THE BLESSED LIFE, AND MERITORIOUS DEATH OF OUR LORD and SAVIOR Jesus Christ;
From his CONCEPTION to his CROSS, and from his CROSS to his CROWN.

Together with the Series, and Order of his Ministry, and Miracles, as they
are Recorded by the four Evangelists, wherein what is wanting in one is
supplied out of the other.

By SAM. CLARKE, sometime Pastor in St Bennet-Fink, London.

In all things it behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might
be a merciful, and faithful high Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the People.

For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them
that are tempted.

Heb. 2. 17, 18. LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Sign of the
Gilded-Acron St Paul's Churchyard near the little North door. 1664.

Imprimatur,

Joh. Hall R. P. D. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.
April 13. 1664.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF OUR BLESSED LORD and SAVIOR Jesus Christ.
Christ's conception foretold.
IN the 6th month after John, surnamed the Baptist, was conceived, the Angel
Gabriel (who had in time past foretold to Daniel, the coming of the Messiah, by
a definite number of weeks) was sent by God to Nazareth in Galilee, to the
blessed Virgin Mary, that was betrothed to Joseph, of the same Tribe of Judah
with her self, and of the stock of David, who, after salutations, declared unto
her that she should bring forth the Son of God, and should call his Name Jesus:
and having more fully taught her of the admirable manner of her conception, to
be performed by the power of the holy Ghost overshadowing her, with great Faith
she said, Be it to the handmaid of the Lord according to thy word. Luke 1. 26,
38.

Mary goes to her Cousin Elizabeth.
Christ being thus conceived, the Mother of our Lord went into the Hill
Country, with have into a city of JIuda (to wit, Hebron, a city of the
Priests, situate in the mountains of Judea, Josh. 21. 10, 11.) where, when she
entered into the house of Zacharias the Priest, and had saluted her cousin
Elizabeth, she, perceiving the child to spring in her womb, was filled with the
holy Ghost, and declared that Mary was blessed which believed, and confirmed
that those things should be performed that were told her of the Lord: To whom
for an answer the blessed Virgin (imitating that song of Hannah. 1 Samuel 2. 1.)
rehearsed that Divine Hymn, My soul does magnify the Lord, etc. After which
Mary tarried with her about three months. Luke. 1. 39, 56.

Joseph is warned not to put away his wife.
Mary Not long after, Joseph finding his betrothed wife with child, was willing
to put her away privily: but being warned of God in a dream, and informed that
she had conceived by the holy Ghost, and should bring forth her Son Jesus, who
should save his people from their sins, he takes his wife. Matt. 1. 18, 24.

Joseph and Mary go to be taxed.
When the time of Mary's delivery drew near, there came forth a command from
Augustus that all the Roman world should be taxed, which taxing was first made,
when Cyrenius was Governor of Syria, [ Luke 2. 1] whereupon Joseph went up
from Galilee, from the city of Nazareth, into Judea into the city of David,
which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the House, and lineage of David,
that he might be taxed, with Mary his Wife, being great with child. Luke 2. 4,
5.

Jesus Christ is born.
During their abode there, Jesus Christ, the Son of God in the fullness of time
was born of the most blessed Virgin Mary at Bethlehem, [ Matthew. 1. 25. and 2.
1, 5. Gal. 4. 4.] in the four thousanth year of the World [saith the learned
Primate of Ireland, Doctor Usher] whom Mary rolled in swaddling clothes, and
laid him in a manger, because there was no room in the Inn. Luke 2. 7.

His birth is revealed to the shepherds
Christ being thus born, his Nativity was revealed by an Angel of the Lord to
Shepherds that were keeping their Flock by night in the neighboring Fields,
which word, a multitude of the Heavenly Host receiving, prayed for Glory to
God, peace to the earth, and good will to men; when they were departed, the
Shepherds making have to Bethlehem, found Mary and Joseph, and the child lying
in the Manger, and they published that which was told them concerning the
child, and so returned praising, and glorifying God. Luke 2. 8, 20.

Christ is circumcised.
The eighth day after his Nativity the child was circumcised, and his Name was
called Jesus, which was so appointed by the Angel Gabriel, before he was
conceived in the womb. Luke 2. 21.

Wisemen come to Jerusalem
Presently after, the Wise men from the East, being guided by a new and
extraordinary Star, came to Herod to Jerusalem, and there, having learned that
the Birthplace of Christ was Bethlehem of Judea, they went thither, and
entering into the house which was pointed out to them by the Star that stood
over it, they found the little Child, and Mary his Mother, and falling down
they worshipped him, and opening their Treasures, they offered unto him Gold,
Frankincense, and Myrrh. Then being warned of God in a dream that they should
not return to Herod, they departed into their own Country another way. Matthew.
2. 1, 12.

Mary goes to be purified.
The fortieth day after her delivery, Mary went up to Jerusalem to the Temple,
both that she might present him to the Lord according to the Law of the
firstborn; and also that she might offer for her self a pair of Turtle Doves,
or two young Pigeons (she being so poor that she could not offer a Lamb)
according to the Law concerning Women that had lain in. Luke 2. 22, 23, 24, 27.
with Levit. 1^. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8.

Simeon, and Anna prophecy of Christ.
When his Parents, Joseph and Mary brought the Child Jesus into the Temple, to
do for him according to the custom of the Law, their came in at the same time
Simeon of Jerusalem, to whom it was revealed by God that he should not die
before he had seen the anointed of the Lord, whom he took in his arms, and
praised the Lord, adding Prophesies, both concerning Christ and his Mother. At
the same instant also came Anna, a Prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, who
also acknowledged the Lord openly, and spoke of him to all that looked for
Redemption in Jerusalem. Luke 2. 25, 38.

Thus when Joseph and Mary had performed all things according to the Law of the
Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own City Nazareth. Luke 2. 39.

Joseph is warned to fly into Egypt.
Some time after, the Angel of the Lord appeared unto Joseph in a dream,
warning him to fly into Egypt, thereby to provide for the life of the Child,
and to escape the malicious designs of Herod, who having by the Wise men heard
that one was born King of the Jews, sought to destroy him: and accordingly
Joseph, when he awaked, took the young Child and his Mother by night, and went
into Egypt, where he remained until the death of Herod. Matthew. 2. 13, 14, 15.

The Babes of Bethlehem are slain.
But Herod, thinking that the young Child had been still at Bethlehem (being
further provoked by the Wise men's not returning to him) that he might destroy
him amongst the rest, sent forth some of his Soldiers, who killed all the
children which were in Bethlehem, and in all the coast thereof from two years
old and under, according to the time of the Star first seen in the East,
concerning which he had enquired of the wise men. Matthew. 2. 16.

Joseph returns into Judea.
After the death of Herod, who had sought the life of the young Child Jesus,
the Angel of the Lord appeared again to Joseph in a dream whilst he was in
Egypt, commanding him that he should return with the young Child and his Mother
into the Land of Israel, for that he that sought his life was dead: and
accordingly when Joseph awaked, he performed what was by the Angel enjoined
him. Matthew. 2. 19, 20, 21*

He goes to the city of Nazareth.
But when he was come back into the Land of Israel, he heard that Archilaus
reigned in Judea in the room of his Father Herod, he therefore feared to go
thither: and being warned of God in a dream, he departed into the parts of
Galilee (which Tetrarchy Herod had given by Will to Antipas) and there dwelt in
the City of Nazareth, from whence Jesus took the name of Nazarene. Matthew. 2.
22, 23. and the Primitive Christians of Nazarenes* Act. 24. 5.

Jesus is found in the Temple.
When Jesus was twelve years old, at the Feast of the Passover, he was brought
to Jerusalem by his Parents, Joseph and Mary; and when the seven days of
unleavened bread were ended, his Parents returning home, Jesus staid behind
them. But so soon as they missed him, they sought him three days, and at last
found him in the Temple sitting in the midst of the Doctors hearing them, and
asking them questions, so that all that heard him were astonished at his
understanding and answers. Luke 2. 41, 47.

His private Life.
Then went Jesus down with his Parents to Nazareth, and was obedient to them.
Luke 2. 51. and during his minority, followed his Fathers trade of a Carpenter,
eating his bread in the sweat of his brows, as appears by the speeches of his
fellow-Citizens. Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary? Mar. 6. 3.

John Christ's forerunner.
The thirtieth, and the last Jubilee falling in the thirtieth year of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and in the beginning of his Gospel, John, his forerunner
proclaimed in the wilderness: Prepare ye the way of Lord and make his paths
strait. Mark 1. 12. and opening the acceptable year of the Lord, or the time of
his Divine pleasure, in which our good God vouchsafed to manifest that Great
One to the world, Isa. 61. 2. Luke 4. 19. For in the 13th year of the reign of
Tiberius, Caesar, Pontius Pilate being Governor of Judea, Herod Antipas
Tetrarch of Galilee, his brother Philip Tetrarch of Ituraea, and the region of
Trachonitis, and Lysanias Tetrarch of Abilene, under the Priesthoods of Annas,
and Caiphas, came the word of the Lord unto John the son of Zacharias in the
Desert [ Luke 3. 12.] according unto whose command this Nazarite, both Priest
and Prophet of the Lord, did Baptize in the Desert of Judea (in which there
were many Cities which are mentioned Josh. 15. 16.) preaching the Baptism of
Repentance for the remssion of sins. Matthew. 3. 1. Mar. 1. 4. Luke 3. 3.
endeavoring that Christ that came after him might be made known to Israel.
John 1. 7, 8, 13. which that he might more certainly know, this sign was given
him of God, that upon whom he should see the holy Ghost descending and
remaining, he should thereby know that it was he that should Baptize others
with the holy Ghost. John 1. 33. Its most probable (says the learned Doctor
Usher) that this his ministry began on that most convenient day, the tenth of
the seventh month (about the nineteenth day of our October) which was both
penitential, being joined with a solemn Fast, in which whosoever did not
afflict his soul, should be cut off from his people, and also Expiatory, in
which the high Priest went into the Holy of Holies to expiate the sins of the
People with blood that was offered: and that same day in which by the sound of
Trumpet the Jubilee was commanded to be proclaimed over all the Land. Levit.
25. 9.

John* preaches and Baptizech.
So John Baptist, the Preacher of repentance and remission of sins, to be
attained by the blood of Christ that was to come, passing through every Region
round about Jordan, lifted up his voice like a Trumpet, saying, Repent ye, for
the Kingdom of heaven is at hand: whereupon there went out to him Jerusalem,
and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan (especially that huge
multitude which returnned from Jerusalem, the Feast of Tabernacles being ended
about the beginning of our November) and were Baptized of him in Jordan,
confessing their sins. Matthew. 3. 2, 3, 5, 6. Mark 1. 5.

Jesus is Baptized.
And when all the People were Baptized, Jesus came also from Nazareth of
Galilee to Jordan to be Baptized of John. Luke 3. 21. Matthew. 3. 13. Mark 1. 9.
which office John denied at first to perform as standing in need himself to be
Baptized of Christ; but the Lord urging that thus it behoved that all
righteousness should be fulfilled, he Baptized him. Matthew. 3. 14, 15. Jesus
then beginning to be about thirty years old, Luke 3. 23.

A manifestation of the Trinity.
At this time there was made a most illustrious manifestation of the blessed
Trinity: For the Son of God in the humane nature that he assumed, ascending out
of the water and praying, the Heavens were opened, and the holy Ghost was seen
in a bodily shape like a Dove, descending upon him, and the voice of the Father
was heard from Heaven saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.
Matthew. 3. 16, 17. Mark 1. 10, 11. Luke 3. 21, 22.

Jesus* tempted of the Devil.
Jesus being now full of the holy Ghost, returned from Jordan, and was driven
by the Spirit into the Desert, where for forty days and nights, being tempted
by the Devil, he remained amongst wild Beasts, not eating any thing, and when
the days were ended he was an hungry. Luke 4. 1, 2. Matthew. 4. 1, 2. Mark 1, 12,
13. Satan taking this opportunity, set upon him with a threefold Temptation,
all which being ended, he departed from him for a season. Matthew. 4. 3, 11. Luke
4. 3, 13. and the Angels came and ministered unto him. Matthew. 4. 11. Mark 1. 13.
After which Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee. Luke 4. 14.
John the Baptist, the next day after Christ's coming to him, when the Jews from
Jerusalem sent some Priests and Levites of the Sect of the Pharisees to him, as
he was Baptizing at Bethabara by Jordan, to ask him who he was, he professed
clearly that he was not the Christ: He denied also that he was Elias, or that
Prophet (foretold by Moses. Deuteronomy. 18. 15. the same indeed with Christ. Act. 3
22 and 7. 37. but by the Jews thought to be another,) He told them also that he
was, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, make strait the way of the
Lord: and then added that testimony of Christ, I Baptize with water, but there
stands one amongst you whom ye know not, he it is who comes after, and is
preferred before me, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to unloose. John 1.
19, 28. with Chap. 5. 33.

John's testimony of Jesus.
The next day John seeing Jesus coming to him, says, Behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world. This is he of whom I spoke, there comes
one after me that is preferred before me, for he was before me, etc. and I saw
him, and testify that this is the Son of God. John 1. 29. 34.

Simon named Cephas.
The day after John stood and two of his Disciples with him, and seeing Jesus
walking, said, Behold the Lamb of God, which, when the two Disciples heard they
followed Jesus, and tarried with him that day, for it was about the tenth hour
One of these was Andrew, who brought his Brother Simon to Jesus, and then Jesus
saw him, he said, Thou art Simon, son of Jonah; thou shall be called Cephas.
John 1. 35, 42

The next day Jesus going into Galilee, commanded Philip (which was of
Bethsaida, the City of Andrew and Simon Peter) to follow him. Philip finding
Nathaneel under a Fig Tree, brought him to Jesus, who declared him truly to be
an Israelite in whom their was no guile* John 1. 43, etc. withal hinting, that
himself was that Ladder of Heaven foreshewen to Jacob in his dream. Genesis 28.
12. upon which the Angels of God were seen ascending and descending. John 1. 51.

Christ's first Miracle.
On the third day their was a marriage in Cana of Galilee to which Jesus was
invited, together with his Mother and his Disciples, where he turned water into
wine, the beginning of his miracles: and his Glory being hereby made manifest,
his Disciples believed in him. John 2. 1, 11.

Dr Ushers Annals.
After this he went down to Capernaum, He, his Mother, and Brethren (or
Kinsmen) and his Disciples, and tarried there not many Days. John 2. 12. And
thus we are come to Christ's entering upon his public Ministry, whose Acts
shall be set forth according to four distinct Passovers out of the Harmony of
the four Gospels contrived by Doctor Richardson, Bishop of Ardah in Ireland,
and recorded by the Primate, Doctor Usher: In which this is singular, that
Saint Matthew only is found not to observe the order of time which is
constantly observed by the other three Evangelists; excepting only the
Parenthesis of John's being cast into prison by Herod. Luke 3. 19, 20.

The first Passover of the Ministry of Christ. John 2. 13. from which the first
year of the seventieth, and last Week of Daniel began, in which the Covenant is
confirmed with many. Dan. 9. 37. with Matthew. 26. 28.
Jesus went to the passover.
Jesus went to Jerusalem to the Passover, and going to the Temple he scourged
out them that bought and sold there: and for a sign of his Authority, he
declared unto them that the Temple of his Body should be dissolved by the Jews,
and be raised again by himself. John 2. 13, 14, 19.

He works miracles.
He wrought Miracles, and many believed on him, but he did not commit himself
to them because he knew what was in man. John 2. 23, 24, 25.

He instructed Nicodemus.
He instructed Nicodemus, the Disciple that came to him by night, in the
mystery of Regeneration, and about Faith in his Death, and the condemnation of
unbelievers. John 3. 1, 21. Then leaving Jerusalem he went into the land of
Judea with his Disciples. verse. 22. There he tarried and Baptized ( viz. by the
hands of his Disciples, who had been before Baptized, either by himself (or by
John.) At this time John Baptized in Aenon, for he was not yet cast into
prison. John 3. 23, 24. There arose a question between some of John's Disciples
and the Jews about purifying. verse. 25. Then did John instruct his Disciples,
who told him of Jesus in a way of emulation, concerning himself, and his
Office, and of the Excellency of Jesus Christ the Son of God, giving this
notable and last Testimony of John's last testimony of him.
him before his Imprisonment. verse. 26, etc. For presently after, Herod the
Tetrarch cast John into Prison for reprehending his Incest with his brother
Philips wife, and other evils done by him. Mark 6. 17, 20. Matthew. 14. 3, 4, 5.

Jesus went into Galilee.
Jesus hearing that John was cast into Prison, and that the Pharisees had heard
that there were many made Disciples by him, and Baptized, viz. by the hand of
his Disciples, he left Judea (having staid there about eight months) and went
into Galilee. John 4 1, 2, 3. Matthew. 4. 12. But in his way he must needs go
through Samaria, where he brought the Samaritan woman near the City Sychar, and
the Citizens thereof, to the knowledge and acknowledgement of him, four months
before the harvest (or the Passover) about the middle of the ninth month
called Ab. John 4 4, 5, etc.

He preaches, with great applause.
Jesus having staid two days in Sychar, he went onward in his journey into
Galilee. John 4. 43. This was his second return from Judea into Galilee after
his Baptism, and being received of the Galileans who had seen what things he
had done at Jerusalem, he preached with great fame in their Synagogues. John 4
45. Luke 4. 14, 15. Mark 1* 14, 15.

He preaches, and works miracles.
In Cana of Galilee he healed the son of a Nobleman that lay sick. John 4. 46,
54. he wrought miracles also in Capernaum, and afterward came unto Nazareth
where he had been brought up; and entering into the Synagogue (as his custom
was) he expounded to them the prophecy of Isaiah concerning himself: the
Citizens at first wondering, but afterward being filled with wrath, they
thrust him out of the City, and endeavored to have cast him down headlong from
a Hill; but he, passing through the midst of them, went his way. Luke 4. 16, 30.

Jesus then leaving Nazareth dwelt at Capernaum, and their so taught them on
the Sabbath days that they were astonished at his Doctrine. Luke 4. 31, 32.
Mark 1. 21, 22. Also at the Synagogue in Capernaum he cast out an unclean
spirit, commanding him that he should not tell who he was. Luke 4. 33, 37. Mark
1. 23, 28. After which he arose and went out of the Synagogue into the house of
Simon and Andrew, where he healed Simons wives mother that lay sick of a
Feavour. Luke 4. 38, 39. Mark 1. 29, 30, 31. Matthew. 8. 14, 15.

He heals all Diseases.
About Sunset Jesus healed all the sick folk which were brought to him, and
cast out Devils, commanding them to hold their peace. Luke 4. 40, 41. Mark 1.
32, 33, 34. Matthew. 8. 16, 17. In the morning he went into a Desert place to
Pray, and when Simon and others sought, and would have staid him, he answered,
that he must Preach to other Cities also. Luke 4. 42, 43, 44. Mark 1. 35, 39.

A great draught of Fishes.
Then Jesus went through all Galilee, and taught in their Synagogues, and cast
out Devils. Luke 4. 44. Mark 1. 39, and as he stood by the Lake of Genazereth a
great multitude pressed upon him: He entered therefore into Simons ship, and
taught the multitude from thence. Luke 5. 1, 4. and when he had left speaking,
at his command there was a great draught of Fishes taken; at which Simon Peter
and Andrew, James and John being astonished, he commanded them to follow him,
and he would make them Fishers of men. Luke 5. 4, 11. Mark 1. 16, 20. Matthew. 4.
18, 22.

Then Jesus went through all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and healing
every disease, and his fame went through all Syria, and a great multitude
followed him. Matthew. 4. 23, 24, 25.

A Leper healed.
In a certain City Jesus healed a Leper, who, though he was forbidden, yet
published it: and they came to him from every place to hear him, and to be
healed, insomuch as he could no more openly enter into the City, but was in
Desert-places, and Prayed. Luke 5. 12, 16. Mark 1. 40, 45. Matthew. 8. 1, 4.

He forgives sins.
Then again Jesus entered into Capernaum, his own City, after some days, and
taught them at home, and before the Scribes and Pharisees, and a great
multitude: He forgave sins to one sick of a Palsy, who was let down through
the roof of a house, and healed his disease to the astonishment of them all.
Luke 5, 17, 26. Mark, 2. 1, 12. Matthew. 9. 1, 8.

He called Levi.
Then went Jesus forth again by the Seaside, and all the multitude came unto
him, and he taught them, and as he passed by, he saw, and called, Levy, or
Matthew, sitting at the receipt of Custom. Luke 5. 27, 28. Mark 2. 13, 14.
Matthew. 9. 9.

And defends his practice.
Jesus in the House of Levi defended both himself and his Disciples for eating
with Publicans, and excuses and vindicates them against the Pharisees for
their not Fasting. Luke 5. 29. 39. Mark 2. 15, 22. Matthew 9. 10, 13. And it came
to pass on the second Sabbath after the first ( i. e. the first Sabbath of the
New-year, instituted after their coming out of Egypt, and beginning from the
month Nisan, or Abib) Jesus going through the Corn fields, cleared his
Disciples from the charge of the Pharisees, because they plucked the ears of
Corn; and explained the Doctrine of the Sabbath. Luke 6. 1, 5. Mark 2. 23, 28.
Matthew. 12. 1, 8.

The second Passover of the Ministry of Christ, from which the second year of
the seventieth week of Daniel begins.
He heals on the Sabbath.
AFter this was the Feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and
healed on the Sabbath day a man that had an infirmity thirty eight years, who
lay at the Pool of Bethesda: and made a most Divine Apollogy to the Jews, who
sought to kill him because he said that God was his Father. John 5. 1. 47.

They seek to destroy him.
Afterward he went from thence and entered into a Synagogue and taught, and
healed one that* had a withered hand: whereupon the Pharisees went forth, and
straightways, with the Herodians, took counsel how they might destroy him. Luke
6. 6, 11. Mark 3. 1, 6. Matthew. 12. 9, 14.

But Jesus when he knew this, withdrew himself to the Sea, and healed the
multitudes that followed him, straightly charging them that they should not make
him known, and commanded his Disciples that a small ship should wait on him,
because of the multitude that througed him. Mark 3. 7, 12. Matthew. 12. 15, 21.

He chooses twelve Apostles.
And it came to pass in those days that he went into a Mountain to Pray: and
when it was day, he chose twelve, whom he called Apostles, who are specified by
name. Luke 6. 12, 16. Mark 3. 13, 19.

And he came down with them from the mountain, and stood in a plain, where a
great multitude came to him and he healed them all. Luke 6. 17, 18, 19.

He is judged to be mad.
After this they went into an House, and the multitude came together again so
that they could not so much as eat bread, and when his kinsmen heard of it they
went to lay hold on him, for they said, He is besides himself. Mark 3. 19, 20,
21.

His Sermon on the Mount*
When Jesus saw the multitude, he went up into a Mountain, and when he was set,
his Disciples came unto him: and then he preached that long, and excellent
Sermon, first to the Apostles, and afterward to all the People. Luke 6. 20,
49. Matthew. 5, and 6, and 7.

Now when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the people, he entered
into Capernaum, where he healed the Centurions servant that lay sick of the
Palsy, ready to die. Luke 7. 1, 10. Matthew. 8. 5, 13.

Raises a dead man to life.
The day following he went into the City of Naim, and raised one that was dead,
and carrying out to his Burial, which was the only son of a widow: whereupon
his same spread abroad. Luke 7. 11, 17.

Jesus his testimony of John.
John the Baptist, being yet in Prison, and being moved with the relation of
his Disciples concerning the fame, and deeds of Jesus, sent two of them unto
him, saying, Art thou he that was to come, or shall we look for another? and
when they were returned with his answer, Christ gave a large testimony of John
After which he upbraided some of the Cities for their ingratitude, and yet
willingly submitted to the sole good pleasure of his Father, who hid his Son
from some, and revealed him to others. Luke 7. 18, 35. Matthew. 11. 2, 30

One washed his feet.
Then Simon the Pharisee, desired him that he would eat with him, and as they
were at meat he defended against Simon, and absolved the woman, a sinner, that
washed his feet with her tears and wiped them with the hair of her head, both
kissing, and anointing them, Luke 7. 36, 50.

It came to pass afterward that he went from City to City preaching, and his
Disciples were with him, and certain women ministered unto him. Luke 8. 1, 2, 3.

Casts out a Devil.
Then they brought unto him one that had a Devil that was both blind and dumb,
and he healed him, and zealously defended himself against the Pharisees and
Scribes that came down from Jerusalem, that blasphemed him, saying, He casts
out Devils through Beelzebub. Mark 3. 22, 30. Matthew. 8. 22, 37.

Then said some of the Scribes and Pharisees to him, Master, we would see a
sign of thee, to whom* when he had sharply rebuked them, he would give no other
sign but that of Jonas. Matthew. 8. 38, 45.

He shows who are his kinsmen.
Whilst Jesus spoke to the People, it was told him that his Mother and Brethren
stood without desiring to see, and to speak with him: but Jesus answering,
showed them whom he accounted for his Mother, and Brother, and Sister. Luke 8.
19, 20, 21. Mark 3. 31, 35. Matthew. 11. 46, 50.

He teaches by Parables.
The same day Jesus went out of the house and sat by the Seaside, and great
multitudes were gathered unto him, so that he went into a Ship, and sat, and
taught the multitude many things, by the parable of the Sower, and by diverse
other parables, Luke 8. 4, 18. Mark 4* 1, 34. Matthew. 13. 1, 53.

He calms the Tempest.
Also the same day when it was evening, he said unto them, Let us lance forth
unto the other side of the Lake: and when he had given an answer to some that
would follow him, and sent away the multitude, they took him even as he was in
the ship, and by the way there arose a great tempest, but he rebuked the wind,
and calmed the Sea, and saved his Disciples. Luke 8. 22, 25. Mark 4. 35, 41.
Matthew. 8. 18, 27.

He casts out the Legion of Devils.
When they came to the other side into the Country of the Gadarens, or
Gergasens, which was on the opposite shore to Galilee, and when he was gone on
Land, there met him two possessed with Devils, very fierce ( Mark and Luke
mention but one) out of whom Jesus cast the Devils, and suffered them to go
into the heard of Swine; whereupon the Gadarens desired him to leave their
Coasts. Then did the possessed persons importune him that they might abide with
them; but he denied their request, and sent them back to publish about
Decapolis what great things Jesus had done for them: After which he passed over
again by Ship to the other side, and from thence went unto his own City [
Capernaum.] Luke 8. 26, 36. Mark 5. 1, 16, 17, 20. Matthew. 8. 28, 33, 34.

He answers John's Disciples.
And it came to pass that when Jesus was returned, the people received him
gladly, for they waited for him, and he was by the Seaside. Luke 8. 40. Mark
5. 21. and there came to him the Disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the
Pharisees Fast often, but thy Disciples Fast not? to whom he gave answer. Matthew.
9. 14, 17.

Raises Jairus's daughter.
Whilst Jesus yet spoke, behold there came Jairus, one of the Rulers of the
Synagogue, and besought him greatly for his only Daughter, being about twelve
years old, who lay at the point of Death: and as he was going, even at Jairus
door, a woman that had an issue of blood twelve years was suddenly healed by
touching the hem of Jesus Garment: and the Daughter of Jairus being now already
dead, was restored to life by his Word only: and he straightly charged them that
no man should know it. Luke 8. 41, 56. Mark 5. 22, 43. Matthew. 9. 18, 26.

Cures blind men
When Jesus was departed thence, two blind men followed him, whose eyes he
opened, straightly charging them (but to no purpose) that no man should know
it. Matthew. 9. 27, 31.

He casts out a dumb Devil.
As they went out, behold, they brought unto him a dumb man possessed with a
Devil, and when the Devil was cast out, the dumb spoke, and the multitude
marvelled: but the Pharisees blasphemed. Matthew. 9. 32, 33, 34, 35.

He is scorned. ^
Then went Jesus round about all their Cities, and villages, teaching, and
healing their diseases. Then went he into his own Country, and his Disciples
followed him, and he taught in their Synagogues on the Sabbath days, and was
again contemned of them and called the Carpenter: yet were they astonished at
his Doctrine. Mark 6. 1, 6. Matthew. 12. 54, 58. and he went round about their
villages teaching. Mark 6. 6.

His compassion to Souls. He sent out his Disciples.
Jesus was moved with compassion toward the multitude when he saw the great
harvest, and the few laborers, and thereupon commanded his Disciples that they
should pray the Lord that he would send forth Laborers. Matthew. 9. 35, 38.

Then sent Jesus the twelve Apostles by two and two, having sufficiently
instructed them with commands and power to preach, and to heal Diseases. Luke
9. 1, 5. Mark 6. 7, 11. Matthew. 10. 1, 42.

And it came to pass when Jesus had made an end of commanding his Disciples,
that he departed thence to teach and to preach in their Cities. and the twelve
departed, and went through the Towns preaching the Gospel, and healing every
where. Luke 9. 6. Matthew. 11. 1, 12. 16.

Sejanus killed at Rome.
About this time ( November 17th) Sejanus was killed: after whose death,
Tiberius Caesar soon knew that all the crimes which he had charged upon the
Jews, were feigned by himself: Wherefore he commanded the Governors of all the
Provinces, that in every Town they should spare that Nation, except very few
that were guilty persons: but that they should alter non of their customs, and
should make much account of them as lovers of peace, and their customs as
conducing to public tranquillity.

John beheaded.
About this time also was John Baptist beheaded. Mark 6. 17, 28. Matthew. 16. 6,
11, 12. and when his Disciples heard of it, they came, and took up the body,
and buried it, and went and told Jesus. Mark 6 29.

The Fame of Jesus being spread abroad, Herod the Tetarch, and others, hearing
it, declared their opinions about him, and Herod desired much to see him. Luke
9. 7, 8, 9. Mark 6. 14.

The Apostles returning, told Jesus what things they had done. Luke 9. 10. Mark
6. 30

Multitudes follow Jesus.
When Jesus had heard of the death of John, and of the deeds of the Apostles,
he said unto them, Come ye your selves apart into a Desert-place, and rest a
while: For by reason of the multitude they had not leisure to eat; He
therefore, taking the twelve with him, went by ship privately into a Desert
place, of the City called Bethesda: But when the multitude heard it, they
followed him on foot out of all Cities, and out went him, and he taught and
healed them. Luke 9. 10, 11. Mark 6. 31, 32. Matthew. 16. 13, 14.

He sed five thousand men, etc.
Then Jesus went up into a Mountain, and there sat with his Disciples, and the
Passover was nigh. And when it was evening, he sed above five thousand men,
besides women, and children, with five Barley loaves, and two little Fishes,
and there remained twelve Baskets full of fragments. And when the Jews (seeing
his Miracles) would have made him a King; Jesus constrained his Disciples to go
before him unto the other side, opposite to Bethesda, toward Capernaum: and he
himself went apart into a Mountain to pray: and when they had gone about five
and He walked on the Sea.
twenty or thirty furlongs, in the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went to
them, walking upon the Sea, and would have passed by them: but they being
affrighted, he told them who he was, rebuked Peter and saved him from sinking,
so that they were amazed: and they drew to shore and came to the land of
Genazaret: and when he came out of the ship, as soon as it was know, they
brought their sick that they might touch the hem of his Garment, and they were
presently made whole. John 6. 1, 21. Luke 9. 12, 17. Mark 6. 35, 56. Matthew. 16.
15, 36.

Many go back from him.
The next day, after that Jesus was passed over, the People which stood on this
side the Sea, took Shiping and came to Capernaum seeking Jesus, to whom he
preached in the Synagogue of Capernaum about the Bread of Life, and affirmed to
the Jews that murmured, that he was that Bread of Life. From that time many of
his Disciples went back, but the Apostles would not go away, notwithstanding he
called one of them a Devil. John 6. 22, 27.

The third Passover of the Ministry of Christ. John 6. 4. From which the third
year of the seventieth week of Daniel began.
He condemned their Traditions.
THe Scribes, and Pharisees which came from Jerusalem, came to Jesus, and when
they saw some of his Disciples to eat with defiled, that is, unwashen hands,
they found fault, because they did not walk after the tradition of the Elders,
to whom Jesus answered concerning traditions, that they frustrated the commands
of God that they might keep the traditions of men: and he taught the People,
which he also expounded to his Disciples at home, that nothing which enters
into a man, but that which comes from within, that defiles a man. Mark 7. 1,
23. Matthew. 15* 1, 20.

Heals the Cananitish woman's daughter.
Then he arose from thence and went into the borders of Tire, and Sidon, and he
could not be hid. For a Canaanitish woman, a Gentile, a Syrophaenician by
Nation, came to him, earnestly beseeching him for her Daughter, that was vexed
with a Devil: whom, when he had commended for the greatness of her Faith, he
cast the Devil out of her Daughter. Mark 7. 24, 30. Matthew. 15. 21, 28.

And again departing from the Coasts of Tire and Sidon, he came unto the Sea of
Galilee, through the midst of the coast of Decapolis, and they brought unto him
one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech, whom he healed, and
charged him that he should tell no man, but all in vain. Mark 7. 31, 37.

He heals many.
Then went he up into a mountain and sat there, and healed many, so that the
multitude wondered. Matthew. 15. 29, 30, 31.

Feeds four thousand.
In those days, when there was a very great multitude that had remained with
him three days, he fed four thousand men, besides women and children, with
seven Loaves, and a few little fishes, and there remained seven baskets full of
fragments. Mark 8. 1, 9. Matthew. 15. 32, 38.

And straitway Jesus entered into a Ship, with his Disciples, and came into the
parts of Dalmanutha, or the coasts of Magdala. Mark 8. 10. Matthew. 15. 39.

Denies a Sign to the Pharisees.
And the Pharisees came to him, requiring a sign from Heaven, who after he had
deeply sighed, he denied any sign but that of Jonas, to those Hypocrites, who
knew how to discern the face of the sky, but not the signs of the times: and
leaving them, he entered again into a Ship and passed to the other side. Mark*
8. 11. 12, 13. Matthew. 16. 1, 4.

Warns his Disciples of their Leaven.
And when his Disciples were come to the other side, they had forgotten to take
bread, and they had but one loaf with them in the Ship. Then Jesus said unto
them, Take heed of the Leaven of the Pharisees and Sadduces, and of the Leaven
of Herod: and they reasoned amongst themselves because they had forgotten to
take bread: But Jesus rebuking* them that they had forgotten the miraculous
multiplication of the loaves, gave them to understand that he spoke not of the
Leaven of Bread, but of their Doctrine. Mark 8. 14, 21. Matthew. 16. 5. 21.

Then came Jesus to Bethsaida, and they brought to him a blind man, whom he led
out of the Town, and anointed his eyes with spittle, and he recovered his
sight, and Jesus forbad him to tell it. Mark 8. 22, 26.

Who Christ was judged to be.
And Jesus went with his Disciples into the Towns of Caesarea Philippi: And it
came to pass as he was alone praying, and was now in the way, that he asked his
Disciples, whom do men say that I am? When they had answered, he said unto
them, But whom do ye say that I am? And when Peter had answered, he pronounced
him happy, annexing promises, and forbad his Disciples to tell any man that he
was the Christ. He also foretold his Death, and Resurrection, and called Peter
Satan, because he rebuked him for so saying. Then he Preached to his Disciples,
and to the multitude of the Cross which every one must bear that would follow
him, and at length foretold his Transfiguration. Luke 7. 18, 27. Mark 8. 27,
38. Matthew. 16. 13, 28.

His transfiguration.
And it came to pass about eight days after these things (or six intermediate
days) that he was Transfigured in an high Mountain. And when they came down
from the Mountain, he charged them that they should tell no man what they had
seen till he was risen from the dead: and they kept it close, questioning one
with another, what the rising from the dead should mean, and they asked him,
why do the Scribes say that Elias must first come? and they received an answer
by which they understood that Jesus spoke of John Baptist, as that Elias. Luke
7. 28, 36. Mark 9. 1, 13. Matthew. 17. 1, 13.

Heals the* Lunatic.
And it came to pass the next day when they were come down from the Hill, and
that he was come to his Disciples, he saw a great multitude about them, and the
Scribes questioning with them: and straitway when all the multitude saw him,
they were greatly amazed, and running to him, saluted him: and as he was asking
about their questioning with his Disciples, the Father of a Lunatic child
answered him, that it was about his child that had an unclean spirit, both deaf
and dumb, and that his Disciples could not cast him out. Then Jesus having cast
out the spirit, restored the Child to his Father whole: and being at home, he
showed his Disciples the reason why they could not cast out this Devil. Luke 7.
37, 42. Mark 9. 14, 29. Matthew. 17. 14, 21.

Foretel's his Death, and Resurrection
And they departed thence and passed through Galilee, and he would not that any
man should know it: and he taught his Disciples concerning his death and
Resurrection: but they understood not that saying, and being exceedingly sorry,
were afraid to ask him. Luke 7. 43, 44, 45. Mark 9. 30, 31, 32. Matthew. 17. 22,
23.

Pays Tribute.
When they were come to Capernaum they asked Peter about Jesus his paying
Tribute money. And when Jesus was come into the house, he prevented Peter,
telling him, that he should find a piece of money in a Fishes mouth, and bad
him pay that for Tribute both for himself and for Jesus. Matthew. 17. 24, 27.

Teaches Humility.
At Capernaum Jesus asked his Disciples what it was that they disputed of among
themselves by the way, at which, when they were silent at the first, they
afterward told him that it was, who should be greatest in the Kingdom of
Heaven: Then Jesus taking a child, and seting him in the midst, taught them
that they should have humility even as a child. He also warned the world of
offenses: Admonishing Darling sins must not be spared.
us to take heed that neither hand, foot, nor eye make us to offend. That
little ones are not to be despised. How our Brother sinning against us, is to
be reproved* as also to be bound and loosed by the Church: and to be forgiven
to seventy times seven times, as he showed in that parable of the two debtors
to the King. Luke 7. 46, 47, 48. Mark 9. 33, 37. Matthew. 18. 1, 35.

Then said John to him, we saw one calling out Devils through thy name, whom
Jesus taught that he was not to be forbidden, and again warned them not to
offend little ones, and to take heed again that neither hand, foot, nor eye
cause them to offend. Luke 7. 49, 50. Mark 9 ^8, 50.

They sought to kill him.
After these things Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would not walk in Jury,
because the Jews sought to kill him. Now the Feast of Tabernacles was at hand:
and Jesus went not up to the Feast, as his Brethren would have him do, who as
yet believed not on him: but he went up after them, not openly, but as it were
in secret. John 7. 1, 10.

And it came to pass that when the time was come that he should be received, he
set his face to go to Jerusalem, and he sent messengers before his face, and
they went into a Village of the Samaritans to make ready for him, But they
would not receive him, wherefore they went into another City, and Jesus rebuked
his Disciples who would have commanded fire to come down from Heaven upon them.
Luke 7. 51, 56.

And as they were passing in the way, Jesus gave an answer particularly to some
that would follow him. Luke 7. 57, 62.

He sent out seventy Disciples.
After these things Jesus sent seventy Disciples by two and two into every City
and place where he himself would come, giving them instructions, and arming
them with power. Mark 10. 1, 16.

He preached at the Feast.
The multitude enquiring after Jesus at the Feast, and murmuring concerning
him, Jesus in the midst of the Feast, taught in the Temple: and they wondering
at his Doctrine, he answered, that his Doctrine was not his own but his that
sent him: He also answered many things to them who reproached, and objected
against him, and Officers were sent to apprehend him. In the last and great day
of the Feast, Jesus crying out concerning Faith in him, there was a division
concerning him amongst the People: but the Officers which were sent, and
Nicodemus defended both his person and cause before the Pharisees that spoke
against him. John 7. 11, 53.

And in the Temple.
Then went Jesus unto the mount of Olives, and early in the morning he sat and
taught in the Temple, where, being not willing to condemn the woman that was
taken in Adultery, he warned her to sin no more. As he was teaching in the
Treasury of the Temple, he affirmed that he was the light of the world, and
defended his bearing record of himself.] He taught many things concerning the
Father himself, and told them whether he goes, and who he is: Also of their
Father Abraham: Of the servitude of Sin and of the Devil: Of himself, that he
had not a Devil as they supposed: That whosoever kept his sayings should not
taste of Death, concluding with these words, Before Abraham They attempt to
stone him
was, I am; whereupon they took up stones to throw at him: But Jesus hid
himself and went out of the Temple, going through the midst of them, and so
passed by. John 8. 1, 59.

He cures the blind man.
As Jesus passed on the way, he saw one begging that was blind from his youth,
who being made to see, after many examinations both of himself, and of his
Parents, he was cast out of the Synagogue, who afterward meeting Jesus, he
worshipped him. John 9. 1, 41.

He is the Door of the sheep.
Then Preached Jesus that he is the door of the sheep, and that good shepherd:
as also concerning Thieves, and Hirelings: and there was again a division
amongst the Jews for those sayings. John 10. 1, 21.

At this time the Seventy returned to him with joy, whom Jesus further warned
and instructed: and rejoyceing in spirit, he told them privately that their
eyes were happy. Luke 10. 17, 24.

Then came to him a certain Lawyer, asking him, what he must do to inherit
eternal life? Jesus sent him to the Law; and by the Parable of the man that
fell amongst Thieves, taught him who was his Neighbor. Luke 10. 25, 37.

Of Martha and Mary.
Afterward it came to pass, that as he went, he came to a certain Town, and
was received into the house of Martha, she her self ministering to him, whilst
Mary heard the words of Jesus, for which she was preferred before Martha. Luke
10. 38, 42.

He teaches the Lords Prayer.
And it came to pass as he was praying in a certain place, when he ceased, one
of his Disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to Pray, as John taught his
Disciples: Whereupon he, the second time prescribed to them the Lords Prayer:
using arguments also to stir them up to constancy in Prayer, and for the
confirmation of their Faith in obtaining their suits. Luke 11. 1, 13.

Then cast Jesus a Devil out that was dumb, and the multitude marvelled, and he
confirmed against some blasphemers, that he did not cast out Devils through
Beelzebub. Luke 11. 14, 26.

And it came to pass as he spoke these things, that a certain woman of the
company said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, etc. to whom he
replied, Luke 11. 27, 28.

Of the Queen of the South and the Ninivites.
And when the multitude were gathered thick together, he began to say: This
Generation seeks a sign, but there shall be none given but that of Jonas:
Adding, that the Queen of the South, and the Ninivites should condemn that
Generation, charging them to take heed that the light which was in them, were
not darkness. Luke 11. 29, 36.

When Jesus had spoken these things, a certain Pharisee desired him that he
would dine with him: and wondering that Jesus had not first washed, he was
severly reprehended, with the rest of the Pharisees, by Jesus for their outward
holiness, or simulation, and for their inward wickedness, covetousness and
pride: and he pronounced a Woe likewise to the Lawyers. Luke 11. 37, 54.

In the mean time when there was gathered together an innumerable company,
Jesus said to his Disciples, Take heed of the Leaven of the Pharisees which is
Hypocrisy: and fear not them which kill the body. Luke 12. 1, 12.

He resuses to be a Judge.
And one of the company said to him, Master speak to my Brother that he divide
the Inheritance with me: To whom Jesus said, who made me a Judge? And upon this
occasion he preached against Covetousness in the Parable of the rich man that
would build great Barns: as also against all anxious, distrustful, and
unprofitable carking about the necessaries of this life; commanding them rather
to seek the Kingdom of God: and to be like them that wait for the coming of
their Lord as becomes every faithful and wise Steward: Telling them that he
would send the fire of division into the earth, and upbraided them that they
could not find out that that was the appointed time. Luke 12. 13, 59.

Exhorts to Repentance.
There were present at that season some that told him of the Galileans, whose
blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices, from which occasion he preached
Repentance, and propounded to them the Parable of the Fig Tree, that had no
fruit. Luke 13. 1, 9.

As he taught in one of the Synagogues on the Sabbath day, behold, there was a
woman that had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was bowed together;
whom Jesus healed, and defended his deed against the Ruler of the Synagogue
that was full of indignation. Then did he liken the Kingdom of Heaven to a
Grain of Mustardseed, and to Leaven. Luke 13. 10, 21.

Then went he through all the Cities, and villages teaching, and journying
toward Jerusalem, to wit, to the Feast of Dedication. Luke 13. 22.

Few to be saved.
As he went, one said to him, Are there few that shall be saved? To whom he
answered, commanding to strive to enter in at the straight Gate. Luke 13. 23,
30.

On the same day some of the Pharisees came to him, saying, Get thee out, and
depart hence, for Herod will kill thee; to whom he gave a resolute answer. Luke
13. 31, 35.

And it came to pass as he went into the House of one of the chief Pharisees to
eat Bread, there was one present that had a Dropsy, whom he healed, and
defended the deed though it was done on the Sabbath day. He also spoke a
Parable to them that were bidden, and instructed him that had invited him. Luke
14. 1, 14.

And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things, he said
unto him; Blessed is he that shall eat Bread in the Kingdom of God: To whom
Jesus answered, and propounded to them the Parable of the great Supper, and of
the several excuses that those that were invited, made. Luke 14. 15, 24.

Life to be laid down for Christ
And there was a great multitude that went with him, and he turned and preached
unto them, that life it self is to be laid down for Christ. He also propounded
to them the Parables, of the man that was about to build a Tower, and of the
Kings going to War. Luke 14. 25, 35.

The parable of the lost sheep, etc.
And there came to him all the Publicans and sinners for to hear him, and the
Scribes and Pharisees murmured, whereupon he spoke unto them the Parables of
the lost Sheep, of the Groat, and of the Prodigal Son. Luke 15. 1, 32.

Of Dives and Lazarus. Of offenses.
He also told to his Disciples the Parable of the unjust Steward accused to his
Lord: together with the application of the same: and the Pharisees, that were
covetous, when they heard these things, derided him. Then preached he against
them, and taught many other things, and declared the Parable of the Rich man
fareing deliciously, and of Lazarus the beggar. Luke 16. 1, 31.

Moreover he said to his Disciples, Woe to them by whom offenses come, and
taught, that a brother sinning against a man is to be forgiven. Luke 17. 1, 14.

The power of faith.
Hereupon his Disciples said to him, Lord increase our Faith, to whom he
answered concerning the power of Faith; and by the Parable of the servant
coming from plough and straightway ministering, he showed that they are
unprofitable servants when they have done all, having done no more than what
was their duty. Luke 17. 5, 10.

Cures ten Lepers.
And it came to pass as he went to Jerusalem, that he passed through the midst
of Samaria, and Galilee, and as he entered into a certain village, there met him
ten Lepers, who, as they were going according to his command, to the Priests,
they were cleansed, of whom one of them came back to Jesus to give him thanks,
and he was a Samaritane. Luke 17. 11, 19.

The Pharisees asking Jesus when the Kingdom of God would come? He answered,
That the Kingdom of God would not come with observation: but that it is within:
and further* said to his Disciples, that according to the days of Noe, and Lot,
so shall be the day in which the Son of man shall be revealed: but that he was
first to suffer many things. Luke 17. 20, 37.

To pray always.
Then spoke he to them a Parable that they should always pray, by the example
of the widow interceeding to the unjust Judge: whereas God is a Righteous
revenger. Luke 18. 1, 8.

The Pharisee and Publican.
He spoke also to some that persuaded themselves that they were just, and
despised others, the Parable of the Pharisee^, and Publicane praying in the
Temple. Luke 18. 9, 14.

And it was at Jerusalem the Feast of the Dedication, and it was winter, and
Jesus walked in the Temple in Solomon's Porch: Then came the Jews round about
him and said unto him, How long do thou make us to doubt? If thou be the
Christ tell us plainly? which he avouched by his works, saying, I and the
Father are one: whereupon they again took up stones to stone him. And he
defending himself to be God by the Scriptures, and his works, they sought again
to take him, but he escaped out of their hands. John 10. 22, 39.

Preaches and heals.
Then he went again beyond Jordan where John at first did Baptize, and there he
abode, and many resorted to him; and as he was wont, he taught them, and healed
them, and many believed on him there. Luke 18. 40, 41, 42. Mark. 10. 1. Matthew.
19. 1, 2.

About Divorce.
Then came to him the Pharisees tempting him, saying, Is it lawful for a man to
put away his wife for every cause? Jesus denied it, and gave an answer to the
Pharisees, objecting the Bill of Divorce which Moses commanded: He answered his
Disciples also who said, that then its better for a man not to marry. Mark 10.
2, 12. Matthew. 19. 3, 12.

He blesses little children.
At this time they brought unto him little children that he should lay his
hands upon them, and pray, and his Disciples forbad them; for which, being
rebuked by Jesus, he laid his hands upon them, and blessed them, and then
departed from thence. Luke 18. 15, 16, 17. Mark 10. 13, 16. Matthew. 19. 13, 14,
15.

Jesus going from thence, as he was in the way, there met him a young man, one
of the Rulers, very rich, saying unto him, Good Master, what must I do to
inherit eternal life? And Jesus having spoken concerning the title that he gave
him, sent him to the Commandments, and he replying, that he had observed them,
Jesus loved him: but bidding him to sell all that he had, and give it to the
poor, he went away sorrowful. Luk 18. 18, 30. Mark 10. 17, 31. Matthew. 19. 16,
30.

Against Covetousness.
Then Jesus inveighed bitterly against covetous rich men: and when Peter said,
Behold we have left all to follow thee, he made notable promises to all such,
whereof some were peculiar to the Apostles: Adding withal, that many which were
last should be first, and the first should be last, which he declared by a
Parable of laborers in a Vineyard: For many were called, but few chosen. Luke
18. 28. 29. 3. Matthew. 19. 27, etc. Mark 10. 23, etc.

Lazarus's sickness and death
Lazarus of Bethany being sick, his Sisters sent to tell Jesus thereof, who as
soon as he heard it, tarried two days in the place where he was: but afterward
he said to his Disciples, Let us go again into Judea: they said to him, the
Jews of late sought to stone thee, and go thou thither again? Jesus
answering, said unto them, Lazarus sleeps (meaning that he was dead) Let us
go to him (said Thomas) that we may die with him. John 11. 1, 6.

Jesus raises him.
Jesus came nigh to Bethany, and found that Lazarus had been buried four days:
and Mary hearing of it, came quickly to him out of the Town, where Martha also
met him, and Jesus seeing her weep, he wept also, and coming to the grave, he
bad them remove the stone, and, giving thanks to his Father, called Lazarus out
of the grave, whereupon many believed on him: but some went to the Pharisees
and told them what things Jesus had done. John 1^. 17, 54.

Hereupon the Pharisees called a Council, where Caiphas prophesied concerning
Jesus, and from that day they consulted together that they might put him to
death, commanding that if any one knew where he was, they should give them
notice that they might take him. Jesus therefore walked no more openly amongst
the Jews, but went unto a City, called Ephraim, and there continued with his
Disciples. John 11. 54.

He foretells his sufferings.
After this they went up to Jerusalem, and as they were in the way, Jesus went
before them, and they were afraid, and he again took the twelve, and began to
tell them what things should happen unto him, but they understood none of those
things. Luke 18. 31, 34. Mark 10. 32, 33, 34. Matthew. 19. 17, 18, 19.

Then came to him James and John, the sons of Zebedee, and their mother,
desiring that they might sit, the one on his right hand, and the other on his
left; but he repelled them with his answer, and when the rest were displeased
with their request, he admonished them all, that he that would be great and
first amongst them, must be the Minister and Servant of all. Mark 10. 35, 45.
Matthew. 19. 20, 28.

He cures the blind man.
And it came to pass when Jesus came nigh to Jericho, a certain blind man sat
begging by the way side, and asking who it was that passed by, and hearing that
it was Jesus of Nazareth, he (though he was rebuked) earnestly implored his
mercy, and being called by Jesus, he received his sight, and followed him,
Glorifying God. Luke 18. 35, 43.

Calls Zacheus.
Then Jesus entered, and passed through Jericho, and espying Zacheus in a
Sycamore tree, he said unto him, I must abide at thy house to day. Luke 19. 1,
10.

And as Jesus went out of Jericho, a great multitude followed him: and he
restored sight to two blind men, whereof Bartimeus was one, and they followed
him. Mark 10. 46, 52. Matthew. 19. 29, 34.

Ten pounds given to ten servants.
Being come nigh to Jerusalem, because they thought that the Kingdom of God
should immediately appear, as he went forwards, he told the Parable of the
Noble man that went into a far Country, who gave to his ten servants ten
pounds to occupy therewith till he returned, and when he came back, knowing
which had gained most by trading, he rewarded each of them according to the
proportion of their gain. Luke 19. 11, 27.

Now the Passover was at hand, and many went out of the Country up to
Jerusalem before the Passover, that they might purify themselves, John 11. 55,
56, 57.

And Jesus, six days before the Passover, came to Bethany, and they made him a
Supper, and Lazarus sat with him* and Mary anointed his feet, and wiped them
with the hairs of her Head, whom Jesus defended against Judas: and much people
came thither, not only for Jesus sake, but that they might see Lazarus: But
the chief Priests consulted how they might put Lazarus to death, because many
of the Jews believed by reason of him. John 12. 1, 11. Mark 11. 1, 7. Matthew.
21. 1, 7. Luke 19. 28, 35.

He rides into Jerusalem.
After this Jesus went before, ascending up to Jerusalem; and it came to pass
that when he was nigh to Bethphage, and Bethany, at the Mount of Olives (the
29th day of our March) he sent two of his Disciples for an Ass-colt that was
tied. Mattkew mentions the Dam also: and they brought the Colt unto Jesus, and
cast their Garments on the Colt, and set him thereon, and much people that came
to the Feast, met him, many casting their Garments in the way, and others cut
down branches of the Trees and strewed them in the way, and when he was come
unto the descent of the Mount of Olives, the company that went before and that
followed, cried, Hosanna to the Son of David; then said some of the Pharisees
to him, Master, rebuke thy Disciples: Jesus answered them; and the Pharisees
thereupon said amongst themselves, Perceive ye not that we prevail nothing?
Belhold the world is gone after him. John 12. 12, 18. Luke 19. 36, 40. Mark 11.
8, 9, 10. Matthew. 19. 8, 9.

He wept over Jerusalem.
When Jesus was come nigh, seeing the City, he wept over it, foretelling the
utter destruction thereof. John 12. 19. Luke 19 41, 42. Mark 11. 10, 11.

Children cry Hosanna.
And when he was entered into Jerusalem, all the City was moved saying, who is
this? And Jesus entered into the Temple of God, and cast out those that bought
and sold in it, and healed both blind, and lame in it: and justified the
children who cried, Hosanna, in the Temple, against the Priests, and Scribes
that were displeased at it. He also taught daily in the Temple, those that
heard him being very attentive: But the chief Priests and Elders of the People
sought to destroy him. Luke 19. 45, 46. Mark 11. 11. Matthew. 21. 12, 13, 14, 15,
16.

A voice from heaven.
Some Greeks of those that came to worship at the Feast, desired to see Jesus,
and he answered them that told him: also by preaching of his Passion, and
calling upon his Father he received an answer from Heaven, which some thought
to be Thunder, others an Angel: and speaking again of the lifting up of the Son
of man from the earth, he answered them that asked him, who this Son of man
was? Then going from thence, he hid himself from them: and when it was evening,
he went with his Disciples unto Bethany: and though he had done so many
miracles amongst them, yet did they not believe, that the word of Isaias might
be fulfilled. Yet nevertheless many of the Rulers believed on him, but did not
confess him for fear of the Pharisees Jesus crying out therefore, preached
concerning Faith in him. John 12. 20, 50. Mark 11. 17.

He curses the Fig Tree.
On the morrow when he came from Bethany, he was an hungry, and seeing a
Fig Tree that had only leaves on it, he cursed it, and it straitway withered.
Then they came to Jerusalem, and entering into the Temple, he again cast out
those that sold and bought there, and would not that any should carry a vessel
through the Temple; and crying out, he taught concerning Faith in himself: But
the chief Priests sought how they might destroy him: for they feared him,
because all the people were astonished at his Doctrine: and when evening was
come Jesus went out of the City. Mark 11. 12, 19. Matthew. 21. 18, 19.

Power of Faith.
And when they returned in the morning, as they passed by the Fig Tree, they
saw that it was dried up by the roots, which Peter showing to Jesus, he
preached unto them of the power and virtue of Faith, but especial in Prayers.
And they came again into Jerusalem, and as he was walking in the Temple and
teaching, the chief Priests, Elders, and Scribes came unto him, saying, By what
authority do thou these things? Jesus answered by asking them concerning
John's Baptism. He also spoke unto them the Parable of the two Sons, asking
them, which of the two did the will of his Father? and applied it unto them. As
also the Parable of the vineyard let out to Husbandmen, and of their killing
the Heir of the vineyard, together with the application thereof: And from that
hour they sought to take him: but they feared the People, for they took him for
a Parable of the vineyard and wedding Feast.
Prophet. Again he propounded to them the Parable of the marriage of the Kings
Son, and the refusals, and excuses of some that were bidden, and the wickedness
and punishments of others, especially of him that had not on the wedding
Garment. Then went the Pharisees, and took Counsel how they might entangle him
in his talk: wherefore They lay snares for him.
they sent out unto him their Disciples, with the Herodians saying, Is it
lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not? These being astonished at his answer,
lest him, and went their way. Luke 20. 1, 8, 9, 19, 20, 40. Mark 11. 20, 33,
and 12. 1, 12, 13, 37. Matthew. 21. 19, 46. and 22. 1, 46.

He proves the Resurrection.
The same day there came to Jesus the Saduces, asking him of the woman that had
seven Brethren to her Husbands, which of them should be her Husband in the
Resurrection? and when the multitude heard his answer whereby he proved the
Resurrection, they were astonished at his Doctrine: Then a Pharisee that was a
Lawyer, tempted him, asking which was the great Commandment in the Law? to whom
he answered, and asked the Pharisee whose Son Christ is? and no man was able to
answer him a word, neither durst any man from that day forth, ask him any more
questions. Luke 20. 41, 44.

Eight woes against the Pharisees.
Then spoke Jesus to the multitude, and to his Disciples concerning the Scribes
and Pharisees, denouncing eight woes against them: and turning his speech to
the City of Jerusalem, he accused her of cruelty, and obstinacy, and foretold
her desolation. Luke 20. 45, 46, 47. Mark 1^. 38, 39, 40. Matthew. 23. 1, 39.

The poor widows charity.
And as Jesus sat over against the Treasury he saw a widow casting in two
mites, whom he preferred before them that cast in more. Luke 21. 1, 4. Mark 12.
41, 44.

When he was gone out of the Temple his Disciples showed him the stately
buildings, and stones of it, whereupon he foretold the ruin thereof. Luke 21.
5, 36. Mark 13. 1, 37. Matthew. 24. 1, 51.

He foretells the de struction of the Temple, and the end of the World.
And as he sat on the Mount of Olives over against the Temple, his Disciples
asked him when these things should be, and what should be the sign of his
coming, and of the end of the world? To whom he at large answered concerning
the signs of them both: and warned them to watch, and be ready, because they
knew not the hour when the Lord would come, and he taught the same thing by the
Parable of the ten Virgins: As also by the Parable of the Talents delivered to
the Servants to trade withal; and described the Judgment of this world
(perhaps as a Type of that) by setting the Sheep on the right hand, and the
Goats on the left, and giving sentence upon each of them. By day he taught in
the Temple, but at night he went into the Mount of Olives: and all the People
came unto him early in the morning, and he taught them in the Temple. Matthew.
25. 1, 46. Luke 21. 37, 38.

Foretells his death.
And it came to pass when Jesus had finished these sayings, he said unto his
Disciples, Ye know that after two days is the Passover, and the Son of man
shall be betrayed to be crucified: About which time they consulted together in
the Palace of the High Priest, that they might kill Jesus: But they said, not
on the feast day, lest there be an uproar amongst the People. Mark 14. 1, 2.
Matthew. 26. 1, 5.

And is anointed.
As Jesus was in the House of Simon the Leper, he defended a woman that powered
an Alabaster Box of Ointment on his Head, as he sat at meat, against his
Disciples that murmured at it, and foretold his Burial. Mark 14. 3, 9. Matthew.
26. 6, 13.

Then entered Satan into Judas, who offered himself and covenanted to betray
him. Luke 22. 1, 3. Mark 14. 10, 11. Matthew. 26. 14, 15, 16.

The fourth and last Passover, in which Christ (our Passover) was Sacrificed. 1
Cor. 5. 7. and so an end was put to all the Legal Sacrifices which prefigured
this only one. The fourth, or middle year of the last week of Daniel now
beginning. Dan. 9. 27.
The Passover is prepared.
IN the first day of unleavened Bread, when the Passover was slain ( April 2.)
his Disciples asked him where they should prepare it? Then he sent Peter and
John into the City, telling them that there should meet them a man bearing a
pitcher of water, by following of whom, they should find a Guest-chamber ready
furnished by the good man of the House. Mark 14. 12, 16. Matthew. 26. 17, 18, 19.

Judas the Traitor.
And in the evening he went thither with the twelve, and when they had sat
down and eaten, Jesus said, I have greatly desired to eat this Passover with
you before I suffer: And he commanded them to divide the Cup amongst
themselves: saying, I will not any more eat of the Passover, or drink of the
fruit of the Vine, until the Kingdom of God shall come; Then said he, One of
you shall betray me, and they began to be sorrowful, and to say unto him one by
one, Is it I? and he answered, It is he that dippeth his hand with me in the
dish: and to Judas, asking Is it I? he answered, Thou have said. Luke 22. 14,
18. Mark 14. 17, 18, 21. Matthew. 26. 21, 25.

The Lords Supperinstituted.
Also whilst they were eating Jesus instituted the Sacrament of his Body and
Blood in Bread and Wine after he had supped, adding, I will not henceforth
drink of the fruit of the vine, till I shall drink it new with you in the
Kingdom of my Father? But, behold (says he) the hand of him that betrays me,
is with me at the Table, then they began to enquire amongst themselves if any
among them should do this. Luke 22. 19, 23. Mark 14. 22, 25. Matthew. 26. 25, 26.

He washes his Disciples feet.
There was also a strife amongst them which of them should be accounted
greatest: when Supper was ended, Jesus arose and laid aside his Garments, and
took a Towel and girded himself therewith, and began to wash, and wipe his
Disciples feet, and Peter's also, who at first denied it, but afterward desired
it. This being done, Jesus sat down again, saying, I have showed you an
Example, that as I have done, you might likewise wash one another feet: He
that will be greatest amongst you, let him be the least: Yet he added, I do not
speak of you all for I know whom I have chosen. When he had said these things
he was troubled in spirit, and testified, saying, One of you shall betray me:
His Disciples therefore looking one upon another, were uncertain of whom he
spoke: Peter therefore beckened to the beloved Disciple that he should ask who
it was: Jesus answered, he it is to whom I shall give a sop after I have dipped
it, and he gave the sop to Judas, and said unto him, what thou do, do
quickly. Judas having received the sop went out immediately; and it was night.
Joh. 13. 2, 38. Luke 22. 24, 30.

Faith shall not fail.
When Judas was gone out Jesus said, Now is the Son of man Glorified, and God
is glorified in him: and he told them of his sudden departure, and exhorted
them to the mutual love one of another. He said also, Simon, Simon, behold
Satan has desired you, that he might winnow you as wheat: but have prayed for
thee: and do thou strengthen thy brethren: and when Peter, too confidently,
said, I will lay down my life for thee, he answered, The Cock shall not Crow
till thou have denied me thrice. Then said he unto them, He that has a purse,
let him take it, and he that has not a sword, let him buy one: Some answering,
Here are two Swords, he said, It is enough. Luk 22. 31, 38.

He comforts his Disciples.
Then did Jesus comfort them against the sorrow which they conceived for his
Death: and to the questions of Thomas, Philip, and Judas (who is also Libbaeus,
surnamed Thaddaeus, another of the Son of Alphaeus, and brother of James) he
answered every one particularly, promising them that the holy Ghost should be
their Teacher: And left his Peace with them: and again admonished them of his
approaching Death, and of the joyful fruit thereof: Adding, Arise, let us go
hence: And when they had sung an Hymn, they went out toward the mount of
Olives. John 14. 1, 31. Mark 14. 26. Matthew. 26. 30.

The Parable of the vine and branches.
In the way as they were going, by the parable of the Vine, and the branches,
he exhorted them to bring forth fruit, and to remain in the Love of God toward
them, and mutually to love one another, and to abide patiently the hatred of
the World, which hates Christ himself: and that they should not be offended for
persecutions. John 15. 27. And again he comforted them against sorrow for his
Death by the promise of sending them the Comforter, the Spirit of truth, whose
Office against the World, and toward them he describes. And admonished them
that yet a little while, and they should not see him: and they, not
understanding what that meaned, he explained it unto them: and told them that
their aforesaid sorrow should be turned into joy, by the example of a woman
bringing forth a man-child: As also by the promise of his returning to them, by
the love of the Father toward them, and by his ready hearing of their
Petitions that they should make in his Name. And when he said, I came forth
from the Father, and am come into the world, and again, I leave the world and
go unto the Father, his Disciples answered, Lo, now thou speak plainly: we
believe thou came from God: To this Jesus replied, that the time was now come
that they should be scattered every one to his own, and that himself should be
left alone, and at last concluded with a most Divine Prayer to the Father for
the mutual illustration of his own, and the Fathers Glory: His Divine Prayer.
As also for the Apostles, and the whole company of believers John 16. 1, 33.
and 17. 1, 26.

He foretells Peter's denial
When Jesus had spoken these things, he went with his Disciples (as he was
wont) over the Brook Cedron, to the Mount of Olives. Then said Jesus unto them,
all ye shall be offended because of me this night. But after I am risen again,
I will go before you into Galilee: and when Peter said, Though all men should
be offended, yet will not I; Jesus said, To Day, vein this night before the
Cock-crow thou shall deny me thrice: but both he, and all the Disciples
replied, Though we should die with thee, yet we will not deny thee. John 18. 1.
Luke 22. 39. Mark 14. 27, 31. Matthew. 26. 31, 35, 36.

Jesus in his Agony
Then came they to a place called Gethsemane, where was a Garden into which
Jesus entered, and his Disciples, unto whom he said, Pray ye that ye enter not
into Temptation: Sit here, while I go and Pray yonder. And he took Peter, and
the two Sons of Zebedee with him, and began to be very sorrowful, and he said
unto them, Tarry here and watch, and going from them about a stones cast, he
kneeled down and Prayed that the Cup might pass from him: and there appeared an
Angel from Heaven, strengthening him. Then he returned and finding his
Disciples sleeping, he reprehended and admonished them: and then went the
second time, and prayed more earnestly, and being in an Agony his sweat was as
drops of blood: and coming again, he found them sleeping for sorrow, for their
eyes were heavy: and therefore he again admonished them, and they knew not what
to answer. Then left he them, and went away again and prayed the same words:
after which coming to his Disciples, he said unto them, Sleep on now, and take
your rest: Behold the time is come, and the Son of man is betrayed into the
hands of sinners: Arise, Let us be going: Behold he is at hand that does betray
me. Luke 22. 46. Mar. 14. 32, 42. Mat. 26. 36, 46.

He is betrayed by Judas.
While Jesus yet spoke, Behold Judas (who knew the place, because Jesus often
resorted thither with his Disciples) with the chief Priests, Pharisees,
Captains of the Temple, and Elders of the People, and Officers, and a Band sent
from them, came thither with Lanthorns, and Torches, and a great multitude with
swords and staves. And Judas had given them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall
kiss the same is he, and he straitway kissed Jesus: To whom Jesus said,
wherefore art thou come? Betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss? John 18.
23. Luke 22. 47, 48. Mark 14. 43. 4, 7. Matthew. 26. 47, 56. But Jesus knowing
all things that should come unto him, went out, and said unto them, Whom seek
ye? they said unto him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus said unto them, I am he: and
they went backwards and fell to the ground. He asked them again, and answered
them as at first: adding If ye seek me, let these go away. Joh. 18. 4, 9. Then
they took him; and when those that were about Jesus saw what would follow, they
said to him, Lord* shall we smite with the Sword? and Peter struck off the
right ear of Malchus. To whom Jesus said, Put up thy sword: Cannot I pray, and
have more than twelve Legions of Angels? Shall not I drink of the Cup that my
Father has given me? Suffer you thus far: and he touched his ear and healed
him. And Jesus said unto them, Do ye come out as against a Thief with Swords
and Staves? But this is your hour, and the power of Darkness. Then all his
Disciples left him and fled, and a certain young man (of their company) being
laid hold of, left his linen cloth, and fled from them, John 18. 10, 11. Luke
22. 49, 50, 51. Mark 14 48, 52. Mat. 26. 57, 75.

He is sent bound to Caiphas.
Then they bound Jesus, and brought him, first to Annas, the Father in law of
Caiphas, who sent him bound to Caiphas the high Priest, who formerly had
prophesied, that it was expedient that one man should die for the People. There
were all the chief Priests, and Elders, and Scribes of the People gathered
together. Then Caiphas asked Jesus concerning his Disciples, and his Doctrine:
Jesus answered, I spoke openly to the world, ask them that heard me: then one
of the Officers stroke him with a staff: To whom he said, If I have well
spoken, why smitest thou me? Then all False witnesses against him
the Council sought false witnesses against him, and found none. At last two
false witnesses came, but their testimony agreed not. Caiphas then said,
Answerest thou not to what they witness against thee? But Jesus held his peace.
Then he adjured him to tell whether he were the Christ, and Jesus answered, I
am: and ye shall see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the power of
God, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven. Wherefore they judged him guilty of
death He is judged guilty of death and abused.
for this blasphemy. Then did they mock him, and spit upon him, and cruelly
beat him with buffets and staves: and covering his face, they said, Prophecy
who smote thee? and many other things they spoke against him reproachfully.
Joh. 18. 12, 27. Luke 22. 54, 65. Mar. 14. 53, 72. Mat. 26. 57, 75.

Peter denies him.
Peter followed afar off that he might see the end, and so did another Disciple
that was known to the high Priest, and went with Jesus into the Palace, but
Peter stood without at the door: then that other Disciple spoke to her that
kept the door, and brought him in. And as Peter was warming himself at the fire
(for it was cold) the maid that kept the door asked him, and affirmed that he
was one of his Disciples, but he denied it, or that he knew him, or knew what
she said. A little after he went out into the Porch, and the Cock crew. And as
he was going out another maid saw him, and said to the bystanders, This fellow
was also with Jesus of Nazareth; Also another said, Thou art also one of them;
Then he again denied it with an Oath: and about an hour after they that stood
by said, Thy speech bewrays thee: and the Cousin of Malchus amongst the rest
said, Did not I see thee in the Garden with him? and while he yet spoke the
Cock crew the second time: then the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter, and he
remembering the words of Jesus, went out, and wept And Repents.
bitterly. John 18. 25, etc. Luke 22. 55, etc. Mark 14. 66, etc. Matthew. 26. 69,
etc.

As soon as it was Day, the Elders of the People, and the chief Priests, and
the Scribes, came together, and led him into their Council, saying, Art thou
the Christ? Jesus said unto them, Ye will not believe, nor answer me, nor let
me go. Yet he said, that he was the Son of God: To which they replied, what
need we any further witness. Luke 22. 66, 71.

Jesus is sent to Pilate.
Then straightway in the morning the whole multitude of them arose, and led him
bound to Pontius Pilate, the Governor, from Caiphas to the Hall of Judgment (
April 3d.) But they went not into the Judgment Hall, lest they should be
defiled that they could not eat the Passover: and Jesus stood before the
Governor. Pilate therefore came forth unto them, and said, What accusation
bring you against this man? they answered, If he were not a malifactor we would
not have delivered him unto thee: and they accused him, saying, we found this
man perverting the Nation, and forbiding to pay Tribute unto Caesar, saying
that he himself is Christ, a King: And when he was accused of the Chief
Priests, and Elders, he answered nothing. Then said Pilate, Hear thou not
how many things they witness against thee? But he answered him not a word, so
that Pilate marvelled. Then said Pilate to them, Take ye him and judge him
according to your Law: But they replied, It is not lawful for us to put any man
to Death. Pilate then entered into the Judgment Hall again, and calling Jesus,
said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews? Jesus answered, Say thou this
of thy self, or did others tell it thee of me? Pilate said, Am I a Jew? Thine
own Nation, and the Chief Priests have delivered thee unto me: what have thou
done? Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this world: Pilate therefore said
unto him, Art thou then a King? Jesus answered, For this cause came I into the
world that I might bear witness unto the truth. Then said Pilate to him, what
is Truth? And when he had said this, he went out again to the Jews, and said
unto Pilate cleers him
them, I find in him no fault at all: and they were the more fierce, saying, He
stirs up the People, teaching throughout all Jewry, beginning in Galilee, to
this place. Pilate hearing of Galilee, asked him if he were a Galilean? and
when he knew that he belonged to Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who
was in Jerusalem in those days. When He is sent to Herod, who abuses him.
Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad: But being deceived of his hopes of
seeing a Miracle, and Jesus not vouchsafing any answer, either to him, or to the
chief Priests and Scribes that vehemently accused him, after he had set Jesus
at naught, and mocked him, he sent him back to Pilate, arrayed in a gorgeous
robe: and Herod, and Pilate were made friends that very day. John 18. 28, 40.
Luke 23. ^, 16, 25. Mark 15. 1, 5. Matthew. 27. 11, 26.

Pilate again cleers him.
Then Pilate, when he had called the Chief Priests, and the Rulers, and the
People, he said unto them; Neither I, nor Herod find any fault in him, nor any
thing worthy of Death: I will therefore chastise him and release him. For he
was of necessity (according to the custom) every Feast to deliver to the
People one Prisoner whomsoever they would. And the multitude crying out aloud,
began to desire that he would do unto them as he ever had done. Then said
Pilate, ye have a custom that I should release one unto you at the Passover:
Will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews, or Barabbas?
For he knew that the chief Priests had delivered him up of envy: But they
stirred up the People that they should rather desire Barabbas, who was a
notable Thief, who lay bound for insurrection, and murder in the City. When
Pilate was set down on the Judgment seat, his Wife sent to him, saying, Have
thou nothing to do with that just man: For I have suffered many things in my
dream by reason of him this day* Pilate therefore spoke unto them again, being
willing to release Jesus, which of them will ye that I release unto you? They
all cried out, saying, Not him but Barabbas. Pilate replied, What then will ye
that I shall do unto him whom ye call King of the Jews? and they all cried out
again, Crucify him: Pilate said unto them the third time, Why? what evil has
he done? I find no cause of death in him: I will therefore chastise him, and
let him go: But they cried the more earnestly, Crucify him: and were very
instant with loud voices desiring the same. Mark 15. 6, 15.

Jesus is scourged, and Crowned with Thorns.
Then Pilate took Jesus and scourged him, and the Soldiers platted a Crown of
Thorns, and put it on his Head, and clothed him with Purple, saying, Hail, King
of the Jews, and beat him with staves. Pilate therefore went forth again unto
them, and said unto them, Behold I bring him forth unto you, that ye may know
that I find no fault in him: Then Jesus came forth, wearing the Crown of
Thorns, and the Robe, and Pilate said unto them, Behold the man. When the Chief
Priests, and Officers saw him, they cried out, saying, Crucify him, Crucify
him. Pilate replied, Take ye him and Crucify him; for I find no fault in him.
Then said the Jews, He ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God:
When Pilate heard that, he was the more afraid, and went again into the
Jugdement Hall, and said to Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no
answer. Then said Pilate to him, Speak thou not unto me? Know thou not
that I have power to Crucify thee? Jesus answered, Thou could have no power
unless it were given thee from above. From thence-forth Pilate sought to
release him: But the Jews cried out, Then art thou not Caesar's friend. When
Pilate heard this, he sat on the Judgment seat, in the place called the
Pavement, and it was the preparation of the Passover, and about the sixth hour:
Then said he to the Jews, Behold your King: The chief Priests answered, We have
no King but Caesar. When Pilate therefore saw that he prevailed nothing, but
the rather a tumult was made, he took water and washed his hands before the
multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this Pilate condemns him.
just person, see you to it. And all the People answered, and said, His blood
be upon us, and our children. Then Pilate being willing to content the
multitude, released unto them Barabbas, and when he had scourged Jesus, he
delivered him over to their will, that he might be Crucified. John 19. 1, 16,
17, 30.

He is mocked.
Then the Soldiers of the Governor, when they had led Jesus into the Hall
called Praetonium, they called together the whole band; and when they had
stripped him, they put upon him a Skarlet Robe, and platted a Crown of Thorns
and put it on his Head, and a Reed in his right Hand, and bowing the knee, they
mocked him, saying, Hail, King of Jews. And when they had spat on him, they
took the Reed, and smote him on the Head: and when they had mocked him, they
took off the Purple, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to
Crucify him. Matthew. 27. 27, 31. Mark 15. 16, 37.

Judas hangs himself.
Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented
himself and brought the thirty pieces of Silver to the chief Priests,
confessing his sin unto them: and casting the Silver pieces into the Temple,
went and hanged himself: and they bought with them the Potters Field, that the
Prophecy might be fulfilled. Matthew. 27. 3, etc.

Jesus carries his cross.
And Jesus came forth carrying his Cross; but as they were leading him, they
found one Simon of Cyrene, as he came out of the Country, whom they took, and
compelled to carry the Cross after Jesus: There were also two Thieves that were
led with him to be Crucified. And there followed a great multitude of People,
and of women that lamented, to whom Jesus turned and foretold the lamentable
destruction of Jerusalem. And when they were come into the place called
Calvary, but in the Hebrew, Golgotha, they gave him to drink Wine mingled with
Myrrh, and vinegar mingled with Gall, and when he had tasted it, he would not
drink it: and they Crucified him there He is Crucified
(and it was the third hour) and two Thieves with him, one on the right hand,
and the other on the left. And Jesus said, Father forgive them: for they know
not what they do. And Pilate wrote a Superscription in Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin, and put it on the Cross: which, at the request of the chief Priests,
Pilate would not alter. And after they had crucified him, they divided his
Garments into four parts, to every Soldier, that was employed in his
execution, a part: and cast Lots for his Seamless Coat, whose it should be,
that the Scripture might be fulfilled: and sitting down they watched him there;
and the People stood beholding him: But they that passed by, reviled him,
wagging their heads, and saying, Oh, thou that destroyest And mocked.
the Temple, and buildest it in three Days, save thy self: If thou be the
Son of God, come down from the Cross. Likewise also the Chief Priests, and
Rulers, with the People, and Scribes, and Elders mocking, and scoffing, said
amongst themselves: He saved others, himself he cannot save. If he be the King
of Israel; If that Christ, the chosen of God, let him come down from the Cross,
and we will believe him. He trusted in God let him deliver him if he will have
him; For he said, I am the Son of God: The Soldiers also mocked him, and
coming to him, offered him Vinegar, saying, If thou be the King of the Jews,
save thy self. The Thieves also that were Crucified with him, cast the same in
his Teeth. And one of them, continuing his railing against him, the other being
converted, rebuked him, and said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come
into thy Kingdom: To whom Jesus answered, To day shall thou be The good Thief.
with me in Paradise. And there stood by his Cross the Mother of Jesus, and his
Mothers Sister, Mary, the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene: When Jesus
therefore saw his Mother, and the Disciple whom he loved standing by, he said
to his Mother, Behold thy Son, and to the Disciple, Behold thy Mother. And when
the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over all the Land, or Country,
until the ninth hour: and about the ninth hour, Jesus cried out with a loud
voice, Eli, Eli, lamma saba cthani? and some that stood by, said, he calls
Elias. Luke 23. 26. 38. Matthew. 27. 32, 50. Luke 23. 44, 45, 46.

He gives up the Ghost.
After this, when Jesus knew that all things were accomplished, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, he said, I thirst. Now there was set there a
vessel full of Vinegar, and they filled a Sponge with Vinegar, and put it upon
Hysop, or a Reed, and put it to his mouth, saying, with the rest, Let be, let
us see if Elias will come to save him, and take him down. But Jesus, when he
had received the Vinegar, said, It is finished. And then again he cried with a
loud voice, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and bowing his head, he
gave up the Ghost. And when the Centurion saw that he so cried out, and gave up
the Ghost, he Glorified God, saying, Truly this is a just man; Truly this is
the Son of God. Mark 15. 38, 42.

The Vail of the Temple is rent.
And behold the vail of the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the
bottom, and the Earth did quake, and the Rocks rent, and the Graves were
opened, and many Bodies of the Saints, which slept, arose, and came out of
their Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the Holy City, and appeared
unto many. And the Centurion, and they that stood over against, and they that
watched Jesus, when they saw the Earthquake, and the things that were done,
feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God. And all the People that
came together to that sight, beholding the things that were done, smote their
Breasts, and returned: And his acquaintance, and the Women which followed him
from Galilee, stood afar off, beholding these things, among whom were Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the Mother of James the Less, and Mother of Joses, and
Salome, who also when he was in Galilee followed him, and ministered unto him,
and many other Women that came up to Jerusalem with him. Luke 23. 47, 48, 49.
Mat. 27. 51, 56.

His side is pierced.
The Jews therefore, that the Bodies should not remain on the Cross on the
Sabbath (for that Sabbath was an high day) because it was the preparation,
besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken
down. The Soldiers therefore came and brake the legs of the two Thieves, but
not of Jesus, because he was already dead. Yet one of them with a spear pierced
his side, and there came out Blood and Water, and these things were done that
the Scriptures might be fulfilled. Joh. 19. 31, 37.

His Body is given to Joseph.
And when Even was now come, because it was the preparation, that is, the Day
before the Sabbath, there came Joseph of Arimathea, a Rich man, and an
Honorable Councellor, who also looked for the Kingdom of God, a good, and a
just man, and one who had not consented to the counsel and deed of them: Being
a Disciple, but secretly for fear of the Jews, came boldly to Pilate, and
begged the Body of Jesus. Pilate marvelled that he was already dead, and
calling the Centurion asked him, and when he knew it, he gave the Body to
Joseph. There came also Nicodemus (which at first came to Jesus by night) and
brought a mixture of Myrrh, and Aloes about a hundred pound weight: and they
took the Body of Jesus and wrapped it in a linen cloth with the spices, as the
manner of the Jews was to bury. And Joseph laid it And buried.
in his own new Sepulcher, which he had hewn out of a Rock, wherein yet never
man was laid, and which was in a Garden in the place where Jesus was crucified,
rolling a great Stone to the door of the Sepulcher: and Mary Magdalene, and
Mary the Mother of Joses, who came with him from Galilee, beheld where they
laid him, sitting over against the Sepulcher; and they returned and prepared
spices and ointments, and rested the Sabbath Day according to the Commandment.
Joh. 19. 38, 42. Luke 23. 50, 56. Mar. 15. 42, 47. Mat. 27. 57, 61.

His Sepulcher is sealed.
The next Day [ April 4th] the Pharisees besought Pilate that he would command
the Sepulcher to be made sure until the third Day, adding their reason; which,
when he had yielded to, they went and made the Sepulcher sure, sealing the
Stone, and setting a Watch.

His Resurrection.
In the end of the Sabbath, or when the Sabbath was now past [ April 5th] when
it dawned toward the first day of the Week, in the morning very early whilst
it was yet dark, came Mary Magdalene, and Mary the Mother of James and Salome,
bringing Spices which they had bought, that they might see the Sepulcher, and
anoint Jesus: And they said, Who shall roll away the Stone from the door for
us? and when the Sun was risen, coming to the Sepulcher they saw the Stone
rolled away: For behold there was a great Earthquake: For the Angel of the Lord
came down from Heaven, and rolled away the Stone, and sat upon it: and they
went in, but found not the Body of the Lord Jesus: and it came to pass, as they
were much perplexed thereat, behold two men came to them in shining Raiment;
their countenances were as lightening, and their garments white as snow.
Matthew and Mark mention but one Angel: and the Keepers for fear did shake, and
became as dead men. And when the Women were afraid and bowed their Faces to the
Earth, the Angels said to them, Fear not ye, I know that ye seek Jesus that was
Crucified: But why seek ye the living amongst the Dead? He is not here: He is
risen as he said, Come and see the place where the Lord was laid, and remember
what he said, whilst he was in Galilee with you; saying, The Son of man must
be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be Crucified, and the third Day
rise again: But go ye quickly, and tell his Disciples, and Peter, that he is
risen from the dead, and behold he goes before you into Galilee, there ye shall
see him; behold, I have told you. Then the women remembered the Words of Jesus,
and they departed quickly out of the Sepulcher with fear and wonder, and great
joy, and ran to tell his Disciples: but they said nothing to any man as they
went: for they were afraid. And when the Women told these things to the eleven,
and to all the rest, their words seemed to them as idle Tales. But Mary
Magdalene telling Peter, and the other Disciple whom Jesus loved, They have
taken away the Lord and we know not where they have laid him; Peter and that
other Disciple went out, and came to the Sepulcher: but that other Disciple did
outrun Peter, and came first to the Sepulcher, and when he stooped down, he saw
the linen clothes lying, but went not in. Then came Peter following him, and
went into the Sepulcher, and saw the linen clothes lie, and the napkin that
was about his Head not lying with them, but wrapped together in a place by it
self: Then went in that other Disciple, and saw and believed, and Peter went
unto his own home, wondering at what was done: For as yet they knew not the
Scriptures, that he must rise again from the Dead. And the Disciples went to
their own home. But Mary Magdalene stood without at the Sepulcher weeping, and
whilst she wept, she stooped down in the Sepulcher and saw two Angels in
white, sitting, the one at the Head, the other at the feet, where the Body of
Jesus had lain; and they said unto her: Woman why weepest thou? She said, They
have Jesus appears to Mary M.
taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him: and when she had
thus said, she turned back, and saw Jesus, but knew not that it was he. And
Jesus said to her, Why weepest thou? whom seek thou? She, supposing that it
had been the Gardener, said, If thou have born him hence, tell me where thou
have laid him, and I will take him away: Jesus said to her, Touch me not, but
go and tell my Brethren saying, I go, etc. And she came and told his Disciples,
and those that had been with him, as they were weeping, and mourning, that she
had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her: But they believed
her not. And as the Women went from the Sepulcher (perhaps Mary Magdalene was
absent) that they might tell his Disciples, behold Jesus met them, And to other
Women.
and said unto them, All hail, and they came and held him by the feet, and
worshipped him. Then said Jesus to them, Be not afraid, Go and tell my Brethren
that they go into Galilee, there they shall see me. Joh. 20. 1, 2, 18. Luke 24.
1, 12. Mar. 14. 1, 11. Mat. 28 1, 8, 9, 10.

Now when they were going, behold the Watch went into the City, and showed to
the Chief Priests all the things that were done: and when they were assembled
with the Elders, they took counsel, and gave large money to the Soldiers that
they should say, that his Disciples came and stole him away whilst they slept:
and if it come to the Governors ears (said they) we will persuade him, and
secure you. So they took the money, and did as they were taught: and this
saying is commonly reported amongst the Jews to this Day. Mat. 28. 11, 15.

And to two, going to Emaus.
And two of them went into the Country that same Day to a Village sixty
Furlongs from Jerusalem, called Emaus: and as they journeyed, Jesus went along
with them; and they, telling what things were done concerning Jesus of
Nazareth, how he was crucified, and that he rose again, etc. Jesus showed them
out of the Scriptures that it behooved Christ to suffer, and to enter into his
Glory. And in the Village, when he had taken Bread, and given Thanks, and
broken it, he was known to them, their eyes being opened, though he appeared in
another form, and he vanished out of their sight. And they rose up that same
hour, and returned to Jerusalem to the eleven, who said to these two, The Lord
is risen indeed, and has appeared unto Simon. Then they told them what things
were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking of Bread: but
neither believed they them. Luke 24. 13 35. Mar. 14. 12, 13.

And to his Disciples.
Whilst they yet spoke, it being evening, in the first Day of the Week, the
Doors being shut where the Disciples were gathered together for fear of the
Jews, came Jesus himself and stood in the midst of them, and said, Peace be
unto you: But they were affrighted supposing that they had seen a Spirit; But
he upbraided them with their unbelief, and hardness of heart, because they had
not believed those that had seen him since he was risen: and he said unto them,
Why are you troubled? see my hands and my feet: A Spirit has not flesh and
bones: and he showed them his hands and his feet and his side: And when they
believed not for Joy, and wondered, he said unto them, Have ye here any meat?
and he did eat a piece of broiled meat and an Honey comb: and his Disciples
rejoiced that they had seen the Lord And he said unto them, These are the words
that I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you: That all things must be
fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms of me. Then he opened their understandings that they might
understand His speeches to them.
the Scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behooved
Christ to suffer, and to rise from the Dead the third Day, and that Repentance
and remission of sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations, and ye
are witnesses of these things. And behold I send the Promise of my Father among
you: But tarry ye at Jerusalem till ye have received power from on high. He
said again unto them, Peace be unto you: as my Father sent me, so send I you.
Go ye into all the World and Preach the Gospel to every Creature: He that
believes and is Baptized, shall be saved: but he that believes not, shall be
damned. And these signs shall follow them that believe: In my Name they shall
cast out Devils: they shall speak new Tongues: they shall take up Serpents: and
if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them: they shall lay their
hands on the sick, and they shall recover. And when he had said these things,
he breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: Whose sins ye remit,
they are remitted to them, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. Thus
Jesus appeared five times in the first Day of his Resurrection. Joh. 20. 19,
23. Luke 24 36, 49. Mar. 14. 14, 18.

Thomas his incredulity
But Thomas called Dydimus was not with them when Jesus came, and the rest of
the Disciples told him, We have seen the Lord: But he very confidently
professed that he would not believe it. After eight Days [ April the 12th]
Thomas being then present with the rest, Jesus came, the doors being shut, and
stood in the midst, and said unto them, Peace be unto you, and abundantly
satisfied Thomas his unbelief. Joh. His Faith is confirmed.
20. 24, 29. Luke 24. 16, 20.

He appeared again.
Then the Eleven Disciples went into Galilee unto the Mountain that he had
appointed them. And when they saw him, they worshipped him, but some doubted:
and when Jesus came unto them, he said, All power is given unto me both in
Heaven and Earth, Go therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. and
lo I am with you to the end of the World. Mat. 28. 16, 20. After that, Jesus
was seen of above five hundred Brethren at once and after that to James. 1 Cor.
15. 6, 7.

And again
Afterward Jesus showed himself to his Disciples at the Sea of Tiberias: or at
least, to seven of them as they were fishing. For they having fished all night
and caught nothing, in the morning, Jesus unknown unto them, stood upon the
shore, and bid them cast their net on the right side of the Ship, and they
caught a hundred fifty and three great Fishes: and Jesus said unto them, Come
and Dine; and none of them durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing it was the
Lord. When they had dined, he warned Peter thrice of his Pastoral charge as he
loved Jesus, and forewarned him what kind of death he should die. And to Peter's
question concerning John, he gave an answer that was not rightly understood of
the Brethren. Joh. 21. 1, 24.

His Ascension.
Last of all be appeared to his Disciples in Jerusalem, and led them out as far
as Bethany, and he lift up his hands, and blessed them. And it came to pass
that as he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into Heaven.
Luke 24. 50, 51. Mat. 28. 19.

The Promises of him to the Fathers.
This Jesus Christ was promised to Adam in Paradise presently after his fall in
those Words, The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Head: but whether
he should come of Jew or Gentile, not a word was told him. After this Abraham
(the Hebrew) was given to understand that of his Seed should come the Messiah:
but of what Tribe, nothing was revealed. To Jacob indeed it was showed, that of
the Tribe of Judah should Shiloh come: but whether Male, or Female, nothing
certain. David was assured that a Son of his should sit upon his Throne for
ever: But till Isaias, it was not known that he should be born of a pure
Virgin: that a woman should compass a man. Isa. 7. 14. Behold a Virgin, that
famous Virgin (the Original sets it forth with an Accent) spoken of Genesis 3.
15. shall conceive and bear a Son. The very place of his Birth was not set
forth till Micha did it. Mich. 5. 2. Not the just time till Daniel foretold it.
Dan. 9. 24. Thus by degrees, and piecemeal (as it were) God spoke of old to the
Fathers by his servants the Prophets. Heb. 1. 1. Every age almost, brought
sorth some new thing touching the Babe of Bethlehem (lapt up in the swathbands
of the Holy Scriptures) either in express and evident terms, and testimonies,
or else in mirrors, and miracles. Lastly John Baptist (Fibula Legis and
Gratiae, as one calls him) the Buckler of the Law, and Gospel, pointed him out
Chrysolog.
with his finger, Behold the Lamb of God, etc.

His excellency.
Now this Jesus Christ is the most excellent Person in the world; the fairest
amongst men: worth ten thousand of us, as the People said of David. 2 Samuel 18.
3. Look upon him as he is described, Heb. 1. 1, 2, 3. For his Nobility, He is
Gods own Son: For his Riches, He is heir of all things: For his Wisdom, He made
the Worlds: For his Eminency, He is the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and
the express Image of his Person: For his might, He upholdeth all things by the
Word of his Power: For his Merits, He has by himself purged our sins: For his
Preferment, He sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on High Traps Treas.

The quallity and kind of Christ's Death is remarkable for three Characters
which were engraven on the Death of the Cross, which he died.

His painful Death
1. For the painfulness of it. The nature of that Death was painful: For Death
it self is painful; no man pays that debt with ease. When Asa dies, he cries,
Ah my feet. When David dies, he complains, O my cold Body. When the Shunamites
Child dies, he cries, Ah my pained head. When ^zzah dies, he cries, Oh my
Leprous skin. Life is a precious Pearl: But there are three things besides,
which made Christ's Death painful.

His violent Death.
1. Violence. It Is painful to die of any violent disease: but when five deaths
do all concur, and strive which of them shall dispatch the poor man soonest,
this must needs be more painful. Such was Christ's Death, which made him
complain. Psalm. 22. 16. They pierced my hands and my feet, and Joh. 19. 34. One
of the Soldiers with a Spear pierced his side, and forthwith there came out
blood, and water. Here are five Deaths that invaded a living man: Death on each
hand, and on each leg, and death on his side, though this last, came a little
too late. Now a violent Death it must needs be, when strong and great nails did
pierce the most nervous parts of his Body, his hands and his feet.

His slow Death.
2. Slowness. Four leasurely violent Deaths seized on him. Blood is the life of
the living Creature: then look how long his blood was coming out, his Life was
dropping out as long. It Is a great aggravation for a man to be long a dying,
and yet cannot die. To have his torment quick, and yet his Death slow is an
Image of Hell, where men seek Death, and yet cannot find it. Christ's slow
Death was divided into four quarters. Death at each hand, and at each foot made
his pain the greater. The weight of his Body did hang upon those four
tormenting nails, his pierced Hands and Feet, as if Death had delighted to hold
Christ long at sea, and to deny him it is last sad service. Christ had been
before dying a terrible Death in the Garden, when he was boiled (as it were) in
a bloody sweat: and two circumstances show that the two Thieves Death was
nothing in slowness of torment comparable to Christ's death.

1. The sad and direful preparatories to Christ's Death, as he was the night
before in a Soul-death, when those (...), as it were Drops, or great hail
stones of blood, frozen, or hardened together (as Stephanus thinks) through
extreme terror: when he was scourged, and Crowned with Thorns.

2. He was so weakened in Body thereby, that he was not able to bear his own
Cross: which made him complain. Psalm. 22. 17. I may tell all my Bones. My
strength is dried up like a Potsheard: So that Christ began to die the night
before, and continued dying twenty four hours, the Lords anger and curse being
on him, and then bodily pain, with the curse of the Law all this time wrought
upon him. And Christ, in bearing the pains of the second Death, did suffer that
which all the Elect should have sustained in their Souls for ever. Isa. 53. 6.
The Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all: and though Christ died but one
Death for all the Elect, yet in the extremity of the pain, it was many Deaths
to him.

3. Many degrees of Life were taken from him. Consider how much of Life Christ
had, and the removing of it by violence must be so much the more painful. Now
life natural had in Christ a sweet and a peaceable dwelling: the possession of
life was with excellent delights: It was planted besides the Glorious Godhead
personally, and so had sweet company, and that made it pleasant. It had not
been so much to take away the Life of a common man, whose life is not
privileged with Grace, and the Grace of a Personal union with God.

2. His shame full death.
The second Character that was engraven on Christ's Death, was, that it was
shameful, and reproachful. Now Shame is, first, Fundamentally in the cause:
Sin, and Sin acted by men against that Law of God is the only foundation of
Shame: Exodus 32. 25. Aaron made the People naked to their Shame. So 2 Samuel 13.
13. Shame and sin are near a kin. And thus Christ was no more capable of Shame
than he was of sin. He came out of the Womb clothed with the white Robe of
Innocence, and he never contracted one black spot on that fair Robe of the
highest Image of God from the womb to the Grave, and therefore there was no
shame fundamentally in Christ.

2. There is Shame formally in sin: and that, first, In being ashamed Actively.
Secondly, In bearing of Shame Passively. In the former consideration, because
sin is a shameful thing in itself. Jer. 11. 13. There is an Internal blushing,
and Shame rising from sin; the Conscience of the sinner (if it be not
cauterized) thinking ill of sin, and esteeming it self base in doing it. Romans
6. 21. What fruit had you in those things whereof you are now ashamed? So
Christ thought ill of sin, and esteemed the Creature base in sinning. 2. Christ
our Lord being our surety, though he could not be ashamed of any sin he did
himself: Yet being made a sin for us, he did bear the shame of our sin: and
thus he was not free from shame passively, as it is a punishment of sin. Isa.
50. 6. I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off
the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting. Heb. 12. 2. He endured the
Cross, despising the shame. So then in these respects Christ did bear our Shame.

1. In that, though he was the Lord of Glory, and thought it no robbery to be
equal with the Father; yet he abased himself to become man: yea, the lowest of
men, a Servant. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. Matthew. 20. 28. Isa. 49. 7.

2. All the tokens of reproach and shame were on his sufferings: As,

1. In Gestures: they put a Crown of Thorns on his head: and a Reed for a
Scepter in his hand to mock his Kingly Power. They saluted him with mocks, and
bowing the knee to him. 2. In words. They cried out, Hail, King of the Jews:
They scorned his Prophetical dignity, when they blindfolded him, saying,
Prophecy who it is that smote thee. And to deride his Priesthood, they put a
Robe on him: and when he was on the Cross offering himself as our Priest in a
Sacrifice to God, all that passed by, wagged their Heads, and shot out their
Lips, saying, He trusted in God, let him deliver him, etc. Then did they spit
in his face, which in the Law was a great shame. Deuteronomy. 25. 9, 50. Job 30. 10.
3. His Death was shameful, the Death of a thief, and robber: So it is called,
Christ's reproach. Heb. 13. 13. Let us go forth bearing his reproach. It was a
shameful thing to see the Lord of Glory, bearing his own Cross on his back, and
all the children, and base ones of the City wondering at him, and crying out
upon him. This is called the reproach, or Shame of Christ. Heb. 11. 26. Psalm.
22. 7. 4. They shamed him in pulling off his Garments, and scourging him. As,
Jer. 13. 26. They brought him bound to Pilate as if he had been a Common Thief.
Matthew. 26. 2. Hence Isa. 53. 3. He was despised, and rejected of men: and we
hid as it were our faces from him. He had all shame put upon him: He was
branded as the greatest Thief of the three: He went out at the Gate of life,
bleeding, pained, cursed, shamed, forsaken, despised and mocked. Even the Sun
seemed to be ashamed to see its Creator in so painful and shameful a condition,
and therefore hid its head.
3. His cursed Death.
The third Character which was engraven on Christ's Death, was the curse of God.
Now the Curse that Christ was made, Was,

1. The Lords pronouncing him a Curse. Deuteronomy. 21. 23. Cursed is he that hangs
on a Tree; which Paul applies to Christ. Gal. 3. 10, 13. This indeed was a
Ceremonial curse; but had a special Relation to Christ, who was under a real,
and Moral Curse. 2. Gods devoting and setting him apart in his eternal Counsel
for suffering the punishment of sin. 3. The dishonor that was put upon him;
and so was Christ under a curse. Psalm. 22. 7. He was a worm and no man. Isa.
53. 3. The least of men: the contempt and refuse of men. Act. 4. 11. The Stone
rejected by the builders. Hanging is the death of the poorest, and basest of
men: and thus was Christ used. Act. 5. 30. Whom ye slew and hanged on a Tree.
Act. 2. 23. Whom by wicked hands ye have Crucified and slain. Hanging is more
then slaying: It Is putting him to a base Death that is cursed of God and man:
and this to be inflicted on a King lineally descended of the Blood Royal, the
Kingly Tribe of Judah: the only man on Earth that by birth and Law had Title
to the Crown of Judea, was the worst that men or Devils could do.
Triuni Deo Gloria.
To the Reader.
THere is lately published, by Mr Sam. Clarke, a new piece of Lives containing
the Lives of ten eminent Divines; with some other private Christians, the
Divines being as follow, Mr John Carter, Mr Sam. Crook, Mr John Cotton, Dr Tho
Hill, Dr Will. Gouge, Mr Tho. Gataker, Mr Jeremy Whitaker, and Bishop James
Usher, Mr Rich. Capel, and Dr Rob. Harris, etc.

There is also another piece of Mr Clerks Newly published, it being the wicked
Life, and wosul death of Herod the Great, a stranger by nation, yet by the
Romans made King of the Jews. Taking in also the Story of the Jews during all
the time of his Reign, which was about thirty seven years, whereof thirty five
were before the Incarnation of Christ, and two after, whereby much light is
given to many passages in the Evangelists, etc.

Both sold by William Miller, at the Gilded Acorn near the little North door in
St Paul's Churchyard.


