Mr: HIDES ARGUMENT BEFORE THE LORDS IN THE UPPER HOUSE of Parliament. April
1641.

Printed in the year, 1641.

Mr. HIDES ARGUMENT Before the LORDS in the upper House of Parliament. April.
1641.
MY Lords, I am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House
of Commons to present to your Lordships a great and crying grievance, which
though it be complained of in the present pressures, but by the northern parts,
yet by the Logic and Consequence of it, it is the grievance of the whole
Kingdom. The Court of the Presidents, and Counsel of the North, or as it is
more usually called, the Courts of York, which by the spirit and ambition of
the Ministers, truste^ there, or by the natural Inclination of Courts to
enlarge their own power and Jurisdiction, has so prodigiously brake down the
banks of the first Council, in which it ran, that it has almost
overwhelmed that Country under the Sea of Arbitrary power, and involved the
people in a Laberynth of distemper, oppression and poverty.

Your Lordships will give me leave not with presumption to inform your great
understandings, but that you may know what moved the house of Commons to their
resolutions to remember your Lordships of the foundation, and erecting this
Court, and of the progress and growth of it.

Your Lordships well know, that upon the suppression of all religious houses to
such a value in the 27 year of H. 8. from that time to the thirtieth year of
that Kings reign, many (not fewer then six Insurrections) and Rebellions were
made in the Northern parts, under pretense of that quarrel, most of them
under the command of some eminent person of that Country, the which being
quieted before the end of the thirtieth year, that great King well knowing his
own mind, and what he meant to do with the great Houses of Religion; in the
year following for prevention of any inconvenience that might ensue to him
upon such distemper, in the 31. year of his Reign granted a Commission to the
Bishop of Landaffe, the first President, and others for the quiet government of
the County of York, Northumberland, Cumberland and Westmerland, the
Bishopric of Durham, the counties of the Cities of York, Kingston upon Hull,
and New Castle upon Tyne. But my Lords this Commission was no other then a
Commission of Oyer and Terminer, only it had a clause at the end of it, for
the hearing of all causes real and person, quando ambae parts, vel altera
pars sic gravata paupertate fuerit, quod quomodo vis suum secundum legem Regni
nostri, aliter persequi non possit, which clause how illegal soever, for that
it is illegal and void in Law, little doubt can be made yet whether they
exercise that part of the Commission at all, or so sparingly exercised it, that
poor people found ease and benefit by it. I know not, but at that time I find
no complaint against it, till the coming in of King James the Commission
continued still the same, and that in the first year of his Reign to the Lord
Sheffeild varied no otherwise from the former, save, only it had reference to
Instructions which should be sent, though any new sent or no is uncertain, but
we can find none.

In June, in the seventh year of the Reign of King James a new Commission was
granted to the same man (the Lord Sheffeild) very differing from all that went
before, it being left out, that they should enquire per sacramentum bonorum and
legalium hominum, and to hear determine secundum leges Angliae, Relation being
had only to the Instructions, which were the first Instructions, we can find
were sent thither, though I told your Lordships there were some mentions of
some In 1. I shall not trouble your Lordships with these Instructions, nor with
the other that followed in 14. Iacobi to the same man, nor in 16. Iacobi, when
a new Commission was granted to my Lord Sunderland, nor indeed with any till we
come to these present Instructions, and Commissions under which that part of
the Kingdom groans and languisheth.

My Lord of Strafford came to that government in December. 4. Caroli, and since
the Commission has been three several times removed, in the fifth year in
March, in the eighth in November. in the thirteenth year of his Majesty's reign
into that Commission of 8. and 13. a new clause served in for the granting,
sequestring, and establishing Possessions according to instructions, crowded in
a Mass of new exorbitant and intolerable power, though our complaint be
against this Commission it self, and against the whole body of those
instructions: I shall not mispend your Lordships precious time in desiring to
have the whole read, but shall presume to trouble your Lordships only with five
or six of the instructions, that by the vast irregularity of those your
Lordships may judge, how insupportable the whole burden is. I shall not
trouble your Lordships with the ninth Instruction, though it be but short,
which introduces that, miseram servitatem, ubi jus est vagum, and incognitum,
by requiring an obedience to such ordinances, and determinations, as be or
shall be made by the Council Table, or high Commission Court. A grievance my
Lords, howsoever consuetudo and peccantum claritas nobilitaverit han^ culpam,
of so transcendent a nature, that your Lordships noble Justice will provide a
remedy for it, with no less care, then you would rescue the life and blood of
the Commonwealth.

Read the 19. 22, 23, 24. 29. and 30. I will not trouble your Lordships with
reading more, there being among them in the whole 58. Instructions, scarce one
that is not against, or besides the Law.

Whether His Majesty may caution out a part of his Kingdom to be tried by
Commission, though according to the rules of Law, since the whole Kingdom is
under the Laws and government of the Courts established at Westminister, and
by this reason the several parts of the Kingdom may be deprived of that
privilege, will not be now the question; that his Majesty cannot by
Commission erect a new court of Chancery, or a proceeding according to the
rules of the Star Chamber, as most clear to all who have read Magna Charta;
which allowed no proceedings, nisi per legale judicium parium and per legem
terrae: for our court of Chancery hear by long usage and proscription is
grown to be as it were lex terra. But my Lords, the thirtieth Instruction
goes further, and erects such an Emprie, such a Dominion, as shall be liable
to no contrary.

The Courts of Westminster, my Lords have superintendences over all inferior
Courts to regulate their jurisdictions, if they exceed their limits. As to hold
Plea of greater value, or the like in his exercise of Jurisdiction, the Judges
are sworn to grant, and send prohibitions, and to stop the granting of these
prohibitlons, or to neglect them, when they are granted, is the greatest and
boldest scorn of the Law, and the Lawmakers that can be imagined.

The Kings Courts at Westminster, having bin always of that awefull and
reverent esteem, with inferior Judges, that the Instances of such contempts
against them are very rare and exemplary in the punishment.

The Bishop of Norwich in Trinity Term, in the twentieth year of Edward the
third, in Rot. 289 in the common Pleas in Hillary Term 21. in the Kings Bench,
was attached for disobeying a prohibition at the suit of Stracill, upon full
and solemn dissension of the whole matter, the Court resolved, that the
proceedings of the Bishop were in obedientiam and diminucorem Domini, and
potestatis Regiae authoritatis suae lectionem and coronae suae exhereditationem
manifestum, etc. As the words of the Records are, and therefore adjudged the
temporal ties of the Bishop to be seized into the Kings hand, and great,
verily great damages to be paid to Plaintiffes: And whosoever gave directions
for these stout Instructions, might have remembered that no longer since then
Michaelmas, in the seventh year of Eliz. Rot. 31. An Attachment was granted
against the Archbishop of York then President of that Counsel, for forbidding
the Jailer of York to deliver one Lambert his Prisoner, who was sent for by a
habeas corpus from the Kings Bench, and if they would have believed the
resolution of all the Judges in England, in Trinity Term, in the 6. year of
King James, they would have known how unfit it had been to enlarge that
Jurisdiction, since most of their proceedings being of an inferior nature to
what they are now grown, were then declared to be illegal and inconsistant
with the liberty of the Subject.

And can such a court, as this my Lords deserve to live? what a compendious
abridgement has York gotten of all the courts in Westminster Hall, whatsoever
falls within the cognizance, orjurisdiction of either courts here is completely
determinable within, that one Court at York, besides the power it has with
the Ecclesiastical and high Commission courts.

What has the good Northern people done, that they only must be disfranchised
of all their privileges by Magna Charta, and the Petition of right, for to
what purpose serve these Statutes, if they may be fined and imprisoned without
Law, according to the discretion of the Commissioners, what have they done,
that they, and they alone of all the people of this happy I land must be
disinherited of their birthright, of their Inheritance. For prohibitions,
writs of Habeas Corpus, writs of erour are the birthright, the inheritance of
the Subjects.

And it is here worth your Lordships observation, that to those many
prohibitions, which have been granted from above, for till of late, the court
of York had not the courage to dispose prohibitions, nor indeed till our
courts here, had not the courage to grant them. T was never known, that court
pleaded the Jurisdiction of their counsel, which without doubt they would have
done upon the advantage of many great persons, in whose protection they have
always been, had they not known the Law, could not be misinterpreted enough
to allow it.

Your Lordships remember the directions I mentioned of Magna Charta, that all
proceedings shall be per legale Iudicium parium, and per legem terrae, now
these Jurisdictions tell you, you shall proceed according to your discretion
that is, you shall do what your please, only that we may not suspect this
discretion will be gentler and kinder to us then the Law: special provision
is made no fine, no punishment shall be less then by the Law is appointed, by
no means, but as much greater, as your discretion shall think fit; and indeed
in this Improvement we find: Arbitrary courts are very pregnant, if the Law
requires my good behavior, this discretion makes me close Prisoner, if the
Law sets me upon the Pillory, this discretion appoints me to leave my ears
there.

But this proceeding according to discretion is no new expression, it was in the
first commission I told your Lordships of in the 31. Hen 8. that they should
proceed secundum legem et consuetudinem Regni Angliae vel aliter secundum ^anas
discretiones vestras, which in the interpretation of the Law, and that is the
best interpretation, signifies the same thing, to proceed according to
discretion, is to proceed according to Law, which is summa discretio, but not
according to their private conceit or affection, For talis discretio (says the
Law) discretion^m confundit: and such a confusion has this discretion in these
Instructions produced, as if discretion were only removed from rage and fury,
no inconvenience, no mischief, no disgrace, that the malice or insolence, or
curiosity of these commissioners had a mind to bring upon that people, but
through the latitude and power of this discretion the poor people have felt
this discretion, has been the quick sound which has swallowed up their
property, their liberty: I beseech your Lordships rescue them from this
discretion.

Besides, the charge that this Court is to his Majesty, which is near 1300. l.
per annum, your Lordships will easily guess, what an unsupportable burden the
many officers (whose places are of great value) the Atturnies, Clerks,
Registers, and above 1000 Sollicitors that attend the Courts, must be to that
people (insomuch) that in truth the whole country seems to be divided into
the Officers and Dependants upon that Court: And the people upon whom these
Officers of that Court prey and commit rapines, as he said in Patronius, Omnes
hic aut captantur, aut captunt; aut cadavere quae laterentur, aut corni quae
laterunt. Truly my Lords, these vexed worne-people of the North are not suitors
to your Lordships, to regulate this Court, or to reform the Judges of it, but
for extripating these Judges, and the utter abolishing this Court, they are of
Catoes mind, who would not submit to Caesar for his life, saying, he would not
be beholding to a Tyrant for injustice, for it was injustice in him to take
upon him to save a man's life, over whom he had no power.

So these Gentlemen desire not to be beholding to this Court hereafter for
injustice. The very administration of injustice, founded upon such illegal
principles being a grievance and oppression to the subject.

First upon the whole matter the house of Commons is of opinion, that the
Commission and Instructions whereby the Resident and Counsel of the North,
exercise a Jurisdiction is illegal, both in the creation and execution.

Secondly, that it is improfitable to his Majesty, for besides so much near
thirteen hundred pound taken out of His Majesty's revenues, every year His
Majesty loses the great benefit would accrue to him upon writs and upon
Fines, upon Out-lawes, and other profits, which redound to his Majesty out of
his Court here.

And which I had almost forgot to tell your Lordships of, that his Majesty may
be sure to have benefit from that Court (notable care is taken, by the fifty
three Instructions, that if any money remains over and above all
disbursements, it shall be bestowed in providing Household Stuff, and furniture
for the house, where the Lord President and Counsel use to be.

And lastly, that it is inconvenient and grievous to His Majesty's subjects of
those parts.

And therefore they are humble Suitors to your Lordships, and the house of
commons, on this behalf, that since this people do and have in all matters of
duty and affection contend with the best of His Majesty's subjects, that they
may not be distinguished from them in the manner of His Majesty's Justice and
protection, since this court originally instituted and continued by his
Majesty, for the ease and benefit of his subjects, is apparently inverted to
the burden and discomfort of them that your Lordships will join with, the
House of commons in beseeching His Majesty, that the present commission may be
revoked, and no more such granted for the future.

FINIS.

