A DISCOURSE Concerning The OPERATIONS OF The HOLY SPIRIT.

TOGETHER WITH A Confutation of some part of Dr. OWEN'S Book Upon that Subject.

Imprimatur, May 4th 1677. Guil. Jane, R.P.D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris domest.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Hen. Brom at the Gun at the West End of St.
Paul's. 1678.

THE PREFACE.
AMongst other things, which are usually aimed at in a Preface, one is to
invite the Reader to the Book. The Author of this Book does not think it worthy
of every man's perusal, into whose hands it may chance to come; and therefore
does not commend it to All.

It was written principally for their sake, who have been made to believe that
the Ministers of the Church of England have departed from the Scriptures, in
their Doctrine concerning the Operations, and Grace, of the Holy Spirit; which
is one of those prejudices that have been instilled into the dissenting party
by their Leaders, to confirm them in their Separation. The Author thinks he has
made it plain, that they do not only accuse us very wrongfully; but that they
themselves are guilty of that Crime which they lay to our charge.

And he hopes their Followers cannot think it an unreasonable request that they
would impartially consider what is said on both sides, and judge accordingly.
But if he should be mistaken in that, he has this satisfaction however; that he
has done his Part, by giving them a fair occasion so to do.

If some of them should be inclined, by the weightiness of the subject, to read
the Discourse; and yet be tempted on the other hand to throw it aside, merely
because it pretends to be a Confutation of some of Dr. Owen's Principles; Dr.
Owen himself will help to cure them of so unreasonable a prejudice.

For he has told you long since, in a Book of his, called, The duty of Pastors
and People distinguished, that you are not to take any Doctrine of Religion on
the credit of his Authority. Alas, says he, P. 44.
you are in a miserable condition, if you have all this while relied upon the
Authority of men in Heavenly things: He that builds his Faith upon Preachers,
though they preach nothing but truth, and he pretend to believe it, has indeed
no Faith at all, but a wavering opinion, built upon a rotten Foundation.

Now you know the Authority of the Doctor is no more than the Authority of a
Man; and therefore you have his own word for it, that to build your Faith upon
his Authority, is to build it upon a rotten Foundation. Whether you have so
done all this while I cannot say; but if you have, he tells you that you are in
a miserable condition: And if you have not, you will easily be persuaded to
take this opportunity now offered to you, of examining his Doctrine by the Word
of God; to which the Author does appeal as heartily as the Doctor himself can
do.

I confess I am not altogether of his mind in the forementioned passage; for
it seems to imply, that all men are in a state of Damnation, who rely upon the
honesty and wisdom of their Spiritual Guides in matters of Faith. But I doubt
there are some persons incapable of inquiring much further; and I hope some of
these do so firmly believe the truth, upon the testimony of God's Ministers, as
to live according to it; which if they do, God forbid that I should say they
are in a damnable condition.

But you see in what strict terms the Doctor admonishes every one of you, not
to rely upon the Authority of men; but to examine their Doctrines by the Word
of God. Possibly he means no more, than that this is a duty to be discharged by
all Christians according to the measure of those Means, Abilities, and
Opportunities which God has been pleased to give them: and this surely is a
great truth. But then I desire you to consider that every one of you are more
concerned, to look to it, that you omit not this duty, than many other
Christians are; and that for this reason, because you have withdrawn your
selves from the communion of the Lawful Guides of this Church, to follow those
that take upon them to lead you without any known Authority by which they do
so. For if you follow these your Leaders into error, it will be no excuse for
you, to say, they led you into error; because you set them up to your selves
against the will of your rightful Superiors both in Church and State. Whereas
if the Christians of our Communion should be led into some great mistake, (as I
am persuaded they are not) by relying upon the Authority and Wisdom of their
Pastors; though it would not totally excuse them, yet it would be some
mitigation of their fault, that they were misled by those Guides and Ministers
which God had set over them.

P. 44.
The Doctor himself tells you in that Book, that the people are bound to hear
those who possess the place of teaching in the Church. And, that if the Law
accounts only such Assemblies to be Conventicles, P. 52.
where the Assemblers contemn and despise the service of God in public, he had
not spoken one word in favor of them.

You do not wonder I suppose at these passages; for, you know, this Book was
written by him above thirty years since, when he was a Presbyterian, as he
there solemnly declares himself to be, P. 42.
and engaged by the Interest of his Party, to contend for some Church-decency
and Order, P. 46, 47.
as he there does after his manner. Indeed since that time he turned
Independent: But however, you have no reason to conclude from thence that he
has changed his mind in that other point also, of the peoples being bound to
examine by the Word of God, the Doctrines of those Teachers whom they are bound
to hear; or that he believes that all that is said in Conventicles, or written
by those Assemblers that despise the service of God in public, may be taken
upon trust.

No, though he has changed his party, he may still be of this mind, P. 45.
that, unless Ministers (as he tells you) will answer for all those souls they
shall mislead, and excuse them before God at the day of Trial, they ought not
to debar them from trying their Doctrine. Now this they cannot do; for if the
blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the pit of destruction. Now unless
he excepts himself from a possibility of misleading you, thus far I would not
desire a fairer Adversary; and if you think he ought not to except himself, I
cannot wish more equal Judges than your selves.

Sure I am, the Doctor must either explain himself further, or he must not
debar you from trying his Doctrine, and enquiring whether he himself be not a
blind Guide, whom you may follow into the Pit of destruction. For what he
says in general, may be applied to him in particular; that if he should
mislead you, he cannot excuse you before God at the day of Trial.

Now the truth is, although he does not say in plain terms that he is
infallible, yet in that Book which I have taken the pains to consider, he lays
claim, as you will see, to such an Illumination of mind, by the Holy Spirit,
as differs very little from that kind of Inspiration which the Apostles had.

But this will not hinder you from trying the Doctor's Spirit and way of
Teaching, if you consider what he very well observed in the forementioned
Book, P. 44.
viz. that the Bereans were highly extolled for searching whether the Doctrine
concerning our Savior, preached by St. Paul, were so or no: For he must not
desire to be believed more hastily than St. Paul did, who, we are sure, spoke
by an infallible Spirit.

The more highly any man pretends to the divine Spirit, the better Testimonies
he had need to produce for the truth of his pretense. No wise man will lightly
take up that belief of another, which if he once gives way to, he must believe
him in all things else. The brighter those Illuminations are, which any Teacher
boasts of, the less reason you have to take his bare word for it; and if he be
not willing that you should examine his Doctrines, he gives you great cause of
suspicion, that they will not abide the Trial.

Besides, the Doctor takes notice that what was praised in the Bereans, P. 44.
is commended in the Scripture: Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits whether they be of God; because many false spirits are gone out into
the world, 1 John 4.1. Prophets then, as he goes on, must be tried before they
be trusted: now the reason of this holds still; there are many false Teachers
abroad in the world, wherefore try every one, try his spirit, his spiritual
gift of Teaching, and that by the Word of God.

I will only add, that the reason holds more strongly now: for if false
Teachers pretended to an infallible Spirit, even whilst the Apostles were alive
to contradict them, and discover them; much more likely are they to do so now,
when they think they may do it more securely; and therefore we had need to use
the more diligence in trying those Teachers that pretend loftily, by that Word
of God which the Apostles have left us in their Writings.

Now if the Doctor would have you to shut your own Eyes, and then trust to that
New saving Light, by which he pretends to explain Gospel Truths; this were
enough to make you suspect that the Light that is in him is Darkness. Or if he
meant to except himself from being tried, when he bad you try the Spirits; for
that reason he is least of all to be excepted.

I have obeyed the Apostles advice, and tried him, as you may see in the
following Book, which I was willing to make public, because those Reasons
which satisfy me, that he is very much out of the way in discoursing upon
spiritual things, after this manner, may possibly seem as clear to you as they
do to my self.

If there be any Sophistry in them, or carnal Reasoning, or perverting of Holy
Writ, it is more than I know; and I shall thank the Doctor for making the
discovery; which I think he is bound to do, if he can, not only for your sake,
but for mine too. For so far as I understand my self, I am not less desirous to
retract any error of my own, than I am to convince you of his; And therefore,
if he be as willing as I am, I shall in all probability hear further from him.
In the mean time I desire you to believe neither of us, but to try us both.

If the Doctor's friends should be troubled to find him charged with Nonsense
in the following Book, the Author has this to say for himself, that he knew no
other name so fit as Nonsense to call Nonsense by. And he believes that he has
not only said, but proved also that the Doctor is guilty of Nonsense, where he
has charged him with it.

He hopes also that they will not be offended with him, for taking occasion
sometimes to rebuke this man for those rude Words, and unjust Reproaches which
he has poured forth, for whole Pages together, upon his Adversaries of the
Church of England. For (if it be possible) he should be taught at last to
manage controversies in Religion in a more Christian manner than he has done
hitherto.

And now the Author will only say in behalf of himself, that his design in
this Book was to clear the Truth of that Question which he has undertaken, to
every ordinary understanding, and thereby to promote the power of Godliness.
And the best thing he can say of the Book it self, is, that it has been
thought by men of far better judgment than he can pretend to, not to be
altogether improper for that end. And, if they are not mistaken, may the
All-wise and good God prosper the design of it with his Blessing.

The CONTENTS. Of the Introduction.
SECT. I. THat the promise of the Holy Spirit, is according to the Scriptures a
great motive to diligence in Religion, Page 1. That according to Dr. Owen's
principles it seems to be none at all, p. 3. The Author's design, p. 4. SECT.
II. The advantage which the Doctor makes by pretending that only the
Regenerate understand spiritual things spiritually, p. 5. while he proves
himself to be regenerate by his spiritual understanding of spiritual things, p.
6. This Artifice of his discovered in some instances, p. 7. That he allows
only himself and his party to be competent Judges of his Doctrine concerning
the Operations of the Holy Spirit, p. 11. SECT. III. His interpretation of 1
Cor. 2.14. explained, p. 15. SECT. IV. That his meaning of the natural man is
groundless, p. 20. Of his not receiving the things of the Spirit absurd, p. 21.
And of their being foolishness to him blasphemous, p. 25. The odd account he
gives of the reasonableness of the Gospel in his Preface, p. 27. Other
reflections upon his sense of the forementioned Text, p. 30. That the Doctor's
pretended Gospel-mysteries need his interpretation of that Text; but the real
mysteries of the Gospel need it not, p. 31. The pernicious consequence of his
interpretation, p. 32. SECT. V. Another sense of the Text offered according to
St. Chrysostom, whose Authority the Doctor pretends in favor of his own, p.
33. The scope of the Apostle in that and the former Chapter largely shown, p.
34. From whence it plainly appears what he meant by the natural man, p. 40. The
Scriptural notion of the state of nature, p. 42. What is meant by the things of
the Spirit of God, and their being spiritually discerned, p. 43. and by the
spiritual man, p. 45. The incoherence of the Doctor's sense with the Context,
p. 46. Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase upon the Text vindicated from the exceptions of
Dr. Owen, p. 47. And shown to agree with those passages of St. Chrysostom
which Dr. Owen himself produces, p. 51. That the following Book is not to be
rejected on pretense that the Author is but a natural man, which concludes the
Introduction, p. 53.
Of the Book, PART. 1.
CHAP. 1. What significations of the Word Spirit are needful to be noted, p.
56. The difference made by Dr. Owen between giving of the Spirit, and giving
his Graces, p. 58. And what more he understands by putting on the Spirit, p.
59. The subject of the discourse stated, p. 61. That Dr. Owen confounds the
promise of the Spirit made to the Apostles, and the first Disciples only, with
that which is made to Christians in all ages, p. 64. And argues inconsequently
from the former, in favor of his own mistakes concerning the latter, p. 65.
That by this way of arguing he sometimes also concludes that which is true,
from premises that do not infer it, p. 67. His design in all this, p. 68. And
the disservice that is done the Truth by it, p. 70. CHAP. 2. For the producing
of what effects the Holy Spirit is promised to men; which is the first matter
of enquiry, p. 72. may be discerned in great part from Luke 11.13. p. 73. To
which end the scope of our Savior's discourse there is considered, p. 74. And
it is from thence proved that they are only needful purposes for which the
Holy Spirit is there promised, p. 76. What effects are needful, p. 77. What are
necessary, p. 79. What are profitable, p. 81. How we are to pray for needful
Graces of the latter sort, p. 83. Several Consectaries useful to our proceeding
in the following enquiries gained from the forementioned Text, p. 88. An
exception to this Chapter from the necessity of Regeneration, p. 94. CHAP. 3.
The Doctor's loose way of talking concerning Regeneration, p. 96. But at last
he concludes the word is to be understood in its proper sense, p. 99. That it
is absurd so to understand it, p. 100. That it cannot be so understood without
contradicting the Scriptures, p. 101. His argument that the Scripture has no
metaphorical expressions of the work of the Spirit, p. 106. His manner of
charging his Adversaries with turning all Scripture-expressions of spiritual
things into Metaphors, p. 110. His scornful hints concerning Christian Virtues,
p. 112. That Regeneration is a metaphorical expression proved from what he
says himself, where he denies it, p. 113. How Dr. Owen and the Papists do
alike abuse the Scriptures, p. 115. What we are to understand by the state of
Regeneration, p. 117. The notion proved, p. 119. The Doctor represents his
Adversaries notion of Regeneration falsely, p. 123. And that knowingly, p. 125.
The distinction between Grace and moral Virtue considered, 126. That the Doctor
rejects the true notion of Regeneration in terms that do notoriously contradict
the Scriptures, p. 128. That he contradicts them also by that reason which he
gives for rejecting it, p. 130. The charge of Pelagianism justly retorted upon
Dr. Owen, p. 133. Regeneration considered as an Effect, p. 136. Several reasons
why the state of a true Disciple of Christ is expressed by the Metaphors of
Regeneration, the New Creature, etc. p. 139. Why the expression of Regeneration
is more used than the rest, p. 143. The scope of our Savior's discourse to
Nicodemus shown, p. 145. A Paraphrase of that part of it which concerns
Regeneration, p. 149. The reddition of our Savior's similitude of the Wind
explained, p. 150. A probable sense of the (...) and (...) mentioned by our
Savior to Nicodemus, p. 155. The Doctor's Objection against the true notion of
Regeneration, grounded upon the rebuke given to Nicodemus, answered, p. 157.
CHAP. 4. That Faith is an effect of a divine Operation, p. 161. In what sense
it is affirmed so to be, p. 162. The preparation required for Faith, p. 165.
That all those Christian virtues which flow from Faith, are also the Graces of
the Holy Spirit, p. 169. That our improvement in those virtues is so likewise,
p. 173. What is meant by God's dwelling in men, p. 175. What was signified by
his dwelling in the Ark, p. 176. which is applied to the state of the Christian
Church, p. 178. That God is said to dwell only in good men, p. 181. That their
progress in Christian virtue and perseverance is from the Holy Spirit, p. 185.
Some Consectaries from the foregoing discourse, p. 186. CHAP. 5. Gifts
pretended to be from the Spirit, p. 189. Immediate revelation of the true sense
of Scripture not promised in St. Luke, p. 191. Either to the spiritual Guides,
or their people, p. 193. Nor absolute assurance of our particular Election, p.
195. Dr. Owen's way of proving such assurance profitable, p. 197. What the
Author understands by the full assurance of Hope mentioned Heb. 6.11. p. 199.
The reason why some will not admit of comfort without assurance, p. 204.
Neither is it there promised that the Spirit will dictate extemporary Prayers,
p. 205. That in the better sort of these Prayers there is a form of matter, and
usually of method, and that all the variety commonly lies in shifting of Words
and Phrases, p. 209. That these three pretended gifts are promised no where in
the Scripture, p. 211. What is meant by sealing to the day of Redemption, p.
214. And by the witness of the Spirit, p. 216. And by praying with the Spirit,
p. 218. And by the Spirit's helping our infirmities, p. 219. CHAP. 6. The Holy
Spirit given to whom, p. 233. The difference between common and special Grace,
p. 234. Special Grace promised upon conditions, p. 237. And not to be expected
but by those that perform them, p. 239. Dr. Owen's mystical talk concerning the
object of sanctifying Grace, p. 240. That he makes no qualification on our part
requisite beforehand for Regeneration, p. 243. And that, according to him, all
praying for it is unprofitable, p. 244. That he shuffles off the task of
proving his main principle, by pretending falsely that he had proved it before,
p. 246. The folly of trusting to a supposed absolute Decree, p. 247. The
Doctor's insincerity in changing his notion of Election, to shift off the
difficulty of proving his own opinion concerning it, p. 250. That he makes
nothing to contradict himself as his cause requires it, p. 258. What that
common Grace is which is given to all, p. 261. The notion proved, p. 262. Why
the promise of common Grace is not expressly made to all, p. 266. That it is not
properly part of the New Covenant, p. 267. That the promises of special Grace
are made to all under possible conditions, p. 268. CHAP. 7. Difficult to define
the manner of the Holy Spirit's Operations particularly, p. 270. Dr. Owen
peremptory and fierce in this point, p. 271. His definition of it of dangerous
consequence, p. 274. Faith and Repentance are in that manner caused by the holy
Spirit, that they are still properly the effects of God's Word, p. 274. That
according to Dr. Owen's principles they are not the effects thereof, p. 277. An
instance of his excessive boldness in this matter, p. 280. The manner of the
holy Spirit's Operations suitable to the rational nature of Mankind, p. 282.
which is in words granted, but in effect denied by Dr. Owen, p. 283. His vain
endeavors to reconcile this Proposition with his Physical immediate Operation,
p. 286. Isa. 5.4. discoursed upon, p. 290. The holy Spirit operates in that
manner as to leave our diligence necessary to attain the end of his Operations,
p. 292. What is meant by God's working in us to will and to do, p. 293. And by
giving a new Heart, p. 296. The Operations of the Spirit suited to our
spiritual estate, p. 298. That his Graces are wrought gradually is an useful
consideration, p. 302. That the Operations of the holy Spirit are in themselves
imperceptible, and known only by their effects, p. 305. That to be guided by
the Holy Spirit, and by the Gospel, and by a good Conscience, is one and the
same thing, p. 309. That men resist the Holy Spirit when they think of nothing
less, p. 312. That the Operations of the Holy Spirit are Assistances, p. 314.
Dr. Owen falsely pretends that his Adversaries deny the Assistances of Grace, p.
315. That his error is more justly chargeable upon himself, p. 318. The
promise of the Holy Spirit a forcible motive to Godliness, shown from the
general Heads of the whole Discourse, p. 324. The Conclusion of the First Part,
p. 326.
THE INTRODUCTION.
SECT. I.
FRom what St. Paul says, Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling;
Philipp. 2.12, 13.
for it is God that works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure,
it is evident, that the consideration of that Divine Assistance whereof the
Apostle speaks, is a pregnant motive to excite our greatest care and endeavor
to do the will of God: For I suppose no Christian will say that St. Paul
pretended to enforce his Exhortation, with an Argument that had little or no
force in it to persuade.

The forcibleness of this Motive lies principally in this Supposition, that as
they upon whom the aids of the Holy Spirit, which are promised in the Gospel,
are bestowed, may fulfill the conditions of obtaining Eternal Life; so withal
they may miscarry through their own negligence; and then their sin becomes more
inexcusable, and their punishment will be more heavy: And this is a clear
reason, why even those in whom God works both to will and to do, are yet
exhorted to work out their Salvation with fear and trembling. Upon this
Supposition the Author to the Hebrews does earnestly exhort Christians to
perseverance in the profession and practice of the Gospel: Heb. 10.29.
For says he, of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who -- has done despite to the spirit of grace? which he says plainly
for this end, to excite them to an effectual care in improving those Spiritual
Aids whereby they were able to persevere. This I think will easily be granted,
unless we can imagine that the Apostle talks at as strange a rate as Dr. John
Owen frequently does in his Book concerning the Holy Spirit, (...) Or, a
Discourse, etc. J.O.
where he often threatens them with the day of Judgment, that look upon him,
and diverse of his notions in Divinity, to be senseless and fanatical. For we
shall see that his threatenings have not that charitable meaning in them, which
the admonitions of the Apostle have. He tells us that Those by whom
Regeneration (i. e. his notion of it) is exposed to scorn, Page 254.
will one day understand the necessity of it, although it may be, not before
it is too late to obtain any advantage by it. Now one would think it to be the
Doctor's opinion, that those who shall one day be damned, might by a timely
care have prevented it; and that he intended this warning to make them careful
to understand the necessity of Regeneration before it be too late. But if you
think so, you are much mistaken, and you do not yet understand this man's
Principles: for throughout his whole Book he supposes a certain powerful
illumination of the Holy Ghost, given to none but those that shall certainly be
saved, to be necessary in order to a saving knowledge of Regeneration. And as
for the rest, the darkness that is in them is no less effectual to bind them
in a state of Sin, P. 228.
than it is in the Devils themselves. Now I do not understand how the Doctor's
Warnings could be of any use to the Devils themselves: And I do as little
understand why he makes such frequent excursions as he does, to threaten his
Adversaries with the day of Judgment, unless (as one would be tempted to
believe, by the insulting language that goes along with it) it be some
refreshing to a man, so naturally vindictive, to think he shall one day see 'em
damned.

This is one great exception I have against this Man's Book, that whereas he
contends so fiercely for his Opinions, as he does all along, pretending in
particular, P. 164.
That it is of the highest importance to us to enquire into, and secure unto
our selves the promised workings of the Spirit; yet, supposing his notions
thereof to be true, it is no matter whether they be enquired into or no: for
neither can we have a true understanding what they are, nor if we could, would
that excite our endeavors to secure them: for according to him, it is
impossible for a man to understand a spiritual truth, or do any thing that is
spiritually good, unless he be enabled by such an Almighty Power, as leaves it
on the other hand impossible for him to be spiritually blind and dead any
longer: For this power, he says, is irresistible, and he affirms it to be
false that the Will can make use of that Grace for Conversion which it can
refuse. P. 262.
Now the Doctor confesses, that this kind of blindness and deadness, with
respect unto spiritual things, is a matter which the World cannot endure to
hear of, and is ready to fall into a tumult upon the mention of it. P. 206.
And if he says true, I am very glad on it, because if the World could not
endure to hear such Doctrines as these are, we might hope to see a great many
men wiser and better than they are: for he has stated the Doctrine of the
operations of the Spirit in that manner, that instead of exciting men thereby
to hearty endeavors after true goodness, he has laid down Principles that
will excuse them, if they be never so careless, and so has betrayed this great
encouragement of the Gospel into the hands of lazy and wicked men.

I shall therefore endeavor to give a better account of what the Holy
Scripture teaches us in this matter, then I think he has done; and I shall
withal examine those Arguments wherewith he pretends so to demonstrate his
notions, that the proudest and most petulant of his Adversaries shall not be
able to return any thing of a solid answer thereunto. P. 206.
For my part, I do not think that Pride and Petulancy qualify men either to
maintain Arguments, or to answer them; the Doctor seems to be of the opinion
that they do, and much good may his advantage do him. But this I see, that
Pride and Petulancy are good helps toward the writing of a Great Book: For if
this man had spared himself the pains of charging his Adversaries with
Pelagianism, Ignorance, Impudence, and ill Manners, and his frequent
Tautologies into the bargain, the bulk of his Book had been taken down so
considerably, that the smalness of the Volume would have carried an even
proportion* to the truth and the profitableness of his Discourse. And how much
of that is to be allowed to him, I will leave the indifferent Reader to judge.

SECT. II.
MY design, as I have said, is to treat of the operations of the Holy Spirit:
but before I enter upon this work, it will be necessary to remove one
prejudice, which the Doctor has laid in every man's way, that shall pretend to
write against him concerning this, or any other Divine Subject. And that is,
that no man's reasonings about spiritual things are to be heeded, till his
mind be illuminated by an almighty work of the Holy Ghost; (i. e.) till he be
regenerated. This is the clear consequence of his affirming that without such
illumination a man cannot understand spiritual things spiritually, i. e. as
they ought to be understood: For if he himself cannot understand them
spiritually, neither can he explain them spiritually to others; and then let
him say what he will, he is not fit to be regarded.

And there is a very great advantage he makes by this pretense; for when he is
not able to answer the objections that lie against him, he despises them under
the name of carnal Reasonings; and when he has run himself upon manifest
absurdities, he comes off with pretending that they are mysteries not to be
understood without the illumination of the Spirit, and therefore Natural men
understand them not, because they are not enlightened. It Is true, he makes use
of Scripture very often, and he makes a show of reasoning also, i. e. of
propounding difficulties, and giving their solutions, and the like; but then if
you make it never so plain that he argues weakly, and that he alleges
Scripture impertinently, this will not serve your turn; for you must know that
you have not yet received that new saving Light he speaks of, which can only
make you to understand spiritual things spiritually: for without the addition
of this new Light, which only the regenerate have, the use of Reason and
Scripture is utterly insufficient to give you a spiritual understanding of
them: so that you can neither be convinced that another understands them
spiritually, till security be given you that he is a regenerate man; nor when
you are certain of that, is he able to make you understand them so, till you
are regenerated your self.

Now if this be true, then I have a very strange task, for then I cannot
confute Dr. Owen till I can prove him to be an unregenerate man; nor can I
convince any man that what I am to say is true, till I have proved the truth of
mine own Conversion: (both which Arguments I take to be very improper for a
Book) for though I should argue from Principles common either to all
Christians, or to all men, with never such appearance of Reason, it might yet
be replied, that all this is but carnal reasoning, which the Doctor and his
sanctified Friends discover to be no better, by that illumination, which
because I have not, I cannot understand spiritual Mysteries spiritually.

But for this reason, you will say our Author ought consonantly to his
Principles, to have proved himself a regenerate man, before he could reasonably
expect, that we should surrender our belief to his discourses of Spiritual
Mysteries. You must know therefore that he has done something toward it in
diverse places of his Book: for he supposes that whoever understands
Gospel-mysteries in that spiritual manner wherein he has explained them, is
thereby proved one that has received the special illumination of the Holy
Ghost, and consequently, regenerate. So that if you ask how a man is qualified
to understand and teach spiritual things spiritually, you are told, by the
especial illumination of the Holy Ghost: But if you would then be satisfied
that the Doctor (suppose) is thus illuminated, you must know it cannot be
otherwise, because he understands and teaches Spiritual things spiritually;
which I take to be a shameful Circle. Now whether I have injured the Doctor in
any thing that I have hitherto charged him with, let the Reader judge by a few
of many passages to that purpose, which lie up and down in his Book.

He says, P. 209.
that without an effectual powerful work of the Holy Spirit creating, and by
his Almighty power inducing a new saving Light into the minds of men, they are
not able to discern, receive, understand, or believe savingly spiritual Truths,
or the Mysteries of the Gospel: And again, P. 236.
such is the darkness of their [unregenerate] minds, that they are powerfully,
and as unto any light of their own, (i. e. till the Almighty creating work is
done) invincibly kept off from receiving spiritual things in a spiritual
manner. Now I shall show, by two or three instances, that the Doctor makes his
way of understanding spiritual things to be a mark of Regeneration, and an
Argument that the irresistible work has been upon a man's mind.

When he undertakes to show why God does require Holiness and Righteousness of
us, and affirms, that he does not require it in order to our Justification, he
tell us, carnal Reason cannot discern of what use it should be, P. 334.
if it serve not to this purpose, or one of those which he there rejects. Now
that Holiness is necessary, is one of the spiritual things of the Gospel, and
this carnal Reason may understand: but if you understand this Doctrine
spiritually, you must understand that it is not necessary to the purpose of
Justification; and this forsooth carnal Reason cannot discern. But what follows
makes it plainer yet: But the first saving Light that shines, by the Gospel,
from Jesus Christ into our Hearts, begins to undeceive us in this matter. So
that he who believes, that God has required Holiness of us as an indispensible
condition of our being justified, has had no saving Light shining into his
Heart by Jesus Christ; for he has not had the first of all: and this clearly
shows how the Doctor makes the rejecting of his Notions to be a mark of an
unregenerate man. He says further, And there is no greater evidence of our
receiving an Evangelical Baptism, or of being baptized into the spirit of the
Gospel, than the clear compliance of our Minds with the Wisdom of God herein.
This is full and home to the purpose: for you see, that on the other hand, to
discard the necessity of Holiness under that consideration, is a clear
compliance with the Wisdom of God, and a mark of Regeneration. I take this to
be a competent instance of the Doctor's proving himself to be regenerated, by
his spiritual understanding of things; but how he came to understand them so
spiritually, you heard before, viz. by an Almighty Power, which induced a new
saving Light into his mind; for I suppose he has not a way by himself of
arriving at this Felicity. This now is very plain, That if you spiritually
understand the necessity of Holiness, you must not understand it to be
necessary to Justification: But if you ask the Doctor why you cannot understand
it as he does, his Answer is, Because you are not enlightened and regenerated by
the irresistible Work: for where this work is not, that spiritual thing cannot
be so understood; and where it is, it is impossible but it should be so
understood. Now then, if you ask how the Doctor proves himself to be a
regenerate man, he proves it clearly, by his understanding the necessity of
Holiness in that spiritual manner wherein he understands it. And at this rate I
think a man may prove any thing.

Thus the Doctor tells us how the purifying virtue of the blood of Christ is
applied to us by Faith, P. 401.
but in so mystical a manner, that he is forced to confess it himself; and
therefore, says he, when you understand these things, you will not think it so
strange, that God should appoint this way of believing only as the means to
interest us in the purifying virtue of the Blood of Christ. For, the truth is,
before he had done with that point, he had made it so unintelligible, that he
had nothing to keep up his Readers in heart withal, but by promising them, that
when they understood those things, they would not think them strange, i. e.
when that new saving Light is once darted into their minds, by which the
Doctor discerns spiritual Mysteries. In the mean time, he cautions them against
those that pretend the believing he speaks of to be no more than a work of the
fancy, in these words: Despise their ignorance; for they know not what they
say; when men come to the real practice of this Duty, the practice of believing
that the Blood of Christ, without any more ado, will cleanse them from their
Sins, they will find what it is to discard all other ways and pretenses of
cleansing, viz. a sincere reformation of Heart and Life; what it is to give
unto God against all difficulties and oppositions, i. e. though it be never so
absurd to imagine this makes for the Glory of God, the glory of his Attributes
in finding out this way for us.

Again, after he had given such a description of Gospel-holiness, as any one
would be ashamed to own, that pretends to an intelligible Religion, he hopes to
make up all with saying, P. 421.
The thing it self, as has been declared, is deep and mysterious, not to be
understood without the aid of spiritual Light in our minds. So that if you do
not understand what the Doctor says, the reason is plain, because you have not
the Spirit: and at this rate any man may write Nonsense safely enough, and put
it off for a Gospel-mystery when he has done: For the thing may be understood,
though you do not understand it; for it may be understood by the aid of
spiritual Light: And if you understand it not, it is because you rely upon
carnal Reason, and have not the Light of the Spirit. For thus the Doctor tells
us, The reason why men have other notions of holiness than he has, is their
ignorance and hatred of the only true real principle of Evangelical holiness
which we have described; for what the world knows not in these things, it
always hates, and they cannot discern it clearly, or in its own light and
evidence; for it must be spiritually discerned. This the Natural man cannot do,
1 Cor. 2.14. and in that false light of corrupted reason, wherein they discern
and judge it, they esteem it foolishness and fancy. So that it is to no purpose
what the Natural man (a man that uses the best means he can to find out the
meaning of the Scriptures) says in these matters, till that new Light be
created in his mind; by the help whereof, this Author, as it should seem,
talks of sublime Mysteries, which we use to call Nonsense, and yet are blamed
for it, though he confesses, it is impossible that we should do otherwise.

Now the Doctor is as safe as may be, if he can thus make his Reader believe,
that to understand the Doctrines of the Gospel spiritually, is to understand
them according to his apprehensions of them, and that to contradict him, is an
infallible sign of one that wants the special illumination of the Holy Ghost:
For, upon these terms, whoever goes about to write against him, must do it at
the peril of being reckoned an unregenerate man, and then the Doctor is secure:
for we have often seen (as it is said by him) that such a man, because he wants
special illumination, cannot understand the Mysteries of the Gospel
spiritually, and then he cannot discourse of them spiritually, and then I think
he may as well hold his tongue for any good he is likely to do with his carnal
Reason.

And this is that prejudice which I am in danger of lying under with the
Doctor's party, while I treat concerning the assistance of the Holy Spirit: for
he uses the same artifice to support his notions in this matter. Thus he tells
us, P. 336.
A Command they suppose leaves no room for a Promise, at least such a Promise
as wherein God should take upon himself to work in us what the Command requires
of us; and a Promise they think takes off all the influencing authority of the
Command. If Holiness be our duty, there is no room for Grace in this matter;
and if it be an effect of Grace, there is no place for Duty: But all these
arguings are a fruit of the wisdom of the flesh. Now, as I shall show
hereafter, in these words he belies those whom he writes against; for they
suppose no such matter as he talks of; But the Doctor, as we shall see, does in
other places mean by Grace, an irresistible force upon the minds of men,
though he conceals it here dishonestly to slander his Adversaries. Now that
such a Grace is inconsistent with the commands of God in Scripture, may be so
evidently argued, that he has nothing to say against it, but to call such
arguing a fruit of the wisdom of the flesh, which is his perpetual refuge. But
to be short, he expressly tells us, The whole work of the Spirit is rationally
to be accounted for by and unto them who believe the Scriptures, P. 187.
that I like very well, and have received the spirit of Truth; but there we are
all spoiled again; for we know what he means by having received the spirit of
Truth, viz. being illuminated by an almighty work of the Spirit: so that none
but the Doctor and his enlightened ones can possibly either give or receive a
rational account of the workings of the Spirit; and then if we reject his talk,
it is because we want that spiritual Power, without which the mind cannot
receive it. If you ask yet further what this spiritual Power is, he gives you
an admirable description of it: P. 432.
The spiritual power of the Mind, consists in a spiritual light and ability to
discern spiritual things in a spiritual manner. So that spiritual Light is
spiritual Power, and spiritual Power is spiritual Light. This men in the state
of Nature are utterly void of; P. 433.
but any one that is truly sanctified, has light enough to understand the
spiritual things of the Gospel in a spiritual manner; for we have received the
Spirit of God, that we may know the things that are freely given us of God.

What others may think of this, I know not; but methinks it would grieve any
Christian heart to observe the Gospel of our Savior, that Divine means of
making men truly wise and good, thus debased and dishonored by such a
senseless use of Scripture-phrases as this man makes of them, who writes
himself D. D. For that which sets off all this wild and confused talk of his,
which is enough to puzzle any man at the first blush, is his perverting the
true use of these Phrases, viz. the Natural man, and the state of Grace;
spiritual things, and discerning them spiritually; with which he rings the
changes so often in his Book, leaving a noise of the words in the fancies of
his Readers, instead of the true, i. e. the Scriptural notion belonging to
them, imprinted on their Minds. That I may therefore reconcile the Reader to
an opinion that I may possibly write of the operation of the Holy Spirit with
more truth than this man has done; I shall prepare my way by enquiring into
the sense of this Text of St. Paul, The natural man receives not the things of
the spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; 1 Cor. 2.14.
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. For it is
chiefly upon this place (as far as I can understand) that the Doctor builds his
confidence that we cannot spiritually discern Spiritual things; and as by
expounding thereof, the use of those Phrases, and such as are equivalent to
them, will be understood: so the understanding of them will be conducible also
to the main design of this Book.

I shall first examine the Doctor's interpretation of this place of Scripture,
and then offer that sense of it, which I take to be truer than his. Before I
attempt either of which things, I must beg his pardon, if I do not think it fit
to follow him, as often as he is pleased to leave the Argument, and fall a
railing against those that have other thoughts of the Text than he has,
especially where he spends almost two whole Pages upon nothing else, P. 222,
223.
charging his Adversaries with the want of those Virtues particularly
enumerated by him, which they greatly praise and extol, and accusing them of
Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Vanity, and Profaneness, and I know not how many
Vices more. Now what is all this, and a great deal more of the like stuff,
which he has swelled his Discourse withal, to the explanation of St. Paul's
Text, which he was endeavoring? Suppose I had a mind to retaliate, having so
large a Subject as Dr. Owen's Pranks, from the year 1648, to this present time,
to expatiate upon; what goodly work were here for the Reader? Therefore all I
shall say to this matter is, that whereas his lewd and notorious practices
against the Church and State have been exposed in Print, and these charged upon
him, not from Tales picked up in the Streets, and at Gossiping-meetings; but
from his own public Actions and Writings: He has no way to be revenged upon
the Gentleman that has done him this kindeness, but by letting fly upon his
whole Order, with all sorts of Calumnies and Reproaches; though it is very
likely he is not able to fasten his Accusations upon any one of those whom he
thus bespatters, since his plentiful Rage against them might satisfy any man
that his Will was not wanting. Wherefore, it being to as little purpose to
attempt the confutation of such loose and general Calumnies, as it had been to
have answered the Doctor, if he could have satisfied his implacable malice with
being at a word, and calling us once for all Rogues and Villains; I shall leave
him in the quiet possession of his Talent at Lying and Defamation, and shall
now only try whether his Reasonings be as unanswerable as his Railings.

SECT. III.
I Often find it very difficult to fasten any meaning upon so slippery a
Writer as this; but to my best understanding he thus explains the phrases of
the Text.

1. By the Natural man, he means one that has the use of all his rational
faculties, P. 217, 218.
or every one that is so, and that is no more than so; that is, every one who
is not a spiritual man, is not one who has received the spirit of Christ, one
that has the spirit of a man enabling him to know things Natural, Civil, or
Political; but not the Spirit of Christ to know things Spiritual: So that the
Natural man is one who is not a Spiritual man, but a Natural man only, as the
Spiritual man is one who is not only a Natural man; or thus: the Natural man,
concerning whom the Apostle says, that he cannot know the things of the Spirit
of God, is one who has not the Spirit, and cannot know the things of the
Spirit of God. And if the Doctor had rested in this Explication, I think he had
been safe enough for ever being confuted. But he has a further meaning, which
discovers not it self till we come toward the end of his Comment: For he tells
us, the reason why the Natural man has no ability to discern spiritual things
is, because the Light it self, P. 224. Sect. 38.
whereby alone spiritual things can be spiritually discerned, is created in us
by an Almighty Act of the Power of God; so that at last this is his notion of a
Natural man, (which agrees with the rest of his Book) that he is one in whose
mind spiritual Light is not created by the Almighty Power of God.

P. 218. Sect. 26.
2. By the things of the Spirit of God, he understands the mysteries of the
Gospel, which depend wholly on supernatural Revelation; and I think this is the
only Phrase he understands right: If he means honestly by supernatural
Revelation, viz. that Revelation which was communicated to the World by Christ
and his Apostles; and not any particular Revelation made to himself and his
Party, by an irresistible work of the Spirit upon their minds. But such a
custom he has gotten to confound every thing, that within two Pages he
understands by it all the Commands of God whatsoever: for through two whole
Sections he discourses concerning the impotency of Man to perform the Commands
of God, Sect. 29.30.
and makes it equivalent to an inability of receiving Spiritual things, Sect.
27.
and quotes Romans 7.8. The carnal mind is not subject to the Law of God; as if
it were a parallel place to the Text in hand. For my part I cannot tie these
incoherent things together; if the Doctor can, let him: He had told us in plain
terms, Sect. 26.
that moral Duties to be observed toward God, our selves, and other men, were
not the things here peculiarly intended; and that is right; but the Mysteries
depending on more Sovereign Supernatural Revelation, and that wholly. And in
this notion I shall understand him; for I cannot understand him in both
together.

3. He explains receiving of these things, by receiving them spiritually; Sect.
28.
and sometimes by receiving them as they are in themselves; and by other
Phrases that are equivalent according to him. But what means he by Spiritually?
he tells you the Natural man may so receive them as to assent to their truth;
but that which he cannot do, is to assent to them under an apprehension of
their conformity to the Wisdom and Holiness of God; nor can he discern their
suitableness unto the great ends, for which they are proposed as the means of
accomplishing. So that this it is to discern them spiritually, and as they are
in themselves. He likewise tells us, Sect. 42.
the proper meaning of receives not, is, he cannot know them; and that
impotency is double. Sect. 38, 39, 40, 41.
1. A Natural impotency, that of the Understanding, in respect whereof, he is
absolutely unable so to do, without an especial renovation by [an irresistible
work of] the Holy Ghost; and this impotency, he says, is absolutely and
naturally insuperable. And 2. A moral Impotency, that of the Will and
Affections. The short of it is, he neither will, nor can if he would know them
spiritually; so that his meaning of these words, The natural man receives not
the things of the Spirit of God, is this; That a man in whose mind an Eternal
Light is not created by the Almighty Power of God, although the Doctrines of
the Gospel be proposed to him with that evidence, that he assents to the truth
of them; yet he neither can nor will understand them to be agreeable to the
Wisdom and Holiness of God, and suitable to the ends of the Gospel, the Glory
of God, and the Salvation of Man.

4. This clause, they are foolishness unto him, he has perplexed with various
interpretations. After giving several accounts on which a thing may be esteemed
foolishness, he tells us, for one or other, Sect. 31.
or all of these reasons, are spiritual things foolishness to the natural man;
which is as much as to say, there is some reason why they are so, though he
cannot directly tell us what it is. If any of his Reasons will serve, let us
take one for instance: That is looked on as foolish which contains means and
ends disproportionate: Now he had told us, spiritual things are foolishness in
the nature of the things themselves with respect unto the mind. I think he
means thus, that such is the nature of them, that a natural man must needs look
upon them to be a means unsuitable and disproportionate to the ends of God's
Glory, and Man's good; and then his interpretation runs thus: The Natural man
is one who, for want of the irresistible Light, cannot discern the suitableness
of the Gospel to those ends, because he cannot discern it is suitable to them.
But it may be his Instances will make his mind more plain: One is that of the
Philosophers of old, to whom the Gospel was foolishness: now says he, if
spiritual things had been suited to the reasons of natural men, then those who
had most improved their minds would more readily have received them than
others: By which I perceive he understands, by these things being foolishness
to the natural man, their unsuitableness to their minds, who had most improved
them, or were wisest and knew most. But that which is somewhat stranger, is his
telling of us that things of any worth in nature and morality are soonest
embraced by such persons. But here things fell out quite otherwise; they were
the Wise, the Rational, that made the longest opposition to spiritual things,
i. e. (if the Doctor's instance be pertinent) that such is the nature of those
things, that it could not be otherwise: so that the unsuitableness of spiritual
things to our minds does at last consist in this; that the more wise and
knowing a man is, the more unapt he is to receive them. But then his other
instance of those to whom the Gospel is (as he says) foolishness, Sect. 33.
viz. That of his present Adversaries, is to a quite contrary purpose; for he
charge them with profound Ignorance and Confidence, which cannot be
sufficiently admired or despised, and certainly then their minds are not very
much improved: Now I think he says concerning these, that they look upon the
spiritual things of the Gospel as foolish and unsuited to the rational
principles of their minds. So that all the light we have gained by the
Doctor's instances to discern his meaning of this clause is, that the spiritual
things of the Gospel are in themselves unsuitable to the minds of those who
have the best improved reasons, and they are looked upon to be unsuitable to
the rational principles of their minds, whose Ignorance and Confidence can
never be sufficiently despised. And here I desire the Doctor to make my peace
with the Reader for carrying him along with me to grope after his meaning in
such a tedious Labyrinth as he has contrived to lose us in. But I do not ask
the Doctor's pardon, if I have missed of his meaning at last, since if he
please, he may write more perspicuously; if he cannot, his Friends would do
well to find out a more natural employment for him.

5. Because they are spiritually discerned, he explains thus; Sect. 38.
because they are discerned by a spiritual light. What light is that? he tells
you, the light it self, whereby alone spiritual things can be spiritually
discerned, is created in us by an Almighty act of the Power of God.

Now from the examination of his Notions concerning the several Phrases, his
sense of the whole seems to be this: That a man in whose mind a spiritual
Light is not created by the Almighty act of the power of God, neither can, nor
will understand the revealed Doctrines of the Gospel to be agreeable to the
attributes of God, and fit to procure man's Salvation; because such is the
nature of those Doctrines, that he cannot but look upon them to be disagreeable
to the one, and unfit for the other: or, because they are unsuitable, or are
looked upon as unsuitable to the rational Principles of the Mind; and it is
utterly impossible he should discern that agreeableness and fitness without
that new light created in his mind, because such is the manner whereby they
must be discerned, that it is impossible to discern them, without that new
light. And now that I have taken this pains to bring the Doctor out of the
clouds, I challenge him to show that this Paraphrase is not the just sum of his
talk concerning the Text before us: now although the naked representation of
this Paraphrase were enough to expose it; yet because this is the Text, which
these men perpetually rely upon, when they set themselves to cant down the use
of reason in Religion, I shall briefly let the Doctor see, that his notions of
it are either groundless, or absurd and inconsistent with themselves, and
incoherent with the Context.

SECT. IV.
1. WHereas he makes the natural man to be one in whom spiritual Light is not
created by the Almightiness of God, it is altogether groundless; for the word
(...) does not of it self signify one who wants that light: nor does the word
(...) denote any Almighty Act, whereby a man comes to be spiritually
enlightened: Nor can the Doctor show from the circumstances of the place, any
reason for this his notion; for those words neither can he know them, do not
infer, that a man cannot know them without such an irresistible light, as he
supposes, nor is there the least mention of any such thing in the whole
Context. Sect. 38.
He tells us indeed that St. Paul plentifully shows elsewhere, that this Light
must be created in us by Almightiness; and he instanceth in 2 Cor. 4.6. I shall
in due place prove that St. Paul shows no such thing in that Text: But admit he
did, yet it does not presently follow that St. Paul does in this place mean by
the Natural man, one in whom this Light is not created; for it is certain he
does not speak one word of it throughout the whole Chapter. Wherefore the
Doctor ought at least to have proved, by comparing both these Texts, that he
designed the same thing in them, which he has not once attempted; and yet this
arbitrary supposal, is the foundation of his whole Comment upon this place.

2. His granting that the Natural man may assent to the truths of the Gospel,
and his denying that he can discern their agreeableness to the Divine
Perfections, and their fitness to promote the ends of the Gospel, is palpably
absurd: For how is it possible that a man who exercises his rational faculties
about divine things (which he grants the natural man may do) should believe the
Revelations of the Gospel to be divine, and yet see no consistency in them with
the Divine Attributes, and no suitableness in them to the ends of Gods Glory,
and Man's Good? The Doctor, whatever he says about those improvements of the
natural man's mind, which he allows to him, seems rather to take him for a
natural fool, than a rational man. A great part of that evidence upon which we
believe the Doctrine of Christ, is, that it is a Doctrine worthy of God, and a
means conducible to the recovery of man; and if the literal sense of the
Christian Doctrines themselves is not more evident to a man that can consider,
than that they are so, why may not a considering man who believes the
Doctrines, believe this of them? Or how can he believe the former without
believing the latter? I know not which way the Doctor can hope to escape, but
by pretending it is possible for a man to assent to a Doctrine or Proposition,
the true reason whereof he does not discern; For example, that a man may assent
to the Creed, upon the Authority of his Spiritual Guide, and not discern the
true reasons of those Propositions which are contained in it. But this will not
serve him; For the natural man is by him granted to be one who may have an
improved Reason, and may exercise it in the consideration of divine things; and
of such a man, viz. who is thus improved and considering, I say it is absurd to
affirm, that he may assent to the revelations of the Gospel, and cannot discern
that they are agreeable to the Divine Attributes, etc. The reason is, because
this is to suppose him as dull and ignorant, as he was allowed to be knowing
and rational before: Since it is plain that they are agreeable to the Divine
Attributes, etc. As for those who believe the Christian Doctrine upon that
meanest motive, of the Authority of their Teachers; though for want of
considering, they do not discern its agreeableness to the divine Perfections,
yet they do believe it; it being not only unreasonable, but impossible for a
man to assent to any Proposition as a divine Revelation, which at the same time
he believes to be inconsistent with the Perfections of God. But men that can
tolerably well use their Understandings in Divine things, as the natural man
may do (to abate the Philosophical Improvements which the Doctor is willing to
cast into the bargain) may not only believe, but discern this Agreeableness;
and it is nonsense to suppose they have exercised their Rational Faculties as
they might have done in this matter; and withal to affirm that they assent to
the truths of the Gospel, but cannot discern that they are consistent with the
Divine Perfections. To put this out of question, I will instance in these
Propositions of the Gospel, That God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. This a natural man, according to the Doctor, may assent unto:
But I demand; This Proposition being revealed, is it not very discernible, that
God's giving his Son for Mankind is very agreeable with his Goodness? And that
his purpose of saving Mankind by the Sacrifice of his Sons death, is agreeable
with his hatred of Sin and his Justice? And that the demonstration of his
Justice and Mercy this way is agreeable to his Wisdom? (2.) That no unrighteous
person shall enter into the Kingdom of God: This also the Natural Man may
assent to; But I demand, Is it not very discernible that this Doctrine is
agreeable with the Holiness and Righteousness of God? Is it not discernably
agreeable with his Wisdom and Sovereignty? And then why may not the wise and
knowing man, that believes these Doctrines to be divine Revelations, discern
them to be agreeable with the divine Perfections? Take the same Doctrines
again, and I demand concerning them, Are they not manifestly suitable to
promote the ends of the Gospel? These ends the Doctor says are the Glory of
God, and our deliverance from a state of Sin and Misery. As for the Glory of
God, they plainly tend to the promoting thereof, because they manifest the
Divine Wisdom, Goodness, and Holiness, and the Perfections of God, which was
observed before: As for our deliverance from Sin; Is not that Doctrine plainly
suited to that end, which assures us there is room for Repentance, since God
has given his only Son, etc. and which acquainteth us, there is no possibility
of our entering into the, etc. if we are unrighteous? As for the deliverance
from misery; Are not those Doctrines discernibly suited to that end, that are
suited to deliver us from sin? And are not all these things so plain, that it is
impossible for a man who has an improved mind, and considers them as an
understanding man may, not to discern them; much more, if he has considered
the Propositions themselves, so as to assent to the truth of them? What
Agreeableness and Suitableness is it which this Doctor means? Is he able to
explain it by such like instances as I have used? If he be, he shall see that
we are able to discern it; if he be not, he cants like a Quaker, and pretends
to know things, which he is not able to make sense of, when he comes to speak
them. But may a Natural man understand and assent to the truth of the
propositions of the Gospel? Yes, says the Doctor, he may: For instance, he may
assent unto this, That Jesus Christ was crucified: But now it is another
Proposition of the Gospel, that to preach Christ crucified is to Speak the
Wisdom of God, verse. 7. It is also another, that The preaching of the cross, to
them that are saved, is the power of God, Chap. 1. verse. 18. Now if he may
understand and assent to these Propositions, he may believe the conformity of
the Doctrine concerning Christ crucified to the Divine Attributes, and its
efficacy to bring men to Repentance and Salvation; which the Doctor says he
cannot, and thereby revokes his concession, That the Doctrines of the Gospel
are Propositions whose sense and importance any rational man may understand,
and assent to their truth, and so be said to receive them. Again, if the Doctor
will take my word for it, I assure him that I do assent unto the Doctrines of
the Gospel, Under an apprehension of their conformity to the Wisdom and
Holiness of God, and of their suitableness to the great ends, for which they
are proposed as the means of accomplishing. If a natural man can do this, then
the Doctor is something mistaken to say, that he cannot; if he cannot, then I
am no natural man according to his own Principles, and may I hope pretend to
argue with him about Spiritual things.

3. He says, That Spiritual things being foolishness unto the natural man, is
a reason why he cannot receive them, taken from the nature of the things
themselves with respect unto the mind. Now the nature of the things themselves
is perpetually the same, but the Minds of men may apprehend them otherwise
than they are, in their own nature; Thus St. Chrysostom upon the place. Hom.
4. (...). This happens not through the nature of the thing, but their disease.
as when they apprehend them to be foolishness, which is the reason why they do
not receive them; and this reason is not at all taken from the nature of the
things themselves, but from the Minds mistaking the nature of these things, as
he in effect confesses, when he says, that in themselves they are the Wisdom
of God. But that which he means, as we may see by his instance of the
Philosophers of old, is this, That the more wise and knowing any man is, the
more unready he is to embrace the Mysteries of the Gospel. He says expressly;
Any thing in Nature and Morality of any worth is embraced soonest by them that
are wisest and know most; but here things fell out quite otherwise. Well,
suppose they did; yet the reason why the Philosophers rejected the Gospel, was
not because they were wise and knowing men, but because they would not admit of
Revelation, as such, nor yield that to be divinely revealed which was above the
reach of mere natural reason; and this was their great Pride and Folly. So the
Pharisees rejected our Savior, (...). The wisdom that is without did not only
not instruct men [ in the Mysteries of the Gospel] but also hinder them.
Chrysostom. in loc. Hom. 7. But how it hindered them St. Chrysostom plainly
tells us in these words, (...). For these [ great men who rejected the Gospel]
were full of Pride. Hom. 5.
not because they were Learned and Knowing men; but because their Lusts and
Interests prejudiced them against his Doctrine, as he frequently told them: So
that neither those nor these, opposed the Gospel, because it was unsuitable to
the rational principles of their minds, as the Doctor would have us believe,
but because it was unsuitable to their unreasonable prejudices and interests,
which sure were none of those Principles. The Writings of Justin Martyr,
Clemens Alexandrinus, and diverse others, may satisfy us, that the Gospel was
early received by Learned Men and Philosophers; what wise men they are that
reject it, we may learn from the Doctor. The principal Mysteries of the Gospel,
says he, are by many looked upon and rejected as foolish, because false and
untrue, though indeed they have no reason to think them false, but because they
suppose them foolish. Now are not these excellent Philosophers, that reject a
Doctrine as foolish, because it is false, and then have no other reason to think
it false, but because they suppose it foolish? Is not their rejecting the
Gospel, an admirable instance whereby to demonstrate that the Doctrines thereof
are foolishness in the nature of the things themselves with respect unto the
minds of them that are wisest and know most? If that which the Doctor here
says be true, then if it be necessary for a man to be a Christian, it is a very
dangerous thing for him, to improve his mind by the exercise of his reason,
since foolish and credulous persons are the most likely to give any
entertainment to it; which was the very charge of Celsus and Julian against
Christianity; and if they could have made good this charge, they and the Doctor
here had done very well to expose it to scorn and contempt, as they and he have
done, by representing it to be such a Religion, as the more a man exercises his
reason about it, the further he is from believing it: For this is that which
the Doctor means by saying, that the Mysteries of the Gospel are foolishness in
the nature of the things themselves, with respect unto the mind: viz. that
they are in their own nature such things, that the more wise and knowing a man
is, the more likely he is to despise and scorn them; which whether it be not
Blasphemy, I now leave the Reader to judge.

Here I cannot but remember what the Doctor premised in his Preface to the
Readers, concerning the reasonableness of Christian Religion. It is not, says
he, that I know of, denied by any, that Christian Religion is highly
reasonable. I suppose, he means by any Christian. But now, as he adds
presently, the Question is not what it is in it self, but what it is with
relation to our Reason; and then he tells us largely, it is reasonable to Reason
enlightened, but foolishness, i. e. unreasonable to the natural man, whose
Reason is unenlightned by the irresistible work: Say you so, Doctor? How comes
it then about, That it is not denied by any, that Christian Religion is highly
reasonable? Can they not deny it to be highly reasonable, and yet must they
necessarily esteem it foolish and unreasonable? He says also, It Is in vain to
dispute with any about the reasonableness of Evangelical Faith and Obedience,
until the state and condition of our Reason be agreed. Wherefore to speak
plainly in the case, as we do acknowledge that Reason in its corrupted state is
all that any man has in that state, whereby to understand and judge of the
sense and truth of revealed Doctrines, etc. so as to the Spiritual things
themselves of the Gospel, in their own nature they are foolishness unto it. If
the Doctor speaks plainly here, then (1.) according to him, it is in vain to
dispute with any whose reason is corrupted, about the reasonableness of
Evangelical Faith and Obedience. According to him also, every man's Reason is
corrupted whose Mind is not renewed by the Holy Ghost, i. e. enlightened by an
Almighty act of the Power of God; So that it is in vain to dispute with any such
person about the Reasonableness of the Gospel, for the Spiritual things thereof
will seem foolishness to him, do what he can, till the Holy Ghost renews him by
his Almightiness. And thus the Doctor has proved, that it is in vain for him or
any man to go about to convince an Infidel of the reasonableness of the Gospel,
for it is in vain to dispute it with him, till the state and condition of their
reason be agreeed on, i. e. till it be agreed to make renewed Reason the judge
of the matter in question; but the Infidel has none of that Reason, for all
the reason he has to judge of these matters by, is corrupted reason, as the
Doctor himself contends, wherefore it is impossible for him to agree that their
renewed Reason shall be the judge in this case; Wherefore it is in vain (one
would think) to dispute with him at all. The only remedy in this case, is for
the Infidel to make the Doctor's renewed Reason the judge between them; and
when they are agreed upon that, they may fall to dispute, i. e. when the
dispute is at an end; for if the Doctor's reason is to judge of the
Reasonableness of the Gospel, the Infidel has yielded the cause without any
more ado. Thus the Doctor has left no other way for a Christian to convince an
Infidel, but this ridiculous one, of persuading the Infidel to let him be judge
of the controversy between them; as if he should say, Here is like to be a
dispute between you and me, whether the Gospel be the true Religion; now the
Gospel is indeed the true and reasonable Religion, but this is only discernible
by renewed Reason, such as mine is, and yours is not: Wherefore before we
dispute, you must agree that my renewed Reason, that is, that I should be the
judge of the Reasonableness of the Gospel; for till we are thus agreed it is in
vain to dispute about the reasonableness of Evangelical Faith and Obedience. I
do not wonder that the Doctor falls foul upon the Quakers in his Book; for they
and such sottish Enthusiasts as they are, seem to be the only men besides
himself that claim the privilege of this way of arguing: if the Doctor had it
by himself without any Competitors (and his Fanatic cause needs it as much as
theirs, though, thanks be to God, the Gospel needs it not) he would in a short
time carry the world before him. (2.) It Is also, according to the Doctor, in
vain to dispute with a man about the reasonableness of the Gospel, till he be
convinced of it already: For, to say the truth, though the Infidel should make
the Doctor judge in his own cause, he is yet never the nearer; for the Gospel
will be foolishness to him, till he is himself enlightened by the irresistible
work: Now when he is illuminated as the Doctor is, he shall believe and
understand the Gospel to be a wise and reasonable dispensation, as the Doctor
does* but before he is so, it is in vain to dispute with him. So that, for ought
I can see, the regenerate men are even left to dispute it amongst themselves,
that is, who need not dispute it at all, because they are already of one mind
about it: And thus the Doctor has proved all disputing whatsoever upon this
matter to be vain and useless; which makes me wonder why he has troubled the
world with his great railing Book, wherein he has pretended to prove the wild
Opinions of his Party, to be Gospel-Mysteries: For if his Reader be
enlightened, he is convinced of them already; if he be not, his Arguments
cannot enlighten him; And therefore though the Doctor might pity him, yet
methinks there is no reason why he should rail at him, because his Doctrines
are foolishness unto him, since such is the nature of them with respect unto
our minds, that it is impossible it should be otherwise.

4. Whereas he interprets those words, He receives them not and he cannot know
them, by adding spiritually thereunto, he makes the Apostle to speak downright
nonsense; For he makes him to say, that the natural man cannot know the
Mysteries of the Gospel spiritually, because they are spiritually discerned or
known: for this is as much as to say, that he cannot know them spiritually,
because he cannot know them spiritually, which I hope the Doctor will grant to
be nonsense; and this is a defect which runs through this whole Paraphrase
which I have charged him withal; the short of it being no more than this, The
Natural man cannot understand the things of the Spirit of God, no, he cannot.

5. He does in effect clear the natural man from all blame, for his not
receiving the Doctrines of the Gospel: Sect. 39.
For he roundly tells us, that his impotency to discern them is absolutely and
naturally insuperable. What can be said more fully to prove that a beast is not
to be blamed for not discerning these things, than that it is absolutely and
naturally impossible that he should? But that which is still more absurd, is,
that he does not only ascribe his ignorance of these Spiritual matters to a
moral impotency likewise, Sect. 41.
but he makes the moral impotency to be greater than the natural: for though he
had concluded this impotency of the Understanding to be absolutely insuperable,
yet he says, the Will and Affections are more corrupted than the
Understanding, that is, more than most of all: For what greater corruption of
the Understanding as to these things can be imagined, than that it is naturally
impossible for it to understand and discern them? that is, unless I am turned
into such a block as he speaks of, by reading his unintelligible Notions, that
as to these things it quite cease to be an understanding; and a beast may be
as soon made to discern them as a man.

Now I freely grant, that there are some Opinions which the Doctor would
persuade us are Gospel-Mysteries, to which this his Interpretation very well
agrees; and if he had meant them only, I had not gone about to confute him
here; for indeed I look upon them to be as he says, Unsuitable to the rational
principles of the Mind, unprofitable to man, and dishonorable to God; but
then withal I cannot find them any where in the Scripture, and therefore
(whatever he fancies of a possibility to believe that to be divinely revealed,
which is not believed to be consistent with the divine Attributes, etc.) I do
not so much as believe them, nor do I see any likelihood that I ever shall,
unless some irresistible Power makes another thing of me, than I find my self
to be at present. And if this will content the Doctor, I have no quarrel with
him: But then if he pretends, that the real Doctrines of our Savior's Gospel,
viz. That the Son of God was crucified for us, and that we must be saved by
Faith in him, and that God will give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him, etc.
are as unintelligible, and the usefulness of them as indiscernible, as that of
his new-fashion'd Principles; I must beg his pardon, if I cannot believe that
neither, but reckon on the contrary, that the Doctor has cast an horrible
reproach upon the Christian Religion, while he makes it impossible for a man
that bends his Mind to consider the Doctrines thereof never so attentively,
and uses his reason never so modestly in the examination of them, to assent to
them as Doctrines worthy of God and profitable to man. If that be true, then
this pernicious Consequence is unavoidable, That it is to no purpose for a man
to use any means to satisfy himself concerning the Truth of the Gospel; and if
it be yet pretended to him, that he ought to be a right Believer, he has no
way but to sit down in a lazy expectation of that Light which the Doctor says
must be created in his Mind by an Almighty Act of God, before he can know and
believe the Mysteries of the Gospel, as they are, and as they ought to be
known. This is the consequence of the Doctor's interpretation of St. Paul's
Text; and let any man but himself judge, whether it does not infinitely
disparage the whole Gospel of our Savior, and whether it does not offer great
wrong to the Souls of men, by betraying them either into a contempt of
Christianity, or at least into a sluggish neglect of all that Consideration
whereby they come to understand and believe it upon its proper grounds.

And this is the reason, why I have been so punctual in finding out, and so
long in confuting his Notions of this Text, which if they had not been
altogether as pernicious as they are false, I should have left them to perish
in their own Nonsense.

SECT. V.
THe incoherence of his Interpretation with the scope of St. Paul in that and
the former Chapter, must be judged of by observing what St. Paul's design is in
them; which I now come to enquire into, and thereby to lay a foundation for the
true Interpretation of the Text.

To allay those Contentions that were amongst the Corinthians about their
Teachers whom they should follow, Chap. 1. verse. 11. St. Paul reminds them, how
he had preached the Gospel among them, and by what arguments they had been won
to receive it, not with wisdom of words, verse. 17. and again, not with enticing
words of man's wisdom, Chap. 2. verse. 4. but in demonstration of the Spirit and
of power This Text our Author produces in another place, P. only to show his
dislike of the sense thereof given in the Friendly Debate, as any one may see
by the impertinence of it to his design there; For this is all he says about
it: Some of late have put in faint and weak exceptions against this latter
clause (this Slanderer should have said, against his interpretation of this
clause) viz. Demonstration of the Spirit, etc. as though not an evidence of the
powerful presence of the Spirit of God, in the dispensation of the Gospel was
intended therein, but the power of working Miracles, contrary to the whole
scope of the place, and consent of the best Expositors. Now, unless the Doctor
supposes that the Power of working Miracles was not an evidence of the powerful
presence of the Spirit of God in the, etc. his exception is nonsense: But I
leave it to the Doctor's second thoughts to consider, with what modesty he
could call that Authors apprehensions of the Demonstration, etc. faint and weak
exceptions, contrary to the whole scope of the place, and consent of best
Expositors, after that excellent person has vindicated them against his
Adversary, by such clear and solid Reasons, and such pregnant Authorities, as
neither he, nor any of his friends, nor the Doctor for them, have been able to
say a wise word to. But what can that man want a forehead to say, who has a
face to pretend St. Chrysostom is for his turn in an interpretation of a place
of Scripture, wherein he is clearly contradicted by St. Chrysostom in three or
four Homilies together, out of one of which too he transcribes a passage in
favor of his own sense, as he pretends? Now whether the Doctor be not guilty
of this dishonesty, I shall leave the Reader, and him too, to judge by the
following marginal Notes.
; i. e. not with Rhetorical Orations, or Philosophical Discourses, such as the
wise men among the Gentiles made use of, to put off their Opinions to the
people withal, he did not go about to persuade them in this manner; but as it
was fit to prove the truth of a divine Revelation, which the Gospel was
pretended to be, he proved it to them by a divine Demonstration of the truth
thereof, viz. that of Supernatural Gifts bestowed now upon Believers; of
ancient Prophesies; of apparent Miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles;
and such Testimonies of Gods owning the Gospel to be a Revelation from him, as
these are. The consequence whereof was, that their Faith did not stand in the
wisdom of men, but in the power of God; i. e. that their Faith was not grounded
upon the Eloquence, or the subtle reasonings of men; but upon the plain
Testimony of God, declared by Miracles, etc. And this was clearly a good
consideration to take them off from contending about the persons of their
Teachers, who never went about to make Proselytes to themselves, as verse. 13.
by the oftentation of Learning and Eloquence; but to win them to the Christian
Faith, by the demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power.

But hereupon the Apostle takes occasion to show, (1.) The offense, which they
who were most in vogue for wisdom, took at the Gospel, and the way of preaching
it; and the prevalency of that way notwithstanding, above all other methods to
make men wise and good; and this is the scope of chap. 1. from verse. 18. to the
end. (2.) To vindicate this way of preaching the Gospel, against their
pretenses who rejected the Revelations of the Gospel, which is the design of
chap. 2.

That the former is the design of the Apostles discourse in the first Chapter,
is plain from what he says verse. 18. and so forward. For the preaching of the
Cross is to them that perish foolishness; And who these were, we learn from
verse. 20. Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? etc. i. e. Let those men who
are offended at the Preaching of Christ crucified, come and compare the
Religion they teach, and the Reasons they bring for it, (...), Chrysostom. in loc.
Hom. 4. Who of those that are busied in Syllogismes, who of those that are
skilled in the Jewish matters, have saved men, and made known the truth to
them? (...). Ibid. The Doctrine of the Cross being a discourse not about any
ordinary mean things, but concerning God, and true Piety, and the Evangelical
way of living, and the Judgment of the world to come, has made all Believers
Philosophers, even rusticks and private men themselves. (...). Hom. 6. For a
demonstration by miraculous works and signs, is much more clear, and
convincing, than that by Philosophical Arguments.
and the Good they do by it, with our Doctrine, and the Testimonies we confirm
it withal, and the Advantages which it brings to them that believe it: For it
pleased God by the foolishness (as they are pleased to call it) of preaching to
save them that believe, verse. 21. And the foolishness of God is wiser than men,
and the weakness, etc. verse. 25. i. e. Let it be considered, and you will see a
clear manifestation of Divine Wisdom and Power in the Death and Resurrection of
Christ, to the convincing of men that his Doctrine is true, and the bringing of
them to Salvation by it, verse. 24. You will see also what an infinite
disparegement this wise contrivance of God will do to all the methods of human
wisdom, when they are compared with it. For God has chosen the foolish things
of this world, those ways of instructing and saving Mankind, which are so far
above all the inventions, and above the expectations of the wisest men, that
they now generally reckon them to be foolish; to confound the wise, to put down
all that wisdom of theirs which they so much glory in, and thereby to show that
God is infinitely wiser than men, v. 27. That no flesh should glory in his
presence; verse. 29. But the particular reasons, (...). Hom. 7. Worldly wisdom
was excelled not by foolishness, but by a more perfect wisdom, and that so
much more perfect, that it seemed foolishness. (...). Ibid. I hear that Christ
was crucified, and thereupon I admire his love to mankind. He that calls this
foolishness, when he hears it, thinks the death of Christ was an argument of
his weakness, and inability to save himself. (...). Hom. 4. The Greeks require
of us Oratory and Philosophical Arguments. And this is that which St. Chrysostom.
calls so often the (...), the wisdom that is without, which prejudiced the
Philosophers against the Gospel.
why so few of those persons whose wisdom was in this manner baffled, did
embrace the Gospel of Christ (for not many wise men after the flesh are called,
verse. 26.) we find in verse. 22, 23. For the Jews require a sign, and the
Greeks seek after wisdom; But we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a
stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness. Here are two sorts of men,
concerning whom the Apostle speaks, and he shows concerning each of them, why
they rejected the Gospel. 1. The Jews were offended at it, because it required
the belief of a crucified Messiah; but their pretense was that they wanted a
Sign, i. e. some Prodigy from Heaven, or some such amazing appearances as
accompanied the delivery of the Law to Moses upon mount Sinai. 2. The Greek
Philosophers of those days were offended at the simplicity of the Apostles
preaching, who nakedly represented their Doctrines, without any such
Philosophical Subtleties and Reasonings, as they used themselves: For that
which they sought after, which they pretended to want in the preaching of the
Gospel, was wisdom, or demonstration from natural Principles; and therefore
it is of these peculiarly said, that the Gospel was foolishness unto them; viz.
because they looked for Wisdom or Discourses merely Philosophical. Now it is
plain that the Apostles chief design in the second Chapter, is to vindicate
his way of Preaching the Gospel, against the fault which the Greeks found with
it. For to this purpose he begins directly thus. And I Brethren, when I came to
you, (...). Hom. 6. For the Apostle said, I determined to know nothing, in
direct opposition to the wisdom that is without. I came not forming Syllogisms
and Sophisms, nor saying any thing in that way to you, but only that Christ was
crucified. (...). For a Mystery a revealed Doctrine needs no Philosophical
Argumentation, but it is enough that it be barely declared what it is. Hom. 7.
(...); Hom. 6. What should give men assurance of the truth of these things, but
the Demonstration of the Spirit? for this is a clear demonstration: for who, I
pray, could see the dead raised, and evil Spirits cast out, and not receive
Those Doctrines that were confirmed by these works? That which the Apostles
confirmed their Preaching withal, were (...). Signs and Testimonies out of the
old Scripture. Ibid.
came not with excellency of speech or wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony
of God; i, e. I answered not their expectation, who looked for Eloquence or
Philosophy; For I determined not to know any thing among you save Jesus Christ
and him crucified. v. 2. not to make known unto you any other Doctrines, but
those which God had revealed, and particularly that the crucified Jesus was the
Son of God. And my Speech and my Preaching was not with enticing words -- but
in demonstration of the Spirit, etc. i. e. and these Doctrines I proved by
Miracles and other Divine Testimonies.

Now this way of proving them the Apostle justifies, from the nature of those
things which he had preached unto them, showing that they had depended
altogether upon the free and Sovereign Will of God, and therefore could not be
known but by Revelation, and therefore could not be proved to those unto whom
they were not immediately revealed, otherwise than by sufficient testimony,
that God had revealed them to others; such as Miracles; and this was enough to
show why he rejected excellency of speech and wisdom, (...). Hom. 4. For if we
should go about to prove by natural reasons, how that God was made man, and
entered into the Virgins womb, instead of leaving these revealed matters to
faith, i. e. instead of proving them by testimonies of divine Revelation; they
would laugh at us more than they do already.
viz. because it was an improper way of proving things of that nature which he
had delivered to them.

Thus says the Apostle, We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the
hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world unto our glory, v. 7. i. e.
we declare those counsels of God concerning the Salvation of Mankind, which
were concealed from former ages, and which God has now honored us with the
clear revelation of; (...). Hom. 7. This Honor has God done to us, that by our
means others should hear his Mysteries. For to those whom we make our friends,
we give this testimony of our friendship, that we communicate our secrets to
them before to any else. (...). Ibid. If the Prophets spoke of these things;
why says he, Ear has not heard, nor have entered into the heart of man, etc?
This is yet true, for he speaks concerning humane nature, -- for they did not
hear as men, but as Prophets; i. e. what they knew of these matters they knew
by Revelation.
Which none of the Princes of the world knew; for had they -- But as it is
written, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart
of man, what things, etc. verse. 8, 9. i. e. if it could have been found out by
natural Sense or natural Reason that God would send his Son into the world,
etc. the chief men among the Jews could not have been ignorant of it, and
instead of crucifying him, they would have become his Disciples themselves.

But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit, verse. 10. But these things, to
the knowledge whereof no man by mere natural reason could attain, God has made
known to us by revelation of his Spirit; so that this contrivance of Divine
Wisdom is no longer hidden now, being revealed to us by the Spirit: For the
Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God; for the Spirit of God
is acquainted with all the secret Counsels of God; and we may therefore be
sure, that we are acquainted with as many of them, as the Spirit reveals unto
us: For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is
in him? even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God, verse.
11. i. e. what man knows the secret purposes of another man, till he thinks fit
to discover them himself? So the things of God, i. e. his Counsels concerning
the Salvation of man, which depend merely upon his own Will and Choice, none
can know but the Spirit of God. And that these are the things which the Apostle
means, is plain from the Argument which he uses here; for those things of a
man which are common to humane nature, one man may know concerning another,
without being acquainted by him what they are: In like manner, without
particular Revelation, a man may understand the Natural Perfections of God, and
those Divine Truths which by the mere use of Reason may be thence inferred;
wherefore the things of God here meant, are those intentions and designs of
God, which by natural reason cannot be inferred, from the consideration of the
divine Perfections; because they depend only upon the Will and Pleasure of God,
and are therefore only to be known by Revelation: And this is further expressed
by the Apostle in the 12 verse. We have received the Spirit which is of God,
that we may know the things which are freely given to us of God; to instruct
men in the knowledge of those things, that could not otherwise be known. Which
things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which
the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual; i. e. there
is then no reason why they should be offended, that we pretend not to prove
these divine matters by Philosophical Arguments, but by such Arguments only as
are proper to prove them by: The truth of our Revelation we prove by the
demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, verse. 4. The sense of Revelation we
prove by comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual; (...). Hom. 7. When a
Spiritual Doubt arises, we bring testimonies from Spiritual things; for
instance, I say that Christ arose from the dead, that he was born of a Virgin:
then I produce these testimonies, types, and demonstrations; viz. Jonas his
tarrying three days in the whale, etc.
i. e. one divine Revelation with another, the Revelations of the Old
Testament, with the Revelations of the New.

Then the Apostle adds, But the natural man receives not, etc. which is the
Text to be explained. Now if we will allow the Apostle to speak consistently,
we are [1.] By the Natural man to understand one who rejects Revelation, It Is
true that the word (...) does not always so signify, for in St. Jude, verse.
19. the (...) are sensual men, men addicted to their Lusts, not those that
reject Revelation, because they are there supposed to be Professors: and so the
(...), are not those who are opposed to the (...) in 1 Cor. 2. who were taught
by the Revelation of the Spirit; but to the (...) mentioned chap. 3. who were
meek peaceable Christians. They therefore in St. Jude, were such as did not
walk after the Spirit, wanted those Christian virtues of Love, Meekness,
Peaceableness, which are the fruits of the Spirit. It is not unusual for the
holy Writers, to use the same word under different significations; and then the
sense they intend by such a word is to be determined by the Context. Now that
(...) in St. Jude signifies the sensual man, who though a Christian, was yet
wanting in Christian temper and practice, is not more clear from the Context
there, than that here it signifies one that is no Christian at all, or one that
rejects the Revelations of the Gospel, is clear from the whole scope of the
Apostle in this Chapter. Here it will not be unfit once for all to observe a
like variety in the signification of the word (...) used by the Apostle, Chap.
2, 3. (...) in the second Chapter is opposed to (...), and therefore signifies
one that admits of Revelation, and is thereby acquainted with the Will of God.
And concerning him it is that the Apostle says, verse. 15. (...), which the
(...) was not fit to do, because he rejected the only proper way, whereby the
(...) were to be known. But in the third Chapt. (...) is opposed to (...), as
when the Apostle says, verse. 1. I could not speak unto you (...); now the
(...) were (...), and consequently those who had received the Revelations of
the Gospel, but by reason of their unchristian temper, being given to strife
and debate, could not be said to be grown Christians, but were only babes in
Christ, very imperfect Christians. Wherefore (...) in opposition to them
signifies, not only one who has received and believed the Revelations of the
Gospel, but whose mind also is thoroughly conformed to the Christian Doctrine,
and so is the same with (...), Chap. 2. Verse. 26. where the Apostle says,
(...), i. e. amongst those improved Christians, who were by their good temper
qualified to receive higher knowledge concerning the Mysteries of the Gospel,
which the (...) mentioned Chap. 3. were not able to bear. Thus St. Chrysostom. tells
us, that the (...) were those who did (...), etc. Hom. 8. who were of the
lowest rank among the Spiritual; and this (...), because of their evil lusts:
and of these he says, (...), their carnality permitted them not to hear higher
Doctrines. Moreover he says, Ye cannot bear them, is put for, Ye will not;
for, says he, if it were a natural impossibility, (...), a man would pardon
them perhaps; but since their inability is (...), from their own choice, (...),
they are bereaved of all excuse. And it was from their own choice, because it
proceeded from their lusts; (...). For an impure life is an hinderance to
sublime knowledge, etc. and as he excellently says, (...). He ought to purify
himself from all lust, who intends to pursue after truth; and to purge himself
in particular from the lusts of Strife, and Contention, and Unpeaceableness;
since as St. Chrysostom well observes, The Apostle could have told them they
were carnal, because of their fornications, etc. but he chooses to tell them
they were so, because of their Schisms and Contentions; the lust whereof makes
men as unmeet to labor after the knowledge of Truth, as any other impure
affection whatsoever; which J. O. and his Brethren, as spiritual as they seem
to themselves, would do well to consider a little better than I fear they do.
not excluding him that never had it offered to him. But the former seems
principally to be intended (though upon the matter it comes all to one) viz. he
who rejects the testimonies whereby any thing is proved to be divinely
revealed, which is above the reach of Philosophical wisdom. Thus did the Greek
Philosophers, who counted the Doctrine of a crucified Savior foolishness, as
here the natural man does the things of the Spirit of God; and it is he to whom
the Apostle offers the Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, against the
excellency of speech and wisdom; wherefore the Natural man is he against whom
St. Paul was proving the necessity of Revelation, and the truth of revealed
Doctrines by testimonies of Revelation; and consequently the Natural man is one
who rejects revealed Doctrines. Though, as I intimated before, he may be so
called that is fain to rely upon his mere natural Reason, for want of
Revelation, because it was never proposed to him: For whether a man never had
it, or rejects it being offered, he is equally forced to trust to natural
Reason in his enquiry after divine Truths.

And therefore if the Doctor by the state of Nature, which he makes such a
clutter about all over his Book, means the state of the Natural man here spoken
of; the Scriptural notion thereof (though we do not find this very phrase, The
state of Nature in the Scripture) is this, viz. the state of an heathen man,
who either wants or rejects divine Revelation. And thus it is fitly opposed to
a state of Grace, as that signifies being a Believer, or a member of the
Christian Church. And both are distinguished from the state of Judaism, or
being under the Law. For the Jews did not reject all divine Revelation,
believing that which came by Moses, and so were not in a mere state of Nature,
as the Heathens were. But as many of the Jews as would not receive the Gospel
were under the Law, but not under Grace, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 3. i. e.
they were not in a state of Grace; not as the phrase is taken now adays; but,
as it signifies no other thing, than the receiving of the Christian Faith,
which those Jews who received not, were under the Law; those Heathens who
received not, were in a state of nature, or the natural men which the Apostle
here speaks of.

2. By the things of God which the natural man rejects, the Apostle means,
those Doctrines of Christianity, the truth whereof is not discoverable by
natural Reason, which neither eye has seen, etc. verse. 9. the hidden wisdom of
God, v. 7. but are knowable only by Revelation [ God has revealed them to us
by his Spirit, verse. 10.] being they concern the purposes of God that depended
upon his Sovereign Will and Pleasure [even so the things of God, etc. verse. 11,
12.] and therefore are to be proved only by divine Testimonies and Arguments
[by the demonstration, etc. verse. 4. in words which the Holy Ghost teaches,
etc. verse. 13.] (3.) Because they are foolishness unto him, signifies because
they are not proved by wisdom which the Greeks seek after, by Philosophical
Demonstrations from Natural Principles, chap. 1. verse. 22. [4.] By being
spiritually discerned is meant, their being known, and understood, and judged
of by the Revelation and Testimony of the Spirit, and that external to those
who are not immediately inspired, as the Apostles were; which is clear from St.
Paul's former discourse, for he proposes this way whereby to judge of the truth
of the Gospel, viz. the demonstration of the Spirit and of Power; he also
proposes this way whereby to judge of the sense of the Doctrines thereof, viz.
by comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual, that is, It should have been
remembered before, that although the Apostle had said before, that the Wisdom of
God which he had Preached was hidden till God revealed it by Christ and his
Apostles, yet this Wisdom had been foretold by the Prophets, and their
Prophecies were Revelations of it. How then was it hidden? It was hidden in
comparison to that revelation of it, which was made when those Prophesies were
accomplished. The Prophesies of the Old Testament contained the Wisdom of God
so as to cover it; but now when these Prophesies were fulfilled, then the
meaning of them was made plain. The completion gave light to the Prophecy, when
the Prophecy was made good by the completion. And when those Prophesies were
clearly fulfilled, and the wisdom hid in them was now manifested, it was a very
convincing method, which the Apostles took, to compare one divine Revelation
with another, that of the Old Testament with that of the New, in order to the
demonstrating of their true meaning by their agreeableness to one another. Thus
St. Chrysostom clearly. (...). Hom. 7. The future things of the Gospel were by
such resemblances, and descriptions, as it were shadowed (...); that when they
came to pass, they might be believed.
one divine Revelation with another. Now this had been utterly vain, if those
to whom that evidence and this help was proposed could not possibly know
spiritual things, without such an internal and immediate Revelation of them as
the Apostles had themselves.

The Doctrines of the Gospel are revealed to the world, not immediately by the
Spirit, but by the Apostles who had the Spirit of Christ, and have left us the
Doctrines of Christ in their holy Writings. They proved that the Spirit of God
had revealed those Doctrines, by the demonstration of the Spirit; they proved
the Sense of them, by comparing one divine Revelation with another. And this
way of Conviction St. Paul clearly opposes to Philosophical Demonstrations;
which it had been ridiculous to do, if he had not meant an external means of
conviction by it, i. e. a means by which one man may convince another: which
the Doctors irresistible Light cannot with any face be pretended to be;
wherefore to be spiritually discerned does, according to the clear scope of the
Apostle, signify to be discerned and understood by the external revelations
and testimonies of the Spirit. As things that are naturally discerned are
things discernable by Sense, This is exactly according to St. Chrysostom. Note
upon the place, (...). Hom. 7. Because they are spiritually discerned, i. e.
because the Doctrines preached by the Apostles must necessarily be received by
Faith; and because they cannot be assented to from mere reasonings: or, because
they cannot be proved by Philosophical discourses; if they be assented to at
all, it must be upon the account of Divine Revelation.
or mere natural Reason; so things that are spiritually discerned are those
which be discernible only by the revelation of the Spirit, i. e. by the
testimony of the Spirit, in the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles, as to the
truth of them, and by comparing one divine Revelation with another, as to the
meaning of them. So that the Apostle's Argument is this: A Natural man cannot
understand those things which are to be known by revelation from the Spirit;
because they are spiritually discerned, i. e. because there is no way of
knowing these things, but by Revelation and Testimony of the Spirit, which he
rejects.

Now he whose Faith is grounded upon this Revelation, the Apostle calls a
Spiritual man, v. 15. in opposition to the Natural man; and he says concerning
him, that he judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man, i. e.
either, (according to St. Chrysostom's excellent Note) He judges both the
Doctrines that may be known by mere natural Reason, and those which cannot be
known but by Revelation: For he has the Principles of Natural Reason, equally
with the Natural Man, (...). Hom. 7. We know both our own things, and all those
of unbelievers; but they know not ours.
and moreover he has further knowledge by Revelation, which the other has
not. Or, He judges all things of that nature, whereof the Apostle was
speaking, viz. Gospel-Mysteries. He is able to prove the truth of these things,
by proving that they are divinely revealed, and thereby to confute their
pretenses who reject them, because they cannot be known by mere natural Reason;
but no man can confute him whose knowledge of these things is grounded upon
sufficient evidence that they are divinely revealed. For who has known the
mind of the Lord? Who can pretend to know the mind of God better than God
himself does? and yet those must do so, (...), Hom. 7. We know those things
that are in the mind of Christ; viz. whatever it was his Will we should know,
and which he has revealed.
who contradict what is proved by the demonstration of the Spirit; and
therefore this is the certain foundation of our knowledge, which must stand
when all the Wisdom of the wise men shall perish, that we have the mind of
Christ; that we are instructed by Christ himself, who came from God.

Thus have I largely shown the design of the Apostle in these two Chapters,
and that sense of the Text in hand which makes the Apostles Discourse clearly
consistent. And now I leave it to the unprejudiced Reader to judge whether the
Doctor's interpretation of it, which I have already shown to be absurd in it
self, be not also utterly impertinent to the Apostles main design: for
supposing the natural man to be one in whom spiritual Light is not created by
an almighty work of God upon his mind, how strangely must the Apostle have
wandered from his purpose, which was to show that revealed Truths could only
be known by God's revealing them to us, and the truth of such Revelation by
Miracles, Prophecies, and such Arguments as he opposed to those natural
Demonstrations, and ways of proving things which the Philosophers used? And how
justly might they have derided the Apostle for finding fault with them, because
they rejected revealed Religion, for its not being knowable by mere natural
Reason; if, after so long a flourish about an higher and better way of
demonstrating those divine Truths he spoke of, than from natural Principles, he
had concluded that no man could understand their truth and sense, as they ought
to be understood, till God made him to understand them by an irresistible work
upon his mind, which is the Doctor's sense of those words, that they are
spiritually discerned?

I put it also to the Reader to judge whether this following Paraphrase upon
these words, which the Doctor carps at, be as he calls it, a wresting of the
Scripture at pleasure: But such things as these, ( matters of Divine
Revelation) they that are led only by the Light of humane Reason, the learned
Philosophers, etc. do absolutely despise, and so hearken not after the doctrine
of the Gospel; for it seems folly to them, Chap. 1. verse. 28. nor can they by
any study of their own come to the knowledge of them; for they are only to be
had by understanding the Prophecies of Scripture, and other such means which
depend on divine Revelation, the Voice from Heaven, descent of the Holy Ghost,
Miracles, etc. This is the Paraphrase of the Reverend Dr. Hammond, and it fully
expresses that sense, which by the Context I have proved to belong to the
Text. Our Author brings it in at last to examine it by his own comment, which
since I have disproved, I might spare my self any further trouble in defending
the sense of that Paraphrase: But let us see what he has to say against it.

1. He says that the Apostle by the natural man intends not only the learned
Philosophers, but every one of what sort and condition soever, who has not
received the Spirit of Christ. To see what a man will say when he is set to
wrangle! Dr. Owen himself, more than once, gives his meaning of the natural man
in such expressions as these; One which has the use and exercise of all his
rational faculties; the things of the Gospel were foolishness to the learned
Philosophers of old, and the wise, knowing, and rational, made the longest
opposition to them. And he says himself in the very next exception, The Apostle
gives an account why so few wise and learned men receive the Gospel. But if Dr.
Owen's offense be taken that they only, are intended by Dr. Hammond, this
offense is unreasonably taken; for the Doctor intends, as his words are very
plain, all those, of whatsoever sort they be, that are led only by the light
of humane Reason, i. e. who either want or reject Revelation.

2. He dislikes the paraphrasing of he receives not by he absolutely despises
the things of the Spirit; and yet this is sometimes his own Paraphrase, as
where he gives the reason why the natural man does not receive them, he says,
the Apostle tells them the Gospel is the foolishness of God, and that to cast a
contempt upon the wisdom of men by whom it is despised: And in diverse other
places he uses the same liberty. But his chief exception against this part of
the Paraphrase is, because it does not express the reason given by the Apostle,
why the natural man does not receive, etc. and that reason is his disability to
receive them, i. e. because it does not express that which the Apostle could
not possibly intend; for he that barely says, that any one believes or receives
not such a Doctrine, will not (unless he be a Fool) pretend that by saying so
he gives a reason why he does not. But Dr. Hammond gives a reason why the
natural man receives not the things of God, where St. Paul gives a reason, who
says, he does not receive them because they are foolishness unto him, and he
cannot, because they are spiritually discerned.

His fifth Objection is to the same purpose with this; for he says, the proper
meaning of receives not is given in the ensuing reason and explanation of it,
he cannot know them; which is nonsense: for not to know a Doctrine is one
thing, and not to be able to know it is another; and therefore the latter
cannot be the proper meaning of the former; nor do I understand how the meaning
of a Proposition can be said to be given by the reason of it: for I always
thought that the meaning of a Sentence must first be understood, before the
reason or truth of that meaning can be known. It were much to be wished, that
though Dr. Owen takes no care to speak truth, he would yet make some conscience
of speaking sense.

3. He says, The Apostle treats not of what men could find out by any study of
their own; but of what they could not do; they could not receive the spiritual
mysteries of the Gospel. Which exception I am amazed at; because neither Dr.
Hammond speaks of what they could find out, but of what they could not find
out by any study of their own: but says J.O. they could not do it, when the
Gospel was proposed, declared, and preached to them; and so the Doctor supposes
too; and any man in his wits must suppose it likewise: for how else could they
have called the Gospel foolishness, if it had never been known to them?

4. The Gospel was preached to them by the testimonies of Prophecies, Miracles,
and the like, in the same way and manner as it was to those that believed. What
then? why you may go look: for he has only left us to guess at the design of
this exception: But at the end of his fifth exception, he says concerning the
things of the Gospel being spiritually discerned; To wrest this unto the
outward means of revelation, which is directly designed to express the internal
manner of the minds reception of things revealed, is to wrest the Scripture at
pleasure. I answer, 1. If the word spiritually is designed to express not the
means, but the manner of receiving Gospel-mysteries, then Dr. H. does wrest the
Scripture by making it to signify the outward means of discerning them, viz.
Miracles, Prophecies, etc. But then withal, Dr. Owen wrests the Scripture too,
by making it to signify the inward means of discerning them, viz. the
irresistible Light, by which he discerns them: for inward means of doing a
thing, are opposed to the manner of doing it equally with outward means: And if
Dr. Owen says, that the internal manner of the minds reception is expressed
by his saying, that they are discerned by irresistible Light; I ask him why I
may not say too, that the internal manner of the minds reception of them is
expressed by Dr. Hammond's affirming, that they are discerned by Miracles,
Prophecies, etc. The true difference between Dr. H. and Dr. O. in this matter,
is not whether the manner or the means of receiving spiritual things be
signified by the word spiritually: but whether it is designed to express those
means which Dr. H. affirms, viz. external Testimonies of divine Revelation, or
those which Dr. O. contends for, viz. the internal and irresistible operations
of the Spirit upon a man's mind. But 2. I have shown by the clear scope of the
Apostle, that the outward means are here to be understood. This I see is our
Author's great trouble, that Dr. H. supposes the true cause why the Natural man
cannot know the things of the Spirit, is because he will only be led by his
natural Reason, and will not attend to Revelation, and the outward means
whereby revealed Doctrines may be proved: whereas J. Owen's meaning is, that he
cannot receive them; because the New Light is not yet created in his mind by
an almighty act of the Spirit. The truth of Dr. Hammond's sense, and the
absurdity of Dr. Owen's, I have already shown; and shall only add this to
help our Authors understanding, viz. That the proposal of the external
evidences of a divine Revelation made equally to those who rejected the Gospel,
with them who received it, is no argument that they who rejected it could not
receive it, because their minds were not enlightened by an omnipotent act of
the Spirit: For another reason may be given why they could not, viz. the
Apostles reason; because they sought after man's Wisdom, and would not admit of
that for truth which was not proved by Philosophical discourse.

By the Authorities he brings to confirm his own exposition, and to confront
Dr. Hammond's, we may guess how pertinent the rest are, that his Book is
stuffed withal. He produces that saying of St. Chrysostom; A natural man is
he who lives by the flesh, and has not his mind yet enlightened by the Spirit,
but only has that connatural humane understanding, which the Creator of all
things has endued the minds of men withal. This Exposition which he calls
better than Dr. Hammond's is clearly to the same purpose with it: for here is
not a word about that irresistible Light which J. O. contends for; and to be
led only by the Light of humane Reason, which are Dr. Hammond's words, is
perfectly the same with having only the connatural humane understanding, etc.
The following passage of Chrysostom, which he quotes, is to the same effect. I
shall only add that citation out of the same Writer, which he brings in at the
beginning of his Exposition: The natural man is one that ascribes all to the
reasonings of his own mind, and does not think that he stands in need of aid
from above; which is madness; for God has given the Soul, that it should learn
and receive what he bestows, or what is from him, and not suppose that it is
sufficient to it self. Eyes are beautiful and profitable, but if they would see
without light, this beauty and power will not profit but hurt them; and the
Mind, if it would see without the Spirit of God, it does but entangle it self.
This is clearly against him: For that which God is here said to bestow, is not
that irresistible Light the Doctor speaks of, but the Light of Revelation,
which I have been discoursing of, i. e. revealed truths, which St. Chrysostom
says the Soul is to learn; but to learn that Light he talks of, is nonsense:
St. Chrysostom is so far from supposing, that it is impossible for a man to
receive what [Revelations] God bestows, unless the Almighty Power of God
necessitateth him to do it, that he says God has given the Soul that it might
receive them, when they are bestowed: And he reckons it madness for a man to
think he needs no divine Revelations, and consequently to reject them, when
they are offered with sufficient evidence. Now the only reason, according to J.
O. why he rejects them is, because the Almighty work has not been yet upon his
mind: If St. Chrysostom had thought so too, he had been a mad man himself for
accusing them of Madness, that failed of doing, what no Power less than
almighty could enable them to do; which is in effect to accuse them of Madness,
because they were not Almighty themselves. St. Chrysostom's Similitude is very
pertinent: For as Light is to bodily Eyes, so is Revelation to the Mind in
respect of revealed Truths; which are such, as none but the Spirit of God could
discover: And therefore whoever refuses to attend to his revelation of them,
must needs be ignorant of them, and will find himself entangled in many
difficulties, which he might have understood by harkening to Revelation. This
Similitude St. Chrysostom uses elsewhere to the same purpose; for he says,
As no man with his naked eyes can learn the appearances in the heavens, so the
Soul alone cannot learn the things of the Spirit, (...). Hom. 7.
i. e. they are not to be learned by mere Natural Reason, without the aid of
Revelation.

I now leave the Reader to judge with what conscience this man could pretend
the Authority of St. Chrysostom, to countenance his own Exposition of this
Text of St. Paul; and this is all I shall say to the Doctor's Authorities,
which any one may see are as convincing as his Reasons.

And now at length, I desire him to take notice, that it will be to no purpose
for him, to reject what I have to say concerning spiritual things, contrary to
his notions of them, under pretense that I am a natural man: for I thank God I
am a Christian; and so long as I have the Scriptures by me, I enjoy the means
of understanding what Revelations God has made known to us by his Son: For
they contain those Doctrines, which were proved by the demonstration of the
Spirit and of Power. These Doctrines are so far from being foolishness to me,
or rejected by me, because they are not knowable by mere natural Reason; that I
should be guilty of inexcusable madness, if I should not surrender up my belief
unto them. Though I could not possibly find them out, nor have known them,
unless they had been revealed; yet being revealed, I discern the great Wisdom
and Goodness of God toward us in them; still acknowledging that I know but in
part, and that there is a depth of Wisdom in the Mysteries of the Gospel, which
my understanding cannot reach. (...). Hom. 6. 1 Cor. And neither do we now
persuade by Syllogisms; but, we prove what we say, from the divine Scriptures,
and the Miracles wrought at first. And the Apostles persuaded not only by
Signs, but discoursing also; i. e. they reasoned and argued from those Miracles
they wrought: whereby it appears that the (...) and (...), which St. Chrysostom.
so often rejects, are not simply all Reasonings and Syllogisms, but such only
as admit not of Revelation, as the ground of them: these being altogether
improper, when revealed Doctrines are inquired into.
But the truth of these Revelations I learn principally from the testimonies
given to them, and the sense of them (not excluding other subordinate helps) by
comparing one Divine Revelation with another: and the Doctor has no other
means, to qualify him, for the discerning of these things aright, but that new
light which he pretends to, but which the Apostle speaks never a word of, and
let him make his best advantage of it.

But if the Doctor be resolved to Cant on still in his own defense, and call
this Exposition of St. Paul's Text, which I have offered, carnal Reasoning, and
the Wisdom of the Flesh, (and perhaps he will find little else to say against
it) there will be small hope left of doing any good upon him; nor is any thing
to be done with him, but to turn him over to the Quakers, and with them at
present I leave him.

PART 1. An Account of what we are taught in the Holy Scriptures concerning the
Operations of the Holy Spirit.
CHAP. I. The General Subject of the following Discourse stated.
1.
THrough the Assistance of that Holy Spirit, whose Operations I intend to treat
of, I shall endeavor the performance of these two things.

First, to lay down as clearly and methodically as I can, what I find the Holy
Scriptures have taught us concerning his Operations; and as I go along, to
remove those erroneous, and, as I am yet persuaded, dangerous Opinions of Dr.
Owen and his Brethren concerning this matter, which may seem needful to be
debated in order to the present clearing of the Truth; and this shall be the
work of the First Part.

Secondly, to confute some other pernicious Doctrines of his, relating to the
same subject; the consideration whereof may be fitly enough reserved till we
have concluded what the Holy Scriptures affirm in this matter; and that will be
my design in the Second Part of this Discourse.

I shall begin the First part with stating the general Subject of my intended
Discourse as plainly as I can.

Amongst other significations of the word Spirit that may be met with in the
Scripture, it will be sufficient for my present design, to take notice of
these that follow.

1. It is sometimes used to signify the Mind of man, as in Joh. 4.24. to
worship God in Spirit, is to worship him with our Souls: and in Gal. 6.18. and
Col. 2.5. and in diverse other places. This is so plain, that it needs only to
be mentioned; for where the word is used in that sense, the Context does easily
lead a man to the right understanding of it.

2. It sometimes signifies the Temper and Disposition of a man's mind. Thus we
are to understand that spirit of Faith mentioned by St. Paul 2 Cor. 4.13. which
the Christians and God's Servants also in former times had, viz. the same pious
temper of Mind, in bearing Afflictions for Gods sake, and looking for
deliverance and reward from him. So likewise, God has not given us the spirit
of Fear, but of Power, of Love, etc. 2 Timothy 1.7. contrary to that timorous
cowardly temper of being afraid to endure Persecution for Righteousness sake.
Hereby, says St. John, we know that we dwell in him, 1 John 4.13.
and he in us; because he has given us of his Spirit. And what that spirit is,
we see plainly by the former words, Chap. 4. verse. 12. If we love one another,
God dwells in us. It is that spirit of Love, that Benignity and
charitableness of mind whereby we become like unto God.

3. By the Spirit, we are frequently to understand the Holy Spirit of God, the
third person in the blessed Trinity, as in 1 John 5.7. There are three that
bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, or Spirit. So
also when St. Paul says, There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit,
1 Cor. 12.4. we are by Spirit to understand the Holy Ghost; for verse. 6. he
says it is the same God which works all in all; which compared with verse.
11. But all these works that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every
man severally as he will, makes it plain, that by the Spirit here St. Paul
understands God the Holy Ghost. This is the sense wherein I understand the word
Spirit, when I speak of the operations of the Holy Spirit in us; I mean the
person of the Holy Ghost. But we must observe,

4. That the Holy Spirit is frequently used to signify his Operations, or
those Effects which are wrought by his Operations. Thus the pouring out of the
Spirit, mentioned Acts 2. plainly signifies his bestowing supernatural gifts in
great measures upon the Apostles and Disciples of Christ. So, Received ye the
Spirit, i. e. the gifts of the Spirit, by the works of the law, or by the
hearing of faith? Gal. 3.2. Thus also are we to understand that promise made to
the Apostles of sending the Holy Ghost, Joh. 14.26. For this being the promise
of the Father, mentioned Acts 1.4. which was foretold in these words, I will
pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh, Acts 2.16, 17. must needs signify the
same thing with pouring out of the Spirit; which phrase, P. 87.
as Dr. Owen truly notes, has respect unto his Gifts and Graces. So likewise
the phrase of giving the Spirit, Luke 11.13. is explained in Matthew. by giving
good things, i. e. such good things as the Spirit of God is the Author of to
Believers. Indeed nothing can properly be said to be given to us, but what is
capable of becoming our own; therefore when the Holy Spirit is said to be
given, some spiritual good or benefit is meant, which accrues to us by the
Operation of the Holy Spirit. Ibid.
But the Doctor tells us, that where the Spirit is given, he is given
absolutely, and as to himself not more or less; but his Gifts and Graces may be
more plentifully and abundantly given, at one time than at another, to some
persons than to others. So that he makes two different things, of having the
Spirit of God given to us, and our being partakers of his Gifts and Graces: for
according to him, a man may have these limitedly; That he must have absolutely:
These more or less; That not so. And this is a mystery which he has found out
in that expression of giving the Spirit. Whatever he intends by this conceit,
it is plainly contrary to the use of that Phrase in the Scripture; for John
3.34. it is said of our Savior, that God gave not the Spirit by measure unto
him; from whence it is evident that the Spirit may be given in measure:
Wherefore this Phrase does not necessarily imply, that the person of the Spirit
is properly given, P. 80.
as the Doctor pretends: for he confesses, that as to himself he is not given
more or less. Nay, those words of St. John Baptist imply that the Spirit was
given to all other Prophets and Righteous men in measure; and consequently the
giving of the Spirit unto men, cannot signify the giving of his Person, or the
giving of him absolutely neither more nor less; for he is always given to them
in measure, i. e. in the same measure wherein his Gifts and Graces are
communicated to them.

The same thing is otherwise expressed, Matthew. 12.18. I will put my Spirit upon
him; which being spoken concerning our Savior Christ, is parallel to Gods
giving the Spirit to him, mentioned John 3.34. Indeed there is little
difference in the expressions, if it be observed that the passage in St Matthew
is cited out of Isai. 42.1. where the words are (...) I have given my Spirit
upon him; which is almost the same expression with (...) in St. John; only
(...) upon Him, makes the former to allude to the Descent of that visible Glory
upon our Savior, when he was consecrated to his Office by the Holy Ghost. But
the Doctor has met with an unexpected Secret in the Phrase of putting on; for
he does not only pretend that it is the person of the Spirit, which God is said
to put upon men, but he thinks something more is meant by it, than by Giving
the Spirit. He says, P. 85.
God does not only give and send his Spirit unto them, to whom he designs so
great a benefit and privilege, but he actually collates and bestows him upon
them. He does not send him unto them, and leave it in their wills and power,
whether they will receive him or no; but he so effectually collates and puts
him in them, or upon them, as that they shall be actually made partakers of
him. And again, P. 86.
As to some Gifts and Graces, God does bestow his Spirit where there is some
preparation and cooperation on our part; but wherever he designs to put or
place him, he does it effectually. This is too serious a subject to be pleasant
withal, otherwise, here would be occasion enough. The Doctor it seems has
discovered, that the person of the Spirit is bestowed upon those that are
converted, and that their Conversion is by an irresistible work; and all this
in the Phrase of putting the Spirit upon a man, or in him. Now what a goodly
Argument is here lost, if this Phrase should signify the same thing with that
of giving the Spirit! as I have shown that it does; unless our Author is
subtle enough, to show some real difference between the meaning of these Phrases
in Matthew. 12.18. and John 3.34. where they are used concerning Christ. But
perhaps the force of his Argument lies in the only word Put, and therefore he
produces that Text, P. 15.
Isai. 63.11. where indeed the Verb (...) is made use of, which properly
signifies to Put. The words are, Where is he (...) that put his Holy Spirit in
the midst of them? i. e. whose Spirit was present with the Israelites, to save
them from their enemies: For the Context plainly shows this to be the meaning,
Where is he that brought them up, out of the Sea? where is he that put, etc.
that led them by the right hand of Moses, etc.? verse. 12. Now certainly this
work of the Spirit, in saving the Israelites from the Egyptians, does not
imply that the very person of the Spirit was put upon them; and without all
question, it is of a very foreign nature from that work, for which, as he
pretends to prove from this place, the Spirit is irresistibly put upon men. And
therefore this Text is every way impertinent to his purpose.

To conclude; The Reason of these and the like expressions, may be easily
understood, by comparing them with that plain Text of St Paul, 1 Cor. 12.4.
There are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit; for to one is given by the
Spirit, the word of wisdom, to another, etc. All these works that one and the
self-same Spirit, dividing to every one severally as he will, verse. 11. For
because it is the person of the Holy Spirit that bestowed these several gifts,
therefore by an usual Metonymy, they who received these gifts were said to
receive the Holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.12. And in like manner the Spirit of God is
said to be given, and sent, and poured forth, and administered, and put upon
those in whom his Operations are, and upon whom his Blessings and Benefits, his
Gifts and Graces are bestowed. These are (...) significations of this word
Spirit in the Holy Scriptures, which I have not noted, as being too ^^^rain to
my present purpose of stating the subject of this Discourse, to which I now
proceed.

SECT. 2.
First of all, by the Operations of the Holy Ghost, I understand those, which
the Mind of man is the object of; and therefore I do not intend to say any
thing of the work of the Spirit, in the creation of Man, in the forming of his
Body and his Soul, and in enduing him with Intellectual and Moral Abilities;
much less in the Creation of the World, the Heavens and the Earth, etc. which
Dr. Owen has taken great pains about. But I cannot think this needful to the
design which I have, Chap. 4. B. 1.
of discoursing about the Actions and Operations of the Holy Spirit upon our
minds; for they are hereby supposed to have been created, and to be what they
are. Thus the first signification of the word Spirit is proper to the object,
about which those Operations of the Holy Ghost that I mean are conversant.

Secondly, I intend those Actions of the Holy Ghost upon our minds, which are
proper to cause certain Qualities in them, whereof they are capable subjects;
for instance, such as are contained under the second signification of the word
Spirit, viz. Faith, and Charity, and Meekness, and the like. But I do not mean,
nor is it requisite for me to say any thing of the Operation of the Spirit,
whereby our minds or any other created beings, are sustained in their Natures;
especially, because the Doctor has taken care not to omit that Subject. Ibid.


Thirdly, I mean those Operations of the Holy Spirit only, the promise whereof
is contained in the Gospel of our Savior; by which limitation of the Subject,
you see I am not like to trouble you with any enquiry concerning the Operations
of the Spirit upon the mind of Man before the Fall: for the promise of the
Holy Spirit in the Gospel is made to Fallen creatures; and what his Operations
upon our minds are since the Fall, cannot be known but by Revelation; because
it depended altogether upon God's free Will and Pleasure to bestow the Spirit
upon us. Neither shall I discourse of the nature and degrees of the Spirit of
Prophecy, Chapter 1. B. 2.
as it was communicated before the coming of the Messiah: nor shall I at
present examine our Author's learning in that point; because I intend to
confine my self to those promises of the Spirit which may be met withal in the
Gospel. For the same reason I shall altogether omit to take notice how by the
Operations of the Spirit men grow skilful Politicians; in which matter if any
one has a mind to be informed, P. 116, 117.
he may consult Dr. Owen. Nor lastly do I think my self concerned to say any
thing of the work of the Holy Spirit, in and upon the humane nature of Christ;
which the Doctor has likewise spent above a long Chapter upon: Chapter 34. B. 2.
for that is not the work of the Spirit upon our minds which Christ has
promised to us, and which we can have no other knowledge of than by his Word,
i. e. by what he has been pleased to declare concerning it by himself and his
Apostles.

Lastly, I mean those Operations of the Holy Spirit upon our minds, the
continuance whereof is promised to the Church in all Ages; removing those from
the matter of our enquiry, which were peculiar to the first; i. e. such as
showed themselves in the extraordinary and miraculous Gifts of the Apostles,
and the Believers of that time, who were to confirm and establish the Christian
Doctrine in the world, by the demonstration of the Spirit, and of power; by
supernatural effects evident to sense, and such testimonies of divine
Revelation. When the Doctrine of the Gospel was once fully demonstrated to be
divinely revealed, there was no need that God should appear in every Age to own
it by new testimonies of Revelation; because the knowledge of those that were
given thereunto at first, is conveyed down to us with sufficient evidence that
they were then given. Now Miracles and such extraordinary works of the Spirit
are ceased: But the Scriptures mention such a Promise of the Spirit, which will
never be out-dated while the ministration of the Gospel lasts; and this is one
of those promises made in the Gospel, which argue the constant bounty and
affection of our Heavenly Father toward us. Now they are these Operations of
the Spirit, viz. which are continued through all ages of the Church, to which I
shall confine my thoughts in the following discourse. But before I proceed, it
may not be amiss to make this plain Inference, that since these Operations of
the Spirit differ clearly in their nature and end from those which were
peculiar only to the first ages of the Church; therefore those places of the
Holy Scripture, which only concern the work of the Holy Spirit in gifts
extraordinary and miraculous, are not to be produced for the proof of any
opinion concerning his ordinary and constant Operations. And whatsoever is
affirmed concerning those, must not presently be affirmed of these, unless it
can be shown by some clear Text, or other good Reason, that what is so affirmed
is common to them both. And therefore to be sure, some care must be had, not to
mistake those places of Scripture, which speak of the extraordinary gifts of
some Believers, for Texts which mention those Operations and Graces that are
common to all. But as obvious as the difference between these things is, I
find Dr. Owen frequently confounding them, as if there were no difference to
be put between them. Thus after he had recited those promises of our Savior,
made to his Disciples; The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to
your remembrance whatever I have said unto you. I have many things to say unto
you; but you cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he the Spirit of truth is come,
he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he shall show you things to
come. He supposes that these are instances of that general promise of the
Spirit, P. 10.
which belongs unto all Believers unto the end of the world; than which nothing
can be more apparently false, as is plain from our Saviors words themselves;
He shall bring to your remembrance whatever I have said unto you, etc. and he
shall show you things to come; which and the like expressions no sober man can
apply to Believers now. And this the Doctor himself is so sensible of, that he
tells us in the same breath, The Holy Ghost was bestowed on the Primitive
Christians in a peculiar manner, and for especial ends. Now I would gladly know
of him what other ends besides those that were peculiar to the state of the
Primitive Church, are mentioned in the foresaid promise of the Holy Ghost.

Many instances of this nature might be produced against him, were it not for
wasting of time: I shall only give the Reader a Specimen how he argues from
those Texts which speak of the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit.

He tells us, P. 166.
that in some the Spirit works Conviction and Illumination, without intending
to work saving Grace in them; which therefore shall never be effected; and that
the reason why some Believers are not so good as others, is because the Spirit
carries on the work to a great inequality. And this Doctrine he makes a shift
to countenance, by saying, that the Spirit works in all these things,
according to his own will, aiming at that place of the Apostle to the
Corinthians, where he faith, The Spirit works all these things, 1 Cor. 12.11.
dividing to every man severally as he will. Now I think we have as good as his
own confession presently after, that this place belongs to another ^^tter,
viz. the distribution of the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit. For thus he
faith, And this is that which the Apostle minds the Corinthians of, to take
away all emulation and envy about spiritual Gifts, that every one should
orderly make use of what he had received to the profit and edification of
others. Now either the Doctor alleged this place to no purpose, or he must be
supposed to argue in this manner. Because the Spirit distributed extraordinary
gifts for the edification of the Church, according to his own will; therefore
it is sometimes the will of the Spirit to enlighten and convince those men in
whom he intends not to work saving Grace. That the Spirit of God works always
according to his own will and wisdom, there is no question; but we may well
question, whether in bestowing that Grace which is necessary to the salvation
of every Believer, he works in the same manner and method as he did in
conferring extraordinary gifts, that were none of them necessary to the
salvation of those particular persons on whom they were bestowed; and therefore
that the Spirit of God in the distribution of these, worked according to his
own will, can be no proof of the affirmative. And the Doctor might have
observed the inconvenience of referring to this Text in favor of his opinion,
from what he himself concludes. So that it is an unreasonable thing for any to
contend about them, i. e. about those spiritual Gifts: For if what is affirmed
truly of the distribution of them be true, also of all the effects of the Holy
Spirit upon the minds of men; it is also an unreasonable thing to contend
about any of them, i. e. it is as unreasonable for the Doctor to reprove any
man because he is not converted, or because he has no more Grace than he has,
as it would have been for him that could speak with Tongues to find fault with
his Christian Brother, to whom that gift was not imparted.

Again, it is plain enough that the promise of the Father, concerning the
Spirit which the Apostles were to wait for, Acts 1.4. and the power which they
received after the Holy Ghost came upon them, that they might be Witnesses,
etc. and the promise of the Holy Ghost which Christ received from the Father,
Acts 2.23. peculiarly concerned the miraculous Gifts which were bestowed after
Christ's Ascension; and this, as I conceive, the Doctor acknowledges, by saying
that Christ shed forth what they saw and heard in the miraculous operations and
effects of it. Now says he, P. 157.
In this promise, viz. Acts 1. verse. 4, 8. the Lord Christ founded the Church
it self, and by it he builded it up. And this is the Hinge whereon the whole
weight of it does turn and depend unto this day. It is indeed certain that the
faith of the Church is at this day founded upon the extraordinary testimonies
that were given to the Gospel by the Spirit in the first ages of the Church.
But that which follows is absolutely false: Take away this promise, suppose it
to cease as unto a continual Accomplishment, and there will be an absolute end
of the Church of Christ in this world. For (as he elsewhere confesses himself)
Miracles are ceased, and yet there is a Church. He proceeds thus: No
Dispensation of the Spirit, no Church; he that would utterly separate the
Spirit from the Word, had as good burn his Bible. Be not so hasty; for although
this happens to be a truth, yet it is more than you have proved. The Operations
of the Spirit may now be utterly separated from the Word, for all Acts 1.4. And
although you very truly tell us, that the bare Letter of the New Testament,
cannot ingenerate Faith and Obedience in the hearts of men; yet for any thing
you have here said, it may: For those Texts upon which you ground your
confidence, speak only of the miraculous Gifts whereby the Gospel was
confirmed. Now these being recorded in the New Testament, together with that
Doctrine which was proved by them, may be as able to assure men of the truth of
the Gospel, and make them obedient to the Law of Christ, as they were when they
were seen and heard; and that of themselves too, for any thing you have shown
to the contrary from Acts 1. though the contrary may well be shown from other
Scriptures.

Now I cannot see to what end these men, when they are speaking of the Promise
of the Spirit, which will in all ages be accomplished, should fly so often as
they do to those Texts, which mention those extraordinary gifts of the Spirit
that were bestowed in the first; unless it be to make their followers believe
that the true Ministers of the Gospel are inspired as the Apostles were; and
that they preach in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, as the
Apostles did: Which because we do not pretend to, it is left to them who do so,
to be sole owners of the Privilege: Just as the Papists support their pretense
to Miracles and Infallibility, by drawing the promises peculiarly made to the
Apostles and first Believers, into consequence for the Church of Rome in every
age. And I fear by the like device, our Author has laid his Plot to unchurch
us quite and clean, who conform to the Laws. P. 158.
For, says he, Let men cast themselves into what order they please, institute
what forms of Government and religious Worship they please, let them do it by
an attendance according to the best of their Understandings unto the Letter of
the Scripture, i. e. let their Government and Worship be as near the rule of
the Scripture as they can possibly frame it; yet if the work of the Spirit of
God be disowned or disclaimed by them, if they disown those extravagant
pretenses to the Spirit which you set up, to magnify your selves withal; If
there be not in them, and upon them, such a work of his as is promised by our
Lord Jesus Christ, there is no Church State amongst them; nor as such is it to
be owned and esteemed. And is this that you have been driving at all this
while? you have now found out a new color for your Schism; and it seems the
separation from the Church of England must go forward upon this pretense, that
the work of the Spirit promised by our Lord Jesus Christ is not in us and upon
us; which in many places of your Book, also, you spare not to say we reproach
and disavow. But I beseech you, dare you say that you have that work of the
Spirit in you and upon you, which is signified by the forementioned Texts? If
you say so, we shall presently desire you to convince us of it by Miracles, and
such signs as the Apostles did. If you dare not say it, then it seems that
work of the Spirit is no more in you and upon you than it is in us; and then I
hope we are not unchurched for not pretending to it, nor fit to be accounted
Reprobates, because we are not Liars. I acknowledge that promise of our Savior
mentioned by you in your next Section, Matthew. 28.20. P. 158.
I am with you always even unto the end of the world, proves the constant
presence of Christ in his Church, by his Spirit; but then Sir it does not
prove, nor, I think, are you able to prove, that the forementioned promise
made to the Apostles, is the same promise with that which is here made. Now as
to that work of the Spirit, which will indeed continue through all ages of the
Church, God forbid that we should disown and disclaim it. But we disown the
proving it, from such places of Scripture as you lay the great stress of your
proof upon, lest we should seem to pretend to those influences of the Holy
Spirit, which were poured forth upon the Church at her first appearance in the
world, to confirm the Christian Faith by signs and wonders; and not being able
to make good our pretense, be laughed at for our pains. It would not avail us
to say that we pretend not to those measures of the Spirit, those extraordinary
Gifts which the Apostles and first Believers had: for it would be unanswerably
returned upon us, that these Texts cannot be proved to speak of any but these;
and thus we should disparage a good cause, by arguing no better for it.
Therefore, Doctor, if the whole work of the Spirit in and toward the Church it
self, be openly derided, as you complain; P. 118.
you may, I doubt, in great part thank your self, and such as you, who by
imprudent Discourses upon this subject, have given profane persons occasion to
make a question whether nowadays there be any work at all of Gods Spirit upon
the hearts of men. I shall now endeavor to show that there is, and that by
laying together what the Holy Scriptures say concerning it: All which I suppose
may be reduced to these three heads.

1. What those effects are for the producing of which in the minds of men, God
will give the Holy Spirit in all ages of the Church.

2. To whom this promise of the Holy Spirit is made.

3. What is the manner and measure of his Operations.

By showing what we are taught in the Scriptures concerning these things, I
hope the Reader who has not so well considered them, may gain a profitable
knowledge of this part of Christian Doctrine. And that is a profitable
knowledge of it, which will incite him to the study of Godliness and Virtue.
For this promise is made to encourage men to be good; and the principal end
which I aim at in this undertaking, is to make it appear what great reason they
have to endeavor earnestly after true goodness, since God has promised to
give his Holy Spirit.

CHAP. II. Concerning those effects, for the producing of which the Holy Spirit
is given to Believers.
SECT. I.
DOctor O. says well, that when we treat of the Operations of the Holy Spirit,
we are exercised in such a Subject, as wherein we have no rule nor guide, nor
any thing to give us assistance, but pure Revelation. For I suppose he means by
these words, that all our knowledge concerning this matter depends upon
Revelation: For the promise of the Spirit is a branch of the New Covenant,
which depended upon the pleasure of God; therefore our knowledge of this part
of the Covenant must be grounded upon the Scriptures, which contain the
revelation of it. And by God's assistance I shall endeavor to govern my self
by that rule, while I am debating those Questions I have propounded concerning
the Operations of the Holy Spirit:

The first whereof is this, What those effects are for the producing of which
the Holy Spirit is given to men. And this I the rather begin withal, because
the end of his Operations, being well understood, we shall be the better able
to judge of the meaning of those Texts which tell us who they are to whom the
Spirit is promised, and what is the manner of his Operations.

What the effects themselves are, for which the Spirit is given, may be known,
1. In great part from that promise of the Holy Spirit, which our Savior made
to his Disciples, Luke 11.13. 2. They may be fully known from those other
places of Scripture which mention the several Graces of the Holy Spirit.

I begin with the promise in St. Luke; whereby we may understand for what
purposes the Holy Spirit is promised to those that believe in Christ. The Text
is this; How much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them
that ask him? These words deserve our attention the more, because they are the
first wherein we find our Savior mentioning the Gift of the Holy Spirit to
his Disciples; and therefore let us consider their connection with the precedent
part of the Chapter, to come by that means to their true meaning: and hereby
also we shall plainly see, what those effects are, for the producing of which
the Holy Spirit is promised to us in this place.

We find, verse. 1. that one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to
pray; whereupon he taught them that Form of Prayer, Our Father, etc. Having
thus answered their desire, he takes this occasion to require them to pray
fervently and importunately, urging his Command with this Argument, that if
they did so, they should certainly be heard, and their requests should be
granted: for thus he speaks to them, verse. 9. I say unto you, Ask and it shall
be given you; seek and ye shall find; knock and it shall be opened to you: for
every one that asks receives, etc. This argument is enforced by two
similitudes (whereof the former makes way for the latter to proceed with more
strength) toward the proving of this thing, that God will hear our earnest
Prayers. The first is, that of a man that goes to his friend at midnight to beg
three Loaves for the entertainment of another friend of his, verse. 5, 6. Now it
is here observed, that the request was very troublesome and unseasonable, verse.
7. Trouble me not, the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed:
and withal the trouble was so great, that the bare friendship that was between
them would not have prevailed; verse. 8. He will not rise and give him because
he is his friend. Yet, on the other side, it is observed, that two
considerations prevailed with him, viz. that of the necessity, and that of the
importunity of his friend: Yet because of his importunity, he will rise and
give him as many as he needs. Now from hence our Savior concludes, verse. 9.
that if we ask we shall have, i. e. God will give us whatsoever things we ask
of him importunately, if those things are needful for us. And this with great
reason; for 1. God is our best Friend, and greatest Benefactor. 2. We are never
unseasonable to him; and the giving of what we ask is never uneasy to himself.
Wherefore, if a man will grant to his friend what he is importunate with him
for, if it be needful for him, though he cannot do it without trouble and
uneasiness to himself; much more will God, who loves us more than a man can do
his friend, bestow such things upon us as are needful, if we earnestly desire
him, since he can without any trouble to himself grant our requests.

In the next Similitude the Argument is improved: If a son shall ask bread of
any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish,
will he for a fish give him a serpent? Or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer
him a scorpion? verse. 11, 12. Now here 1. The Son asks of the Father, where, on
the one hand, the natural affection is greater between a Father and his Son;
and, on the other, the dependence greater in the Son upon his Father, than in
one Friend upon another. 2. The Son requests food necessary to sustain himself,
not for the entertainment of another, as in the former Similitude; wherefore
seeing here is greater love on his part that is asked, greater dependence and
necessity on his that asks, our Savior concludes he will prevail: so that the
Father instead of giving that which is necessary, will not give that which is
unprofitable, as a Stone instead of Bread, much less will he instead of that
which is profitable give that which is hurtful; as a Serpent for a Fish, and a
Scorpion for an Egg. From hence our Savior argues: If ye then being evil, know
how to give good gifts unto your children; how much more shall your heavenly
Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? The Argument proceeds a
minori, and the force of it lies in this; That earthly Parents, who may be
tenacious toward others, and envy what they enjoy, (for in that sense (...) is
taken, Is thine eye evil because mine is good) will not yet be so toward their
Children, when they ask such things as they need; much less will God, who is in
this Similitude affirmed to be our Father, as in the former he is supposed to
be our Friend, and who is good to all his creatures, who envieth no man's
happiness, who gives to all liberally, and upbraideth none; much less, I say,
will he deny us his Holy Spirit if we ask him.

From hence it is evident, that the scope of our Sayiour in this Discourse, is
to persuade his Disciples to pray fervently for such things as are indeed
needful for them; and that by this Argument, that God will grant such requests
as these are: It is also evident that our Savior concludes with this Argument
in these words, God will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him.

Wherefore I conceive we have gained one note of those spiritual Effects which
the Holy Spirit is promised to work in our minds, viz. that they are such as
are indeed needful: For it is plain, that in both Similitudes the things that
were asked, either by the Friend or the Child, were really such as they stood
in need of, the one for his friend, the other for himself; and that this was
one reason why they prevailed. Now from hence our Savior infers, that God will
much more give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him, i. e. for such purposes as
are needful; otherwise the Argument will not hold. For we cannot infer from
this consideration, that we are ready to bestow upon our Children what they
need; therefore our heavenly Father will give us the Holy Spirit for such ends
as are needless. If the demands of Children be not within the limits of Reason
and Modesty; if they ask not to supply their real needs, but to gratify their
wanton appetites, it is consistent with the goodness of a Parent to deny such
desires as those, and to rebuke the folly of them too. And if we should ask
those gifts of the Holy Ghost which are not needful for us, this would be more
than we are encouraged to do by the promise of Christ; and the compassion of
our Heavenly Father may very well consist with the refusal of such Requests as
these.

SECT. 2.
But this general Rule, that we are to pray for such effects of the Holy
Spirit, as are needful for us, would be insufficient to direct us what to pray
for in particular, if we did not also understand what effects are needful. Now
to satisfy you in this matter, I might presently produce those places of
Scripture where the several effects of the Holy Spirit upon the minds of
Believers are mentioned; which work belongs properly to the second way
propounded for the resolution of the present Question: But before I come to
that, I shall try how far we may conclude from our Savior's promise thus; This
is a needful Grace, therefore we are to pray for it: and then I shall in due
place proceed to the second Head, under which those Texts are to be considered;
from whence we may conclude in this manner: This Grace we are to pray for,
therefore it is needful. These methods of arguing will indeed bring us to the
same conclusion, concerning what those effects are for which the Holy Spirit is
promised in St. Luke. But by so doing they will afford mutual light to each
other, and infer the conclusion with more strength; which I hope will not be
judged unprofitable in a matter of so great weight for every Christian to be
well satisfied about.

I begin with arguing from our needs to those Graces of the Holy Spirit which
we are to pray for. Now because it is some good or advantage of ours, that is
regarded in this promise of the Holy Spirit, and in respect whereof his Graces
are supposed to be needful; we must in the first place set that end before us,
by which we are to measure what effects are needful to be wrought in us by the
Holy Spirit, and then consider what are indeed needful to that end: for so far
as we understand this, we shall know what Graces to pray for, since we are to
pray for those that are needful, and the needfulness of any thing must be
judged of according to that end in respect whereof it is said to be needful.

1. As for the end it self, if we consider that this promise of the Holy Spirit
is part of the New Covenant, there can be no reason to doubt, but the ultimate
end of this promise, with regard to our Good, is our eternal Salvation and
Glory: For that which is the last end of the whole Covenant, is the last end of
every part of it. Now the state which Christ came to bring us to at last, is
that of seeing God as he is, and living for ever in the enjoyment of his Love:
For which reason St. John tells us, This is the promise that he has promised
us, even eternal life, 1 John 2.25. not as if the Gospel had no other promises;
but because the rest are subordinate to this, and consequently that of the Holy
Spirit must needs be so. Wherefore, in that promise of his Operations to
produce all needful effects in our minds, those are supposed to be such which
are needful for our Eternal Salvation. Now

2. We must consider what effects are needful to be wrought in us for that end.
The needfulness of any means to an end consists either in this, that the end
cannot be attained without them at all, or not so well without them. That which
is needful in the former sense, is absolutely necessary* that which is needful
in the latter, is only profitable. Let us therefore first consider what
effects are absolutely necessary to be wrought in us in order to our eternal
Salvation: what these are we are plainly told in the Scripture, and they may be
comprised under these Heads. 1. Faith in Jesus, or believing him to be the Son
of God, and so, one upon whose Authority we may safely rely as to whatever
Revelations he has made of God's Will: the necessity of which Faith, our
Savior has told us in those words; If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall
die in your sins: Though indeed the Holy Spirit cannot be said to be promised
in this place of St. Luke for the producing of Faith in this notion, it being
apparently supposed, that whatever is here promised, is promised to the
Disciples of Jesus, who do already believe him to be the Christ. 2. So much
knowledge of the Christian Doctrine (which is Faith in another notion) as is
necessary to instruct us in, and encourage us to, that Repentance and Holiness
which the Gospel requires in order to Salvation.

When we believe in Christ, our next care must be to know what his will is, and
to possess our minds with those principles of Obedience, without which it is
impossible to please God: For if it be necessary to salvation to do the Will of
Christ, it is equally necessary to understand his Revelations, his Laws, and
Promises, in that measure which is necessary to the doing of his Will; and
therefore a Believer is encouraged by this promise of our Savior, to ask the
Holy Spirit, that he may use the means of arriving to such needful knowledge,
in that manner as not to miss of it. 3. All those Virtues and Graces, which
make up practical Christianity, and consist in having our minds set free from
the dominion of all sensual and worldly Lusts, and in sincere obedience to the
Commands of Christ: So that we make it our greatest care to keep every one of
his Laws, endeavoring to grow better in some proportion to those means which
we enjoy by the good providence of God. What these Virtues are in particular,
we may know by the precepts of the Gospel; and principally by our Saviors
Sermon from the Mount, where he directs his Disciples in the way to everlasting
Blessedness, obliging all whose office it is to teach, and all his Disciples
whatsoever, to do the very least of his Commandments, upon pain of being
excluded out of the Kingdom of Heaven. All those dispositions of Mind
therefore, which are supposed to the keeping of these his Commandments, are
effects necessary to our eternal Happiness, and such as we are to ask of God
that they may be produced in us by his Holy Spirit. And look whatever Virtue or
Qualification of our Wills and Affections the Gospel lays so great a stress
upon, that if we want it, it is not possible for us in that state to see the
Kingdom of God; that is an effect so needful to be wrought in us, that we may
be sure our Heavenly Father (such is his compassion toward us) will no more
deny us his Holy Spirit to that end, if we importunately ask him, than we can
refuse to give our most beloved Children Bread, or any other good thing as
necessary for them as that. 4. After we are brought into this state, and thus
become the sincere Disciples of Christ, it is equally necessary to our eternal
Salvation, that we persevere therein: For it had been better for us not to have
known the way of righteousness, than after we have known it (so as to escape
the pollutions of the world) to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto
us, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. And therefore constancy and unweariedness in well-doing is
also a Grace, for the obtaining of which we are encouraged by our Savior's
Promise to ask the Holy Spirit, that we may be kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation. I know not any effects that are absolutely necessary to
Salvation, which are not plainly implied, and readily deducible from some of
these. And thus much for the former sort of needful Graces, viz. such as
without which Salvation cannot be attained at all, being indispensibly
necessary thereunto.

Secondly, I come to speak of those Graces which are profitable to Salvation;
and these are such as regard our improvement either in Goodness or in
Knowledge. Of the former sort are those degrees of goodness, according to which
sincere Christians, who are all careful to avoid wilful sin, and endeavor to
grow in Grace, do yet excel one another. These degrees consist in being more or
less free from sins of mere infirmity, an absolute freedom from which is that
which our condition in this world cannot admit of: but every degree toward
Perfection which we attain unto in this kind, must needs be so much the more
profitable by how much greater it is. We are the better able to conclude
certainly of our good estate toward God, which is a matter of great advantage
in the course of a Godly Life; whereas a man may be conscious to himself of so
many of these sins, that it may be a difficult matter for himself, or any body
else, to pronounce certainly concerning his Spiritual estate; and therefore the
only good advice that can be given him in that case seems to be this; to put
the matter out of doubt, by using more effectual endeavors after a further
amendment. Besides, the nearer we come to Perfection, the further off are we
from Apostasy, and the less in danger of backsliding into a wicked course of
Life; we are the more confirmed in ways of Godliness and Virtue, and more
likely to persevere therein to the end. Finally, the degrees toward
Perfection, wherein some good men excel others, are profitable; because they
will increase their reward in Heaven: For God will judge every man according to
his works; and therefore they that have done better shall have a better reward;
they that have done worse than others shall be beaten with more Stripes; and
there seems to be the same reason for a proportionable difference in Rewards.
When St. Peter exhorts us, that Christian Virtues should not be in us only,
but abound, he gives this reason for the Exhortation, viz. that an entrance may
be ministered unto us abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord, 2
Pet. 1.11. Upon all these accounts, those degrees toward Perfection, which
consist in prevailing against sins of mere Infirmity, are highly profitable in
the way of Salvation.

The latter sort of profitable things, are such degrees of Knowledge in divine
matters, as are not simply necessary for Salvation. The more knowledge a
Christian has, the better able he is to avoid all errors that are dangerours;
and thus that knowledge which is not absolutely necessary may be profitable to
himself. Likewise the more a man understands in Religion, the more useful he
may be to others, in promoting their Salvation, by rescuing them from dangerous
Error, and removing Doubts, and many other ways.

If it now be demanded whether we can conclude from our Savior's promise, that
if we ask the Holy Spirit for needful Graces of this sort, God will grant our
Request: I answer;

1. It follows in general from our Saviors promise, that God will give the
Holy Spirit, not only for what is necessary to Salvation, but also for what is
profitable and advantageous to us in the way of Salvation. For our Savior
assures us, that God in bestowing his Holy Spirit will use us with the
Kindness and Bounty of a Father. Now we know, that although the affection of
wise and good Parents toward their Children, will not carry them to gratify
their wanton and unreasonable Desires, yet neither will they deal so straightly
and narrowly with them, as to give them what is but barely needful to keep them
from perishing. To this purpose we may observe, that two of the good things
mentioned by our Savior, viz. the Egg and the Fish, which Parents are not
wont to deny their Children, are instances of that Food which is not absolutely
Necessary but Convenient, and of ordinary use for the preservation of Life. Now
the Affection of our Heavenly Father being much more than that of Earthly
Parents, it may strongly be concluded in the general, that God will not deny us
what is profitable, any more than what is necessary to Salvation. But

2. It does not follow in every particular: That is, I have no reason thus to
conclude, This is useful, therefore if I Ask, it shall be given me. For you
must observe that our Savior argues from the Fatherly Goodness of God, that he
will grant our request. Now we cannot argue against that Goodness of God, if he
does not grant every particular request of this kind; 1. Because he may grant
me the effect of my request, which is to obtain something profitable for
Salvation, though he does not give me that particular which I ask; for he may
give me another thing more profitable than that, instead of it; and then he is
far from being less good for so doing. As if a Child asks his Parent for such a
Fish, and he gives him a better, or another sort of food more proper for him,
he is not the less bountiful; and though perhaps he does not please him so
well, yet he does not deny him the effect of his request. Thus I may pray for
knowledge in some point of Religion, which I would fain be satisfied in, while
in the mean time I may lie under a greater need than at present I am sensible
of, not having improved that knowledge, which God has already blessed me with,
to those degrees of Goodness which I might and ought to have attained by it;
and in this case the knowledge I ask might probably puff me up rather than
edify me: Wherefore if God does not bless my endeavors after it, with the
thing itself, but instead thereof give me a better knowledge of my self,
helping me to rectify some disorder in my Will and Affections; he gives me
that which is more profitable, than that which I ask in particular. 2. God may
grant me all those profitable things which are suitable to that place and
condition, which he has appointed to me; and then I ought not to question his
paternal goodness, if he denies my particular request of some profitable thing,
which is more suitable to another condition, than mine own. If a Father should
allow a more liberal maintenance to one of his Sons, who serves him in a more
expensive employment than the rest, they are not to take it ill, that he has
not made them all equal; but on the other hand to acknowledge his goodness, if
every one of them have a convenient allowance proportionable to their needs.
Thus if I, that am but a private Christian, labor to know as much in divine
things as my spiritual Guide, and pray for Gods blessing upon my endeavors, do
yet fail of my desire; I must not conclude that God is wanting in his kindness
to me, if upon my industry in searching for knowledge with a sincere intent, he
grants me that measure of profitable Understanding, which is suitable to my
state, education and calling, and abundantly sufficient to all the purposes of
Christian Life, as to my own particular, or for the Government of my Family, if
that be my case also. To this it must be added, that God knows what profitable
things are most suitable to us, better than we our selves: Though Children are
humbly to acquiesce in the allowance of their Parents, yet they may not always
be bound to believe, that it is made with good judgment, and proportioned
wisely to their needs. But here it is otherwise; for as we may conclude from the
Goodness of God, that if we are sincere and diligent, he will give us such
profitable things, as he judges to be most suitable to our condition: So we
may likewise argue from his Wisdom, that he cannot be mistaken in judging what
that is, though we may, and thereupon ask some profitable thing in particular,
which his Goodness may very well consist with the denial of. Finally, It is
consistent with the Fatherly Goodness of God, in bestowing what is profitable
for Salvation, upon every one that asks, to use his Sovereign Power in giving
to one more than to another: for though upon my sincere endeavors and prayers,
I may promise my self from that his Goodness, besides the necessaries, what is
abundantly profitable in answer to my Needs; I may not every profitable thing
which I can think of, or which I see another, of my own rank in other respects,
favored withal. Wherefore I have no reason to complain if I see another man
wiser than his Teachers, while I need to be instructed by them; or, if I am a
Teacher, to see my self so far excelled by those of my own profession, that it
is fit for me to be a Learner under them. For these Reasons it does not follow,
in every particular, that if I ask something that is profitable, God will grant
it. Yet

3. We are to remember, that a great difference is to be put between things
profitable, viz. between degrees of improvement in Goodness, on the one hand,
and in Knowledge on the other. There is this difference between them; that the
former do of themselves recommend us to the greater Love and Favor of God; the
latter not so, but only as they are the fruit of sincere Love, and study of
the Truth, (which is a branch of Righteousness) and accompanied with an upright
care to do the will of God more perfectly. Therefore let a sincere Christian
pray for any degree of Righteousness and Holiness which his imperfect condition
in this world will admit of, though he cannot conclude that God will grant that
particular request, merely because he asks something that is profitable; for so
is every degree of Knowledge too: yet he has this reason to conclude, which is
not common to praying for profitable Knowledge, that he prays for something
which God loves for it self, and which he will be the more pleased with him for
obtaining. That delight which God takes in the persons of men, is not founded
upon the mere improvements of their Understandings, but upon the sincerity of
their Obedience, which the Scripture does often witness to us in such places as
these; The Righteous Lord loves Righteousness, his countenance does behold the
upright, Psalm. 11.7. The prayer of the upright is his delight, Prove. 15.8. The
way of the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord; but he loves him that
FOLLOWS after Righteousness, verse. 9. Whence we may conclude, that the more
we grow in Grace and Virtue, the more God loves us, and therefore that he will
give the Holy Spirit to increase all Christian virtues in us, to such degrees
toward Perfection, as are proportionable to our Prayers and Endeavors in
Following after Righteousness.

From which we may see what encouragement we have to study the defects and
infirmities of our Wills as particularly as we can, and to observe the several
Irregularities of our thoughts and affections with our best attention; since by
this means we may employ our care and prayers against them more effectually:
for the more particular and importunate we are in so doing, the more is God
pleased with us; and therefore he will not fail to answer the sincerity of our
intention with a proportionable gift of the Holy Spirit.

But as for other sorts of profitable things, (such as greater measures of
knowledge) which do not of themselves recommend us to God, we are not to ask
them so particularly, or if we do, not so absolutely as the former. I may, and
ought to pray for them in general; and particularly for those degrees of them,
which are proper for my condition, if I govern a Family; for so much knowledge,
as may well serve me to bring up those that are under me, in the fear of God,
and the way of Salvation; or if I am a Minister, for that underderstanding in
Religion which may best fit me to discharge that duty I owe to God, of guiding
those souls to Heaven that are committed to my trust: but if I pray more
particularly, for the understanding of such a difficult Point in Religion,
which I would satisfy my self or others about, I must not do it absolutely,
but with submission to God's wisdom and pleasure.

Thus have I endeavored to show what qualifications of mind we are to pray
for, under this notion of their being needful to Salvation; and consequently
what those effects are, for the producing of which, the Operations of the Holy
Spirit are promised to Believers, in Luke 11.13. Dr. Owen indeed thinks that
there is a certain change of the mind, of a very different nature from any
that I have named, necessary to Salvation; which he makes to be the Great work
of the Spirit upon the Souls of Believers: I shall not be long before I come to
consider what reason he has for it. In the mean time, it may not be amiss to
observe what conclusions may be made from this promise of the Holy Spirit,
which we have begun with the Consideration of. And the first is

SECT. 3.
1. That we ask the Holy Spirit in the Lords Prayer; which as it may be
concluded from the perfection of that Form in general; so more particularly
from the coherence of our Savior's Discourse in this place, upon occasion of
that request made by one of his Disciples, that he would teach them to pray.
For, to satisfy the request fully, he did these two things. 1. He taught them
what things to pray for, by prescribing to them the use of this Form: Our
Father who art in Heaven, etc. 2. He taught them in what manner to pray for
these things, that they might obtain them, viz. to pray importunately and
fervently for them, as it is plain from verse. 9. compared with verse. 8. and one
reason given by him, upon which they may conclude God will grant their requests
is this, that they ask only needful things.

Now it is very improbable, that our Savior should have left out so needful a
Request, as that of the Holy Spirit, in that Prayer which he had taught them;
for then he did not instruct them so fully what needful things to pray for, by
prescribing that Form as he did, in what manner they should pray for those
things, by the following directions. But much more improbable is it that he
left that Request out of this Form, considering that he chose the gift of the
Holy Spirit, for an instance of what might be obtained by Prayer, so soon,
after he had commanded his Disciples to use the Form of his prescribing. For
this gift of the Holy Ghost is the greatest blessing that is now to be obtained
under Heaven; and it is not credible that he should immediately, as it were,
tax his own Form of so much imperfection, as the want of that Request must
suppose in it: Or, that he should let his Disciples know, there was no other
way to obtain the Holy Spirit but by asking; though he had not before taught
them to ask it in the Prayer which he had given them.

But lastly, there is no necessity of inferring this Conclusion from the
coherence of our Savior's Discourse, since the gift of the Holy Ghost
comprehends the gift of all those Heavenly Graces which we ask in the Lords
Prayer; and therefore the meaning of those words, God will give the Holy Spirit
to them that ask him, is this, God will give the Disciples of Christ such
needful Graces as he has taught them to ask in that excellent Form which he
gave to his Disciples. And this indeed makes the coherence of our Savior's
Discourse most clear and accurate: For upon this supposition, you see that he
does at last instance in such a request, viz. that of the Holy Spirit, which is
a brief Summary of all the most considerable matters that he had taught them to
pray for before* Wherefore observe, that

2. We pray for the Holy Spirit when we pray for any Grace or Virtue; or for
any Disposition of mind which is needful to qualify us for the Kingdom of
God. In the Lords Prayer, wherein the Holy Spirit is asked, the Petition is not
formally expressed, but contained under other words; for instance, under these
amongst others, Thy Will be done, as in Heaven, so in Earth: For in this
Petition we pray, That till we come to the perfect heavenly state, we may by
the Divine Spirit be disposed to such a submissive and cheerful performance of
the Will of God upon Earth, as may bear some resemblance, and carry some
proportion to that absolute readiness of mind, wherewith the Angels, and the
Spirits of just men made perfect, and wherewith we our selves do hope ere long
to perform the Will of God in the Kingdom of Heaven. I say, although in that
Petition we do not expressly ask the Holy Spirit, yet in effect we do; because
we pray for such a temper of mind as may qualify us for the heavenly Life
hereafter. And to ask of God so needful a Grace as this is, is, as I have
already shown by the plain scope of our Savior's Discourse, the same thing
with asking the Holy Spirit. Now for the same reason in every Petition, wherein
we beg of God that we may be able to subdue any Lust, that we may be endued
with any Christian Virtue, or grow in any Grace; In every such Petition, I say,
we ask the Holy Spirit; because this is to ask those needful things for which
his Operations are promised to us. Therefore those Prayers of our Church, that
God would make us to have a perpetual fear and love of his holy Name; that he
would give unto us the increase of Faith, Hope, and Charity; that he would keep
us from all things hurtful, and lead us to all things profitable for our
salvation; together with all the yearly Collects, are Prayers for the gift of
the Holy Spirit; i. e. for the several Graces of the true Disciple of Christ,
which are expressly ascribed to the Spirit in that Prayer, that God would grant
to us his Spirit, to think and to do always such things as be rightful; that we
who cannot do any thing that is good without him, may by him be enabled to live
according to his will. And this I have by the way observed, that you may see
how fully our public Prayers agree to that rule of our Savior concerning what
we are to pray for, viz. that we are to ask of God to give us the Holy Spirit;
which is done both when we use the formal Petition, and when we pray for any
Divine Grace, or Christian Virtue. And when our Souls breath after true
Goodness, when they hunger and thirst after Righteousness, when they zealously
strive against every evil desire, and every evil work, that we may perfect
Holiness in the fear of God; then do we importunately ask the Holy Spirit, we
do effectually invoke him, and attract those Divine Aids to our selves, which
will make us what we desire to be, the true followers of Christ, and holy as he
was holy in all manner of Conversation.

3. And by consequence the Operations of the Holy Spirit are supposed in those
places of Scripture, where God is said to give or work any Grace or good
Disposition in our minds: for if it be the same thing to ask any such Grace,
and to ask the Holy Spirit, then the same thing is meant by Gods giving the
one, and his giving the other; i. e. as Dr. Owen very often and very truly
notes, when God bestows any Blessing of this nature, he does it by his
Spirit. So that all those Texts which ascribe Christian Virtues to a Divine
Operation, and consequently those Prayers of St. Paul in behalf of the
Christians, that God would make them eminent in all kinds of Goodness, are
places pertinent to this subject, and proper to inform us what we are to
believe concerning those Operations of the Holy Spirit, which I am now
discoursing of. But that which is most necessary of all to observe is this:

4. That this promise of our Savior concerning the Holy Spirit, does equally
regard the Church in all ages, to the end of the world. For those Effects which
his Operations are here promised to produce, are needful for all Christians;
and not only for those to whom Christ spoke in person. Now the reason why God
would give his Holy Spirit to them being this, that they needed those things
which he had taught them to pray for, and because God was their Father; it
follows that upon the performance of the same condition we shall obtain the
Holy Spirit; for God is our Father too, and those things we ask in the Lords
Prayer, are as needful for us, and for all Believers, as they could be for them
to whom the Promise was made at first. Therefore the gift of the Holy Ghost
here promised did not determine with the age of Miracles.

Lastly, it is not improbable, that as by the latter Similitude where it is
observed, that Children obtain of their Parents things needful for themselves,
our Savior does encourage every one of his Disciples to ask the Holy Spirit in
his own behalf; So by the former Similitude, where the man is said to prevail,
who requested of his Neighbor what was needful for his Friend, we are
encouraged to pray for one another, that God would give us his Holy Spirit to
convert us from all our sins, and to increase his Graces in us. This I conceive
may be one intention of our Savior in that Similitude, viz. to excite us to
this and of Charity, by letting us know that we fare the better for the earnest
Prayers we make in each others behalf; and it is the more probable, because he
used that Similitude immediately after he had taught his Disciples to pray for
one another, by prescribing to them a Form of Prayer, in the use of which they
could not do otherwise.

These things seem to be clearly implied in that place of St. Luke which we
have been considering, and not improper to be observed. And now I should
forthwith proceed to those places of Scripture which expressly mention the
several Graces of the Holy Spirit, and show that those needful effects, for the
producing of which the Holy Spirit is here in general promised to Believers,
are in several of them particularly ascribed to his Operations. But I am
sensible that I should then leave behind me a great Objection against what I
have already said, viz. that I have given a very lame account of those
Qualifications which are needful to Salvation. For Dr. Owen comes and tells us,
that there is a Qualification of quite another kind than any I have named,
absolutely necessary to Salvation; and that, you must know, is Regeneration.
Now indeed our Savior says, Except a man be born again he cannot see the
Kingdom of God, John 3.3. And this Regeneration our Savior likewise ascribes
to the Operation of the Holy Spirit; Except a man be born of the Spirit he
cannot, etc. verse. 5. Wherefore God forbid that any Christian should deny
Regeneration to be needful even in the degree of necessity, to qualify us for
eternal Life, or to be an effect of the Holy Spirit, wherever it is. But I
cannot think it to be so unintelligible a thing as our Author represents it,
who makes it to be somewhat distinct from believing and obeying the Gospel of
Christ. Wherefore I shall in the next place particularly enquire into the true
notion of Regeneration: and because this is not only a matter of great
Consequence, but the great Outcry which has been long raised by the Doctor,
and his Brethren of the Separation, against the present Ministers of the Church
of England, is this, that we are not Orthodox in the point of Regeneration; I
shall thoroughly consider what the Doctor has written Pro and Con in this Book
of his concerning it.

CHAP. III. Of the state of Regeneration.
SECT. I.
THat we are Regenerated by the Operations of the Holy Spirit, and thereby
qualified for eternal Life, is agreed between us; but I can by no means grant
our Authors notion of Regeneration to be true; and I think his mistake in that,
may have led him into diverse others. To proceed therefore with the more
clearness, I come to show what it is to be Regenerate or born again. And here I
shall be forced to consider the Doctors notion of Regeneration as far as I can
understand it; because if the principle upon which he goes in stating his
notion be true, it fundamentally overthrows that which I take to be the true
Scriptural notion thereof. For he contends, that these Expressions, to be born
again, to be a new creature, and to have a new heart, and the like, do properly
and literally signify that which is intended by them. I say they signify it
figuratively: It must therefore be debated in the first place, whether they be
proper or Metaphorical expressions, before we can settle the true notion of the
words. This must be done by inquiring whether to be born again, to have a new
heart, and to be created anew, can properly be affirmed of those that are
qualified to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; If not, we are next to consider
what figurative sense it is in which these expressions are to be understood. By
determining which, according to the Scriptures, we shall come to the right
notion of Regeneration.

But (so troublesome a thing it is to deal with a Writer that plays fast and
loose) I must yet go further about to come to the business, and begin with
making good my charge against our Author, that he contends for the proper use
of these words. For some passages he has himself that look another way, and
might persuade a man that he did not understand those Scripture-expressions
literally and properly, but figuratively. Thus he tells us, P. 184.
This new creature therefore does not consist in a new course of actions, but
in renewed faculties, with new Dispositions, Power, and Ability, to them and
for them. These Dispositions he says are the Divine Nature spoken of by St.
Peter, a divine principle of operation; and hereunto, says he, St. Paul
exhorts in these words, Be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds. If now the
new Creature, the state of Regeneration, consists in the renewing of our
Faculties, our Wills and Understandings, that is, in furnishing them with new
Dispositions, Power, and Ability for a new course of Actions; then it is not
literally true of that man, who is thus fitted for the Kingdom of God, that he
is a new creature, but only figuratively, i. e. that he is the old creature
still, only bettered; has the same Will and Understanding that he had before,
but these renewed and made better than they were before; and that God does not
properly give a man another Understanding, or another Heart which he had not
before, when he is said to Regenerate him, but that he reforms the old,
furnishing them with new Abilities and Dispositions.

Again he says in the same Section, that the New creature consists in the
universal Change of the whole Soul, as it is the principle of all Moral and
Spiritual Actions. If that be true, then here is the same Soul there was
before, only it is changed from bad to good; and whereas it was hitherto
disposed to evil Actions, it is now biased by better Principles than it was
before, and disposed to those Actions that are good, and pleasing to God.
Consequently it is not true, in the Literal sense, of that man who is fit to
see the Kingdom of God, that he is Born again, and is a New Creature, and has
a new Heart, Will and Understanding.

Now these, and other such passages in the Doctor's Book, were either inserted
by him, that he might the more fairly retreat, in case he should be forced to
quit the Literal and proper sense, or else (which sometimes happens) he spoke
the truth against his will. For whatever he has said to this purpose, he
earnestly contends, that those expressions of the New Creature and
Regeneration, are to be understood in their proper sense. And even in this very
Section he tells us, Sect. 21.
It is called the New man, because it is the effect of Gods creating Power, and
that in a way of a new Creation. Now the object of a creating Act is an
Instantaneous production; whatever preparations there may be for it, the
Bringing forth of a New Form and Being by creation is in an instant. Which
words plainly suppose that there is a New being properly created in man, when
he is said to be Born again, and to become a New creature; and he argues from
the Literal sense of Creation, to prove that a man is made a new Creature in an
instant, for the object of a creating Power is an Instantaneous production.

Page 183.
Again he says, The new creature is produced in the Souls of men by a creating
Act of the Power of God, or it is not a Creature; and it is superinduced into
the essential Faculties of our Souls, or it is not a New creature; for whatever
is in the Soul of Power, Disposition, and Ability, or inclination unto God, or
for any moral Actions by Nature, it belongs unto the old creation, it is no New
creature; And it must be something that has a being and subsistence of its own
in the soul, or it can be neither New nor a Creature. This passage is strangely
perplexed; for by what our Author says concerning the disposition and
inclination of the Soul to God, one would guess he was for the Metaphorical
sense, and all the rest carries it clearly for the Literal. But that we might
know his meaning, he falls foul upon them, that say the expression is
Metaphorical, and consequently that the New creature is a Moral man that has
changed his course and way; and in a triumphant manner tells us, This is good
Gospel, at once overthrowing Original Sin, and the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ. I may in time convince the Reader, that he is neither to trust this
Author what those Doctrines are, which overthrow these things, nor what the
Judgment of our Conformable Divines is in these matters. At present my business
is to fix this man to a certain sense, and to make it good, that what I charge
him with is his opinion. He says plainly, that the New creature has a being
and subsistence of its own in the Soul, and it is superinduced into the
essential faculties of the Soul, otherwise it could not be New nor a Creature;
that is, literally and properly so, for it may figuratively; so that, besides
the heart which the Sinner had before, he has now another, and then I grant
the expression is not Metaphorical. Page 173.
He tells us, That which is born of the Spirit, is a new spiritual being,
creature, nature, life, as shall be declared. Now he declares what his meaning
is by these expressions very solemnly, Ibid.
where he renounceth at large that opinion, which makes them to be
Metaphorical, and has these remarkable words among the rest: So long as we can
obtain an acknowledgment from men that the writings of the New Testament are
true, and in any sense the word of God, we doubt not but to evince that the
things intended in them, i. e. the things signified by Regeneration, New
creature, etc. are properly expressed, i. e. by those Phrases; so as they ought
to be, which no body denies, and so as they are capable to be expressed; i. e.
(if he be consistent to himself) that they cannot be expressed more properly.
Again: Some, meaning himself and his Party, judge the things of the Gospel to
be deep and mysterious, the words and expressions of it to be plain and proper.
Others, meaning his Adversaries, think the words and expressions of it to be
Mystical and Figurative, but the things intended to be ordinary and obvious By
all which, and much more to the same purpose, it is plain, that this he must
stand to as his opinion; That the forementioned expressions are not to be
understood Metaphorically, but literally and properly. And now my next work is
plain, which is this: 1. To prove that they are not so to be understood, as he
says they are. 2. To answer those Arguments which are produced by him to the
contrary.

SECT. 2.
I shall first prove that these expressions ought not to be understood
Literally and properly. And I prove it thus.

1. Because it is in it self absurd so to understand them. 2. Because they
cannot be so understood without contradicting the Scriptures.

1. Because it is in itself absurd so to understand them. The Reason is,
because these expressions of being Regenerated, i. e. Born again, and being
Created, do properly note diverse things, and yet our Author will confess that
the same thing is to be understood by them, when they are used to express the
state of a man qualified for the Kingdom of Heaven, or to note the Causes of
that state; wherefore to say also that they are properly to be understood, is
to say that the same thing is to be understood by them, and not the same. That
they properly note diverse things is plain, for to be Born is one thing, to be
Created is another. Adam by being Created could not properly be said to be
Born; nor when an Infant is Born, can it be properly said to be Created.
Therefore to Create and Regenerate, and to be Created and Regenerated, cannot
properly be understood, when they are used to express the same thing, (as by
all they are confessed to do in the case before us) because properly they do
not signify one and the same, but diverse things.

This will farther appear, if we consider what other expressions the Scripture
uses to note our being Regenerated and Created anew. It is called our being
Drawn to Christ, John 6.44. and our being Awakened, 1 Cor. 15.34. and our being
raised from the dead, Col. 3.1. Ephesians. 2.1. Now by the same reason, as we shall
see afterward, that being Regenerated, and Created, and having a new Heart,
and a new Spirit and Understanding, must be properly understood, all those
other expressions must be properly understood too: and then what monstrous
absurdities do we charge upon the Scripture? For no man can properly be said to
be raised from the Dead that was not created before. How can it then be
properly said, that a man is raised from the dead, and created by the same act?
No man can be said properly to be awakened, who is not alive. How then is it
possible that to give life and to awaken should be the same thing in the
literal sense of those words? Or how can all these things be properly drawing,
which in the literal sense is not akin to any of them? But now, according to a
figurative use of these expressions, they may be all used to express the same
thing, without any absurdity at all, as any man may see that understands what
is meant by them, and which I shall ere-long endeavor to explain.

Wherefore to retort the Doctor's charge upon himself, which he has laid
against those who contend that these are Metaphorical expressions; P. 175.
If it be so, that they are, as he says, proper expressions, then our Lord
Jesus was so far from bringing the Doctrine of Regeneration to more light, by
what he teaches concerning it, that he cast it thereby into more obscurity and
darkness, than ever it was delivered in before. And again, if all these
expressions are properly to be understood, the Scriptures must be granted to be
obscure, beyond those of any other Writers whatsoever, always excepting our
Author's upon this subject.

2. These expressions cannot be literally understood without contradicting the
Scriptures; which I thus prove. If he that is regenerated be a new creature in
the literal sense, and has properly a new nature; then there must either be a
removal of the former Nature, and an introduction of a new one in the room of
it; or else the addition of a new Nature to the former. But to affirm either of
these things to be true in the proper sense, is to contradict the Scriptures.

That the former Nature is properly renewed, and another introduced into the
room of it, is contrary, 1. To those texts which clearly affirm that the same
persons who are now regenerate, were once unregenerate; as when St. Paul says,
Such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, etc. 1 Cor.
6.11. that is, they were the same persons, though now regenerate. But if in
Regeneration, literally and properly, one nature is taken away, and another
given, Regeneration cannot be said to be a change of the same man, but the
Annihilation of one man, and the Creation of another: for to take away one
Nature, and to give another; to take away one Understanding and Will, and to
put in another, is properly to put one Soul into the Body, after the
destruction of another. 2. It Is contrary to those Scriptures which suppose sin
to remain in the Regenerate; as when St. James says, In many things we offend
all, James 3.2. And then they are much mistaken who tell us, that those words
in Romans 7.14. But I am carnal, sold under sin, to be spoken in the person of a
regenerate man. For supposing the old Nature to be taken away, which is the
only Nature wherein there is a principle of sin, and the new Nature given,
which is the Divine Nature, it is impossible that Corruption and Sin should
remain behind; for there is no principle from whence it should proceed. None
in the new Nature; for that is the Divine Nature: None in the old; for that is
taken away.

But this seems not to be the notion in which the Doctor owns the Literal
sense; but those passages of his which we have already noted, would incline a
man to believe that he favors the other, viz. that Regeneration does signify
the addition of a new Nature to the old: For the new creature, according to
him, has a being and subsistence of its own in the Soul, and it is
superinduced into the essential faculties of the Soul. So that our former Souls
do remain still; and if the new creature be literally to be understood, then,
according to our Author, there is a new creature added to the old. And indeed
this is clearly the consequence of his arguing: For when he undertakes to
explain that Text of St. Paul, P. 183.
2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ he is a new creature, he tells us that
the new creature (which he that is in Christ is) has a being and subsistence
of its own in the Soul, and is superinduced, etc. wherefore, 1. The former
creature remains, i. e. the essential faculties of the Soul: and 2. The new
creature is a creature or being properly distinct from the essential faculties
of the Soul, i. e. from the former creature. Wherefore the Regenerate man is
properly two creatures; he is the old creature, because the essential faculties
of his Soul remain; he is the new creature, as the Apostle himself says, i. e.
according to the Doctor's explication, a creature that is superinduced into the
old, and has a being and subsistence of its own. Now besides the absurdity of
making a regenerate man to be two creatures properly distinct from one another,
the Old, and the New; the literal sense this way clearly contradicts what the
Scripture says concerning the state of Regeneration; (which is the thing I am
concerned to prove:) for the Scripture makes the state of Regeneration to
consist in having the Heart of stone taken away, as well as the Heart of flesh
given; in putting off the Old man, as well as in putting on the New; and when
St. Paul says, He that is in Christ is a new creature, we are not to
understand that he is the old creature too: for he tells us all old things are
passed away, and all things are become new. Now thus I argue: If these
expressions are to be understood literally, then it is literally true, that the
old man, the old creature is put off, etc. as well as the new man put on; and
therefore it is contrary to Scripture to affirm Regeneration to consist in the
addition of a new creature, literally understood, to the old.

Lastly, since the Scripture does express the state of Regeneration by phrases,
which literally and properly taken, do some of them signify the addition of a
new Nature to the old, and others the removal of the old Nature, with a
substitution of the new; it is impossible that the literal and proper sense
should be intended.

Thus I have proved the literal sense of these expressions to be inconsistent
with the Scriptures: and having before proved the absurd consequences, which
understanding them in this manner is chargeable with, I hope it is sufficiently
proved, that they are not so to be understood; which was the first thing to be
done.

The consequence of what has been said is clear, that if they are not to be
understood literally and properly, then are they to be understood figuratively
and metaphorically; and nothing can be reasonably desired for the farther
clearing of this point, but to answer our Author's arguments against it; which
was the second thing proposed.

SECT. 3.
All that he says to the contrary, which can pretend to (...) arguing, P. 175.
we have Sect. 7. where his Arguments against the Metaphorical use of these
expressions are two; (though they are there jumbled together by him without any
distinction) whereof one lies against affirming Regeneration to be a
metaphorical expression, or rather such an expression, of what, he says, his
Adversaries understand by it: the other lies against the supposition of any
metaphorical expressions whatsoever whereby the Scripture is said to represent
the work of God's Spirit upon the Souls of men.

The former Argument is to this purpose: If Regeneration be no more than a
metaphorical expression of amendment of Life according to the rules of the
Scripture, then our Savior proposed unto Nicodemus a thing which he knew
perfectly well before, only under a new name and notion which he had never
heard of before, so to take an advantage of charging him of being ignorant of
what indeed he full well knew and understood: But this he says is a
blasphemous imagination; therefore Regeneration is no metaphorical expression
of, etc.

The latter Argument (if you will be so civil as to call it an Argument) is
designed against the opinion that the Scripture uses any Metaphors at all in
this matter. For thus he concludes; Some judge the things of the Gospel to be
deep and mysterious, the words and expressions of it to be plain and proper.
Others think the words and expressions of it to be mystical and figurative, but
the things intended to be ordinary, and obvious to the Natural Reason of every
man. Now that which he thinks, is, that the things are mysterious, and the
words proper. His Argument to prove this is contained in these passages. If
there be not a secret mysterious work of the Spirit of God upon the Souls of
men intended in the Writings of the New Testament, they must be granted to be
obscure, beyond those of any other Writers whatsoever -- If they are the Word
of God, the things intended in them are clearly and properly expressed; The
difficulties which seem to be in them, arising from the mysterious nature of
the things themselves contained in them, and the weakness of our minds in
apprehending such things, and not from any obscurity or intricacy in the
declaration of them. Therefore some do well to judge the things of the Gospel
to be deep and mysterious, and the words of it to be plain and proper. If there
be any coherence in this Arguing, I think it would be this: If there be a
mysterious Work of the Spirit upon the Souls of men intended in the Scripture,
then the words and expressions of the Gospel concerning it, are plain and
proper; and such a mysterious work there is, otherwise the Scriptures are
obscure beyond all other Writings, because the words of the Gospel are proper
expressions of such a mysterious work. I begin with this latter Argument.

First of all let us consider the Doctor's Conclusion, that we may afterward
see whether it is to be found in the Premises. If he concludes any thing
against his Adversaries, he concludes that the Scripture has used no
Metaphorical expressions at all of the things of the Gospel. For he says,
Herein indeed consists the main controversy whereunto things with the most are
reduced, viz. that he and his friends judge the things of the Gospel to be
mysterious, and the words and expressions proper; that is, ALL the words and
expressions of it. For if he concludes only that some, or the greater part of
them are proper and not figurative expressions, he concludes what none of his
Adversaries deny; and unless he concludes universally, he proves nothing. Now
by the way I shall convince our Author, that he has concluded amiss for
himself, by putting him in mind, that he elsewhere acknowledges that very
thing of the Gospel, which is the subject of our Debate, to be in the Scripture
Metaphorically expressed. The work of the Spirit is expressed there by Quickening
from Death to Life, it is also expressed by Turning from Darkness to Light. Now
as to the latter, our Authors words are these: The term of Darkness in this
case is Metaphorical, and borrowed from that which is Natural. As to the
former, these: There in is men a spiritual Death, called so Metaphorically,
from the Analogy and proportion that it bears to Death Natural. Let us see
whether the Doctor's Argument will not Vnmetaphor these expressions again. If
there be a secret mysterious work of the Spirit intended in these expressions,
then they are not Metaphorical; if no such work be intended by them, then are
the Scriptures obscure, beyond all other Writers. If he can Answer his Argument
for himself, he can Answer it for us too, and then Regeneration in particular
will prove a Metaphorical expression; for if Death be so, then Life is so too,
and being Born into that Life, will unavoidably be so likewise. Some of the
expressions of the Gospel concerning these matters, the Doctor allows to be
Metaphorical; so that the controversy we have with him, one would think should
be, whether there be not more Metaphors than he allows; not as he pretends
here, whether there be any Metaphors at all. But since he will have it so, he
must not say hereafter, that he intended only to prove all the expressions of
the Gospel were not Metaphorical, since his Argument concludes that they are
all proper, if it concludes any thing. That most of them are proper we grant:
and it is well, that it stands not in need of being proved by him; for his
untoward way of proving, would tempt a man to suspect the plainest truth he
meddles withal, if he had not better reasons of his own. For

Secondly, What consequence is there in this Arguing: If there be a secret
mysterious work of the Spirit upon the Souls of men intended in the Scriptures,
then are all the expressions of the Gospel concerning it plain and proper,
otherwise the Scripture is obscure? For (1.) None of the expressions of it
might have been proper, and yet some of them plain, and then the Scripture
would not have been obscure in that thing; for a Figurative expression may be
plain enough to be understood by a man of common sense. Sure our Author will
grant, that saying of our Savior, This is my body, to be figurative; and I
hope he will not deny it to be plain, because it is figurative. So that his
Argument, by which he concludes all the expressions of the Scripture,
concerning this mysterious work to be proper, does not prove that any one is
so. (2.) If some of the expressions be both plain and proper, and others
figurative, some whereof are more and some less plain, as the truth is; and if
those which are not so plain, may be understood by the help of plainer; then
may this secret mysterious work be sufficiently understood, by the expressions
of it in the Scripture, and consequently the Scripture far from being the
obscurest Book in the world, because all the expressions of it are not to be
taken properly and literally. But it seems our Author has an opinion by
himself, that no Writer in the world ever used the liberty of Metaphorical
expressions.

Thirdly, his way of proving that there is such a mysterious work, is a mere
begging of the Question. This we shall see by considering what he must mean by
a secret mysterious work, viz. such a work of the Spirit, as is properly
expressed by Regenerating, Creating, Quickening, and Drawing the Soul of a man;
and this I grant to be a very mysterious work, if these be all proper
expressions of it. Now he proves there is such a work, by this Argument, That
otherwise the Scriptures are obscure. Why so? Because they are obscure if these
be not proper expressions of the work of the Spirit; so that he proves there is
a mysterious work, i. e. a work properly expressed by Regeneration, Creation,
etc. by this Argument, that these are proper expressions of such a work; which
is to prove a thing by it self: And he proves also that these are proper
expressions, because there is such a mysterious work, that is, a work properly
expressed by them; which is to beg the Question. So that if you will grant the
Doctor, that they are proper expressions, he can then prove there is a a work
properly expressed by them; or if you will grant there is such a work, he can
prove those to be proper expressions.

And now I understand the Doctor, when he says, The Difficulties which seem to
be in these things, arise from their mysterious Nature, and not from any
obscurity in the Declaration of them; and I am fully of his mind: for if any
one tells me that a Body may be greater than it self, and lesser than it self,
and that Transubstantiation may be true Doctrine; or that a man may be properly
Regenerated, Created, Quickened, Drawn, and Awakened all at once; I grant he
does not obscurely declare his mind to me, and that I find no difficulty to
understand the meaning of his words: But the only difficulty which seems to be
in these things arises from the mysterious nature, or rather the nonsense of
the things themselves contained under these plain expressions; for the more
plain any nonsense is, the more easily it is understood to be so.

This I think is a sufficient answer to that slender proof, which the Doctor
brings for the judgment of his party, concerning the propriety of these
Scripture-expressions; but it will not be amiss to consider how he represents
the judgment of those others whom he speaks of. For he says,

SECT. 4.
Others think the words and expressions of it to be mystical and figurative;
but the things intended to be ordinary and obvious to the natural Reason of
every man. So that if the Doctor may be believed, there are some who think the
effects of the Holy Spirit upon our Hearts are not expressed by any proper
words at all in the Scriptures; P. 183.
but, as he says, they turn all Scripture-expressions of spiritual things into
Metaphors. If any such senceless people there be, they are, I should think,
most likely to be found among those that separate from the Church of England;
for many of their Preachers, if we may judge of their Sermons by their Books,
do so train them up to Metaphorical talking, that some of them may possibly
believe the Scripture affords little or nothing else. But as for those who
think the things intended by these expressions, suppose the assistances of the
Divine Spirit, are ordinary and obvious to the natural Reason of every man; I
never heard there were any such before, if by obvious the Doctor means
discoverable by mere natural Reason; for the knowledge of these things is by
all granted to depend on divine Revelation. But being revealed, I would fain
know what reason we are to understand them withal besides our natural Reason.
But if by ordinary and obvious, he means plain and intelligible by an ordinary
capacity, I am one of those who think the things of the Gospel, whereof we are
speaking, to be ordinary and obvious: and that they are not the less, but the
more excellent for being so, our Author must grant, unless he will revoke his
Argument, that the expressions of these things are not Metaphorical, taken from
hence, that otherwise the Gospel is dark and unintelligible. So that we are
both agreed in words at least, that Perspicuity and Intelligibleness is an
excellent thing.

But the truth is, he and his Party have a notion of Intelligibleness and
Perspicuity by themselves, as any one would guess by their Writings. For
Example, the Doctor here tells us, that if the Gospel intends nothing but moral
Duties, and their observance in its Doctrine of Regeneration, then it is dark
and unintelligible. Now this is very strange; for ^f (as it is confessed on all
hands) moral Duties are easily intelligible, and if the Scripture intends (...)
more by the Doctrine of Regeneration than the performance of moral Duties, then
is the Scripture very intelligible in the point of Regeneration: For that which
is the meaning and intendment of the Scripture therein (which the practice of
moral Virtue is at present supposed to be) is very plain and intelligible;
therefore I say the Gospel in this matter must be so too, in the judgment of
all men but those who have been so long used to nonsense, that they reckon
nothing intelligible but what they do not understand, and nothing
unintelligible but what they do.

Possibly the Doctor will grant, that upon this Supposition, the Gospel is
intelligible, to those who do understand this to be the meaning of
Regeneration; but he will pretend that it is unintelligible how these
expressions of being regenerate and created, etc. should be Metaphorical
expressions of being good and virtuous Christians. Some such thing he intimates
within a few Lines after, in these words: Others judge that under a grandeur of
words and Hyperbolical expressions, things of a meaner and lower sense are
intended, and to be understood. So that our Author seems unable to understand
how such grand and lofty Phrases, as being Regenerated, Created, and Quickened
from death, should come to signify such a creeping attainment as that of being
truly good and virtuous. Alas! to love the Lord our God with all our hearts,
and our Neighbor as our selves; to follow the example of our Blessed Savior,
and to obey the commands of the Gospel uprightly and universally, these are but
things of a meaner and lower sense; and it is unintelligible how they should be
intended by the grandeur of such Hyperbolical expressions, as Regeneration, and
the new Creation are.

Tell us then, I pray, what be those things of a nobler and loftier sense than
those which must be understood by these grand expressions. Forsooth, we are to
understand the proper and literal significations of these expressions, viz.
that men are properly created, born again, and raised from the dead, when they
are qualified for the Kingdom of Heaven. These indeed are lofty things; but so
unfit are they to be understood by those expressions, that they cannot be
understood at all; and that we are not so to understand those Phrases, our
Author has implicitly confessed but two lines before, where he says, that
all things are so expressed in the Scriptures with a condescension to our
capacity, so as that there is still an inexpressible grandeur in many of them
beyond our comprehension. Now if the mystery of that work of the Spirit upon
our Hearts, whereby we are fitted for Heaven, be so expressed by these Phrases,
then let him mark what follows, viz.

1. That we are not required to understand these Phrases in their proper
meaning: for as I have shown, it is impossible they should be so understood,
with the least congruity; therefore if the Scripture in any measure condescends
to our capacity in using those expressions, the literal sense of them is not
intended.

2. When the Scripture is said to condescend to our capacity, it is always by
the use of Metaphors; thus God is said to have Hands and Eyes, and this with
condescension to our capacity; but sure you will not say that we are to
understand these expressions properly, but that by the Hands of God we are to
understand his power, and by his Eyes his knowledge. Now if the Scripture
condescends to our capacity in representing the mentioned effects of God's
Spirit, by Regeneration, Creation, etc. then by the same reason these are
Metaphorical expressions too, by the using of which for the expressing of those
effects, the Scripture condescends to our capacity.

Lastly, he says that there is still in these things an inexpressible grandeur
beyond our comprehension. If the grandeur of these things be expressed by a
grandeur of words proper to the things, the grandeur of these things is not
inexpressible, as he says it is. The proper meaning also of being born and
raised from the dead, he clearly comprehends, I suppose; how happens it then
that the things properly meant by these words are beyond his comprehension?
That it is beyond his comprehension or any man's else that the same person
should in the proper sense be Born, Created, and Raised from the dead, all at
once, I do not question, since it is sufficiently incomprehensible that
contradictions may be true. But then they are the contradictions implied in the
proper acceptance of these Phrases in our present case, which make the things
incomprehensible: for set the contradictions aside, and you cannot deny the
proper meaning of those words to be beyond your comprehension, i. e. you could
as well comprehend what it is for the same man to be properly Born, Created,
Quickened, Awakened, by the same numerical act, as what it is for the same man
to be first Created, then Born, then Quickened, and the like. So that if our
Author had marked the true reason why he might lawfully affirm the thing
supposed to be properly expressed by these phrases, to be beyond his
comprehension, he would have confessed it to be the contradictions implied in
the supposition, that those phrases do properly express it. Had he therefore
considered his own words, he had presently seen that his sublime nonsense is
none of those loftier things that are to be understood by Regeneration.

I have been the longer in confuting this pretense of these men, that these
Scripture-phrases are properly to be understood; because it is the foundation
of those wild Doctrines concerning Grace, and the Operations of the Holy
Spirit, and the manner of Conversion, and the nature of Holiness, which they
have introduced into Divinity. Were it not for their amusing the people with
such discourses about Regeneration, and the New Creature, as if they were
literally to be understood; it were as unlikely for them to persuade the
meanest of their Hearers that no man can be converted till it is impossible for
him to hinder it, that conversion is wrought in a moment, that before that
moment comes the very best actions of men are sins, as it would be that the
Romanists should cheat so many ignorant souls into the belief of
Transubstantiation, had they not a weak pretense for that Doctrine, from the
sound of those words This is my Body, which they contend are literally and not
figuratively to be understood.

The people of both these parties are to be pitied, since they equally
surrender up their understandings to their Guides, and receive their
interpretations of Scripture without examining them. And then, out of reverence
to the Scriptures themselves, which say This is my Body, and that we are Born
again, and Created, and Quickened, etc. they come to believe nonsense, i. e.
that these expressions are to be understood in their proper sense, as their
Masters teach them. But how they themselves can be excused, since I fear they
cannot but be aware of the dishonor that is done to the Scriptures, and the
mischief which may happen to the Souls of men by such an absurd use of
Scripture-metaphors as that, I cannot understand. Some of them I think may take
Sanctuary in that Ignorance, which will I hope make some abatement for the
mistakes of the people; but as for the rest, they would do well to consider
those dreadful words of our Lord, Luke 17.1, 2. It is impossible but that
offenses will come; but woe unto him through whom they come. It were better for
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea,
than that he should offend one of these little ones.

SECT. 5.
I should come next to consider that Argument of the Doctor, which lies
particularly against the supposal of Regeneration to be a Metaphorical
expression of reformation of Life according to the Scriptures, which he takes
to be his Adversaries notion of Regeneration: But it is fit their notion should
be better understood than as it is lamely represented by him. Wherefore my next
business shall be to state what I conceive to be the true meaning of
Regeneration; which being done, I promise the Doctor not to forget his
Objection against it.

The meaning of being Regenerate or born again, will be fully known, if we know
what it signifies as a State, and what as an Effect. I shall first consider
what is the meaning of being Regenerate, as that phrase implies the state or
condition of that man who is said to be Regenerate; and then I shall offer
those reasons which make it evident, that that meaning is fit to be expressed
by this Metaphor.

1. As Regeneration denotes a State, I affirm, that to be regenerate or born
again, signifies in its utmost meaning to become a sincere Proselyte, or
Disciple of our Lord Jesus. I shall first briefly show what I mean by a sincere
Disciple of Christ. Secondly, I shall prove that to be the meaning of a
regenerate state.

To be a sincere Disciple of Jesus, consists in these two things. 1. In being
baptized, as our Savior requires. 2. In making good the profession of Baptism,
which is to believe in Christ, and to obey his Commands. This is clearly
answerable to that rule which our Blessed Savior gave to his Apostles,
according to which they were to make men his Disciples: Go ye therefore, and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. i. e. admitting them by Baptism into the Church, and
thereby engaging them to believe, and to profess their Faith in the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and of that Doctrine to which they have born record.
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, i. e. and
by the same Baptism engaging them to obey all my Commands. That therefore which
makes us sincere Disciples, is thus to believe, and obey, as we are by Baptism
engaged to do.

Now because to obey the Commands of Christ, whatever we lose or suffer by it,
is the clearest proof we can give to our selves or others, that we own him in
good earnest to be our Lord and Master, and that we do heartily believe him to
be the Son of God; therefore we find that our Savior speaks of this obedience
to him, as if it were the only thing in which our being his true Disciples did
consist. Thus John 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much
fruit, that ye be fruitful in Piety and good works, so shall ye be my
Disciples. The same thing is affirmed of obedience to one, but that a very
remarkable Precept of our Savior, John 13.34. A new commandment I give unto
you, that ye love one another as I have loved you. By this shall all men know
that ye are my disciples, if you have love one to another. i. e. such love as
Christ had to us.

Now we are not to think that this last saying of our Savior concerning that
one instance of obedience to him, or that the former concerning obedience in
general, do exclude either the one obedience to the rest of his Laws, or the
other believing him to be the Son of God, from being necessary to make us his
true Disciples. But that by such an high act of Virtue, as to love the Brethren
as Christ loved us, it may strongly be concluded that we will not stick at any
thing he requires of us; and that our yielding a sincere obedience to all his
Commands does clearly suppose that we believe him to be the Son of God, and all
his promises to be true. Hence our Savior does not admit that we can be his
Disciples, if we do not entirely submit our selves to him. If any man come to
me, and hate not his Father, etc. and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple, i. e. unless he loves God, and Truth, and Goodness so much more than
all his worldly Interests, even his Life it self, that he may be said to hate
these things when his love to them is compared with his love to Christ, he
cannot be a Disciple of Christ: He cannot be so, if he be not willing to part
with all earthly things in obedience to Christ. The meaning is, he cannot be a
sincere Disciple, he cannot answer the profession of Baptism, while it is thus
with him. Thus are we taught to interpret those words by our Savior himself in
another place, If ye continue in my word, to do according to it whatever
betides you for so doing in this world, then are ye my Disciples indeed, St.
John 8.31. So that the best notion we can frame of a true Disciple of Christ,
and that to which we are guided by Christ himself, is this, that he is one who
does so firmly believe that Jesus is the Son of God, and that all his promises
are true, as to love God above all things, and yield an hearty obedience to all
the Commands of Christ. Now

Secondly, I am to prove, that the state of Regeneration means no more than to
become such a Disciple of Christ as I have described; and my first Argument is
this.

1. It is acknowledged that unless we be Regenerate we cannot see the Kingdom
of God; and withal, that if we be Regenerate, we have thereby all that is
necessary to qualify us for his Kingdom. It is, I think, likewise
acknowledged, that it is equally necessary and sufficient for that end, that we
be the sincere Disciples of Christ. Let these things be granted, and I am much
mistaken, if it does not follow, that to be Regenerate, and to be a sincere
Disciple of Christ, are the same thing. If the latter be not readily granted,
it is clearly proved from all those Scriptures which suppose Faith and
Obedience to be necessary and sufficient qualifications for eternal Happiness,
such as these: He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that
believes not, shall be damned. Christ is the Author of salvation to them that
obey him. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life; and he that
believes not on the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Without holiness no
man shall see the Lord. No unrighteous person shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven. The righteous shall go into life eternal. And who is righteous? He that
does righteousness is righteous. Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and
does them, I will, etc. Matthew. 7.24. Thus coming to Christ is sometimes
affirmed to be the condition of having life by him; and then by coming to
Christ, nothing can be meant, but being his true Disciple, which in allusion to
the Jewish Proselytism is called coming to him. I am the bread of life, says
our Savior; he that comes to me, i. e. is my Disciple, shall never hunger;
and he that believes on me shall never thirst. Him that comes to me I will in
no wise cast out.

Now is there any thing plainer in the Book of God, than that to be a sincere
Disciple of Christ, i. e. to believe in him, so as to love him and obey his
Commands, is that state or condition of a man, whereby he is, and only is
qualified for the Kingdom of Heaven? And if that be true, it follows by
undeniable consequence, that Regeneration, and all those other Metaphors which
express the state of a man qualified for eternal happiness, do signify nothing
else but his being such a Disciple of Christ, as to believe in him, to love
him, and obey him. For if Regeneration signifies any other state, then first,
to believe in Christ, and to obey his Gospel, is not a sufficient Qualification
for pardon of sin, and eternal happiness, contrary to all those clear Texts now
mentioned; for besides this, that other state supposed to be meant by
Regeneration would be necessary. And then secondly, (which is equally contrary
to the Scripture) Faith and Obedience would not be so much as necessary to
qualify us for Salvation, since that other state, supposed to be meant by
Regeneration, would be sufficient without them.

2. The state of a regenerate man is by St. John explained to be that of being
such a Disciple of Christ as we have described. Thus he tells us, 1 John 5.4,
5. Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world; and this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith. Who is he that overcomes the world, but
he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? Here we have the full character
of a true Disciple of Christ, viz. one who so believes that Jesus is the Son of
God, that his Faith prevails against all worldly temptations, the lust of the
Flesh, the lust of the Eye, and the pride of Life, and who therefore keeps the
Commandments of God, not reckoning them to be grievous. For this is the reason
given by St. John, why he that loves God keeps his Commandments; because he
that is born of God overcomes the world. Thus also, verse. 1. Whoever believes
that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. This is the state of Regeneration, to
believe that Jesus is the Christ, with such a faith as implies obedience; which
is afterward expressly added in those terms of keeping Gods Commandments, and
overcoming the world. Again, Chap. 2.29. If ye know that he is righteous, ye
know that every one that does righteousness is born of him. And in the next
Chapter, verse. 9. we find that every one that is born of him does
righteousness. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin; for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God, i. e. such is
the state and temper of his Mind, such is the disposition of his Will and
Affections, that he does not sin; but his Life is agreeable to the Laws of God,
for his seed remains in him; for the Word of God, that divine Seed (so
called, Matthew. 13.19. 1 Pet. 1.) has wrought its due and proper effects upon
his soul by its precepts and motives; for where this seed is received into a
good and honest heart, it will grow into good fruits, and be an effectual
principle of obedience, and a holy life. Wherefore the Apostle adds, and he
cannot sin, i. e. it is not only true of him that he abstains from sin, but it
is contrary to the genius and the sense of his soul to sin. It is not the
consideration of worldly Interests; it is not the want of Temptation and
opportunity that keeps him at any time from offending God, so much as the sense
of his duty to God, his love of Virtue, and the conformity of his Mind to the
Laws of God; which so long as they continue, are principles which will carry a
man through the whole circle of holiness and virtue. Thus we use to say of a
meek-spirited man, that he cannot be furious; and of an honest man, that he
cannot deceive; and of a generous man, that he cannot do a base or unworthy
action. By which words we do not mean that it is absolutely, but morally
impossible that he should, it being directly contrary to the frame and the
temper of his mind so to do. And such is the state of him who is born of God;
and it is well expressed in those words of Joseph, How can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? He cannot sin, i. e. the reason why he does
not sin, is because it is abominable to him so to do, and repugnant to the bent
and inclination of his nature; which being Holy and Divine, will therefore
produce a correspondent, i. e. a godly and virtuous Life.

So apparently false is that Doctrine, that although a man, who has been once
regenerated, fall into foul and abominable offenses, yet the Seed of God, and
the Root of the Matter, and true Grace remains in him still: For the Apostle
says, He that is born of God sins not, because the seed of God remains in
him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. How should this be a reason
why he cannot sin, viz. that the Seed of God remains in him, that he is born of
God, if he may be guilty of notorious and wilful sins, and yet that Seed
remain, and he be regenerate still?

Thus have I proved out of the holy Scripture, that by a state of Regeneration,
the Scripture means no more than being a sincere Disciple and Follower of our
Lord Jesus.

SECT. 6.
I must now tell Dr. Owen that he has not done fairly, to represent the
opinion of his Adversaries, concerning the state of Regeneration, as if they
believed it consisted only in a Reformation of Life, excluding a real change
in the Soul. And this is the best artifice he has wherewith to delude his
Reader into an ill opinion of them, viz. to state their opinions falsely, and
then to fasten odious names upon them, as he does frequently in his Book.

Thus he tells us, We, meaning himself and his followers, say and believe that
Regeneration does consist in Spirituali Renovatione Naturae, a Spiritual
Renovation of our Nature. Our modern Socinians, that it does so in Morali
Reformatione Vitae, a moral Reformation of Life. What other Socinians our
Author has found out, besides the modern, I know not: but here he calumniates
us and the Socinians too. Though the Socinians deserve rebuke, yet they are not
to have lies told of them; for not only we who are no Socinians, but those
that are, do acknowledge the state of a regenerate man to consist in the
spiritual renovation of his Nature.

Whereas therefore he tells us, If they will grant that this moral reformation
of Life, does proceed from a spiritual renovation of our Nature, this
difference will be at an end; I answer him, that this difference is at an end
before it is begun. For we have always granted it; and as I shall show him
presently, he knew it too: Only our Author was willing to impose the fallacy
of Non causa pro causa upon his Readers: and to gain the better opinion of his
endeavors in this Chapter, he would make them believe that his design is
indeed to prove that there is a change of the Heart as well as of the Life in a
regenerate man. Now this is not the thing he had to prove against us, however
he shifts the Question here, that (to use his own words) he might take an
opportunity to rail at others for want of better advantage. His business was to
prove that Regeneration and the new Creation are to be understood properly; and
(as he knows) a foundation was hereby to be laid of affirming that we cannot be
regenerated without the interposal of an irresistible power, like to that
whereby the world was made, and the dead shall be raised. Here lies the
difference between him and us, not whether Regeneration implies a change of the
Soul as well as of the Life. And this he confesses himself in the very next
Page, Sect. 20, where he says, Some say a new Creature is no more but a
changed Man; it is true: but then this change is internal also; yes, in the
Purposes, Designs, and Inclinations of the mind. But is it by a real infusion
of a new Principle of spiritual Life and Holiness? No, it denotes no more but a
new course of Conversation; only the expression is Metaphorical: A new
Creature is a moral Man that has changed his course or way. Now under that new
course of Conversation, which he says some mean by Regeneration, either he
includes an internal change, as their meaning too, or not. If he does, then he
confesses their true meaning, and the difference is at an end: If not, then he
either wants a good Conscience or a good Memory; for he granted before, that
they confessed an internal change also. As to what he adds, that they deny the
real infusion of a new Principle of spiritual Life and Holiness; I say, they do
not deny a new Principle of Holiness to be in the Regenerate: for they confess
the Seed of God, that is, the Word of God to be in them; the Precepts and
Motives whereof prevailing in their minds, are properly a principle of
Holiness of Life in them. Now whether this Principle be really infused into
them or not, belongs not to this place to consider, where we are treating about
the state of Regeneration, and not the manner whereby the Holy Spirit does
regenerate us. Whereas he says, that the new Creature according to them is a
moral man that has changed his course or way, he ought not to blame them for
it, since the change of the Heart is supposed in that of the Life. He knows
there is no better way to judge of the Tree than by the Fruits; of the temper
of the Mind, than by the constant course of the Life; and therefore we should
conclude, it is a very honest account which they give of the new Creature,
because it will not suffer a man to reckon himself regenerate who does not
sincerely amend his Life according to God's holy Word; which is a good way to
keep Hypocrites from pretending too fast to Regeneration, who might else be
comforting themselves that their hearts are good, while their lives and manners
are naught. I am sure their description of the regenerate state is agreeable to
what St. John says of it, He that does righteousness is born of God.

But after all, I thus far differ from him, that I look upon his distinction
between Spiritual and Moral to be vain and useless in the description of a
regenerate state, or of Regeneration (which is his own phrase) as passively
considered. For as the moral reformation of Life, which he speaks of, is
spiritual; so the spiritual renovation of our Nature is moral: For as the state
of a regenerate man, in both respects, may be called spiritual, as being caused
by the grace of the divine Spirit; so in both it may be called moral, as
consisting in the purity both of Heart and Life, and the conformity of our
Minds and Actions to the divine Laws. For I suppose he will grant that all
sin, i. e. all unbelief of God's Word, and all disobedience to Gods Commands,
whether moral or positive, is Immorality. Therefore faith in God, and obedience
to his Will, is Morality, or moral goodness, i. e. they are things good in
their own nature, eternally and unalterably so. P. 181.
This man charge his Adversaries here with confused notions, and Sophistical
expressions about Morality; where he does not tell the Reader one of their
notions or expressions about it; and therein he has done more like a Sophister
himself than a Doctor.

It Is in this Latitude, which I have told you, that they understand moral
Righteousness and Virtue, who affirm that the state of a regenerate man does
consist therein; and that there is no difference between Grace and Virtue,
between Spiritual and Moral, supposing that by Grace and Spiritual you express
not the cause, but the state of Regeneration. If Dr. Owen does not take them in
this sense, he misunderstands them, and makes a wrong report of their
judgment, concerning the sufficiency of moral Righteousness to qualify men
for Heaven. If he does thus understand them, and yet is angry because they make
no distinction between Grace and Virtue, a spiritual and moral state, as I
find he is, Sect. 19. sure it must be because he thinks all is not moral
Virtue which they say is, viz. faith in God, Page 183.
and universal obedience to his Will; and then the contention between us is a
mere (...), a strife about words, in which I suppose he has the hardest part,
unless he can show, that to disbelieve any of the Revelations, and to disobey
any of the Commands of God, are not Immoralities. Or else the reason of his
displeasure must be, because he thinks a regenerate state does not consist in
Faith and Obedience; which, if I understand him, is his opinion; and it is our
affirming the contrary which has made him so fierce against us, as I observe
him to be, Sect. 17. where he has these strange words; Page 181.
Regeneration does not consist in a moral reformation of Life and Conversation;
let us suppose such a reformation to be extended to all known instances.
Suppose a man be changed from Sensuality unto Temperance; from Rapine to
Righteousness; from Pride and the dominion of irregular Passions unto Humility
and Moderation; with all instances of the like nature which we can imagine, or
are prescribed in the rules of the strictest Moralists. Suppose this change be
labored, exact, and accurate, and so of great use in the world. Suppose also
that a man has been brought and persuaded unto it through the preaching of the
Gospel, so escaping the pollutions that are in the world through Lust, even by
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, or the directions of his
Doctrine delivered in the Gospel; yet, I say, ALL this, and ALL this added unto
Baptism, accompanied with a profession of Faith and Repentance, is NOT
REGENERATION, nor do they comprise it in them.

Is not ALL this Regeneration? Not a change from sin in all known instances?
not a change to Virtue in all instances which we can imagine, or are prescribed
by the strictest Moralists, not excepting our Savior himself? not to escape
the pollutions that are in the world through Lust, and to be persuaded hereunto
through the faith of the Gospel? What do these men make of Regeneration? Where
is that reverence which they pretend to have for the Word of God, which they do
thus openly and notoriously contradict? Was it not true which I said, that our
difference with these men is this, that we affirm Regeneration to consist in
the faith and obedience of the Gospel, and they deny it? But let us hear Gods
Word once more concerning this matter: St. John says, He that believes that
Jesus is the Christ, so believes it as to overcome the world, is born of God.
Now does not this man contradict St. John, when he says, Though a man has
escaped the pollutions that are in the world through Lust, even by the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, he is yet not born of God. St.
John says, We know that every one that does righteousness is born of God: But
quite contrary says our Author; Let a man be changed from Sensuality to
Temperance, from Rapine to Righteousness, with all instances of the like nature
which we can imagine, he may yet not be born of God. Doctor, I challenge you
here before your own Party, and the world, of contradicting the plain and
express words of God, and that in a matter of the highest moment to us, wherein
the eternal salvation of men's Souls is most nearly concerned; which is enough
to provoke the indignation of all good men against you.

Let us again suppose a man in that state which our Author has well described,
but unchristianly reprobated; and then I demand, what lacks he yet besides
perseverance in that state? Not to tarry for the Doctor's Answer, I shall prove
from the words of our Blessed Savior that he lacks nothing else. A certain
Ruler asked our Savior, What shall I do to inherit eternal life? Luke 18.18.
And Jesus said unto him, Thou know the Commandments, Do no commit adultery,
etc. And he said, All these have I kept from my youth. Jesus answered, Yet
lackest thou one thing; sell all that thou have, and distribute unto the poor,
and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me.

The Ruler then wanted nothing but a willing mind to part with his Estate when
God required it, and to become a follower of Jesus; for had he done this, we
have our Savior's word for it, he should have had treasure in Heaven, which
none but the Renegerate shall have. But our Authors moral man wants none of
those Qualifications which this Ruler either had or wanted, that were necessary
in order to his inheriting eternal life; he wants none of them which the other
had, being changed from Sin to Virtue in all instances; he wants none of them
which he lacked; for he is a follower of Christ, baptized, professing Faith and
Repentance; and he is changed from Covetousness too, which is one known
instance of sin, to a readiness of yielding up his Estate when God will have
him do it, which we may easily imagine to be an instance of Virtue. Therefore
the Doctor reprobates him whom Christ chooses, he condemns him whom God
justifies.

It is the great discouragement which this Doctrine gives to true goodness, and
the dishonor which this Writer does to the Gospel, by pretending himself a
Christian, which makes it needful to prove these plain things against him.

SECT. 7.
Let him not think that he has made himself whole, P. 181.
by adding these words at last: Whatsoever there may be of actual Righteousness
in these things, they do not express an inherent habitual Righteousness. For
this will not serve his turn; since, 1. Here he does no more than give a
reason, the best he has, why he contradicts the Apostle, who says, He that
does righteousness is born of God, by saying that he is not born of God. But
then, 2. His reason here is as false as his Doctrine, and as contrary to
Scripture. Our Savior says, An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruits; but
he has the face to say that it can: for he says that a man who is not
inherently and habitually righteous, may bring forth all these good fruits,
even all instances of reformation of Life which can be imagined. St. Paul
likewise says, that the carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. And that you may not think,
that subjection to the Law of God, which consists in universal amendment of
Life, not here to be meant; observe that in the same Chapter, Romans 8. he says,
There is no condemnation to them that walk after the Spirit; and if ye live
after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live. So that if the carnal mind can be so far
subject to the Law of God, as that the carnal man may walk after the Spirit,
and mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, then it is possible for a
carnal man, so continuing, to be saved; which again contradicts the Apostle,
who says, that to be carnally minded is death. But now our Author's Doctrine
is this, that the carnal man while he is such, viz. one who wants inherent
habitual Righteousness, who is not regenerate, may be subject to the Law of
God, and may mortify the deeds of the body; for he says, all that actual
righteousness which he had before described, and which does unavoidably imply
mortifying the deeds of the body, and walking uprightly according to the
Gospel, does not express an inherent habitual righteousness, which is the same
with being spiritually minded. And does not he contradict the holy Apostle by
so saying?

I know not what he can possibly say to save himself from this charge of
contradicting the Apostle, but that his meaning is not that the carnal man can
mortify the deeds of the body, by the Spirit, and that he can walk after the
Spirit, i. e. that he reforms himself thus universally, as he is supposed to
do, by the Spirit; but only that he may be such a reformed man, that he may
mortify the deeds of the body, that he may walk according to the rules of the
Gospel; and yet all this proceeds from the Old Nature, and this work belongs
but to the old Creation. And this I find indeed to be his sense; P. 183.
for he tells us, Whatever is in the Soul of Power, Disposition, or Ability, or
Inclination unto God, or for any moral action by nature, i. e. before
regenerating Grace comes, it belongs unto the old Creation, it is no new
Creature. Now by comparing these words with his 17 Section, we may now discern,
that by the inherent habitual righteousness, which the moral man wants as he
says, he does not mean an internal disposition and inclination to Virtue,
correspondent to that righteousness which he practices in his life; for he
supposes that in the state of Nature or Unregeneracy, such a disposition and
inclination, such a power and ability he may have: But he means by it, a
principle of spiritual life and holiness infused by the Holy Spirit, as he
explains himself afterward. So that this is the defense he must make for
himself out of his Book, when I charge him with contradicting St. Paul, viz.
that he only says, the carnal man may mortify the deeds of the body, may be
universally righteous and obedient in his life; but this is no more than a
natural work all this while; all his actual righteousness, and his internal
disposition to it, belongs unto the old Creation, it is no new Creature;
whereas the spiritually-minded man, of whom St. Paul says, that he walks after
the Gospel, walks after the Spirit too; and when he mortifies the deeds of the
body, does mortify them by the Spirit.

This pretense, so derogatory from the grace of the Holy Spirit, contradicts
the Scripture, which says, He that does righteousness is born of God. I shall
now only observe, that our Author, whatever he pretends to the contrary, is
discovered to be a rank Pelagian. I speak it with great seriousness; for the
thing is plain, and he cannot with any modesty now deny it.

He makes it possible for a man to mortify the deeds of the body without the
Spirit; and to walk after the Gospel, though he be not led by the Spirit; to
keep the commands of God by the mere abilities of Nature; to be universally
righteous in his life, and to be disposed and inclined thereunto in his Soul,
without an infusion (as his phrase is) of a new principle of spiritual life and
holiness. And he plainly supposes, that all that righteousness which the
Gospel requires, viz. an universal performance of God's commands, proceeding
from the belief of the Gospel, may belong unto the old Creation, and be no new
Creature, nor the work of the Spirit.

Now Pelagius his great Heresy was this; That a man by his natural Faculties
might do that which God required, without any further help from God, than that
of declaring his will. For, setting that aside, he thought our willing and
doing needed no divine assistance, as St. Austin reports him; August. Lib. de
Gratia Christi. c. 41.
and that God gave us the power of choice in vain, if we cannot do his will,
unless he always helps us, as St. Hierom says concerning him. Hierom. Ep. ad
Ctesiph.
It is the same which the Doctor says, while he makes all the righteousness
and disposition thereunto which we have been considering, even that of the
faith and obedience of the Gospel, to be the effect of nature, and to belong
unto the old Creation, so that a man may believe the Gospel, and keep the
Commandments of God, without the renewing grace of the Holy Spirit. If the
Doctor says, that however in all the Regenerate he ascribes that righteousness
to the Holy Spirit, and his Grace; this will not bring him off: For Pelagius
himself was brought to confess, though not the same thing, yet what would serve
his turn, as well as this can the Doctor's. For at length he said, Therefore is
the Grace of God given, that what we are able to do by Nature, we may more
easily do by Grace. But the Doctrine of the Catholic Church was, that Grace is
necessary to our doing the Will of God; and if that be true, it does equally
conclude both him and Pelagius to be the same Heretics, though he says doing
the Will of God is sometimes the effect of the gracious Aids of the Spirit; and
Pelagius said, doing it more easily was always so.

Our Author, I confess, speaks diverse things in this Book which destroy this
Pelagian Doctrine; for he is sometimes in the humor of a Manichee, which is an
Heresy of the other extreme, and will not allow that a man can do any good
action whatsoever, without an irresistible determination of his Will thereunto,
as in due place I shall put him in mind again. How he came by the knack of
believing such inconsistent things, if he believes them, I know not; but he
makes great use of his Talent that way, as I shall have further occasion to
show him hereafter.

But whether he believes these Contradictions or not, as long as he asserts
Pelagian Doctrines, he is to be judged from his own words, and to go for a
Pelagian. I grant that the sense of what a man says in one part of a Book, is
to be judged of by what he says in another; but that always is upon
supposition, that his words are capable of that sense, which is that way
endeavored to be put upon them. But our Author's arguing in Sect. 17. compared
with Sect. 20. is in my judgment so notoriously for the Pelagian Heresy, that
if Pelagius himself were here, we could not discern the least difference
between them, in the point of man's natural ability to keep the Commandments of
God. Indeed he gives the Pelagians ill words enough in many places of his Book;
and he would persuade his Reader that his Adversaries are a kind of Pelagian
Heretics; but, for ought I see, he is more angry at the name of Pelagius than
at his error; or he hopes that he may unsuspectedly broach the opinions of
Pelagius, while he falls foul upon other men as if they were his followers. And
truly this insincerity he might happily learn from Pelagius himself, who was
wont to say, and unsay, to contradict his own Concessions one while, and his
Assertions another, when he was to save himself now against the Catholics, and
then against his own Party, as St. Augustine tells us: which being considered, I
leave it to others to judge whether our Author is not to be esteemed a
Pelagian, De pecc. Orig. c. 17, 18, etc.
though he elsewhere affirms things inconsistent with Pelagianism. I believe he
has but one way to come off, and that is to renounce the Doctrine here by him
maintained, viz. That a man may do Righteousness without the renovation of the
Spirit, or without being born of God; and then he must say with the Apostle,
that He that does righteousness is born of God; which is one of those Arguments
whereby I have proved, that a state of Regeneration is a state of inherent
personal Righteousness, and which, together with the rest I have produced, does
prove, that to be Regenerate, as it signifies the state of a man, is no other
thing than to be a sincere Disciple of Christ, to believe and obey the Gospel
of our Blessed Savior; which was the first thing to be shown.

SECT. 8.
2. If we consider Regeneration as an effect, we are to enquire into the causes
and means of that state which we have described Regeneration to be. These our
Savior affirms to be Water, and the Spirit, verse. 5. viz. when he repeated his
Doctrine to Nicodemus: Concerning which Grotius well notes: Exponit jam qualem
nativitatem intelligat, ne Nicodemus diutius Allegoricae locutionis ignorantia
fallatur. Our Savior now explains what Birth he understood, that Nicodemus
might no longer be deceived by his ignorance that Christ spoke figuratively:
For after it was told him that this Birth was effected by Water and the Spirit,
he could not dream that our Savior meant being born again, in the literal and
proper sense, as he conceived at first, when it was only told him, Except a
man be born again be cannot, etc.

Now whether one cause of the state of Regeneration, or more, be expressed in
these words by Water and the Spirit, is not generally agreed upon; there being
some, whereof Grotius himself is one, who conceive that by an (...), those
words signify the sanctifying or cleansing Spirit of God. Non loquitur de
Baptismo, says Grotius; but withal he says, Sed locutiones sunt alludentes ad
Baptismum; our Savior alludes to Baptism, as he supposes him to allude to the
Eucharist in those words; Except ye eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood, etc.
But by the leave of so great a man, I think the other opinion more generally
received, and in particular maintained by Dr. Hammond, viz. that by Water
Baptism is here meant, to be (to say no more) far more probable than the
supposition of the (...), and that for these two reasons, 1. Because Baptism
was that ceremony of Proselytism among the Jews, which our Savior borrowed
from them. Vid. Dr. Hammond in loc. and resol. of 6 Queries.
To be born of Water was no new Name or Notion, as Dr. Owen pretends; for the
Jews called their Proselytes Recens nati, (as Grotius himself observes) new
Born men, and as such counted them to have quitted their Relation to their
former Country, Parents, and Kindred: and since the Jewish Proselyte was (...),
a baptized person, and the (...) or immersion in Water, was one of the
indispensible ceremonies of his Proselytism, or Regeneration; we may well
conceive that by being born of Water, our Savior meant becoming a Proselyte to
his Church by Baptism, as by Baptism the Jews admitted Proselytes to theirs;
for otherwise it would not have been so strange that Nicodemus a Master of
Israel should not understand what our Savior meant by being born of Water. 2.
St. Paul does expressly call Baptism the laver of Regeneration; which what it
signifies but a means whereby we are regenerated, or become the Disciples of
Christ, I cannot understand; and then that is the very same with being born of
Water. Now where there is not only no necessity to find a figure in
Scripture-phrases, but the proper sense also contains a truth very pertinent to
the Subject spoken of, in all reason there the proper sense (and consequently
here of the word Water) ought to be followed. And then being born of Water
signifies our being admitted into the Church as the Disciples of Christ, and
engaged to be so for the future by Baptism.

To be born of the Spirit, is to be made the sincere Disciples of Christ, and
true to the profession of Baptism by the Operations of the Holy Spirit; and
what the Scripture teaches us concerning them, is the main design of this
Treatise to show; therefore I shall say no more of them in this place; but
only add, that we are not to understand the Spirit of God to be the immediate
cause of our Regeneration, or becoming good Christians; but we are to suppose
those other Causes, viz. those means which the Scripture ascribes our
Regeneration unto, to be included under the Spirit, who is indeed the principal
cause of this effect, without whose operations those means cannot be effectual
to their end. And these are the Doctrines of the Gospel: For St. Peter tells
us, 1 Pet. 1.23. That we are born again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever. But this
shall be more fully considered when I come to speak of the manner of those
Operations of the Holy Spirit whereby we are born again.

And thus have I given you an account of the true meaning of being Born again,
both as it signifies a State, and as an Effect; and the sum of all is this:
That our Savior does require us to become his sincere Followers and Disciples,
if we hope to see the Kingdom of God.

SECT. 9.
I come now to show the Reasons, why our becoming the sincere Disciples of
Jesus, is expressed by being born again. And I shall likewise show how fitly the
same thing is expressed by the other Metaphors that are used in the Scripture for
that purpose; and this, because our Author seems unable to conceive how so mean
a thing as to believe and obey the Gospel of Christ, should be intended by such
grand and Hyperbolical expressions, as those of the new Birth, the new
Creature, etc. I shall first observe the similitude between our becoming true
Christians, and being Born.

First, the greatness of that alteration which is made in a man's state, by his
becoming a sincere Disciple of Jesus, is one good reason why the state of such
a Disciple is expressed by this Metaphor; for it expresses a very great change.
Thus Mr. Baxter tells us very well, that Regeneration is a Metaphorical term,
Treat. of Conv. p. 8.
taken from our natural Generation, because there is so great a change, that a
man is as it were another man. If we consider how great this change is, we
shall find it so to be. There is first of all an Intrinsic change, peculiar
to the state of adult Christians, their understandings being informed with the
knowledge of those truths concerning God and themselves, and a Life to come,
which they are most of all concerned to know, which is the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ. Hereby also is produced a proportionable change in
their Wills and Affections, which the belief of the Gospel has wrought such
effects upon, that from being addicted to sensuality and worldliness, they are
come to love God with all their Hearts, and to be strongly inclined to Holiness
and Virtue. This likewise produces a suitable change in their lives, which now
are led, not according to the lusts of the Flesh, and the examples of evil Men;
but the Laws of God, and the Example of Christ. And thus we come to the true
use of all our Faculties, as an Infant after it is born falls into those
natural motions which are hindered by its imprisonment in the Womb. Now when our
minds are thus purified from sin, when the Spirit that was in Christ is in us,
and our bodies and souls are become the Instruments of Righteousness; there
follows a Relative change in our state as considerable as the other: For then
are we the Sons of God, Heirs with Christ, Brethren to God's Children in heaven
and on earth; we are of kin to the Family of God, we enjoy his Favor and
Blessing, and have an actual right to that promise which he has promised, even
eternal life. Lay all these things together, and nothing will be more evident
to you than this, that so great a change of our state is implied in our being
the true Disciples of Christ, that we are as it were other men by being so, and
so may fitly be said to be Born again when we become such persons.

But that Intrinsic alteration which seems to afford the clearest Similitude,
regards that sense of good and evil, which is proper to a true Christian. We
know that all living Creatures have such a sense of things hurtful and
destructive to them, that they are thereby generally prompted to avoid them.
It Is thus, I say, in the natural life that we readily apprehend what is
contrary to it; and therefore we do not run into the Fire, nor venture down
Precipices, because these things are contrary and destructive to our Natures.
And this is a very fit Emblem of the state of a true Christian; for by reason
of that divine temper of Soul, which is wrought in him by the Holy Spirit, he
has such a like sense of good and evil, with regard to his Mind and
Conscience, as all living Creatures have with respect to their Natures. He
therefore that is in Christ, i. e. who is a true Christian, is said to be Born
again, and to become a new Creature; for he has a new sense of things which he
had not before; he has other apprehensions of sin than sensual and worldly men
have: he looks not upon any immorality as a harmless thing; but apprehends all
kinds of wickedness to be what they are, pernicious and detestable; which is
the reason (as I have already intimated) of what St. John says, He that is
born of God sins not.

In like manner, that which in the Relative change seems to be most visibly
intended by this Metaphor, is our being qualified to enter into the Kingdom of
God, which is the Inheritance of the Saints, or the true Disciples of Christ:
for by becoming his Disciples, we are as it were born to this Inheritance, we
are the Sons of God; and if Sons, then Heirs, as the Apostle tells us.

Now if faith in Christ, and obedience to his Laws, make men so much better,
and more excellent persons than they were before, and qualify them also for an
everlasting reward; then here is another visible reason for the choice of this
Metaphor to express the state of a good Christian by, viz. the great advantages
they gain by it; we have as it were a new being given unto us when we truly
believe in Jesus, and conform our selves to his Doctrine and Example; we are so
much altered for the better, as if we had never lived till then; and we have
infinitely more reason to think of this alteration in our state, than to
remember the day of our Birth with joy and gladness. Hence we find that the
Scripture does not only represent the advantages we gain by the Gospel of our
Savior, under Metaphors taken from things most grateful to our natural
Appetites, as Liberty, Life, and Light; but withal it assures us, that the good
implied in those things, does in a more eminent manner belong to the true
Disciples of Christ than to any body else; as when our Savior says, Joh.
8.36. If the Son shall make you free, then are you free indeed. Now what this
freedom is, we are told, verse. 32. The truth shall make you free; and verse. 34.
He that commits sin is the servant of sin. So that this freedom consists
in the knowledge of the Truth, and in obedience to the Laws of God; which is
that very state that the Scripture elsewhere calls Light, and Life, and being
Born again, and created in Christ Jesus.

Lastly, Since it is by the Operations of the Holy Spirit in us that we become
true believers and good men, it is visible that our being then said to be born
of God, does fitly express the concurrence of that Divine power whereby this
change is effected in us.

There are other Metaphors whereby the Scripture expresses the same thing; but
none of them seem to be so full of signification as this; although the use and
meaning of all of them is easily discernible. Those expressions of Creating and
Drawing seem principally to respect that divine Grace, by which we are enabled
to overcome the world, and to live to God. Converting or Turning, peculiarly
notes that alteration that is hereby made in our state. Taking away the Heart
of stone, expresses the same thing; but chiefly with regard to what we were
before, as giving the Heart of flesh also does, with respect to what we become
afterward. Making a new Heart, and a new Spirit, signifies that change which is
wrought in the Dispositions of the Mind, as causing us to walk in God's
Statutes notes the reformation that is made in the life. Purifying, Cleansing,
and Purging, are Metaphors that express the excellency of this change, and how
much our Natures are bettered by it. But Quickening, and making Free, and
turning from darkness to light, do express all the advantages which we gain by
the Faith and Obedience of the Gospel, whether they be Inherent or Relative.
And this may serve to show in what diverse respects these Metaphors conspire to
express the same thing: But you may observe that the Metaphor of Regeneration,
or the new Birth contains all those Similitudes to the state of a true
Christian which are severally discernible in the rest. And this probably is the
reason why it is more frequently used in the Scriptures than the rest are, as
that is the reason I suppose why it has obtained amongst Christian writers to
treat of the conditions of eternal Life more frequently under the name of
Regeneration, than under any other phrase whereby they are Metaphorically
expressed. And possibly this common use of the word, may have been an occasion to
some unwary Christians of imagining that it is to be understood in the proper
sense. But I do not see how so learned a man as Dr. Owen can excuse himself
from dishonesty for making this construction of it, which must appear
ridiculous to any considering man. However, I hope, the Reader will acknowledge
that I have given a plain and reasonable account of the use of these Metaphors,
by showing wherein the Similitude lies between the proper and figurative
significations of them. And hereby I may have helped our Author to conceive it
a very possible thing, that the Scriptures mean nothing more by those grand and
Hyperbolical expressions (as he calls them) of being Regenerate, etc. then
becoming a sincere Disciple of Christ, which is his Adversaries notion of a
Regenerate man. Thus also I have shown how far we may argue from these
Scripture- metaphors; If any man can go further, and find out more Similitudes
between the Metaphors and that which is meant by them, I shall not be his
Adversary, provided he keeps himself within the bounds of Sense and Reason. But
to argue from the proper signification of any one or all these Metaphors, to
conclude something parallel in the state of a Believer to every thing which can
properly be affirmed of them, is to run upon such wild and absurd
consequences, as any wise man would be ashamed to own, and any good man would
be afraid to fasten upon the Scriptures. How our Author argues from them, we
shall see hereafter. In the mean time we have proceeded thus far, as to state
the true notion of Regeneration.

SECT. 10.
Though I have, as I conceive, sufficiently proved, that to be born again is to
become a true Disciple of Christ; yet for further confirmation, and because it
may be of some use to the ordinary Reader, I shall make it plain, that this
notion is agreeable to the scope and design of our Savior's discourse to
Nicodemus, Joh. 3. which is the most famous place in the whole New Testament,
where this phrase is used. It is one of the best ways of interpreting any
difficult passage in Divine or Humane Authors, to observe the design of that
whole discourse to which it belongs; and then to fix such a meaning upon that
passage as is apparently suitable to the scope of the Author, if the words will
bear that meaning. That the Phrase of being Regenerate will bear that sense
which I have assigned to it, I have shown; and that it is the true sense
thereof, I have proved by clear Arguments from other Scriptures: wherefore, if
I show also that this sense of the Phrase is consonant to the plain scope of
our Savior in that discourse, where he made the first mention of it that we
read of, nothing can be further desired to demonstrate that this indeed is the
true meaning thereof.

The design of our Savior's discourse may easily be gathered from the plain
passages of it, and then it will appear to be this. 1. To show that faith in
Christ, and obedience to him, were the means by which God had appointed to
bring men to eternal Happiness. 2. To show the unreasonableness of the Jews,
who would not believe in him.

The former we find, verse. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have
everlasting life; i. e. this is the way by which God has determined to save
Mankind, viz. by faith in his Son, who was to be lifted up upon the Cross, as
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, a rude Salvage place, and so fit
to be the figure of that corrupt state of the World in which Christ came to die
for us, that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but, etc. verse. 14,
15. Now this was so great a demonstration of God's Love to man, thus to give
his only begotten Son, that no man could hope to escape the anger of God who
should refuse the benefit of this Sacrifice: For though indeed God sent not his
Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might
be saved, verse. 17. yet he that believes not is condemned already, verse. 18.
is in a state to which condemnation belongs; and that a more severe one, for
refusing so gracious an opportunity of Salvation as was now offered.

2. Our Savior shows the unreasonableness of those men that believed not, and
that by noting, 1. The Evidence of that Truth which they disbelieved. 2. The
true cause of their unbelief. The former he admonished Nicodemus of in these
words, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and testify
that we have seen; and ye receive not our testimony, verse. 11. i. e. Ye believe
not my Doctrine concerning that only way, by which you must come to see the
Kingdom of God, although it be evidently true; for this is that very Message
which I bring you from God; this is that Counsel and Decree of God which I come
from him to testify unto you, that there is no other way but that. Now this
you acknowledge, that I am a Teacher come from God; for no man can do those
Miracles that I do, except God be with him; [ v. 2.] how strangely incredulous
therefore are you, that yet you will not believe me delivering that Doctrine,
which by these Testimonies of my coming from God I confirm? For I prove that I
have seen and known what I testify; I prove the truth of what I say by those
Arguments that convince you, that I am a Teacher come from God. Hence we may
probably gather the meaning of those words, And no man has ascended up to
heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of Man which is in
heaven, verse. 13. to be this: No man has known the secret purposes of God,
concerning the way of saving Mankind, viz. by the death of his Son: No man
has thus ascended into Heaven, but he that is come from Heaven, whom God has
sent to reveal this to you, even he who now speaks to you, who am who know
the purposes and intentions of my Father concerning the way of Salvation. This
I take to be a more probable interpretation of this difficult place, than that
which supposes our Savior to speak here of his local ascension into Heaven
afterward; because, 1. The words themselves seem not well able to bear the
notion of a future ascension. 2. As Grotius has well shown, the phrase of
ascending into Heaven is in other places of Scripture to be taken in the former
sense, viz. of gaining knowledge from God, as in Prove. 30.3, 4. And 3. if thus
it is understood in this place, then what our Savior says here has a clear
connection with verse. 11. where he rebukes the Jews for not believing his
Revelations, taxing them of unreasonableness for it, since he delivered nothing
but what he had seen and known from God; and also with the precedent verse,
where by the heavenly things our Savior speaks of, we agree, that those
Doctrines which were to be known by his Revelation are meant. But this by the
by; it is however clear that our Savior challenges the Jews of unreasonable
incredulity, for disbelieving what was sufficiently testified and proved to
them.

2. Christ assigns the true cause of their unbelief, This is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather
than light, because their deeds are evil, verse. 19. i. e. The truth of that
Doctrine which I bring, is so bright and clear, that the cause why men believe
it not, is not because they want Reason and Argument to induce them thereunto;
( or supposing that our Savior means himself by Light) it is so evident that I
am the Son God, that if you do not perceive it, it is not for want of means of
Conviction, but because your deeds are evil; because my Doctrine is so contrary
to your Lusts and Vices, that you are not willing it shoud be true, and so you
do not attend to the evidence of its truth; and therefore greater shall be your
Condemnation. Every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does the truth, that is
sincerely disposed to do whatever is the will of God, comes to the light, that
his deeds may be manifest, is not unwilling to have his actions proved, that
they are wrought of God, whether they be according to the Will of God or not.

I think it is thus sufficiently plain, that the scope of our Savior in this
his discourse to Nicodemus, is to show the necessity of coming to him, or
believing in him, i. e. of being his Disciple, in order to everlasting
Salvation; and to convince those of unreasonable obstinacy, and incredulity,
who would not be his Disciples. It is therefore plain, that supposing the true
Disciple of Christ is to be understood by the Regenerate man, then the
beginning of our Savior's discourse concerning the necessity of Regeneration
is consonant to his plain design, which was to show why we must be his
Disciples, and how inexcusable we are if we be not.

But that the connection of the whole may be clearly seen, I shall here subjoyn
a Paraphrase of that part of it which concerns Regeneration, proceeding upon
our notion of it. It is probable, as Grotius observes, that after Nicodemus had
acknowledged our Savior to be sent from God, he asked him what Qualifications
a man must have to see the Kingdom of God, which in his preaching he had made
so much mention of: To which question our Savior's answer was, Except a man be
born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God; as if he had said, No man can
enter into the Kingdom of God, except he become my Disciple, which you seem
unwilling to be, because you come secretly to me for fear of the Jews; but, I
tell you, it is not sufficient for you to acknowledge to me that I am a Teacher
sent from God, but withal you must become one of my Disciples, and own your
self so to be, though you forfeit thereby the honor you have in the Jewish
State; for you must forsake all to follow me.

Nicodemus not understanding this to be our Savior's meaning, replies as if it
was required that a man should be born again in the literal and proper sense;
How can a man be born when he is old, as I am? can he, etc. Jesus answered,
Verily I say unto thee, Except a man be born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God, q. d. It is not such a Birth that I mean, but
that of Water and the Spirit; you must be born of Water, you must by Baptism
become a professed Disciple of mine, whom you acknowledge to be a Teacher sent
from God; and this is not all, you must be born of the Spirit too; it is
equally necessary that by the Operations of the Holy Spirit (the promise
whereof is part of my Doctrine) you become obedient in Heart and Life to those
Laws which I deliver, which are so holy and divine, that they are hated by them
whose deeds are evil, who will not be persuaded to leave their sins, [ verse.
6.] That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the
spirit, is spirit. That which is born in the literal sense, as when an Infant
is born of his Mother, is discernible to your eyes, and the change made thereby
is evident to your grosser Senses; it is not this change which I mean: but I
say you must be born of the Spirit; and it is a spiritual change that I mean
thereby, viz. that of the Dispositions of men's Hearts, and the manner of their
Lives; which change, together with those Operations of the Spirit whereby it is
produced, are not discernible the same way in which the natural Birth is [
verse. 7, 8.]

Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be Born again. The Wind blows
where it lifts, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence
it comes, and whither it goes: so is every one that is born of Spirit. By
this it should seem, that which was most troublesome to Nicodemus to understand
was this, viz. How a man could be born of the Spirit; and that the difficulty
which he stuck at in this matter, was the Imperceptibleness of that Operation
of the Spirit whereby this change was produced; for how should a man know when
he is born of the Spirit? This being supposed, our Savior's answer to him
removes the doubt; for it shows, 1. That the Operations of the Spirit, though
they are not perceptible to the Senses, yet they may be otherways known; to
this purpose he uses a familiar similitude to explain himself by, viz. that of
the Wind, which blows hither and thither, but is not discernible to the eye;
and though we see it not, yet we are sure there is such a thing, because we
hear it. Now as every Body is to be judged of by its proper Sense, so is every
thing to be judged of by its proper faculty; and as we do not deny the
existence of some Bodies, because they are not evident to one sense, if they
are evident to another; so we are not to deny the existence of some things,
because they are not evident to our Senses if they be evident to our Minds, as
the Operations of the Holy Spirit upon our minds may be. 2. Our Savior's
answer shows that we may know an effect, the immediate cause whereof we do not
know; and that by the same Similitude of the Wind, the natural cause whereof
the generality of men, who are yet sure there is such a thing, are ignorant of.
Now in like manner we may perceive or feel an effect in our minds, viz. that
change which the Spirit makes there, though we do not perceive, and in that
sense do not know the Operations of the Spirit themselves, which are the causes
of that change. And as that original or cause of that change is not perceived
by us (as we know not whence the Wind comes) so the end of it is not perceived
by us neither; for that is eternal Life, which yet we do not see, (as we know
not whither the Wind goes) but only believe. 3. Our Savior's Similitude
likewise shows, that a thing may be discoverable only by its effects, as the
Wind is by the noise it makes, and other effects thereof; so likewise the
Operations of the Holy Spirit upon our minds, though they are not in
themselves perceivable by us, yet in their effects they are; for if Christian
Virtue and Piety cannot be attained, or preserved, without the Operations of
the Holy Spirit, then where there is this change in a man's state, there we are
sure have been, and still are, the Operations of the Spirit; and though he does
not feel the cause it self, yet he discovers it in its effects.

Page 177.
Dr. Owen indeed tells us, that the Work it self is discoverable in its Causes;
and brings this very Text to prove his saying, which proves the contrary. It Is
true, we know that the Spirit of God is the cause of this change; but how? not
by the Work it self, but by the Revelation of Christ, who withal has informed
us, that we have no other way to discern the Operations of the Spirit in us,
but by their effects, i. e. those alterations that are thereby produced in our
Hearts and Lives. Thus then we may understand our Savior's words:

Let not this startle you, that the Operations of the Holy Spirit, whereby you
must be changed, and as it were born again, are not discernible and sensible;
for though you cannot feel them, yet you may understand them by the effects and
alterations in you that are caused by them.

Now whereas Nicodemus answered, How can these things be? I suppose the reason
of his Hesitation was either, 1. That he did not understand this to be our
Savior's meaning; or, 2. That he thought, as Dr. Owen does, that to be born
again, was too Hyperbolical an expression, of that which he now perceived our
Savior meant by it. I cannot positively say which it was: But suppose whether
you will, our Savior's Reply to him rebuked his Ignorance either way: Art thou
a master of Israel and know not these things? verse. 10. q. d. Art thou one
of the Great Council, a learned Jew, and yet ignorant of these matters? Do you
not perceive that I speak to you of the necessity of becoming my Disciple, in
such language, as any man who is versed in your Customs, and in the Writings of
the Prophets, may easily understand? Is not being born again that very phrase
whereby you express the making of a Proselyte? Is not washing one of the
Ceremonies whereby a Proselyte is made amongst you? and therefore when I tell
you a man must be born of Water, what should you think I mean, but that he must
become my Disciple by Baptism? I have also told you that he must be born of the
Spirit too; and can you be ignorant that those Prophecies which speak of the
days of the Messiah, do mention the Operations of the Holy Spirit upon the
Hearts of men, which shall then be liberally bestowed upon the Subjects of his
Kingdom, to make them good and holy persons, viz. that God will circumcise the
Hearts of his people, that he will take away their Heart of stone, and give
them an Heart of flesh, with his Law written in it, that they may be the true
Disciples of the Messiah, that Prophet to whom you are to hearken in all
things? I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and testify that we have
seen, and ye receive not our testimony, [vers. 11.] Now I am that Prophet; but
how credible soever that testimony is which is given hereof, ye regard it not.
If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not; how shall you believe if
I tell you of heavenly things? [vers. 12.]

This last, is a place of some difficulty: for although by heavenly things are
meant Doctrines which were to be known by the Revelation of Christ; yet by
those earthly things (which our Savior had told Nicodemus already) we must not
understand truths merely natural; for that Jesus was the Messiah, that it was
necessary for the Jews to become his Disciples by Baptism, and to be born of
the Spirit, which none but his Disciples could be; these were heavenly
Doctrines too in this sense, that they were knowable only by Revelation.
Wherefore I conceive that by heavenly things here, may probably be meant such
revealed Doctrines as were most contrary to the worldly and sensual
expectations of the Jews, who had long cherished in themselves the notion of a
Messiah, who should fight their Battles for them, as their other Saviors and
Deliverers had done, and rescue them from the Roman Power. Now these Doctrines
were, that Christ should be delivered into the hands of the Romans, and be
Crucified for the sins of the World; that those who believed in him should not
perish, but have everlasting Life. Diverse Considerations make it probable that
these are the heavenly things meant by our Savior in this place: for, 1. After
he had made way for it, by telling Nicodemus that he only ascended up into
Heaven, i. e. knew the secret purposes of God, concerning the way of Salvation,
he falls upon the mention of that Death which he was to undergo for the sins of
the World. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in, etc. 2. The Cross of Christ,
was that which made the Jews most of all offended, that his Disciples should
still pretend him to be the Christ. It was to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and
to the Greeks Foolishness; The opinion of Grotius that the (...) are the
similitudes of the Natural Birth, and the Wind which our Savior used, and the
(...), divine things spoken without this condescension by the use of Metaphors,
etc. wants not its probability. Nor that of Dr. Hammond, who supposes the (...)
to be things ordinary in the Jewish Law; which notion seems to be countenanced
by verse. 31. But then by Believing, they are both forced to mean Understanding,
whereas this notion does not only equally, if not better, agree with the
Context; but may without using that liberty be applied to the Words.
and therefore it is probable this was the thing which the Jews would hardly
believe, viz. that God would save Mankind by the death of his Son. 3. When St.
Peter rebuked our Savior foretelling his own Passion, he said unto Peter, Get
thee behind me, Satan, for thou savourest not the things that be of God, or
heavenly things, i. e. the wisdom of God's way to save the World; but the
things that be of man; thou speak according to the imaginations of the Jews,
who persuade themselves that the Kingdom of the Messiah will be of this World.

Lay all these things together, and it will appear probable, that by those
heavenly things which our Savior intimated would be more difficulty believed
by the Jews, than those which he had already mentioned to Nicodemus, are meant,
his Sufferings and Death, by which Believers should be saved, and which he
discoursed to Nicodemus of presently after.

And then by the earthly things, on the other hand, we are to understand those
truths which were indeed divinely revealed, but were not so contrary to the
worldly expectations of the Jews as the other, viz. that Jesus was the Christ,
and that all men were to be his Disciples; which the Jews would have been much
more willing to be, had it not been for the meanness of his outward appearance,
and his ignominious death afterward.

This I take to be a probable interpretation of this difficult place; but I do
not think every body is bound presently to believe it, or to yield to it any
further than he judges those reasons to be of weight, which I have offered for
it. And if Dr. Owen, or any other Divine, can show me a more probable sense of
these words, or of any difficult passage in this discourse of our Savior, than
what I have propounded, I shall make no difficulty to forsake my own, and come
over to his. In the mean time we may safely suppose that our Savior spoke to
this purpose.

If I have proved to you by those miracles which you acknowledge, that I am the
Messiah, and consequently that you ought to be my Disciples, and yet you will
not believe me and become my Disciples; how much more unlikely is it that you
will be so, after I tell you that I who am your Messiah must be lifted up upon
a Cross, and die for the sins of the World? this will go down more hardly with
you than any thing I have told you hitherto. And yet this is the purpose of God
for the salvation of the world, as I know and am come to tell you, who have
ascended into heaven, and am acquainted with these heavenly things, these
secret Counsels of God, which so far transcend all the wisdom of men; and this
is that too which was prefigured, by Moses lifting up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, etc.

Our Savior thereupon proceeds, showing it to be the purpose of God to save
Mankind this way, viz. by faith in Christ; that there was no salvation to be
expected but by becoming his Disciples; and that they who would not be so were
inexcusible, as we have already shown. And now I leave it to the Reader to
judge, whether the Paraphrase which I have given of the former part of our
Savior's discourse to Nicodemus, does not make the connection between all the
parts of it very clear; and also whether our understanding the Regenerate man
to be a true Disciple of Christ, (which is the notion this Paraphrase does
proceed upon) does not agree with the scope of our Savior's whole discourse in
this place.

SECT. II.
I come at last to answer the Doctor's objection against our notion of
Regeneration, which (as he says) we suppose to be a Metaphorical expression of
reformation of Life. His objection is this, Nicodemus knew the necessity of
Reformation of life well enough, if he had ever read Moses or the Prophets. And
to suppose that our Lord Jesus Christ proposed unto him the thing which he knew
perfectly well, only under a new name or notion, which he had never heard of
before, so to take an advantage of charging him with being ignorant of what
indeed he full well knew and understood, is a blasphemous imagination.

To this I answer, 1. That reformation of Life, which we say our Savior meant
by Regeneration, Nicodemus did not understand so perfectly well, as our Author
imagines. For though he understood well enough that Reformation of Life, which
was required by Moses and the Prophets, he did not yet understand the necessity
of that reformation which was required by our Savior, under which is supposed
the believing of Jesus to be the Christ, the becoming of his Disciple, and the
keeping of his Laws, which were better than the Laws of Moses. Now, as I have
already told the Doctor, none of those conformable Divines, whom he endeavors
to represent as odiously as he can, do mean any thing less by that reformation
of life, which they affirm Regeneration to consist in, than such a reformation
as supposes faith in Christ, and being his Disciple, and a sincere change of
the Mind to the love and obedience of God, and our Savior Jesus. This is what
we mean by that Reformation; and it is sufficiently plain, out of the Writings
of those men whom the Doctor so tragically complains of, that they mean nothing
less by it. And I am confident, so well do I know them, that there is not one
of them who would not with all their Hearts forbear this use of that expression
of reformation and amendment of Life, if they either thought it dangerous or
offensive; which hitherto they have not, because the state of Regeneration is
thus described in the Scriptures themselves: He that does righteousness is born
of God; and he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, he is my
Brother, etc. Now this is my first answer to the Doctor, that that reformation
of Life which his Adversaries mean, which namely implies being a sincere
Disciple of Jesus, Nicodemus did not understand the necessity of, but was that
very thing which our Savior designed to make him understand.

2. So mistaken is the Doctor every way; This thing was proposed unto
Nicodemus, not under a new, but under an old name or notion: for, 1. The name
and notion of being born again was not new, since the Jews counted their
Proselytes Recens Nati, Newborn men, and as such to have quitted their
Relation to their former Country, Kindred, and Parents, and become the Children
of Abraham. 2. To be born of Water was no new notion neither, since purifying
by Water, or Baptism, was one of the Ceremonies of this Regeneration by
Proselytism. 3. Neither was it a new notion to be born of the Spirit; P. 174.
it was to be found in the Old Testament, and the Doctor himself finds it
there in those words where God promises to Circumcise the Hearts of his
People, to take away their Heart of stone, and to give them an Heart of flesh
with his Law written in it. Had Nicodemus therefore talked like himself, when
our Savior spoke to him of the necessity of being born again of Water and the
Spirit, then instead of asking that strange Question, Can a man when he is old,
etc. and afterward, How can these things be? he should either have offered
himself to be a Proselyte or Disciple of Christ, and to submit to his divine
Laws, (which he that observes is born of God, has a new Heart, etc.) or
offered some reason to the contrary.

Thus then I answer the Doctor; that supposing Regeneration to be a
Metaphorical expression of becoming a true Disciple of Jesus, our Savior did
not propose an old thing to Nicodemus under a new name and notion, to puzzle
him, as the Doctor pretends; but on the contrary, he proposed a new thing to
him under old and familiar expressions.

And thus, though the Doctor knew not how we could do it, I hope we have freed
our selves from the guilt of that Blasphemous Imagination he would fain fasten
upon us.

The sum of what has been said is this: That Regeneration, which is an effect
of the Holy Spirit, consists in being a true Disciple of Christ, i. e. in
believing his Gospel, so as to yield a sincere obedience to his Laws. This is
that Regeneration which is necessary to Adult persons, as Nicodemus was, and as
you may remember is one of those needful effects, for the producing of which in
our minds, God will give the Holy Spirit to us if we ask him.

Thus have I shown what those Qualifications are for the effecting of which the
Holy Spirit is promised in St. Luke 11.13. Now though I have not pretended to
prove from this place, that God will give the Holy Spirit, to work faith, and
the beginnings of a good mind, and good desires in us; (and there was good
reason for it, since the Spirit is here promised to Believers, and such as
desire to do the will of God) yet I intended not to exclude them from being the
effects of the Holy Spirit: and I shall immediately prove that they are; for I
now proceed to show what those several Graces are, which the Scriptures
particularly ascribe to the Operations of the Holy Spirit; which was the second
way propounded for the resolving of the first Question; and will not only
confirm what has been offered for that end from St. Luke, but fully satisfy
the Question we are upon.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the several Graces of the Holy Spirit.
SECT. I.
IN the first place, Faith it self, as that signifies a firm persuasion of the
truth of our Savior's Doctrine, is an effect in our Minds, which the
Scripture frequently ascribes to the Operations of the Holy Spirit. This is the
first Grace of the Holy Spirit, which I mention, because an hearty belief of
the Gospel, is the foundation of all other Christian Virtues. And I shall now
show that the Spirit of God is given to prepare our minds as they ought to be
prepared, that we may become the true Disciples of Christ.

To speak clearly to this matter, we are to consider, 1. That the Revelations
of the Doctrines of the Gospel, and sufficient testimonies that they are
divinely revealed, are presupposed to our obligation of believing them; and, 2.
That teachableness, and due attention is necessarily required to Faith, or
actual believing of those Doctrines. Now that which I shall take upon me to
prove, is this; That the Teachableness of Mind, which is necessary to actual
Believing, is from the Holy Spirit. And I only say, that Faith in this sense,
is an effect of his Operations upon the Minds of men.

But I do not say, that the Holy Spirit does now reveal the Doctrines of the
Gospel to men by immediate Inspiration; or that he convinces them of their
truth by any immediate, or any new testimony whatsoever, that they may believe.

Not the First; because we have them in the Scriptures. As to the Doctrines of
the Gospel themselves, we may say with the Apostle, God has revealed them to
us by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10. But not to us as he did to the Apostles; to
them, by Inspiration; to us, by their Writings; whereby we may be fully
instructed in all necessary Truth.

Not the Second; because the Doctrines of the Gospel have been sufficiently
confirmed already, even by the demonstration of the Spirit, and Power, in the
Miracles and Resurrection of Christ, and the supernatural Gifts which the
Apostles and the primitive Believers had. And there is not any one promise in
the Scripture, that I can find, that God will give unto us any further
testimony of the Holy Ghost to the truth of the Gospel, after that which was
given to it by the Holy Ghost at first.

Wherefore we have no Warrant to look for any private Illumination and
Conviction by the Holy Spirit, to assure us of the truth of that Doctrine,
which has been abundantly confirmed to our hands by so many divine Testimonies
already.

It is the same light, and the same evidence, by which we discern the truth of
the Gospel, that those to whom Christ and his Apostles preached, discerned it
by, i. e. the Testimonies by which they proved their Doctrines: only with this
difference, that they saw and heard them; we know them by the tradition of the
Scriptures. Our Savior says* Light is come into the world; but men, etc. i.
e. The Will of God was plainly revealed by him, and he was clearly proved to be
the Son of God by the testimony of his Works, etc. and yet many would not
believe him. Now this is that Light which still continues in the world, viz.
the Revelations of the Gospel, and the Testimonies by which they were
confirmed; for we have them in the Scriptures, which are delivered to us, that
we might believe the same Doctrines which Christ and his Apostles preached to
the world, and upon the same evidence whereby men were at first convinced of
their truth.

Therefore I do not say that the Holy Spirit works Faith in us by
illuminating our minds with any new Revelation of the Christian Doctrine, or
any new Testimony of the truth thereof; for this is more than needs to be done,
and I conceive, more than any body can prove. But he does it by disposing our
minds to attention and teachableness; or to that temper which whosoever is of,
will believe truths that are proposed to him with sufficient evidence.

It is true indeed, that there is no more required, to an understanding man's
assent to a true propo^tion in Philosophy, than to explain the meaning, and
represent the reasons of it to him intelligibly and clearly. This ordinarily is
sufficient in that case: But there is more assistance required toward the
belief of the Gospel, though propounded with sufficient evidence of divine
Revelation. For there is this difference between the truths of Religion, and
conclusions in natural Philosophy, and other Sciences; that our sensual
Appetites, and worldly Interests are thwarted by those, but not by these; and
therefore we are not so apt to rise up in contradiction to the latter, as we
are to the former, though they may be both proved with equal evidence. Religion
is to govern our lives, and binds us to deny the pleasures and advantages of
sin, under the penalty of God's high displeasure. And no wonder if the Lusts of
men influence their Judgments, and blass their Understandings against the
belief of those Doctrines which are so irreconcilable to a wicked life. These
are the things which do not only so often spoil the virtue and efficacy of
Faith where it is, but do also cause uncertainty and unbelief, where Faith is
not, but where in all reason it ought to be. For they make men unwilling to
believe; and this unwillingness does on the one hand hinder their attention to
the force of those Arguments which prove the Gospel to be indeed the Word of
God; and inclines them on the other hand to lean to the weakest Objections that
can be offered against it. This was just the case of the great men amongst the
Jews; as is plain, from that one instance in John 9. amongst many. For when our
Savior had opened the Eyes of him that was born blind, the Pharisees would
believe never the more that he was of God; and yet all the pretense they could
find against him, was because this cure was wrought on the Sabbath Day, verse.
16. For when they had strictly examined all circumstances of the Miracle, and
the healed person in conclusion talked such unanswerable reason against them:
Herein is a marvelous thing that ye know not whence he is, etc. Since the world
began was it not heard that any man opened the Eyes of one that was born
blind: If this man were not of God, he could do nothing, i. e. he could do no
such works as these: they were resolved to give him the hearing no longer; but
first bitterly reproached him, and then cast him out. Now our Savior
frequently told these men that their prejudice against him arose from their
Lusts: How, says he, can ye believe, who receive honor from one another, and
seek not the honor that comes from God only? John 5.44. i. e. so long as
your Hearts are set upon worldly greatness, and the praise of men, which if you
can compass, you care not in the mean while whether God approves of you or not;
it is no wonder that ye reject my Doctrine, who came not to answer your
ambitious and worldly expectations, although I come with testimony from God,
and the works that I do bear witness of me, verse. 36.

Thus the Apostle tells us, That the God of this world blinds the minds of
them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is
the Image of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4. where we have a plain
reason given us by the Apostle why some believed not, who had the light of the
Gospel shining about them, i. e. who had it preached to them with its proper
evidence, viz. because the God of this world had blinded their Minds, i. e.
because they were blinded with the prejudices of prevailing Lust and Passion,
by which the Devil rules in the Children of disobedience.

Wherefore as Faith is necessary to that more perfect victory over our Lusts,
which includes the universal doing of God's Will: So on the other hand, our
minds must in some degree be disengaged from the power of our Lusts, before we
can heartily believe, viz. so far as that we may be ready to yield to the
truth, how contrary sover it proves to our sensual and worldly affections, and
consequently that they shall not hinder our attention and consideration when
the Word of God is offered to be made known to us.

Of this teachable disposition we have a remarkable instance, in Acts 16.14.
The Lord opened Lydia 's heart that she attended unto the things which were
spoken of Paul: where we may observe, 1. That her being qualified to hear,
which is here expressed by the opening of her Heart, is ascribed to a divine
operation, which prevented even her attention to what she heard. 2. That the
immediate effect of the Lords opening her Heart, was not her believing, but her
attending to those things which were spoken of Paul, i. e. she heard him
diligently without prejudice and passion, and was willing to embrace the truth.
This was the effect of God's Spirit; and whoever is thus disposed, will believe
the Gospel when it is made known to him; because it is indeed the Word of God.

This is that temper of mind, which was all that our Savior desired to find
among men, in order to the convincing of them that he was the true Prophet: If
any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God,
or whether I speak of my self, Joh. 7.17. i. e. If a man be willing to do
whatsoever shall appear to be the Will of God, and so is not prejudiced against
the truth by his Lusts, such a one will easily be convinced that my Doctrine is
of God. And because this temper comes from the divine Spirit, therefore he that
is thus disposed is said to be of God. For it is exactly to the same purpose,
what our Savior says, John 8.47. He that is of God, hears God's Words; ye
therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. For this was the Answer he
made to that Question of his own; If I say the truth, why do ye not believe me?
He gives the reason himself; Because ye are not of God. The meaning whereof is
plain from verse. 44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your
Father ye will do; he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth, etc. So that to be of the Devil, is to be wedded to our Lusts, and
enraged against the truth that contradicts them. And therefore the contrary
state or temper, to be of God, is plainly to be ready to perform all duty, and
to believe all truth; and whoever was thus disposed, would hear God's Words,
and believe them, verse. 47.

Thus after our Savior had appealed to the Miracles which he wrought before
his Enemies, Joh. 10.25. he tells them, But ye believe not, because ye are not
of my sheep. Where by Sheep cannot be meant actual Disciples; for then the
sense were, Ye believe not, because ye believe not: But such as were by a
teachable spirit disposed to be so, and would hear his voice; for such as these
would follow him as soon as he called them; because he was the true Shepherd.
Now that this preparedness of mind to embrace the truth, was an effect of the
divine Spirit, is clearly implied in verse. 29. My Father who gave them me, i.
e. who has thus disposed and qualified them to hear my voice, is greater than
all, and none is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hands, to defeat them of
that eternal Life which Christ had promised, v. 28.

All these places being compared with John 6.37. give a clear light to the true
interpretation thereof; All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me, i.
e. will believe in me, and become my Disciples: and then to be given of the
Father, is the same thing with being resolved to do the Will of God, Joh. 7.17.
and being of God, Joh. 8.47. and being Christ's Sheep, Joh. 10.26. All which
Phrases signify that humility and teachableness of mind, whereby men are
prepared to believe the truth: Only the Fathers giving such persons to Christ,
is an expression noting that divine Grace whereby their minds are thus
disposed; for which reason, being brought to this temper, is called, verse. 44.
being drawn by the Father. No man can come to me, except the Father who has
sent me draw him, i. e. unless the grace of God has so far prevailed over his
Affections, as to indue him with an impartial love to the truth, and his Heart
be thereby opened to attend to God's Word. And in this sense we may use those
words of the Apostle spoken upon another occasion; No man can say that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3.

This is the substance of what I can find in the Scripture concerning this
matter; and I suppose it is sufficiently shown, that faith, or a firm
persuasion that Jesus is the Son of God, and that his Doctrine is the Word of
God, is an effect of a divine Operation upon our minds; and that the first
preparations within us toward Regeneration are from the Holy Spirit: And
consequently that the Semipelagian opinion introduced by the Massilienses upon
occasion of the Pelagian controversy, viz. that there is no necessity of
preventing Grace, though Grace be necessary to make our Faith fruitful of good
works; but that Faith and the first inclinations of the Will to that which is
good, are merely from our selves, is contrary to the Scriptures.

SECT. 2.
Now when we are once persuaded that Jesus is the Son of God, that which still
remains to be done by us, is to overcome the world, and keep the Commandments
of God. Indeed, if we believe in Jesus, we have entertained into our minds
such forcible and prevailing considerations, as will not easily suffer us to
disobey him in any thing; and they have so much power to lead our Affections
after them, and to govern our practices, that I always thought the
Semipelagians might with more appearance of reason have questioned the Doctrine
of the Church concerning those divine Operations by which the Faith of a
Believer is crowned with all other Christian Virtues, than concerning those
which are preparatory to Faith it self: for of the two, he is a more
unreasonable man, who, believing God's Word, is yet so mad as to go on still in
his sins, than he who believes it not; and since the Lusts of men make them so
unwilling to attend to those truths which are against them, we might think it
were an easier matter to keep the Faith of Christ from entering into their
Hearts, than to resist the power of it when it is once admitted.

But now as the evidence of those Reasons, by which the Gospel is proved to be
a divine Revelation, is far from excluding all need of a divine Influence upon
our minds to create a firm Faith in us: So neither does the power of those
motives which are contained in our Faith, render the concurrence of the Holy
Spirit needless, to move our Wills to that which is good, and upon good
principles; but still our sufficiency is of God; without whose Grace, the
temptations of the World, and the lusts of our corrupt Nature, which make us
unwilling to entertain the truth, would always suppress the force and virtue of
it afterward. Thus our Savior told his Disciples, Without me ye can do
nothing, John 15.5. but he did not suppose that they were incapable of doing
any thing with him too; but that they had power to bring forth fruit unto God,
and that it was from him. Now that this power imparted to them was not merely
the effect of the Revelation of his Doctrine to them, is plain from hence, that
they already believed the Revelations he had made: Now ye are clean through the
word which I have spoken to you, verse. 3. and yet he tells them that without
him they can do nothing; which must needs imply some grace distinct from the
bare revelation of the Gospel, by which they had already bore some fruit, and
were capable of bringing forth more, verse. 2, 3.

But that all those dispositions and virtues wherein our obedience to the
Gospel does consist, are as well the graces of the Holy Spirit, as the effects
of our Faith, is clearly and fully affirmed in those words of the Apostle,
Phil. 2.13. It is God which works in you both to will and to do; which being
again spoken to Believers, manifestly suppose a divine Operation distinct from
the Revelation of the Gospel, which enabled them to will and to do, i. e. to
perform that obedience from their very souls, which would qualify them for
eternal happiness: For this is the motive by which the Apostle encourages them
to work out their Salvation, verse. 12. by universal obedience, as hitherto they
had done. Now because the motive extends to engage us to every part of our
duty; therefore God works in us, that we may be every way so disposed in
mind and will, and obedient in life, as to become meet for the Kingdom of
Heaven. Wherefore the fear and love of God, and godly Sorrow, and true
Repentance, and the hope of eternal Life, together with all Christian Virtues;
such as Righteousness, Mercy, Patience, Love, Peace, Joy, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, and Temperance, are the Graces of the
Spirit. Wherefore Lastly, our doing that which God requires, and with that fear
and love of him which he requires too, are the effects of his Operations in us.

If any thing were yet wanting to satisfy us fully in this matter, our being
taught to pray that we may not enter into temptation, and to pray always that
we may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, would leave no room for
doubting whether of our selves we need, or by promise have this great
encouragement to the study of Godliness and Virtue, or not: For these
directions were unprofitable, if we either needed no strength from the divine
Spirit against our Temptations, or if it were not to be gained by our Prayers.
Much less would those Prayers of St. Paul for other Christians, which we so
often meet withal, have signified any thing to their advantage or
encouragement, if there were not a divine Grace obtainable by them, for the
producing of those effects which he so much desired to see in their
conversation. And these effects were no other than all kinds of Christian
Virtue and Goodness, as we may learn by the following places. Wherefore also we
pray always for you, that our God would count you worthy of this calling, and
fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of Faith with power,
2 Thessalonians. 1.11. i. e. that God would make their Faith fruitful of all good
works, acceptable to him, that the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ might be
glorified in them, as he speaks in the following verse. Again, we do not cease
to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of
his Will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that ye might walk worthy
of the Lord unto all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, Col.
1.9, 10. Thus in another place; For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would grant you according to the riches of
his glory to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the Inner man.

Now that which the Apostle prays for in these and many like places, is plainly
this; That those Christians to whom he wrote might attain all those
Qualifications which the Gospel requires in Believers. And from hence it
follows that God has not left the success of the Gospel to depend upon that
force only, which the bare Revelation of the motives to obedience has to
persuade us. For if we could reasonably expect no other power to overcome the
world, and to practice all Christian Virtues, than what arises merely from
such a consideration of the promises and threatenings of the Gospel, and all
other obligations to obedience, represented to us therein, as we are able to
excite in our selves, and to bring one another to; then did the Apostle in vain
spend those his solemn Prayers in behalf of others; and in vain were they
required to pray for themselves in like manner: and it would be lost labor to
call now upon God to help us by his Grace, after he has revealed the Doctrines
of the Gospel to us, and settled the Ministry of the Church, to bring men to
repentance and good works.

Seeing therefore that the attainment of all Virtues and Qualifications
necessary to Salvation, ought to be a subject of our Prayers; seeing these
Prayers cannot be profitable, unless there be a divine Grace, and that distinct
from the Revelation of the Gospel obtainable thereby, for the producing of
those Qualifications in us; since Prayer also is one necessary means prescribed
for the attaining of them; it follows that all Christian Virtues are the Graces
of the Holy Spirit, or the effects of his Operation in us. Wherefore we may
conclude with St. James, If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God that gives
to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. Every good
gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
Lights, with whom is no variableness nor shadow of turning, James 1.5, 17. who
will not fail of his promise, but give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him.

SECT. 3.
By the same Argument it is clear, that there is a communication of the divine
Spirit to good men, that they may yet further improve in the fruits of Faith,
and grow in Grace. As our Savior says, Every branch that bears fruit, he
purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit, Joh. 15.2. For thus also the
Apostle says, And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more, in
knowledge and in all judgment; that you may still be more powerfully prompted
to Charity, and all Christian works, by a deep sense of their goodness; that
you may approve things that are excellent; that you may apprehend all Christian
Virtues to be as excellent as they are in their own nature, that ye may be
sincere and without offense till the day of Christ; that being thus strongly
disposed to all righteousness, you may constantly and universally do the Will
of God, being filled with the fruits of righteousness, Phil. 1.9, 10. And this
progress in the Christian life which the Apostle prayed for in their behalf,
together with that perseverance which it would be the means of, he does not
only by his Prayers suppose to be the effect of a divine Operation; but he
expressly ascribes it thereunto, verse. 6. where he tells them how strongly he
was persuaded, that God who had begun a good work in them would perfect it
until the day of Christ. To the same purpose is that Prayer, The God of Peace
make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13.21.

But if we consult the Holy Scriptures, we shall find that the Operations of
the Holy Spirit are more plentifully communicated to men, when they become holy
and good, than they were before; and this I take to be clearly affirmed in
those passages wherein God is said to dwell in them. And because this
consideration cannot but strongly move us to follow the study of Piety, I shall
distinctly show, 1. What we are to understand by God's dwelling in men; and, 2.
That they are holy and good men only in whom God dwells.

As to the former, it is observable that God's dwelling in Christians is
sometimes joined with the mention of their being his Temple, as you may see, 1
Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 2.21, 22. Now from hence it is obvious to gather,
that these Phrases allude to what had been said of God's dwelling in the Temple
at Jerusalem, and before that in the Tabernacle; and therefore that they will
be more easily explained by observing the use of them in the Old Testament; and
to this way we are plainly directed in the New, as you will see by consulting 2
Cor. 6.16. where the Apostle cites a place out of the Old, containing God's
promise to dwell among the Israelites.

First of all, the Sheckinah, or Habitation of God, was in the holy place
within the Vail, where God said he would appear in the Cloud of Incense, Lev.
16.2. and where the Ark of God was. And hence the place of the Ark was called
his Dwelling, as we may see, by comparing David's intimation of his purpose to
build an house for God, with God's Message to him upon that occasion: I dwell,
says David, in an house of Cedar, and the ARK OF GOD dwells within Curtains,
2 Samuel 7.2. But the Prophets words to him were these; Thus says the Lord,
Shall thou build me an house for ME to dwell in, or for MY ARK, whereas to this
day I have walked in a Tabernacle? verse. 5. Thus the place within the Vail
where the Ark was, while the Tabernacle stood, and the Oracle into which it was
carried after the building of the Temple, was called the Most Holy place, the
place where God vouchsafed to be present in a peculiar manner. The Symbols of
his presence, there, were the Cherubims, or Angels under which the Ark was
placed; and thus we find in Jacob's vision, that the presence of God was
signified by an appearance of Angels, Genesis 28.12. And the manner of the
appearance of the Angel to the Shepherds, is described by the glory of the Lord
shining round about them, Luke 2.9. For this reason it is that God is so often
called by the name of him that dwells between the Cherubims, who was pleased
thereby to signify his presence in the Most Holy place.

But that which I chiefly aim at is this, that God's dwelling in this place was
a testimony of his peculiar mercy and kindness toward the House of Israel, and
that he would bless and prosper them, if they would keep his Commandments. And
for this reason the Ark was called the Ark of the Covenant between God and
them. For first the Tables of the Commandments which they were to keep, were
laid up in the Ark; and then the Blessings which God would bestow upon them,
were signified by the Ark's standing under the Mercy-seat, which was covered
with the Wings of the Cherubims, between which God was so often said to dwell:
So that the presence of God was there exhibited, as it were sitting upon a
Throne of Mercy, to dispense his favors and blessings amongst the Children of
Israel. And to this purpose it is observable, that God's dwelling thus in the
Most Holy place, is called his dwelling amongst the Israelites. Thus when he
commanded the building of the Ark, Let them, says he, make me a Sanctuary,
that I may dwell amongst THEM, Exodus 25.8. And after he had promised to
sanctify the Tabernacle with his Glory, he tells Moses, And I will dwell
amongst the Children of Israel, and will be their God, Exodus 29.45. Now that
the presence of his mercy and favor toward them, was meant in this promise,
appears by the following words; And they shall know that I am the Lord their
God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt: i. e. he would so
manifest his power in protecting and defending them from all their Enemies,
that they should know he had the same care of them which he showed in
delivering them from the Egyptian bondage. But this is yet more clearly
signified by those words; In all places where I record my NAME, I will come
unto thee, and BLESS thee, Exodus 20.24. For the Name of God, as we find in 2 Samuel 6.2. was, The Lord of Hosts that dwells between the Cherubims. And this
is that account which the Psalmist gives of God's dwelling in Sion, where the
Ark of his presence was: The Lord has chosen Sion, he has desired it for his
habitation. This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it.
I will abundantly satisfy her poor with bread; I will cloth her Priests with
salvation, and her Saints shall shout aloud for joy, Psalm. 132.13. Thus in
times of distress and danger they began their prayers for deliverance, by
invoking the Lord God of Israel that dwells between the Cherubims, 2 Kings
19.15. and Psalm. 80.1. By all which it appears, that Gods dwelling there
signified the peculiar favor which he had toward the house of Israel before
all other people. And accordingly we may observe that the Scripture does use to
express the presence of God amongst them, when they were punished for their
sins, not by dwelling with them; but by visiting them; which, you know, is a
word that does not imply continuance and long abode, as the other does; and is
therefore much fitter than that, to express the presence of his angry Justice,
who delights not in Vengeance, but in Mercy; and who is more easily prevailed
with to withdraw his displeasure, than his favor and kindness. Thus says the
high and lofty One -- I DWELL with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit;
which that it signifies the lasting presence of his favor, is plain from the
following words: For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always
wroth; for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made,
Isa. 57.15, 16. Although God is said to visit men both when he is present to
punish them, as in Exodus 32.34. Psalm. 89.36, etc. and when he is present to
deliver and bless them, as in Exodus 3.16. Psalm. 106.4. yet it is in respect of
the latter only, that he is said to dwell amongst them.

Now as I observed before, the Apostle cites that promise of God made to the
Israelites, that he would dwell in them, applying it to the state of the
Christian Church, as you may see, 2 Cor. 6.16. Wherefore God's dwelling in men,
as this phrase is used in the New Testament, signifies also his peculiar grace
and favor toward them; as the Apostle himself explains it, by subjoyning that
other place thereto; And I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons
and Daughters, says the Lord God Almighty. And this is that testimony which he
has given us hereof, that the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, full of
grace and truth, John 1.14. By whom we have received God's blessings and
favors, and the clear revelations of his Will, more freely than the Israelites
ever did by the dwelling of the Ark amongst them. They prayed toward their
most Holy place, where God was extraordinarily present, that he would stir up
his strength and come and save them: But we look up to the more Holy
Mercy-seat, where God is more gloriously present than he was between the
Cherubims, even to Jesus, whom all the Angels of God worship, and in whom the
fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, that through him we may have help and
salvation: The Name of God which he has now recorded amongst us, is, The God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and by this name we invoke him that he
would come unto us, and bless us. And there is as great difference between the
Blessings, that God's coming to us and dwelling amongst us implies, and those
which were promised to the Israelites, as between the testimonies themselves of
God's presence amongst them and amongst us. They were temporal favors and
deliverances which they promised to themselves from God's presence in the most
Holy place: But we look for a salvation incomparably more excellent, God having
blessed us through Christ with all spiritual blessings in things that concern
Heaven, Ephesians. 1.3. The Enemies we are to subdue by the strength of the Lord, and
the power of his might, are those which would hinder us of our heavenly Canaan,
viz. our sensual Lusts, and earthly Affections, and the temptations of the
World and the Devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood; but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickednesses in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. against all
the suggestions of evil spirits, whether to more gross and sensual, or to more
refined and spiritual vices: And they are Enemies so much more dangerous than
those which the Israelites had to deal withal, that theirs do not deserve to be
called Principalities, etc. when they are compared with those here mentioned by
the Apostle. Thus by the Spirit of God dwelling in us, twice mentioned by St.
Paul, Romans 8.9, 11. we are to understand the presence of his Grace, whereby we
are constantly enabled to mortify the deeds of the Body, verse. 13. For then
our Bodies shall have a blessed Resurrection, verse. 11. and the Spirit is life,
because of Righteousness, verse. 10. our Souls shall then be qualified for
eternal Life and Happiness. Now this being certain to come to pass if the
Spirit of God dwells in us, it is plain, that the peculiar grace and favor
of God toward us, which is signified thereby, is that by which we may be kept
from living after the flesh, which if we do, we shall die, and enabled to
mortify the deeds of the Body, to subdue our spiritual Enemies more perfectly,
and to prevail finally against them, that we may live, verse. 13.

Therefore to conclude this point; as God's dwelling amongst the Israelites
signified his peculiar favor to them in protecting and defending them, and
bringing them to the Land of Canaan, and blessing them with plenty and
increase, etc. so is the peculiar presence of his Grace signified too, by that
his dwelling in us, which is mentioned in the New Testament; but this in order
to that more eminent blessing of an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled,
and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us, who are kept by the power
of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.4, 5.

I shall only add, that as this presence of God still denotes his goodness
and mercy, as was proved by St. Paul's interpretation of it, 2 Cor. 6.16. so
dwelling does, according to the propriety of the word, signify that this grace
and goodness shall not be transitory, but abiding, while the condition abides
upon which it is promised; and that condition is no other than this, that we be
careful to keep the Commandments of God; which is the second thing I am now to
discourse of; but before I attempt it, I must confess that I am now falling
upon a subject which belongs to the second Question, viz. Who they are to whom
the promise of the Holy Spirit is made; which I shall fully treat of in the
sixth Chapter. But there is this excuse to be made for preventing some part of
the design of that Chapter; that the consideration of the several ends and
degrees of the Holy Spirit's Operations, is so nearly related to that which
concerns the Objects of those Operations, and so often interwoven with it, that
they cannot be so fully separated, and distinctly treated of, as we could wish.
Wherefore

2. I come to show that they are only good and holy men in whom God is said to
dwell. And this I think is not obscurely intimated by the Ark's being called
peculiarly the Ark of his presence: for as the Cherubims were the Symbols or
visible Tokens of the divine presence in the most Holy place; as the Mercy-seat
signified the end of God's presence there, viz. to dispense his blessings and
graces amongst his people: So the Ark being the peculiar place of his presence,
seems clearly to note upon what condition he would be thus gracious to them,
viz. if they would keep his Commandments, the Tables whereof, you know, were
laid up in that place. How probably it might be inferred from hence, that God
dwells only in good men, I shall not say at present; but sure I am, that there
is a true harmony between this explication of those Types and Figures, and
between the clear and evident Doctrines of the New Testament concerning this
matter; which I lay the greatest stress upon, and which you may find in such
passages as these: He that keeps his commandments dwells in him, and he in
him: and hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has
given us, 1 John 3.24. and the same is repeated, Chap. 4. verse. 13. Now
doubtless he speaks here of such a privilege, as those who kept not the
Commandments of God had no reason to pretend to. Again, verse. 14. Whosoever
shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God (i. e.) who is not afraid of
suffering for him, verse. 18. and has overcome the world, Chap. 5. verse. 5. God
dwells in him. But in that place of St. Paul to the Corinthians, which we
have already noted, it is observable, that obedience and true holiness is made
the condition of God's dwelling in us: God has said, I will dwell in them, and
walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people; wherefore
come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you, i. e. I will then dwell in you, as I
have promised. And this is yet more clear from the beginning of the next
Chapter; Having therefore these promises, that God will dwell in us, etc. let
us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, that it may
be unto us as God has promised. Now whereas the Apostle tells them, verse. 16.
Ye are the temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in you,
etc. we must observe that their being God's Temple signifies the right he had
to their service; but by his dwelling in them, that peculiar favor and grace
wherewith he would reward their obedience; so that the Apostle uses a double
Argument to persuade them to cleanse themselves: 1. From their duty; they ought
so to do, being God's Temple: and this Argument he elsewhere more largely
insists upon; What! know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost
in you, (the outward Court as it were of the Lord's house, and that here
especially noted, because he was warning them to flee Fornication, which is a
sin that defiles the Body) which ye have of God, and ye are not your own: for
ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit, which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. In which words it is plain, that he
principally urges them to consider the right by which their serving God by an
holy use of themselves was due. 2. From the reward of so doing; for then, as
God has said, He will dwell in them, and walk in them, as in his Temple; but
not upon other terms. Thus although the House of Israel was God's peculiar by
virtue of that Covenant which he had made with them, and his particular right
to their service grounded thereupon, which remained even when they rebelled
against him; yet when they did so, he dwelt not amongst them, he did not come
unto them and bless them, but forsook them, and departed from his house,
although the Ark of his presence was still amongst them. In like manner, we who
have been admitted into God's Covenant by Baptism, and thereby consecrated to
his use and service, are become his Temple and peculiar, and we cannot alienate
his right to us. But if we profane our selves, if we defile the Temple of God,
if our Minds be unholy, and our Actions wicked, God dwells not in us; for
what fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness? What communion has
Light with Darkness? They are those Virtues by which we grow like to God, that
make us capable of those Communications of the divine Spirit, which are
signified by his dwelling in us. And the nearer we ascend to God by
righteousness and true goodness, which is a participation of the divine Nature,
the more freely and plentifully we receive the emanations of his grace and
love. It is the mind of a good Christian wherein God delights to dwell, and
to show himself graciously present: For this is a Temple (to speak in the
language of the Metaphor) where his glory is indeed spoken of. Here his Name is
honored, and his great Perfections adored; his immense Presence, his infinite
Power, Wisdom and Goodness effectually acknowledged, not only by a bare
confession that there is a Being absolutely perfect; but by affections suitable
to the Divine Attributes, his Goodness being here loved, his Justice feared,
his Power and Wisdom reverenced, his Fidelity and Truth trusted, and his
Sovereign Dominion owned by a spirit of obedience and submission to it, which
are incomparably more effectual acknowledgments of the Divine perfections, than
whole Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices: For this, as our Savior speaks, is to
worship God in spirit and in truth. Such a Temple as this, God is so delighted
in, that in comparison therewith, he disregarded the Temple at Jerusalem, with
all the external services that belonged to it: For that God dwells in pious
minds, was not unknown to the Jews. Where is the house that ye build unto me,
and where is the place of my rest? To him will I look, says the Lord, even to
him that is poor, and of a contrite heart, and trembles at my word, Isa. 66.2,
3. Thus says the high and holy One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is
Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the spirit
of the contrite ones, Isa. 57.15.

Let us now lay these things together, and the conclusion will be, that God's
dwelling in men, implies a plentiful communication of Divine grace to confirm
and strengthen them in all goodness; which was what I took upon me to show
under this head. For since this expression of God's dwelling in men, denotes
the presence of a peculiar grace and favor to those in whom he is said to
dwell, which is not afforded to others: Since the dwelling of the Holy Ghost in
Believers is to enable them to mortify the deeds of the body, and to prevail
finally against all their spiritual Enemies: Since also it is true, that God
dwells in good and righteous, but not in impure and unholy persons; it
follows, in the first place, that after we are regenerated, it is still by the
grace of God, and the Operations of his Holy Spirit, that we are enabled to
proceed in virtue and godliness, and to persevere therein to the end: for God
dwells in us, that we may mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit.
Secondly, it follows also, that there is a more abundant measure of Divine
Grace communicated to holy persons, than to those who are not so: For God's
dwelling implies the presence of more than ordinary Grace. And thus our Savior
also has plainly told us: To him that has shall be given, and he shall have
abundantly.

Finally, this Doctrine is very well consistent with that of attributing the
beginnings of Christian Faith and goodness in us, to the Operations of the Holy
Spirit. For although the Spirit of God dwells only in good men, yet it is by
his Operations that any are made so at first; and as the Apostle speaks, we are
built together for an habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. But his
dwelling in us afterward signifies, as we have shown, the more abundant grace
we are made partakers of. And thus, although the blessings which all the World
enjoyed, while the Tabernacle and Temple stood, flowed to Mankind from the
Divine bounty and goodness; yet God was said to dwell only among the
Israelites, because he had a more especial care of that people, than of any
other Nation in the World.

My design in this Chapter was to show that the beginnings and progress of
that state whereby we are qualified for Heaven, are in the Scriptures ascribed
to the Operations of the Holy Spirit; and that all Christian Virtues are the
gifts and graces of God. I might now prove, by as convincing testimonies, that
perseverance in the Faith, and obedience of the Gospel, is the effect of a
Divine Operation in us: But this truth is so evidently consequent, from what
the Scripture asserts concerning God's dwelling in good men, which I have
largely enough discoursed of, that I reckon it needless to produce any further
testimonies to confirm it.

Thus have I discharged what I promised in the close of the last Chapter; which
was to prove, that those Christian Virtues in which the state of Regeneration
consists, together with our improvement and perseverance in them, are
particularly ascribed in the Scriptures to the Operations of the Holy Spirit.

And from what has been thus proved, these things follow:

1. That he who is endued with these Virtues, has the Spirit of God; for they
are the effects of his grace: And to say that a man may be endued with them,
and yet be void of Grace, is to contradict the Scriptures, which ascribe them,
in whomsoever they are, to the Operations of the Holy Spirit.

2. And by consequence, it is an idle supposition that God will be displeased
with us, though we be never so careful to do his Commands, and to increase in
Christian Virtues, if all this while we have not the Spirit of God; for the
former cannot be without the latter.

3. Wherefore also it is a vain thing to make our believing and obeying the
Gospel, on the one side, and our having true Grace and the Spirit of God, on
the other, distinct marks of a Regenerate state: For if Faith and Obedience are
the fruits of the Holy Spirit within us; if they are Grace, as that signifies
the performance of our duty, and the effects of Grace, as that signifies Divine
Assistance; then having the Grace of God, and the Spirit of God, is not a mark
of Regeneration, distinct from believing and obeying the Gospel; because this
is Grace it self in the former, and is it self the only mark of Grace in the
latter sense of the word, i. e. of our having the Spirit of God.

And now I have not discoursed upon this subject out of the least suspicion
that there are any in this Church who deny the Qualifications of a true
Disciple of Jesus to be the graces of the Holy Spirit. For excepting Dr. Owen,
and some of his party, and (as those who are acquainted with them say) the
Quakers, I do not know of any in England, who may justly be suspected (to use
one of the Doctor's phrases) of being gone over into the Tents of the
Pelagians. Nor was it merely to vindicate the Ministers of this Church, whose
judgment in this matter I am acquainted with, something better than our Author
seems to be, from the imputation of Pelagianism, which with so much clamor and
railing he has charged them withal: But principally to give those, who believe
what the Scripture thus plainly declares, occasion to consider it again, and to
lay it to heart; since there can hardly be a more effectual encouragement to
Piety and Virtue than this, that God will give his Holy Spirit to them that ask
him for all blessings needful for their eternal welfare: And nothing will
render the wilful sinner more inexcusable, and more severely punishable, than
this, that whilst he goes on in his wicked life, he does despite unto the
Spirit of Grace.

CHAP. V. Concerning pretended Gifts of the Spirit.
SECT. I.
HItherto I have shown of what kind those Effects are for which the Holy
Spirit was in general promised by our Savior, Luke 11.13. and proved also that
they are in the Scriptures severally ascribed to his Operations. Now upon the
whole matter we cannot but conclude, that in respect of the end of this divine
Grace, God has made us a very large and bountiful promise thereof, and given
thereby such an abundant demonstration of his good will toward us, that indeed
he desires not the death of a sinner; but had rather he should turn and live,
as we ought to acknowledge with our utmost Thanks and Praises.

But after all this, it will be pretended by some men, that if we say the
Operations of the Holy Spirit are limited to those effects we have been
speaking of, we confine the Promise within too narrow a compass, and do in
effect deny several divine Graces and works of the Holy Spirit upon the Hearts
of God's people, such as darting the true sense of Scripture into their minds,
suggesting words and matter to them when they pray Extempore, and giving them
absolute assurance that they shall be saved at last. Hence it is, that if we
take the liberty of dissenting from their sense of a place of Scripture, the
next thing we hear is, that we want the Illumination of the Spirit; and all
that we can say, is at once turned off for carnal reasoning. If we dare not
pretend to any other than a conditional assurance of our Salvation, we are
those that have not the testimonies of the Spirit: And if we make use of pious
forms of Prayer, and other exercises of Devotion, we do not pray by the Spirit.
Therefore I think my self obliged to enquire upon what grounds they pretend to
these spiritual Gifts: But before I do so, I shall premise by way of Caution
these following things. 1. That those dispositions which qualify us for a
profitable understanding of the Scriptures, such as Teachableness, Humility,
Attention, and Industry, are the graces of the Holy Spirit, and consequently,
that our success in endeavoring after the knowledge of divine Truths, depends
upon his blessing and grace. 2. That it is our duty to labor after a right
understanding of our spiritual estate, and that this knowledge of it is a grace
of the Holy Spirit. 3. That those affections which make our Prayers acceptable
to God, such as love to God, trust in him, hatred of sin, zeal and fervency,
and the like, are likewise the effects of divine Grace. All these things I
heartily acknowledge; and they are no other things than what may be concluded
easily, from the foregoing discourse concerning the graces of the Holy Spirit.

But that which I have some reason to question is this, Whether we can conclude
that the Spirit will convey a right understanding of the Scripture into any
man's mind by an immediate revelation of the meaning of it; or that he will
give to some men an absolute assurance of their salvation, while they live here
upon their trial; or that he suggests to them by Inspiration what they say in
their extemporary Prayers: For whatever he may do in this kind, I do not find
that he has promised any where so to do. And I think we are not to promise to
our selves that divine Grace which God has no where promised to us. And that
he has not promised these things, I shall show, 1. By comparing the contrary
pretense with that promise of our Savior concerning the Holy Spirit, in Luke
11.13. 2. By considering what ground there is for it, from other places of
Scripture.

1. By comparing the pretense with Luke 11.13. and here I shall show, that
whatever countenance it may have from other Scriptures, it can have none from
this, which (as I have already proved) contains a promise of such gifts as are
needful to our eternal happiness.

1. As to that of coming to the sense of Scripture by inherent Revelation, I
say that such a Revelation is not needful for us, to make us wise unto
salvation; because those places of Scripture which are necessary to be
understood by us, need no infallible Interpreter: for all Truths necessary to
be known, are plainly delivered in the Scriptures; and there is no need of a
new Revelation to acquaint us with the meaning of those Texts, the sense
whereof is plain and obvious. There are indeed many passages hard to be
understood in the Scriptures; but there is no necessity of an Infallible guide,
or of New revelation to come to the sense of them, unless they were themselves
necessary to be understood. If you say, that because all Scripture is
profitable, the revelation of the true meaning of those Texts, at least, which
have the greatest difficulties belonging to them, must be profitable also. I
answer,

1. It does not follow in every particular, that because such a thing is
profitable, therefore if I ask, God will give it; which you know was proved in
the explication of St. Luke's Text, Chap. 2. Sect. 2. Wherefore if I pray only
that God may prosper my industry in endeavoring to understand such a difficult
place, it does not follow from the promise in St. Luke, that God will grant my
request in that particular: For he may give me something as good or better
instead of it. As I may get advantage by understanding that place, so I may
also get advantage by finding that after all I do not understand it; which may
through the grace of God be improved by me into an occasion of more Humility,
Modesty, and Charity; which, if St. Paul may be believed, is better than
Knowledge, as my trying to understand did before excite me to Prayer and
Industry. But much less does it follow that God will grant my request, if I
pray yet more particularly, that the meaning of the difficult place may be
revealed to me by immediate Inspiration: For,

2. Though that be profitable, yet it is profitable also to come to the
knowledge of it by study, and the industrious use of means common to learned
men, if I am a Teacher of others; or by the help of a spiritual Guide, if I am
merely a Learner. And if I come either of these ways to the understanding of a
difficult Text, God has not been less good to me, for not communicating it to
me by immediate revelation: Especially if it be considered,

3. That if God gives me the understanding of a difficult place, by blessing
my industry in Reading, Hearing, Conferring with others, Meditating and
Comparing place with place; this will in all probability be more useful to
others, (not to say to my self) than if he gave it to me by immediate
Illumination; because the knowledge which is gained the former way, may be more
easily imparted to another, than that which might be obtained by the latter.
For I can lead another into my knowledge of Scripture, which comes by the way
of industry and study, by showing him the reason that convinced me, and
discovering the method of my coming to it. Now Reason you know is a thing
common to you and me, and all Mankind. But I cannot go about to convince
another of that truth, which I know only by immediate Inspiration, unless I
could add the demonstration of power, by doing Miracles to confirm my
Doctrine; or had a mind to make my self as ridiculous, as those Champions of
the Roman Fraternity make themselves, who say, their Church is Infallible in
the Conclusion, though she may be mistaken in the Premises; which is as much as
to say, that they are sure their Church is always in the right, though
sometimes it is more than they can prove.

This may be said for coming to the knowledge of a difficult place by study,
the using of which way is principally the duty of spiritual Guides. Now the
advantage thereof being this, that they may easily communicate their knowledge
to others; there will be still less reason for private Christians, who want
leisure or ability to use the former means, to expect that God will teach them
the true sense by Inspiration, since he may lead them to it by his Ministers.
And for this way it may be said further, that it is agreeable to the
constitution of the Church, in which God has established an Order of men,
whose peculiar Office it is to feed the flock of Christ, Acts 20.28. and that
by taking care to instruct them out of the Word of God, not only in necessary
truths, but in such as are profitable too, so far as they are qualified to
understand and improve by them. For some are to be fed with milk only, and not
with meat, being not able to bear it, 1 Cor. 3.2. which words to my
understanding imply, that God's Ministers are to consider and judge of the
capacities of their people, and to instruct them in the meaning of those
Scriptures which contain the most proper truths for them to understand: And
consequently that these are bound to attend to the Ministry of their spiritual
Guides, whom God has set over them, and who are to judge what kind of meat
they are able to bear, what difficulties are fit to be propounded and explained
to them, and what truths are profitable for them to be instructed in, besides
those that are indispensibly necessary to be known. This is the Order which God
has appointed in his Church, for their edification who are least able to
improve their knowledge in the Scriptures, by their own reading and studying of
them, without further assistance: Therefore they must not expect knowledge by
immediate Revelations, but by attending to their instructions, whom God has
appointed to watch for the good of their Souls.

The conclusion of all which is this; that neither God's Ministers, nor any of
their Flock, neither the learned nor the unlearned, can ground any just
pretense to the gift of Interpreting Scripture by immediate Revelation, upon
this promise in St. Luke, that God will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask
him.

SECT. 2.
It cannot be concluded from this promise, that an absolute assurance that we
shall be saved, is obtainable by us, while we are upon the trial of our Faith
and Obedience. My reason is, because this assurance is neither needful as a
condition of Salvation, nor as a motive to our duty, nor as a means of comfort
in the performance of it. Not as a condition of Salvation; for no such
condition is required, buton the contrary we are exhorted to work out our
Salvation with fear and trembling; and how that and the like exhortations can
consist with supposing this Assurance to be a condition of being saved, I do
not so well understand. Besides, the friends of the contrary persuasion do not,
as far as I can discern, pretend to this Assurance by the Spirit, otherwise
than by having also the evidences of their regenerate estate cleared up to
their understandings: Wherefore a man must be actually in a state of salvation,
before he can be assured that he shall be saved: but now if assurance be a
necessary condition of being saved, then till we are assured, we are not in a
state of Salvation: So that if ever we be saved upon these terms, we must
either be assured, before we are assured; or be in a state of salvation, before
we are in a state of salvation. Which inconvenience those Divines who at first
placed the notion of justifying faith in this Assurance were so sensible of,
that they generally substituted that new notion of relying and rolling upon
Christ, in the room of the other. And therefore I had not revived this
Objection against it, but that I find Dr. Owen taxing the want of this
assurance, P. 529.
by the Name of Unbelief which will cast us under spiritual sloth and slumber;
for he opposes this Unbelief, to an assurance of our personal election, and
the confidence we have from thence that we shall not utterly and finally
miscarry. He does not indeed say in plain terms that we are not true Believers
till we are thus assured; but his words imply as much, though they look as if
he was loath to speak it out; and therefore I shall trouble you no further with
this matter.

2. It is not needful as a motive to our duty; for then the Scriptures do not
contain sufficient inducements to obedience, since the promises of eternal Life
there are all conditional; and by consequence, all the assurance we can have of
our reward from thence is but conditional. Besides, a greater assurance than
that, cannot be necessary to move us to well-doing in point of Gratitude; for
we have infinite reason to love God, and be thankful to him, because we may
escape the wrath to come upon the conditions of the Gospel: nor in point of
self-love; for what consideration, regarding this matter, can make us more
careful of our duty, than that our eternal welfare depends upon it? So that an
absolute assurance of the event would be rather unprofitable for this purpose,
because it would take off the force of a most considerable motive, wherewith
the Scripture persuades us so frequently to Diligence and Watchfulness, and
that is the motive of Fear. Our Savior's exhortation would no longer be of use
to us; Fear him which has power to cast into hell, yea, I say unto you, fear
him, Luke 12.5. nor any of the like nature. He told his disciples, What I say
unto you, I say unto all, Watch; which implies, that whilst we are in this
world, we are in a state of temptation and danger. Now as long as we are under
such circumstances, Assurance would on the other hand be rather unprofitable,
since it would supplant the usefulness and efficacy of so profitable a
consideration, as that of God's angry Justice against Impenitent sinners, and
backsliding Christians. But Dr. Owen says, P. 530.
Men do but bewray their Ignorance whilst they contend that the Assurance we
speak of does any way impeach, or does not effectually promote the industry of
Believers in all duties of Obedience. And to convince their ignorance, he
produces this admirable instance: Suppose a man that is on his Journey knows
himself to be in his right way, and that passing on therein he shall certainly
and infallibly come to his Journeys end, especially if he will a little quicken
his speed, as occasion shall require; will you say that this is enough to make
such a man careless and negligent, and that it would be much more to his
advantage to be lost and bewildred in uncertain Paths and Ways, not knowing
whither he goes, nor whether he shall ever arrive at his Journeys end? Common
experience declares the contrary. And common sense might have informed him that
this Similitude rather makes against his opinion than for it: For, it is one
thing for a man to know himself to be in the right way, and that passing on
therein he shall certainly and infallibly come to his Journeys end, i. e. on
supposition he keeps on in the right way, which he knows himself to be in; and
it is another thing to be infallibly assured that nothing can possibly turn him
out of the way, whether he quickens his speed as occasion shall require, or
whether he lets it alone. Now it is an Assurance of this kind, about which
(according to him) we bewray our Ignorance, by saying, it does not effectually
promote the industry of Believers; although there is this plain reason for it,
that the former assurance leaves the Traveller under an obligation to quicken
his speed, as occasion shall require, if he hopes to come to his Journey end;
but the latter leaves him under none at all. Wherefore I leave the Doctor to
judge what coherence there is between his Similitude, and that Reddition of it
which he has given us in these words: It is that Soul alone ordinarily, which
has a comfortable assurance of God's eternal immutable electing Love, and
thence of the blessed end of its own course of obedience, i. e. who is assured
of his personal Election, and consequently of his perseverance, that goes on
constantly and evenly in a course of holiness. Here indeed he minceth the
matter, by putting in the word Ordinarily; though he had no reason for it,
having concluded just before, that impressions of Fear, together with all
resolutions of Conversion grounded upon them, still come to nothing. But his
Similitude does not conclude that absolute assurance he speaks of, to be either
ordinarily or extraordinarily needful to quicken us in a course of holiness,
because it supposes the Travelers assurance of coming to his Journeys end to
be but conditional.

But from the Similitude he proceeds to the testimony of Scripture, viz. Heb.
6. from the 10th Verse. to the end of the Chapter, where he says, it is the very
design of the Apostle to explain and confirm this Doctrine, concerning the
need of absolute assurance to move us to holiness; which he says also is
declared elsewhere, I suppose he means in his Exercitations upon the Hebrews;
which Book I have not now by me; but the Bible I have, and to that I will go.
The words which I suppose he chiefly aims at in that Chapter, are these: And we
desire that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full assurance
of hope, unto the end, verse. 11. And let the meaning of them be judged by the
main scope of the Apostle in that Chapter; which was to exhort the Hebrews to
whom he wrote, to persevere in their Christian profession and conversation, and
that by two Arguments; the former (from v. 4. to v. 9.) being the desperateness
of their condition, who had revolted from their Christian profession: the
latter (from v. 10. to the end) being the certainty of their reward who should
persevere, as the Apostle was persuaded those Hebrews hitherto had done, verse.
9: whereof they had given good testimony by their liberality to the poor
Christians, verse. 10. Now he would have them still be followers of them who
through faith and patience inherit the promises, verse. 12. an example whereof
they had in Abraham, who after he had patiently endured, obtained the promise,
verse. 15. and then he proceeds to show, that our hope of an Inheritance is
grounded upon the Word and Oath of God, viz. that we shall obtain if we be not
slothful, but continue in Faith and Patience, as they did who now inherit.
Wherefore his discourse here clearly proceeds upon this supposition, that they
had no other assurance of their Reward, but upon condition of perseverance in
their Duty; and then the immutability of God's promise was their security. This
therefore the Apostle desired, that every one of them would show the same
diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end, i. e. that by
Perseverance they might arrive to the enjoyment of what they hoped for. For,
first of all, the full assurance of hope, was to be consequent upon their
showing the same diligence; for (...), etc. is the same as if he had said, that
we may obtain the full assurance, etc. Therefore it cannot from hence be
concluded, that this Assurance, whatever is meant by it, was antecedently
necessary to incite them to diligence. Wherefore, secondly, by this full
assurance of hope, we are to understand that Assurance which is the reward of
showing the same diligence to the end, i. e. the consummation of their hope, as
(...) signifies; and then the meaning of the Text is this, that the Apostle
would have them be diligent to the very last, that at last they might have
(...), etc. i. e. enjoy what they hoped for; or as it is expressed in the next
Verse, inherit the promises. This is that sense of the place, to which, as I
conceive, we are led by the words themselves, and by the scope of the Apostle
in this Chapter: And therefore from hence it cannot be concluded, that the
absolute Assurance Dr. Owen speaks of, is either ordinarily or extraordinarily
needful to incite us to holiness; and notwithstanding this place we may affirm,
that such assurance is more likely to impeach than to promote the industry of
Believers in all duties of obedience. But the Doctor appeals from the ignorance
of them that say thus, to the experiences of them that find it otherwise, i.
e. he appeals from us to himself and his party. Now if this were a good way of
arguing, then we who are so sensible of our own infirmities, as to know our
need of all sorts of Motives, not excepting that of the fear of God's
threatenings, to make us watchful against the temptations of sin, may appeal to
our own experiences, for the truth of what we say, from the ignorance of them
that say the contrary. But there is no necessity that you or we should be
trusted in this matter, when the Word of God is before us, which does so
vehemently urge us to fear him that can destroy both Body and Soul in Hell.
Wherefore notwithstanding all the contempt you cast upon serving God out of
this principle, we see our Savior thought it was needful for us, and therefore
we have good reason to believe that God will not be angry with us, because we
are afraid to provoke his angry Justice; nor disregard our care to do his will
ever the more, because we are moved thereunto by Fear, since it is an argument
that he himself persuades us withal; especially since the Scripture makes those
divine benefits, which challenge our utmost gratitude; and that goodness of God
toward us, which is so powerful an argument to make us love him with all our
hearts, a reason also why we should fear him. For if we may believe the
Psalmist, we are to fear God, because there is forgiveness with him, Psalm.
130.4. i. e. because the abuse of his Mercy will yet more provoke his
Displeasure, and bring a more dreadful punishment upon us. Lastly, since the
Scripture tells us that we are not only to begin, but to perfect holiness in
the fear of God; and that too, in consideration of those promises whereby we
are encouraged to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, 2
Cor. 7.1. all this makes me wonder at your presumption in saying, that by the
want of your absolute Assurance, Duties are discouraged, spiritual Endeavors
and Diligence are impaired, Delight in God weakened, and Love cooled; when the
Scripture is so plainly against you. And for your saying that we bewray our
Ignorance, while we make the fear of God's threatenings, lest they fall upon us,
needful to quicken our industry in all duties of obedience; might we not
requite you by saying more justly, that you do but bewray your confidence in
making your self wiser than Christ, who thought we stood in need of this
argument, and would have it take impression in our minds, as I have already
shown you? It is, you say, very sad that any man should so far proclaim his
inexperience and unacquaintedness with the nature of Gospel Grace, the Genius
of the New Creature, etc. as to be able thus to argue, viz. that the ^^^^rance
you speak of tends to carelessness, etc. But it is more sad, that men under a
pretense of greater acquaintance with Gospel Grace, should take upon them to
undermine the usefulness of so excellent a Grace of the Gospel, as the fear of
God's threatenings. Now as to that experience you have of the nature of
Gospel Grace, and of the New Creature, and which makes you so confident, I have
a good while considered what it should be, and cannot find a more probable
sense of your words than this, That you find your selves made new Creatures,
and put on to good works by an irresistible grace, which is the darling opinion
you contend so fiercely for in your Book. And if that be your meaning, and your
meaning be true, then I confess there is no need of the Argument of Fear to
constrain such as you: And I will add also, neither can there be any need of
any motive whatsoever to make you as good as you say, and, as, we hope, some of
you are.

3. Neither is this Assurance needful to encourage and comfort us while we are
performing our duty: nor must the want of it needs cast us into Perplexities,
Discouragement, and Despondency, as the Doctor will have it. P. 529.
For the Scripture supposes that the conditional promises of the Gospel are a
sufficient ground of comfort, while we are careful to keep the Commandments of
God; and if we are not, Comfort is a thing that belongs not to us. St. John
says, We declare the Gospel unto you, that you may have fellowship with us;
and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And
these things write we unto you, that your joy may be FVLL. If we say that we
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth, 1
John 1.3, 4, 6. Now that joy which is full, is encouragement enough to our
duty, and yields sufficient comfort in the performance of it: but if we may
believe the Apostle, this fullness of Joy may be grounded upon the conditional
terms of the Gospel, viz. that if we do not walk in darkness, we have
fellowship with God; if we obey the Gospel, God will love us; and if we
persevere therein, he will save us eternally: wherefore it may be had without
absolute assurance that we shall be saved. The Gospel will afford us no other
comfort than that which depends upon the performance of our duty; and seeing it
has given us abundant encouragement by the promises of God's Grace, to be
diligent in our duty, it has also abundantly provided for our comfort. But
it is a most unreasonable thing to pretend that we cannot begin to serve God
with any comfort, till we have a comfortable assurance, as the Doctor very
truly calls it, that we are personally elected, and that it is absolutely
impossible for us to miscarry: for this is a comfort proper only for them that
have finished their course, and are now ready to receive the Crown of
Righteousness. Suppose a good man should employ his Servant in a business of
some difficulty, promising him sufficient means to go through with it; and for
his reward, a considerable inheritance in his Family: If after he has taken the
charge, and before he has well begun it, he should come to his Master, and fall
down at his Feet, entreating him to settle that Inheri-upon him beforehand, and
to give him an absolute Estate in it, promising upon his ingenuity that he
would not be the less careful of his work, but think himself rather the more
obliged to perform it to the utmost of his power; sure his Master would tell
him that he desired an unreasonable thing, since he had never found him worse
than his word; and there was some reason to suspect that his impatience was a
sign of no honest intention in him; but that for his own part, he would give
him no better assurance of his reward, than upon condition, lest afterward he
must get somebody else to do his work. Now if for all this, the loitering
Servant should lie grovelling upon the ground, wringing his Hands, and beating
his Breast, protesting that he cannot go about his work, nor so much as think
of it with any joy, till he has full assurance that fair Estate he is so
enamoured withal, shall be his, whether he does his service required of him, or
whether he does it not; that nothing will comfort him, and keep up his Heart
from sinking within him, but such a comfortable Assurance; that he is all over
lame and stiff, and cannot stir a foot, nor move a hand in his Master's
service, as long as he has any the least fear of missing that Reward: By this
time we may suppose the good man to have a better opinion of his Servant than
to think him a Knave; but he would certainly conclude that he was not very
wise. The Parallel is so easy, that I need not make it. Indeed if a man be
persuaded that it was the purpose of God from all eternity, to bring a few men
to eternal Life by an irresistible power, and to leave the rest to unavoidable
ruin; he can no more hope to obtain the favor of God by doing what he can to
please him, than to reverse the Decrees of Heaven. Wherefore if he understands
his own principles, he must needs be under a great Agony, till he becomes
assured that he is one of that happy number, whom nothing, no not sin it self,
can separate from the love of God. But if we entertain honorable thoughts of
God, as we have great reason to do; if we believe that he seriously calls upon
us to repent, and would have us to be saved; and that he is ready to supply us
with Grace sufficient, 2 Cor. 12.9. then upon our care to please God in all
things, we shall never want so much comfort as we need, i. e. the joy of
well-doing, which is the testimony of a good Conscience.

Wherefore since an absolute assurance that we shall be saved is needful,
neither as a condition of Salvation, nor as a motive to Holiness, nor as a
means of Comfort; I may conclude also, that neither is this one of those
Graces, which our Savior has told us, God will give to them that ask him.

SECT. 3.
Lastly, that promise gives us no reason to expect that the Holy Spirit will
dictate extemporary Prayers to us. For, 1. Such Prayers themselves are not
necessary to the obtaining of our requests; for had that been so, then
certainly we should have been admonished in the Scriptures to pray Extempore
(as they call it) as well as to pray at all; and to beware of Book-prayers, and
the use of Forms, as much as of neglecting the Duty altogether, or performing
it in a careless slothful manner. And this the rather, because Forms of Prayer
and Thanksgiving were used in the Jewish Church; and because also the modesty
of many good Christians, and the inabilities of many more, would naturally
prompt them to the use of so ready a help to devotion, as pious and useful
Forms of Prayer are. But so far are we from finding any Command in Scripture to
pray upon sudden invention, that we find no preference given to this way,
above the use of Forms, but rather the contrary; for when our Savior taught
his Disciples to pray, he enjoined them the use of a Form, When ye pray, say,
Our Father, etc. Luke 11. But

2. Not to contend for the usefulness of Forms of Prayer, above leaving the
performance of this duty to extemporary effusions, but admitting the advantage
lay on the side of the latter, as some men persuade themselves; I affirm, that
the suggestions of the Holy Spirit are not necessary to the conception or
utterance of such Prayers. For first, they are not necessary to dictate what
things we are to pray for, since the Holy Scriptures may abundantly supply us
with the knowledge of them. Therefore I see no reason why Dr. Owen should say
with so much anger, that the Spirit of God (let the proud carnal world despise
it whilst they please, and at their peril) does graciously in the Prayers of
Believers, carry out and act their Souls and Minds in Desires and Requests,
which, for the matter of them, are far above their natural contrivances and
invention. This is somewhat obscure; but I would know what requests those are,
which for the matter of them, are above your natural contrivance and invention:
If they be agreeable to the Word of God, as I suppose you will say they are,
then either you knew them to be so, before you prayed, or you knew it not: If
you did, you have no reason to say that the matter of these requests was above
your natural contrivance and invention; if you mean thereby, as I think you do,
that when you were praying, you could not possibly have thought of those
requests, without a supernatural suggestion; for you confess that you knew well
enough before, that you were to pray for such things as then come to your
mind. But if you knew them not, then either you prayed for such things as you
did not then know to be agreeable to God's Word, or else you must suppose that
the Holy Spirit, which then gave you the first notice of them, did immediately
reveal to you that they were: And yet you said just before, I do not think that
the Spirit works supplications in us by an immediate supernatural divine
Afflatus, so as he inspired the Prophets of old, who oft-times understood not
the things uttered by themselves. Now that Revelation is as immediate and
supernatural, as the Inspiration of the Prophets was; and to make all even, you
say elsewhere, that (let profane and ignorant persons, whilst they please,
deride what they understand not, nor are able to disprove) the Holy Spirit of
God does guide Believers in and by the working and experience of Faith, to pray
for those things the depths of whose mysteries they cannot comprehend. So that
if you neither know them before, nor understand them afterward, I think you may
lay claim to the Afflatus of the old Prophets upon a double Title, by your own
account. Now I shall be so far from deriding your pretense, that I shall not go
about to disprove it; but only tell you, that we are not bound to believe you
to be Inspired men, unless you could prove it by some evident divine Testimony;
for want of which, P. 349.
you again appeal to your Experiences, and let us know withal, that he who has
not experience hereof, i. e. of having the matter of his Prayers suggested to
him by the Spirit, is a greater stranger to these things than will at length be
unto his advantage; which any man may say, who speaks more than he understands.
All that I contend for, is, that the matter of our Prayers needs not to be
dictated by Inspiration, and that because the Spirit teaches us by the written
Word of God, what we may, and what we ought to pray for. Nor,

2. The words in which we pray: for a ready use of our Mother Tongue will serve
us with them freely enough; so that a competent understanding of the chief
Heads of Religion, and the retaining in memory of a certain number of
Scripture-phrases and Passages of holy Writ, proper to be converted into
Petitions, together with a tolerable readiness of uttering ones thoughts in
proper words, will in some measure furnish a man with this gift; and being thus
qualified, he shall not need to have the matter or the words of his Prayers
dictated to him by the Holy Spirit, any more than of an ordinary discourse with
his Neighbor upon a subject which he is used to speak of. But if he has over
and above, a warm Invention, and a voluble Tongue, and a good share of
Assurance in himself, especially if he be apt to be heated with his own
thoughts and expressions, he is then qualified to excel in the way of
extemporary praying, and to pass for one that has a double measure of the
Spirit, with them who are apt to ascribe all Heat and Eloquence in matters of
Religion to a divine Principle. I do not speak this to undervalue any man's
abilities in this kind, but only to show that they may be set too high. As
for them that do so, they may undeceive themselves by observing the very
Prayers of those persons whose gifts this way are most remarkable; for although
these men are sometimes pleased to decry the use of Forms as not savouring of
the Spirit, yet it is plain enough, that their own Prayers, as spiritual as
they look, may be as purely Humane as the Prayers of a Book are by them judged
to be. For it is evident that they tie up themselves to those usual Topics of
Prayer, and Heads of Devotion, according to which Book-prayers (as they call
them) are framed. They usually begin with the Invocation of God, by the
acknowledgement of his Attributes, and then they run through the common places
of Confession, Petition, and Thanksgiving, which are the subjects that furnish
set Forms of Prayer. They confess the same Sins, they beg the same Graces, they
praise God for the same Blessings in all their Prayers. Now this is that which
I suppose none of them will deny; and then I think they must confess, that
their Prayers, as to the matter of them, are as formal as those of the Liturgy.
But further, as the matter of their Prayers is confined to certain Heads, so
for the most part they use the same expressions, only with this condition,
that they are laid in with such good store of them, that they need not use them
all at once, but may keep some against another time. And thus indeed they do
not tie up themselves to a form of Words, because they have as many Forms to
use, as may be made by the shifting and transposing of those Phrases which they
have in stock; and so many Forms they have more or fewer, according as that
stock increases more or less. And thus as we pray out of our Books, so do they
out of their Memories; and the difference between their way and ours (for I
speak now of those that do not use to talk idly and extravagantly in their
extemporary Prayers) is this, that ours has the advantage of Safety, and
theirs of Popularity and Ostentation.

But I am not able to divine what that is in Extemporary praying, as that is
distinguished from using a set Form, which must needs be ascribed to the
immediate suggestion of the Spirit: The matter of such Prayers is certainly the
most considerable, and the knowledge of that we see may come another way; which
seemed to be the mind too of the late Assembly, who although they threw aside
the Book of Common Prayers to make way for Extemporary Performances, yet
thought fit to give the Minister a Directory for the Matter, without leaving
him to be guided in that by the suggestion of the Holy Ghost: which made some
men think they might e'ne as well have prescribed a set Form, unless they
intended to leave the meaner office of supplying him with words, to the Holy
Spirit. But the words and phrases, as I have shown you, may come from a more
familiar Principle: And then there is nothing left, but that shifting and
changing of places, with them, which makes the great show of variety. But this
is so unworthy to be ascribed to a divine principle, that I may conclude
extemporary Prayers, allowing them to be never so useful and profitable, need
not to be dictated by Inspiration; and therefore no such Inspiration was
promised by our Savior when be promised the Gift of the Holy Spirit to all his
Disciples.

Thus have I shown that neither of these three things come under the promise in
St. Luke 11.13. For they are not Gifts of that kind which are there promised
to them that ask the Spirit. And I add, it may be strongly presumed, that they
are promised nowhere else, since they do not fall under this general promise of
the Spirit, which comprehends all the rest.

But because there are some men so vehemently persuaded that the Holy Spirit is
given for these purposes, that they reckon it little better than Blasphemy to
gainsay it; I shall proceed to those places of Scripture upon which such mighty
confidence is grounded, to see whether they afford any reason for it.

SECT. 4.
And first, as to those testimonies which are alleged out of the Bible, in
favor of interpreting or understanding Scripture by the immediate revelation
of the Spirit; I refer the Reader wholly to Dr. Hammond's Postscript concerning
New Light, and divine Illumination, annexed to his Paraphrase, etc. upon the
New Testament; where they are all considered, and shown to infer no such thing
as is desired to be concluded from them. But if after all, any man should say
that he knows by the Light of the Spirit, that Interpretation which Dr. Hammond
has given of those Texts, to be nothing better than carnal Reasoning, and come
over with Dr. Owen's talk of the Natural Man, and the impossibility of
understanding the spiritual sense of Gospel Truths, without the Almighty
Illumination of the Spirit; I confess it will prove a matter of as great
difficulty to reply to such a pretender, as it is to find out a way to
convince a Quaker: For what success can any man promise himself by replying to
a confident Enthusiast, who perpetually appeals from the most evident reasons,
the plainest testimonies of Scripture, and the most rational inferences from
them, to the testimony of the Spirit? However, this I will venture to say, that
if it were granted impossible to understand these Texts without that New Light,
which the Papists call an Infallible Spirit, and Dr. Owen and his party an
Almighty work of the Holy Ghost, for in effect they are both the same thing;
then it must be granted withal, that these Texts are impertinently produced, to
convince us who do not pretend to this Infallible Spirit, that there are a sort
of men upon whom God bestows that privilege. For that theirs is the true
sense, cannot be proved to us, but by rational means, i. e. either by arguing
from the original words, or the Context, or parallel places, or the like; or
else by some clear divine testimony proper to convince us that they in
particular are inspired, such as real and undoubted Miracles. This latter way
is pretended to only by the Papists; and though the frauds they have been
deprehended in, sufficiently show those amongst them that have raised the noise
of their Miracles to be Impostors; yet it is to be acknowledged that they
pretend to offer a rational means of Conviction, that their Church interprets
the Scripture by an infallible Spirit; which the men I am at present speaking
of do not offer in the least. As for the former way of convincing us by
rational evidence from the Text it self, it is that which we are ready to
submit to, and then I desire Dr. Hammond's interpretation may be considered.
But if they neither use this way nor the other, nor any like it, it is an
absurd thing to produce those testimonies of Scripture at all to convince us by
them; because upon these terms it is utterly impossible they should convince
us, till we have received that New Light which they themselves pretend to. And
this is all that I can hope to bring them to, viz. to confess their own
impertinency in offering any testimony of Scripture for the justifying of their
pretense; and that when all is done they have nothing to say, but the Spirit
tells them this is the true sense and meaning of Scripture, without enabling
them to make it appear to any body else. And so we are to let them go, either
for errant Hypocrites, or rank Enthusiasts, whom the State has reason to be
jealous of, lest they should have some dangerous design against the Government,
or be prompted to Sedition and Rebellion by the heats of their own fancies, or
the suggestions of the Devil, which by an Enthusiast may be so easily mistaken
for the Impulses of the Holy Ghost.

If last of all it should be said, that although God has not promised this
Inspiration we are speaking of, yet for ought we know, he may do more than he
has promised, and reveal the true sense of what passages in Scripture he
pleases to whom he pleases: I answer, that as I am no way obliged to
contradict this supposition, so withal I must add, 1. That supposing a man to
be thus inspired, he cannot prove to another that he is so, otherwise than by
Miracles; which if he does not, neither can he justly expect to convince
another that the sense revealed to him is the true sense, otherwise than by
such rational means as he must have used if it had not been revealed: and 2.
That therefore if one man has nothing to say in conclusion for his
interpretation of a place of Scripture, but that the Spirit led him to it, and
that to put any other sense upon it, is the fruit of carnal reasoning, and of
the wisdom of the flesh, and a sign of Unregeneracy, and the state of a
natural man that has not the Spirit of God, which is always Dr. Owen's last
refuge; and another plainly shows, either by the words themselves, or by the
design of the discourse to which they belong, or by some other way apt to
convince a rational man that the foresaid meaning does not belong to them, but
one that is different from it: In this case I say the former is convinced to
pretend falsely to Inspiration; and in plain English, he must be a very Fool
that will prefer his interpretation before the other. And so much for that
matter.

SECT. 5.
2. The principal passages of Scripture, which seem to imply Assurance to be a
gift bestowed upon the regenerate by the Holy Spirit, are two: The first I
shall mention is that of St. Paul to the Ephesians, Grieve not the holy Spirit
of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. Now by the
Believers being sealed, etc. some have thought that a testimony of the Spirit,
whereby they are absolutely assured that they shall be saved, must needs be
meant. But first, the words are fairly capable of another meaning, viz. that
the gifts of the Holy Spirit, bestowed upon Believers, were an evidence that
God was now preparing them for the Kingdom of Heaven, since upon their
believing he had blessed them with so many advantages in order thereunto, and
therefore that he had now a peculiar right to their obedience: For this we know
is one use of sealing, to distinguish that which of right belongs to our
selves, from what is common. Thus are all Believers marked out for God's
portion and peculiar, by the eminent advantages of the Gospel which he has
made them partakers of: and therefore are they said to be sealed by the Holy
Spirit, because the Gospel is a divine Revelation, and the ministration of the
Gospel is the ministration of the Spirit. Thus when it is said that God the
Father has sealed Christ, John 6.27. the meaning is, that by the descent of
the Holy Ghost upon him, he owned him to be his Son, that great Prophet, who
was to declare the will and pleasure of God to men. In like manner God's giving
his Holy Spirit to them that believe in Christ, is, as St. Chrysostom speaks
excellently upon this place, his marking them out to be a Royal Flock; it is a
token of their peculiar designation to the service and obedience of God, and a
pledge of that Inheritance, 2 Cor. 1.22. they shall be rewarded with, if they
walk as becomes the Gospel. But all this is very far from inferring an absolute
assurance in them who are thus marked out for God's people, that they shall
infallibly persevere in that duty, which belongs to their peculiar relation to
God, and the performance whereof is the condition of receiving the Inheritance.
And therefore such assurance cannot be proved to be spoken of in this place.
But, 2. The words are not only capable of that sense which I have offered; but
their coherence with the foregoing and following verses, and the force and
reason of St. Paul's Exhortation, requires it: Let him, says he, that stole,
steal no more; and let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, etc.
Let all bitterness and wrath, etc. be put away. The Argument wherewith he
enforces these Exhortations is this, that otherwise they would grieve the Holy
Spirit, by which they were sealed, etc. i. e. they would plainly contradict the
end for which God had bestowed the gifts of the Spirit upon them, who were thus
marked out to be his Servants and Children. This would be to grieve the Holy
Spirit, i. e. to bereave themselves of his gracious presence, and to come in
danger of being excluded for ever out of the Rest of God; as it was with the
Israelites in the Wilderness, with whom God was grieved forty years; and he
swore in his wrath, that they should not enter into his rest, Heb. 3. And the
note which the Apostle makes thereupon is this, that we are made partakers of
Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end, verse.
14. i. e. if we hold on resolvedly and patiently in the course of a Christian
life. It is the like Argument which the Apostle uses more concisely to the
Ephesians, when he disswades them from impure and evil courses, lest they
grieve the Holy Spirit of God, and by consequence never enter into that Rest
God had designed for them. But this consideration could have been of no force
at all, if they had been absolutely sure of their Inheritance, as some from
these words have pretended they were; whereas it must be granted to be very
prevailing, on supposition, that by sealing is here meant, their being, as it
were, consecrated to a life of obedience by the Spirit of God which they were
made partakers of; for then they would find little excuse, and a greater
punishment for their unchristian practices, if, being so greatly obliged, they
should prove unthankful and disobedient.

The second place is that of St. Paul to the Romans, The Spirit it self bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God, Romans 8.16. But, 1.
This testimony of the Spirit, Vid. Knowl. of Jesus Christ, p. 389.
is that public Testimony which was given by the Spirit, that true Christians
are the Sons of God; for it is said in the former Verse that they had received
the spirit of Adoption; which being opposed to the spirit of Bondage, shows the
Apostle's meaning to be this, that the Christians were the Children of the
promise, and (...), of the Freewoman, as he expresses it, Gal. 4.28. whereas
the Jews, those of them that were under the Law, answered the condition of
Ishmael, who was (...), the Son of the Bondwoman, to whom there was no promise
of an Inheritance. Now that none but true Christians were the Sons of God, and
Heirs of the promised Inheritance, was that which was testified against the
Jews, by the Miracles and supernatural gifts of the Apostles and primitive
Believers, i. e. by the testimony of the Spirit. And then this Text is very far
from intending any immediate testimony of the Holy Ghost to our minds that we
are God's Children. And yet, 2. All that is here affirmed regards only our
present state, that we are the Children of God; which if we be, it is certainly
possible for us to be assured of it: nay, we cannot be ignorant of our
spiritual condition, without our own fault, since we have so plain a rule to
try our selves by as the Word of God; By this we know that we know him, if we
keep his commandments. Now our keeping of God's Commandments, is that which our
own spirit or Conscience must witness; and then upon this condition the
Revelations of the Gospel (wherein, to be sure, is the witness of the Spirit)
witness to us that we are the children of God; and if children, then heirs,
etc. All which may very well be, without our believing that it is absolutely
impossible for us to forfeit our Inheritance by any future miscarriage; and
therefore from this place it cannot be concluded, that such assurance is given
by the Holy Spirit.

SECT. 6.
3. For the pretense of uttering the suggestions of the Spirit in Extemporary
Prayers, I know likewise but two places of Scripture commonly urged in favor
of it. The former is St. Paul's saying, I will pray with the spirit, and I will
pray with the understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.15. Which I confess is a Text that
I never heard produced for this pretense, but by those that have nothing but
mere zeal to defend their opinions withal, I mean some of the people that
follow Dr. Owen and his Brethren of the Separation: I do not wonder that after
they have been possessed with a strong persuasion that the Spirit of God helps
them to Words, or Sense, or both, in their Prayers, they conceit this Text to
be a proof for their purpose; for the words sound that way, if a man believes
what they do, about Extemporary Prayers, beforehand. But I have often wondered
that they who take upon them to be their Guides, who pretend to learning, and
if they minded the Text at all, can hardly be ignorant that the praying by the
Spirit there meant, was using the gift of Tongues in Prayer; and the praying by
the Understanding, was praying in a Language understood by the people; that
they, I say, should suffer their people to run away so long together, with a
belief that this Text gives them Authority to expect that the Spirit of God
will take care they shall speak good sense in their Extemporary Prayers; this
is that which I cannot but admire. I do not say they are all so dishonest; but
I have reason to think that many of them are; and they cannot deny it, I
suppose, unless they grant that we are acquainted with the talk of their
Followers, better than they themselves are.

But dismissing this place, which is so very wide from the purpose which it is
produced for, I proceed to the second, which indeed carries a more likely
appearance; and in the judgment of Dr. Owen, contains a sufficient proof, that
the Spirit of God carries out the minds of Believers in requests, which for
the matter of them, are far above their natural contrivance and invention, i.
e. that when Believers venture to pray Extempore, the Spirit of God prompts
them as they go along, to pray for such things, as otherwise could never have
come to their minds. For his words signify thus much at least; if not, that
the very knowledge of those things is communicated to them at that very instant
before they pray for them, and that by immediate Revelation. The place is this:
Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities; for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us
with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that searches the Hearts,
knows what is the mind of the Spirit; because he makes intercession for the
Saints according to the will of God, Romans 8.26, 27. I shall endeavor to show
the true meaning of these words, and leave it to the Reader, whether the
foresaid opinion of the Doctor can be concluded from them. His other thoughts
of this matter I shall not pretend to confute, because I do not so well
comprehend what he means, viz. when he tells us with respect to the subject of
Prayer, the sanctified Heart, that by the Groans which cannot be uttered, are
meant, P. 385.
that bent, frame, inclination, and acting of the Inward man in prayer from the
power of the Spirit, which they themselves in whom they are wrought, do not
fathom nor reach the depth of; unless he means that a man may desire the Graces
of God with inexpressible vehemence, and yet not understand that he does so: If
he intends this, I need only to tell him, that because these groanings are
unutterable, it follows not that they are unintelligible. If he intends it not,
I do not fathom nor reach the depth of his meaning. Again when he tells us,
with respect to the object of Prayer, that the mysterious things which
Believers pray for, are now made nigh, now realized unto them; I do not well
know whether he means now at their Prayers, or now at some other time before.
If when they are praying, it is somewhat hard to conceive that the Spirit
represents the truth of those things in and by the Word, as he says; if at
some other time before, then certainly the things themselves were represented
before too, and they knew they were to pray for these things; and then it is
above my apprehension how the matter of their Prayers should be far above their
natural contrivance and invention, P. 349.
either just before, or while they are praying. It seems strange likewise, that
by the Prayers of men low and weak in their notional apprehension of things, we
may see them led into Communion with God in the highest and holiest mysteries
of his Grace; and that they have an experience of the life and power of the
things themselves in their own Hearts. For what have we to see this by, but
their Words, and Gestures? etc. But it is past my reach, how by these helps we
can see that which he told us before, God only sees, viz. the fervent workings
of the New Creature, when acted by the Holy Ghost in supplications. And to do
him right, he seems not to ascribe the extemporary utterance, but only the
present conception of matter, to the Spirit. Other observations of this kind
might be made, which I shall not clog the Reader withal. But upon the whole
matter, Romans 8.26, 27. seems to me much easier to be understood than any thing
that he says with relation to it; and unless he shall please to explain
himself further, one may sooner, I think, understand St. Paul than him, though
there be considerable difficulties in the Text which need an Interpreter.

Therefore I shall, 1. Consult the sense of good Authors, and such as the
Doctor, I hope, will not take upon him to say were Proud, Carnal, Ignorant, P.
349, 385.
and Profane persons; words which he throws so fiercely about him whilst he is
discoursing of Prayer, the very mention of which one would think should have
taught him more meekness. 2. I shall compare what they say with that which
seems to me to be the design of St. Paul in the foregoing and following
Verses. This I take to be a good way, both to understand the Text, and to avoid
the Doctor's displeasure, if we should not altogether agree about the meaning
of it at last.

St. Chrysostom says, that in those words, Chrysostom. in Romans 8. Hom. 14.
Likewise the Spirit helps our infirmities; for, etc. St. Paul instructs us
not always to judge those things profitable which seem to be so, (...), to mere
natural Reason: For it was likely that they who suffered so many evils, wished
a relaxation, asking it as a grace from God. But says he, do not think that
would be best, which presently appears to be so: upon this very account we need
divine assistance; for man knows little or nothing what is for his welfare;
wherefore the Apostle says, We know not, etc. And then he shows this was St.
Paul's case too, when he prayed that the Thorn in the Flesh might be removed, 2
Cor. 12. but obtained it not: For he proves that this Thorn were the (...), and
(...) the Dangers and Persecutions he lay under.

August. Ep. ad Probam, 121. c. 14.
In like manner St. Austin tells us, It is not to be believed that St. Paul, or
those to whom he spoke, knew not the Lord's Prayer; why should he therefore
say, We know not what to pray for as we ought? but because temporal afflictions
are mostly profitable, either to cure us of the swelling of Pride, or, etc. but
we, not considering this, desire to be exempted from them. From which ignorance
the Apostle shows himself not to have been free, when lest he should be exalted
by the abundance of Revelations, there was given to him a Thorn in the Flesh, a
Messenger of Satan to buffet him; and he besought the Lord thrice that it might
depart from him, herein not knowing what to pray for as he ought -- Therefore
in these tribulations, which may be either profitable or hurtful, we know not
what to pray for, i. e. whether it be better to have them removed or not; and
yet, because they are hard to be born, we do as men altogether desire to have
them removed. And not long after he says, Ad Probam, c. 15. De Anim. etc.
Orig. Lib. 4.
The Spirit causes the Saints to intercede with unutterable groans, inspiring
them with the desire of a thing yet unknown, which they patiently expect; for
how should that which is desired, be uttered when it is yet not known?

Hierom in locum.
To the same purpose St. Hierom says, the Spirit helps our Infirmities, that
we should not desire earthly but heavenly things; we know not what to pray for:
They are commonly hurtful things which we think profit us, and therefore our
desires are not granted -- as he says himself elsewhere: For this thing I
besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from me. He makes intercession
for the Saints. Here, says he, St. Paul by the Spirit, means the grace of the
Spirit: For the Spirit intercedes, because he makes us to pray with
unutterable groans, as God is said to try us that he might know us; that is,
that he might make us know our selves. And to intercede according to the will
of God, is to desire Holy and not Secular things.

Thus St. Ambrose (if he was the Author of those Commentaries:) We know not,
Ambrose Com. in R^m.
etc. for we are deceived, thinking those things will profit us which we
desire, when they are not profitable: and here he uses the same instance
likewise of St. Paul's desiring that the Messenger of Satan might depart from
him; to which he adds that of James and John desiring the pre-eminence in
Christ's Kingdom, who asked they knew not what. But withal he supposes, that
the Spirit does properly intercede with God in our behalf, that we may have
such things as are profitable for us.

Theodoret says, Theod. in Romans
the Apostle speaks to this purpose; Pray not to be delivered from troubles,
for you know not what is profitable for you, as God does who governs all.
Resign up your selves to him that holds the Helm of the Vni^^^se, etc. But,
says he, by the Spirit is meant the grace of the Spirit, which is given to
them that believe; for being thereby stirred up, we pray more earnestly, etc.
And he adds, that the Apostle spoke this from the experience of what he had
suffered; [referring probably to that passage concerning the Messenger of
Satan, so often already mentioned.]

To mention no more, Orig. in Ep. ad Romans Lib. 7.
Origin thus paraphraseth upon the Text: Sometimes through infirmity we desire
things contrary to our welfare; as a sick man would have the Physician
prescribe him what is agreeable to his present appetite, instead of that which
is for his health; so in this infirm state of ours, we ask sometimes what is
not expedient for us. And I [Paul] who had the Messenger of Satan given me,
thrice asked, etc. not knowing what I asked; and received this answer, My grace
is sufficient for thee -- The Flesh lusts against the Spirit; but when the
Spirit of God sees our spirit striving against the Flesh, he reaches out his
help -- Now, says he, if any one can find out a more sublime sense than this,
let him enjoy it to himself. But they are to be admonished who desire of God
the prosperity, etc. of this life; because in these respects they know not what
to pray for as profitable; for it often happens that these present advantages,
etc. tend to the harm of the soul. And therefore that is to be minded by us
which we are taught in the Lord's Prayer; Thy Will be done. As to that clause,
who searches the Hearts, he says, it shows that God regards the mind more
than the words wherewith we pray. As to the unutterable groans, he says, How
can that which the Spirit of God speaks to God, be uttered by us, when
sometimes that which our own spirit feels and understands cannot be expressed
by us in words?

Now I believe we shall not readily meet with a place of Scripture containing
any matter of difficulty, in the interpretation whereof the Fathers do more
unanimously conspire, than they do in their sense of this. I could easily have
added more Authorities to the same purpose, if I had pleased; but I hope these
will be sufficient to satisfy any sober person, that that interpretation of
this Text which I prefer before Dr. Owen's, is not fit to be called presently
the reasoning of the carnal and unregenerate man; for I shall offer no other
than what is agreeable to the sense of these Christian Writers, who may with
the help of a little charity, I think, pass for regenerate men.

The sum of what they say toward the interpretation of the Text is this:

1. That we ought in the general to pray for what is best for us.

2. That in some cases we know not what is best; and they are those which
concern our present state in this world, with regard to afflictions on the one
side, and ease and prosperity on the other. And thus St. Austin prevents that
Objection of the Christians knowing the Lords Prayer, by restraining the
ignorance of what we are to pray for to the matter of temporal afflictions.

3. That our infirmities here mentioned, consist in this ignorance, together
with our proness to desire Health, Riches, and Ease, etc. and the natural
aversation we have to Pain and Trouble, when as yet God may see that the former
will be hurtful, the latter profitable for us.

4. By the Spirit's making intercession for us, they all understand his
exciting us to pray for our selves, excepting St. Ambrose, who supposes the
Spirit to intercede properly for us, that God would bestow better things on us,
than we sometimes ask for our selves: and Origin seems to understand both.

5. That the Spirit's helping our infirmities, is his inciting of us to pray
for heavenly things, and not for earthly, as St. Hierom says; which is to pray
(...) according to the pleasure of God: not as if it were unlawful to pray at
all for any temporal blessings; but that we are to be content if we be denied;
because those things, viz. deliverance from Afflictions, etc. which we think
would profit, may hurt us, as he observes. And therefore all our desires of
this kind, are to be limited by that Petition which our Lord has taught us:
Thy Will be done, as Origin notes. In short, by the scope of what they all say,
this seems to be their meaning, that the Spirit helps our infirmities, by
increasing our desires after heavenly things, by making us more indifferent
about earthly matters, and content with afflictions, if God sees them good for
us, seeing his Grace is sufficient for us, as he told St. Paul when he so
earnestly desired to be delivered from the Messenger of Satan; which is the
Instance they all use.

6. By the unutterable groans, some of them understand that inexpressible
fervency of mind, enkindled in good men by the Spirit of God, wherewith they
desire heavenly things; and which, wherever it is, will certainly abate our
desires of worldly advantages, and make us less weary of afflictions. Others of
them suppose the proper intercessions of the Spirit to be understood by them.
And St. Austin, in particular, supposes that by the unutterable groans, is
meant, the desire of that state and condition in this world which is best for
us: For, says he, how should that which is desired be uttered, when it is yet
unknown? i. e. when under an affliction, we pray for what God sees best for
us, not knowing whether that may prove to be the continuance, or removal of it?

Thus you see how they agree in the main about this matter; the interpretation
of Origin himself, who could not learn it from any of the rest, falling in with
theirs; and yet he was apt to find as many mysteries in the Bible as another
man; but he leaves them that could light upon a more sublime sense of these
words, to enjoy their opinion by themselves.

Now it is very plain that the supposition upon which they go in interpreting
the Text this way, is this, that our not knowing what to pray for belongs to
the case of present afflictions, which for ought we know may be more profitable
for us, than to be exempted, or rescued from them. And now I come to show that
this Supposition, and the Interpretation built upon it, is agreeable to the
design of the Apostle in that part of the Chapter, wherewith this Text has a
plain coherence; which was the second thing propounded.

In the 17 verse St. Paul begins to comfort the Christians under their
afflictions, showing them that they who suffered with Christ, should be also
glorified together. This consideration affords two arguments of Patience, which
he distinctly notes: The former, being the transcendent greatness of that Glory
which they hoped for: The latter, the profitableness of their present
sufferings to prepare them for that Glory. 1. The nature of the Glory it self:
For I reckon, says he, that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy
to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us, v. 18. Between v.
19. and v. 24 there are some difficult passages, viz. the creature being
subject to vanity, and the groaning of the creation, etc. which are made very
clear and plain in Dr. Hammond 's Annotations, where that which I have here
supposed to be the general meaning of the whole Period; is particularly
explained; and therefore because I am unwilling to entertain the Reader with
the solution of difficulties, somewhat remote from my main design; I refer
him: thither.
From which Verse to the 24th, he proceeds to show that as in God's good time
the Heathens would be rescued from their Idolatries, to be made partakers of
this Glory; so the Christians should be rescued from their sufferings also,
under which they now groaned. Wherefore at present he would have them take
comfort in the hope of that deliverance and Glory, which was yet to come: For,
says he, we are saved by hope, etc. v. 24. But if we hope for that we see not,
then do we with patience wait for it, v. 25. 2. He persuades them to patience
yet further, by the profitableness of their present sufferings: We know that
all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the
called according to purpose, verse. 28. that is, who with full purpose and
resolution adhere to the profession whereunto they are called, notwithstanding
all these sufferings: For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many
brethren. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he
called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified,
verse. 29, 30. i. e. And it is not only true that God will convert these
sufferings which now befall us into a means of our inestimable advantage; but
we are to consider also, that those whom God fore-knew or fore-approved for his
Children, were fore-appointed to sufferings, that in this respect also we might
be like our elder Brother Christ Jesus, who has shown us this way of coming to
the joy that is set before us; wherefore we are not to wonder if we be called
to actual sufferings now, upon our undergoing of which with faith and patience,
God will justify and own us for sincere persons, and reward us eternally. What
shall we say then to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us?
verse. 31. etc. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword? As it is written, For thy sake are we killed, etc. verse. 35. Nay, in all
these things, which through the divine disposition tend to our good, we are
more than Conquerours, verse. 37. etc. This is the second argument used by the
Apostle, viz. the profitableness of afflictions themselves, to them that love
God; which is fully expressed, verse. 28. and vehemently urged to the end of the
Chapter. But the Apostle makes way for this argument by what he says verse. 26,
27. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities; for we know not what to
pray for as we ought, etc. For it is plain by those words likewise, also, that
he was now offering to them a further consideration, having just before
concluded that motive to patience, from the Deliverance and Glory which they
hoped for. And that which he proceeds to show, is the mistake of thinking that
it were at least better for the present to be exempted from these sufferings;
since in matters of this nature we know not what to pray for as we ought; but
the Spirit it self makes intercession for us, that we may have what is best;
and then if sufferings befall us, we know they are most profitable for us; and
consequently that all things work together for good, etc. Now by this time I
think it is very plain, that the supposition upon which the Fathers went,
restraining the ignorance of what we are to pray for, to the matter of present
afflictions, is not only coherent with the design of the Apostle in this
place, but that the context does indeed require it. I shall only add, that
the words themselves, (...), do properly signify the Spirit relieveth us under
our afflictions; for (...) here translated infirmity, See Dr. Ham. An.
is very frequently used in the New Testament to signify Misery and Distress.

To conclude therefore, if with Origin, St. Ambrose, and Dr. Hammond, you
suppose the intercession of the Spirit to be understood in the proper sense,
the Text may be thus paraphrased. The Gospel of Christ affords us this relief
against impatience under afflictions, that whereas we know not whether
Afflictions, or Deliverance and Ease be best for us at present, and
consequently, as to these respects, know not what to pray for in particular;
the Spirit of Christ himself intercedes for us with [(...)] unuttered
groanings, i. e. earnestly and powerfully: ( for by an inexpressible desire we
commonly understand one that is vehement.) And God who searches our Hearts,
and understands that we do sometimes desire such things as tend not to our
advantage, knows also what the Spirit intercedes for, and [(...)] that he
requests in our behalf, better things for us, than we do for our selves; for we
are ever ready to desire [(...)] such things as seem best to man; but he asks
[(...)] what God knows to be best for us.

But if with St. Austin and the rest, we understand by the intercession of the
Spirit, his making us to intercede for our selves, as we may without swerving
in the least from the main scope of the Text, or excluding the former sense;
then the words admit of this Paraphrase. Whereas when we pray for deliverance
from affliction, we know not whether it be best for us to have our desire
granted; the Holy Spirit inclines us to an entire submission of our selves to
the divine Will; and together with our most earnest prayers of that kind,
there is all along mingled that secret and more vehement desire of what God
sees best for us; which is a grace of the Holy Spirit, whereby the forwardness
of our Appetites after the ease and comforts of this world* is corrected and
governed. Now though this earnest request be not uttered, the particular matter
of it being not yet known, since we are ignorant what will be most profitable
for us, yet he that searches the Heart, understands it perfectly, and knows
that we vehemently desire not so much that deliverance, or worldly advantage,
which is the matter of our uttered groans and Prayers, as that good which the
Spirit moves us to pray for, and which we cannot particularly utter, that
namely which God sees best for us. This indeed is a desire of the Heart, which
proceeds from a divine cause; and God is so pleased with it, that he will not
fail to grant it; so that if afflictions continue, we know they shall work
together for good, etc. And thus the Holy Spirit relieveth us under our
infirmities and distresses, by bringing all our worldly appetites under
submission to the pleasure of divine Wisdom and Goodness.

And thus much for the interpretation of this Text, which I have been the more
careful in considering, because it is perpetually produced to justify the
pretenses of those men that ascribe their extemporary inventions and
contrivances in Prayer, to the suggestion of the Spirit of God, and make it
little less than Blasphemy for any man to contradict them. I have by good
Authorities, and by the scope of the place, and by the importance of the words
themselves, clearly shown that it belongs to another very distinct matter, and
is consequently incapable of being made use of for their purpose. And now
whether he that uses pious Forms of prayer, be not capable of that relief from
the Spirit which is here mentioned, ^ leave it to every sober Reader to judge;
but will not so far question his understanding, or presume upon his patience,
as to help him any further to do it.

Thus have I at last considered those places of Scripture, which are commonly
alleged in favor of those three pretended gifts of the Spirit, which I showed
before were not contained under the general promise of the Holy Spirit, Luke
11.13. Amongst many other reasons inducing me to this work, I shall mention but
these two.

1. To vindicate the Holy Spirit from those dishonours that are daily done to
him, either while wicked and unrighteous men attribute their confidence that
they are personally elected to the testimony of the Spirit; or while men
impatient of contradiction, ascribe their absurd interpretations of the
Scripture to the Revelation of the Spirit; or while men low and weak in their
national apprehensions of things, impute the vanity which they frequently utter
in their Prayers, to the impulse and suggestion of the Spirit. 2. To take off
the minds of Christians from the expectation of such gifts from the Spirit, as
are nowhere promised, that they may more zealously pursue after those Graces
which are indeed promised, and without which they cannot be saved. And thus
much for that part of my undertaking, which concerned those Effects for the
producing of which the Holy Spirit is promised.

CHAP. VI. Concerning those to whom the Holy Spirit is promised and given.
SECT. 1.
TO speak clearly to this matter, we are in the first place to observe, that
the Operations of the Holy Spirit are either,

1. Such as prevent our belief of the Gospel, and our very first desires to
know the will of God, and to live according to it; this is that Grace which
depends not upon our believing, being the cause of those dispositions which I
have shown to be preparatory and antecedently necessary to Faith it self.

2. Such as follow after, to cherish and improve such good beginnings in us,
and to endue us with all qualifications necessary to eternal Life. Now the
promises of this Grace are conditional; such is that promise in St. Luke 11.13.
and the condition is plainly expressed, God will give the Holy Spirit to them
that ask him, who are already convinced of the Truth, and desire to do the Will
of God, and pray for divine assistance. Such also is that promise in 2 Cor. 6.
that God will dwell in us; which depends upon our being the sincere Disciples
of Christ, and cleansing our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit. These are the principal promises of Grace made to us in the Gospel; and
it is evident we have no right to the former, but on condition of our believing
in Christ, and owning our selves to be his Disciples; nor to the latter, if we
do not obey the Gospel. And from hence we may learn where the true difference
lies between common and special Grace, which is a distinction, I doubt, oftener
used than understood. That special Grace implies an higher degree of favor
toward them upon whom it is bestowed, than is signified by common Grace, is
obvious to every man's understanding. Now there are indeed diverse promises of
such Grace to be met with in the Gospel, and which will be in force to the end
of the world; but they are all of them conditional, and made with respect to
some Qualification, without which they do not belong to us. Wherefore special
Grace is that which is suspended upon the performance of some condition; and
consequently, that Grace to which such a condition is not required beforehand,
is common. But since there are several degrees of Grace, proportionable to the
several* Qualifications of men: For instance, since more Grace is promised to
Believers than to Unbelievers; and yet more to sincere Christians, than to mere
Professors: The distinction is to be understood in this Latitude, that the same
degree of Grace which is special in one respect, may be common in another; for
that Grace whereof Faith is the condition, is common in respect of that which
obedience qualifies a Believer to receive; as it is special, with regard to
that which does not require the condition of Faith, and which an Unbeliever is
capable of. Wherefore the distinction is not accurate enough, to be nice
withal: for if it be strictly held to, there are several instances of divine
Grace that will not fall under it; because then only the first Operations of
the Spirit upon our minds, preventing all good inclinations in them, will be
common Grace; and those only which crown our obedience with perseverance,
special. But admitting the former Latitude, the distinction will reach every
Operation of the Holy Spirit upon our minds; and the difference between that
Grace which is common, and that which is special, may be so placed, as that we
may understand one another when we use the distinction.

And then I offer it to be considered, whether it be not most agreeable to the
Scriptures, to place the difference between them in this; that common Grace is
that whereby we are led to the faith of Christ, and the profession of
Christianity, and so includes all those goods desires that are excited, and all
those good dispositions that are produced in the minds of men before they
believe; and special Grace, that which is given to Believers only, for the
strengthening of their Faith, the increasing of their good desires, and the
enabling of them to live according to the Gospel. For although there are
degrees of that Grace to which Faith is pre-required, and of that which is
antecedent to Faith, our Savior's rule, To him that has shall be given,
holding equally in both cases; yet it is observable, that the promise of the
Holy Spirit, in St. Luke, and all the particular promises of that nature in the
Gospel, are given only to Believers; and that we have no right to them but
upon the performance of some condition required in the New Covenant. Now since
there are peculiar promises of the Holy Spirit, which belong only to them that
believe, it seems agreeable to the Scriptures, to suppose Faith to be the first
condition of special Grace, and consequently that Grace to be common, which
requires not the performance of any condition undertaken by us when we are
admitted into the Covenant.

It is in this sense that I shall understand the distinction, because otherwise
I think it will often prove a Distinction without Difference, since in the
strict meaning of the words, the same Grace may be both common and special.
Thus also we may understand the difference between preventing and cooperating
Grace, and between preparing and perfecting Grace: For these distinctions
express the same thing in other respects, that is meant by common and special
Grace. For that Grace which we call common, because it is given without that
condition which is necessary to qualify us for greater Grace, is also said to
be preventing Grace, with respect to God, who is the first cause of all that is
good in us; and likewise preparing Grace, with regard to some further
improvement, that we are thereby made capable of attaining: And then
cooperating and perfecting Grace, are but other words expressing the same
thing that is meant by special Grace, with a like difference of respects. So
that these distinctions are to be understood with the same Latitude, and used
with the same caution that the former is. If I am mistaken in this, they are
more subtle and intricate than I was aware of.

But the accurate use of these distinctions is not that which I contend for; it
is sufficient for me if I can make my meaning to be understood; which is this:
That although Faith be an effect of divine Grace, yet there is an higher
measure of Grace promised to us if we believe, and a greater than that, if we
sincerely obey the Gospel. The greater promises of Grace are made to those that
are in a good way already; and the better that way is in which they are, the
more plentiful communications of the divine Spirit are they capable of. It is
indeed impossible to assign the several degrees of that Grace, which is
bestowed upon men, under such qualifications as the Gospel requires; because we
know not the degrees by which men are more or less qualified. The Scripture
has only acquainted us that believers and good men have promises of special
Grace. As for the particular degrees of it, it is not necessary we should know
them; and therefore our Savior has told us only in general, To him that has
shall be given; that is, as the Parable to which these words belong clearly
imports, greater measures of Grace shall be bestowed upon them who best improve
the Grace they have already received. And this is a very weighty encouragement
to make us all careful to be better.

SECT. 2.
I come now to speak directly to the Argument of this Chapter, viz. who are the
Object of Grace, or the Operations of the Holy Spirit; and that by laying down
two or three plain Propositions; which being proved, the Question will be
sufficiently and truly answered.

1. God will give special Grace to all those that perform the conditions upon
which it is promised; which I hope stands in need of no other medium to prove
it by, than that God is faithful and true, and will perform his promise. Dr.
Owen truly observes, that the same Grace in nature and kind, P. 182.
is communicated unto several persons in various degrees, and is by them used
or improved with more or less care and diligence. I shall add, that this
special Grace (for of that he speaks) is communicated unto them in those
degrees, according as the Grace they had formerly received, was improved with
more or less diligence; for that is plainly the meaning of those words now
mentioned, To him that has it shall be given; a saying so often repeated in
the Evangelists, but as near as I can remember, not once taken notice of by our
Author throughout his great Book, though it be as material and necessary a
passage, for any Christian Writer, that undertakes this subject, to guide
himself by, as any is in all the Scripture. For what reason he slipped over this
Text, though it lay so plainly before him in the Bible, he knows best himself:
He could not but know it was very pertinent to the subject, though it was
impertinent to his manner of handling it: I am sure it is a sufficient
confutation of his design in the Chapter concerning works preparatory to
Regeneration; where, as I shall in due place manifest, he makes all the
preparatory works that one can well think of, to signify nothing at all in
effect, toward the obtaining of that Grace whereby we are Regenerated; which,
besides that it confutes the Title of the Chapter, is nothing less than to make
the communication of that Grace an arbitrary act, that depends not upon the
performance of any conditions required on our part; and consequently, to
destroy all the encouragement we have from the promise of Christ to pray for
the Holy Spirit, that we may become the sincere Disciples of Christ. Indeed he
is now and then pleased to mince the matter, as where he tells us; P. 86.
Sometimes, as to some gifts and graces, God does bestow his Spirit where there
is some preparation and cooperation on our part. Sometimes, and some Graces,
and some Preparation, are uncertain words: But I would know what he means by
those Graces, which he supposes will not be bestowed, though there be never so
much preparation on our part; for that is also clearly supposed in his words.
For instance, If through the grace of God a man believes the Gospel, and
heartily desires to live according to it; praying as our Savior has taught
him, for the Holy Spirit, in order to that end; I would know whether upon this
preparation and cooperation on his part, God will not enable him so to do. If
our Author denies it, let him answer our Savior's saying; How much more shall
your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? And so upon the
like preparation for any special Grace that we need. If he should deny that God
will bestow it, I would also desire him to give us his thoughts upon that other
saying of our Savior, which seems to conclude against him in all instances of
this nature, viz. That unto every one which has it shall be given, Luke 19.26.

2. On the other hand, the Gospel gives us no ground to expect any special
Grace, or such Operations of the Spirit as are promised to qualified persons,
if we do not perform the conditions upon which the promise depends. But on the
contrary, we have reason to believe that God will withdraw that Grace which he
has already given, from those slothful persons that refuse to make any good
use of it. Indeed how long God will extend his patience toward them, and bear
with their obstinacy, is concealed from us, and depends upon his Sovereign
pleasure. But our Savior plainly told us, that, from him that has, i. e.
improveth not, even that he has shall be taken away from him. So little reason
has any such person to expect any new accession of Grace to that which he has
forfeited by receiving it altogether in vain. Wherefore I am far from
contradicting those men that say the promises of regenerating Grace belong not
to all who have the Gospel preached to them; though I take my leave of them
when they tell us that these promises are restrained to a few men, whom God
has personally chosen, and by an absolute Decree fore-appointed to salvation:
but instead thereof I affirm, that the restriction of these promises to certain
persons, is measured only by the conditions upon which they are made, i. e.
that they belong only to those by whom these conditions are performed. My
reason is this; because there is not one promise in the whole Covenant, that is
made absolutely to this or that man's person; but they are* all made with
respect to men's qualifications. Now the New Covenant is the only means by
which we can know any thing of God's Councils and Decrees concerning our
salvation: Wherefore if the promises of the Covenant be not absolute, but
conditional, then the reason why every man cannot claim the benefit of them, is
not because this man's person was absolutely excluded, and that man's benefit
absolutely intended by them; but because some are qualified as they ought, to
receive the promises, and others are not.

Thus I cannot but subscribe to the Title of our Author's third Chapter in his
fourth Book, viz. That Believers are the only object of Sanctification, and
subject of Gospel-holiness; for this one would think to be his meaning, that a
man must be a Believer before he can be an holy person, since believing of the
Gospel is an indispensible condition of obtaining that Grace, by which we may
obey it; for I know not what we should understand by Gospel-holiness, but the
obedience of the Gospel. But this is not that which he intends; for if you
examine the Chapter it self, you will find that by Believers he means
Regenerate persons: For he tells us, P. 358.
that that the Spirit is promised and received as a spirit of Sanctification,
unto and by the Regenerate, that is, unto Believers, and only unto them; and
withal, that the Qualifications of Faith and Obedience are not previously
necessary to Regeneration; which must needs be true, if to be Regenerate be no
other thing than to Believe and Obey the Gospel. His meaning is, that
Regeneration, or Faith and Obedience, is previously required to sanctification,
which he confesses to have some difficulty; and so do I think too, since no
man can be regenerate who is not in some measure a sanctified or an holy
person. But he removes the difficulty by answering thus; The same Spirit first
works Faith and Obedience in us, and then preserves it when it is wrought.
So that his meaning is this: Faith and Obedience are not conditions
pre-required to Faith and Obedience; but where they are preserved, it is
necessary they should be before. This you will say is plain enough; but the
Doctor is not content to let it go so; wherefore to clear the manner of it, as
he says, we may observe, that Sanctification may be considered, 1. As to the
essential work of it, which consists in the preservation of the principle of
spiritual life and holiness communicated to us in our regeneration. 2. As to
those renewed actual Operations, whereby it is carried on. And then Faith also
may be considered, 1. As to its original communication, infusion, etc. into the
Soul, or as to the seed, principle, and habit of it; and thus it is wrought as
all other graces is in Regeneration. 2. As to its actings in us, or as unto
actual believing, or the exercise of Faith, and the fruits of it, in holy
obedience. Now, says he, Sanctification in the first sense respects Faith also
in the first; i. e. the preservation of the seed, principle, etc. of Faith,
belongs unto the sanctifying work of the Holy Spirit, and so believers only
are sanctified. And in the latter sense it respects Faith in the latter also;
that is, the progress of the work of the Sanctification is accompanied with the
actings and exercise of Faith, i. e. the actings of Faith are pre-required to a
progress in sanctification; and thus Faith is both ways a necessary
qualification in and unto them that are sanctified. This is that which our
Author calls Clearing; but is in my mind confounding what was clear enough
before, viz. that where Faith and Holiness are preserved, they must be before;
and that the sanctifying work of the Spirit consists in the preservation of
them; which is all that he means; only he has dressed it up with formal
distinctions, and solemn phrases, as men use to do that would seem to say
something, when in effect they say nothing at all. For all this while I do not
see that difficulty removed, how that which he makes to be a necessary
qualification of being at all sanctified, should not be as necessary to
Regeneration; since I cannot understand how a man should be regenerated without
some measure of sanctification. But the worst of it is, that the difficulty is
impossible to be removed, if Regeneration, and Sanctification, that namely
which is the condition of obtaining eternal Life, be the very same thing as I
say they are; and for the proof thereof, I refer the Doctor to the Chapter of
Regeneration.

Now after all, our Author's design in distinguishing thus artificially
between Regeneration and Sanctification, was this, that he might seem to grant
there were some Qualifications required to make us capable of the sanctifying
Operations of the Holy Ghost, (which no man can deny without facing down the
Word of God) though all the while he granted no such thing; excepting only in
this sense, that the Holy Ghost will take care to keep those in a sanctified
state, who are sanctified, or (which is the same thing) who are regenerated
already: For to Regeneration it is very plain that he makes no qualification on
our part necessary at all; and that I do not wrong him by saying so, will
appear from his own words. He says, P. 357.
The chief and principal ends for which the Holy Spirit is promised, may be
reduced to four heads; the three first of which are Regeneration,
Sanctification, and Consolation: And this, he says, is the plain order and
method of these things. 1. He is promised and received as to the work of
Regeneration unto the Elect: 2. As to the work of Sanctification unto the
Regenerate: 3. As to the work of Consolation unto the Sanctified. This is the
Scheme of those Qualifications which he supposes are previously required to
the respective works of the Holy Spirit; and it is plain that he makes no other
qualification necessary to the regenerating work of the Spirit, but Election;
which according to him signifies, an absolute Decree of God that some certain
persons shall be glorified; and if there be any persons thus absolutely chosen,
I confess they need no other Qualification for the regenerating work of the
Spirit. But now, as the Doctor very well observes, P. 361.
this Election is no Qualification on our part; but only the secret purpose on
the part of God what himself will do. From whence I conclude, that if Election
be the only qualification previously required to Regeneration, then no
Qualification on our part is necessary thereunto; and further, that if his
Elect only shall be regenerated, then no such Qualification can be profitable
to any one else; nor can it make him capable of the regenerating Grace of the
Holy Ghost. Lastly, if both these things be true, then, besides many other evil
consequences fundamentally repugnant to the very nature and design of the New
Covenant between God and Man, it unavoidably follows, that the promises of
Grace can never afford us a good reason to do any thing in order to our
Regeneration. Which inconvenience of confining Election to eternal Life first
of all, and then the promises of regenerating Grace to a few certain persons
without any respect to what they are, one needs not the Doctor's abilities to
be sensible of, though I find it requires greater than his own to remove it;
unless a man may be said to remove an Objection, by dissembling the force of
it, instead of answering it. For the Doctor proposes it thus; May a person,
says he, who is yet unregenerate, pray for the spirit of Regeneration, P. 361.
to effect that work in him? May he do so! yes, without question he may; and if
he please he may let it alone too. Our Author having told us that the spirit of
Regeneration was promised only to the Elect; and then falling upon that point
of praying for the spirit of Regeneration, tells us, that he might give
directions in some enquiries, which indeed deserve a larger discussion, if his
present design would admit of it; but he would instance only in one, i. e.
May a person who is unregenerate, and knows not his election, etc. But now
there is another enquiry that deserves a larger discussion than this, viz.
Whether the Prayers of an unregenerate man can avail any thing toward the
obtaining of the Spirit of Regeneration; whether he knows his election, or
whether he knows it not. But there was good reason why this enquiry was not to
be meddled withal, namely, because our Author's present design would not admit
of it, which was to serve an Hypothesis that would not bear the enquiry. That
he was well enough aware of it, we may see by the last Answer he brings to that
one gentle Question he took in hand; May an unregenerate man pray for the
spirit of Regeneration? Doubtless he may; for persons, says he, under such
convictions, as put them upon praying for Regeneration, have really sometimes
the seeds of Regeneration communicated unto them; and then, as they ought, so
they will continue in their supplications for the increase and manifestation of
it. Now if the Doctor had not been ashamed of his meaning, he might have
expressed it plainly and undisguisedly in this manner. All may and ought to
pray for Regeneration; for some, i. e. the Elect, happen to be regenerated
while they keep on praying, and then they will be sure to pray on still that
they may know it. This is the most that can be made of his final Answer; and it
comes to no more than this; that the Prayers of unregenerate men will do them
no hurt: but for any thing I can see, he has not yet satisfied us, that they
will do them any good; which I should have thanked him to have shown me
according to his principles, if his present design would have admitted it.

But what if the Scriptures teach that the promises of regenerating Grace are
made only to those who are absolutely elected to Glory? I answer, If that can
once be shown, I have done; or if it can be made to appear but probable by the
Scriptures, I shall begin to suspect all my reasoning against it to be as
carnal, as the Doctor can believe it. For I heartily believe the Scriptures to
be the Word of God; and all my Reasonings shall submit to this one Proposition,
Whatever God has said, that is true. Now the Doctor, having repeated the first
Proposition of the forementioned Scheme, viz. that the Spirit of Regeneration
is promised only unto the Elect, P. 358.
tells us, that the promises concerning the communications of the Spirit unto
this end, have been before explained and vindicated. These words I confess
surprised me; for they suppose that he had elsewhere produced some promises in
the Scripture, inconditionally made to some certain persons that they should be
regenerated; or at least some Texts to prove that the promises of regenerating
Grace were meant only to some men whom God from all eternity had absolutely
chosen to Glory. Now one would have thought there had been a former Chapter
with this Title; The Elect are the only Object of regenerating Grace. But
there is no such thing: however, I have looked backward and forward to find
where he had explained and vindicated these promises he speaks of; but after a
long search I was satisfied that my Memory had not failed me in this
particular, and that I looked for what was not to be found; unless it be in the
first Chapter of the third Book, P. 172.
where he dogmatically tells us, that the Souls of God's Elect were the matter
designed of God for the work of the New Creation to be wrought upon, without
offering one syllable of proof to make it good. Now to flip over the great
difficulty when one comes at it, by pretending that it is satisfied elsewhere,
without referring to the particular place, is the Artifice either of a bad
writer, or one that serves a bad Cause; and a man may fairly put it in
practice, that writes so largely as the Doctor does: for it is hard if some of
his Readers are not so courteous as to distrust their own Memories, after they
have gone above half way through so great a Book as his, rather than to
question his honesty. But for his sake I shall be very sure of an Author,
before I trust general References again.

Now till I see those promises produced that I have looked for in vain, viz.
that God will regenerate these Elect, I shall not only conclude that God will
enable us to forsake our sins, and to keep his Commandments, if we believe the
Gospel, and implore the assistance of the Holy Spirit; but also, that without
these qualifications we have not the least ground to expect that special Grace,
which is proper for that end, that is, to make us regenerate or holy persons.
If it should be said, that for ought we know there are some persons whom God
has absolutely decreed to save, and whom therefore he will take care to
regenerate, that they may be fit for salvation; which is the Doctor's notion of
Election, as is plain from his Scheme here in this place, and from the second
Chapter of his fifth Book, though he has disguised it there with many
intricate sayings, as his manner is: I answer, without assuming the boldness to
pronounce concerning God's secret Decrees, that it is a monstrous vanity, for
any man that may become a regenerate person, and obtain eternal Life, by a
method determined by that Will of God which he knows, to trust that he shall be
regenerated and saved, by force of a supposed Will in God which he knows not.
If the Scripture had told us there were some persons absolutely elected to
Glory hereafter, it had been a very dangerous thing for any man to neglect the
care of becoming a regenerate person, trusting to his particular election, for
the certainty of his Regeneration; unless withal the Bible had given us the
names of these special Favorites of Heaven, and he had found his own amongst
them. But if the Scripture had mentioned no such thing at all, it is little
better than madness to venture our Regeneration upon so great an uncertainty.
And thus much I think may be gathered from Dr. Owen, where he says, The
expectation and hope of any man for Life, P. 521.
and Immortality, and Glory, without previous holiness, can be built on no
other foundation but this, that God will rescind his eternal Decrees, and
change his purposes, that is, cease to be God, merely to comply with them in
their sins: And who knows not what will be the end of such a cursed hope and
expectation? These words I confess are capable of a double construction, viz.
that the expectation of Glory, either without holiness previous to that
expectation, or without holiness previous to the obtaining of that Glory, is a
cursed hope. If he means the latter, he supposes it possible for a Christian
to expect Salvation and Glory, though he is neither holy at present, nor
presumes that he shall be so hereafter; and this is a cursed hope indeed: but I
believe it will be hard to meet with it any where, either amongst Christians
who deny the Doctrine of personal Election, for they are persuaded that
holiness is the condition of obtaining eternal Life; or amongst Christians that
grant it, for they are persuaded, as the Doctor can bear them witness, that God
will take care to make the Elect, who shall only be saved, holy before he
brings them to Glory. There being therefore no great danger of any Christian's
entertaining this cursed hope that he shall be brought to blessedness, without
being made holy antecedently thereunto, P. 580.
as our Author's expression is; one would think his zeal were meant against a
wicked man's hoping to be saved, i. e. who wants that ground for his hope which
the Gospel affords to them who have sincerely forsaken their sinful courses.
Now if this be his meaning, it is a very good meaning; and I think he can
hardly say too much to awaken those men who go on in their ungodly practices,
and still flatter themselves with the hope of Salvation: But then from his
words I infer, 1. Such men's expectation of Glory cannot be built upon this
foundation, that God has absolutely elected some persons to eternal Life; for
the Doctor says it cannot be built upon any other foundation than this, that
God will rescind his eternal Decrees, to comply with them in their sins; and
these are plainly two distinct things. 2. That therefore there are no persons
who are thus absolutely elected; for if there were, then a wicked man might
hope that he is one of them; and to nourish this hope, he need not suppose that
God will change his purposes to comply with him in his sins, but that God will
take care to convert him from his sins in compliance with his own purposes. And
then, 3. It follows plainly, that God has decreed to save no man but upon
condition of his being holy; and therefore, 4. There is not the least ground
for any man to hope that he may be regenerated, because he may be elected;
since Holiness, or Regeneration it self, is the condition of any man's being
elected to eternal Life. And this is to the full as much as I said concerning
the desperateness of putting our Regeneration upon the venture of our Election:
And whether it be not the consequence of the Doctor's words according to the
most charitable construction of them, I leave the Reader to judge between us.

But that he may not complain that I mis-represent his opinion concerning that
which he calls the Decree of Election, I shall here give you his own account of
it, from the second Chapter of his fifth Book, where he discloseth his
judgment of it very solemnly. His design in that Chapter is to prove that
eternal Election is a cause of and motive unto holiness, as the Title thereof
acquaints us; and therefore I acknowledge he took a very proper way to begin
with explaining what he understands by eternal Election: But I can by no means
think he has done fairly, to make Election to be one thing when he
industriously explains his notion of it, and another thing when he proceeds to
use it for the proving of something else. To make it plain to him that he is
guilty of this fault, I will first show what he understands by the Decree of
Election, where he pretends to prove that it is a motive to Holiness. P. 525.
To this end he says, First, the Sovereign Grace and Love of God herein, is a
powerful motive thereunto. Now the Grace which he means is this, That God
should first choose us unto Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ, decreeing
immutably to save us out of the perishing multitude of Mankind, from whom we
neither then did in his eye or consideration, nor by any thing in our selves
ever would differ in the least; which is as much as to say, that Election is a
peremptory Decree of God, that this and that man shall be saved, without
considering them under any qualification, which the Gospel says is necessary
to eternal Life: so that his judgment in this place is, that God has
absolutely elected all that shall be saved; which he plainly affirmed not long
before, P. 522.
by saying, that every thing else will fail, but what is an especial fruit and
effect of this Decree of Election. But that he might be sure to be understood,
he propounds the common Objection against this Doctrine, viz. that on
supposition thereof, a chosen one may happen to argue in this manner: If God
has thus chosen me, I may then live in sin as I please; P. 525.
all will be well and safe in the latter end, which is all I need care for, i.
e. Election to eternal Life being supposed to be absolute, it follows that a
man may live in sin all his days, and it shall not go the worse with him
hereafter. Which inference seems to be plain and strong, and I think our Author
confesses it so to be, by not once attempting to show the contrary. But
instead thereof he tells us, This is the language of a Devil, and not of a man;
and he that shall act practically according to this inference, is such a
Monster of Impiety and presumptuous Ingratitude, as Hell it self cannot
parallel in many instances. May be so; but I hope a man may doctrinally make
this inference without being as ill-natured as the Devil; and that our Author
will not call us Devils, for urging him with an Objection that he is not able
to answer. For when all is done, if Believers should argue in this sort, and
live accordingly, he has no way, that I can see, to convince them that they
shall fare the worse for it. But thus he goes on; I shall use some boldness in
this matter; and to do him right, P. 526.
he is every jot as good as his word: for presently he sets himself to call
them stupid, impious, and ungrateful Monsters; and to bestow such language upon
them, as might make him liable to be questioned by his Brethren, whether he has
not taken too much boldness with the Elect; if he had not made his peace with
them in particular, by saying that he never knew any man who was duly
persuaded of his election, in whom it tended to ingenerate looseness of Life.
But I suppose he is not acquainted with them all; and if there be any of them
that make this hellish inference doctrinally and practically too, any man may
see, that his foul words do not confute the consequence of their arguing,
although they may deserve them for living according to it: For if they should
chance not to care for the Doctor's boldness in calling them out of their
names, he has no more to say to them; and their conclusion, All will be well
and safe in the latter end, which is all we need care for, is in as good a
condition as it was before he meddled with it. For it is the inconsequence of
their arguing that must be shown, to free the Doctor's opinion concerning
personal Election, from the charge of being a temptation to carnal Security.
And this he was the more obliged to show, because he said two Pages before,
that under this pretense chiefly, P. 522.
his Doctrine concerning Election is blasphemed, and evil spoken of. It would
therefore have been very kindly done, both to himself and us, to show the
forementioned arguing to be inconsequent; but I challenge him to show me one
single Line that looks that way through all his pretended answer to the
Objection, which is yet above two Pages long; and so may serve for one instance
among many, P. 523, 524.
what an excellent faculty our Author has, when pertinent matter is scanty with
him, to confound a Reader with a multitude of words.

There are many other ways by which he pretends to show that eternal Election
is a motive to holiness; but this is sufficient to let you see what he
understands by eternal election, where he endeavors to prove it to be such a
motive, viz. that it is God's absolute purpose from Eternity, to save some
persons, not considered under any good qualification. I shall now show you his
definition of it toward the beginning of the Chapter: P. 520.
It is, says he, the eternal and immutable purpose of God, that all who are
his, in a peculiar manner, all whom he designs to bring unto blessedness in
the everlasting enjoyment of himself, shall antecedently thereunto be made
holy. These words are printed in the Italick Character, that the Reader might
observe them the better, and take notice that they are the foundation of the
following discourse. And I desire also the Reader to observe, that this is our
Author's definition of that Election, which, as he pretends, is afterward
proved to be a motive to holiness. Now this notion of Election is plainly
different from that; for he says, it is the eternal purpose of God, that all
who are his in a peculiar manner, etc. His in a peculiar manner! how came they
to be so? were they his in a peculiar manner before they were elected, or not?
If the former, then they were God's peculiar people before they were chosen to
be so, and there was no need of his election to make them so. If the latter,
then I understand what he means by saying, that Election is the eternal purpose
of God, that all who are his shall be holy, viz. that Election is the purpose
of God that all who are elected already, shall be made holy; which is as much
as to say, that Election is Election; and they that are elected to be holy, are
elected to be holy. To save himself from this Nonsense, he has but one way, and
that is by saying that these all whom he speaks of, were God's people in a
peculiar manner, by virtue of another Decree of Election than that which is
here discribed, viz. of that absolute Decree to save them; which he afterward
shows to be a motive unto holiness. And then this is the meaning of his words:
Eternal Election is God's Decree that all they shall be made holy, concerning
whom he had already decreed that they shall certainly be saved. Now this is
that which I said, that he means one thing by eternal Election, when he defines
it to lay a foundation for his following discourse; and another thing by it
when he enters upon the discourse it self. And there was good reason for it:
for if he had defined eternal Election to be God's absolute purpose to save so
many certain persons, without regarding how they are qualified, before that his
purpose; he had found himself obliged to prove this bold Assertion of his,
before he proceeded to build his other opinions upon it. But here he declines
that work, by substituting another Proposition in the room of it; which indeed
sounds as if it were the same, but really is very different from it, as he had
declined it before, by pretending that he had done it elsewhere. Now if I
understand any thing of the duty of an Author, he was more than ordinarily
concerned to produce some evident proofs out of Scripture, if there be any
there, that the decree of Election to eternal Life is made with respect to the
persons of men, and not their Qualifications; for this is not only supposed by
him in this Chapter, but it is the Hypothesis upon which the greatest part of
his Book runs; and which is more than all the rest, he lays such a stress upon
it, as I do not remember to have met with any man that does the like: For in
this Chapter he says, P. 526.
Men may frame an Holiness to themselves, and be stirred up unto it by motives
of their own; (as there is a Religion in the world, that runs in a parallel
Line by that of Evangelical truth; but touches it not, nor will do so to
eternity) but that which the Gospel requires, is promoted on the grounds and by
the motives that are peculiar to it, whereof this of God's free electing Love
and Grace is among the principal; which, setting aside the fantasticalness of
his expression, is plainly to send all men to Hell that question his Doctrine
of Personal Election, let them be otherwise never so careful to do the Will of
God. Now instead of proving this necessary Article of his Faith, he manfully
runs away from it, where any one would have expected to see him fall to work
about it: and then takes occasion from his definition of Election, to prove
that all who are ordained to Glory, are ordained to holiness, in order to
Glory; which is a Proposition much better able to shift for it self, than that
there are any persons whom God has absolutely elected to Glory; which is the
notion he proceeds upon, after he had finished his proof of the other. This is
so bleak a business, that although a man wanted common honesty, and his
Conscience would suffer him to impose upon others; yet if he had but ordinary
Wit, he would hardly venture to expose himself in this manner, unless he were
furnished with such a vast measure of Confidence as to think himself able to
braze out any thing.

And now I must tell the Doctor, that all this was but a juggling Plot of his
own, and not one of his usual mischances: for not long after he had defined
eternal Election, as you have seen, he takes the boldness to suppose God's
Decrees to run in this manner: I do, says God, choose these poor lost sinners
to be mine in an especial manner, P. 521.
to save them by my Son; and in order hereunto, I decree that they shall be
holy. Now it is not at all probable that he should so soon forget that he had
solemnly made eternal Election to consist only in God's purpose to regenerate
all that were his in a peculiar manner, etc. i. e. (now that his design begins
to be opened) all those that were absolutely elected to Glory. Only it was not
fit to put these plain words into the definion; for then every ordinary Reader
would have discovered there was another Decree of Election, antecedent to that
which the Doctor had defined; and perhaps might be so uncivil as to expect a
proof of the supposition: But instead of these plain words, it was more
prudently done to put in those who are his in an especial manner, which are
somewhat obscure words; and those whom he designs to bring to blessedness,
which express but half his meaning: For he supposes the design he speaks of to
be absolute. This care being taken, that which he takes upon him to confirm
briefly, as he says, is this, viz. That if we are not personally holy, we have
no interest in that Decree of God whereby any persons are designed unto Glory;
which is a great truth, but, by the way, most false, according to his
principles: for while a person who is absolutely elected remains unholy, as he
does, till he is regenerated, he has as full an interest in the purpose of God
to bring him to Glory, as he can have after he is regenerated; since nothing
can be more plain, than that he who is elected upon no consideration of
holiness, cannot have the less interest in that Election for not being holy.
But this I see, that our Author's unhappy way of expressing himself, sometimes
makes him hit upon a better saying than he intended. That which he meant to
say, as is plain from his definition, is this, that all who are elected to
Glory shall be made holy; which while he is proving, he does very carefully
drop in a word now and then, as if he were proving absolute election to eternal
Life; and this for a very good reason, viz. that he might by convenient degrees
slip into that notion of Election, against his turn came to prove it to be a
motive unto holiness. But such unintelligible work he has made by mingling
these things together, in his third Sect. where his design is to prove that
the Elect shall be made holy, that any one may see how his thoughts were
puddled while he was contriving to come off in this business: and he comes off
very fairly; for thus he winds up that Section; The Councils of God therefore
concerning us, i. e. his electing us to eternal Life, do not depend upon our
Holiness; which is as much as to say, that the Decree of Election to eternal
Life is not conditional, but absolute: but upon our holiness our future
happiness depends in the Councils of God; which is saying quite backward, that
the Decree of Election is not absolute, but conditional. For to say that our
future happiness depends upon our holiness in the Councils of God, is in plain
English to say, that it is one of the Councils concerning us, that our
happiness should depend on our holiness; which cannot truly be said, if it
depends upon an absolute Decree: Therefore the Decree of Election to eternal
Life is conditional; for if it were absolute, then, according to that Decree, a
man may be saved without any holiness at all, which the Doctor denies; and thus
he comes off with contradicting himself within the compass of three Lines, as
you cannot but see, unless you are so taken with the chiming of his words, that
you are not at leisure to examine the sense.

From all this it may I think be presumed, without any uncharitableness, that
the Doctor did not write with an intention to satisfy his Reader; and what
other end he proposed to himself, I leave it to his own Conscience. For his
evasions, when he is to prove the chief matter in question; and his
obscurities, when it is inconvenient to speak plainly, cannot without an
incredible reproach to his Parts and Abilities, be looked on otherwise than as
studied Artifices to serve his Cause withal. Especially, if you consider how
seasonably he contradicts himself, when his design requires it: and of this I
will give him one instance more out of his present discourse, and then leave
his Friends to judge of his honesty as they please. In answer to that Objection
against his Opinion, that indeed it rendered holiness unnecessary, among other
things he thought good to say, That as for a man's own personal election, P. 524.
he cannot believe it, nor is obliged to believe it, any otherwise, but as God
reveals it by its effects; i. e. in plain terms, no man can or ought to believe
that he is one of the Elect, till he believes and obeys the Gospel; for that he
means by the effects of Election. Now supposing this did something to satisfy
the former Objection; yet the Doctor saw well enough that it would raise
another, viz. that if this be true, then no man's personal Election can be a
motive to him to become an holy person; because he cannot believe it till he is
so already. The Doctor does not indeed propound this Objection; but he
forestals it, (as you will see presently what reason he had so to do) by a
downright contradiction to what he had immediately said before; for he goes on
thus: No man ought, no man can justly question his own Election, DOUBT of it,
or disbelieve it, until he be in such a condition, as wherein it is impossible
that the effects of Election should ever be wrought in him, if such a condition
there be in this world. Now this is very strange; cannot a man believe his
Election till he sees it in the effects, and yet cannot he justly doubt of it
before those effects are wrought in him? Is he not obliged to believe it till
then; and is it yet true that he ought not to disbelieve it, till it is
impossible those effects should be wrought; and yet perhaps there is no such
condition in this world? I hope our Author will not say, that this is one of
those Mysteries which we cannot understand without his New Light; but rather
confess against himself, what he has taken upon him to accuse S. P. of, P. 205.
viz. that these are the words of one who seems not much to Consider what he
says, so as that it may serve his present turn: For he does not use to
contradict himself for nothing; and the reason is plain why it was necessary
here. In the next Page he was to show that personal Election was a motive to
Holiness in point of Gratitude: Now that the Motive might be fit to be used
upon every body, it was necessary to say, that no body had cause to doubt of
his Election; which part of the Contradiction looked forward to encounter a
second Objection, as the other part of it looked backward to keep off the
first. And at this rate a Child may confute all the Arguments in the world,
that are brought, for, or against any thing.

Having thus discovered our Author's fallacious way of proceeding upon this
Head, and his art in declining the proof of what he so boldly affirms
concerning personal Election, and the promise of regenerating Grace being made
to his Elect; it may not now be unnecessary to put the Reader in mind, that I
have not been wandering all this while from the design of this Section; which
was, to show that we have no reason to expect God's special Grace, (such as
that is whereby we are enabled to keep the Commandments of Christ) if we be not
on our parts qualified to receive it. Now I do not see how this can be admitted
for a certain truth, on supposition that there are any absolute promises in the
Scripture made to some particular men that God will regenerate them; or that
there are any certain persons whom, without consideration of any qualities in
them, God decreed to save. But if these are groundless suppositions themselves,
I understand not which way any man should think to obtain the special Grace of
God, but by performing the condition on which it is promised. And then I say
with Dr. Owen, that Believers are the only object of Sanctification, and
subject of Gospel-holiness; not meaning by Believers as he does, holy persons,
though the word is, and may be so used; but those merely that are persuaded
that Jesus is the Christ. I only add, that these Believers must visibly own
themselves the Disciples of Christ, and they must use earnest Prayers for that
divine Grace which will enable them to do the Will of God upon Earth as it is
done in Heaven. For both these conditions are supposed in that promise of the
Holy Spirit, made to the Disciples of Christ, which is mentioned in Luke 11.13.
Wherefore if Believers themselves do not perform these conditions, they have no
reason to expect that special Grace which is there promised. Finally, since the
Spirit of God is promised to dwell in good men only; if the Disciples of
Christ do not improve that Grace which they obtain by their Prayers, to actual
amendment, and a sincere obedience of the Gospel, it would be a vain
presumption in them to think that God will communicate those fuller measures of
Grace to them, while they are thus unreformed, which are signified by his
dwelling in us.

SECT. 3.
Having thus shown you who are the Objects of special Grace, I proceed to a
third conclusion, which being proved, nothing else seems necessary for the
satisfying of this Question, To whom the Holy Spirit is given. Wherefore I add,

3. That common Grace, or that which is not suspended upon the performance of
any condition required in the Covenant, is given to all those that live under
the ministration of the Gospel. My meaning is, they are all prevented with that
Grace which makes it possible for them to begin well, i. e. to desire the
knowledge of God's ways with a purpose of walking in them when they are known;
and then, to be convinced that the Gospel is the Word of God, by the use of
those external means which God has afforded them. I do not say, that every one
of them has this Grace always bestowed upon him; for it is possible that some
of those to whom the Word of God is spoken, may put it away from themselves, as
the Jews did, and be at length forsaken by the divine Grace, and left under an
obstinate and unteachable mind, as they were. Much less shall I venture to say
how long the divine Spirit moves upon the Souls of men, to make them teachable
and willing to learn the truth before he gives them over: For God has reserved
this matter to his own Sovereign pleasure; and therefore we neither ought to
set limits to his patience, nor to presume upon the length of it. But all I say
is this; That Grace of God, which prevents our first good inclinations and
desires, and is necessary to make us capable of learning the Truth, is given to
as many as have the Gospel preached to them; so that until by their obstinacy
they have utterly forfeited the divine Grace and Blessing, it is in their power
to lay aside prejudice, to attend to the Word of God, and receive the knowledge
of the truth.

Out of many Arguments which the Scripture affords to this purpose, I shall
choose but one, having already drawn out this Part into a greater length than I
expected; but that concluding strongly enough to spare me the labor of
producing any more. The Argument I mean is founded upon those passages in the
New Testament, wherein those to whom the Word of God is made known, are
threatened with eternal Damnation, if they believe it not, and with more
grievous punishments than had been inflicted on them if the Gospel had never
been preached to them. Thus says our Savior to his Apostles: Go ye into all
the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.15,
16. If any man hear my words, and believe not, but rejects me, the word that
I have spoken the same shall judge him in the last day, John 12.47, 48. He that
believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed in the Name of
the only begotten Son of God, John 3.18. Further, the severity of that
punishment which belongs to them who believe not, is intimated plainly in the
aggravation of their fault, as our Savior says, If I had not come and spoken
unto them, they had not had sin, they could not have been accused of this
particular sin, of not believing in me, and that would have mitigated their
other faults; but now they have no cloak for their sin, they are every way
inexcusable, and therefore the more punishable, John 15.22. But it is fully
expressed in Matthew. 11.20. where we find our Savior upbraiding the Cities
that rejected him, and declaring it should be more tolerable for Tire, and
Sidon, and Sodom, at the day of judgment than for them, verse. 22, 23. These
testimonies of Scripture being premised, I argue thus: If all that preventing
Grace, which is necessary to believing, be not sometime given to all that hear
the Gospel, then it would be always impossible for some that hear to believe;
and that without their fault. But it is not always thus impossible for any;
therefore such Grace is sometime given to all. The former Proposition is
evident: for as long as I want that which is necessary to the doing of any
thing, so long is that thing impossible to me; and if it be not my fault that I
want the former, neither is the impossibility imputable to me as a fault.
Finally, it is not my fault that I want it, if I could never do any thing to
procure it; and it is plain that no body can do any thing to procure that Grace,
which is at first necessary to put him into the way of well-doing. The latter
Proposition is clear, thus: No man shall be condemned to eternal punishment,
much less to such punishment in a more intolerable degree, for not believing
what was always impossible for him to believe, and that without his own fault:
But every man to whom the Gospel is preached, shall be condemned to eternal
punishment if he believes it not, and to a sorer punishment for not believing
it; therefore it is not always thus impossible for any man, to whom the Gospel
is preached, to believe. The second Proposition is clear from the
forementioned passages of Scripture; as the first is from the unchangeable
perfections of the Divine Nature. For to say that God requires impossible
things of any man, and so takes advantage against him, to cast him into fiercer
flames, where he must burn for ever, is to blaspheme all the Attributes of God,
but those which make him great and powerful; it is to rob him of all his
Goodness, in the glory of which he has expressed so much delight. For not to
say that this fastens the reproach of Insincerity, and foul Dissimulation upon
the Redeemer of Mankind, it is to charge the Creator of Men and Angels with
Tyranny, and the Judge of the whole world with Injustice. God is pleased to
expostulate with men, because of their disobedience, from that relation wherein
they stand to him as his Children and Servants; If I be a father, where is mine
honor? and if I be a master, where is my fear? says the Lord, Mal. 1.6. Now
can we think that he has given any man cause to retort that Expostulation in
this manner: If thou art a Father, where are thy Bowels? If thou art a Master,
where is thy Justice? for kindness belongs as necessarily to the Character of a
good Father, and justice to that of a good Master, as Obedience and Fear can to
that of a good Child or Servant. And we are not to forget, that God has
appealed to the common principles of Reason impressed upon the minds of men, in
justification of the equity and mercy of his proceedings toward them; the
latter in Isa. 1.18. Come now, let us reason together, says the Lord, etc. The
former in Ezekel 18.25. Is not my way equal? are not your ways unequal? But to
inflict a more grievous punishment, and that eternal, for not performing an
impossible condition, is in its own nature cruel and unjust; and therefore
cannot stand with the goodness of a Father, nor with the justice of a Master,
nor with God's pleading with obstinate evil men from these relations, and the
appeal he makes to their own minds, for the righteousness of his dealings with
them; which upon these terms it is impossible for them to acknowledge, unless
they lay aside the brightest principles of their Reason.

If some things be so evil that they can never be good, then some things there
are which can never be ascribed to God without Blasphemy. Now if the inflicting
of eternal Torments upon men for what they could never help, be not one of
those things, I desire any man to tell me what is. Besides, is it Blasphemy to
say that God can lie? But he has told us, that he takes no pleasure in the
death of him that dies; but had rather he should turn and live: And what
shadow of truth can there be in that saying, if he first prescribes impossible
terms of forgiveness, and then damns the sinner with more severity for not
performing them? I shall have occasion to debate this matter with Dr. Owen in
another place; but in the mean time, let him please to contrive some undeniable
instance of barbarous injustice, which without question he can easily do; and
when he has given us his Idea of it, I will undertake to reconcile the
fastening it upon God, with the honor of his Attributes, as easily as he can
secure the glory of the divine Goodness, while he makes God to oblige men to
impossibilities under pain of eternal Damnation. But if there be no difference
between right and wrong, if we know nothing so good or so evil, but it may
cease to be so; then the divine Perfections may cease too, and for ought we
know the Nature of God is mutable; and so farewell to the Notion of God himself,
and the certainty of any thing in Religion. And if this be not the last result
of that Doctrine, which makes believing, and consequently obeying the Gospel,
impossible from the very first, to them that will be damned for not doing so; I
leave indifferent men to consider.

The Conclusion is, that believing is possible to all that hear: Now the
possibility thereof must consist either in this, that of our selves we are able
to dispose our minds to that love of the Truth, to that teachableness and
attention, which will cause actual believing as soon as the Gospel is plainly
and evidently made known; or else in this, that by the help of divine Grace we
may be thus disposed, and consequently come to the knowledge of Christ. The
former is the Semipelagian Doctrine, which I have shown to be contrary to the
Scripture [ Chap. 4. Sect. 1.] therefore the latter remains to be true, viz.
that through the Operations of the Holy Spirit, it is possible for all that
hear the Gospel to believe; and by force of the former Argument it follows,
that common Grace, or that which makes it possible for a man to begin well, and
by believing, to perform the first condition of the Gospel, is given to all
that hear it.

I do not indeed find any such express promise in the Gospel, that God will
give every man that hears the Gospel Grace to believe it; as there is that he
will give the Holy Spirit to Believers and good men: And this may be said why
there is no such promise made expressly, viz. because it would have been of
little or no use; either to those that believe already, because they need not
that Grace which is proper to beget Faith at first, but only that which is
proper to confirm and increase it; or to those who do not believe; for of
whatsoever use such a promise could be to any man, it must suppose the belief
of it, which he would want who does not yet believe the Gospel to be a divine
Revelation. But though there be no promise of common Grace expressly made to all
that hear the Gospel, yet there is an implicit promise thereof contained,
partly, under that obligation which the Gospel lays upon all that hear it, to
believe; and partly under those passages in Scripture which suppose Faith to be
an effect of the Holy Spirit's Operations in us: For no man can be justly
obliged to impossible terms of forgiveness, under pain of a more grievous
punishment; therefore if Faith be an effect of the Holy Spirit, God will give
his Spirit in such measure to all that shall hear, that it will be possible for
them to believe. Which is so clear a consequence, that the very mention of it
would have been sufficient, had not some men gotten a custom of imputing the
want of Faith (and indeed of all other Christian virtues) to a defect on God's
part, as if he had not given them Grace enough to believe, and repent, etc. The
meaning of which Phrase, and the like, if it be this, that the Grace of God
has not put it into their power to believe, is so highly dishonorable to the
divine Goodness, that I have thought fit to show wherein it is so, and thereby
to prove the untruth of it.

Finally, this implicit promise of that Grace which is necessary to put them
that hear the Gospel into the way of obtaining Salvation by it, is not properly
a part of the New Covenant; (such as the promises made to Believers and good
men are) because there is no condition annexed to it. Thus that promise of God,
that he would send his Son into the world to be the Mediator between God and
Man, could be no part of that Covenant, whereof Christ is the Mediator, and
which he was to seal with his Blood: But it was an absolute promise of an act
of Grace, that was antecedent to the Covenant it self, and which depended not
upon any condition required by it. The promise of a Savior was indeed part of
the Gospel, or of the revelation of God's Will to Mankind in order to our
recovery and salvation; but it cannot be affirmed to be a part of the Covenant
between God and Man with any more propriety, than it can be said that God's
entering into Covenant with Man is an Article of the Covenant. In like manner,
that Grace by which we are first put into a capacity of believing, and
consequently of obeying the Gospel after it is revealed, is supposed in the
Gospel, otherwise the conditions of the Covenant were impossible; which is to
take away the very foundation of a Covenant of Grace, such as that is whereof
our Lord Jesus is the Mediator. But although the promise of this Grace is
implied in the Gospel; yet it is not properly any part of the Covenant, because
it is a promise without condition.

SECT. 4.
4. From what has been already proved, it may be inferred; That the promises
of special Grace are made to us all under possible conditions. For since a
Believer may by his prayers obtain that special Grace of God, which is needful
for sincere obedience; since an obedient Christian may obtain that further
Grace which is needful for perseverance; seeing also that Grace which is
necessary to a good beginning, i. e. to excite good desires in us, and to bring
us to Faith, is given absolutely to all that live under the means of Grace: It
follows plainly, that the promises of special Grace are made to all such under
possible conditions.

Wherefore we may conclude, that God will give his Holy Spirit to all that live
under the ministration of the Gospel, that they may learn and believe, and pray
for his further Grace; that to all who are thus qualified he will give his
Spirit, that they may overcome the World, and obey the Gospel: And that to all
such sincere Christians he will give his Spirit, that they may perfect holiness
in the fear of God, and persevere to the end: which is a plain and satisfactory
Answer to the second Question.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Manner and Measure of the Holy Spirit's Operations.
SECT. 1.
THis Question may easily be multiplied into a great many more, according as
men are led by their curiosity. That which has been still most debated under
this Head, is this: How far, or in what measure, the Operations of the Holy
Spirit upon our minds, conduce to those effects which are designed to be
produced by them.

Now concerning this, and all other Questions of this kind, I observe, that
the Scriptures are very silent, in comparison to that clear and full account
which they have given us of the former; God having thought it sufficient for
our encouragement in the search of Truth, and the study of Godliness and
Virtue, to let us know assuredly that he will give his Holy Spirit to them that
ask him, for necessary and profitable purposes, without satisfying our
curiosity about the manner of his Operations, and the measure of their power.
Wherefore in treating upon this Subject, a man should not venture to affirm
many things, or to conclude very particularly, much less to obtrude his
Opinions upon other men: For in matters that are not knowable but only by
Revelation, and concerning which there is but little revealed; he that is most
ready to affirm boldly and particularly, is still most likely to miscarry; and
that, if there were no other reason for it, because it argues an immodest
temper, to define peremptorily in things which God has reserved from our
knowledge: and this, to be sure, is none of those Qualifications which he has
promised to reward with the discovery of truth.

But yet I observe that some men have been as dogmatical and particular in
determining the manner and measure of the Holy Spirit's Operations, as if their
Conclusions were as clearly grounded upon Revelation, as the plainest truth in
the Gospel; and have thrust them upon the world with more fierceness and zeal
than would have become a much better Cause. For an instance hereof, we may take
Dr. Owen's Book, where he does not only assert for himself and his Brethren,
that the efficiency (as he calls it) of the Holy Spirit on the minds of men is
irresistible, P. 270.
and that Grace is always prevalent or effectual, and cannot be resisted, as to
that end whereunto of God it is designed, and much more to the same purpose;
but falls upon his Adversaries, in this point, with such insolent language and
immodest reproaches, that they could hardly deserve to be worse used by him, if
they had affirmed divine Grace was not necessary to Regeneration, as resolutely
as they maintain the contrary. This is the Doctrine which he pretends to stand
up for against the New Pelagians, and a crew of Socinianized Arminians, (they
are his own words) as if to deny the personality of the Holy Ghost, and the
assistances of divine Grace, and to contradict his opinion that the Holy Spirit
does irresistibly produce the effects of Grace upon the minds of men, were the
same thing. But this you will less wonder at, when you consider, that he makes
nothing to compare those that oppose his opinion to Cain and Ishmael: For he
says, P. 287.
The Enmity of Cain against Abel was but a branch of this proud inclination.
The instance of Ishmael in the Scripture, is a representative of all such as
under an outward profession of the true Religion, do scoff at those who being
as Isaac, Children of the Promise, do profess and evidence an interest in the
internal power of it, which they are unquainted withal. And by this he shows
that the practice of despising his opinions concerning Grace, has not been
taken up of late. Now I will not say how old the practice has been of making
every quarrel a man is concerned in, equal to the Cause of those godly men
whose sufferings are mentioned in the Scripture; but it is well enough known,
that it is at least as old as that Faction which our Author has espoused; and
whether this be not one branch of a proud inclination, let sober men judge. It
has been often observed of these men, how dear They, and their Opinions, are to
themselves; and the Doctor has here given you a good ordinary instance of it:
For if he had not been bewitched with self-conceit, he had never made this
absurd parallel: for what had Abel or Isaac to do with his Cause? If he had
only called us the seed of Cain and Ishmael, without saying why, who would
have thought the reason had been our questioning whether men are snatched into
a state of Grace by an irresistible power? And yet this is his great quarrel
against us concerning the manner of Conversion, which here he pretends to
explain. I know he does more than insinuate, and that more than once, that we
disown the very assistances of the Holy Spirit, as I shall convince you in a
fitter place; but this you are to look upon as an effect of his rage, which
makes him foam out Calumnies against us without any discretion; for he knows
well enough that his Adversaries are not guilty of it, as I shall show you too
from his own words; and then I shall desire him to consider whether the Father
of Lies be not the Representative of such shameless Writers as he is an example
of. As to what he says, P. 287.
that such a work of God upon men, as he contends for, is exposed to derision,
if upon that account he compares his Adversaries to scoffing Ishmael, I think
he does them great wrong: For let him, if he can, name any of his opinion in
this matter, who has debated the point with any appearance of Modesty and
Sobriety; and was answered with the least show of Contempt. But as for those
(of whom Dr. Owen is one) that instead of answering the Arguments of their
Adversaries, complain that they are laughed at, and do themselves fall upon
them with the foulest reproaches, as upon the Enemies of Christ; it may be
sometimes good to take down their haughty spirits, and to render their
arrogance contemptible, lest others be encouraged to hope, that any Cause may
be carried by vapouring.

In my opinion it is a difficult undertaking, to define in particular what is
the manner and measure of the Holy Spirit's Operations; because, I think, the
Scriptures have not particularly acquainted us what it is. Let others who have
better considered the thing, enjoy the liberty of thinking otherwise; and for
my own part, I shall with all thankfulness submit to further instruction. But
as for Dr. Owen, I hope to make it appear, that the Scriptures do not favor
his determination of the Question; which I shall the rather endeavor, because
I conceive this opinion, that the Spirit works upon our minds in an
irresistible manner, especially as he has advanced it, to be of dangerous
consequence to the Souls of men. In the mean time I shall lay down some
Propositions, the truth of which will, I think, be easily granted by all sober
Christians, from whence we may in general conclude what is the manner of the
Holy Spirit's Operations, and the measure of their power; not that I think even
this were needful, if our Author, and those of his way, had not fallen into a
dangerous Mistake by venturing too far. For that which has been already said
seems to me to afford a sufficient foundation of Godliness and Comfort, if all
be not subverted again by their opinion of the Manner wherein we are
regenerated by the Holy Spirit. Now I think it will appear that those general
Propositions wherein they agree with us concerning the Manner of the Holy
Spirit's Operations on our minds, are inconsistent with their particular
definition of it. And the first of them is this: That,

1. Faith and Repentance, or Conversion to God, together with Perseverance in
Holiness, are truly and properly the effects of God's Word, revealed to us in
the Doctrines of the Gospel. Wherefore such is the manner of the Holy Spirit's
Operation in producing these Qualifications in our minds, that it hinders them
not from being the Genuine effects of the Revelation of the Gospel; but they
ought still to be ascribed to that force and efficacy of those divine Truths
which are contained in it; whereby the Gospel is in it self a fit and proper
means of working the Grace of God in the mind^ of men. Now it is very plain
that the proper and natural power of the Gospel to produce these effects,
consists in the evidence of its Truth, in the authority and excellency of its
Laws, and in the weightiness of its Promises and Threatenings, and other motives
to obedience. Wherefore if Conversion be the proper effect of God's Word, it
follows that the Holy Spirit does, 1. Only cooperate to the producing of that
effect; and, 2. In that manner, as it may truly be affirmed to be an effect of
those considerations which are propounded to us in the Gospel.

The truth of the Supposition is manifest from diverse places of Scripture: As
for Faith, St. Paul plainly tells us, it comes by hearing, and hearing by the
Word of God, Romans 10.17. Thus upon the conversion of many Unbelievers, it is
said, that the Word of God grew mightily and prevailed, Acts 19.20. i. e. the
testimonies which God gave to the truth of the Gospel, convinced many that were
in all appearance most likely to oppose it. Hence St. Paul tells the
Corinthians, that in Christ Jesus he had begotten them through the Gospel; i.
e. by the preaching of the Gospel he had first brought them over to the faith
of Christ. Furthermore, our obedience is by St. Peter ascribed to the power of
God's Word, where he says, that we have great and precious promises given to
us, that by These we might be partakers of the divine Nature, having escaped
the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. To the same
purpose the Word of God is said to work effectually in those that believed, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. i. e. by the force of those promises mentioned by St. Peter, and
other weighty considerations moving to holiness. Finally, our Regeneration is
expressly ascribed to the Word of God; for we are said to be born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and
abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. and our Spiritual improvement is attributed not
long after to the same cause; As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the
Word, that ye may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. Thus the increase of Christian
Virtue, is ascribed both to the Holy Spirit, and to the Word of God, in that
Prayer of St. Paul for the Colossians, that they might be filled with the
knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding; that they
might walk worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every
good work, etc. that is, by the means of a fuller understanding of the Will of
God, Col. 1.9, 10. And the cooperation of both these Causes for the producing
of the same Effect, is yet more plainly expressed in those words of our
Savior's Prayer for his Disciples: Sanctify them through thy TRVTH: thy WORD
is TRVTH; where nothing can be more plain than this, that the holiness of
Believers, is ascribed to the Operation of Truth upon their minds, viz. that
Truth which is revealed in the Gospel.

Seeing then, that the Gospel is not only in it self a proper means of
converting the Unbeliever and the Disobedient, of confirming and improving the
sincere Convert; but as you see the Graces of the Holy Spirit are those effects
also, which the Scriptures frequently ascribe to the weightiness of those
Reasons and Considerations that are offered to our understandings by the Word
of God: We must be careful not to define the manner whereby the Holy Spirit
works in the minds of men to produce these Graces, so as to deny them to be
the Genuine and proper effects of divine Truths; which is done by assigning
such a manner of Operation to the Holy Spirit, as must needs be inconsistent
with ascribing Conversion to the Operation of Truth.

Wherefore it is too boldly done of Dr. Owen and his Party, to affirm that
Conversion is an effect of such an Operation of the Holy Spirit upon the mind,
as makes it impossible for a man not to be converted, and withal that
Conversion is impossible without such an irresistible Operation. For,

1. If a man must necessarily resist the whole strength of God's Word, till
Conversion be wrought in him by an irresistible action of the Spirit, as these
men teach; then it is plainly absurd to make Conversion to be an effect of God's
Word. For upon this Hypothesis it contributes no more to a man's conversion,
than the hurling of a Pebble does to the throwing down of a mighty Wall that is
falling by the fury of the Cannon. If, as the Doctor says, P. 262.
the Will cannot make use of that Grace for conversion which it can refuse; if
also it can resist all kind of Persuasions, Reasons, Arguments, and Motives,
P. 261.
as he himself supposes; and by consequence, that Operation of the Spirit
whereby Conversion is caused be irresistible: What can be more evident than
that Conversion must upon these terms be only and wholly the effect of an
irresistible power; and not at all of Reasons and Motives? To say that the
Operations of the Spirit produce their effects irresistibly, because they are
joined with the Word, is to ascribe an irresistible Operation to the Word as
well as to the Spirit; or rather, to make the irresistibleness to arise from
the concurrence of both those Causes. Now, besides, that upon this Hypothesis,
all men to whom the Gospel is made known would be converted, seeing we have
proved the ministration of the Gospel to be accompanied with the Operations of
the Spirit in all that hear it: Besides this, I say, these men do not place the
irresistible force by which Conversion, as they say, is wrought in the
concurrence of the Word and the Spirit; but in the sole Operation of the
Spirit. Now, that Conversion should at the same time be an effect of God's
Word, which, as they say, a man cannot but resist till he is converted; and of
such an Operation of the Spirit too as is altogether irresistible, is to me as
unintelligible as Transubstantiation. For if it were only said, that it is
possible for a man to resist the Operations of Truth, and withal granted, that
Conversion must as well be an effect of the truth of God's Word, as of the Holy
Spirit's Operating in our minds; it would plainly follow that his Operations
were resistible. The reason is, because where an Effect depends upon the
concurrence of two Causes, he that has it always in his power to resist the
force of one, is at any time able to frustrate the other, and consequently to
hinder the effect. Now they themselves grant, and it is plain by daily
experience that the Word of God may be resisted, and heard in vain, as it was,
even when preached in the demonstration of the Spirit, and Power. Wherefore
when the Operations of the Spirit conspire with the power of the Word to
convert a sinner, if he can be obstinate against the latter, he may also quench
the former; and then they are not irresistible. Furthermore it may be said, if
Conversion be wrought irresistibly by the sole Operation of the Spirit; then
the Word which may be resisted, is unnecessary: But if the Word cannot but be
resisted till the effect is wrought by another power that is invincible, viz.
that of the Spirit; then it is plain, that the effect is owing only to that
power; which is to render the whole Ministry of the Gospel utterly vain and
useless, and to contradict all those passages of Scripture, which attribute our
Conversion to the force of divine Truth. But

2. It is further evident from the manner of their explaining this irresistible
Operation, that they exclude all the influence of God's Word from being a means
of Conversion. P. 254.
Dr. Owen tells us that the Holy Ghost is the immediate Author and cause of
Regeneration; and he is often putting us in mind, that we are converted by an
immediate Physical Operation of the Spirit; P. 269, etc.
which he endeavors to prove for many Pages together. Now a Physical Operation
he opposes to Moral, and thereby excludes from it all use of any Reasons,
Arguments, and Motives whatsoever, as he does industriously more than once. P.
261.
Now what is more plain, than that to ascribe Conversion to such an Operation
as this, is wholly to exclude the Word of God from being any way subordinate to
that Grace whereby we are converted? For although the Doctor tells us
sometimes, that he grants a Moral Operation of the Spirit, and that he only
denies the concurrence of that with the Word to be the total cause of
Conversion; yet, by his leave, P. 268.
he does not make it so much as a partial cause. For if this Physical Operation
only, is that Grace which can remove all obstacles, and overcome all
oppositions, and infallibly produce the effect intended, as he speaks; P. 270.
if this Operation does not consist in the use of any motive whatsoever
contained in the Word of God: Finally, if this Operation be the immediate cause
of Conversion; if nothing intervenes between this Operation and the Effect: it
is then plain, I conceive, that the Word of God is wholly excluded from being a
means of Conversion: for neither is the use of any motive included in the
nature of this Operation; nor does the Spirit use any motive, when he thus
operates: for, as these men say, this Physical Operation is the immediate cause
of Conversion: And now let any man tell me in what capacity the Word of God can
stand, to be a means of Grace. In the mean time our Author, if you will believe
him, pays a great regard to the Scriptures, which he does not only render thus
useless in general, but many plain testimonies whereof he contradicts in
particular; and for instance, that passage in our Savior's Prayer; Sanctify
them through thy truth, thy Word is truth. I desire him at his leisure to
consider, whether the Grace which our Savior prayed for in his Disciples
behalf, were an immediate Physical Operation; if not, whether we are now
sanctified by another sort of Operation than that which Christ prayed for.

Now to say in express terms, that the Word of God is of no use in the
conversion of a Sinner, would sound so horridly in any sober Christians Ears,
that the Doctor himself has not ventured upon it; but on the contrary he is
often persuading his Reader, that he attributes as much to the efficacy of the
Word as any of them all: For he tells us; P. 268.
Whereas some contend that the whole of the Grace of God consists in the
effectual application of it unto the minds and affections of men, whereby they
are enabled to comply with it, and turn unto God by Faith and Repentance; they
do not ascribe a greater power unto the Word than we do, by whom this
administration of it is denied to be the Total Cause of Conversion: For we
assign the same power to the Word as they do, and MORE also; only we affirm,
that there is an effect to be wrought in this Work, which all this Power, if
alone, is insufficient for. After a few such sayings as these, a man need not
be ashamed to say any thing: For, 1. They who contend, that the administration
of the Word by the Spirit applying it to the mind, is insufficient to cause
Conversion, and that there is another action of the Spirit, wherein no use is
made of the Word at all necessary to Conversion, do not attribute so much power
to the Word as they do, who say the former is sufficient. 2. Much less do they
so, if withal they pretend that this other Operation, is the immediate cause of
Conversion, whereby the Word is excluded from intervening as a Means. 3. And
yet much less, if they say this Operation produces the effect irresistibly; and
till this irresistible act has taken place, the Word is utterly ineffectual.
4. Least of all can it be pretended that they assign more power to the Word,
than their Adversaries do. I wonder at this man's confidence to venture such
open falsehoods abroad as these are! It had been enough in conscience for a
modest man to say, that those of our Author's opinion, ascribe as much power to
the Word as we do; but to say, they assign more to it, is too much in all
reason to go for a mere mistake. And therefore one may well think, he saw
clearly enough that he deferred not so much to the Word as we; and that because
he affirmed the contrary, he resolved to put on a Face for something, and say
withal, that he ascribed more. For truly he may e'ne say that, as well as the
other; for this passage of his is but the next Page before he asserts, and
endeavors to prove for a great while together, that till the Soul is changed
by his Physical Operation, the Word of God has no more power to make a due
impression on it, no though the motives thereof be urged by the internal
persuasion of the Spirit, than you have to stir a Rock by speaking to it; or to
raise a dead Body from the Grave by a Syllogi^^^* And yet this is the man* that
just before would make you believe, how he yields as much, nay more efficacy to
the Word than we, who say, that Mankind is not so incapable of being converted
by the Word; but that when it is blessed and used (as he well enough expresses
it) by the Holy Spirit, P. 268.
it is sufficient to convert a man, without any such Physical Operation as they
talk of. But, you see, this man makes it to be no more than a Dead Letter, even
when it is quickened by the Spirit too; and after all his Flourishes, resolves
Conversion into an irresistible Operation, in which there is no use of the Word
at all. And this is enough to show you what an irreverent opinion he has of it,
whatever he pretends to the contrary. And so much for the first Proposition.

SECT. 2.
2. The manner wherein the Holy Spirit acts upon the minds of men, is suitable
to the ratio^nal nature of Mankind: Which is a truth so fully expressed and
liberally granted by Dr. Owen, that I shall need to say the less of it. P. 270,
271.
For he says, The power which the Holy Ghost puts forth in our Regeneration,
is such in its acting or exercise, as (...) Minds, Wills, and Affections are
suited to be wrought upon, and to be affected by it according to their Natures
and natural Operations. Again he does not act in them otherwise than they
themselves are meet to be acted according to their own Nature, Power, and
Ability. He draws us with the Cords of a man. And then he tells us the work it
self is expressed by persuading and alluring; and that it carries no more
repugnancy to our Faculties, than a prevalent persuasion does. Again, that our
minds are not merely passive Instruments, (as formerly in Prophetical
inspirations) moved above their own natural Capacity and Activity, as to the
manner of Operation: But he works on the Minds of men, in and by their own
natural actings, through an immediate influence and impression of his Power.
Lastly, that he offers no violence or compulsion to the Will: this, he says,
that Faculty is not naturally capable to give admission unto; if it be
compelled, it is destroyed. These are very fair concessions; and ^^less you
have given over wondering at our Author's way of writing, you would hardly
believe they should drop from his Pen. But they are his own words I assure you;
though Light and Darkness may be as soon reconciled as they can be to that
Opinion concerning the manner of the Holy Spirit's Operations, which he so
eagerly contends for. For if a Physical Operation immediately and irresistibly
producing Faith and Holiness, be utterly unsuitable and repugnant to the
natural faculties and operations of the mind, in which those effects are
wrought: then is it most evident that those Concessions are inconsistent with
the Hypothesis of Conversion by that Physical Work. Now let him tell me whether
the mind of man is according to its Nature, and natural Operations, suited to
be wrought upon by such a Power, as makes not the least use of the
Understanding, of the least Thought, or intellectual Operation whatsoever; and
whether the power of his Physical Operation be not such a power. Again, if
Conversion be the immediate effect of this Physical Operation, is it not plain
that the Mind is merely a passive Instrument in its Conversion? And yet
further, if till the effect be irresistibly wrought by this Physical work, the
Mind is unperswadable by any Reason and Argument; does it not follow, that
Violence and Compulsion is in the highest manner offered to the Will? that is,
(for I know not what he should mean else by it) that Conversion is not an act
of the Will, but that a man is converted without his Will; and that it is not
his act, but God's only. Can our Author tell me what it is to work upon a
rational intellectual Being, in a way suitable to its nature; but to work upon
it in an intellectual way, i. e. by convincing, by persuading, by prevailing,
by the power of Truth? But that irresistible power which he makes to be the
immediate cause of Conversion, works not this way at all, but is
contradistinguish'd to all use of reason whatsoever, and produces its effect
by natural necessity. So that you may as well say that a Clock strikes, and the
Clapper makes the Bell sound, in an intellectual manner, as that such a power
converts in a way suitable to the rational faculties of Mankind. If the
immediate Operation of the Spirit, by which a man is converted, be Physical, as
our Author will have it, and carries no force of reason with it; the Soul is
then moved, just as if it were a senseless Machine, which obeys indeed (if you
will so call it) the necessary Laws of Motion; but, I think, is not suited to
be wrought upon, and be affected according to the nature and the natural
Operations of a reasonable Creature as such. If the Soul were a mere Engine,
our Author's Physical Operation would suit it well enough; and then Persuasion
would be as improper a means to make it do any thing suitable to its nature, as
his Physical Power is to produce a free consent, immediately and irresistibly
in an intellectual Agent. The work of the Spirit, which he contends for, (if
you will take his word) carries no more repugnance to our Faculties, than a
prevalent persuasion does. This is one of his bold sayings; but he was wise
enough not to say a word of the Physical Operation in all that Paragraph to
which it belongs; for then the slowest Reader might have marked the
Contradiction, since every body knows that a persuasion, be it never so
prevalent, carries no repugnancy at all to our Faculties; because persuasion is
the proper way of working upon a free Agent. But now I appeal to him whether
any Operation can carry a more direct repugnance to them, than that Physical
Omnipotent Operation he speaks of. And therefore if he will stand to this
saying of his, he must confess, if he does like an honest man, that he was out,
in affirming Conversion to be the immediate effect of such an Operation.

I know indeed he talks much of the Persuasion, or moral Operation of the
Spirit; but as I shall let him see further in another place, it is only to
reproach it with insufficiency to convert the Sinner: And it is plain from his
Hypothesis, that he does not make Conversion to be the effect of persuasion at
all. For it is impossible it should, if, 1. It be an immediate effect of the
Physical Operation; and, 2. If no persuasion will serve the turn, till that
comes like a Hurricane and carries all before it; that is, till all opposition
is born down without the assistance of Persuasion. For this man makes every
unregenerate soul as inflexible by the persuasions and gentle breathings of the
Holy Spirit, as the very Rocks are by a whispering Wind. Now if Persuasion can
do nothing, then it is the Torrent of irresistible Power, that must do all, or
else a man can never be converted. And if this be the way of Conversion, a man
may become a Convert when he thinks of nothing less, as well as when his
thoughts are busied about it; nay it is all one whether he be sleeping, or
waking; whether he dreams of it, or of something else. The habitual Villain
stands as fair for Conversion, as a man of the most ingenuous Nature: And he
may be converted as easily at the point of Death, as if he were to begin his
Race again, and were not hardened by a custom in sinning. All which is contrary
to the common sense of Mankind, and the constant experience of Humane Nature.
One would have thought, that if the persuading Incitations and Motions of the
Holy Spirit himself be long resisted by a Sinner, he is growing past all the
methods of divine Grace. But while he is thus immovable by the most convincing
Arguments, and most powerful persuasions, little does the proud soul think,
that there is a Physical Operation still behind; and the moment may come, when
his stubborn Will shall be brought down in spite of all resistance: But our
Author knows it is so, and withal, that no man is converted but in this manner,
viz. by an irresistible Operation, which moves the Soul no otherwise than as if
it were a stock or a stone; because it is incurable by any method that is
suited to the Nature of Man.

But after all, we must not pass by our Author's attempt of reconciling
Conversion by this Physical work of the Spirit, with its being an act of our
own choice: for, says he, since this Grace does irresistibly prevail against
all this opposition, P. 271.
and is without the mediation of any reason effectual and victorious over it;
(...) will be enquired, and well it may, how this can any otherwise be done but
by a kind of violence and compulsion. He shows that no violence is offered to
the Will, upon these terms, by two Answers; whereof the first is this, viz.
That the enmity and opposition that is acted by the Will against Grace, is
against it as objectively proposed to it. So do men resist the Holy Ghost; that
is, in the external dispensation of Grace by the Word: And if that be alone,
they may always resist it; (which you are not to wonder at, because) the enmity
that is in them will prevail against it; Ye always resist the Holy Ghost. The
meaning of all which is this; that a Sinner may resist the force of all reason
and persuasion whatever, and that indeed his Will is invincible by it. Now thus
he proceeds: The Will therefore is not forced by any power put forth in Grace
in that way, wherein it is capable of making opposition unto it; but the
prevalency of Grace is of it, as it is internal, working really and physically,
which is not the object of the Wills opposition; for it is not proposed unto
it, as that which it may accept or refuse, but works effectually in it. That
is to say, the Will is not forced by persuasion, which it may resist; but it is
forced by that Physical Operation which it cannot resist, and which does not
leave any room either for accepting or refusing; so that because Conversion
thus wrought is not an act of our own choice; therefore no violence is offered
to the Will when it is so converted; which is as much as to say, that because
Conversion thus wrought is not chosen by the Will, therefore it is chosen by
it. This Answer was so apparently absurd, that I thought fit to transcribe the
whole Paragraph, lest they who have not the Doctor's Book at hand, might
suspect that I had wronged him.

The substance of his second Answer is this; That at the same instant of time
wherein the Will is acted, it acts it self; and by so doing preserves its own
liberty in its Exercise. To which I reply, 1. That it cannot be said that the
Will or the Soul, considered as a free Agent, does, as such, act any thing at
that instant of time, when it is immediately and irresistibly converted by the
Physical Act. If he means, indeed, that the Soul acts as my Pen does when I am
writing; or as an Engine does when it is set a going, I grant it: but it is plain
that no such action can properly be said to be an act of the Will, or a free
action. 2. Yet further, whatever act you ascribe to the Will at that time, it
cannot be truly pretended, that by this act the Liberty of the Will is
preserved. The Reason is, because there is none to preserve about this matter
of Conversion; since all the liberty which the Soul had, before that
Instantaneous Act as he elsewhere calls it, is utterly destroyed by it. For
such is the nature of this Act, that it converts by a greater necessity of the
same kind, than that whereby Mechanical Causes produce their Effects; for it
leaves it naturally impossible for the Soul not to be converted. Now if such an
act be the immediate cause of Conversion, I do not see that there is the least
regard had to the Souls being a free Agent in this manner of Conversion. But on
the contrary, it seems plain, that the Soul is utterly deprived of all kind of
liberty in this matter: And if she has no liberty left to exercise, she has
none to preserve, by any act you would have to be contemporary, with the
irresistible Operation. Wherefore our Author's saying, that the Grace he speaks
of, so acts our Wills, as that they also act themselves, and that freely; is a
mere begging of the Question, instead of an Answer to the Objection propounded.
For, Whether it be possible for the Soul that is thus acted, to act freely at
the same time, is the very thing in question. Perhaps he lays some stress upon
those words used by him; that there is herein an Inward, Almighty, Secret act
of the power of the Holy Ghost. For it is usual, when men contend for
inexplicable and unintelligible notions in Divinity, to pretend they are
Mysteries, and fly to God's omnipotence to fetch themselves off.

Now I think no man denies, that God can convert the greatest Sinner in a
moment into a Saint, (or, if he pleases, into an Angel) by such a Physical act
as this man speaks of. But then, 1. This could not be reconciled with supposing
the rational use of our Faculties in being converted to God. Conversion would
only be a necessary effect of God's power, but no free act of our own. 2. It
does not follow, that because God Almighty can convert a Sinner this way,
therefore he will do it. But, 3. If it be granted that God always converts men
in an intellectual manner, and that the Operations of the Spirit produce their
effects in our minds, in a way suitable to the rational nature of Mankind; it
will follow that God never converts men in that manner, which our Author
contends for, because so to do is inconsistent with a rational way of
Conversion; and therefore unsuitable to the nature, and the natural Operations
of our minds. Lastly, since he grants that the Holy Spirit operateth in our
minds, no otherwise than they are meet to be moved, according to their own
nature and power; it is clear from the premises, that by this concession he
overthrows his own Hypothesis of Conversion by the immediate, Physical and
irresistible work.

I shall conclude this matter with considering that remarkable Expostulation of
Almighty God with the Jews, which we find in Isa. 5.4. What could have been
done more to my vineyard that I have not done in it? By comparing the Parable
with the Explication of it, verse. 7. you may observe, 1. That it was in their
power to have turned to God; and therefore God had given them all that internal
Grace which was necessary to Conversion: otherwise he had not expected their
conversion, nor complained of their obstinacy, much less punished them with
that severity threatened, verse. 5. 2. That they had not only all necessary
means and helps, but even such as were moreover profitable and advantageous in
the way of conversion; so that it was not only possible, but considering what
God had done for them, it was very likely they would turn; and this is clearly
signified by that greatness of expectation expressed by the making of a
Wine Press in the Vineyard, v. 2. Nay, 3. God asks them what could be done more
than had been done for them already. And yet, 4. They were all this while
unconverted, and as bad as ever, v. 4, 7.

Now lay all these things together, and it follows, 1. That men may be
converted without that measure of Grace, which makes it impossible for a man
not to be so: for if, as the Doctor tells us, the Will cannot make use of that
Grace which it can refuse, then God had not given these men that measure of
Grace which was necessary to Conversion; for they refused, that is, they were
not converted by that Grace which was imparted to them. Now if he had not done
what was necessary for their Conversion, what reason had he to expect it? how
could it be said sincerely, What could have been done more? what justice had
there been in punishing them with so much severity?

2. It follows also, that it is possible for men not to be converted, when God
has done the utmost for his part that is meet to be done in order to their
Conversion. For those words, What could have been done more to my vineyard that
I have not done in it? strongly imply, that he had done all to make it
fruitful, that was any way proper for him to do; and that the Jews could not
reply with truth, that God had ever done more for the conversion of those that
had actually repented, than he had done for them. Indeed if God pleased, he
could have converted these obstinate creatures, by such an irresistible power
as the Doctor ascribes Conversion to; and therefore those words What could have
been done more? or as it is better expressed in the Hebrew Text (...) i. e.
what is to be done more? do not imply that God by his omnipotence could not
have converted them; but that no more remained to be done by him, in a way meet
for him to use, toward the conversion of reasonable Creatures. According to
which Explication the words of the Translation may be used well enough, i. e.
What could have been done more, considering they were to be wrought upon as
Men? what is further meet to be done, unless they should be converted otherwise
than as Men; unless they were to be dealt with like Creatures that cannot
reason and understand; and were not to have the use of that liberty left them
which belongs to their natures? It is in this manner, I say, that the Question
is to be understood, because no man can deny that in respect of absolute power,
God could have converted them in spite of all their resistance: And then it
may be strongly concluded, that because he did not do so, therefore it was not
by his wisdom judged meet and proper so to do: for if it had, and if this had
ever been his way of converting Sinners; that Question, What is to be done more
that I have not done? was not fit to be put to those men, who knew well enough
that the Grace they had frustrated could not possibly be irresistible Grace.
Finally, the no mention of any Reply made by that people to this upbraiding
Question, (and if they had any Reply to make, it is exceeding probable that
some notice had been taken of it, because God is pleased here to make them
their own Judges, verse. 3, 7.) shows, that in those days either no such thing
was dreamed of, as Conversion by irresistible Grace; or if it were, that these
men could not themselves judge it meet for Almighty God to convert them by it.
Nor can any man judge so, who thinks it meet that the Operations of Grace
should be suited to our reasonable natures; unless he be a Slave to an
Hypothesis: And commonly in that case men care not what they say.

SECT. 3.
3. Since it is evident from the Holy Scriptures that God requires and expects
we should put forth our own endeavors after all those things, which the Spirit
is given to work in us; it follows, that such is the manner of the Holy
Spirit's Operations, that they do not make our own diligence and care
unnecessary to the attaining of them; but that his Operations will do us no
good if our own endeavors be wanting. The reason is, because it were high
presumption to say, that although God requires us to be active and diligent, it
may be never the worse for us, though we be lazy; which might be said, on
supposition that the Graces of the Spirit might be attained without any
industry of our own. Now we are commanded in the Scripture, to work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, although it be presently said, that God
works in us both to will and to do. Wherefore God's working in us does not
render our own care to will and to do unnecessary to that end; especially if
you consider, 1. That God's Operation is brought in as a reason why we should
work: Now it would be very strange, that God should use that for a reason to
us, why we should work out our Salvation, which is on the other hand a clear
reason why we need not. Wherefore it is again evident, that God does not work
his Graces in us irresistibly; nor is that manner of Operation supposed in the
Text: For if it were, then it is plain that our own negligence cannot hinder the
effect of his working; nay, not the utmost resistance we can make, that is, our
working the quite contrary way, cannot prevent it: and I refer it to any man of
common sense, if this be not a temptation to carelessness, instead of a motive
to industry. 2. Much less would the Apostle have added, With fear and
trembling, if our own industry were not necessary to the attainment of those
Graces, which God is said to work in us. Therefore also they are not wrought by
an irresistible Operation: For there could be no cause for Fear and Trembling,
if we could not possibly miscarry through our own negligence. But as long as
God works in us irresistibly to Will and to Do, there can be no possibility
of miscarrying; and consequently no ground for that Fear and Trembling, which
should increase our diligence. Dr. Owen tells us upon this place, P. 470.
that To say God does only persuade us, or excite and stir up our Wills by his
Grace to put forth their own acts, is to say, he does not do what the Apostle
affirms him to do; That is, that he does not work in us both to Will and to Do.
To which I answer; that to say God works in us both to Will and to Do, not
only by exciting and stirring up our wills to put forth their own acts; but by
making it utterly impossible for us not to Will and to Do, is to say, that we
have no cause at all to work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling, which
the Apostle plainly exhorts us to. I do not say, that God does not what the
Apostle affirms him to do; but I say, the meaning of those words is this, that
God works in us what is on his part requisite for our willing and doing, by
stirring up our Wills to put forth their own Acts; which, for all that, they
may not put forth. That this is the true interpretation of the words, I prove
thus: 1. Because their connection with the Exhortation does manifestly require
it, as you will confess, if you do but observe how the Apostles discourse must
run according to the Doctor's interpretation, viz. I assure ye all to whom I
write, that God works in you all things that appertain to your Obedience and
Salvation (those are the Doctor's own words) and that by an irresistible
Operation, so as it is not possible for you not to will or to do whatsoever is
necessary to Salvation: therefore I seriously exhort you to be very careful,
even with Fear and Trembling, that ye both will and do all such things, lest
you miscarry through your own negligence and disobedience. Than which nothing
could be more absurd. 2. Because God is frequently said, in the Scripture, to
do those things, for the effecting of which he has contributed means and help
sufficient, although the things themselves do not actually come to pass. Of
this manner of speaking I might give you many instances; but these few that
follow will put the thing out of question. In Jer. 51.9. God says concerning
Babylon, (...) We have healed Babylon, but she is not healed. The common
Translation, We would have healed, being rather a right Exposition, than
Translation of the words. The same thing God says of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 24.13.
Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness any more, i. e. God would afford them the means and
opportunities of Conversion no longer, because they had already obstructed the
efficacy of them so long together. And then by his purging Jerusalem, it is
plain nothing can be meant, but his doing all that was proper for him to do in
order to that end, and which would certainly have accomplished it, had they
complied as they might with his gracious methods. Thus also the goodness of God
is said to lead them to Repentance, who are not actually led by it, being such
as after their hardness and impenitent hearts, treasure up wrath unto
themselves against the day of wrath, Romans 2.4, 5. The meaning is plainly this,
that the forbearance and Grace of God, is a most sufficient means of bringing
those to repentance, who do not only neglect what they ought to do in
compliance with the goodness of God, but harden their Hearts against it. Thus
we see the holy Scripture does ascribe unto God the honor of what he does
toward the conversion of those Sinners that continue in impenitence, by saying
that he has converted and healed them, even while they are yet in their sins;
hereby intimating to us, that it was not through any defect of Grace on his
part; but only through their own failing to excite such endeavors, as they
might have done, that they were not actually reformed. Now in like manner, and
according to the usual style of the Scripture, God may be said to Work, even in
those men, to Will and to Do, who are still unwilling and disobedient; and
therefore that Phrase does not necessarily import, that God does more than
excite and stir up our Wills by his Grace; or that he does not leave it
possible for us to obstruct the efficacy of his Operations. For we see the
Scripture supposes God's administering of those gracious Helps, which are
abundantly sufficient to make us true Converts, to be ground enough for saying
that he has converted us. Wherefore if the Words themselves are capable of
such a meaning; if the scope also and design of the place does necessarily
require such a meaning, I know not what can be required more to prove this to
be the true meaning of them, viz. that God works in us to Will and to Do in
that manner, that if our own care and diligence be wanting, we may neither will
nor do, but continue in our sins, and perish everlastingly.

Further, whereas God is said to give Repentance and a new Heart, it is from
hence plain that the meaning of such places is not this, that he does all
himself, and leaves nothing for us to do that we may be converted; because he
commands us often to do those things which he is yet said to do for us. Thus,
as it is said in Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new
spirit will I put within you -- and cause you to walk in my statutes: (which
words considered by themselves, run as if God had absolutely undertaken to do
this for his People, and they needed not now to trouble themselves with doing
any thing toward it:) So by the same Prophet God requires them to Cast away
from them all their transgressions, to make themselves a new heart and a new
spirit; for, says he, why will ye die, O house of Israel? Ezekiel. 18.31. From
whence it is plain, that notwithstanding God's promise of giving them a new
Heart, it was necessary for them to Renew their own Hearts: And what can this
signify, but that the Promise is not absolute, but supposes the concurrence
of our own endeavors, and consequently that it was given to encourage them;
but not to make them needless? And this will be more evident to you, if you
consider, that what the Lord promised to do in this kind for his People, was
not done for some of them, as you may see in Ezekiel. 11.19, 20, 21. I will put a
new spirit into them, and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and
will give them an heart of flesh, That they may walk in my statutes, etc. But
as for them whose heart walks after the heart of their detestable things, and
their abominations, I will recompense their way upon their own heads, says the
Lord God. From whence the needfulness of their own care to walk in God's
Statutes is most evident; for if no such condition had been implied in the
Promise, none of them could have walked after their Abominations.

Finally, Since the Holy Spirit is not only promised to work in us all needful
Qualifications for eternal Life, but we are also Commanded, Exhorted,
Entreated, and that most Seriously, Affectionately, and Frequently, to Repent
and be Converted, and to persevere in Holiness; and all this with promises of
an eternal Reward if we do, and with threatenings of everlasting Punishment if
we do not; it follows that the Spirit is not promised to work his Graces in our
Hearts, in such a manner, as to make our own endeavors unnecessary to the
attainment of them: For this were to make all those Commands and Exhortations
of God's Word a solemn piece of Pageantry, and to say that God has required us
under the greatest penalties, and with the most alluring promises, to obtain
those Qualifications which will be thrust upon us, though we do nothing to
obtain them. Wherefore I conclude, that the Holy Spirit works no otherwise in
the minds of men, than to leave them under as great an obligation to be
diligent in the use of all proper means for their recovery and perseverance, as
if they had not the benefit of any such divine Operation, but were left (if it
had been possible for them) to do all themselves.

SECT. 4.
4. It may be added, that the Operations of the Holy Spirit upon the minds of
men, are suited or proportioned to their present spiritual state. He does not
produce those effects in us all at once, which the Scripture ascribes to divine
Grace; but in such an Order, and by those Degrees that suit with our capacities
and qualifications. This is partly evident, 1. From what has been already said
concerning the communications of special Grace, the promises whereof are made
only to Believers and good men; the Holy Spirit does not form his other graces
in us, till he has wrought an hearty belief of the Gospel in our Souls: Nor
does he dwell in them, till they are purged from the love of sin and this
world. And since there are various degrees of holiness, according to which good
men differ from each other; since also our Savior has told us, that to him
that has, more shall be given; we may conclude that the communications of the
Holy Spirit are not made in equal measures to all good men neither; but
according as their minds are more or less raised toward the heavenly state:
And that the more perfect Christian enjoys a more plentiful influence of Grace
from above, and is more sensibly affected with those joys of the Holy Ghost
which increase the love of Virtue, and confirm him in every divine disposition.
2. This is further evident from those passages in Holy Writ, where we are
required to grow in grace, to abound in the work of the Lord, and to go on to
perfection. For these places, and the like, do strongly imply, that we cannot
on a sudden arrive to any degree of goodness which we fall greatly short of at
present, much less that we can presently be filled with the fullness of God.
Wherefore it plainly follows, that the Holy Spirit does not affect our minds,
when we begin the Christian life, in the same manner and measure that he moves
us in after we have made some progress in it, or shall arrive to such an
eminent degree of Christianity as may answer that expression of being filled
with the fullness of God. For if it were thus, then we might become Men in
Christ as soon as we are Babes; and come to the fullness of our stature without
growing, and going on to perfection. It is further observable, that the Word of
God is affirmed to be the means of our increasing in holiness; we must desire
the sincere Milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby, as St. Peter tells us:
and in Col. 1.9. St. Paul instructs us, that the way whereby the Spirit makes
us to walk worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every
good work; is by filling us with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding. From whence I observe, that our improvement in
holiness is greater or lesser, according as we consider and meditate upon
divine Truths, viz. for this end of governing our lives by them, which is to
know them in Wisdom and spiritual Understanding. Now since the effects of the
Holy Spirit's Operation in our minds, are, as I have shown, the genuine and
proper effects of the Word of God, seriously considered and laid to heart; it
follows, that the Holy Spirit works in us according to that measure wherein
divine Truths are considered by us: Therefore since our fruitfulness depends
upon our increasing in the knowledge of God, or that spiritual Understanding
which the Apostle speaks of; the Holy Spirit who works in us by the Word of
God, does not make us capable of arriving to that state of walking before the
Lord in all well-pleasing, all at once, but by degrees, viz. as we increase in
the knowledge of God by daily Meditation.

Lastly, since by the experience we have of Humane Nature we see, that customs
are not easily and presently put off; and that matters of difficulty cannot be
made familiar to us, but by use and practice; more particularly, that they who
are accustomed to do evil, cannot of a sudden learn to do well; that ill habits
are not wasted but by degrees; that the difficulties of a Religious life press
most upon us when we first enter upon it; and that they wear away insensibly by
continuance in well-doing; likewise that virtue is improved by exercise, and
that the Path of the just, as the Wise man speaks, is as the shining light,
that shines more and more unto the perfect day. I say, this being considered,
we must needs acknowledge that the Holy Spirit does not produce the effects of
his Grace in the minds of men all at once; but that he accommodates his
Operations to the state in which they are at present, prompting them to that
amendment which the measure of their capacity will admit. And this I take to be
a If I forget not, he acknowledges it somewhere in express terms.
Consequence also of what the Doctor so fully grants, viz. that the Spirit acts
the minds of men, only as they are meet to be acted, according to their own
Nature, Power, and Ability, and according to their natural Operations: For if
we may trust the constant experience of Mankind, both of the good and the bad,
although an evil habit is sooner contracted than a good one; yet none is gained
without some use and exercise; and ordinarily it cannot be otherwise. Now if
the Spirit moves us no otherwise than according to the Nature, Power, and
Ability of our minds; we must not think that by his Grace we may leap out of a
wicked course of life, in a moment, into the habits of Piety and Virtue; but
that he is in that manner present with us, as to enable us to make a good
beginning, and if we do so, that by his more abundant Grace we may proceed, and
so by degrees come to a divine temper of mind, and to walk worthy of the Lord
unto all well-pleasing.

There is no doubt but God, if he pleases, can in an instant change the most
vicious man into a Saint; but we have no more reason to think that he will do
so, than that he should work new Miracles to convert us. But we have great
reason to persuade us that he will not do so; for if we may judge of the Manner
and Measure of the Holy Spirit's Operations, by the promises of special Grace,
which belong only to qualified and prepared persons; or by the Commands of the
Scripture to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of Christ; or by the general
experience of Humane Nature: we may conclude, that an habitual Sinner cannot
become a good man in an instant: He must first learn to be afraid of God's
angry Justice; he must be heartily sorry for his sins; he must deeply consider
the promises of the Gospel; he must avoid the occasions of sin, and fortify
himself with vehement resolutions to forsake his wicked course; and he must
make many earnest prayers before he can subdue his Lusts, and overcome the
world, and yield a sincere obedience to all the Commands of God. And by
consequence, he cannot expect that the Operations of the Holy Spirit should
make him a holy man, but by the former means; and therefore by degrees.

This Consideration ought not to have been omitted; because it may be of great
use to two very different sorts of men.

1. To those who have been long accustomed to a sinful course of life, and
think it impossible to recover themselves, although they have the opportunities
of amendment before them. For it happens sometimes, that such men wish they had
taken an early care to live in the fear of God, and the practice of Religion
and Virtue; but they believe it is now in vain to strive against those fatal
habits, which are so deeply rooted in their minds; and so they abandon
themselves to carelessness and desperation. The reason whereof is commonly
this; that when they attempted their own reformation, and had purposed to lead
a new life, they soon found themselves surprised again by their former
temptations, and carried away as strongly by their sensual appetites as ever
they were before; which makes them conclude, it is to no purpose to take any
more pains with themselves: as if, because their freedom from the servitude of
sin could not be effected in a few moments, it cannot be procured at all. It
many times hinders a good beginning, that a man finds he cannot become a
Convert in an instant, and thence concludes that it can never be better with
him than it is at present; which he will be the more ready to do, if he has
heard that Conversion is a thing that comes by a snatch, and an Instantaneous
Act; and that unless the work be done all of a sudden, (which he finds it will
not be) it can never be done. But this is a Doctrine so pernicious to the Souls
of men, that the mischief of it were sufficient, to prove it false. For if it
were true, it were then in vain for an habitual sinner at least to attempt his
own recovery; since a custom in sin cannot be suddenly broken, without a
Miracle, but must be worn away by contrary practices, or not at all. It will
require some time, and much patience, to unlearn a way of life that is grown
customary and natural, and to make the contrary habitual and easy. But by
assiduity and constancy the thing may be done: Therefore if a man has
entertained any serious thoughts of Repentance, he ought not to discourage
himself, though he finds his affection to sin hard to put off; nor to give up
himself for a lost person, when he is again overtaken by a Temptation; but to
renew his resolutions more vigorously, and to pray more frequently and
earnestly; and to keep on thus in a way of well-doing: for there is not the
least doubt, but by this means, every day something will be done, to the
bettering of his mind, and the making of a good life more easy and ready to
him; till he has gained the true liberty of the Sons of God.

2. This very Consideration, which is of good use against despairing to
prevail, if a man that has yet the opportunity, desires to amend his life; is
also a good Antidote against the madness of deferring our Repentance upon a
presumption that we can repent and turn to God when we please. For if it be not
in the power of a wicked man, while he is thus flattering himself, to repent
this present moment; he has no reason to think that he may suddenly repent any
time hereafter. The most that is in his power at present, is to do something in
order to Repentance, or Conversion; but that is not to repent: The utmost he
can do, is to begin well; but that is not doing the thing. Now the longer he is
thus trifling with himself, his evil habits contract more stubbornness, and
will require more time to break them; and yet he has less time to do it in than
he had before. Nor is it likely that he will begin hereafter while he has any
time before him; for the reason why a man defers his reformation to another
time, is not because he intends to begin then; but because he has no mind to
begin now; and unless he be then in a better mind than he is at present, he
will certainly defer his Repentance still; nor is there any probability that he
will find himself better disposed after he has added Iniquity to Iniquity, and
made himself more a Child of the Devil than he was before. And indeed it
commonly happens, that they who cheat themselves in this manner, run out their
foolish presumption almost to the length of their Lives, till the terrors of
death make them serious; and then, I fear, it is too late to make a good
beginning: For what good should it do a man, to promise that he will mend his
life, now he can live no longer; or to resolve that he will spend his time
better, when he has no more to spend?

To conclude, if the Conversion of a wicked man be a work of some time, and
requires much diligence and preparation: If, so far as we can judge by several
Promises and Exhortations in holy Writ, and by the experience of Mankind, the
Operations of the Spirit move Unregenerate men according to their present
capacities; for instance, either to Fear, if they be yet Fearless; or to
Sorrow, if they have yet little or no Remorse; or to Care, if they are ready to
run upon Temptations, and the like. If the Holy Spirit enables them to mend
their state by such Degrees and Means, till their lusts and evil habits be
subdued; then, as they that have lived a wicked life, and yet enjoy the
opportunity of Repentance, have no reason to despair of their Conversion,
merely because they cannot break the power of their Lusts, and overcome the
world all at once; so neither has any man the least reason to presume that he
can repent when he pleases, and thereupon to neglect the present opportunity:
For all that he can do at present, is to make a good beginning; and not to do
that immediately, when upon this moment my eternal state may depend, what a
madness is that!

SECT. 5.
To all that has been said, we may further add, that the Holy Spirit moves
upon the minds o^ men in a most familiar way; and that his Motions are not
discernible by us, from the natural Operations of our minds. We feel them no
otherwise than we do our own Thoughts and Meditations; we cannot distinguish
them by the manner of their affecting us, from our natural Reasonings, and the
Operations of Truth upon our Souls. This imperceptibleness of the impressions
made upon our Souls by the divine Spirit, was that, which (as I told you
before, Chap. 3. Sect. 10.) our Savior signified to Nicodemus by the
Similitude of the Wind, Joh. 3. And we are not to wonder that the Holy Spirit
does move our Souls, when we are not conscious to our selves of any
supernatural Influence which they are acted by; since he can communicate Reason
and Persuasion to them, without making use of any thing that belongs to our
bodily Structure, and much more of our external Senses; without which it is
impossible for us to convey our Thoughts and Reasonings to one another's
minds: Wherefore the Holy Spirit being intimate to our Souls (which is a good
expression of the Doctor's, P. 272.
used to another purpose) can affect us, when we are not sensible of it, and
produce effects upon our minds, in that manner, as if they were merely the
effects of our own natural reasoning, and such consideration of divine Truth,
as we can excite in our selves and in one another.

Such is the manner of the Spirit's Operations in us, that if God had only
designed to give the Holy Spirit to us, without making any mention of it in his
Word, we could never have known, unless it had been communicated to us by some
private Revelation, that our Souls are moved by a divine Power when we love God
and do his Will; which, as I take it, the Doctor seems to grant in those words
of his; that this is a subject, in the handling whereof we have nothing to give
us assistance but pure Revelation; which are large words; but, according to a
candid construction, very true. But this, I think, may at least be inferred
from them: That without Revelation we could not have known that the Spirit
operates in the minds of men, in order to their Regeneration: And
consequently, that his Operations are imperceptible by us now; for if we were
sensible that the Holy Spirit moves us, we might argue from our own sense, as
well as from Revelation, that the Spirit is given to us.

Wherefore the best rule we can have to know when we are moved by the Holy
Spirit, must be taken from the Nature and End of his Operations. When we find
our selves inclined to that which is good, when we are bent upon the doing of
God's Will, when we perform our Duty, and govern our Actions by the Word of
God; then we may conclude that we are acted by a divine Spirit; and that
therefore we have occasion given us of humble and thankful Praises. But if we
forsake the steady rules of our duty, written upon our Hearts in our Creation,
or in the Bible by the inspired Messengers of God; and take every violent
impulse that we feel within us, for a suggestion of the Holy Spirit, we may
easily mistake a brutish Inclination, or a suggestion of the Devil, for divine
direction; since no sort of men are acted with a more sensible and impetuous
zeal, than they that are strongly led by the Devil and their own corrupt
affections. Therefore, unless we will expose our selves to Fanatical and
Diabolical delusions, we must keep close to Reason and Scripture, and try the
nature of all the impulses and motions of our minds by them: We must not
pretend that the Spirit inciteth us to such an action, and therefore it is
warranted by the Scripture; for the motions of the Spirit are in themselves
imperceptible: But we must first see what the Scripture would have us do, and
then if we have a mind to that, we may conclude that the Spirit has moved us
to it; for the Spirit inclines us only to what is good; and the Scripture is
a steady and unalterable rule of that. These are very plain and evident truths,
and yet we can hardly say too much to possess the minds of men with the
apprehension of them; since we can remember what infinite dishonours have been
done to God in the late times, by men professing Godliness, and pretending to
the special Guidance of the Spirit; how they asked counsel of God whether they
should commit Murder and Treason, Rebellion and Sacrilege; how they thought to
justify the most execrable Parricide (as the Doctor knows who did) that was
ever heard of in these parts of the World; and how blasphemously they pretended
that the Lord had put these things into their Hearts.

God does not now give the Spirit to justify the actions of men, but to assist
them in those that are good; and he has shown us what is good, partly by the
light of Nature, which is common to all men; and completely by the public
revelation of his Will contained in the Scriptures. Wherefore since the
Operations of the Spirit are imperceptible by us, and merely an object of our
Faith, we have no other way of assuring our selves that we follow the guidance
of the Spirit, but by following the rule of God's Word.

To this purpose it is observable, that the word Spirit does sometimes signify
the Gospel, as several Divines have proved, and particularly when St. Paul does
oppose the Spirit to the Flesh, as in Gal. 3.3. We are the circumcision which
worship God in the spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh; i. e. we are
the true Children of Abraham who worship God according to the Gospel, placing
no confidence in the observation of Moses's Law. And in Gal. 5.16. Walk in the
spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, i. e. walk according to
that Law of Love, verse. 14. which the Gospel so strictly prescribes; and do not
yield to inclinations of Revenge, Hatred, Variance, etc. verse. 20. But, at
least, in these and the like places, it is indifferent whether by the word
Spirit, you understand the Gospel, or the Holy Ghost; because it is in effect
the same thing, to be led by the Spirit, and to obey the Gospel.

Thus when the Apostle, Romans 8. so often notes the difference between those
that walk after the Flesh, and those that walk after the Spirit; we may easily
see, that walking after the Spirit may indifferently be interpreted, either by
living according to the rules of the Gospel, or by following the persuasion of
a well-instructed Mind or Conscience, or by obeying the motions of the Holy
Spirit of God. For to do one of these things, is to do them all, since they are
the Precepts of the Gospel, which the Conscience ought to be directed by; and
it is the obedience of the Gospel to which the Holy Spirit does move and incite
us.

We may observe also, that in this Chapter these following expressions are
equivalent, viz. To walk after the Spirit, v. 1. To be freed from the law of
sin, v. 2. To mind the things of the Spirit, v. 5. To be spiritually minded,
v. 6. To be subject to the law of God, v. 7. To please God, v. 8. To have the
Spirit of Christ, v. 9. Christ being in us, v. 10. The Spirit of God dwelling
in us, v. 11. Mortifying the deeds of the body by the Spirit, v. 13. And being
led by the Spirit, v. 14. These several Phrases, I say, do all express the same
state, viz. our being the true Disciples of Christ; only they conspire to
express the same thing under different respects: That of being subject to the
Law of God, respecting the rule of our Lives, as that of minding the things of
the Spirit, regards that serious consideration of the Doctrines of the Gospel,
which disposes us to walk according to that Rule. To be freed from the Law of
sin, notes the same thing, with respect to our former condition. Not to be
carnally but spiritually minded; not to live after the flesh, but to mortify
the deeds of the body the Spirit, are expressions that principally regard the
prevalency of our Conscience over our sensual Appetites. The Spirit of God
dwelling in us, is an expression of that constant readiness in good men to do
the Will of God, which is cherished in them by the Holy Spirit; as our having
(...) the Spirit of Christ seems principally to regard that likeness to him,
which we gain by becoming such persons. Finally, to walk after the Spirit, or
to be led by the Spirit, are Phrases which seem to take in all these respects
indifferently.

Now because it is really one and the same state and disposition, that is
signified by these Phrases, there can be no dangerous mistake incurred if a man
should understand any one of them, under a respect which perhaps was not
principally intended; as for instance, if by the Spirit of God dwelling in us,
he should understand our being strongly and deeply affected with divine Truths;
for where the Word of God dwells richly, there the Spirit of God dwells too.
Nay I may add further, that there is no need of being curious to mark what
respect was principally aimed at by the Apostle in the use of these Phrases
throughout Romans 8. and likewise Gal. 5. and other places; and that because the
Apostle does not seem to be curious in the use of them himself: Nor was it
necessary for him so to be, in order to the making good of that conclusion
against the Jews which he aimed at, viz. that Justification was not to be had
by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Christ; i. e. by being a true
Disciple of Christ, in mortifying the Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts. But
on the other hand, his using of those Phrases of being led by, and walking
after the Spirit, indifferently for living according to the Gospel, and being
governed by the motions of the Holy Spirit, was very suitable to his design of
showing that Justification was no other way to be obtained, but by being a true
Christian: For since mortifying of the deeds of the body, and being subject to
the Law of God in that degree which Christianity now required, were necessary
to Justification, the Jew who rejected the Gospel of Christ must needs be under
Condemnation; because the Holy Spirit, whose guidance and incitations were
necessary to the subduing of sin, was given for that purpose to none that
rejected Christianity. Wherefore as long as the Jew would not submit to the Law
of the Spirit of Life, i. e. to the Gospel, to the profession whereof the
special promise of the Spirit was made, he must needs be subject to the Law of
Sin and of Death: Of sin, because he refused the necessary means of subduing
the lusts of the Flesh, viz. the Faith of the Gospel, which was to refuse the
Incitations and Grace of the Spirit. Of Death, because if we live after the
Flesh we shall die.

This Observation I thought might not prove altogether unuseful to well-meaning
persons, that have not hit on it before; for a man may well be in danger of
mistaking the Apostle's design in this and other places, where the
forementioned Phrases are promiscuously used, if he expects that every one of
them should have a peculiar mystery belonging to it, and a sense quite
different from all the rest.

But that which I chiefly intended, was to observe, that the promiscuous use of
those Phrases in the holy Scripture, is extremely agreeable to that familiar
way wherein the Holy Spirit moves the minds of men. For if we are so moved by
him that we are not sensible of any operation in our minds, but that of divine
Truth, as it is represented to us by ordinary means, and thereupon embraced by
our Understandings; then we cannot better express our being led and guided by
the Spirit, than by saying that we obey the Gospel. And thus you see a further
reason of the promiscuous and indifferent use of the abovementioned Phrases,
and that taken from the manner of the Holy Spirit's Operations, as the former
was from the end and design of them.

I shall conclude this point, with inferring from what has been said
concerning it, that we resist the Holy Spirit of God, many times, when we think
of nothing less; and we do not think of it, because we do not feel that
supernatural impression which is made upon us, and cannot discern it from the
free and natural Operations of our minds. And thus we quench the motions of the
Spirit very often, when we imagine that we only quarrel with our own Thoughts,
or reject the good counsels of a Friend, or the exhortations of a Minister, or
the rebukes of our own Conscience. Now if we could hear or apprehend the Holy
Spirit dissuading us from any wickedness, as sensibly as when a good man speaks
to us; we should not dare, surely, to entertain one thought more of going
forward. A temptation could no more prevail against us if we were thus
admonished, than if God should speak to us from Heaven with an audible voice,
in these words; O do not that wicked thing which I hate. But God does not use
this method upon us, because we are here to live by Faith; because he will
prove us, whether we believe his Word or not. Therefore, if it be plain from
the holy Scriptures, that when we are sinning against the clear Convictions of
our duty, when we are baffling any good Exhortations and Counsels, and our own
hopes of Heaven, or our fears of Hell, or the force of any seasonable good
thought tending to Repentance; we do then as really contradict the persuasions
of the blessed Spirit, as if we heard his Voice sounding in our Ears; shall we
not be as much afraid to do the former, as we should be to do the latter? For
it will not be admitted in our excuse, that we did not think of rebelling
against the Holy Spirit; for our not thinking of it is another fault, since we
have reason to believe, that every sin we commit against the checks of
Conscience, has that aggravation, and why should we think that one fault will
excuse another? Wherefore if we cannot but acknowledge, that the doing of
despite to the Spirit of Grace, must needs add an heavy weight to every sin
which we commit presumptuously, and to every neglect of improving an
inclination to Repentance; methinks we should tremble to do the one, or to
delay the other. Finally, the consideration of this matter, if we have any due
reverence of God, will not fail of making all good counsels profitable to us,
of giving strength to all our own good purposes, and making us careful to
improve by all reasons that are proper to convince us, by all Examples that are
fit to instruct us; and by all opportunities of serious reflection upon our
selves: For the Operations of the Holy Spirit do conspire with such familiar
methods, as these are, to produce his Graces in us.

SECT. 6.
From all these things, it follows in the last place, that the Operations of
the Holy Spirit in our minds are Assistances or Helps; as they are generally
called by Christians of all persuasions, not excepting our Author, and the
Friends of his way. But I say also, they are properly so called; because the
Operations of the Spirit are no more than Assistances; and that because his
Graces are truly and properly the effects of other Causes, viz. of the
ministration of the Gospel, of the external means of Grace, and of our own
endeavors; with all which the Operations of the Holy Spirit conspire for the
producing of those effects in us. The Spirit is indeed the principal cause of
these effects, and therefore they are called his Graces; and ascribed to him as
if we did nothing our selves to gain them; according to that saying of the
Apostle; I labored abundantly, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with
me, 1 Cor. 15.10. But because they are our own free acts, therefore He is not
the only cause of them. The Holy Spirit does not regenerate us in that manner,
as to do all himself, and leave nothing for us to do in order to our
regeneration; but we are as much concerned to use all proper means of
Regeneration, as if the whole matter depended upon our single endeavors, as I
showed Sect. 4. and that which I say of Regeneration, is equally true of every
particular Grace of the Holy Ghost.

It is this Supposition, viz. that the Operations of the Spirit are Aids and
Helps to our natural Faculties, which makes the ascribing of all Christian
Virtues to his Grace consistent with leaving the use of our Reason, and those
duties which depend thereupon, necessary to the attainment of them: Which our
Author understood so well, that in his Preface, where he complains so
tragically of the Reproaches that are cast upon those that dare take upon them
to defend the work of the Spirit, Pres. J. O.
he pretends to plead for nothing else but the Aids and Assistances of the
Spirit; very well knowing that they do not impugn the use of reason in
Religion, as his Phrase is; and withal, that this Objection is produced by his
Adversaries against nothing but his opinion of the irresistible manner of the
Spirit's Operations; which, very wisely, he says not one word of through his
whole Preface. The only inconvenience, says he, wherewith our Doctrine is
pressed, is the pretended difficulty in reconciling the nature and necessity of
our Duty, with the efficacy of the Grace of the Spirit; and I have been so far
from waving the consideration of it, as that I have embraced every opportunity
to examine it in all particular instances wherein it may be urged with most
appearance of probability. And it is, I hope, at length made to appear, that
not only the necessity of our duty is consistent with the efficacy of God's
Grace; but also that as on the one hand we can perform no duty to God as we
ought, without its AID and ASSISTANCE, nor have any encouragement to attempt a
course of obedience without a just expectation thereof: So on the other, that
the work of Grace it self is no way effectual, but in our compliance with it in
a way of duty; only with the leave of some persons, or whether they will or
no, we give the Preeminence in all unto Grace, and not unto our selves. And now
who would not believe that there are some amongst us, who do not give the
Pre-eminence in all unto Grace, nay, and think that if we cannot perform our
duty as we ought, without the Aid and Assistance of the Spirit, that the nature
of Duty, and the use of Reason in it is destroyed; and withal that this man has
spent a Folio of railing upon us, because we denied the Aids of Grace and the
internal Operations of the Holy Ghost? Why any man, says he, should be
discouraged from the exercise of that industry which God requires of him, by
the consideration of the AID and ASSISTANCE which he has promised unto him, I
cannot understand. No truly, nor I neither, nor any man that has common sense:
For is it possible that a man should be discouraged from industry, because he
is promised that help, without which his industry would not prevail? But what
is the reason that we hear nothing at all now but of Aids and Assistances, when
the Operations of the Spirit are mentioned? Did the Doctor's Adversaries ever
urge any Objections against them? Was the inconvenience wherewith his Doctrine
of irresistible Grace is pressed, ever charged by them, upon the Aids of the
Spirit? When and where did any of them, with, or without whose leave he was
resolved to write his Book, pretend that the Supposition of the Aids of Grace,
was liable to the inconvenience he promises to remove? Or rather, what can
this man say to palliate so foul an Imposture! Let others, as he goes on, do
what they please, I shall endeavor to comply with the Apostles advice upon the
enforcement which he gives unto it; Work out your own salvation, etc. for it is
God which works, etc. By all means Sir endeavor it; but do not endeavor to
persuade the World, that the reason why you persecute us with bitter words, is
because we are not like to be pleased with you for taking the Apostles reason
to follow his advice. Or if you continue to insinuate this belief of us, and to
make folks think that the principal cause and occasion of your present
undertaking, was the open and horrible Opposition, P. 21.
that is made unto the Spirit of God and his work in the World, since, as you
go on, there is no concernment of his, that is not by many derided, exploded,
and blasphemed; and that your Adversaries of the Church of England, whom you
are so angry with, for saying that you make a Buz and a Noise, and trouble the
minds of men with unintelligible notions, are such Scoffers, that if any one
shall plead the necessity of the Assistance of the Spirit for the due
performance of Duties, he shall hardly escape from being notably derided by
them. I say, if you go on in this manner, surely you must forget all the while
that there is a day coming, when you must appear before the Tribunal of the
Great God, to give an account of your Writings. But as for our selves, to use
your own words, I shall not trouble my self about an accusation, which is laden
with as many Convictions of Forgery, as there are persons against whom you
level these your uncharitable and malicious suggestions.

Let any indifferent man read your Preface, where you pretend to give a Summary
Account of your Book; and say, if the principal design of it were not to
possess your Readers with an opinion, that it is our blaspheming the Doctrine
of the Aids of the Holy Spirit, which enkindled your zeal against us; and that
you have bestirred your self in the Book, principally to make it good against
all our opposition, that we cannot do the Will of God without them.

But now if you light upon a Reader so unfortunate to your self, as will take
the pains to compare you and your self together, your Preface with the greatest
part of your Book; he will soon find, that your Preface was but the Copy of
your Countenance, and not of your Heart. For when you come to give us your
opinion concerning the Operations of Grace in good earnest; it plainly appears,
that it is you that deny them to be Assistances and Helps; and that your true
quarrel against us, is because we say they are Assistances, not the only
Causes of Regeneration. For you labor (as I shall show you further, in the
second Part) with abundance of words, and with all your might, to prove that
mere Assistance, how great soever, is utterly insufficient to the conversion of
a Sinner; and that Conversion is impossible to be effected, but by a Physical
Irresistible Operation; which, whether it can be called an Assistance, I leave
you to judge, after you have considered these words which are your own: P. 266.
The most effectual persuasions of the Holy Spirit (for of them you were
speaking) cannot prevail with men in the state of Nature to convert themselves,
any more than Arguments can prevail with a blind man to see, or with a dead
man to rise from the Grave: and you must not forget that you make as
irresistible an Operation necessary to Conversion, as we suppose to be
necessary for the raising of a dead Body. Now you know it is to no purpose to
persuade a dead man to stir; and by your Argument, it is to as little to
persuade a man, dead in Trespasses and Sins, to Repent. But would it not be
also a most absurd thing to say that God assists a dead body to be alive again?
Whoever is said to assist another to do any thing, is not supposed to do it all
himself, much less by an irresistible Power; but the person that is assisted is
supposed to contribute his own endeavor toward the thing. Now a dead Body can
do nothing toward its own Resurrection, and therefore is incapable of being
assisted to rise; and if God raises it to life, he must do all himself. And do
you not therefore make a Sinner incapable of being converted by the assistance
of the Holy Spirit?

If you do not see this Consequence, pray will you acknowledge your own plain
words, where you give us your sense of that saying of the Apostle, ascribing
the honor of all he did to the Grace of God: Not I, but the grace of God which
was in me, 1 Cor. 15.10. For thus you argue from thence: P. 470.
Suppose now that God by his Grace does no more but AID, ASSIST, and EXCITE the
Will in its actings, that he does not effectually work all the Gracious actings
of our Souls in all our duties; that is, that he does not do all himself; the
Proposition would hold on the other hand, not Grace, but I, seeing the
principal relation of the effect is unto the next and immediate Cause, and
thence has its denomination. These are your own words, wherein you do not
only deny Regeneration, but, which is much stranger, even the Good which
regenerate men do, to be the effect of divine Assistance; and you deny this in
such plain terms, that you allow them not to be the next cause of the good they
do; as if S. Paul had meant, that in truth he had not labored at all; though
he plainly said, I labored abundantly. And thus you plainly make Believing,
Repenting, and Laboring, not to be so much as our own acts, but purely the
acts of God; so that we do not believe and obey, but, according to you, God
does all this for us; not so much as making us to believe, and obey, as it is
impossible he should, without making us the next and immediate cause of our
doing so. Can you read these words of yours without blushing, if you remember
your crafty Preface, where you were all for the Aids and Assistances of the
Spirit, and put your self into such a combustion to defend them, as if Pelagius
were risen from the dead? You knew well enough that we do believe, God does AID
and ASSIST us by his Grace; and that no body but your self, and such as you,
denies Conversion and Perseverance to be the effects of divine Assistance;
only you strained a point with your Conscience, and cast the Odium of so
detestable a Doctrine upon us in your Preface, to make all the reviling
Speeches you bestow on us in your Book go down the better with your Readers.

But this Artifice of yours is not confined to the Preface, but used also in
diverse places of your Book: I shall give you but one instance of it at present.
In the fifth Chapter of the second Book you pretend to reconcile the usefulness
of the Commands, Threatenings, Promises, and Exhortations of the Scripture; with
the promised Aids of the Spirit, and ascribing all that is good in us to the
Grace of God. P. 166.
For this you say is the principal difficulty wherewith some men seek to
entangle and perplex the Grace of God. Who you mean by some men, your
Followers, and we, understand well enough; but you know your Adversaries do not
so much as believe that there is any difficulty at all in reconciling the
assistances of Grace, with the usefulness of Motives; and then they cannot seek
to entangle the Grace of God with this* difficulty. Now this is your way very
often; when you talk of the Objections that are made against supposing the
Grace by which we are converted to be irresistible, you make it your business
to show that these Objections do not lie against saying that the Operations of
the Spirit are Aids and Assistances; as here in this place you say, P. 167.
If there be any opposition between the Commands of Duty, and the Promises of
Grace, it is either because the nature of man is not meet to be commanded, or
because it needs not to be assisted; and then you say very well, that what the
Holy Spirit does in us, he does by us, and our duty is to apply our selves unto
his commands, according to the conviction of our minds, and his work it is to
enable us to perform them. Very good! All this we heartily believe; but now the
Doctrine we seek to entangle by the forementioned difficulty, is, that men
cannot be converted, but by such an almighty Operation, as that which made us
out of nothing, and will hereafter raise our dead bodies to Life. And now I
cannot understand why you should so often attempt to disentangle the Doctrine
of the Aids of Grace, from the former Objection, which does not lie against it;
but because you have a mind to persuade the world that some men say, we can
keep the Commands of God without the help of his Grace. Indeed in one place you
apply the Objection as it ought to be, viz. against your own Doctrine; (and I
intend to let you see shortly that you have not taken it off) but this is an
argument that you had no other meaning in applying it wrong, and so changing
the state of the Question between us, but to make the most odious
representation of us you could devise. And now I take may leave of you for a
while, wishing that you may hereafter write with the clearness of a Doctor, the
good temper of a Gentleman, and the sincerity of a Christian; and then we shall
be very forward to give you that respect which is due to your abilities.

To sum up all that has been said in this Chapter; the Holy Spirit of God does
in that manner work his Graces in us, that they are still the genuine effects
of the Evidence, and the motives of the Gospel, of the natural use of our
Faculties of Understanding and Will; and of our own Care and Diligence in using
the external means of Grace. His Operations in us, make us capable of
recovering our selves by degrees; and all the while there is no sensible
difference between them and the natural Operations of our minds; and yet we
are sure that we have his Assistance and Help in all the good we do, and
without it can do nothing at all to saving purposes.

To affirm more particularly what is the manner of the Holy Spirit's Operations
in us, I dare not; unless I had warrant, which I think I have not, from the
holy Scripture so to do. And if this be all which the Scripture lets us know
concerning it, we have good reason to think that no more is needful to be known
by us.

SECT. 7.
Thus I have, through the blessing of God, finished the First Part of my
Undertaking; and given you a plain account of that which I believe to be the
true sense of the Holy Scriptures, concerning those Operations of the Holy
Spirit, which are promised in the Gospel to all Ages of the Church. I do not
know that I have swerved in the least from the sense of the ancient Church, in
any thing I have said upon this subject; and I am the more persuaded that I
have not done so, being very confident, that I have not at all departed from
the Doctrine of the Church of England in this matter; the judgment whereof I
am prepared to leave to my Superiors.

I had observed that some late Writers, especially, have represented the Grace
of the Holy Ghost, under such notions as are either intricate and
unintelligible; or inconsistent with the great ends of Religion, and of fatal
consequence to the Souls of men: Those of them that cannot be understood,
serving only to the multiplying of idle Questions, and frivolous Disputes; and
those that are, ministering either to unreasonable Presumption, or incurable
Despair. Therefore when the Streams were so muddy and impure, I thought it was
the best way to go to that Fountain of Truth, the holy Word of God; and to
guide all my thoughts of this matter by what I could discern there. And truly
I found, that although the Doctrine of Grace, as it has been tampered withal by
men that serve a Cause, and as it has been debased by humane mixtures, and
inventions, is, at best, a subject of unprofitable talk; yet, as it is
represented in the holy Scriptures, it is clear and plain to the understanding,
and likewise a most powerful motive to Godliness.

How nearly I have kept to the sense of Holy Writ, I must leave you to judge:
As for the Reader who is yet in any thing otherwise persuaded than I am, if he
has used diligence and sincerity in examining, as I know my self to have done
in considering all I have written; where we do not agree, I hope God will
pardon the error, on which side soever it lies.

I think it cannot be denied that I have in some measure expressed my meaning
plainly, easily, naturally; which a man needs not be ashamed to do, who
believes that he speaks the truth. I have neither pretended to explain things
that are not intelligible, nor made any thing difficult to understand, by
affecting obscurity of expression.

As for the profitableness of this Discourse, it cannot be better judged of,
than by that which should be the end of all Writings of this nature, viz. the
promoting of true Godliness. And certainly if the true Doctrine of the
Operations of the Holy Spirit, be that which I have here offered to your
consideration, it does apparently render all wicked men inexcusable, that live
under the Gospel; and makes highly for the encouragement of Religion. This will
appear by surveying the three General Heads of this Discourse; for by so doing,
it may easily be shown that there is nothing wanting to make the promise of the
Holy Spirit, as it has been explained, the most powerful motive to the study of
godliness and virtue, that it can be supposed to be. For,

1. There is nothing wanting in respect of the end of this promise, and of
those effects for the producing of which in us, the Operations of the Holy
Spirit are promised. For they are all Christian virtues whatsoever; all sorts
of qualifications that are needful to our eternal happiness. And therefore we
need not doubt to strive against that sin, which does most easily beset us; nor
sit down in despair of obtaining that Grace or Virtue which is most contrary to
our corrupt affections and customs: for if God will give the Holy Spirit for
all needful purposes, he will bestow a more plentiful measure of his Grace, for
the subduing of that sin, and the gaining of that virtue; because here his
assistance is most needful; and he that has promised his Spirit to answer all
our needs, will not deny us, when we ask him to supply the greatest of all.

2. There is nothing wanting in the promise of the Holy Spirit, to make it such
a motive in respect of those to whom the promise is made; because it is made to
every one that believes the Gospel; to every one, I say, under a possible
condition; so that none of us can have any reason to fear that we are shut out
of the Promise; for I have shown you it lies open to all, and we cannot lose
the benefit of it, but by excluding our selves. Besides, the condition of
obtaining special Grace from God, being that of importunate asking; we are
hereby moved to earnest and frequent Prayers, which, you know, is one branch of
pious endeavor. And then the condition of more plentiful Communications of the
divine Spirit, being a careful improvement of those measures of Grace which we
have now obtained; this also is a plain and powerful motive to every Christian
that has proceeded more or less, in the way of Salvation, to be as fruitful as
he can in every good work, and to follow after holiness, looking diligently
lest he fail of the Grace of God.

3. There is nothing wanting in this promise to make it a strong motive to the
study of godliness, if we consider the manner of the Holy Spirit's Operations
in us; which, as you have heard, will not be effectual without our own
Consideration, and Care, and Watchfulness; because God has promised his Spirit
to assist our Endeavors, but not to make us good men without them; and our
recovery still depends as much upon our diligence in the event, as if it
depended upon nothing else.

Wherefore in all respects, the promise of the Holy Spirit, as it is expressed
in the Scriptures, is a most prevalent motive to the study of Piety and Virtue:
And since it was my design from the first to recover it to this use, out of
the hands of those men that had made it good for nothing, I could not conclude
better than with showing you plainly wherein the force of this Promise lies, to
make us all careful to Work out our own Salvation.

O God, forasmuch as without thee, we are not able to please thee; mercifully
grant that thy Holy Spirit may in all things direct and rule our Hearts,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. THE END.
The Author's distance from London has occasioned these Errata's, which the
Reader may correct.
PAge 33. In the Margin r. P. 260. p. 61. line 12, for these are the r. there
are other. p. 93. l. 18. for end r. kind. p. 105. l. 6. for to his r. to be.
p. 163. l. 30. for proportion r. proposition. p. 191. l. 13. for there is r.
there is said to be. Ibid. l. 22. for inherent r. immediate. p. 310. l. 28. for
having by r. having. p. 322. l. 10. for may r. my.


