THE TRUE CONFESSION OF Margret Clark, Who Consented to the Burning of her
Masters Mr. PETER DELANOY's House in Southwark.

Delivered in Prison to many Witnesses a little before her Death.

And confirmed by her self at the Place of Execution, by answering all the
Questions then put to her by the Reverend and Worthy Divine, Dr. Martin, now
Minister at St. Saviors Southwark.

Published for General Satisfaction.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Joseph Collier, at the Bible on
London-bridg, under the Gate. 1680.

The True CONFESSION OF MARGARET CLARK, WHO Consented to the Burning of her
Masters House in SOVTHWARK, etc.
I Margret Clark being shortly to suffer Death for that which I have deserved,
and am much humbled for, and desire to lie low before God under the sense of my
own Guilt, do give the World an Account of the truth of my Case, for I would
not be guilty of a Lie now I am to appear before my Judge within a few minutes.
Therefore I do say, and shall declare the Truth of the matter, as I shall
answer it before my Lord and Judge.

Upon the 26 th of January, John Satterthwait came to me as I was going out of
my Masters Gate, and did desire me to tell him whether my Master and Mistress
were at home? And I answered him, no; and he told me that he hoped he should
have an opportunity to speak with me, for he had something to say. And I
answered him, if he had any thing to say, I should be so civil to give him the
hearing when I had time (for then I was in haste). Then he came on the next day
with the same Request, and I returned the same Answer. Then the Third time,
being Wednesday, he came again, and used great Importunity, and expressed some
kindnesses, as if he had been a Suitor, and prevailed with me to go into the
Borough with him to an Alehouse, where were two Men more of his company; and
after some little time of discourse, he propounded to me this wicked and horrid
Design which I was to have been engaged in with them, that is, to let them into
my Masters House to set it on Fire; and for a Reward, they promised me Two
thousand pounds, which Sum I was to receive at the Fleece-Tavern in Holborn,
inquiring for a Room in the said Tavern, called the Figure Nine. Then coming
out of the Alehouse, they would fain have had me away with them, saying, Come
let us take Coach, and go into Fleetstreet; for, said they, there we have a
Priest of ours, who Lodges at a Grocers, that shall Confess you, and give you
the Sacrament; I told him I could not possibly go then. So this John
Satterthwait went homewards with me almost to my Masters Gate; and as we went
along, he charged me that I should not divulge it to any person in the world
living; for if I did, I should certainly dye for it (and that quickly) in this
world, and be damned in the other.

Then he came on the next day, and gave me the same charge to keep it secret:
And then on Saturday he came and inquired of me the best time that he might
come to do this most horrid and devilish Action* saying, Would not four or five
of the Clock be a good time? and I said, Yes: Accordingly he came, and conveyed
himself into the Dyehouse, or thereabouts, while Nine or Ten of the Clock that
evening; about which time the Fire was discovered; whereupon with the fear and
dread he had put upon me* I did deny it to the company that came in to quench
it; but after that, he was there, whom I saw amongst the rest of the company;
but I had much horror upon my Conscience; and after some short time I confessed
the whole Crime for which I now dye: And my Examination before Justice Reading,
and Justice Freeman was all true. And this I affirm, and do desire all
Protestants to believe, that John Satterthwait kindled those three Fires in my
Masters House. First in the Dye-house by the Pump; secondly in the Buttery; and
thirdly in the Garret, which last Fire he kindled whilst the People were
putting out the other; And I do declare in the words of a dying Maid, that I
was under great trouble of Conscience, and was many times about discovering it,
but could not; Satan's Temptations, and the wickedness of my own heart did so
much prevail with me; Oh that covetous design of gaining the Moneys, was that
which I desire all who read these Lines which I have writ to beware of; I saw
him among the People in the House very busy, and I made signs at him, to
discover him; but the people being in a great hurry, did not mind the things I
then said to them.

I do also think in my conscience, that if my Master had examined me, I should
have declared the whole matter, for I gave out often suspicious words of my
fear of Fire; and on the Friday before this happened, I went out to a friends
house, and there I was so afflicted and troubled in my mind, that they took
notice of it; and one that went with me thither was importunate with me to know
the reason of my trouble; but the Devil had so subtly engaged my wicked
heart, that I could not tell him. But to pass by my Conviction and
Imprisonment, which you have all heard of, and to come to this one thing which
fell out in the time of my Confinement in Prison (which I bless God for, rather
than that my most Loving and Honored Master, with I know not how many others,
should have suffered by my wicked compliance with that Man) that which I speak
of is this: When I had been about three weeks in Prison, I was then walking in
the Yard, having that liberty granted me by the Jailer, there John Satterthwait
looked out of a Window, and said to me, Are you there? I wish I could come to
you, I would spoil your telling of Tales; but I gave him no answer; neither do
I desire his hurt or death, but beg of God while I am here in this world,
Repentance for him; and oh that God would give him a sense of these his great
Sins, both in tempting me, and his designing the ruin of many Thousands of
Families; I can say before the Lord, I desire not his Death; it would have been
but a poor relief for me to have had him dyed with me: But this I must and will
declare before I go hence, and am no more seen, That John Satterthwait, though
he was cleared by the Jury, was Guilty, as I said before, that is, of making
those three Fires, and I only did consent, and let him in. Now I would not have
you to think that I have written this to lessen or excuse my own fault; I
deserve Death, nay a worser Death for consenting to so horrid a wickedness,
even eternal Death. But now I hope, that through the Merits of Jesus Christ
alone, not trusting to my own Works or Pardons from Men (as I fear the Papists
do depend upon) to be saved from Eternal Fire; and that I shall be justified
freely by his Grace, through the Redemption which he has purchased with his
own blood.

Whereas there is a Report that is gone commonly about* that I had stolen many
of my Masters things, as Plate, etc. I think it fit now I am to dye, to give
the World an Account of what I then took; the things which I had then put into
my Box, was a little Tape, Lace, and other frivolous things, which now makes me
wonder why I then put them up; for I might have put up Jewels and Plate, which
was under my Charge to the value of some Hundreds of pounds; but as to the
carrying out of a Box which I was met with, it is a most false report, for I
was so full of horror and trouble of Conscience, that I did not then think of
my Box. And now I desire all that read these Lines, would consider, and have a
great care how they break the Lords Day; for my neglecting thereof, was the
first step to my downfall; and I desire this downfall of mine may be a warning
to all young Men and Maids; Oh! let them be content with the places that God by
his Providence places them in, and not covet after great things (as I have
done) and so err from the Rule; and have a care of Pride and a worldly mind;
for this I say, Pride and Sabbath-breaking has been my downfall; and I
earnestly beg of you for the Lords sake, and for your Souls sake, to let these
Lines, and my bad Example be a warning to you. Alas, I did once enjoy the means
of Grace, and have lived in good Families; yea, he against whom I committed
this great offense, is a very Worthy good Man; Oh! I did once frequent the
Worship of God, and took delight in it, and thought I understood something of
the Excellency of Christ, and the worth of my own Soul; but a little before I
fell into this Sin, I neglected the Worship of God; and those precious hours
upon the Lords day which formerly I had spent well. And thus I have fallen
foully, and have offended God and Man; and my horrible Sin has made me a
public spectacle to the world. I pray all whom I have offended in it, for Gods
sake to forgive me; and I forgive all men that have offended me, especially I
desire to forgive this John Sattarthwait, that has brought me to this untimely
and shameful Death, which, I hope, is brought upon me for my good; for surely I
have obtained Mercy, and am joyful to think of my going hence; I long to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ; even so come Lord Jesus, and receive me an
unworthy Soul.

MARGRET CLARK.

A further Account of her Behavior in Prison, and what she delivered at her
Execution, the Reader will have a fuller Narrative in a few days, with the
Names of those Worthy Persons who were Eye and Ear-witnesses of the whole
Narrative.

FINIS.

