A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church OF ROCHESTER, On the 29th. of May,
1684.

BEING The Anniversary of His Most Sacred Majesty's Birth, and happy
Restoration to these his undoubted Realms and Dominions.

By JOHN CLERK; Late Fellow of All Souls College, and Proctor of the
University of Oxford.

Now Rector of Ulcomb, and Haristsham, in the County of Kent.

Published at the Request of that Corporation.

Caesaris alma dies --
Longa precor, Pylioque veni numerosior aevo,
Semper and hoc vultu, vel meliore nite.
Mart. Lib. 4. Ep. 1. LONDON, Printed for George Downs, at the Three Flower de
Lyss's, over against St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet Street. 1684.

To the Right Worshipful, the MAYOR, RECORDER, ALDERMEN, and COMMON COUNCIL of
the City of ROCHESTER.
Worthy Sirs,
FIrst in your Cathedral Church to have recommended, and afterward, in a more
solemn manner, to have dedicated a Persuasive to a cheerful Obedience to those
lawful Governors, whom God alone has thought fit to place over you of that so
Ancient and truly Loyal City; may seem, upon a transient View, to argue the
Preacher and Publisher of such a Discourse, to have been so far transported, by
a too fervent Zeal for the defense of his most just Cause; as to have
overlooked his LORD and MASTER'S Observation: namely, that, They Mar. 2. 17.
that are whole have no need of the Physician, but they that are sick. And
therefore a brief Treatise on such a Point as this, had been much more properly
delivered in the Pulpit, much more seasonably presented from the Press, to some
other Corporation; which has, peradventure, of late been afraid to do that
which is Evil against their Supreme Magistrate; only because they have happily
found him not to have borne the Sword of Justice in vain.

But since that Remark of our Blessed Savior does in no wise dehort from
following the Son of Sirach's wholesome Advice; viz. to use Ecclus. 18. 19.
Physic or ever we be sick: to meet even the remotest Symptoms of those more
slowly approaching Diseases, which tend to the dissolution of those earthly
Houses, our Souls at present inhabit. Let therefore what has been said upon
this Subject, be interpreted according to the true meaning thereof: i. e. Not
so much for a Confirmation, as a happy Continuation; but chiefly for a deserved
Commendation of your firm, unshaken Allegiance to the Crown; and of your
Exemplary Obedience to the Church, as now by Law established. And that too at
such a time, when so many of your Sister-Societies did but too plainly
demonstrate; That the true Faith, they ought then to have born to their
Sovereign, his lawful Heirs and Successors, was only supported by the easily
yielding Ground; and built upon that most deceitful Sandy Foundation of a
mistaken Interest.

Wherefore, may the design of this Essay be understood to be (what really it
is) a sincere, hearty, though weak Endeavor; That You, who now stand so
secure, may take heed lest hereafter you fall. That You, who are now planted a
noble Vine, Jer. 2. 21.
wholly a right Seed, may not in time to come be turned into the degenerate
Plant of a strange Vine. So prays,

Your Servant for Jesus sake, John Clerk.

1 Cor. 10. 10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer.
THis Chapter contains a Catalogue of those numerous transgressions, which the
Children of Israel were found guilty of before the Lord their God.

In which account, my Text brings in that Cardinal Sin of murmuring against
their Rulers, of repining against Gods heavenly Dispensations, in governing all
the Nations upon Earth, according to his Divine Will and Pleasure. For the
Words have a particular reference to Korah, and his rebellious Accomplices; who
insolently accused the man Moses, a Person of eminent meekness, even above all
the men which were upon Number. 12. 3.
the face of the Earth; for haughtily aspiring to make himself altogether a
Prince over them in Number. 16. 13.
Temporal matters: and for constituting his Brother Aaron High Priest, and so
consequently making him Chief in all Spiritual affairs.

Whereupon the disaffected Party gather themselves together in Tumults; and
tell these two Pillars, Upholders of the most immediate Theocracy Josephus lib.
contr. Appion.
ever known on this side Heaven, plainly to their faces; That in truth, they
took too much upon them, seeing all the Congregation were holy every one Number.
16. 3.
of them, and the Lord was alike among them. Whence they proceeded to demand
that uncivil question, Wherefore then did these two Brethren arrogantly lift up
themselves above the Congregation of the Lord?

Thus do we find, that in all Ages before and from the Jewish times, even down
to our own later unhappy days of utter confusion and ineffable misery, the
Trumpet never yet sounded an Alarm for battle; but the goodly pretenses, the
specious pleas made use of to excite the unthinking Multitude, to animate the
ignorant Rabble (which, like those sixscore thousand persons of Nineveh, cannot
discern between their right Jonas 4. 12.
hand and their left) evermore were, and evermore will be those false
suggestions, that their Rulers take away from them their Property and Liberty,
their Religion and freedom of Conscience.

Wherefore since the blessed Apostle tells us in the following words of my
Text, That all these things happened unto them for ensamples; and Ver. 11.
they were further written and delivered down unto posterity for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come; whose lot it is, as
persons born out of due time, to wear out a troublesome life in these last and
worst of days; Let us, I say, therefore endeavor to grow wise upon other
persons cost. Let us, having taken a serious view in private of those
stupendous Judgments showed upon those Mutineers; how suddenly those
malcontents perished and came to a fearful end, unanimously resolve Rebellion
to 1 Samuel 15. 23.
be in truth (according to the Scripture comparison made thereof) as the sin of
Witchcraft.

Let us accost those Sons of men, who (in the phrase of the Psalmist) are set
on fire: that resolvedly Psalm. 57. 4.
continue restless, as those noxious aspiring flames, which first incensed
them, until they have, like those, consumed whatsoever is high and great above
them: that most obstinately persevere by their daily practices and nightly
Studies, to cause unhappy divisions amongst us, in the words St. Paul does his
foolish Galatians, Gal. 3. 1. (...).
namely, who has bewitched you? Who, by the Hellish power of magic
Fascination has so far infatuated you, so strangely deprived you of that
natural reason you were born into the World with, as to make you so erroneously
prefer Changes and War, before Establishment and Peace?

In the ensuing Discourse I shall endeavor to show:

1. That in these later times of Usurpation, Liberty and Property, Religion and
Freedom of Conscience were most unjustly taken away from the oppressed
Inhabitants of these three then wretched Kingdoms.

2. That God has been pleased in a most wonderful manner to restore unto us of
these ravaged Nations, together with our King, our Liberty and Property, our
Religion and Freedom of Conscience, in the highest degree of perfection.

3. That notwithstanding this, an ungrateful murmuring against the Government
is still the English, as it was then the Israelitish Sin, which cries aloud to
Heaven for Vengeance. And then

4. And Lastly, I shall draw a practical Conclusion from the foregoing matter,
and so dismiss you.

Of these in their order; and First, That in

It cannot indeed be denied by any ingenuous person, but that (contrary to the
Roman Observation) Silent Leges inter arma. Cic. Orat. pro Milone.
at the same time when the shriller sound of the Trumpet, the noise of Horses,
and the noise of a great Host pierced our Fathers tender ears, Justice,
however, was heard to utter her still small voice in our Streets, whilst (in
the words of the Psalmist) the Throne of Iniquity, which then bore Psalm. 94. 20.
the Sovereign Sway, framed all their Mischief by a Law.

For whosoever shall compare the Trial of our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ,
before Pontius Pilate's first High Court of Justice, with the Arraignment of
our late most barbarously murdered King, before John Bradshaw's second, shall
find them to differ no more, than a faithful Copy from its Original.

The blind rage of the Populace, the insufferable insolence of the Soldiery,
the mock-shew of Equity; but especially the notorious Corruption of both their
Judges, in condemning two innocent Persons, in whom they could find no fault;
in suffering them alike to be destroyed only by a pretended Law; nay, and by a
further abetting their Deaths by an unknown Law, do make their conditions
exactly parallel, and I had almost said, alike in Sufferings, alike in
Innocence.

But to proceed, As it fared with Him, who sat upon the Throne, even so did it
fare with him, Ecclus. 40. 3, 5.
that was humbled in Earth and Ashes, Wrath and Envy, Trouble and Unquietness,
fear of Death, and Anger, and Strife were made the common portion of Truth and
Fidelity: Whilst those partial Determiners of Causes (to use the Prophets
words) smote the great Houses with Breaches, and the little Amos 6. 11.
Houses with Clefts. The Princes and People, the Potentates and Peasants, in
proportion to their respective Estates, were equally damnified and oppressed.

Then was the time, when the Loyal Party having a matter against another, durst
not go to Law 1 Cor. 6. 1, 7.
before the Unjust. Then was the Apostle's Injunction easily observed by all
good men, rather to take wrong, rather to suffer themselves to be defrauded by
their false Brethren, who were for them; or their traitorous Enemies, who were
openly against them, than to bring in their legal Defense, and implead them
before those Heathen Tribunals. Then, in Short, was Judgment turned into
Wormwood; then did they leave off righteousness in the Earth. Whilst they
exercised the most tyrannical, high, arbitrary Government over the Lives,
Liberties and Properties of the English, Scotch and Irish Nations, ever yet
read or heard of amongst us. Whilst Volumes will not contain the Murders,
Rapines, Oppressions, Sequestrations, Decimations, Imprisonments, and
whatsoever else can be thought of, that was cruel, unjust, and (as that great
Apostle of those more modern Gentiles words it) might be taken for an effect of
their power, Hobbs. Leviat. p. 56.
or a cause of their pleasure.

But to leave this Humane Court, and to enter into that Divine one, the Church.

Where, behold, in our Cathedrals (those places of God's standing Worship)
where we used to be most religiously delighted with the grateful melody, and
harmonious noise of Praises and Thanksgivings unto God, the Fountain and
Foundation of all our Bliss: We then (instead thereof) most wretchedly heard
the contrary baleful Notes, the ill-boding voices of those melancholy Birds
mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah: The Cormorant Isa. 34. 11.
and the Bittern, which possessed those Places; the Owl also and the Raven
which alone dwelt in them.

Those that lifted up the Axes before upon the Psalm. 74. 5, 6.
thick Trees (the Psalmist tells us) were renowned as such, who intended to
bring a thing to an holy perfection: but, lo! then they brake down all the
carved work of the Sanctuary with Axes and Hammers.

It pitied us to see the Stones of our ruined Sion lying in the dust; it
grieved us indeed to behold this Abomination of Desolation standing where it
ought not. It afflicted us to view (in the words of Hosea) the Thorn and the
Thistle coming up, flourishing Hos. 10. 8.
and full blown upon our Altars: where the Mystical Body and Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ were usually beheld, and received with a most awful Reverence.

If then our Emanuel, our God with us, had vouchsafed to have bowed the
Heavens, to have come down and visited that stubborn, stiff-necked Generation
of men, which so often in their hypocritical bablings invoked him by the name
of Lord, Lord: He would have found a much like, but more unhallowed Reception
upon such a second Advent, than he did upon his first. For those Enemies of his
Cross made even his Father's House become a lively Representation of that
crowded Inn, where there was no room; where he suffered himself, at his
Incarnation, to be necessitated to make a Stable his consecrated Temple, and a
Manger his Holy of Holies, wherein to lodge his shrouded Divinity.

They most sacrilegiously made those Church Lands, dedicated unto God for the
maintenance of a religious and learned Clergy, to become the Wages of their
Iniquity. They were then guilty of Jeroboam's evil way, they made the lowest of
the 1 King. 13. 33.
People Priests of the High Places: whereupon it naturally followed, that their
Priest taught for Hire, Mic. 3. 11.
and their Prophets divined for Money.

From thence, we had preached up unto us, for sound, and (as the Cant then was)
Soul-saving Doctrine, blasphemous Socinianism, wild Enthusiasm, disguised
Popery, which gave execrable Indulgences and Absolutions to men, not to perform
their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, they had so often taken: by virtue
whereof (as good Christians and Subjects) they and their Posterity were obliged
to bear true Faith and Trust to their lawful Sovereign; and so far as in them
lay, to defend that Protestant Church and Faith, of which our Royal Martyr died
Head and most true Defender.

Wherefore, I shall choose to conclude this first Proposition, with the Remark
of a Person worthily honored for his eminent Loyalty and Learning.

We, like the revolting Subjects of Spain, Sir Robert Filmer.
fought against our Liege Lord for Taxes and Religion; and proved alike
prosperous Rebels: whilst we, as they, brought home from the bloody Fields of
Battle, the same fortunate Trophies of our Victory; namely more Taxes than any
Nation under the Heavens: and all the Religions of the World besides. And so,
in the second place, I come to show, That God has been pleased in a most
wonderful Nations, together with our King, our Liberty and Property, our
Religion and Freedom of Conscience, in the highest degree of Perfection.

Our Fathers (like the plagued Egyptians, described in the Book of Wisdom) were
shut up in Wisd. 17. 2.
their own Houses, and confined by their usurping Governors from maintaining
(the sweetest comfort of Humane Life) Society with their Friends: being made
Prisoners of Darkness, fettered with the Bonds of a long Night. Whilst they
could be permitted See the Act, Anno 1649. Chap. 72.
on the Weekday to travel but little further than the Jewish Sabbath days
Journey. But now (praised be God) the day is broke, and those black affrighting
shadows are fled away. The most illustrious day now shines upon us, our
Calendars ever yet recorded. A Day at first graced by the sacred light of a
Noontide Star added to that of the Sun. A Day which the Lord himself has made
mavelous in our eyes, for the most auspicious Birth and Return of his
Gracious Majesty, the Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord. A Lam.
4. 20.
Day, that, next to the Nativity of our blessed Savior, ought in all Ages to
be solemnized with the most grateful Doxologies of Glory to God in the
highest; for so miraculously sending Peace on this our share of the Earth: and
so graciously showing his good Will toward us, a lost, ruined part of Mankind:
For so mercifully compassing us about with Songs of Deliverance: For so
compassionately vouchsafing us a second inferior sort of Redemption from our
temporal and spiritual Thraldom; a second lower kind of Restoration unto all
our forfeited (through Sin) humane and divine happiness.

For how does Judgment now run down as Waters, Amos 5. 24.
and Righteousness as a mighty Stream! Pure and undisturbed, as that flowing
River, which gushed forth from the twice smitten Rock, opened by the divine
hand of Moses. Number. 20. 11.


Now the sincere and upright Judges of our Land impartially render to all,
their dues; to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, with an undaunted Loyalty;
to God, and his Holy Church, the things that are God's, with pure Religion; to
all the King's Subjects the things that belong to them with an even
indifferency.

We now again walk in the House of God as Friends; which not long since had
been made a graceless Den of Thieves: whilst it was defiled with Horses, and
polluted with those far uncleaner Beasts, their Riders: who plainly, and
without a Metaphor, made the Church of Christ here on earth to be truly
Militant, and terrible as an Army Cant. 6. 4.
with Banners; forgetting that meekness of Wisdom, which guided our first
Reformers in settling that pure, peaceable, Protestant Religion, which this day
happily has restored to us.

In our Cathedral Service (whether in the Body, or out of the Body, we cannot
tell; being caught up, 2 Cor. 12. 2.
as it were, with S. Paul, to the third Heaven) we now join with those ten
thousand times ten thousand, Rev. 5. 11, 13.
and thousands of thousands of Angelical ministering Spirits, in a full Chorus,
to sing Psalms and Hymns of Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power unto him
that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

But to advance yet farther to that most holy ground, where the Communion Table
is by public Authority most properly placed: and here no Protestant Spectator
(unless falsely so called) but but must from the bottom of his heart
acknowledge; that we alone give unto the Lord the Glory Psalm. 29. 2.
due unto his Name, and worship the Lord in the right beauty of Holiness.
Whilst we alike decline the Whorish Gawdry of Babylon, the Idolatrous Pageantry
of the Church of Rome, on the one hand; and the slovenly, clownish, and (in
truth) irreverent behavior of the Phanatick Dissenters on the other.

We enjoy the most absolute form of the Hierarchy to be found upon earth: a
Monarchical Government of Bishops in our Church; where our lawful Sovereign
(the only true Vicegerent of Jesus Christ, that supreme Bishop of our Souls)
presides over us in all sacred spiritual matters.

And by the gracious encouragement of this our King, the Churches Royal nursing
Father, it comes to pass; that many of those, who serve at her Altars, are the
Sons of Nobles: most of them, at least descended from reputable Parentage.

We have public set Forms of Prayer; to the end, that neither Priest nor
People should be rash with their mouths, or let their hearts be hasty to utter
any unpremeditated thing before God. The modest Compilers of our Liturgy having
minded us, that God is in Heaven, and Omniscient; vain Man upon Earth, and born
ignorant of the ways of the Lord, and unskilful in the word of Righteousness;
and therefore prudently direct us to let our words be few and chosen.

It is our Church alone, which holds no pious Frauds, maintains no holy Cheats.
It is she alone that can defy all the studied wit and malice of her
Adversaries, to show any political Article or Canon of her Establishment,
whereby it may be proved that any of her true Sons can cry out (with Demetrius)
and say, Sirs, ye know that by Act. 19. 25, 28.
this craft we have our Wealth; therefore, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

No, it is only her Teachers, when they instruct their respective
Congregations, who cannot be persuaded to suppose that Gain is Godliness: but
with an ardent Zeal demonstrate, that they seek not theirs, but them; that they
covet not their Possessions, but their Salvation.

She obliges her Proselites to stand to no Principles, but those which in
express words are manifest in the Scriptures; or else by undeniable consequence
may be deduced thence. The unfeigned meaning of which Texts, she most heartily
refers to those impartial Commentators, those greatest Lovers and most
competent Judges of the Divine Truth; namely, the uncorrupted Councils, and
genuine Works of those ancient Fathers, who came nearest our Blessed Savior
(the first Author, and last Finisher of our Faith) as well in Holiness as time.

She most indulgently, and like a true Mother, obliges her Children to the
performance of no Duty, which has not the power of God's Law in the first
place, and of the King's Law in the second; a Divine as well as Humane
Sanction, to enforce the practice thereof.

Her Discipline, in short, is most sincerely Primitive, and her Doctrine most
truly Apostolical. It Is she alone that completely answers the description made
in the Canticles of the Spouse of Christ, She is all fair, there is no spot in
her. Cant. 4. 7.


Thus has God been pleased to look upon his people; and magnify his Mercy in
restoring to us our Prince, and together with him, our Religion, Laws and
Liberties, to our unspeakable present and future Comfort. A happiness, that,
before we enjoyed it, was almost above our Faith as well as Sight: and
therefore, now we do enjoy it, should be commemorated with a most exalted
thankfulness. For now has the Lord given Isa. 14. 3.
us Rest from our Sorrows, and from our Fears, and from the hard Bondage
wherein we were made to serve.

This is that we should all learn to do, to praise Psalm. 107. 8.
the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful Works to the Children of Men:
learn to fear God first, and then honor his Anointed, who draws us to
Obedience no otherwise than with the Cords of Hos. 11. 4.
a Man, and with the Bands of Love. Legum idcirco omnes servi sumus, ut liberi
esse possimus. Cic. Orat. pro. A. Cluentio.


But though our Duty be so easy, as that Liberty shall be the purchase of our
Obedience; and (as the Orator says) in being subject to the Laws, we shall find
the greatest freedom; yet will not many amongst us be persuaded hereunto: but
on the contrary, disturb the Peace and Quiet of these Nations, by their endless
Jealousies and Murmurings, Which brings me to the third Proposition; namely,

That notwithstanding the misery we were in, Murmuring against the Government
is still the English, as it was then the Israelitish Sin, which cries aloud to
Heaven for Vengeance.

The English Man will answer his opprobrious, but too sadly true Character;
that he never knows when he is well. Then only will he make a true estimate of
his happiness, when it is too late; when, for his high Ingratitude toward his
Divine and Humane Donors, he most justly becomes deprived thereof.

He is born with an innate sullen Principle of Discontent, which directly
interferes with that inward Quiet, that sedate Serenity of Mind, which alone is
able to yield that true Peace and Satisfaction, which all the Affluence, which
all the good things of this World besides cannot afford.

Yea, he will continue like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest: He will,
like those disturbed Waters, be casting up Mire and Dirt: He will, like those
raging Waves, be evermore foaming out his own shame, by despising Dominion, and
speak-Evil of Dignities. He will not cease bringing false railing Accusations
against the established Government under which he lives; until he has
effectually made his Teeth to prove Spears and Arrows, and his Tongue a sharp
Sword, wherewith to destroy his lawful Sovereign, and Fellow Subjects.

For, whence else have proceeded those two late equally detestable Hellish
Plots, of the Jesuits, and Jesuited Protestants; of Simeon and Levi, who are
Brethren, who have the same Instruments of Cruelty in both their Habitations?

From whence else have arose those contumelious Reproaches, whereby the
blasphemous Rabshakehs of our Age, with the pestilential Breath of their
Mouths, have in vain endeavored to blast the verdant flourishing honor of the
most just Bench, and most Orthodox Pulpit, this Nation could perhaps ever yet
in any Age glory of?

But the English Men will prove themselves Hebrews of the Hebrews; descended,
as it were, on both sides from those murmuring Israelites my Text relates to.

For how do they remember their past Affliction and Misery? the Wormwood and
Gall, they so Lam. 3. 19.
lately fed upon? Why, most truly like that unthankful people, they have their
Souls dried away, Number. 11. 6.
because they have nothing else but this Manna, this Angels Food before their
Eyes to nourish them.

For otherwise how comes it to pass, That they will forsake the true Fountain
of living Waters, the Church of England, which not long since their Souls
seemed to pant after; and perversely hew them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns,
that can hold no Water, unless corrupted and poisoned.

What other Reason can be assigned, That when the Fathers of our time are asked
by their Children for the Bread of Life, they will give them (but at best) an
insipid Stone, in which there is no delight or nourishment, either to Body or
Soul; That when they ask for a Fish, they (contrary to our Savior's Remark)
give them a Serpent: and when an Egg, a Scorpion? When, as new born Babes, they
desire the sincere Milk of the Word, they send them in their tender years, to
suck in those deadly envenomed Principles, that are but too commonly prated up
in Conventicles; those Seminaries of Murmuring, and Nurseries of Rebellion? And
when they desire the strong Meat of the Gospel, that they may grow thereby unto
perfect Men, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; they
(instead thereof) actually engage their unstable minds in Leagues, Covenants
and Associations against the King's sacred Person, his serene and happy
Government.

These are the mischievous methods these Men take to beguile unwary Souls;
these the accursed Theorems they lay down to their Proselites. But whenever
they put them in practice, they will (without a speedy Repentance, and God's
great Mercy) most assuredly find Misery and Destruction to be the Reward of
their Unrighteousness. For though they may chance to escape the stroke of
Justice here, yet, Behold, the Lord comes (says St. Jude) with ten thousands
of his Saints, to execute Jud. v. 14, 15, 16.
Judgment upon all such as are Murmurers, Complainers, walking after their own
Lusts, and whose mouth speaks great swelling words, having men's persons in
admiration because of advantage. But, Fourthly, and lastly,

I shall now draw a practical Conclusion from the foregoing Matter, and so
dismiss you.

It is my wish, and I shall make it my endeavor, Samaritan; and pour in
healing Oil and Wine: to do my little part in binding up those green Wounds,
under which some part of our miserable Nation most wilfully at present
languishes.

Our blessed Savior, although Truth it self in the Abstract, when he found he
could not gain Belief to his Doctrine amongst the hardened Scribes and
Pharisees; condescended so low as to refer them unto Moses and the Prophets:
and tells them, they were they which testified of him. St. Paul condescended
yet lower; when he disputed with his Heathen Auditors, whilst he only refers
Aratus. Menander. Epimenides.
them unto their own Poets, to find a Confirmation of his Arguments.

But I will stoop to the lowest method of Reasoning: whilst I shall only refer
those turbulent Spirits, who refuse to be convinced from the Holy Bible, the
Oracles of God, that they ought to possess their Souls, not only in patience,
but in thankfulness too, to an impartial perusal of those brief Weekly Memoirs,
which are Authentic Abridgments of our present Modern History. And then I dare
challenge the boldest of them to deny if they can,

That God has not in a most gracious manner been pleased to appear to us of
these Fortunate Islands, under his kinder Titles, The God of Peace and of
Order: whilst at the same time he has been known to all the Nations round about
us, as well Christian as Infidel, under his more terrible Names of The Lord of
Hosts, The God of Forces, The Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord mighty in
Battle.

That whilst we have been breaking our Swords into Plough-shares, and our
Spears into Pruning Hooks: whilst We have been making those Instruments of
death, serviceable toward bringing forth the Fruits of the Earth; our
Neighbors have not in a most hostile manner been turning them upon each others
Breasts, even till their Blood has been poured out as the Dust, and their Flesh
as the Dung.

Whilst we have securely eaten every Man of his own Vine, and every one of his
Fig Tree; and drank every one the Waters of his own Cistern: They have (on the
contrary) sowed, but not reaped; and trod Mic. 6. 15.
the Olives, but have not anointed themselves with Oil; and pressed those
Grapes which make the sweet Wine, but have not drank Wine.

Whilst We enjoy the quiet possession of our Estates in our own times, and
probably may leave them so to our Posterity after us; They have had their
Enemies without number encamped against them, to destroy the Increase of the
Earth: And Armies as Grasshoppers for Multitude entering into their Land to
devour it. So that Strangers have been filled with their Wealth, and their
Labors have been in the Houses of Strangers.

Whilst God has been pleased mercifully to crown our Years with his Goodness,
and to cause the Clouds continually to drop down Fatness; yea, to drop even
upon the barren Dwellings of the Wilderness. Whilst our Hills have rejoiced on
every side, our Pastures have been clothed with Flocks, and our Valleys
covered over with Corn: Their Fields have been turned into Aceldama's, made
fertile only by the flowing Streams of Humane Blood; and no other Voice heard
therein, but the dismal howlings, and sorrowful Groans of the most miserably
expiring Slaughtered.

Whilst we have been clothed in soft Raiment, and been gorgeously appparelled;
whilst we have lived delicately, and been pampered with all the various parts
of Luxury: Their Fields have been covered with dead Corpse, their Garments
rolled in Blood: and those Bodies that survived the common Misery, have been
exposed to the scorching heat of the Sun by day, and the chill benumming Cold
of the Moon by night. So that though they were invulnerable, by all the Weapons
formed against them in this cruel Warfare; yet have they not been Armour-proof
against those keener Arrows of Exile, Famine and Despair.

Whilst our most gracious Moses wears himself away with anxious Cares how to
procure all Welfare to his bounden Subjects; and, as if he were not by a
figure, but in a literal sense, the Father of his Country, carries us in his
Bosom, as a nursing Number. 11. 12.
Father bears the sucking Child: Whilst He seems to be wrought upon only by
the (...), by his Natural Affection; and like an indulgent Parent, thinks his
Children ought not to lay up for him, but he for his Children: Whilst (I say)
he has of late exempted us from paying the most customary Taxes usually granted
him over and above his Annual standing Revenue, the most necessary support of
his Crown and Dignity. Our Neighbors all the while have most arbitrarily been
forced to raise almost infinite Sums of Contribution Money, for the Maintenance
of their Usurping Tyrants; and so brought upon themselves and their Posterity,
in good sad earnest (what our late Murmurers vainly but suspected) perpetual
Slavery.

Whilst We enjoy the free Exercise of a most pure and undefiled Religion;
whilst our Mother, the Church, is permitted (without any interruption) freely
to receive her Sons and Daughters into her Arms, and to gather her Children as
a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings; (though many of them are so
rebellious as to despise so tender a Proposal; and rather choose to expose
themselves to those ravenous Birds of Prey, her Adversaries:) The People round
about us are sent to sing the Songs of the Lord in a strange Land; and have no
other Rule left them to walk by, but that hard one to Flesh and Blood; namely,
When they are persecuted in one City, to fly unto another. Mat. 10. 2^.
Nay, and in those places, where the true Religion is not yet wholly
extirpated, the Professors of it are in perpetual danger, even whilst they are
performing her most holy Rites, to be themselves offered up as Holocausts; and
with the surprised Galileans, to have their Blood mingled with Luke 13. 1.
their Sacrifices.

Whilst we have been particularly privileged with calm Halcyon days; whilst we
have been in a most peculiar manner blessed with the Genuine Fruits of the
Dove-like Spirit; to wit, Love, Joy, Gal. 5. 22.
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, and Goodness: On the other side, Snares,
Fire and Brimstone, Psalm. 11. 17.
Storm and Tempest have been the dis-relishing Portion of their Cup. And may
the overruling Providence of God most graciously forbid their being forced
ever to wring out the dregs thereof, and drink them. For that, at present,
within are Fears, although without there are not actual Fightings amongst them.
They are troubled with Formidable Rumors of Wars, and have but too great
reason to fear their speedy breaking out into open Hostility. Their only sad
hopes, alas! are, that, though the thing revealed be true, yet the time
appointed may be long.

Thus has God visited others with Judgment, and us with Mercy. And We trust,
that as he has lately in an eminent manner, so he will still vouchsafe to abate
the pride, assuage the malice, and confound the devices of our Enemies, of
whatsoever Party or Persuasion. Our Souls having escaped, even as caught Birds,
out of the Snare of their entrapping Fowlers: The Snares having been in a
miraculous manner broken, and thereby a most signal Deliverance wrought for us.

And now that God (the Almighty Governor of the World) has done these great
things for us, beyond what he has done for other Nations, it should engage Us
to a most hearty Thankfulness for the same. Let us therefore offer Heb. 13. 15.
the Sacrifice of Praise to God continually, that is, the Fruit of our Lips,
giving thanks to his Name. This would silence all our Complaints, quiet our
Murmurings, and drive away our Fears; especially now we are so thoroughly
convinced by plain demonstration, that the Lord is on our side, he takes our
part, and fights for us.

Away then with groundless Jealousies, and imaginary Fears! When God is our
Helper, our Defense, even a Tower of Strength to his Servants against all their
Enemies. Shall we still dis-believe all these happy signs of his Love, he has
showed among us? Shall we (out of Mockery to his Almighty Power) create to our
selves, out of nothing, unreasonable Discontents and Murmurings? This is (like
Envy it self) for us to weep, because Vixque lacrymas, quia nil lacrymabile
cernit. Ovid. Met. l. 2.
we can see nothing justly deplorable: To draw up the Sluices, and open the
Flud-gates of our Tears; because we can meet with no true reason of Complaining
in our Streets. Let us then no longer nauseate, and ungratefully surfeit upon
our lasting Prosperity; and, like Polycrates, wilfully fling our Rings into the
River, that according to the blind Dictates of Humane Nature (which incline us
to love Variety) we, with him, may obtain an unsavory taste of Adversity. Let
us no more provoke the Lord by a foolish Longing after Change and Novelty: but
resolve to be contented with that Lot and Portion, his merciful Providence has
assigned to us: Ever humbly acknowledging his multiplied Mercy, and his
peculiar Care over us; a Nation, even like Israel it self, for whom the Lord
has wrought Marvels, Exodus 34. 10.
such as have not been done in all the Earth. A Nation, saved by the Lord, the
Shield of our Help, and Deuteronomy. 33. 29.
the Sword of our Excellency.

FINIS.

