A True, and Faithful ACCOUNT OF THE FOUR CHIEFEST PLANTATIONS OF THE English
in America. TO WIT, Of VIRGINIA. NEW ENGLAND. BERMVDVS. BARBADOS.
With the temperature of the Air: The nature of the Soil: The Rivers,
Mountains, Beasts, Fowls, Birds, Fishes, Trees, Plants, Fruits, etc. AS ALSO,
Of the Natives of Virginia, and New England, their Religion, Customs, Fishing,
Huntings, etc.

COLLECTED By Samuel Clarke, sometimes Pastor in Saint Bennet-Fink, London.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, Thomas Passenger, William Cadman, William
Whitwood, Thomas Sawbridge, and William Birch. 1670.

THE DESCRIPTION OF VIRGINIA, AND THE PLANTATION OF THE ENGLISH.
The temperature of the Air; the nature of the Soil, the Rivers, Mountains,
Beasts, Fowls, Birds, Fishes, Trees, Plants, Fruits, etc. As also of the
Natives, their Religion, Customs, Fishings, Huntings, Treachery, etc.

ANNO Christi, 1584. Sr. Walter Rawleigh obtained of Queen Elizabeth of
glorious memory, a Patent for discovering, and Peopling of unknown Countries,
not actually possessed by any Christian Prince, Dated March 25. and in the
26th. year of her Reign: In prosecution whereof April 27th. he set forth two
Barks under the Command of Mr. Philip Amadas, and Mr. Arther Barlow, which
arrived on that part of America, which that Virgin Queen named Virginia: and
thereof in her Majesty's name there took possession July 13. And having taken a
view of, and liking the Country; and having had conference, and some trading
with the Savages, observing about fourteen sorts of sweet smelling timber
Trees, and many other commodities; bringing with them two of the Savages, they
returned home in September following.

Anno Christi, 1585. Sr. Richard Greenvile was sent by Sr. Walter Rawleigh with
a Fleet of seven Sail, which Landed in the Isle of St. John de Porto Rico. May
12. and there fortified themselves, and built a Pinace. The Spaniards promised
to furnish them with Victuals, but did not: whereupon, they took two Spanish
Frigots. In Hispaniola they had friendly greetings, and some trade with the
Spaniards; from whence they came to an Anchor at Wokocon, whereby the
unskilfullness of the Master, their Admiral struck on ground and sunk: July 25.
They returned for England, and by the way they took a Spanish Ship of Three
hundred Tun, richly laden. In Virginia they left a Colony under the Government
of Mr. Ralph Lane and others, besides an hundred men. The Governor wrote from
his new Fort in Virginia, that if they had Kine, and Horses in a reasonable
proportion, no Country in Christendom was to be compared to it. They discovered
from Roanoack to the Chesipians above one hundred and thirty miles, and to
Chawanock North-West, as far. In the beginning of June 1586. the Natives
conspired against the English, for which, the chiefest of them lost his head:
and Sr. Francis Drake coming thither after he had Sacked diverse of the Spanish
Towns, took the Colony with (...) his Victorious Fleet, and brought them into
England.

The same year Sr. Walter Rawleigh (...) sent a Ship of an hundred Tun with
Provisions for the Colony, which arrived at Hatorask presently after they were
come away wherefore having sought them in vain, she returned with her
provisions (...) England: About a fortnight after her departure, Sr. Kichard
Greenvile, General of Virginia, with three Ships arrived there, and neither
hearing of the Ship, nor the Colony which he had left there the year before;
after long search in vain, he left fifteen men to keep possession of the
Country in the Isle of Roanoack, furnished for two years, and so returned, by
the way spoiling some Towns of the Azores, and taking diverse Spaniards.

Anno Christi, 1587. Sr. Walter Rawleigh (notwithstanding former
discouragements) sent another Colony of One hundred and fifty Persons under the
Government of Mr. John White, with twelve Assistants, to which he gave a
Charter, and incorporated them by the name of Governors and Assistance of the
City of Rawleigh in Virginia. These arrived July 22. at Hatorask, where they
went ashore to seek the fifteen men left there the year before, intending to
plant at Chesopiok: But they were informed by a Native called Manteo, that the
Savages had secretly slain some of them, and the other were fled they knew not
whither. This Manteo was afterward Baptized, and by Sr. Walter Rawleigh was
made Lieutenant of Roanock. Here also Mrs. Dare the Governors Daughter was
delivered of a Daughter, that was Baptized by the name of Virginia. Aug. the
27. they departed and returned into England.

The Commodities that are in Virginia.
Oak of an excellent grain; Trees,
straight, tall, and long, Elm, Beech, Birch, very tall and great, of whose
Bark the Natives make their Canows; Nut-Hasil, Hasil, Alder, Cherry-Tree,
Maple, Eive, Spruce, Aspe, Fir in great abundance and many other Fruits, Trees
which the English knew not. From the Firrs issues much Turpentine, and Tar, and
Pitch.

Eagles, Fowls
Hearn, Shaws, Cranes, large Ducks and Mallard, Geese, Swans, Wigeon, Sharks,
Crows, Ravens, Kites, Sea-Mews, Pigeons, Turtle-Doves, Turkies, and many other
Fowls and Birds unknown; Hawks of diverse kinds.

Deer Red and Follow, Beasts
Bears, Wolves, Beavers, Otters, Hares, Conies, Martens, Sables, Hogs,
Porcupins, Polecats, Cats wild and great, Dogs, whereof some like Foxes, Elks,
and some Lions, Squirrils of three sorts, some flying Squirils, Hares, etc.

Whales, Fishes
Porpoises, Seals, Cod very large, Haddocks, Herring, Plaise, Thornback,
Rack-Fish, Lobsters, Crabs, Mussels, Wilks, Cony-Fish, Lump-Fish, Whitings,
Salmonds in great plenty.

Tobacco, Plants, Fruits, and Herbs,
Vines, Strawberries, Rasberries, Goosberries, Hartleberries, Corants, Roses,
Pease, Angellica, Ground-nuts.

The Wood that is most common is Oak, and Walnut, many of their Oak are so tall
and strait, that they will bear Thirty inches square of good Timber for Twenty
yards long: there are two or three several kinds of them: There are, also two
or three kinds of Walnuts, there are Cyprus Trees, some of which are near three
fathom about the Root, very strait and fifty, sixty, yea eighty foot without a
branch. There are also some Mulberry Trees, and Chestnut Trees, whose fruit
equalizeth the best in France, or Italy; they have Plums of three sorts,
Cherries, Vines, Gassafras Trees.

Virginia lies in the Latitude of 43. Degrees and 20. Minutes, Virginia's
Situation.
North. Anno Christ, 1606. King James (of happy memory) granted a Pattent to
sundry Persons to Plant along the Coast of Virginia, where they pleased between
34. Degrees and 45. of Northerly Latitude, in the main Land, and the Islands
thereunto adjoining within a hundred miles of the Coast thereof. In pursuance
whereof, there were some Ships sent the same year to begin a Plantation in the
more Southerly part of Virginia.

Virginia is a Country in America that lies between the Degrees of 34. and 44.
of North Latitude. Their Summers and Winters.
On the East its bounded with the grear Ocean. On the South with Florida. On
the North with Nova Francia. But for the West the limits are unknown. The
Plantation which was begun in the year 1606. was under the Degree of 37. 38.
and 39. where the tempreture of the air, after they were well seasoned, agreed
well with the constitutions of the English. They sound the Summer as hot as in
Spain: the Winter as cold as in France or England: The heat of Summer is in
June, July, and August, but commonly a cool Briefs asswages the vehemence of
the heat: The chiefest Winter is in half- December, January, February, and half
March.

The Winds are variable, which yet purify the air, as does the Thunder and
Lightning, which sometimes is very terrible. Sometimes there are great
droughts, and othersometimes great raines, yet the European Fruits planted
there prospered well. There is but one entrance by Sea into the Country, and
that is at the mouth of a very goodly Bay, which is about eighteen or twenty
miles wide. The Cape of the South side is called Cape Henry: the Land there is
white sand, and along the shore are great plenty of Pines, and Firrs

The North Cape is called Cape-Charles: The Isles before it are called Smiths
Isles. The Country is full of large and pleasant navigable Rivers. In it are
Mountains, Hills, Plains, Valleys, Rivers, and Brooks; this Bay lies North and
South, in which the water flows near two hundred miles, and has a Channel for
One hundred and forty miles, of depth between seven and fifteen fathom: the
breadth makes ten or fourteen miles. Northward from the Bay the Land is
Mountanous, from which fall some Brooks, which after make five Navigable
Rivers: the entrance of these Rivers into the Bay being within twenty or
fifteen miles one of another.

The Mountains are of diverse natures, some of Stone for Millstones, some of
Marble, etc. and many pieces of Crystal are brought down from them by the
raines. The Soil generally is lusty and rich, being generally of a black sandy
mould: In some places a fat slimy clay: In other places gravel. The Country
generally has such pleasant plain Hills, and fertile Valleys, one prettily
crossing another, and watered so conveniently with sweet Brooks, and crystal
Streams as if Artists had devised them. By the Rivers are many Marshes, some of
20, 30, 100. yea 200 Acres, some more, some less. On the West side of the Bay,
and nearest to its mouth, is the River called Powhatan, according to the name
of a principal Country that lies upon it: the mouth of it is near three miles
in breadth: Its Navigable One hundred and fifty miles as the Channel goes: In
the farthest place which the English discovered, are Falls, Rocks, and Shoales
which hinder any farther Navigation. In a Peninsula on the North side of this
River, the English first planted, in a place which they called James Town.

As our men passed up one of their Rivers, there came to them some called
Sasquesahanocks with Skins, Bows, Arrows, Targets, Beads, Swords, and
Tobacco-pipes for Presents. They were great and well proportioned men, so to
the English they seemed like Giants; with much ado they were restrained from
adoring their discoverers. Their Language well seeming their proportion,
sounding from them as it were a great voice in a Vault: their attire was the
skins of Bears, and Wolves. One had a Wolves-head hanging in a Chain for a
Jewel: his Tobacco-pipe was three quarters of a yard long, prettily carved with
a Bird, a Bear, a Dear, being at the great end sufficient to beat out a man's
brains: their Bows, Arrows, and Clubs are suitable to their proportions. One of
the biggest of them had the calf of his Leg measured, which was three quarters
of a yard about, and all the rest of his limbs answerable thereto. His Arrows
were five quarters long, headed with Flints, formed like a heart, an inch
broad, and an inch and an half long, which he wore in a Wolves Skin at his
back: The Natives described.
In one hand a Bow, and in the other a Club.

The Natives of Virgina have generally black hair, but few of them have Beards.
The men have half their heads shaven, the hair of the other half long: The
Women are their Barbers, who with two Shells grate away the hair of what
fashion they please. The Women's hair is cut in many fashions according to their
eyes, but ever some part of it is long. They are very strong, of able bodies
and nimble: they can lie in the Woods under a Tree by the fire in the coldest
Weather, and amongst the Grass and Weeds in Summer: They are inconstant,
crafty, timorous, quick of apprehension, and very ingenious. They are very
covetous of Copper, Beads, and such trash. They are soon angry, and so
malicious, that they seldom forget an injury. They seldom steal one from
another, lest their Connivers should reveal it. Their Women are careful to
avoid suspicion of dishonesty without the leave of their Husbands. Each
Housekeeper knows his own Lands, and Gardens, and most live of their own
labor.

They are sometimes covered with the Skins of wild Beasts, Their Apparel.
which in Winter are dressed with the Hair inward, but in Summer without. The
better sort use large Mantles of Dear-skins, some Embroidered with white Beads,
some with Copper, and others are painted. But the common sort have scarce
wherewith to cover their nakedness, but with Grass or Leaves. Some have Mantles
made of Turkey Feathers, so handsomely wrought, and Woven with Thread, that
nothing could be discerned but Feathers. These were exceeding neat and warm.
The Women are covered about their middles with a Skin, and much ashamed to be
seen bare. They adorn themselves with Copper and Painting; They Have, their
Legs, Hands, Breasts, and Faces cunningly wrought with diverse Works, as
Beasts, Serpents, etc. artificially wrought in their flesh with spots. In each
Ear commonly they have three holes, whereat they hang Chains, Bracelets, or
Copper. Some of their men wear in those holes a small green, and yellow
colored Snake, near half a yard long, which crawling and wrapping her self
about his neck, oftentimes familiarly kisses his lips: Others wear a dead Rat
tied by the tail. Some on their heads wear the wing of a Bird, or some large
Feathers with the tail of a Rattle-Snake. Many have the skin of a Hawk, or some
strange Fowl, stuffed with the Wings stretched abroad. Others a piece of
Copper; And some the hand of an enemy dried. Their heads and shoulders are
painted red, with a certain Powder mixed with Oil, which they hold in Summer to
preserve them from heat, and in Winter from cold. He is most gallant that is
most monstrous to behold. Habitations and Houses.


Their habitations are mostly by the Rivers, or not far from some fresh Spring.
Their houses are built like our Arbours, of small Sprigs bowed and tied
together, and so close covered with Mats, or the bark of Trees, that
notwithstanding Wind, Rain, or Weather, they are as warm as Stoves, but smoky,
though they leave a hole on the top right over the Fire.

Their Lodging is by the Fire side on little Hurdles made of Reeds, Their
Lodging and Beds.
and covered with a Mat. On these round about the house they lie, heads and
points, one by another, covered with Mats or Skins, and some stark naked: Of
these they are from six to twenty in an house. Their houses are in the mid'd of
their Fields or Gardens, which are plots of ground: From twenty to one hundred,
or two hundred of these houses stand something near together.

Men, Their childbirth and children.
Women, and Children have their several names according to the fancy of their
Parents. Their Women are easily delivered of child, yet they love their
children very dearly; and to make them hardy, in the coldest Mornings they wash
them in the Rivers, and by Painting and Ointments they so tan their skins, that
after a year or two no Weather will hurt them.

The Men spend their time in Fishing, Women laborious and men idle.
Hunting, Wars, and such manly Exercises, scorning to be seen about any Womanly
Exercise, which makes the Women very painful, and the men often very idle; The
women and children do all the work; they make Mats, Baskets, Pots, Morters;
they pound their Corn, make their Bread, prepare their victuals, plant and
gather their Corn, bear all kinds of burdens, etc. Their Fire they kindle by
chafing a dry pointed stick in a hole of little square piece of Wood, which
taking fire, will kindle Moss, Leaves, and such dry things.

In March and April is their Fishing time, Their several Diets.
wherein they live on Fish, Turkies, and Squerrils. In May and June they plant
their Fields, and then they live most upon Acrons, Walnuts and Fish: Some upon
Crabs, Oisters, land Tortoises, Strawberries, Mulberries, etc. In June, July,
and August, they feed upon the roots of Tocknough, Berries, Fish, and green
Wheat; and their bodies alter with their Diet, as those of Deer, and wild
beasts do: And accordingly they are Fat or Lean, Strong or Weak.

They use much their Bows and Arrows in Fishing, Their Bows and Arrows.
Hunting, and the Wars. They bring their Bows to the form of ours, by scraping
them with a Shell: Their Arrows are made of strait young Sprigs, which they
head with bone, two or three inches long: With these they shoot at Squirils.
Other Arrows they have made of Reeds, pieced with Wood, and headed with
Christals or Flint, etc. For Knives they have the splinters of a Reed,
wherewith they cut the Feathers of their Arrows into form: With these Knives
they will joint a Deer, or any other Beast, shape their Shoes, Buskings,
Mantles, etc. To make the notch of their Arrows, they have the Tooth of a Bever
set in a stick, with which they grate it by degrees. Their Arrow heads they
quickly make with a little bone, which they ever wear at their bracer, of a
splint of stone or glass, in form of a Heart which they glue to their Arrows;
their Glue they make of the Sinews of Deer, and the tops of Deer Horns which
will not dissolve in cold water.

In their Wars they use round Targets made of the Bark of Trees, Their weapons
in War.
and Swords of Wood, or the Horn of a Deer put through a piece of Wood, in the
form of a Pickax.

Their Fishing is much in Boats, The Fishing Boats, and furniture.
which they make of one Tree, by burning, and scraping with Stones and Shells
till they have made it in the form of a Trough. Some of them are a Ell deep,
and forty and fifty foot long, and will bear from ten to forty men, according
to their bigness: For Oars they use paddles and sticks, with which they will
Row faster than our Barges. The Women use to spin the Bark of Trees, Deer
Sinews, or a kind of Grass called Pemmenaud, of which they make a very good
thread, which serves for many uses about their houses, Apparel, Fishing-nets,
Lines for Angles: Their hooks are either a bone grated in the form of a hooked
Pin, or of the splinter of a Bone tied to the cleft of a little stick, and with
the end of the Line they tie on the bait. They also use long Arrows tied to a
Line, with which they shoot at Fishes in the River, or Darts which they throw
at them.

They take extreme pains in their Huntings and Fishings, Their Huntings.
whereunto they are enured from their Childhood: And by their continual
rangings about, they know all the places and Advantages most frequented with
Deer, Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, Rooks, Bemes. At their Huntings they leave their
Habitations, and in several companies go to the most Desert places with their
Families toward the Mountains, or heads of Rivers where there is plenty of
Game. It Is a marvel how they can pass these Deserts of three or four days
journey over, without missing their way. The Women bear their Hunting Houses
after them with Corn, Acrons, Mortars, and Bagg and Baggage which they use.
When they come to the place of Exercise, every man endeavors to show his best
Dexterity; for hereby they get their Wives. They will shoot level about forty
yards, near the Mark, and one hundred and twenty is their best at Random. When
they have found the Deer, they environ them with Fires, and betwixt the Fires
they place themselves; and some take their stand in the midst. The Deer being
frighted with the Fires, and their voices they chase them so long within that
Circle, that oftimes they kill six, eight, ten, or fifteen at a hunting.
Sometimes also when they find them in a point of Land, they force them into a
River, where with their Boats they kill them. When they have shot a Dear by
Land, they follow him like Bloodhounds, by the blood and stain, and oftimes so
take him. Hares, Partridges, Turkies, or Eggs, fat or lean, young or old, they
devour all they can come by.

When they intend Wars, Their Wars.
the Werowances Corks, consult with their Priests and Connivers, and Ancient
Alleys, and Friend: They have Captains over every Nation, which are lusty young
men. They rarely make Wars for Lands or Goods, but for Women and Children,
Before the battle they paint and disguise themselves in the fiercest manner
they can devise: Either Army has his General, they take their stands a Musket
shot one from another: Rank themselves fifteen a breast, and so place
themselves, that the Rear can shoot as well as the Front. Then from either part
a Messenger is sent with these conditions, That whosoever is vanquished, upon
their submission within two days after, shall live; but their Wives and
Children shall be prize for the Conquerors; upon the return of the Messengers,
they approach in their Order. On each Flank is a Sergeant, and in the Rear a
Lieutenant, all duly keeping their places; yet leaping and singing as they go.
Upon the first flight of their Arrows they give an horrible shout; and when
their Arrows are spent, they join together, charging and retiring, each rank
seconding the former: As they get advantage, they catch their Enemy by the hair
of his head, and then down he goes, and with his Wooden Sword he beats out his
brains, etc.

Their Music is a thick Cane on which they Pipe as on a Recorder. Their Music.
For their Wars they have a great deep Platter of Wood, which they cover with a
skin, upon which they beat as upon a Drum; of these they have Base, Tenor,
Countertenor, Mean, and Trebble. If any great person come to the Habitation of
a Werowanee, they spread a Mat for him to sit upon, setting themselves just
opposite to him; then all the company with a tunable voice of shouting, bid him
welcome. Then some of the chiefest make an Oration to him, which they do with
such vehemence that they sweat till they drop again. Such victuals as they have
they spend freely upon him; and where his Lodging is prepared, they set a woman
finely painted with Red to be his bedfellow.

Their trading with the English is for Copper, Beads, etc. Their trading.
for which they give Skins, Fowl, Fish, Flesh, Mais, etc.

They have a Religion amongst them: Their Religion.
All things that were able to hurt them beyond their prevention, they adore
with Divine Worship: As fire, water, thunder, lightning; The great Guns of the
English, Muskets, Horses, etc. But their chief God is the Devil whom they call
Oak, and serve him more for fear than love. In their Temples they have his
image in an ilfavoured shape, and adorned with Chains, Copper, and Beads, and
covered with a skin. By him is commonly the Sepulchers of their Kings: Their
bodies are first bowelled, then dried upon Hurdles; About their neck, and most
of their joints they hang Bracelets, Chains of Copper, Pearl, and then they
wrap them up in white Skins, and roll them in Mats for their Winding-sheets,
laying them orderly in their Tombs, which are Arches made of Mats: the rest of
their Wealth they set at their feet in Baskets.

For their ordinary Burials they dig a deep hole in the Earth, Their
Sepulchers, and Burials.
and the Corpse being wrapped in Skins, and Mats, with their Jewels, they lay
them upon sticks in the ground; and then covet them with Earth. The Burial
being ended, Their mournings:
the Women having their faces painted with black, sit twenty four hours in
their houses mourning and lamenting by turns, with such yellings and howlings
as may express their great sorrow. In the Woods they have some great houses
filled with the Images of their Kings and Devils, and Tombs of their
predecessors, which they count so holy, that none but their Priests, and Kings
dare come into them.

They have a chief Priest, The Priests Attire.
differenced from the inferior by the Ornaments of his head, which are twelve,
sixteen, or more Snake-skins stuffed with Moss, the Skins of Weesels and other
Vermin; all which they tie by the Tails, so as the Tails meet on the top of
their head like a Tassel, about which a Crown of Feathers; the Skins hang down
about him, and almost cover his face. The Priests faces are painted as ugly as
they can devise, and they carry Rattles in their hands. Their Devotion is most
in Songs, which the chief Priests begins, and the rest follow. Their Solemn
Meetings are upon great distress of want, fear of Enemies, times of Triumph,
and of gathering their Fruits; at which time all both men, women and children
meet together.

The people are very Barbarous, Their Civil Government.
yet have they Government amongst them, and their Governors are well obeyed by
their subjects.

The form of their Government is Monarchical. One of their Chief Rulers is
called Powhatan from the place of his Habitation: Some part of the Country
came to him by Inheritance, the rest by Conquest. In several parts of his
Dominion he has Houses built like Arbors, some thirty or forty yards long;
and in each house provision for his entertainment according to the times. About
the Kings person is ordinarily attending a Guard of forty or fifty of his
tallest men: every night upon the four quarters of his House stand four
Sentinels, and every half hour, one from the Corpse dugard does hollow, unto
which each of the Sentinels does answer; If any fail, he is extremely beaten.

One House he has wherein he keeps his treasure of Skins, Copper, Pearl, and
Beads, which he stores up against his burial; none comes to this House but the
Priest. At the four corners stand as Sentinels four Images of a Dragon, a Bear,
a Leopard, and Giant-like man, all ilfavouredly made according to their best
workmanship.

Their King has as many women as he will, The Kings Women and attendants.
whereof, when he lies on his bed, one sits at his Head, and another at his
Feet: But when he sits, one sits on his Right Hand, another on his Left. When
he is weary of any of them he bestows them upon those that deserves best at his
Hands. When he Dines or Sups, one of his Women, before and after Meat, brings
him Water in a Wooden platter to wash his Hands. Another waits with a bunch of
Feathers to wipe upon instead of a Towel, and the Feathers were dried again.
His Kingdom descends not to his Sons, but first to his brethren, and after
their decease to his sisters, and to the heirs of his eldest sister.

They have no letters whereby to write or read; Their Government by Customs.
the only Law whereby he Rules is Custom; or else his Will is his Law which
must be obeyed. His inferior Kings whom they call Werowances, are tied to Rule
by Customs, yet have they power of Life and Death: they all know their several
Lands, and Habitations, and Limit, to Fish, Fowl, and Hunt in: but they hold
all of their great King, to whom they pay tribute of Skins, Beads, Copper,
Pearl, Deer, Turkies, wild Beasts, and Corn; with great fear and adoration they
all obey him. At his feet they present whatsoever he commands; at his frown
their greatest spirit will tremble: Offenders he causes to be broyled to
death; or their brains to be beaten out; their ordinary correction is to beat
them with Cudgels, for which yet they will never cry nor complain.

Anno Christi 1611. the L. de La Ware upon his return from Virginia, Of the
Plantation of the English.
gave this account of it. That the number of men which he left there was above
two hundred, the most in health, and provided of ten months victuals in the
Store house, besides other quantities of Corn, and show much friendship.

For the securing of the Colony he built three Fronts: two of them being seated
near Point Comfort, had adjoining to them a large circuit of ground, open, and
fit for Corn. The third Fort was at the Falls, upon an Island environed with
Corn ground. The Country is wonderful fertile and rich: The English Cattle were
much increased, and did thrive excellent well. The kine in a hard Winter when
the ground was covered with Snow, lived (with one another help) upon the Grass
which they found, and prospered well; the Swine increased much.

That year Captain Argoll went with his Ship up Pembroke River, where he met
with the King of Pastancy, and procured of him and his Subjects Eleven hundred
bushes of Corn, besides three hundred for his own Company, with which he
returned to James's Town, and delivered it into the Store. Then did he return
and discover Pembroke River to the head of it, which was about Sixty five
Leagues within Land, and Navigable for any Ship: then marching into the
Country, he found great store of Beasts as big as Kine, Elks
of which, they killed two, and found them to be good and wholesome meat, and
yet easy to be killed being but heavy, and slow Creatures. He found also a
Mine and a strange kind of Earth, which the Indian used for Physic, and it
cures the pain of the Belly: He found also a Water issuing out of the Earth
which tasted like Allom water; it was good and wholesome: He found an Earth like
a Gum, white and clear; and another red, like Terra Sigillata: an other white,
and so light, that being cast into water, it swims.

Their Dear have usually three or four Fawns at a time, Fruitfulness of the
Deer.
none under two: and our English Goats in Virginia often times bring forth
three; and mostly two young ones, Their Beasts and Fowls*
so fruitful is the Country: they have Beavers, Otters, Foxes, Racoons, (as
good meat as a Lamb) Hares, wild Catts with rich Furrs; Musk-Rats, etc. wild
Pigeons in Winter numberless, the flocks of them will be three or four hours
together flying over, so thick that they obscure the very Light; Turkies far
bigger than ours that will run as fast as a Gray-hound, Buzzards, Snites,
Partridges, Owls, Swans, Geese, Brants, Droeis, Shell-Drakes, Teal, Widgeon,
Curlews, Puits, Black-birds, Hedg-Sparrows, Oxeies, Wood-peckers, and in Winter
flocks of Parakitoes.

Their Rivers are plentifully stored with Fish: Their Fish.
as Sturgeon, Porpass, Base, Carp, Shad, Herring, Eele, Cat-Fish, Perch,
Trout, Flat-Fish, Sheeps-head, Drummers, Jarsishes, Craifishes, Crabs, Oisters,
etc. At one hale they have caught as much Sturgeon, Base, and other great Fish
as has loaded a Frigot. Their Fruits.
They have without Art, Grapes, Mulberries, Maricocks like a Lemmon, whose
blossom may admit comparison with our most pleasant and beautiful Flowers, and
the fruit is exceeding delightful to the taste. Many goodly Groves of
Chincomen-Trees, that have husks like a Chestnut, and are good meat either raw
or boiled. Chestnuts great store, and Walnuts plenty of three sorts; Filberts,
Crabs smaller but sowrer than ours.

Anno Christi, 1613. Mr. Alex. Whitaker, who was Minister to the Colony,
writing to a Friend in London, gives this account of the Natives. They
acknowledge (says he) that there is a great good God, but know him not, having
the eyes of their understandings yet blinded; wherefore they serve the Devil
for fear, after a most base manner, sacrificing sometime their own children to
him: His Image they paint upon one side of a Toad-stool, much like to a
deformed Monster: Their Priests are no other, but such as our English Witches
are. They live naked in body, as if the shame of their sin deserved no
covering: they esteem it a virtue to lie, deceive, and steal, as their Master
the Devil teaches them.

The Natives are not so simple as some have conceited: The qualities of the
Natives.
For they are of Body strong, lusty, and very nimble; they are a very
understanding Generation, quick of apprehension, sudden in their dispatches,
subtle in their dealings, exquisite in their inventions, and industrious in
their labor. The World has no better marks-men with their Bows, and Arrows
than they be: they will kill Birds flying, Fishes swimming, and Beasts running:
They shoot with mavelous strength, for they shot one of our English, being
unarmed, quite through the Body, and nailed both his Arms to his Body with one
Arrow. Their service to their God is answerable to their lives, being performed
with great fear and attention, and many strange dumb shows are used in it,
stretching forth their limbs, and straining their bodies exceedingly.

They stand in great awe of their Priests which are a Generation of Vipers,
Their Priests.
even of Satan's own brood. The manner of their life is much like that of the
Popish Hermites: For they live alone in the Woods, in Houses sequestered from
the common course of men; neither is any man suffered to come into their House
for to speak with them but when the Priest calls them. He takes no care for his
Victuals, for all necessaries of bread, water, etc. are brought to a place near
to his House, and are there left which he fetches at his pleasure. If they
would have Rain, or have lost any thing, they have recourse to him, who
Conjures for them, and many times he prevails. If they be sick, he is their
Physician: if they be wounded, he sucks them. At his command they make War and
Peace neither do they any thing of moment without him. Their Government.
They have an evil Government amongst them, a rude kind of Commonwealth, and
rough Government, wherein they both honor, and obey their Kings, Parents, and
Governors: they observe the limits of their own Possessions. Murder is rarely
heard off: Adultery, and other gross offenses are severely punished.

The whole Continent of Virginia situated within the Degrees of 34. and 47. is
a place beautified by God with all the Ornaments of Nature, The Country
described.
and enriched with his earthly Treasures. That part of it which the English
chiefly possess, begins at the Bay of Chesapheac, and stretching it self in
Northerly Latitude to the Degrees of 39. 40. and is interlined with seven most
goodly Rivers, the least whereof is equal to our Thames: and all these Rivers
are so nearly joined, as that there is not very much distance of ground between
either of them, and those several pieces of Land betwixt them are every where
watered with many veins, and creeks, which sundry ways do cross the Land, and
make it almost Navigable from one River to another, the commodity whereof is
very great to the Planters, in respect of the speedy and easy Transportation
of Goods from one River to another. The River Powhatan ebbs and flows One
hundred and forty miles into the Main; at the mouth whereof are the two Forts
of Henry and Charles. Forty two miles upward is the first and Mother Town of
the English seated, called James Town: and seventy miles beyond that upward, is
the Town of Henerico built. Ten mile beyond this is a place called the Falls,
because the River has there a great descent, falling down between many Mineral
Rocks which be there. Twelve miles beyond these Falls is a Crystal Rock with
which the Indians use to head most of their Arrows.

The higher ground in Virginia is much like to the mould of France, being clay
and Sand mixed together at the top, but digging any depth, its red Clay full of
glistering spangles. As for Iron, Steel, Antimony, and Terra Sigillata, they
are very frequent. The air of the Country, especially about Henerico, and
upwards, is very temperate, and agrees well with our English bodies. The
extremity of Summer is not hot as in Spain, nor the cold in Winter so sharp as
ours in England. The Spring and Harvest are the two longest seasons, and very
pleasant. The Summer and Winter are both but short. The Winter for the most
part is dry and fair; but the Summer ofttimes watered with great and sudden
showers of Rain, whereby the cold of Winter is warmed, and the heat of Summer
is cooled.

Amongst the Beasts in Virginia, Strange Beasts.
there are two kinds most strange. One of them is the Female Possowne, which
has a bag under her belly, out of which she will let forth her young ones, and
take them in again at her pleasure. The other is the flying Squerril, which, by
the help of certain broad flaps of Skin, growing on each side of her forelegs,
will fly from one Tree to another at twenty or thirty paces distance, and more
if she have the benefit of a little puff of Wind. The English Kine, Goats,
Hoggs, etc. prosper very well.

They have Hawks of several sorts, Their Hawks and other Fowl.
and amongst them Auspreis, Fishing Hawks, and Cormorants. In the Winter they
have great store of Cranes, Herons, Pigeons, Patridges, and Black-birds. The
Rivers and Creeks are overspread with Swans, Geese, Brants, Diverse, and those
other named before. The Woods have many kinds of Rare and delightful Birds.

The Rivers abound with Fish, Birds and Fish.
both small and great, as Pike, Carp, Eele, Perches of six several sorts, etc.
The Seafish come into their Rivers in March, and continue till the end of
September. Frst come in great Skuls of Herrings: Then big Shads, and Rock-fish
follow them. Then Trouts, Base, Flounders, and other dainty Fishes come in
before the other be gone. Then come in multitudes of great Sturgeons, and
diverse others.

Some five miles about Henerico by land, Bermudas City.
but by water fourteen miles. Sr. Tho. Dale, Anno Christi 1611. began to build
a City, called the New Bermoodas, situated very commodiously, whereunto he laid
out, and annexed to be belonging to that Corporation for ever: many miles of
Wood-lands, and Champion, which he divided into several Hundreds. As the Upper
and the Nether Hundreds Roch-Dale Hundreds, Wests-Sherley Hundred, and Diggs
his Hundred.

Anno Christi 1614. Pacahuntas, Powhatans Daughter converted baptized and
married.
the beloved Daughter of the great King Powhatan, having been carefully
instructed in the Christian Religion, by the care of Sr. Tho. Dale, and having
made some good progress therein, renounced publicly her Country Idolatry, and
openly confessed her Christian Faith, and desiring it, was baptized by the name
of Rebecca, and was afterward married to one Mr. Rolph an English Gentleman of
good repute, her Father and friends giving their approbation to it, and her
Uncle gave her to him in the Church.

Anno Christi 1616. Sr. Tho. Dale returning into England, She comes into
England.
there came over with him Mr. Rolfe, with Rebecca, his Convert and Consort, and
Tomocomo, one of Powhatans Counselors; Mr. Rolfs Wife Rebecca, though she
carried her self very civilly and lovingly to her Husband, yet did she behave
her self as the Daughter of a King, and was accordingly respected by diverse
persons of Honor here in England, in their hopeful zeal by her means to
advance Christianity in these Countries. As she was with her Husband returning
into Virginia, at Gravesend she fell sick, and came to her end and Grave,
having given great demonstration of her Christian Faith and Hope.

The English in Virginia Anno Christi 1620. were divided into several
Buroughs, Her death.
each man having his share of Land duly set out for him, to hold and enjoy to
him and his Heirs for ever. The public Lands also for the Company were set out
by themselves; the Governors share by it self; the Colleges by it self, and
for each particular Borough; the Ministers Gleab also was set out and bounded,
their being 200. l. per annum allowed to each Minister for each Town. They are
all Governed according to the laudable Form of Justice used in England. The
Governor is so restrained by a Counsel joined with him, that he cannot wrong
any man, who may not have any speedy remedy.

In the years 1619. and 1620. there were 9. or ten ships sent to Virginia,
Vrginia divided.
wherein were 1261. persons; most of them being for public uses, As to plant
the Governors Land, 80. persons; Tenants for the Companies Land 130. Tenants
for the College Land, 100. Tenants for the Ministers Gleab-Lands 50. Young
Maids to make Wives for so many of the Planters 90. Boys for Apprentices 100.
Servants for the public, 50. Some were employed to bring up thirty of the
Infidels children in true Religion and Civility.

The Commodities which the Planters were directed to apply themselves to, How
Governed:
were Iron; for the making whereof, 130 men were sent over to set up Iron work;
Proof having been made of the excellency of that Iron.

Cordage: Persons sent over.
For which (beside Hemp) order was given for the planting of Silk-grass
(naturally growing in those Parts) in great abundance, which makes the best
Cordage, and Linen in the World. Commodities, their Iron, Pot, and Soap ashes
Pitch and Tar.
Of this every Householder was bound to set 100. Plants; and the Governor
himself set five thousand.

Potashes, and Soap-ashes; Pitch and Tar. for the making whereof, diverse
Polanders were sent over.

Timber of all sorts, Timber.
with Masts, Planks, and Boords for provision of Shipping, etc. there being not
so good Timber for all uses in any Country whatsoever; and for the help in
these works, provision was sent of Men and Materials for the setting up of
sundry Saw-mills.

Silk: Silk.
For which the Country is exceeding proper, having an innumerable of the best
Mulberry-trees, and some Silkworms naturally found upon them, producing
excellent Silk, and to further this work, many seeds of the best Silkworms
were sent over.

Vines; Vines.
Whereof the Country naturally yields great store, and of sundry sorts* which
by good culture might be brought to excellent perfection: for effecting whereof
diverse Skilful Vegneroons were sent, with store also from hence of Vine Plants
of the best sort.

Salt: Salt.
Which work were ordered to be set up in great plenty, not only to serve the
Colony, but to promote the great Fishings upon those Coasts.

Diverse persons of public spirits gave much to the furtherance of this
Plantation. Gifts to the Plantation.
Two unknown persons gave Plate and other necessaries for the furnishing of two
Communion Tables. Mis. Mary Robinson gave 200. l. toward the building of a
Church in Virginia. An unknown person sent the Treasurer 550. l. in gold for
the bringing up of some of the Infidels children in the knowledge of God, and
true Religion, and in fit Trades whereby they might live honestly in the World.
Mr. Nicholas Ferrar by Will gave 300. l. to the College in Virginia, to be
paid when there should be ten of the Infidels children placed in it. And in the
mean time 24. l. per annum to be distributed unto three discreet and godly men
in the Colony, which should bring up three of the Infidels children in the
Christian Religion, and in some good course to live by. An other unknown person
gave 10. l. to advance the plantation.

Anno Christi 1620. Persons sent over.
the Right honorable Henry E. of Southampton was made Treasurer; from which
time to the year 1624. there were 24. Ships sent to Virginia: And there were
diverse persons set for the making of Beads, wherewith to trade with the
Natives, and for making of Glass of all sorts: And 55. young Maids were sent to
make Wives for the Planters. Also a Magazine of all necessaries was sent for
the Colony, to the value of 2000. l. besides Goods, sent by private persons
great store. Twenty five persons were sent to build Boats, Pinnaces, and ships
for the use of the Colony in the Fishing Trade, and for further discovery.

The Plants of Cotton Wool Trees prosper well, and so did Indigo Seeds,
Oranges, Lemons, Sugar Canes, Cassary, Pines, Plantanes, Potatoes, and sundry
other Indian Fruits.

Some of the English East India Company gave seventy pound, Gifts to promote
the Plantation.
eight shillings sixpence, toward the building of a Free School in Virginia,
to be called the East India School. Another unknown person added to it the sum
of thirty pound. And another sent in Gold twenty five pound. Another unknown
person gave thirty pound; for which there was to be allowed forty shillings a
year for ever, for a Sermon Preached before the Virginia Company. Another gave
a rich Bible, and a great Church Bible, and other Books to be sent to Virginia,
and an exact Map of America. The Books were valued at ten pound. Mr. Tho.
Bargrave, a Minister in Virginia, when he died, left for the use of the
College his Library worth one hundred Marks.

(...) Anno Christi 1621. The treacherous Natives, notwithstanding all the
Courtesies and kind Usage by the English to them, most Perfidiously, and
Treacherously murdered above three hundred of them, and would have done the
like to all the rest, but that God (through his infinite Goodness and Mercy)
moved the heart of one of them, who was Converted to Christianity, to Discover
the same a few hours before it was put in Execution, the like Massacres have
been since.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE BERMUDAS, OR Summers Islands: THE FIRST DISCOVERY, AND
PLANTATION of it by the ENGLISH.
The Temperature of the Aier; The Nature of the Soil, Trees, Plants, Fruits,
Herbs, Fishes, Fowls, and other Commodities thereof.

THese Islands were first Discovered by one Bermudas, from whence they received
that name; and afterward from Sr. George Summers an Englishman, they were
called Summers Islands. They lie in the Western Ocean, and in that part of the
World commonly called America, and vulgarly the West Indies. Their Latitude, or
Elevation is 32. Degrees, 25. Minutes, which is almost the same with the
Madaeraes.

They are environed round about with Rocks, which Northward, and Westward, and
Southward extend far, by reason whereof they are very strong, there being only
three places whereby Ships can come into them, which places also are well
fortified. But within there is room to entertain a great Fleet: In most places
the Rocks appear at a low water, and are not much covered at an high water, for
it Ebbs and Flows there not above five Foot.

The Shore for the most part is a Rock, The nature of its soil.
so hardened by the Sun, Wind, and Sea, that its not apt to be worn by the
Waves, whose violence also is broken by the Rocks before they come at the
Shore. The mould is of diverse colors, neither Clay nor Sand but betwixt both:
The red which resembles Clay is worst: The white resembing Sand, and blackish
is good: the brown betwixt them both is best.

Under the Mould two or three foot deep, is a kind of white substance which
they call Rock: the Trees usually fasten their roots in it, and draw their
nourishment from it; neither indeed is it Rock or Stone, nor so hard, though
for the most part harder than Chalk; not so white, but like a Pumice, and
Spongy, easily receiving and retaining much water; and in some places Clay is
found under it: The hardest kind of it (which is commonly under the red ground)
is not so spongy, nor retains much water, but lies in the ground like Quarries,
as it were thick slates, one upon another.

Most of their fresh water (whereof they have good store) comes out of the Sea,
drayning through the sand, or through the aforesaid substance which they call
the Rock, and leaving its saltness behind it, in the passage becomes fresh.
Sometimes they dig Wells of fresh water within four or five paces of the
Seaside: and usually they Ebb and Flow as the Sea does.

The Air is most commonly clear, The temperature of the air.
very temperate, moist, with a moderate heat, very healthful, and apt for the
Generation, and nourishing of all things: so that there is scarce any thing
that is transported from England thither, but it yields a far greater increase:
and if it be any living thing, it becomes fatter and better liking then in
England: By which means the Country was so replenished with Hens and Turkeys,
within the space of three or four years not being looked after, many of them
forsook the Houses, and became wild and so increased abundantly. the like
increase there was of Hogs and other Cattle according to their kinds.

There seems to be a continual Spring, which is the cause that some few things
come not to that maturity and perfection as were requisite. And though the
Trees do shed their leaves, yet are they always full of green.

Their Corn is the same which is used in most parts of the West Indies: Its
fertility.
to wit, Maiz which, to such as are used to it, is more hearty and nourishing
than our English Wheat, and yields a far greater increase, as sometimes a pound
of one or two grains: Of this Corn, and diverse other things without either
plowing or diging the ground, they have two Harvests every year: For they set
about March which they gather in July: and again in August which is ripe in
December. And little slips of Fig Trees, and Vines do usually bear fruit within
a year after they are planted, sometimes in half a year: the like fertility
they have in other things.

There is scarce at any time to be perceived either Frost or Snow, Their
Summers, and Winters.
nor any extreme heat, for there is always some wind stirring which clears and
cools the Air: Their Summers and Winters observe the same times with ours, but
their longest days and nights are shorter than ours in England by almost two
hours and an half: as also their shortest days and nights are as much longer
then ours: For their longest days are about fourteen hours, and their shortest
ten. When its noon with us, its morning with them, and when its about five a
Clock in the evening with us, its noon with them; so that while the Sun
declines with us it rises with them, as also it does in Virginia, its apt to
Thunder and Lighten all the year long, and often times more terrible than in
England, yet never any are hurt by it.

There is no Venomous Creature in this Country: No venomous Creature there.
the yellow Spider which is there making her Webb as it were of Silk, and
bringing forth her young of Eggs, like little drops of quicksilver, neither is
it perceived to be Venomous, yet there is a plant that climbs Trees like our
Ivy, the leaf like that of a Vine, that is somewhat venomous, but of no great
force.

There is great store and variety of Fish, Fish
and so good as these parts of the World afford not the like, which being
mostly unknown to the English, they gave them such names as best liked them: As
Rock-Fish, Groops, Porgie-Fish, Hog-Fish, Angle-Fish, Cavallies, Yellow-tailes,
Spanish-Makerels, Mullets, Bream, Cony-Fish, Morrayes, Sting-Rays, Flying-Fish,
Fowl
etc. The like they did by the Fowl, as Cohoos, Sandbirds, Hearns, Duck, Teal,
Pemblicoes, Castle-Boobies, Hawks, etc.

At the first Plantation of this Country by the English it was all over grown
with Woods, Trees and Plants.
and Plants of several kinds; and to such as were unknown to them they gave
such names as best pleased themselves: such as were known retained their old
names; as Cedars, Palmitoes, Black-wood, White-wood, Yellow-wood,
Mulberry-trees, Stopper, trees, Laurel, Olive Trees, Mangrowes, Pepper-trees,
Yellow-berry-weed, Red-weed, etc. These and many others they found of Natures
Planting: But since they have Inhabited it, there have been brought, as well
from the Indies as from other parts of the World, sundry other Plants, as Vines
of several kinds, Sugarcanes, Fig Trees, Apple Trees, Oranges, Lemons,
Pomgranates, Plantanes, Pines, Parsnips, Raddishes, Artichocks, Pottatoes,
Cassavie, Indico, etc. In so much that its now become like a spacious Garden,
or Orchyard of many pleasant, and profitable things.

There are many Tortoises, Tortoises or Turtles described.
which they call Turtles: they are in the shape of their bodies like
Crab-Fishes, and have four fins, they are as big as three or four men can
carry, the upper part of them in covered with a great shell, weighing about
half a hundred weight, the flesh that cleaves to the inside of it being roasted
against the fire, is almost like the marrow of Beef, excellent good; but the
shell of it self harder than horn: She has also a shell on her belly, but not
so hard as the other, for when its boiled it becomes soft like the gristles of
Beef, and is good meat: These live in the Sea, spending the Spring, and Summer
time about these Islands, but where they spend the rest of the year is not
known; they are like to Fowl in respect of the smallness and shape of their
heads, and necks, which are wrinkled like a Turkey, but white, and not so sharp
bil'd; they breed their young of Eggs which they lay, in their Flesh they
resemble beasts, for it eats like Veal, but more hard and sollid: They always
feed upon grass growing at the bottom of the water, neither can they abide any
longer under the water then they hold their breath, which the old ones will do
long, but the young ones being chased to and fro cannot continue two minutes
without coming up to breath.

Shortly after their coming to those Islands the Male and Female couple, which
they call Cooting, this they continue about three days together, during which
time they will scarce separate though a Boat come to them, nor hardly when,
they are smitten. Not long after, the she Turtle comes up by night upon some
sandy Bay, and further up than the water uses to flow, where she digs a hole
with her Fin upon the sand about two foot deep, and coming up several nights
there lays her Eggs, about half a bushel (which are about the bigness of a
Hens Egg, but as round as a ball) and each time covers them with sand very
curiously, so that a man can hardly find the place: These Eggs in time are
hatched by the heat of the Sun, and so creep out of the Earth, the Dam coming
no more at them. They are no bigger than a man's hand at first, which some Fish
will devour: they grow slowly and seem to live long; they will sleep on the top
of the water, and used to sleep on the Land till the Country was Inhabited.
They will live also out of the water about three weeks, and that without meat,
but then they mourn, and pine away. Being turned upon their backs when they are
on the Land, they cannot without help, or some disadvantage recover themselves;
by which means, when they come a shore to lay their Eggs, they are easily
taken; as also they are when they are Cooting. Otherwise they are taken mostly
by night, by making a great Light in a Boat to which they will resort, so that
a man standing ready, with a staff in his hand wherein is a sharp Iron, four
square with a line fastened to it, This Iron he strikes into the upper shell of
the Turtle where it sticks fast, and after she has tired her self a while with
swimming about, she is easily taken: the head being cut off they will live
twenty four hours, so that if you cut the flesh with a knife, or touch it, it
will tremble, and shrink away; there is no meat that will keep longer, either
fresh or salt.

There is a Fruit called a prickled Pear, The prickl Pear.
growing in such places as are scarce fit for any thing else, namely, upon
Rocks and Cliffs, and commonly by the Seaside, as if the Salt water did
something help to the generating and nourishing of them: The Tree grows certain
years before it bears Fruit, and then it continues bearing very many years,
having almost all the year long fruit upon it. Though it be called a Tree it
has scarce any body or branches, but consists in a manner wholly of leaves
and fruit soft and brittle; many of these Pears grow upon and about a leaf
without any stalk at all, and having some prickles about the top; being opened
the juice is of a crimson color, and they are full of seeds within.

There are gray and white Hearns, Fowls and Birds.
gray and green Plovers, wild Ducks and Mallards, Coots, Redshanks,
Sea-widgeons, Gray-Bitterns, Cormorants; many small Birds like Sparrows and
Robbins, Wood-peckers, Crows, Falcons, Jerfalcons, Hobbies, etc. The Cohow, is
so called from his voice, a night bird, being all day hid in the Rocks. The
Egge-Bird which comes constantly in the beginning of May, when they begin to
lay Eggs almost as big as Hens, and continue laying till Midsummer, and are
very tame, their young are excellent meat, their Eggs are white, and the
Cohows, speckled like a Turkeys Egg, as big as Hens. The Tropic Bird has his
name from the place where he is most seen. The Pemblico is seldom seen by day,
and by her crying foretells Tempests.

For Plants. Plants.
The poison Weed, in shape like our Ivy, with the touch of it causes Redness,
and itching, but after a while pass away of themselves, without farther hurt.
The Red Weed is a tall Plant, whose stalk is covered with Red Rind. The Root
steeped, or a little of the Juice drank alone, is a strong vomit, and effectual
against Distempers of the stomach. There is a kind of Woodbind near the Sea,
that runs up about Trees likk a Vine: The Fruit is somewhat like a Bean, but
flatter, which eaten, purges strongly, yet without harm: There is another small
Tree that causes Costiveness. There is also a Plant like a Bramble, that bears
a long yellow Fruit with a hard snell, and within is a hard Berry which purges
gently. Red Pepper is a Fruit like our Barberries, which bruised with the teeth
sets all the Mouth on a heat, for the time violent, but swallowed whole have
the same operation with pepper.

The Sea-Feather is a Plant growing on the Rock in the bottom of the Sea, in
form of a Vine-leaf, but far larger, with veins of a palish Red, interlaced,
and weaved each into the other. There are also store of Indian Pompeons, the
water Melon, and the Musk-Mellon, the most delicate Pineapple, Papawes, etc.
Ambergriece is many times found upon the shore.

The most troublesome things in these Islands are the Winds, Things offensive.
especially in the Spring and Autumn. The Hurricanes have sometimes done much
hurt: Muskito's are very troublesome: There is a certain Bugg which creeping
into Chests, by their illsented Dung defile all, besides their eating. There
are Pismires or Ants in the Summer times so troublesome that they are forced to
dry their Figgs upon high Frames, anointing their feet with Tar which stops
their passage. Worms in the Earth are destructive to their Corn, and Tobacco,
causing them much labor every morning to destroy them, which else would
derstoy all. There have bee^ large Lizards which are now destroyed by Cats.
Spiders are large by of beautiful colors, as if adorned with Silver, Gold, and
Pearl. Their Webs in Summer woven from tree to tree are perfect raw silk, both
in substance and color, and so strong, that Birds bigger than Blackbirds are
snared in their Nets.

Of these Bermudus Islands there are many, Their number and bigness.
some say five hundred, if we call all them Islands that lie by themselves
compassed with the Sea, of which some are larger and others less, they lie all
in the Figure of a Crescent, within the circuit of six or seven Leagues at
most; the greatest of them is about sixteen miles in length from the East
North-East, to the West South-West, standing in thirty two Degrees and twenty
Minutes.

About these Islands are seen many Whales, Whale-fight.
attended with the Sword-Fish and the Thresher. The Sword-Fish with his sharp
and needle-like Fin pricking him into the belly when he would dive and sink
into the Sea, and when he starts up from his Wounds, the Thresher with his Club
Fins beats him down again.

Here is also a kind of Web-footed Fowl, Strange Birds.
of the bigness of our green Plovers, which all Summer are not seen, but in the
darkest nights of November and December (for in the night only they feed) would
come abroad, making a strange hollow and harsh howling; their color is
inclining to russet, with white bellies, and the long feathers of their wings
are russet and white, they breed in those of the Islands that are farthest in
the Sea, and there in the ground they have their burrows, like Conies. Of
these, the English at their first coming, with a lighted bough have taken three
hundred in an hour. Afterward they found out this devise to take them, by
standing on the Rocks or Sand by the Seaside, they would hollow, laugh, and
make the strangest noise that possibly they could, with which noise these birds
would come flocking to the place, and settle upon the very Arms and Head of
him that so cried, still creeping nearer and answering that noise themselves,
by which means our men would weigh them in their hands, and those that weighed
heaviest and were best they took, the other they let go, and thus they have
taken twenty dozen of the best of them in two hours space; they are fat and
plump like a Partridge, and very well relished.

In January they gat great store of their Eggs which are as big and as well
relished as our Hen Eggs; Rat-plague
These they call Sea-Owles, because of their hooting, they have crooked Bills
and will bite shrewdly.

Not long after the English had planted in this Island, which was about the
year 1620. it pleased God to send a great Plague upon them by reason of a few
Rats that came in a Meal Ship, which though at first few in number, yet within
the space of two years they multiplied so exceedingly, that they did not only
fill those places where they first landed, but swimming from place to place
they spread themselves all over the Country, insomuch, as there was no Island
though severed by the Sea from all others, and many miles distant from the
place where they first began, but was pestred with them; they had their nests
almost in every Tree, and in all places had their Burrows in the ground, like
Conies to harbor in: they spared not the Fruits of either Plants or Trees,
nay, nor the Plants themselves, but eat all up. When the Planters had set their
Corn, they would come by troops the night following, or as soon as it spict,
dig it up again and eat it. If by diligent watching any of it escaped till it
came to easing, it would very hardly escape them: yea, it was a difficult matter
when they had it in their Houses to save it from them, for they became noysom
even to the persons of Men.

They used all diligence for the destroying of them, nourishing many Catts,
wild and tame; they used Ratsbane, and many set the Woods on fire, so that the
fire ran half a mile or more before it was extinguished.

Every man in the Country was enjoined to set twelve Traps, and some
voluntarily set near an hundred, which they visited twice or thrice in a night.
yea, they trained up their Dogs to hunt them, wherein they grew so expert, that
a good Dog in two or three hours space would kill ^^rty or fifty Rats. Other
means they also used, yet nothing would prevail, finding them still to increase
upon them.

This was a cause of great distress to the Planters; for by this means they
were kept destitute of bread for a year or two, so as when they had it
afterward again, they were so weaned from it, that they would easily forget or
neglect to eat it with their meat. By this means they were so destitute of food
that many died, and the rest became very feeble and weak, whereof some being
so, would not, and others could not stir abroad to seek relief, but dyed in
their Houses. And such as did go abroad were subject through weakness to be
suddenly surprised with a disease called the Feages, wherein they had neither
pain, nor sensible sickness, but as it were the highest degree of weakness,
depriving them of power and ability to execute any bodily exercise, as working,
walking, etc. Being thus taken, if any body was present that could minister to
them any relief, they would strait ways recover, otherwise they died there.

About this time there came to these Islands a company of Ravens which
continued with them all the time of this mortality and then departed from them.
Never any being seen there before or since: But it pleased God at length, that
the extremity of their distress began to abate, partly by supplies sent them
out of England, and partly by some rest and ease that they got thereby. Yet the
Rats continued for some time after, notwithstanding all the devises and
industry that they used to destroy them. But suddenly it pleased God, (by what
means was not known) so to take them away, that the wild Catts and Dogs that
lived upon them were famished, and many of them leaving the Woods came down to
the Houses, and to such places where they used to garbish their Fish, and so
became tame.

Here are many wild Palm Trees growing, Palm Trees.
in fashion, leaves and branches resembling the true Palm: The Tree is high
and strait, sappy, and spungious, having no branches but in the uppermost part
of it, and in the top grow leaves about the head of it: (the most inmost part
whereof they call the Palmeto, and it is the heart and pith of the Tree, so
white and thin as that it will pill off pleats, as smooth and delicate as white
Satin, into twenty folds in which a man may write, as in Paper) where they
spread and fall downwards about the Tree like an over-blown Rose: The leaves
are as broad as an Italian Vmbrello, under one of which a man may well shelter
his whole Body from rain, for being stiff and smooth, the rain easily slides
off. The Palmito, or soft top roasted, tastes like a fried Melon, and being
sod, it eats like a Cabbage, but is far less offensive to the Stomach.

From under the broken Rocks they take forth Cray-Fishes often times greater than
any of our English Lobsters.

They have also abundance of Crabs, Shel-Fish.
Oisters, and Wilks; at one draught they have taken small and great about a
Thousand Fishes, Other Fish
as Pilchards, Breams, Mullets, Rock-Fish, etc. Every Cave and Creek being
furnished with abundance of them, which lie there sucking in the water which
falls from the high Hills mingled with the juice of the Palms and Cedars, and
such other sweet woods, whereby they become both fat and wholesome.

There are Sparrows fat and plenty; Robbins of diverse colors green and
yellow, etc.

Many of the Turtles before mentioned, Birds.
be of a mighty bigness, insomuch as one of them will suffice Seventy, or
eighty men at a meal, especially, if she be a she Turtle, which will have five
hundred Eggs in her, being as many as fifty or sixty men can eat at a meal,
they are very good and wholesome meat.

There are Mulberry Trees, Olive Trees, Cedars of color red, and very sweet,
which bear a kind of berry that is very pleasant to eat. The top of the Palmito
Tree is in season, and good all the year, if you take but an Hatchet and cut
it, or an Augur and bore it, it yields a very pleasant Liquor, much like to our
sweet wines: it bears likewise a berry in the bigness of a Prune, and in taste
much like it.

Anno Christi 1609. Sr. Thomas Gates, and Sr. George Summers, as they were
going to Virginia suffered Shipwreck at these Islands, where they continued
till May, 1610. in which time they built there a Ship and a Pinace of Cedar, in
which they departed to Virginia, leaving only two men behind them: and shortly
after some of them came back to the Summer Islands, where Sr. George Summers
dying, his men (contrary to his last charge given unto them) went for England,
leaving behind them three men who stayed voluntarily, who shortly after found
in Sommerset Island a very great Treasure of Ambergreece valued at nine or ten
thousand pounds Sterling.

The discovery of these Islands being made known in England to the Virginia
Company by these men that returned, they sold it to One hundred and twenty
Persons of the same Company, who obtained a Charter from His Majesty: and in
April 1612. sent thither a Ship called the Plough, with about Eighty men and
women in it, who arrived there in safety in July, where they found the three
men that had voluntarily stayed there before as you heard. These men had
Planted Corn, More Planters sent over.
great store of Wheat, Beans, Tobacco, and Melons, with many other good things
for the use of man: Besides they had wrought upon Timber, in squaring and
sawing Cedar Trees etc.

They were no sooner come within a League of the Land but a company of Fish met
them, and never left them till they came to an Anchor within the Haven, of
which with Hooks and Lines they took more than their whole Company was able to
eat. Two days after they went out with their Net and Boat, and if they would
have loaded two Boats they might have done it, which also they might have
daily, there was such plenty of them. The day after they went to the Bird
Islands, where with their hands they took up as many Birds as they pleased,
they were so tame. They took up three for every Boy and Girl, and four for
every Man. Then sent they out some for wild Hogs, who brought home some, that
did eat as well as our English Mutton.

Anno Christi, 1612. Of Governors.
Mr. R. Moor was sent over thither Governor for three years, who spent the
greatest part of his time in fortifying the Country, and training the people to
Martial Exercises. He built nine or ten Forts, and planted Ordnances upon them.
To him succeeded Captain Tucker, Anno Christi 1616. who spent his three years
in Husbanding the Country, Planting, and nourishing all such things as were fit
either for Trade, or for the sustentation, and use of the Inhabitants. He also
added to the Fortifications, and made some enclosures. The The Country also was
then divided, wherein every Adventurer had his share allotted to him, whereupon
the Planters built them substantial Houses, cleared their ground, and Planted
all things necessary, so that in a short time the Country began to approach
near unto that happiness wherein it now flows.

New England Described, AND THE PLANTATION THEREOF BY THE ENGLISH
Of the Beasts, Fowls, Birds, Fishes, Trees, Plants, Fruits, etc.

Of the Natives, of their Religion, Customs, Fishings, Huntings, etc.

THE place whereon the English have settled their Colonies is judged either to
be an Island surrounded on the North with the great River Canada, and on the
South with Hudsons River, or a Peninsula, these two Rivers over lapping one
another, having their rise from two great Lakes which are not far distant each
from other.

Massechusets Bay lies under the Degree of 42. and 43. bearing South-West from
the Lands-end of Old England; at the bottom of which Bay are situated most of
the English Plantations. The Bay is both safe, spacious, and deep; free from
such cockling Seas as run upon the Coasts of Ireland, and in the Channels of
England: without stiff running Currents, Rocks, Shelves, Bars, or Quicksands.

When you have sailed two or three Leagues toward the bottom, you may see the
two Capes bidding you welcome. These Capes thrust themselves out into the Sea
in form of a Crescent, or half Moon, the surrounding Shore being high, and
showing many white Cliffs, with diverse intermixtures of low-sand, out of
which, diverse Rivers empty themselves into the Sea, with many openings,
wherein is good Harboring for Ships of any burden: The Harbors are
New Plymouth, Cape Anu, Salem, and Marvil-Head, all which afford good ground
for Anchorage, being Land-lockt from Wind, and Seas.

The chief and usual Harbor is the still Bay of Massechusets, which is also
aboard the Plantations: its a safe and pleasant Harbor within, having but one
secure entrance, and that no broader than for three Ships to enter abreast, but
within there is Anchorage for five hundred Ships.

This Harbor is made by many Islands, whose high Clifts shoulder out the
boisterous Seas, yet may easily deceive the unskilful Pilot, presenting many
fair openings, and broad sownds, whose Waters are too shallow for ships, though
Navigable for Boats, and small Pinnases. The entrance into the great Haven is
called Nant^scot, which is two Leagues from Boston. From hence they may sail to
the River of Wessaguscus, Naponset, Charles River, and Mistick River, on all
which are seated many towns. Here also they may have fresh supplies of Wood and
water from the adjacent Islands, with good Timber to repair their
Weather-beaten Ships: As also Masts, or Yards, there being store of such Trees
as are useful for the purpose.

The places which are inhabited by the English, are the best ground, and
sweetest Climate in all those parts, bearing the name of New England, the Air
agreeing well with our English bodies, being High Land and a sharp Air, and
though they border upon the Seacoast, yet are they seldom obscured with Mists,
or unwholesome Foggs, or cold Weather from the Sea, which lies East, and South
from the Land. And in the extremity of Winter, the North-East, and South-winds
coming from the Sea, produce warm weather, and bringing in the Seas, loosen
the frozen Bays, carrying away the Ice with their Tides: Melting the Snow, and
thawing the ground: Only the North-west Winds coming over the Land, cause
extreme cold weather, accompanied with deep Snows, and bitter Frosts, so that
in two or three days the Rivers will bear Man or Horse. But these Winds seldom
blow above three days together, after which the Weather is more tolerable.
And though the cold be sometimes great, yet is there good store of wood for
housing and fires, which makes the Winter less tedious: And this very cold
Weather lasts but eight or ten weeks, beginning with December, and ending about
the tenth of February. Neither does the piercing colds of Winter produce so
many ill effects, as the raw Winters here with us in England.

But these hard Winters are commonly the forerunners of a pleasant Spring, and
fertile Summer, being judged also to make much for the health of our English
bodies. The Summers are hotter than here with us, because of their more
Southerly Latitude, yet are they tolerable, being often cooled with fresh Winds.
The Summers are commonly hot and dry, there being seldom any Rain, yet are the
Harvests good, the Indian Corn requiring more heat than wet to ripen it: And
for the English corn, the nightly Dews refresh it, till it grows up to shade
its Roots with its own substance from the parching Sun.

The times of most Rain are in April, and about Michaelmas. The early Spring
and long Summers make the Autumns and Winters to be but short. In the Springs
when the Grass begins to put forth, it grows apace, so that, whereas it was
black by reason of Winters blasts, in a fortnights space there will be grass a
foot high.

New England being nearer the Aequinoctial than Old England; the days and
nights be more equally divided. In Summer the days be two hours shorter, and
in Winter two hours longer than with us. Virginia having no Winter to speak of,
but extreme hot Summers, has dried up much English blood; and by the
pestiferous Diseases, has swept away many lusty persons, changing their
complexions, not into swarthiness, but into Paleness; which comes not from any
want of food, the Soil being fertile, and pleasant, and they having plenty of
Corn, and Cattle, but rather from the Climate, which indeed is found to be too
Hot for our English Constitutions, which New England is not.

In New England Men and Women keep their natural Complexions, in so much as
Seamen wonder when they arive in those parts, to see their Country men look so
Fresh and Ruddy; neither are they much troubled with Inflammations, or such
Diseases as are increased by too much heat. The two chief Messengers of Death,
are Feavours, and Callentures; but they are easily cured if taken in time, and
as easily prevented, if men take care of their bodies. As for our common
Diseases they be Strangers in New England. Few ever have the small Pox,
Measels, Green Sickness, Headache, Stone, Consumption, etc. yea many that have
carried Coughs and Consumptions thither, have been perfectly cured of them.
There are as sweet, lusty Children born there, as in any other Nation, and more
double births than with us here: The Women likewise recover more speedily, and
gather strength after childbirth sooner than in Old England.

The Soil for the general is a warm kind of Earth, there being little cold
spewing Land, no Moorish Fens, nor Quagmires: The lowest Grounds be the
Marshes, which are ovrflown by the Spring-Tides: They are Rich Ground, and
yield plenty of Hay, which feeds their Cattle as well as the best Upland Hay
with us: And yet they have plenty of Upland Hay also, which grows commonly
between the Marshes and the Woods: And in many places where the Trees grow
thin, they get good Hay also. And near the Plantations there are many Meddows
never overflowed, and free from all Wood, where they have as much Grass as can
be turned over with a Sith, and as high as a man's middle, and some higher, so
that a good Workman will Mow three Loads in a day. Indeed this Grass is courser
than with us, yet is it not sower, but the Cattle eat, and thrive very well
with it: and are generally larger, and give more Milk than with us, and bring
forth young as well, and are freer from diseases than the Cattle here.

There is so much Hay Ground in the Country, that none need fear want, though
their Cattle should increase to thousands, there being some thousands of Acres
that were yet never meddled with; and the more their Grass is Mowed, the thicker
it grows; and where Cattle use to graze, in the Woods, the Ground is much
improved, growing more grassy, and less full of Weeds; and there is such plenty
of Grass in the Woods, that the Beasts need not Fodder till December; at which
time men begin to house their milch beasts and Calves. In the Upland Grounds
the Soil varies, in some places Clay, in others Gravel, and some are of a Red
Sand, all which are covered with a black Mould, usually a foot or little less
deep.

The English Manure their ground with Fish, whereof they have such plenty, that
they know not how otherwise to dispose of them, yet the Indians being too lazy
to catch Fish, plant Corn eight or ten years in one place, without any such
help, where they have yet a good Crop. Such is the rankness of the ground, that
it must be Planted the first year with Indian Corn, before it will be fit for
English Seed. The ground in some places is of a soft mould, in others so tough
and hard, that five Yoke of Oxen can scarce plow it, but after the first
breaking up, it is so easy, that one Yoke of Oxen and an Horse may plow it.
Our English Corn prospers well, especially Rye, Oats, and Barley.

The ground affords very good Kitchen Gardens, for Turnips, Parsnips, Carrots,
Radishes, Pumpions, Muskmellons, Squashes, Cucumbers, Onions, and all other
English Roots and Herbs prospers as well there as with us, and usually are
larger and fairer. There are store of Herbs both for Meat and Medicine, not
only in Gardens, but in Woods, as sweet Marjoram, Purslane, Sorrel, Penniroyal,
Saxifrage, Bays, etc. Also Strawberries in abundance, very large, some being
two inches about. There be also Goosberries, Bilberries, Rasberries,
Treackleberries, Hurtleberries, Currants, which being dried in the Sun, are not
much inferior to those we have from Zant. There is also Hemp and Flax, some
that grows naturally, and some that is Planted by the English, and Rape-seed.
There is Iron, Stone, and plenty of other stones both rough and smooth, plenty
of Slate to cover houses, and Clay whereof they make Tiles and Bricks, and
probably other Minerals.

The Country is excellently watered, and there are store of Springs which yield
sweet water that is fatter than ours, and of a more jetty color and they that
drink it, are as healthy, and lusty as those that drink Beer. None hitherto
have been constrained to digg deep for this Water, or to fetch it far, or to
fetch it from several places; the same water serving for washing, brewing, and
all other uses. There be also several spacious Ponds in many places, out of
which run many pleasant and sweet streams both Winter and Summer, at which the
Cattle quench their thirst, and upon which may be built Water-Mills for
necessary uses.

There is also great store of Wood, not only for Fuel, but for the building of
Ships, Houses, and Mills. The Timber grows strait and tall, some Trees being
twenty, and others thirty foot high before they spread forth their branches.
They are not very thick, yet many of them are are sufficient to make
Mill-posts; some being three foot and a half in the Diameter. Neither do they
grow so close, but that in many places a man man may ride a hunting amongst
them. There is no underwood but in swamps, and wet low grounds, in which are
Osiers, Hazels, and such like. Of these Swamps, some are ten, some twenty, some
thirty miles. For the Indians use to burn the under-wood in other places in
November, when the Grass and Leaves are withered and dry, which otherwise would
mar their beloved sport of Hunting: But where the Indians died of the plague,
not many years ago, there is much underwood between Wessaguscus, and Plymouth,
because it has not thus been burned. The several sorts of Timber are thus
expressed.

Trees both on Hills and Plains in plenty be,
The long-liv' Oak, and mournful Cypress Tree,
Sky-towring Pines, and Chestnuts coated rough,
The lasting Cedar, with the Walnut tough;
The Rosin-dropping Fir for Masts in use,
The Boatmen seek for Oars, light, neat grown Spruse;
The brittle Ash, the ever trembling Aspes,
The broad spread Elm, whose concave harbors Wasps;
The watery spungy Alder good for naught,
Small Elder by the Indian Fletchers sought,
The knotty Maple, pallid Birch, Haw thorns,
The Horn-bound Tree that to be cloven scorns;
Which from the tender Vine often takes his Spouse,
Who twines embracing arms abut his Boughs;
Within this Indian Orchard Fruitr be some,
The ruddy Cherry and the jetty Plumb,
Snake murdering Hasel with sweet Saxafrage,
Whose spouts in Beer allayes hot Fevers rage,
The Diars Shumack, with more Trees there be,
That are both good for use, and and rare to see.
The chief and common Timber for ordinary use is Oak, and Walnut. Of Oaks
there be three kinds, Red, White, and Black, whereof one kind is fittest for
Clap-board, others for sawn-board, others for shipping, and others for houses.
They yield also much Mast for Hoggs, especially every third year, the Acron
being bigger than our English: The Walnut-trees are tougher than ours, and last
time out of mind: The hut is smaller than ours, but not inferior in sweetness
and goodness, having no bitter Pill. In some places there is a Tree that bears
a Nut as bigg as a small Pear. The Cedars are not very big, not being above
eighteen inches in Diameter, neither is it very high, and its fitter for
ornament than substance, being of color White and Red like Yew, and smells
like Juniper, they use it commonly for sieling of Houses, for making of Chests,
Boxes, and Staves. The Fir, and Pine-trees grow in many places, shooting up
exceeding high, especially the Pine: They afford good Masts, Boards, Rozin, and
Turpentine, they grow in some places for ten miles together, close by the
Rivers sides, where by ships they may easily be transported to any desired
Ports. Their Ash is blittle, and therefore good for little, so that the Walnut
is used for it. The Horn-bound tree is exceeding tough, which makes it very
difficult to be cleft, yet its very good for Bowls and Dishes, not being
subject to crack: It grows with broad-spread Arms, the Vines winding their
curling branches about them, which afford great store of Grapes, very bigg,
both Grapes and Clusters, sweet and good. They are of two sorts, Red and white:
there is also a smaller Grape growing in the Islands, which is sooner ripe, and
more delicious; doubtless as good wine might be made of them as at Bordeaux in
France, it lying under the same degree: The Cherry Trees yield great store of
Cherries, which grow on Clusters like Grapes; they are smaller than ours and
not so good, if not very ripe: The Plumbs are somewhat better, being black and
yellow, as big as Damasens, and indifferently well tasted. The White Thorn
yields Hawes as big as our Cherries, which are pleasant to the taste, better
than their Cherries.

The Beasts be as follows.
The Kingly Lion, and the strong-arm'd Bear,
The large-limb'd Moosis, with the tripping ^ear;
Quil-darting Porcupines, and Rackcames be,
Castled in the hollow of an aged Tree:
The skipping Squirrel, Cony, Purblind Hare,
Immured in the self same Castle are,
Lest red-eyed Ferrets, wildly Foxes should
Them undermine, if Rampir'd but with mould,
The grim-fac't Ounce, and ravenous howling Woolf,
Whose meager pauch, sucks like a swallowing gulf,
Black-grittering Otters, and rich coated Bever,
The Civet-sented Muscat smelling ever.
Lions there be some, but seen very rarely. Bears are common, which be most
fierce in Strawberry time, when they have young ones; they will go upright iike
a man, climb trees, and swim to the Islands: At which time if an Indian see
him, he will swim after him, and overtaking him, they go to Water-cuffs for
bloody noses, and scratched sides; at last the man prevails, gets on his back,
and so rides him on those watery Plains, till the Bear can bear him no longer.

In the Winter they retire to Cliffs of Rocks, and thick Swamps to shelter them
from the cold, where they live by sleeping and sucking their Paws, and with
that will be as fat as they are in Summer: Yet the Woolves will devour them: A
kennel of them setting upon a single Bear, will tear him in pieces. They are
good meat, and seldom prey upon the English Cattle, or offer to assault any
man, except they be vexed with a shot.

The Moose is somewhat like our Red Deer as big as an Ox, slow of foot, headed
like a Buck, some being two yards wide in the head; his flesh is as good as
Beef, his Hide is good for clothing; they bring forth three young ones at a
time; forty miles to the North-East of Massechusets Bay, there be great store
of them; they are often devoured by the Woolves. The Fallow Dear are much bigger
than ours, of a brighter color, more inclining to Red, with spotted bellies;
They keep near to the Sea, that that they may swim to the Islands when they are
chased by the Woolves They have commonly three young ones at a time, which they
hide a mile from each other, giving them suck by turns, and this they do, that
if the Woolf should find one, they may save the other; their horns grow strait,
over-hanging their heads, so that they cannot feed on things that grow low,
till they have mused their heads.

The Porcupine is small, not much unlike to an Hedghog, only somewhat bigger:
He stands upon his Guard against man or beast, darting his quills into their
Legs or Hides, if they approach too near him. The Rackoon is a deep furred
Beast, not much unlike a Badger, having a Tail like a Fox, and is as good meat
as a Lamb. In the day time they sleep in hollow Trees, in the light nights they
feed on Clams by the Sea side, where they are taken with Dogs.

The Squirrels be of three sorts, the great gray Squirrel, almost as big as our
Conies. Another almost like our English Squirrels; the third is a flying
Squirrel, which is not very big, with a great deal of loose skin, which she
spreads square when she flies, which with the help of the Wind, wafts her
Batlike body from place to place. The Conies are much like ours in England. The
Hares are some of them white, and a yard long; both these creatures harbor
themselves from the Foxes in hollow Trees, having a hole at the entrance no
bigger than they can creep into. The hurtful Creatures are Squncks, Ferrets,
Foxes, whereof some be black, and their Furrs of great esteem.

The Ounce, or wild Cat is as big as a Mungrel. Its by nature fierce and
dangerous, fearing neither Dog nor Man: He kills Deer, which he effects thus:
Knowing the Deers tracts, he lies lurking in long weeds, and the Deer passing
by, he suddenly leaps upon his back, from thence he gets to his neck, and
scratches out his throat. He kills Geese also; for being much of the same
color, he places himself close by the water, holding up his bob tail, which is
like a Gooses neck, which the Geese approaching nigh to visit, with a sudden
jerk he apprehends his desired prey. The English kill many of them, and account
them good meat. Their Skins have a deep Fur, Spotted White and Black on the
belly.

The Woolves differ something from those in other Countries; they never yet set
upon any man or woman, neither do they hurt Horses or Cows; But Swine, Goats,
and red Calves (which they take for Deer) are often killed by them. In Autumn and
the Spring they most frequent our English Plantations, following the Deer which
at those times come down to those parts: They are made like a Mongrel,
big-boned, thin paunched, deep breasted, having a thick neck and head, prick
ears, and a long snout, with dangerous teeth, long stairing hair, and a great
bush tail. Many good Mastiffs have been spoiled by them. Once a fair Grayhound,
ran at them, and was torn in pieces before he could be rescued; they have no
Joints from the Head to the Tail. Some of them are black, and one of their
skins is worth five or six pound.

Of Beasts living in the Water.
Their Otters are most of them black, and their skins are almost as good as
Bevers; Their Oil is of rare use for many things. Martins also have a good Fur
for their bigness. Musquashes are almost like Beavers, but not so big, the
Males stones smells as sweet as Musk, and being killed in Winter or the Spring
they never loose their sweetness: they are no bigger than Cony-skins, and yet
are sold for five shillings a piece. One good Skin will perfume a whole house
full of Clothes. The Bevers wisdom and understanding makes him come nigh to a
reasonable creature. His body is thick and short, with short legs, feet like a
Mole before, and behind like a Goose, a broad tail like a shoo-sole, very tough
and strong: His head is something like an Otters, saving that his foreteeth be
like Conies, two above and two beneath, sharp and broad, with which he cuts
down Trees as big as a man's thigh, or bigger, which afterward he divides into
lengths according to the uses they are appointed for. If one Beaver be too weak
to carry the Log, than another helps him: If two be too weak, three or four
will assist, being placed three to three, which set their teeth in one another
tough tails, and laying the load on the hindermost, they draw the Logg to the
desired place, they tow it in the water, the youngest getting under it, bearing
it up that it may swim the lighter. They build their houses of Wood and Clay,
close by a Ponds side, and knowing their seasons, they build their houses
answerably, three stories high, that when the Land Floods come they may shift
higher, and when the waters fall, they remove lower. These houses are so strong
that no Creature, save an industrious man with his penetrating tools can pierce
them, their ingress and egress being under water. They make very good Ponds;
for knowing where a stream runs from between two rising Hills, they will pitch
down Piles of Wood placing smaller Rubbish before it, with clay and sods, not
leaving till by their Art and Industry they have made a firm and curious
Dam-head, which may cause admiration in wise men. They keep themselves to their
own Families, never parting so long as they are able to keep house together.
Their wisdom secures them from the English, who seldom kill any of them,
wanting time and patience to lay a long siege, or to be often deceived by their
cunning evasions. So that all our Beavers come from the Indians, whose time and
experience fits them for that employment.

Of the Birds, and Fowls both of Land and Water. They are expressed in these
Verses.
The princely Eagle, and the soaring Hawks,
Within their unknown ways there is none can chawk:
The Hum-Bird for some Queens rich Cage more fit
Than in the vacant wilderness to sit.
The swift-wing'd Swallow sweeping to and fro,
As swift as arrow from Tartarian bow.
When as Aurora's infant day new Springs,
There the morning mounting Lark her sweet lays sings.
The harmonious Thrush, swift Pigeon, Turtle Dove
Who to her Mate does ever constant prove.
The Turkey, Pheasant, Heathcock, Partridge rare,
The Carrion-tearing Crow, and hurtful Stare;
The long-lived Raven, the ominous Screach-Owl,
Who tell (as old wives say) disasters foul.
The drowsy Madge that leaves her day-lov'd nest
To fly abroad when day-birds are at rest:
The Eele murdering Hern, and greedy Cormorant,
That near the Creeks in Moorish Marshes haunt.
The bellowing Bittern, with the long legged Crane.
Presaging Winters hard, and dearth of Grain.
The Silver-Swan that tunes her mournful breath
To sing the Dirg of her approaching death:
The tatling Oldwives, and the cackling Geese,
The fearful Gull that shuns the murdering piece:
The strong winged Mallard, with the nimble Teal,
And ill-shap't Loon, who his harsh notes does sweal;
There Widgins, Shildrakes, and Humilitee,
Snites, Dropps, Sea-Larks in whole millions flee.
The Eagles be of two sorts, one like ours in England, the other somewhat
bigger, with a great white head, and white tail, commonly called Gripes, they
prey upon Ducks, and Geese, and such Fish as are cast upon the Seashore; yet
is there a certain black Hawk that will beat this Eagle, so that he is
constrained to soar so high, that his enemy cannot reach him: The Hawk is much
prized by the Indians, who account him a Sagamores ransom.

There are diverse kinds of Hens, Partridges, Heathcocks, and Ducks. The
Hum-bird is no bigger than an Hornet, having Spider-like legs, small claws, a
very small Bill; in color she represents the glorious Rainbow: As she flies
she makes a noise like a Humble-Bee.

The Pigeons are more like Turtles than ours, and of the same color, and have
long tails like a Mag Pie, their Feathers are fewer, but their Bodies as big
as our House-Doves, they come into the Country to go home-ward in the beginning
of their Spring: at which time (says my Author) I have seen innumerable; so
that I could neither discern beginning nor ending, the length nor breadth of
these Millions of Millions: neither could the shouting of People, the report of
Guns, nor the pelting of Hail-shot turn them out of their course, but thus they
have continued for four or five hours together: and at Michaelmas they return
Southward: yet some there are all the year long, which are often killed. They
build some thirty miles Northward; from the English Plantation in Pine-Trees,
joining nest to nest, and Tree to Tree by their nests, so that the Sun never
sees the ground in that place, from whence the Indians fetch whole Loads of
them.

The Turkey is a long Fowl, of a black color, yet is his flesh white, he is
much bigger than our English Turkey; He has long Legs wherewith he can run as
fast as a Dog, and can fly as fast as a Goose: Of these are forty, fifty,
sixty, and sometimes an hundred in a flock: They feed on Acorns, Haws, and
Berries, and some will frequent the English Corn. When the ground is covered
with Snow, they go to the Seaside and feed on Shrimps, and Fishes: If you
watch them where they Perch at night, about ten or eleven a clock at night you
may shoot as often as you will, for they stir not except they be wounded: they
continue all the year long, and weigh forty pounds and more apeice. Pheasants
are rare; but Heath-Cocks, and Partridges are common, whereof our English kill
many.

Ravens and Crows, are much like those in other Countries. There are no
Magpies, Jayes, Cockcooes, Jackdaws, Sparrows, etc. The Stares are bigger than
ours, and are as black as Crows, which do much hurt among the young Corn, and
they are so bold that they fear not Guns. Owls are of two sorts, the one is
small speckled like a Partridg with ears: The other is almost as big as an
Eagle and is very good meat.

Cormorants are as common as other Fowls, they devour much Fish. A tame
Cormorant, and two or three good Dogs in the water make excellent sport: Cranes
are as tall as a man, their bodies not much unlike the Turkies, they are rarely
fat. Also many Swans frequent the Rivers and Ponds, which are very good meat.

There be three sorts of Geese; The Brant Goose like one of our wild Geese. A
white Goose about the bigness of ours: Of these there will be sometimes two or
three thousand in a flock. The third is a gray Goose with a black neck, and a
black and white head much bigger than our English: They are killed both flying
and sitting. The Ducks are very large, and in great abundance; and so is their
Teale. Their Oldwives never leave tatling day nor night, they are somewhat
bigger than a Duck. The Loon is ill-shaped like a Cormorant, but he can neither
go nor fly; He makes a noise somestime like a Sowgelders Horn. The Humilites,
or Simplicites rather, be of two sorts; The one as big as green Plover, the
other is less; they are so simple that one may drive them on heaps, and then
shoot at them, and the living will settle themselves on the same place again
where the dead are, while you shoot again, so that sometimes above twelve score
have been killed at two shoots.

OF FISH.
There are great store, and much variety of Fishes thus enumerated.

The King of the Waters, the Sea-shouldering Whale;
The snuffing Grampus, with the oily Seal,
The storm-presaging Porpus, Herring-Hogg,
Line-shearing Shark, the Cat-fish and the Sea-dogg;
The scale-fenc'd Sturgeon, wry-mouthed Hollibut;
The flouncing Salmon, Codfish, Greedigut;
Cole, Haddock, Haike, the Thornback and Scate,
Whose slimy outside makes him seld in date;
The stately Bass, old Neptunes fleeting Post,
That tides it out and in from Sea to Coast;
Consorting Herrings, and the bony Shad.
Big-bellied Alewives, Macrils richly clad
With Rainbow colors, the Frost-fish and the Smelt,
As good as ever Lady Gustus felt.
The spotted Lamprons, Eeles, the Lamperies,
That seek fresh Waterbrooks with Argu's-eyes.
These watery Villages, with thousands more
Do pass and repass near the Verdant shore.
Shellfish of all sorts.
The luscious Lobster with the Crabfish raw,
The British Oyster, Muscle, Periwig
And the Tortoise sought by the Indian Squaw;
Which to the flats dance many a Winters Jigg:
To dive for Cockles, and to dig for clams,
Whereby her lazy husbands guts she crams.
The Seal, called also the Sea-Calf, whose Skin is good for diverse uses, and
his body between Fish and Flesh, neither delectable to the Pallat, nor well
agreeing with the Stomach. His Oil is used in Lamps.

The Shark is as big as a man, some as big as a Horse, with three rows of teeth
in his mouth, with which he Snaps in two the Fishers Lines; he will bite off a
man's Armor Leg at a bit, they are often taken, and serve for nothing but to
manure the Ground.

There are many Sturgious, but the most are caught at Cape Cod, and in the
River of Meramack, whence they are brought to England, they are twelve,
fourteen, and some eighteen foot long.

The Salmon is as good as ours, and in great plenty in some places: The
Hollibut is like our Plaice or Turbut, some being two yards long, and one
broad, and a food thick. Thornback and Scate is given to the Dogs, being so
common in many places. The Bass is one of the best Fishes, being a Delicate and
fat Fish: He has a bone in his head that contain a Saucerful of Marrow sweet
and good, pleasant and wholesome; they are three or four foot long, they take
them with a Hook and Line, and in three hours a man may catch a dozen or twenty
of them. The Herrings are much like ours. Alewives are much like Herrings,
which in the end of April come into the fresh Rivers to spawn, in such
multitudes as is incredible, pressing up in such shallow waters where they can
scarce swim, and they are so eager, that no beating with poles can keep them
back till they have spawned.

Their Shads are far bigger than ours: The Makarels be of two sorts; In the
beginning of the year the great ones are upon the Coast, some 18. inches long:
In Summer come the smaller kind, they are taken with Hooks and Lines baited
with a piece of Red Cloth. There be many Eels in the salt water, especially
where grass grows, they are caught in Weels baited with pieces of Lobsters:
Sometimes a man thus takes a busnel in a night, they are wholesome and pleasant
meat.

Lamprons and Lampries are little esteemed. Lobsters are in plenty in most
places, very large, and some being twenty pound weight, they are taken at low
water amongst the Rocks; the smaller are the better; but because of their
plenty they are little esteemed.

The Oysters be great, in form of a shoo-horn, some of a foot long, they breed
in certain banks, which are bare after every Springtide; each makes two good
mouthfuls.

The Periwig lies in the Oase like a head of hair, which being touched, draws
back it self leaving nothing to be seen but a small round hole, Muscles are in
such plenty that they give them their Hoggs. Clams are not much unlike to
Cockles, lying under the Sand, every six or seven of them having a round hole
at which they take in Air and Water, they are in great plenty, and help much to
feed their Swine both Winter and Summer; for the Swine being used to them, will
constantly repair every ebb to the places, where they root them up and eat
them. Some are as big as a Penny Loaf, which the Indians count great dainties.

A Description of the Plantations in New England as they were Anno Christi,
1633.
The outmost Plantation to the Southward, which by the Indians is called
Wichaguscusset, is but a small Village, yet pleasant and healthful, having good
ground, store of good Timber, and of Meddow ground; there is a spacious Harbor
for shipping before the Town; they have store of Fish of all sorts, and of
Swine, which they feed with Acrons and Clams, and an Alewife River.

Three miles to the North is Mount Wolleston, a fertile soil, very convenient
for Farmers houses, there being great store of plain ground without Trees. Near
this place are Maschusets Fields, where the greatest Sagamore in the Country
lived before the Plague cleared all: Their greatest inconvenience is that there
are not so many Springs as in other places; nor can Boats come in at low water,
nor Ships ride near the Shore.

Six miles further to the North lies Dorchester, the greatest Town in
New England, well Wooded and Watered with good Arrable and Hay ground, fair
comfortable Fields and pleasant Gardens: Here are many Cattle, as Kine, Goats,
and Swine. It has a good Harbor for ships; there is begun the fishing in the
Bay, which proved so profitable, that many since have followed them there.

A mile from thence lies Roxberry, a fair and handsome Country Town; the
Inhabitants are rich: It lies in the Mains, and yet is well Wooded and watered,
having a clear Brook running through the Town, where are great store of Smelts,
whence its called Smelt-River. A quarter of a mile on the North of it is
another River, called Stony River, upon which is built a water Mill. Here is
good store of Corn and Meddow Ground. Westward from the Town its somewhat
Rocky, whence its called Roxberry; the Inhabitants have fair houses,, store of
Cattle, Come-fields paled in, and fruitful Gardens. Their goods are brought in
Boats from Boston, which is the nearest Harbor.

Boston is two miles North-East from Roxberry. Its Situation is very pleasant,
being a Peninsula hemmed on the South with the Bay of Roxberry. On the North
with Charles River, the Marshes on the back side being not half a quarter of a
mile over, so that a little fencing secures their cattle from the Wolves. Their
greatest want is of Wood and Meddow ground, which they supply from the adjacent
Islands, both for Timber, Firewood, and Hay; they are not troubled with
Wolves, Rattlesnakes nor Musketoes, being bare of Wood to shelter them. Its the
chief place for shipping and Merchandise. This neck of Land is about four miles
in compass, almost square: Having on the South at one corner a great broad
Hill, whereon is built a Fort, which commands all Ships in any Harbor in the
Hill Bay.

On the North side is another Hill of the same bigness, whereon stands a
Windmil. To the North-West is an high Mountain, with three little Hills on the
top, whence it is called Tremount. From hence you may see all the Islands that
lie before the Bay, and such Ships as are upon the Sea Coast. Here are rich
Corn Fields, and fruitful Gardens: The Inhabitants grow rich; they have sweet
and pleasant Springs; and for their enlargement, they have taken to themselves
Farm-Houses in a place called Muddy River, two miles off, where is good Timber,
Ground, Marsh-Land, and Meddows, and there they keep their Swine or other
Cattle in the Summer, and bring them to Boston in the Winter.

On the North side of Charles River is Charles Town, which is another neck of
Land, on whose Northern side runs Mistick River. This Town may well be paralled
with Boston, being upon a bare neck, and therefore forced to borrow
conveniences from the Main, and to get Farms in the Country. Here is a
Ferry-boat to carry Passengers over Charles River, which is a deep Channel, and
a quarter of a mile over. Here may ride forty ships at a time. Up higher is a
broad Bay that is two miles over, into which run Stony River, and Muddy River.
In the middle of this Bay is an Oyster bank.

Medfod Village is situated toward the North-West of this Bay, in a Creek: A
very fertile and pleasant place: Its a mile and a half from Charles Town. At
the bottom of this Bay the River is very narrow.

By the side of this River stands New-Town, three miles from Charles Town. Its
a neat and well compacted Town, having many fair buildings, and at first was
intended for a City; The Inhabitants are mostly rich, and have many Cattle of
all sorts, and many hundred Acres of Ground paled in. On the other side of the
River lies their Meddow and Marsh Ground for Hay

Half a mile thence is Water Town, nothing inferior for Land, Wood, Meddows
and Water: Within half a mile of it is a great Pond, which is divided between
those two Towns; And a mile and a half from this Town is a fall of fresh
waters, which through Charles River fall into the Ocean: A little below this
fall they have made weires, where they catch great store of Shads, and
Alewives, an hundred thousand of them in two Tides.

Mastick is three miles from Charles Town; seated pleasantly by the waters
side. At the head of this River are very spacious Ponds to which the Alewives
press to cast their Spawn, where multitudes are taken. On the West side of this
River the Governor has a Farm where he keeps most of his Cattle. On the East
side is Mr. Craddocks Plantation, who impailed in a Park for Deer, and some
ships have been built there.

Winnisimet is a very pleasant place for situation, and stands commodiously.
Its but a mile from Charles Town, the River only parting them. Its the lasts
Town in the Bay.

The chief Islands that secure the Harbor from Winds and Waves, are first Dear
Island, within a flight shot from Bullin Point. Its so called, because the Deer
often swim thither to escape the Woolves, where sixteen of them have been
killed in a day.

The next is Long Island, so called from its length. Other Islands are Nodless
Isle, Round Isle; the Governors Garden, having in it an Orchard, Garden, and
other conveniences: Also Slate Island, Glass Island, Bird Island, etc. they
all abound with Wood, Water, and Meddows: In these they put their Cattle for
safety, whilst their Corn is on the Ground. The Towns without the Bay are
nearer the Main, and reap a greater benefit from the Sea, in regard of the
plenty of Fish and Fowl, and so live more plentifully than those that are more
remoat from the Sea in the Island Plantations.

Six miles North-East from Winnisimet is Sagus, is pleasant for situation,
seated at the bottom of a Bay, which is made on the one side with a surrounding
Shore, and on the other side with a long Sandy Beach: Its in the circumference
six miles, well Woodded with Oaks, Pines, and Cedars; Its also well watered
with fresh Springs, and a great Pond in the middle, before which is a spacious
Marsh.

One Black William an Indian Duke, out of his generosity, gave this place to
the Plantation of Sagus, so that none else can claim it; when a storm has
been, or is like to be, there will be a roaring like thunder which may be heard
six miles off. On the North side of this Bay are two great Marshes, divided by
a pleasant River that runs between them. The Marsh is crossed with diverse
Creeks where are store of Geese and Ducks, and convenient Ponds wherein to make
Decoys. There are also fruitful Meddows, and four great Ponds like little Lakes
wherein is store of fresh Fish; out of which, within a mile of the Town runs a
curious fresh Brook which is rarely frozen by reason of its warmness: and upon
it is built a Water Mill. For Wood there is store, as Oak, Walnut, Cedar,
Elm, and Aspe: Here was sown much English Corn.

Here the Bass continues from the midst of April till Michaelmas, and not above
half that time in the Bay. There is also much Rock-Cod, and Macharil, so that
shoals of Bass have driven shoals of Macharil to the end of the sandy bank,
which the Inhabitants have gathered up in Wheel barrows. Here are many Muscle
banks, and Clam-banks, and Lobsters amongst the Rocks, and grassy holes.

Four miles from Saugus stands Salem, on the middle of a neck of Land very
pleasantly, between two Rivers on the North and South. The place is but barren
sandy Land, yet for seven years together it brought forth excellent Corn, being
manured with Fish every third year: Yet there is good ground, and good Timber
by the Sea side, and diverse fresh Springs.

Beyond the River is a very good soil, where they have Farms. Here also they
have store of Fish, as Basses, Eels, Lobsters, Clams, etc. They cross the River
in Canows made of whole Pine Trees, two foot and an half wide, and twenty foot
long, in which also they go a Fowling, sometimes two Leagues into the Sea. It
has two good Harbors, which lie within Derbins Fort.

Marvil Head lies four miles South from Salem, a very good place for a
Plantation, especially for such as will set up a Trade of Fishing: There are
good Harbors for Boats, and good riding for ships.

Agowomen is nine miles to the North from Salem near the Sea, and another good
place for a Plantation. It abounds with Fish and Flesh, of Fowls, and Beasts,
has great Meddows and Marshes, and Arable grounds, many good Rivers and
Harbors, and no Rattle Snakes.

Merrimack lies eight miles beyond that, where is a River Navigable for twenty
miles, and all along the side of it fresh Marshes, in some places three miles
broad. In the River is Sturgion, Salmon, Bass, and diverse other kinds of Fish.

Three miles beyond this River is the out side of Massecusets Patent; wherein
these are the Towns that were begun in the year, 1633.

Of the Evils, and Hurtful things in the Plantation.
Those that bring the greatest prejudice to the Planters, are the ravenous
Woolves, which destroy the weaker Cattle, of which we heard before. Then the
Rattle Snake which is usually a yard and a half long, as thick in the middle as
the small of a man's Leg, with a yellow belly: Her back is spotted with black,
russet, and green, placed like scales. At her tail is a rattle with which she
makes a noise when she is molested, or when any come near to her: Her neck
seems no bigger than a man's thumb, yet can she swallow a Squirrel, having a
wide mouth with teeth as sharp as needles, wherein her poison lies, for she
has no sting: when a man is bitten by her, the poison spreads so suddenly
through the veins to the heart that in an hour it causes death, unless he has
the Antidote to expel the poison, which is a Root called Snake-weed, which must
be champed, the spittle swallowed, and the Root applied to the sore; this is a
certain cure.

This Weed is rank poison if it be taken by any man that is not bitten, unless
it be Phisically compounded with other things. He that is bitten by these
Snakes, his fresh becomes as spotted as a Lepers, till he be perfectly cured.
She is naturally the most sleepy and unnimble Creature that is, never offering
to leap at, or bite any man, if he tread not upon her: In hot weather they
desire to lie in paths in the Sun, where they sleep soundly; A small switch
will easily kill them. If a Beast be bitten, they cut his flesh in diverse
places, and thrust in this Weed, which is a sure Cure.

In many places of the Country there be none of them; As at Plymouth, New-Town,
etc. In some places they live on one side the River, and if they swim over, as
soon as they come into the Woods, they turn up their yellow bellies and die.
Other Snakes there be, which yet never hurt eitheir man or Beast.

There be also store of Froggs, which in the Spring time chirp, and whistle
like Birds, and in the end of Summer croake like other Frogs. There are also
Toads that will creep to the top of Trees, and sit croaking there to the
wonderment of strangers. There be also Pismires, and Spiders, but neither
Fleshworms, nor Moles.

There be wild Bees or Wasps that guard the Grapes, making her Cobweb nest
amongst the Leaves: Also a great Fly, like to our Horse flies, which bite and
fetch blood from man or beast, and are most troublesome where most Cattle be.

There is also a Gurnipper, which is a Fly as small as a Flea, and where it
bites it causes much itching, and scratching. Also the Muskito like to our
Gnats: Such as are bitten by them fall a scratching, which makes their hands
and faces swell; but this is only the first year, for they never swell the
second year. Here also are Flies called Cantharides, so much used by
Chirurgions; and diverse sorts of Butterflies.

Of the Natives inhabiting those parts of New England.
The Country is divided (as it were) into Shires, every several Shire under a
several King. On the East, and North-East are the Churchers, and Tarenteens. In
the Southern parts are the Pequants, and Naragansets. On the West are the
Connectacuts, and Mowhacks. Those on the North of them are called Aberginians,
who before the sweeping Plague scorned the confrontments of such as now count
themselves but the scum of the Country, and that would soon root them out, were
it not for the English.

The Churchers are a cruel bloody people, which were wont to come down upon
their poor neighbors, bruitishly spoiling their Corn, burning their houses,
slaying their men, ravishing the Women, yea sometimes eating a man, one part
after another before his face whilst he was alive: But they say, they dare not
meddle with a white faced man, accompanied with his hotmouthed weapon. They are
tall of stature, have long grim Visages, slender wasted, and exceeding great
arms and thighs, wherein their strength lies; with a Fillip of their finger
they will kill a Dog: They live upon Fruits, Herbs, and Roots, but that which
they most desire is Man's flesh.

If they catch a stranger they keep him in as good plight as they can, giving
him their best fare, and daily pipe to him, paint him, and dance about him,
till at last they begin to eat him piecemeal: They are desperate in Wars,
securing their bodies with Seahorse Skins, and Barks of Trees made
impenitrable, wearing Head-pieces of the same: Their Weapons are Tamahauks,
which are Staves of two foot and a half long, and a knob at the end as big as a
Football; these they carry in their right hand, and in their left a Javelin,
or short spear headed with a sharp Seahorse Tooth; they are both deadly
Weapons.

The Tarenteens are little less savage, only they eat not man's flesh: They are
enemies to the Indians amongst the English, and kill as many of them as they
can meet with. They are the more insolent because they have Guns, which they
trade for with the French, who will sell his eyes, they say, for Beaver. So
soon as a Boat comes to an Anchor, they enquire for Sack and strong Liquors,
which they much affect ever since the English traded it with them, so that they
will scarce exchange their Beaver for any thing else. These are wise, high
spirited, constant in friendship one to another, true in their promises, and
more industrious than most others.

The Pequants are a stately Warlike People, just in their Dealings; requiters
of Courtesies, and affable to the English.

The Narragansetz are the most numerous people in those parts, the richest and
most industrious: They are also the most curious Minters of their Wampamprag
and Mowhacks, which they make of the most inmost wreaths of Perriwinckles
shells; the Northern, Eastern, and Western Indies fetch all their Coin from
them: As also they make curious Pendants and Blacelets, and stone Pipes which
hold a quarter of an ounce of Tobacco; these they make with Steel Drills, and
other Instruments, and so ingenuous they are, that they will imitate the
English Mold so exactly that were it not for matter and Color you, could not
distinguish them; they make these Pipes of green or black stone; they made also
Pots, wherein they dressed their Victuals before they knew the use of our
Brass: They seek rather to grow rich by Industry, than famous by deeds of
chivalry.

The Aberginians are mostly between five and six foot high, straight bodied,
strong lim'd, smooth skinned, merry countenanced, of complexion something more
swarthy than a Spaniard; black haired, high foreheaded, black eyed, out-nosed,
having broad shoulders, brawny Arms, long and slender hands, out-breasts, small
wastes, lank bellies, handsome legs, thighs, flat knees, and small feet.

Its beyond belief to conceive how such lusty bodies should be supported by
such slender foot: Their houses are mean, their lodging as homely, their
commons scant, their drink Water, and Nature their best clothing: You shall
never see any monstrous person amongst them, or one whom sickness has
deformed, or casualty made decrepit; most are fifty years old before a wrinkled
brow, or Gray Hairs bewrayes their age: their smooth Skins proceeds from the
often anointing their bodies with Oil of Fishes, and fat of Eagles, and
Rackoones, which secures them also against Muskitoes: Their black hair is
Natural, but made more jetty by oyling, dying, and daily dressing: Sometimes
they wear long hair like women, sometimes they tie it up short like a horse
tail: their boys must not wear their hair long, till they be sixteen year old,
and then also but by degrees, some leave a foretop, others a long lock on the
crown, or one on each side the head, as best pleases their fancy: They will not
endure any Hair on their Chins, but scrub it up by the roots: And if they see
one with the appearance of a Beard, they say he is an English man's Bastard.

Their clothing is a piece of cloth of a yard and a half long put between
their Groyns tied with Snake-skins about their middle, with a flap before, and
hanging like a tail behind. The more Aged in the Winter wear Leather Drawers
like Irish Trowzes; their shoes are of their own making, cut out of a Mooses
Hide; have and some skins which they cast about them like Irish Mantles, being
either Bear, Mooses, or Beaver-skins sewed together, etc. and in the Winter
deep Fur'd Catskins, which they wear upon that Arm that is most exposed to the
weather. When they are disposed to Trade, they choose a good course Blanket, or
piece of Broad Cloth, which they make a Coat of by Day, and a covering by
Night: They love not to be imprisoned in Clothes after our Mode. Though they be
poor, yet are they proud, which discovers it self by their affecting Ornaments,
as Pendants in their Ears, forms of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes carved out of
Bones, Shells, and Stones, with long Bracelets of their curiously wrought
Wampompeag, and Mowhacks, which they wear about their loins.

Many of their better sort bear upon their cheeks the Pourtaictures of Beasts,
and Fowls, which they make by rasing of their skin with a small sharp
Instrument, under which they convey a kind of black unchageable Ink which makes
them apparent and permanent: Others have impressions down the out side of their
Arms and Breasts like Stars, which they imprint by searing Irons. A Sagamore
with a Hum-bird in his Ear for a Pendant, a black Hawke on his Head for a
Plume, Mawhack instead of a Gold Chain, store of Wampompeag about his Loins,
his Bow in his Hand, his Quiver at his back, and six naked Indians for his
Guard, thinks himself nothing inferior to the great Cham, and will say that he
is all one with King Charles.

Of their Diet, Cookery, Meal-times and Hospitality.
In the Winter time they have all sorts of Fowls, Beasts, and Pond-fish, with
some Roots, Indian Beans, and Clams. In the Summer they have all manner of Sea
Fish, with all sorts of Berries. These they roast or boil in great Kettles,
which they gat by trading with the French, and now of the English: Before, they
had good earthen Pots of their own making; their Spits are cloven sticks
sharpened at one end and thrust into the ground, a dozen of them with Flesh and
Fish about a fire, turning them as they see occasion. This they present to
their Guests, dishing it in a rude manner, and set on the ground, without
Linen, Trenchers, or Knives; to this they presently fall aboard without Bread,
Salt, or Beer, lolling after the Turkish fashion, not ceasing till their full
bellies leave empty platters. Their Indian Corn they sees whole, like Beans,
eating three or four corns with a mouthful of Fish or Flesh, filling up thinks
with their Broth.

In Summer when their Corn is spent Isquoterquashes is their best Bread, like
our young Pumpions. When our English invite them to meat, they eat very
moderately, though at home without measure. They all meet friends at a Kettle,
save their Wives, who attend at their backs for their bony fragments. They keep
no set meals, but when their store is spent, they bite on the bit, till they
meet with fresh supplies, their Wives trudging to the Clam-banks when other
Provision fails. Its the greatest discourtesie you can show them, not to eat of
their Delicates, of which they are as free as Emperors, and not to sup of their
Broth made thick with Fish, Fowl and Beasts, all boiled together.

Of their Dispositions, good Qualities, as Friendship, Constancy, Truth, and
Affability.
These Indians are of an Affable, Courteous, and well-disposed Nature, ready to
communicate the best of their wealth to the mutual good one of another, and the
less abundance they have, the more conspicuous is their love, in that they are
as willing to part with their mite in poverty, as their Treasure in Plenty. He
that kills a Deer sends for his friends and eats it merrily. He that receives
but a piece of Bread from an English hand, gives part of it to his Comrades,
and they eat it together lovingly. Yea, a friend can command a friends house,
and whatsoever is his (saving his Wife) and have it freely: and nothing sooner
disjoyns them than ingratitude, accounting an ungrateful person, a double
Robber, not only of a man's courtesy, but of his thanks, which he might have
from another for the same proffered and received kindness. They so love each
other, that they cannot endure to see one of their Countrymen wronged, but will
defend them stiffly, plead for them strongly, and justify their integrity in
any warrantableaction.

They are true, and faithful to the English, and have been the disclosers of
all such treacheries as have been designed by other Indians against them. If
any roaving ship be upon the Coast, and chance to harbor in any unusual Port,
they will give the English notice of it, which has been no small advantage.
When the English have traveled far into the Couutry, they readily entertain
them into their houses, quarter them in their Rooms, and provide for them the
best victuals they can, and give them kind entertainment, if it be for two or
three weeks together. They are also ready to guide them through the unbeaten
Wildernesses, and if any loose their way, they will not leave them till they
have brought them to their desired place.

They are very careful to keep good correspondence with our English
Magistrates, being ready to execute any service which they require of them. If
any Malefactor withdraw himself from condign punishment, they will hunt him
out, and not rest till they have delivered him up to Justice. They are kind and
affable, very wary with whom they enter into friendship; nothing is more
hateful to them than a churlish disposition, or dissimulation: They speak
seldom, and then utter not many words, and those they do, they deliver very
gravely. They never fall out amongst themselves, nor abuse each other in
language. Yea, though in Gaming they lose all their little all, yet is the
Loser as merry as the Winner, and they part good friends.

Of their Hardness.
Their hardness is to be admired, no ordinary pains causing them so much to
alter their Countenance: Beat them, whip them, pinch them, punch them, if they
resolve otherwise, they will not winch for it: and though naturally they fear
death, yet the unexpected approach of a mortal wound by Sword, Bullet, etc.
strike no more terror, causes no more exclamation, no more complaint, than if
it were a shot into the Trunk of a Tree.

Some have been shot in at the Mouth, and out under the Ear, others into the
Breast; others run through the flanks with Darts, others received desperate
wounds, and yet, either by their rare skill in simples, or by Charms have been
cured in a short time. In the night they dare not stir out of their houses, for
fear of their Abamaco [the Devil] they will rather lie by an English fire all
night, than go a quarter of mile in the dark to their own houses.

Of their wondering at their first sight of any new Invention.
They being strangers to Arts, are ravished at the first view of any new
Invention: They took the first Ship they saw for a mourning Island, the Masts
to be Trees, the Sails, white Clouds, and the discharging of great Guns, to be
Thunder and Lightning: But this moving Island being stopped by its Anchor, they
manned out their Canows to go and pick strabones in it; but by the way, being
saluted with a broad side, they cried out, with much hoggery, so big walk, and
so big speak, and by and by kill; this made them to turn back, and approach no
more till they were sent for. They wondered much at the first Wind Mill which
the English erected, for its strange whirking motion, and the sharp teeth,
biting the Corn so small, and its long Arms, neither durst they stay in so
tottering a Tabernacle. The first Plowman they saw was accounted a Jugler, the
Plow tearing up more ground in a day, then their Clamshels could scrape up in a
month. yet are they so ingenious, and dexterous in using the Ax or Hatchet,
that probably they would soon learn any Trade, were they not so much wedded to
idleness; so that they had rather starve than work. In brief, they be wise in
their carriage, subtle in their Trading, true in their promise, just in paying
their Debts: Though their poverty may make them slow, yet are they sure: Some
having died in the English debt, have by Will left Beaver for their
satisfaction: They be constant in friendship, merrily conceited in Discourse,
not Luxurious, in Youth, nor froward in Old Age.

Of their Kings Government, and Subjects obedience.
Their Kings inherit, the Son always succeeding his Father. If there be no
Son, the Queen Rules, if no Queen, the next of the blood Royal; If any other
intrude, he is counted a Usurper; and if his fair carriage win not their love,
they will soon unking him.

The Kings have not many Laws to Rule by, nor have they any yearly Revenews,
yet are they so feared, or beloved, that half their Subjects estates are at
their service, and their persons at his command. Though he has no Kingly Rules
to make him glorious, no guard to secure him, no Courtlike attendance, nor
sumptuous Palaces, yet they account him their Sovereign, and yield cheerful
subjection to him, going and coming at his beck without questioning a reason,
though the matter thwart their wills. Such as commit Treason, or lay violent
hands on their lawful Sovereign, die without mercy. Once a year he takes his
progress, attended with a dozen of his best Subjects, to view his Country, to
recreate himself, and to establish good Order. When he comes into any house,
without any other Complements, they desire him to sit down on the ground
(having neither Stools nor Cushions) and after a while all that are present sit
down by him, one of his Seniors making an Oration gratulatory to his Majesty
for his love, and the many good things they enjoy under his Government.

A King of large Dominions has his Vice-Royes under him to manage his State
Affairs, and to keep his Subjects in good Decorum. For their Laws, as their
evil manners come short of other Nations, so they need not so many Laws, yet
some they have, which they inflict upon notorious Malefactors, as Traitors,
Murderers, etc. He that deserves death, being apprehended, is brought before
the King; and some of his wisest men, and if upon trial he be found guilty, the
Executioner comes in, blindfolds him, and sets him in the public, and brains
him with a Club; they have no other punishment save Admonitions, or reproofs
for smaller offenses.

Of their Marriages.
The Kings and great Pawwoos, or Connirers may have two or three Wives, yet
seldom use it; others have but one. When a man desires to marry, he first gets
the good will of the Maid or Widow, then the consent of her friends, then, if
the King like, the match is made, her Dowry of Wamponpeag paid, and so the King
joins their hands never to part till Death, unless she prove a Whore, for which
they may put them away.

Of their Worship, Invocations, and Conjurations.
As its natural to all Mortals to worship something, so do these. They
acknowledge specially two, Ketar, who is their God, to Whom they sacrifice when
they have a good Crop. Him they Invocate for fair weather, for Rain, for
recovery of their sick, etc. But if they prevail not, their Powwows betake
themselves to their Conjurations, and Charms, by which they effect very
strange things, and many times work great Cures. But since the English came
amongst them, they are much reformed, and most of them have left these
Diabolical practices.

Of their Wars.
For places of retreat in times of danger they make Forts of forty or fifty
foot square, of young Timber Trees ten or twelve foot high rammed into the
ground, the Earth being cast up within for their shelter, and with loop holes
through which they shoot their Arrows. In war their only Weapons are Bows and
Arrows, only their Captains have long Spears, on which, if they return
Conquerors, they carry the chiefest of their enemies heads; for they use to cut
off their heads, hands, and feet to carry home to their Wives and Children as
Trophies of their renowned Victories: They also at such times paint their Faces
with diversities of colors to make them the more terrible to their foes; They
put on also their rich Jewels, Pendants, Wampompeag, etc. to mind them that
they fight, not only for their Lives, Wives and Children, but for their Goods,
Lands, and Liberties; they fight without all order, and when they have spent
their Arrows, they run away. They are trained up to their Bows from their
childhood, and are excellent Marks-men: They run swiftly, and swim almost
naturally.

Of their Huntings.
They have neither Beagles, Hounds, nor Grayhounds, but supply all themselves:
In the season of the year they have Hunting Houses in the places to which the
Deer resort, in which they keep their Rendesvouze, with their Snares, and all
the Accoutrements for that employment. When they see a Deer Moose, or bear,
they labor to get the wind of him, and coming near they shoot him quite
through, if the bones hinder not. They hunt also Wolves, wild Cats, Rackoones,
Otters, Beavers, and Musquashes, trading both their Skins and flesh to the
English: They have also other devises wherewith to kill their game.

Of their Fishings.
They are very expert in fishing, knowing all kinds of baits fit for each
several sorts of fish, and for all seasons of the year. They know also when to
fish in the Rivers, when at the Rocks, when in the Bays, and when at the Seas:
Before the English furnished them with Hooks and Lines, they made Lines of
their own Hemp, curiously wrought, stronger than ours, and used bone-hooks;
They make also strong Nets, wherewith they, catch Sturgion; and in the night
they go forth in their canooes with a blazing Torch, which they wave up and
down, with which the Sturgion being delighted, plays about it, turning up her
white belly, into which they thrust a bearded Dart, her back being
impenetrable, and so hale her to the shore. They look out also for sleeping
Seals, whose Oil they much esteem, using it for diverse things.

Of their Arts and Manufactures.
They dress all manner of Skins, by scraping and rubbing, and curiously paint
them with unchangable colors, and sometimes take off the hair, especially if
they be not in season. They make handsome Bows, which they string with Mooses
sinews: Their Arrows they make of young Eldern, which they feather with Eagles
feathers, and head them with Brass in shape of a Triangle. Their Cordage is so
even, smooth, and soft, that its liker Silk than Hemp. Their Canows are either
made of Pine-trees, which, before they had English Tools, they burned hollow
scraping them smooth with the shells of Clams, and Oysters, cutting their
outsides with Hatchets of Stone: Others they make of Birch rinds, which are so
light that a man may carry one of them on his back. In these tottering Boats
they will go to Sea, scudding over the waves, rowing with a Paddle: If a Wave
turn her over, by swimming they turn her up, and get into her again.

Of their Death, Burials, and mournings.
Though these Indians have lusty and healthful bodies, not knowing many
diseases incident to others Countries, as Fevers, Plurisies, Callentures,
Agues, Obstructions, Consumptions, Convulsions, Apoplexies, Dropsies, Gout,
Stone, Toothach, Pox, Meazles, etc. so that some of them live to sixty,
seventy, eighty, yea, one hundred years before death summons them hence; yet
when death approaches, and all hope of recovery is past, then to see and hear
their heavy sobbs, and deep fetched sighs, their grieved hearts, and brinish
tears, and doleful cries, would fetch tears from an heart of stone.

Their grief being assuaged, they commit the bodies of their friends to the
Earth, over whose grave for a long time they weep, groan, and howl, continuing
annual mournings, with a stiff black paint on their faces: They mourn without
hope, and yet hold the immortality of the Soul, that it shall pass to the
South-West Elysium, a kind of Paradise, wherein they shall for ever abide,
solacing themselves in Odoriferous Gardens, fruitful Cornfieldsd, green
Meddows, Bathing in cool streams of pleasant Rivers, and shelter themselves
from heat and cold in state-Pallaces framed by Dame Nature; at the Portal of
this Elisium they say there lies a great Dog, whose currish snarlings excludes
unworthy intruders: wherefore they bury them with Bows and Arrows, and store of
Wampompeag, and Mouhak^, either to affright the affronting Cerberus, or to
purchase greater prerogatives in that in Paradise. But evil livers they go to
the infernal dwellings of Abamacho, there to be tormented.

Of their Women, their Dispositions, Employments, Usage by their Husbands,
their Apparel, and Modesty.
These Indians scorn the tutorings of their Wives, or to admit them as their
equals, though their qualities, and industry may justly claim the pre-eminence,
and command better usage, and more conjugal esteem, their persons and features
being every way correspondent, their qualifications more excellent, being more
loving, pitiful, and modest, mild, provident, and laborious than their lazy
husbands. Their employments are many, for they build their houses in fashion
like our Garden Arbors, but rounder, very strong and handsome, covered with
close wrought Mats of their own weaving, which deny entrance to a drop of Rain,
though it be fierce and long, neither can the North winds find a crany whereat
to enter; they be warmer then ours: At the top is a square hole for the smoke
to pass out, which is close covered in rainy weather: Yet when they have a good
fire, they are so smoky, that they are fain to lie down under the smoke.

Their Summer houses when Families are dispersed upon diverse occasions, are
less: their winter houses are fifty or sixty foot long; forty or fifty men
lodging in one of them; and when their husbands require it, the Wives are fain
to carry their houses on their backs to Fishing and Hunting places; or to a
planting place, where it abides the longest. The Wives also plant their corn,
which they keep so clear from weeds, with their Clam-shell Hooes, as if it were
a Garden rather than a Cornfield; neither suffering Weeds nor Worms to hurt it.

Their Corn being ripe, they dry it in the Sun, and convey it into their Barns,
which be great holes dug in the ground like brass Pots, lining them with
Rinds of Trees, into which they put their Corn, covering it from their
Gurmundizing Husbands, who else would eat up all their allowed portion, and
reserved Seed if they knew where to find it. But our English Hoggs having found
a way to open their Barn-doors, and to rob their Garners; they are fain to make
use of their Husbands help to roll the bodies of Trees over them, to secure
them against these Swine, whose thievery they hate as much as they do to eat
their flesh.

Another of their employments is, in their Summer processions to get Lobsters
for their husbands, wherewith they bait their hooks when they go a fishing for
Bass and Codfish. This is their every days walk be the weather cold or hot, the
Waters rough or calm, they must dive sometimes over head and ears for a
Lobster, which often shakes them by the hands, with a churlish nip, and so bids
them adieu. The Tide being spent they trudg home two or three miles with an
hundred weight of Lobsters on their backs, but if they meet with none, they
have a hundred scouls from their churlish Hsbands, and an hungry belly for two
days after.

When their Husbands have caught any fish they bring it in their Canows as far
as they can by Water, and there they leave it, sending their Wives to fetch it
home, or they must fast, which done, they must dress it, cook it, dish it, and
present it, and see it eaten before their faces, and their Loggerships having
filled their paunches, their poor Wives must scramble for their scraps. In the
Summer when Lobsters be in their plenty and prime, these Indian women dry them
to keep for Winter, erecting Scaffolds in the hot Sun, and making fires
underneath them, by the Smoke whereof the flies are driven away, till the fish
remain hard and dry: Thus also they dry Bass, and other Fishes without salt,
cutting them very thin that they may dry the sooner before the Flies spoil
them, or the Rain wet them, having a great care to hang them in their smoaky
houses in the night, and dankish weather.

In Summer also they gather Flags, of which they make Mats for Houses; also
Hemp and Rushes with dying stuff, of which they make curious Baskets with
intermingled colors, and Pourtraictures of Antique Imagery. These Baskets are
of all sizes, from a Quart to a Quarter, in which they carry their Luggage.

In Winter they are their Husbands Caterers, trugging to the Clam-banks for
their belly-timber: they are also their porters to lug home their Venison,
which their laziness exposes to the Wolves, till their Wives impose it upon
their shoulders. They also sew their husbands shoes, and weave Turkey Feathers
for them, besides all their households drudgery which daily goes through their
hands, and a big belly hinders no business, nor does their childbirth hinder
much time, but the young child being greased and sooted, wrapped up in a
Beavers Skin, bound to his good behavior, with his feet up to his Bum, upon a
board two foot long, and one foot broad, his face being exposed to the most
nipping weather, this little Pappouse travels about with his barefooted Mother,
to paddle in the Icy Clamb-banks, being not above three or four days old.

The women's carriage is very Civil, smiles being the greatest grace of their
mirth. Their Music is Lullabies to quiet their Children, who yet are generally
as quiet as if they had neither Spleen nor Lungs. To hear one of these Indian
Women unseen, a good ear might easily mistake their untaught voice for the
warbling of a well tuned Instrument. Their modesty suggest them to wear more
clothes than their Husbands, having always a short Coat of cloth, or Skin
wrapped like a Blanket about their loins reaching to their hams, which they
never put off in company.

If a husband sels his Wives Beaver Petticote, as sometimes he does, she will
not put it off, till she has another to put on. Their mild carriage and
obedience to their husbands is very commendable; notwithstanding all their
churlishness, and salvage inhumanity toward them, yet will they not frown, nor
offer to word it with their Lords, nor presume to proclaim their superiority to
the usurping of the least tittle of their Husbands charter, but are contentedly
quiet with their helpless condition, esteeming it to be the Woman's portion.

Since the arrival of the English comparison has made their yoke more
miserable: For seeing the kind usage of the English men toward their wives,
they cannot but as much condemn their own husbands unkindness, as they commend
the English men's love. But in the mean time, their husbands commend themselves
for their wit in keeping their wives in subjection, and to labor as much as
they condemn the English husbands for their indulgence and folly in spoiling
such good working creatures.

These Indian women do often resort to the houses of the English wherewith those
of their own Sex, they do somewhat ease their misery by complaining of their
thraldom, and seldom part without some relief; and if their husbands come to
seek for their Spaws(for so they call all women) and do begin to bluster for
their idleness, the English woman betakes her to her Arms, which are the
warlike Ladle, and the scalding Liquor, threatening blistering to the naked
Runaway, who is soon driven back by such hot comminations. In a word, the love
of these women to the English, deserves no small esteem, whom they are ever
presenting with something that is rare or desired, as Strawberries,
Hurtleberries, Rasberries, Gooseberries, Cherries, Plums, Fish, and such other
gifts as their poor Treasury affords.

New Englands Prospect. Of their Religion.
The Natives of New England conceive of many Divine powers: The good God,
but one whom they call Keihtan(they say) is the principal, and maker of all
the rest, and himself is made by none. He created the Heavens, Earth, Sea, and
all Creatures contained therein. He also made one man and one Woman, of whom
oll mankind came. But how they came to be so far dispersed, they know not. At
first (they say) there was no Sachem or King, but Keihtan, who dwells above the
Heavens, whither all good men go when they die to see their friends, and have
their fill of all thins. Thither bad men go also, and knock at his door, but he
bids them walk abroad, for there is no piace for such, so that they wander in
restless want, and penury. Never man saw this Kiehtan; only old men tell them
of him, and bid them tell their children; yea, to charge them to tell it to
their posterities, and to lay the like charge upon them. This power they
acknowledge to be good; and when they would obtain any great matter, they meet
together, and cry unto him; and when they have plenty and victory, etc. they
sing, dance, give thanks, and hang up Garlands in memory thereof.

Another power they worship called Hobbamock, which is the Devil; Him they call
upon to cure their wounds, and Diseases. And when they are curable, he
persuades them that he sends the same for some conceived anger against them;
but upon their calling upon him, he can, and does help them. But when they are
mortal and incurable, he tells them that Kiehtan is angry, and sends them, whom
none can cure, which makes them doubt whether he be simply good, and therefore
in sickness they never call upon him. This Hobbamock appears in sundry forms
unto them; As in the shape of a Man, a Deer, a Fawn, an Eagle, etc. But most
ordinarily like a snake. He appears not to all, but to the chiefest, and most
judicious amongst them, though all of them strive to attain that Hellish honor.
He chiefly appears to three sorts of persons: Of the first Rank they are few,
and they are highly esteemed of, and they think that no weapon can kill them:
The second sort are called Powahs: and the third Priests.

The Powahs chief Office is to call upon the Devil, and to cure the sick and
wounded. The common people join with him in his Invocations, by saying Amen to
what he says. The Powah is eager and free in speech, fierce in countenance,
and joyneth many Antic and laborious gestures with the same over the party
diseased. If the party be wounded, they suck his wounds; but if they be
curable, the Snake or Eagle sits on his shoulders and licks the same. Him none
sees but the Powah. If the party be otherwise diseased, its sufficient if in
any shape he but comes into the house, and it is an undoubted sign of recovery.

The Powahs in their speech promise to sacrifice many Skins of Beasts, Kettles,
Hatchets, Beads, Knives, and the best things they have to the Fiend, if he help
the diseased party. When women are in desperate and extraordinary hard travel
in in Childbirth, they send for the Powahs to help them. Many sacrifices they
use, and sometimes kill their Children. The Nanohiggansets exceed in their
blind Devotion, and have great spacious houses, into which their Priests only
come. Thither at certain times most of the People resort and sacrifice almost
all their riches to their gods, as Kettles, Skins, Hatchets, Beads, Knives,
etc. all which the Priest casts into a great fire made in the midst of that
house, where they are consumed. To this Offering every man brings freely, and
he that brings most, is best esteemed.

The Priests are men of great courage and wisdom, and to these the Devil also
appears more familiarly than to others, and covenants with them to preserve
them from death by wounds of Arrows, Knives, Hatchets, etc. One of these will
chase almost an hundred of their enemies: They are highly esteemed of all, and
are of the Sachems Council, without whom he will neither make War, nor
undertake any great matter. In War the Sachems for their more safety, go in the
midst of them. They are usually men of the greatest stature and strength, and
such as will endure most hardness, and yet are discreet, and courteous in their
carriages, How they increase the Priests.
scorning theft, lying, and base dealing, and stand as much upon their
Reputation as any men. And to increase the number of these, they train up the
likeliest Boys from their Childhood unto great hardness, and cause them to
abstain from dainty meat, and to observe diverse other Rules, to the end that
the Devil may appear to them when they are of age. They also cause them to
drink the Juice of Centuary, and other bitter Herbs, till they vomit it into a
platter, which they must drink again, till at length, through extraordinary
pressing of Nature, it look like blood: And this the Boys will do at first
eagerly, and so continue, till by reason of faintness they can scarce stand on
their legs, and then they must go forth into the cold. Also they beat their
shins with sticks, and cause them to run through Bushes, Stumps, and Brambles
to make them hardy and acceptable to the Devil, that so in time he may appear
unto them.

Their Sachems are not all Kings, Their Government.
but only some few of them, to whom the rest resort for protection, and pay
them Homage: Neither may they make War without their knowledge and approbation.
Every Sachim takes care for the Widows, Fatherless, Aged, or maimed, if their
friends be dead, or not able to provide for them. A Sachim will not marry any
but such as are equal in birth to him, lest his Seed prove ignoble; and though
they have many other wives, yet are they but Concubines, or servants, and yield
obedience to the Queen, who orders the Family, and them in it. The other
Subjects do the same, and will adhere to the first during their lives, but put
away the other at their pleasure. Their Government is successive, not elective.
If the Sachims child be young when his Father dies, he is committed to the
Protection, and Tuition of some one amongst them, who rules for him till he be
of age.

Every Sachem knows the bounds and limits of his Kingdom, They maintain their
Kings.
out of which, if any of his men desire Land wherein to set their Corn, he
gives them as much as they can use. In these limits, he that Hunts and kills
any Venison, gives the Sachim his Fee; if it be killed on the Land, he has
part of the flesh; if in the water, then the Skin only: The great Sachems or
Kings know not their bounds so well. All Travelers or Strangers usually lie at
the Sachims house, and when they come, they tell them how long they will stay,
and whither they are going; during which time they are entertained according to
their quality. Once a year the Priests provoke the People to bestow much Corn
on the Sachim, and accordingly at a certain time and place, the people bring
many Baskets of Corn, and make a great Stack thereof near to the Sachems house.
There the Priests stands ready to return them thanks in the name of the Sachim,
who fetches the same, and is no less thankful, bestowing many gifts upon them.

When any are visited with sickness, Their charity.
their friends resort to them to comfort them, and often continue with them till
death or recovery; If they dye they stay to mourn for them, which they perform
night and morning for many days after their Burial: But if they recover,
because their sickness was chargeable, they send them Corn and other gifts,
whereupon they Feast, and Dance. Their Burials, and mournings
When they bury their dead, they sew the Corpse up in a Mat, and so bury it. If
a Sachim dies, they cover him with many curious Mats, and bury all his Riches
with him, and enclose the Grave with a Pale. If it be a child, the Father will
put all his own special Jewels, and Ornaments into the grave with it: Yea, he
will cut his Hair, and disfigure himself, in token of his great sorrow. If it
be the Master or Dame of the Family, they will pull down the Mats, and leave
the Frame of the house standing, and bury them in, or near the same, and either
remove their Dwelling, or give over housekeeping.

The younger sort reverence the Elder, Their behavior.
and do all mean Offices for them when they are together, though they be
strangers. Boys and Girls may not wear their hair like men and women, but are
distinguished thereby. One is not accounted a man, till he does some notable
act, and shows his Courage and Resolution answerable to his place: The men take
much Tobacco, but its counted very odious in a Boy so to do.

All their Names are significant and variable. Their names of their marriages,
Their Women.
For when they come to be men and women, they alter them according to their
deeds, or dispositions. When a Maid is given in Marriage, she first cuts her
hair, and then wears a covering on her head till her hair is grown again. Of
their Women some are so modest, that they will scarce talk together whilst men
are by, and are very chaste: Others are light, lascivious, and wanton. If a
Woman has a bad Husband, or affect him not; If there be War between that and
any other people, she will run away from him to the contrary party, where she
never wants welcome; for where there be most women, there is most plenty.

When a Woman has her Courses, Their modesty.
she retires her self from all other company, and lives in a house apart; After
which she washes her self, and all that she has touched or used, after which
she is received into her Husbands Bed or Family. The Husband will beat his
Wife, or put her away for Adultery. Yet some common Strumpets there are, but
they are such as either were never married, or are Widows, or that have been
put away for Adultery: For no man will take such an one to wife.

In matters of injustice or dishonest dealing, the Sachim examines and
punishes the same. Their Justice Punishments.
In cases of theft; For the first offense he is disgracefully rebuked: For the
second, he is beaten by the Sachim with a Cudgle on the naked back: For the
third, he is beaten with many stripes, and has his Nose slit, that all men may
both know and shun him. If one kill another, he certainly dies for it. The
Sachim not only sentenceth the Malefactor, but executes the same with his own
hands, if the party be present, otherwise he sends his own Knife, if he be
sentenced to dye by the hands of another that executes the same. But if the
Offender be to receive any other punishment, he will not receive it but from
the Sachim himself, before whom being naked, he kneels, and will not offer to
run away, though he beat him never so much, it being a greater disparagement
for a man to cry when he is corrected, than was his offense and punishment.

They are a very witty and ingenious people: Their integrity.
They keep account of the time by the Moon, or by Summers or Winters; They know
diverse of the Stars by name: They have also many names for the Winds: They will
guess shrewdly at the Wind and Weather before hand, by observations in the
Heavens.

Their Language is very copious and large, Their Language.
and hard to be learned; And though in an hundred miles distance their
Languages differ, yet not so much, but they can understand each other.

Instead of Records and Chonicles, Their Chonicles.
where any Remarkable Act is done, in memory of it, either in the very place,
or by some Path near adjoining, they make a round hole in the Ground a foot
deep, and as much over, which, when others passing by, behold, they enquire the
cause and occasion of it, which being once known, they carefully acquaint
others with it. And lest such holes should be filled, as men pass by, they will
often renew them. So that if a man travels, and can understand his Guide, his
Journey will be less tedious, by the many Historical Discourses that will be
related to him.

You have heard before of the State of New England in the year 1633. when she
was but in her childhood, but being now grown up to more maturity; Take this
account of it, which was written by a Reverend Minister, in January 1668/9, who
had lived there 40. years, and therefore has great reason, and good
opportunities to be acquainted with the condition of it.

WHen we came first to New England in the year 169. there was then but one Town
in the Country, viz. that of New-Plimmouth, which had stood alone for nine
years. From that time to this year now beginning 1669. is just forty years; in
which time there has been an increase of forty Churches in this Colony (but
many more in the rest.) And Towns in all New England, 120. which for the most
part lie along the Sea Coast for somewhat more than two hundred miles; only
upon Connecticut River, there are thirteen Towns lying near together; and about
the Massacusets Bay, here are above thirty Towns within two, three, four, or
five miles asunder. And from the Sea, which has rendered Boston a very
considerable place, and the Metropolis of New England, all the other Towns on
the Sea Coast, and those in the Country depending upon it. I have lately heard
some Merchants that knew old Boston, say that this is far bigger, and has ten
times more Trade than that, having many Ships and Catches, and they say no less
than an hundred Catches went from the Country this winter to trade in Virginia;
besides many others to the West Indies, and to several parts of Europe.

It was doubted for some years, whether there would be a staple Commodity in
New England; but God and time have showed many, as Furs, Fish, Masts,
Pipestaves, and Deal-board, and such plenty of Corn and Cattle, that abundance
of Provision has been yearly transported for the supply of English Plantations,
the West Indies, and other parts; in so much as though many Gentlemen of great
Estates in the first year spent their Estates, and some of them that were very
brave men of public spirits, were brought very low, both they and theirs: Yet
in the latter years, many that have risen out of the dust, by a way of Trading
and Merchandising, have grown unto great Estates; some to ten, others to
twenty, yea thirty or forty thousand pound estate.

In the year 1643. began the combination of the united Colonies of New England,
which have much encrersed since then; every one of them having their distinct
Pattents, except New Haven, which for want of a Pattent, was since the coming
in of our King, taken into the Colony of Connecticut; And though very many of
the first comers are now dead and gone, yet there is grown up such a numerous
Posterity here, that it is thought there are twenty times more English people
now in the Country, then ever came into it. And it is believed by many observing
men, that there are many above ten hundred thousand souls. Most of the first
Magistrates are dead, and not above two left in the Massacusets; but one in
Plymouth, one at Connecticut, and not one at New Haven.

There came over from England at several times, chiefly before the year 1640.
ninety fore Ministers, of which twenty seven returned to England again, and
there are now dead in the Country thirty six; and as yet living in the Country
thirty one. The Ministers bred up in New England, are one hundred thirty two,
of which two are dead in the Country, forty one have removed to England, most
of them from our Colleges, besides other Scholars that have in England turned
to other Professions, and eighty one that are now living in the Country,
employed in the Ministry in several places.

There have been several Synods in New England; The first at Cambridge, in the
year 1637. wherein the Antinomian* and Familistical Errors were confuted and
condemned by the Word of God. The second at Cambridge in the year 1646. wherein
the Magistrates power and Duty in Matters of Religion, and the Nature and Power
of Synods was cleared. The third, in the year 1648. where it was declared, that
in Point of Doctrine, these Churches consented to the Confession of Faith, put
forth by the Assembly at Westminster; and in Point of Discipline, the Platform
of the Discipline of these Churches, was then published. The fourth was at
Boston in the year 1662. concerning the Subject of Baptism, and Consociation of
Churches.

It has pleased the Lord to give such a blessing to the Gospel among the
Indians, that in diverse places there are not only many civilized, but diverse
that are truly Godly, and shame the English, and are much hated by others of
their own Country men, though that Work has met with many Obstructions and
Remoraes; chiefly by the Death of some of the Choicest Instruments, and many of
the best of the Indians; Yet it may be well believed, that there is such a Seed
of the Gospel scattered among them, which will grow unto a further Harvest in
God's time.

THE DESCRIPTION OF THE ISLAND OF BARBADOS: With an Account of the Trees,
Plants, Herbs, Roots, Fowls, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, etc. As also of
their Sugarcanes, Ingenio's and manner of making their Sugars.
THE first Discovery made of this Island was by a Ship of Sir William Curte'us,
Barbados first discovered.
which returning from Pernambock in Brasile, being driven by foul Weather upon
this Coast, chanced to fall upon this Island, which is not far out of the way,
being one of the most Windwardly Islands of all the Carribies; and Anchoring
before it, they stayed some time to inform themselves of the nature of of the
place, which by trials in several places, they found to be so over grown with
Wood, as that there could be no Champion Ground discovered whereon to Plant; Nor
found they any Beasts, or Cattle there, save Hoggs, whereof there were
abundance.

The Portugals having long before put some on shore for breed, Hoggs found
there.
in case they should at any time by foul Weather be driven to, or cast upon on
this Island, that so they might there find fresh meat to serve them upon such
an exigence. Hunted by the Indians.
And the Fruits and Roots that grew there, afforeded them so great plenty of
food, that now they were multiplied abundantly. In so much as the Indians of
the Leeward Islands that were within sight, Fine Pots.
coming thither in their Canoos, and finding such Game to hunt as these Hoggs
were, whose flesh was so sweet, and excellent in taste, they came often thither
a hunting, staying sometimes a month together before they returned home,
leaving behind them certain tokens of their being there, which were Pots of
several sizes made of Clay, so finely tempered, and turned with such Art, as
the like to them for fineness of Mettle, and curiosity of turning, are not made
in England, in which they boiled their meat.

This discovery being made, The first Painters.
and advice thereof sent to their friends in England; other ships were sent
with Men, Provisions, and Working Tools, to cut down the Woods, and clear the
Ground wherein to plant Provisions for their sustentation, till then, finding
Food but straglingly in the Woods. But when they had cleared some quantity of
Land, they Planted Potato's, Plantines, and Maies, or Indian Wheat, with some
other Fruits, which together with the Hoggs, which they found there, served
only to keep life and soul together. And their supplies from England coming so
slow, and so uncertainly, they were often driven to great extremities: And the
Tobacco that grew there, was so earthy and worthless, as that it gave them
little or no return from England, or other places; so that for a while they
lingered in a doubtful condition. For the Woods were so thick, and most of the
Trees so large and massy, as that they were not to be fallen by so few hands: And
when they were laid along, the Boughs were so thick and and unweldy, as
required more help of strong and active men to lop, and remove them off the
ground; which continued so for many years, in so much as they Planted Potato's,
Maies, and Bonavists between the Boughs as the Trees lay on the ground.

Yet not long after they planted Indigo, Indico Planted. Cotton, and Fustick.
and ordered it so well, as that it sold in London at very good Rates: And
their Cotton Woll, and Fustick Wood, proved very good and staple Commodities:
So that having these four sorts of commodities, to traffic with all; Some
Ships were invited in hope of gain by that Trade, to come and visit them,
bringing for exchange, such Commodities as they wanted, to wit, Working-Tools,
Iron, Steel, Clothes, Shirts, Drawers, Hose and Shoes, Hats, and more Hands.
So that beginning to find good by this Trade, they set themselves hard to work,
and lived in much better condition.

But when their Sugarcanes had been planted three or four years, Sugar Canes
planted.
they found that to be the principal Plant whereby to raise the value of the
whole Island; and therefore bent all their endeavors to improve their
knowledge and skill in Planting them, and making Sugar. Which knowledge, though
they studied hard, was long in Learning.

This Island which we call Barbado's lies in thirteen Degrees and about thirty
Minutes of Northern Latitude: The situation of the Island.
The usual Bay into which Ships put, is Carlisle Bay, which without exception is
the best in the Island, and is somewhat more than a League over, and from the
Points of the Land to the bottom of the Bay, The chief Towns unhealthful.
is twice as much.

Upon the innermost part of this Bay stands a Town called the Bridge; for that
a long Bridge was at first made over a little Nook of the Sea, which yet indeed
is rather a Bogg than a Sea. This Town is ill situated; the Planters looking
more after conveniencie than health. But one house being erected, another was
set up by it for Neighborhood, and than a third, and a fourth, till at last it
became a Town: Diverse storehouses were also built there wherein, to stow their
goods, being so near and convenient for the Harbor. But their great oversight
was to build a Town in so unhealthfull a place. For the ground being somewhat
lower within the Land than the Sea banks are, the Spring-Tides flow over, and
so remain there, making much of that flat a kind of Bog, or Marish, which sends
out so loathsome a Savor, as cannot but breed ill blood, and probably is the
occasion of much sickness to those that live there.

The ground on either side this Bay (but chiefly that to the Eastward) is much
firmer, and lies higher, and therefore with some charge, may be made as
convenient as the Bridge, and much more healthfnl.

Three more Bays there be of note in this Island. The Baies.
One to the Eastward of this, which they call Austins Bay: The other are to the
West of Carlile-Bay. The first whereof is called Mackfields Bay; the other
Spikes Bay; but neither of these three are environed with Land, as Carlisle Bay
is; but being to the Leeward of the Island, and of good Anchorage, they seldom
are in danger, unless in the time of the Turnado, when the Winds turn about to
the South; And then if they be not well moved, the Ships are subject to fall
foul one upon another, and sometimes are driven a ground. For the Leeward part
of the Island, being rather shelvy than Rocky, they are seldom or never cast
away.

The leng the hot Island is twenty eight miles, The bigness of the Island. Ils
beauty
and the breadth in some places seventeen miles, in others twelve; so that they
make about three hundred nitety two square miles in the whole Island. It rises
highest in the middle, so that when you come within sight of this happy Island,
the nearer you come, the more beautiful it appears to the Eye. For being in it
self exceeding beautiful, it is best discerned, and best judged of when your
eyes become full Mistress of the Object. There you may see the high, large, and
lofty Trees with their spreading branches, and flourishing tops, which seem to
be beholding to the Earth and Roots that gave them such plenty of sap for their
Nourishment, which makes them grow to that perfection of beauty and largeness:
Whilst they by way of gratitude return their cool shade to secure and shelter
the Earth from the Suns heat, which otherwise would scorch and dry it up. So
that Bounty and Goodness in the one, and Gratefulness in the other, serve to
make up this Beauty, which always would lie empty and waste.

By the Commodity of the Situation of this Island, which is highest in the
midst, the Inhabitants within have these advantages. First, a free prospect
into the Sea; then a reception of a opure and refreshing air, and Breezes that
come from thence: The Plantations overlooking one another, so as the more in
most parts are not debarred, nor restrained of their liberties of the view to
the Sea by those that dwell between them and it.

Whilst the Sun is in the Aequinoctial, The length of the Days
or within ten degrees of either side, there is little change in the length of
the days, for at six and six the Sun rises and sets: But when its nearer the
Tropic of Capricorn, and in thirty seven degrees from them, then the days are
something shorter, and this shortning begins about the end of October.

Eight Months in the year the Weather is very hot, The temperature.
yet not scalding, but that Servants, both Christians and Slaves labor and
travel ten hours in a day. For as the Sun rises, there rises with it a cool
Brees of Wind; and the higher, and hotter the Sun rises, the stronger and
cooler the Breeses are, and blow alwaeis from the North-East and by East,
except in the time of the Turnado: For then it sometimes chops about into the
South for an hour or two, and so returns about again to the Point where it was.

The other four Months it is not so hot, but is near the temper of the Air in
England in the midst of May. And though in the hot season the Planters sweat
much, yet do they not find that faintness which we find in England in the end
of July, or in the beginning of August. But with this heat, there is such a
moisture as must of necessity cause the Air to be unwholesome.

The Planters there are s^eldom thirsty, unless they over heat their bodies
with extraordinary labor, Diseases,
or with drinking strong drink, as our English Spririts, or French Brandy, or
the drink of the Island, which is made of the scummings of the Coppers that
boil the Sugar, which they call Kill-devil.

For though some of these be needful in such hot Countries when they are used
temperately, yet the immoderate use of them over-heats the body, which causes
Costiveness, and Gripings in the Bowels; which is a Disease that is very
frequent there, and hardly cured, and of which many die. Their blood also is
thinner and paler than ours in England: Nor is their Meat so well relished as
it is with us, but flat and insipid; the Hogs-flesh only excepted, which is as
good as any in the World. Their Horses and Cattle seldom drink, and when they
do, its but in a little quantity, except they be over heated with working.

The moisture of the Air causes all their Knives, The moistness of the air.
Tweeses, Keys, Needles, Swords, etc. to rust, and that in an instant. For if
you grind your rusty Knife upon a Grind-stone, wipe it dry, and put it into
your sheath, and pocket, in a little time after draw it again, and you shall
find it beginning to rust all over; which in longer time will eat into the
Steel and spoil the Blade. Locks also which are not often used, will rust in
the Wards and become useless. And Clocks and Watches will seldom or never go
true, and all this is occasioned by the moistness of the Air. This great heat
and moisture together is certainly the cause that Trees and Plants, grow to
such a vast height, and largeness as they do there.

There is nothing so much wanting in this Island as Springs and Rivers of
Waters; A want of water. The only River or Lake.
there being but very few, and those small and inconsiderable. There is but one
River, which may yet be termed rather a Lake than a River. The Springs that run
into it are never able to fill it: And outlet to the Sea it has none; but at
Spring-Tides the Sea comes in and fills it, and at Neep-Tide it cannot run out
again, the Sea-banks being higher than it. Yet some of it issues out through
the Sand, and leaves a mixture of fresh and salt water behind it.

Sometimes these Spring-tides bring some Fishes into it, which will remain
there, being more willing to live in this mixed water, then in the salt.

Sometimes there have been taken in it Fishes as big as Salmons, which have
been overgrown with fat and very sweet and firm. But Fish is not often taken
in this place, by reason that the whole Lake is filled with Trees and Roots, so
that no Net can be drawn, nor Hook laid, without danger of breaking and losing.

The River or Lake reaches not within Land above twelve score yards, and there
is no part of it so broad, but that you may cast a Coit over it.

The Spring-tides about this Island seldom rise above four or five foot
upright. Into these Rivolets there come from the Sea little Lobsters, but
wanting the great Claws before, Excellent Lobsters.
they are the sweetest, and fullest of Fish that can be eaten.

But the water which the people in this Island most rely upon, is rainwater,
Their ponds.
which they keep in Ponds, and have descents to them, so that what falls upon
other grounds about, may run into them; the bottom of these Ponds are Clay. For
if the water find any leak to the Rocky part, it gets into the clifts and sinks
in an instant. About the end of December these Ponds are filled, and with the
help they have by weekly showers, they mostly continue so, yet sometimes they
find a want. This water they use upon all occasions, and to all purposes, as to
boil their Meat, to make their Drink, to wash their Linen, etc.

In these Ponds are neither Fish nor Fry, nor any living or moving things,
except some Flies that fall into them; but the water is clear and well tasted;
here their Cattle drink also. They also save rain water from the houses, by
Gutters at the Eves which carries it down into Cisterns.

If any tumult or disturbance be in the Island, Speedy warning of dangers
the next neighbor to it discharges a Musket, which gives an Allarum to the
whole Island. For upon the report of that, the next shoots, and so the next,
and the next, ill it go through all, and upon hearing of this all make ready.

Of their Bread.
Bread which is the staff and stay of man's life, Bread of C^ssury.
is not so good here as in England; Yet do they account it both nourishing and
strengthening. It Is made of the root of a small Tree or Shrub, which is called
Cussary. This Root is large and round, like the body of a small Still, and as
they gather it, they cut sticks or blanches that grow nearest to it of the same
Tree, which they put into the ground, and they grow: So that as they gather
one, they plant another.

This Root when its first gathered is an absolute poison, and yet by good
ordering it becomes wholesome and nourishing. First, they wash it clean, and
lean it against a wheel, whose sole is about a foot broad, covered with Latin
made rough like a greater. This Wheel is turned about with the foot, as Cutlers
use to turn theirs, and as it grates the Root, it falls down into a large
Trough which is appointed to receive it. This they put into a strong piece of
double Canvas, or Sackcloth, and press it so hard, that all the juice is
squeezed out, and then drying it in the Sun, its fit to make Bread, which they
do after this manner.

They have a Plate of Iron round, How its made.
about twenty inches in the Diameter, a little hollowed in the midst, with
three feet like a Pot, above six inches high, that they may keep fire under.
They heat this Pone (as they call it) so hot as that it may bake but not burn.
Then the Indians (who are best acquainted with the making of it) cast the Meal
upon the Pone the whole breadth of it, and put it down with their hands, and it
will presently stick together, and when they think that that side is enough,
they turn it with a thing like a Battle-dore; and so turn and re-turn it till
it be enough, which is presently done. Then laying it upon a flat board, they
make others, till they have made enough for the whole family. They make it as
thin as a Wafer, and yet purely white and crisp. Salt they never use in it,
though probably it would give it a better relish. They can hardly make Py-crust
of it; For as they knead, or roll it, it will crack or chop, so that it will
not hold any Liquor, neither with, nor without Butter or Eggs.

There is another sort of Bread which is mixed, being made of the flower of
Maise, Bread of Maise, and Cussary together.
and Cussary: For the Maise of its self will make no Bread, it is so extreme
heavy: But these two being mixed, they make it into large Cakes two inches
thick, which tastes most like to our English Bread. Yet the Negroes use the
Maise another way. For they tossed the ears of it at the fire, and so eat it warm
off the fire.

The Christian Servants are fed with this Maise, who pound it in a large
Mortar, and boil it in water to the thickness of Frumentry, and then put it
into a Tray and so eat it; they give it them cold, and scarce afford them salt
to it; Lob-Lolly
This they call Lob-lolly.

The third sort of Bread which they use, is only Potatoes, which are the
dryest, and largest which they can choose, and this is the most common sort of
Bread used at the Planters Tables.

Of their Drink.
Their Drink is of sundry sorts. Potatoes used for Bread. Their drink Mobby,
how made.
The first, and that which is most used in the Island is Mobby; a Drink made of
Potatoes; thus, They put the Potatoes into a Tub of water, and with a Broom
wash them clean; Then taking them out, they put them into a large Brass or Iron
Pot, and put to them so much water as will only cover a third part of them,
then covering the Pot close with a thick double cloth, that no steam can get
out, they stew them over a gentle fire, and when they are enough, take them
out, and with their hands squeeze and break them very small in fair water,
letting them stand till the water has drawn all the spirits out of the Roots,
which will be done in an hour or two. Then they put the Liquor and Roots into a
large linen Bag, and let it run through that into a Jar, and within two hours
it will begin to work: and the next day it is fit to be drunk; And as they will
have it stronger or weaker, they put in a greater or a less quantity of Roots.

This Drink being temperately made, does not at all fly up into the head, but
is sprightly, thirst-cooling drink. If it be put up into Runlets, it will last
four or five days, and drink the quicker. It is much like Renish Wine on the
Must. There are two several layers wherein these Roots grow; The one makes the
Skins of the Potatoes white, the other Red, and the Red Roots make the Drink
Red like Claret Wine, the other white. This is the most general Drink used in
the Island, but it breeds Hydropick Humors.

Another drink they have which is much wholsomer, Perino how made.
though not altogether so pleasant, which they call Perino, much used by the
Indians, which is made of the Cussavy Root. This they cause their old toothless
women to chaw in their mouths, and so spit into water, which in three or four
hours will work and purge it self of the poisonous quality. This Drink will
keep a month or two, and drink somewhat like our English Beer.

Grippo is a third sort of Drink, Grippo.
but few make it well, and it is rarely used.

Punch is a fourth sort, Punch.
which is made of Water and Sugar mixed together, which in ten days standing
will be very strong, and fit for Laborers.

A fifth is made of wild Plumbs which they have in great abundance upon very
large Trees. These they press and strain, and they have a very sharp and fine
Flavor: But this being troublesome in making is seldom used.

But the Drink made of the Plantane is far beyond all these. Plantane drink.
These they gather when they are full ripe, and in the height of their
sweetness, and peeling off the Skin, they wash them in water well boiled; and
after they have stood a night, they strain it, and bottle it up, and at a weeks
end drink it. Its a very strong and pleasant Drink, as strong as Sack, and will
fly up into the head, and therefore must be used moderately.

The seventh sort of Drink they make of the Skimmings of their Sugar, which is
exceeding strong, but not very pleasant: This is commonly, and indeed too much
used, many being made drunk by it. This they call Kill-Devil. Kill-devil.
Beveridge


The eighth sort of Drink they call Beveridge, made of Spring Water,
White-Sugar, and Juice of Oringes. And this is not only pleasant, but
wholesome. Pine-drink the best of all.


The last and best sort of Drink which the World affords, is the incomparable
Wine of Pines. And this is made of the pure juice of the fruit it self without
mixture of Water, or any thing else, having in it self a natural compound of
all the most excellent tastes that the world can yield. I'ts too pure to keep
long. It will be fine within three or four days. They make it by pressing the
Fruit, and straining the Liquor, and keep it in Bottles.

Three sorts of Meat.
They have several sorts of Meat there, Hogs flesh.
whereof the Hoggs-flesh is the most general, and indeed the best which the
Island affords. For the Swine feeding daily upon Fruit, the Nuts of Locust,
Pompianes, the bodies of the Plantanes, Bonanas, Sugarcanes, and Maise, make
their flesh to be exceeding sweet. At the first coming of the English thither,
they found Hoggs of four hundred pound weight, the Intrals taken out, and their
Heads cut off.

Beef they seldom have any that feeds upon that Island, Beef.
except it die of it self: Only such a Planter as was Sir James Drax (who lived
there like a Prince) may now and then kill one.

Turkies they have large, Turkies. Pullin, and Muscovy Ducks.
fat and full of gravy. Also our English Pullen, and Muscovy Ducks, which being
larded with the fat of their Pork, and seasoned with Pepper and Salt, is an
excellent Baked Meat.

Turtle Doves they have of two sorts, Turtle Doves. Pigeons.
and very good meat. There are also Pigeons which come from the Lee-ward
Islands in September, and stay till Christmas to feed upon Fruits. Many of
these they kill upon the Trees, and they are exceeding fat, and taste
excellently.

Tame Rabbets they have, Rabbets.
but they taste faintly, more like Chickens then Rabbets. They have also diverse
sorts of Birds, but none that they use for Food.

Of their Fish.
Now for fish, the Island want not plenty about it, yet the Planters look so
much after their profit on the Land, Several sorts of fish.
that they will not spare time to catch it, nor to send to the Bridge to buy
that which is caught to their hands. But when any have a mind to feast
themselves with Fish, they go to the Taverns at the Bridge where they have
plenty, and well dressed.

Butter they seldom have that will beat thick; but instead thereof they use
Vinegar, Spice, and fry much of their Fish in Oil, and eat it hot; yet some
they pickle, and eat it cold. Yet Colonel Humphrey Walrond having his
Plantation near the Sea, has a Saine to catch Fish withal, which his own
servants and Slaves put to Sea twice or thrice a week, and bring home store of
small and great Fishes, as Snappers red and gray, Cavallos, Macarel, Mullets,
Cony-Fish, and diverse other sorts of firm and sweet Fish; and some bigger then
Salmons, of the rarest colors that can be imagined, being from the back fin
which is the middle of the Fish, to the end of the tail, of a most pure grass
green, as shining as Satin: The Fins and Tail dappled with a most rare
hair-colour; and from the back Fin to the Head, a pure hair-colour dappled with
green. The Scales as big as an half Crown piece.

It is an exccent sweet Fish; The green Turtle.
only there is one kind of Fish here wanting, which are very rife in the
adjacent Islands, which is the green Turtle, which the best meat that the Sea
affords.

In other places they take an infinite number of them by turning them upon
their backs with staves, where they lie till they are fetched away. A large
Turtle will have in her body half a bushel of Eggs. When they are to kill one
of them, they lay it on his back upon a table, and when he sees them come with
a knife to kill him, he vapors out the most grievous sighs that ever you heard
creature make, and sheds as large tears as a Stag. He has a joint or crevis
about an inch within the utmost edge of his shell, into which they put the
knife and rip up his belly, which they call his Calipee, and take out his
bowels, and heart, which had three distinct points, and this being laid in a
dish will stir and pant ten hours after the Fish is dead: It Is of a delicate
taste and very nourishing.

Of The Quelquechoses.
The Quelquechoses with which they furnish out their Tables at a feast are,
Quasquechoses.
Eggs potcht, and laid upon Sippets soaked in Butter, and juice of Limes and
Sugar, with plumpt Currants strewed upon them, and Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon strewed
upon that, with a little Salt. Eggs boiled, roasted, and fried with Collops.
Buttered Eggs, and Amulet of Eggs, with the juice of Limes and Sugar, a Fraize,
and a Tansie, Custards and Cheese cakes, Puffs, Cream boiled to a height with
yolks of Eggs, and seasoned with Sugar and Spice, Jelly which they make of a
young Pig, Caves-feet, and a Cock; Cream alone, and some several ways with the
help of Limes, Lemmons, and Oranges; and into some they put Plantanes, Gnavers,
and Bonanoes stewed, or preserved with Sugar, and the same fruit also preserved
without Cream, and to draw down a cup of Wine, they have dried Neats Tongues,
Westfalia-Bacon, Caviare, Pickled-Herring, Botargo, all which are brought to
them.

From Old and New England, Flesh and Fish.
Virginia, and Holland they have Beef, and Pork; As al Ling, Haberdine, Cod,
poor- John, Makarels, and Herrings pickled, and Sturgeon. Pickled Turtles they
have from the Lee-ward Islands. Of these things they have had in these latter
years such store, that the Negroes are allowed for each man two Makarels a
week, and every woman one, which are given them Saturday-nights, after which
they have their allowance of plantanes, which is every one a large bunch or two
two little ones to serve them for a weeks provision. The Negroes alowance.


And if any Cattle die by chance, or by any disease, the Christian servants eat
the bodies, and the Negroes the Skins, Head, and Intrals, which is divided to
them by the Overseers. If a Horse dies, the Negroes have the whole bodies, and
this they think a high Feast, with which poor souls were never better
contented: And the Drink which the servants have to this Diet, is nothing but
Mobby, and sometimes a little Beveridge; but the Negroes have nothing but water.

When the chief Planters make a Feast for their friends, An Inland Feast.
its either made by such as live within Land, or near the Sea side. For this
Inland Plantation, my Author instanceth in Sir James Draxe, at whose Table he
has seen these several sorts of Meat well dressed: And this Feast was always
made when he killed a Beef, which he fed very fat, by allowing it a dozen Acres
of Bonavist to feed in.

First, he mentions Beef as the greatest rarity in that Island of which he had
these Dishes; A Rump boiled, a Chine roasted, a large piece of the breast
roasted, a Cheek baked, the Tongue and part of the Tripes in Minced-pies,
feasoned with sweet Herbs finely minced, Suet, Spice and Corrans. The Legs,
pallats, and other ingredients for an Oleo Podigro, and Maribones.

The Guests having eaten well hereof, the Dishes were taken away, and then came
in a potato-pudding, a Dish of Scotch Collips, of a Leg of Pork, Fricacy of
the same, a dish of boiled Chickens, a shoulder of a young Goat; a Kid with a
Pudding in his belly, a young Pigg exceeding fat and sweet; a shoulder of
Mutton which is there a rare Dish: A Pastry made of the side of a young Goat,
and a side of a young Porket upon it, well seasoned with pepper, Salt, and some
Nutmegs: A Loin of Veal, to which they have plenty of Oringes, Lemons, and
Limes; three young Turkies in a Dish, two Capons very large and fat, two Hens
with Eggs in a Dish; four Ducklings, eight Turtle Doves, and three Rabbets; And
for cold Baked Meats, two Muscovy Ducks larded and seasoned with pepper and
salt: And when these are taken from the Table, another course is set on, of
Westphalia Bacon, dried Neats Tongues, Botargo, pickled Oysters, Caviare,
Anchoves, Olives, and mixed amongst these, Custards, Cream, some alone, some
with preserved Plantanes, Bonanoes, Gnavers, and these Fruits preserved by
themselves; Cheesecakes, Puffs, sometimes Tansies, Fraises, or Amulets: And for
raw fruit, Plantaxes, Bonanoes. Gnavers, Milions, prickled Pears, Anchove
pears, prickled Apples, Custard Apples, Water Milions, and Pines, better then
all the rest. And to this they had for Drink, Mobby, Beveridge, Brandy,
Kill-Devil, Drink of the Plantanes, Claret, White, and Rhenish Wine, Sherry,
Canary, Red Sack, Wine of Fiall, besides several sorts of Spirits that come
from England.

Now for a Plantation near the Sea, he instances in Colonel Walronds, A Feast
near the Sea.
who though he wants Sheep, Goats, and Beef, yet he makes a plentiful supply in
sundry sorts of Fish, which the other wants. For all other sorts of Meat which
were at Sir James Draxe his Table, he found at Colonel Walronds, as also
Mullets, Maquerels, Parrat-fish, Snappers, red and gray, Carallos, Terbums,
Crabs, Lobsters, long Fish, with diverse others for which they have no names.
Besides he dwelling so near the Haven, has of all the Rarities that are
brought into the Island from other parts; As Wine of all Kinds, Oil, Olives,
Capers, Sturgeon, Neats-Tongues, Anchoves, Caviare, Botago, with all sorts of
salt meats, both Flesh and Fish; As Beef, Pork, pease, Ling, Habberdine, Cod,
poor- John, etc.

Above one hundred sail of ships come yearly to this Island that bring servants
and slaves, Merchandise imported and exported.
men and Women, Horses, Beasts, Asinegoes, and Cammels; Utensils for boiling of
Sugar; and all manner of Tools for Tradesmen, Iron, Steel, Lead, Brass, Pewter:
Cloth of all sorts both Linen and Woollen, Stuffs, Hats, Stockings, Shoes,
Gloves, Swords, Knives, Locks, etc. and many other things. And they carry back
Indigo, Cotten-wool, Tobacco, Sugar, Ginger, and Fustick wood.

Of their several sorts of Timber.
Timber for building they have great choice and plenty: Timber Trees.
As the Locust Trees which are so long and big as may serve for Beams in a very
large room, Locusts.
Their bodies are strait, above fifty foot long, the Diameter of the Body about
three foot and a half: The Timber hereof is hard, heavy, and firm, not apt to
bend, and lasting.

The Mastick Trees not altogether so large as the former, Mastick Trees.
but tougher.

The Bully Tree is somewhat less, Bully Trees.
but in other qualities goes beyond the former. It Is strong, lasting, yet not
heavy, nor so hard for the Tools to work upon.

The Red Wood, Red wood
and Yellow prickled Wood are good Timber, and higher then the Locusts. Yellow
wood.


The Cedar is the best of all, Cedars
it works smooth, and looks beautifully; Of it they make Wainscot, Iron-Wood.
Tables, and Stools.

They have Iron Wood, and another sort that will endure wet and dry: Of these
they make Shingles, wherewith they cover their houses, because it will neither
warp nor crack.

Of their Stone.
They have two sorts of Stone for building: Stone for buildings.
The one lies in Quarries; but these are small rough, and somewhat porous:
Being burnt they make excellent Lime, white, and firm, by the help whereof they
bind their Stones and make them to endure the weather.

The other sort of stone they find in Rocks, and Massy pieces in the Ground
which are soft, and therefore they saw them to what Dimensions they please, and
the longer it lies above ground the harder it grows. Hangings they use not in
their houses, because they would be spoiled by the Ants, eaten by the
Cockroaches, and Rats.

Of their Servants and Slaves.
In the Island are three sorts of Men, Master, Servants, and Slaves. The Slaves
and their Posterity being subject to their Masters for ever, Of their servants
and slaves.
they take more care of them then of their Servants, which are theirs but for
five years by the Law of the Island. So that for the time the servants have the
worser lives: For they are put to hard labor, ill lodging, and slighted diet.
Formerly the servants had no bone-meat at all, except a Beast died, and then
they were feasted as long as that lasted. Till they had planted good store of
Plantans the Negroes were fed with Bonavisto, and Lob-Lolly, and some ears of
Maise tosted; but now they are well pleased with their Plantans, wherein they
much delight, and thus they dress it. It Is gathered for them before it is full
ripe, by the keeper off the Plantan Groves, who is an able Negro, and laid upon
heaps till they fetch them away, which they do every Saturday night about five
a clock; for then they give over work sooner then ordinary, partly for this
work, and partly because the fire in the Furnace is to be put out, and the
Ingenio to be made clear; besides they are to wash, shave, and trim themselves
against the Sabbath.

It is a fine sight to see an hundred of these Negroes, men and women, every
one with a Grass-green bunch of Plantans on their heads, every bunch twice so
big as their heads, all marchin gone after another. Having brought it home,
they pill off the skin of so much as they will use, and boil it, making it into
Balls, and so eat it.

One bunch a week is a Negroes allowance, which they have no bread, nor drink
but water, their Lodging at night is a board, with nothing under, nor any thing
above upon them.

The usage of the Christian Servants is much as the Master is, How their
servants are used.
whether merciful, or cruel. Such as are merciful, use their servants well,
both in Meat, Drink, and Lodging. But the lives of such servants as have cruel
Masters, is most miserable. When any ships bring servants thither, the Planters
buy such of them as they like, and with a Guide send them to their Plantations,
where they must presently build them a Cabin, or else lie upon the Ground.
These Cabins are made with sticks, withs, and Plantane Leaves, under some
little shade that may keep off the Rain.

The food is a few Potatoes for meat, and water or Mobby for drink. At six of
the clock in the Morning they are rung out to work with a Bell, with a rigid
Overseer to command them, till the Bell ring again at eleven of the clock, and
then they go to Dinner, either with a Mess of Lob-lolly Bonavist, or Potatoes.
At one of the Clock they are rung out again, where they work till six, and then
home to a Supper of the same. But now their lives are much better; For most
servants lie in Hamocks, in warm rooms, and when they come home wet from work,
they have shifts of shirts and Drawers, which is all the Clothes they wear, and
are fed with Bone-meat twice or thrice in a week.

Of their great Fires.
Sometimes through carelessness of servants, Dreadful fire.
whole fields of Sugar Canes, and Houses have been burnt down: For if the Canes
take fire, there is no quenching of them, they burn so furiously, and make a
terrible noise; How quenched.
For each knot of every Cane, gives as great a report as a Pistol. There is no
way to stop it but by cutting down, and removing all the Canes before it for
the breadth of twenty or thirty foot down the wind; and there the Negroes stand
and beat it out as it creeps along; and some of them are so earnest to stop it,
as with their naked feet to tread, and to roll their naked bodies upon it, so
little do they regard their own smart in regard of their Masters benefit.

When Negroes are brought to be sold, Of the Negroes.
the Planters go to the ship to buy them, where they find them stark naked, and
therefore cannot be deceived in any outward infirmity. The strongest, youngest,
and most beautiful yield the best prizes; thirty pound is the price for the
best, and about twenty five pound for a woman Negro; Children are much cheaper.
They are very chaste people. For when at sometimes they are altogether naked,
Their chastiy.
they will not so much as cast their eyes upon those parts which ought to be
covered.

Jealous they are of their wives, and, and take it hainously if any make the
least Courtship to them. Their jealousy.
And if any woman has two children at a birth, her Husband provides a cord to
hang her, concluding that she has been false to his bed: And if by the
authority of his Master, he be overawed, yet he never loves her after. The
Planters allow some of them two or three Wives, but no women above one husband.

When a Wife is brought to bed, Of their easy travel
the Husband removes into another room, leaving his Wife upon a board on which
she lies, and calls a neighbor to her, who makes her a little fire near her
feet, and that serves for Possets, Broths, and Candles. In a fortnight she is
at her work again with her Pickaninny (so they call their Children) at her
back, as merry as any other.

They have times of suckling their Children, and refreshing themselves in the
fields; and good reason, for they carry a burden on their backs, and work too.
Some of them when their children are three years old, as they stoop in their
weeding-work, will set their Pickaninnies a stride on their backs, where he
will spur his Mother with his heels, and crow on her back, clapping his hands
as if he meant to fly, which the Mother is so well pleased with, that she will
continue her painful stooping work longer then she would do, rather then
discompose her jovial Pickaninny, so glad she is to see him merry.

The Sabbath days they have wholly to their pleasures: In the afternoons they
have Kettle-Drums to make them Music, and they all go to dancing, Dancing.
the men by themselves, and the women by themselves, and sometimes the men
wrestle amongst themselves.

When any of them die, The Funerals,
they make a grave, and bury him in the evening, clapping their hands, and
making a doleful sound with their voices. They are cowardly, and therefore
bloody, when they have advantages. If you threaten before you punish them, they
will hang themselves to avoid the punishment. If they have bruises or strains,
they anoint themselves with a kind of Oil that comes out of Barbary that cures
them. And Physic.
When they are sick, or inwardly distempered, a little Kill-Devil revives, and
comforts them.

The young Maids have usually large breasts that stand strutting out, Negro.
Maids and Wives.
hard and firm, but when they are old, and have had children, their breasts
hang down below their Navels.

They are excellent Swimmers and Diverse, both men and women. Some Indians they
have from the Neighboring Islands, or from the Continent, whose Women are
better versed in ordering the Cussavy, and making Bread then the Negroes;
Indians.
As also for making Mobby. The men they use for footmen, and killing of Fish.
One of them will go out with his Bows and Arrows, and in a days time will kill
more Fish then will serve a Family of a dozen persons whilst it is good. They
are very active and learn any thing sooner then the Negroes: Their Women have
small breasts, long black hair: Clothes they scorn to wear, especially if they
be well shaped, only they wear something before their privities.

One of these women being got with child by a Christian servant, when the time
of her travel came, being loath to be delivered amongst the men, went alone to a
Wood, where was a Pond of water, by which she was delivered, and washing her
Child in the Water, within three hours came home again with her Child in her
Arms, which was a lusty boy.

Some of the Planters feed daily two hundred mouths, and keep them in such
good order, as there is no mutinies amongst them, though they be of several
Nations.

Their first work is Weeding, which if it be neglected but a little time, all
is in danger of being spoiled. After Weeding comes Planting, especially in May,
and November: But Canes may be planted at all times, that so one Field may be
ready after another. Commonly one Field contains about twelve Acres.

Of their Beasts and Cattle.
Some Camels they have which are brought to them, Camels.
and they are very useful for carrying down Sugar to the Bridge, or bringing
from thence Hogsheads of Wine, Beer, or Vinegar, which Horses cannot do,
neither can Carts pass, the ways are so Rocky and uneven. One of these will
carry one thousand six hundred pound weight, and therefore the surest of any
beast.

Some Horses they have which are brought from several Countries, Horses. Bulls
and Cows.
and they use them either for the Ingenio, or for the saddle. Some Bulls and
Cows they have from the Isle of May, and Bonavista. The Bulls and Oxen they use
for labor in the Ingenio's, and the Cows for the Pail. A Calf here will bring
a Calf in fourteen months.

Asinegoes they have which are of excellent use for carrying Sugar to the
Bridge: Asinegoes.
For they will go where Horses cannot, by reason of the gullies, and deep
ways: One of them will carry one hundred and fifty pound weight, and some two
hundred.

Hogs they have in abundance which they keep ininclosures; Hoggs.
and they use to sell them alive for 4 d. a pound, and sometime for 6 d. if
they be dear.

Sheep they have but few, neither do they thrive in that Pasture. Sheep.
Yet the Ews have constantly two Lambs, but their flesh does not eat well. Some
sheep they have from Guinny, and Binny, that have hair instead of wool, and
their flesh is more like to Mutton then the other.

Goats they have in great plenty, Goats.
and they prosper well, and taste like our Goats: They live in the Woods, and
are always enclosed.

Of their Birds and Fowls.
Birds they have, but two sorts worth the mentioning. The biggest is a Buzzard,
Birds and Fowls.
somewhat less then ours, and swifter of wing; The only good they do, is, that
they sometimes kill Rats.

The other is the larger Turtle Dove, Buzzards. Turtle Doves.
of which there is great store. It Is handsomer both in shape and color then
ours in England, and is very good meat.

There is also a lesser Turtle, a far finer Bird then she. It Is of the shape of
a Partridge, Thrush.
her color gray, and a red brown under the wings.

There is also a bird like a Thrush, of a melancholy look, and her feathers
stand always ruffling; she has loud and very sweet notes.

Another there is much like a Ren, but as big as a Trush, she always looks
very merry and jolly.

There are great flocks of Blackbirds with white eyes, Blackbirds
they have a harsh note like our Jayes in England: they are great devourers of
Corn, and blossoms of Trees.

They have a kind of Stares which walk, Stares.
but hop not as other Birds do.

They have other like Feldefares with big heads, and therefore they call them
Councellers, Counselors.
they have a strange tune, consisting of quarter notes, composed of five tones,
and every one a quarter note higher then the other.

They have Sparrows, The Humming Bird.
Haysocks, Finches, yellow-Hammers, Titoies, and diverse others, for which they
have no names: And the humming bird, not much bigger then a humble Be, wheerof
I have one. Teals, Oxen, Kine:


Sometimes Teals come to their Ponds, which they kill with their Guns. The like
they do with Fowls called Oxen and Kine.

There is another that they call a man of War, A man of Wyr.
much bigger then a Heron, and flies out to Sea to see what ships are coming,
and when he returns, they know that ships are near. There are Bats that come
abroad in the evening and feed on Flies.

Of Snakes and Insects.
There are some Snakes of a yard long; Snakes.
The harm they do is in Dove-Houses, into which if they can get, they devour
the young ones; And they will skim the Milk-pans when they can get to them.

There is no venomous beast in the Island.

There are Scorpions some as big as Rats, smooth, and colored like a snake,
Scorpious
their bellies inclining to yellow, very nimble and quick, they hurt none; The
Snakes and they will fight long, and in the end the Snake prevails, and devours
the other.

Frogs and Toads they have none. Lizzards.
There would be Lizzards but that the Cats kill them; They love much to be
where men are, and will gaze in their faces, and hearken to their discourse;
Their bodies are about four inches long, and their tails near as much, headed
like a snake in their color, when they please, a pure grass-green on the back,
bluish toward the sides, and yellowish toward the belly, and four nimble
legs, and as cold as Froggs.

They have Cock-roaches of the bigness and shape of a Beetle, Cochoaches.
of a pure hair-colour; They appear in the evening, and they will fly to your
bed, and if you be sleeping, he will bite till he fetches blood, and presently
begone, that you seldom find them.

The Muskitoes bites and string worse then Gnats. The Muskitoes.


Next to these are Merriwings, Merriwings.
and of so evial a substance, that you can hardly discern them but by the noise
of their wings; when they sting, there arises a little knob which will continue
so a whole day.

Caterpillars sometimes they have in great abundance, Caterpillars.
which do much harm, devouring the Potato-plants to the very Roots.

Flies they have of so many kinds, Other flies.
from two inches long with great horns to the least Atome, so that it is too
tedious to speak of them all.

They have Ants and Pismires of a small size, but of a great industry; they are
every where, Ants and Pismires.
in hollow ground amongst the root of Trees, upon the Body, Branches, Leaves,
and Fruit of all Trees; without houses, within their houses, upon their sides,
walls, windows, Roofs, Tables, Cupboords, Stools, Beds, Floors, all within and
without are covered with them. When they find a dead Cockroch, though he be
bigger then a hundred of them, yet they will take hold of him and lift him up,
and away they carry him, some going by to assist those that are weary; some
(like Officers) lead the way to show the hole into which he must pass, and if
his body do lie a cross that it cannot go into the hole, they give notice to
the carriers, that presently turn his body endwise before it come to the hole,
and that without any stop, and they never pull contrary ways.

The Planters which are so curious to prevent their coming upon their Tables,
Cupboards, and Beds, have little troughs filled with water for the feet of
these to stand in; yet all will not prevail, for they will get in the scieling,
and so fall down upon them. To keep them from the shelves on which their meat
stands, they are forced to hang them to the roof with ropes, and to tar those
ropes and the roofs over them.

When a Carpet upon a Table is covered over with them, if you kill many, and
let them alone but a while, they will carry away all the dead ones. If you set
Sugar upon a Table which you have first freed from them, some in the room will
presently smell it, and make toward it as fast as they can, and having found
it, return again without meddling with it, and gives notice of this booty, and
then they come in thousands and ten thousands, and in an instant fetch it all
away; so that there is no place safe from these over-busie Creatures.

Another sort of Ants there are far larger, Ants.
that make their nests as big as Bee-hives, of clay against a wall or Tree, and
sometimes within houses, they make them of several little cells. These the
Cockrocha, and Lizards make their prey upon; wherefore for their own security,
they make several Galleries, some of five or six yards long of Clay also,
through which they pass undiscovered: Their Avenues go out amongst Laaves or
Moss, that they may not be perceived: By often breaking down their Nests, they
are now most of them driven into the woods.

Spiders they have, most beautiful and large, and very curious in their Webs,
and not venomous.

Another harmful creature they call Chegoes, Spiders.
in shape not much unlike a Lowse, no bigger then a Mite that breeds in Cheese,
their color is bluish; They get through your stockings into a place of you
Skin, most commonly under the Nails of your Toes, and they lay their
Offspring as big as a small Tare, which will make you go very lamely, and put
you to much smarting pain.

The Indian Women will put in a small Needle at the hole, Negroes.
and winding the point about the bag, loosen him from the flesh, and so take
him out, but the place will fester and rankle a fortnight after they are gone.

Some little Animals there are in the Woods no bigger then Crickets, Crickets.
that lie all day in holes, but after Sun setting they begin their tunes,
having exceeding shrill voices like a pack of small Beagles. This Music has
no intermission till morning, and then all is hush't.

There are many small Crabs that live upon the Land, of a reddish color, they
are coming from the Sea all the year long (excepting March) and hide themselves
in Holes, and hollow Trees, and come into their Houses and Gardens, where they
eat Herbs.

The Negroes will eat them, Crabs.
and count them good meat. In March they come all out of their Holes and march
to the Sea in such multitudes as that they cover the Earth: No Hedge, Wall, or
House can stop them, but they will over all.

Now for Trees.
Amongst the Trees, The physic Nut.
there is none of more use then the Physic Nut, and yet has it poison
secretly lodged in it, but that poison makes good Physic: This Tree grows to
be eighteen foot high; There are none like it for beauty, and use in the
Island. It has many Sprigs upon it of four, five, and six foot long, which
they lop off one after another, and of them make stakes of above four long, and
stick them in the ground an inch deep, close to one another, and keep them even
with a Rail on either side, and in a months space they will take root, and
send forth Leaves; and in another month will be rooted so fast, that they take
away the the Railes.

These Leaves are large, smooth, and beautifully shaped, of a full green,
looking like green Satin hanged on a line, so even they hang naturally. Their
Stems grow apace, rather in bigness then in height, and within a while imbody
themselves one into another, and then they become a very strong fence, and so
close that a Rat cannot pass through them, neither will Cattle or Vermin
willingly come near them.

And as it is a beautiful and useful fence for Gardens and Orchards, and to keep
in Conies, Turkies, Muscovy-Ducks, so it excellently fences in their Pastures
which they would enclose.

Their Fruit also is Phisical: Five of its kernels eaten in a morning fasting,
causes both Vomits and Stools.

This Nut is like to a white Pear-Plumb, and of a yellowish color, and of
yellowish color, having on it as great a peelp as a Plumb, which being taken
off, you come to the stone of a blackish color, and within that is a kernel
that will part in the middle, where you shall find a thin Film of a faint
Carnetion color. Take off that Film, and you may eat the Kernel safely without
any operation at all, and it is as sweet as a Jordans Almond. The Leaves are
sharp some like a Vine Leaf, but thrice as big, and much thicker.

The poison Tree is very beautiful, almost as large as the Locust: The poison
tree.
Her Leaves as large and beautiful as the Laurel Leaves, and very like them. As
they cut down these Trees they have Cipers over their Faces: For if any of
their Sap flies into their eyes, it makes them blind for a month after. Of
this Timber they make most of the Vessels wherein they cure their Sugar.

There is a Mantionel Tree whose Fruit is Poison. A mantionel tree.
The Fruit is like an Apple John, and (they say) that the Indians invenom their
Arrows with it.

The Cussavy is rather a Shrub then a Tree, Cussavy.
the Sprigs as big as a Broom-staff, crooked and ill shaped; The Leaves grow so
thick as to cover them, and they grow in bunches, each of them an inch broad,
and six or seven inches long, of a Dark Green. The growth of the Roots, and the
use of them is set down before.

Coloquintida is a very beautiful Fruit, Coloquintida.
as big as an Ostrages Egg, of an ill taste, the rind smooth, with various
Greens interlaced with murries, yellows, and faint Carnations.

Cassia Fistula is a Tree which grows exceeding fast. Cassia Fistula.
A Seed of it being set will in one year grow to be eight foot high, and as
thick as a walking staff. The Leaf is like that of an Ash, but much longer, and
of a darker color. The Fruit when it is ripe is of shape like a black Puddling,
sometimes sixteen inches long, the pulp of it is Progatine, and a great cooler
of the reins.

There is a Plant very like a Sugar Cane: A strange Tamarine
If it be chewed in the mouth, it causes the Tongue and Throat so to swell,
that the party cannot speak for two days.

There are Tammerine Trees, Trees. Palm Trees
and Palm Trees planted which were brought from the East India. The Palm yields
excellent Wine, which is thus gathered: They cut off the Bark in such a part of
the Tree, where a Bottle may be fitly placed, and the Liquor that runs into it,
is excellent good for a day, and no longer. It Is a very delicious Liquor.

The Fig Trees are very large, Figg trees.
but bear a small and contemptible fruit, neither are the Leaves like ours, nor
so long by a fifth part. The bodies of the Trees are as long as our Elms.
Cherry-trees.


The Cherry Tree is not altogether so large, the fruit is useless and insiped;
The color some resembling our Cherries, and the shape not unlike.

The Citron is a small Tree, Citron Trees.
though she bears a great Fruit, which weighs it down to the Ground, the Stalk
of a dark color, the Leaf shaped like that of Limon, but of a dark green.

The Orange Trees do not prosper so well, Orange Trees.
neither is their Fruit so kindly as those of Bermudas: Large they are, and
full of juice, but not delicious; besides there full of Seeds, and their rinds
thin and pale. These Trees do not last in their prime above seven years.

The Limon Tree is much handsomer and larger; Their fruits is large and full of
juice, Limon Trees.
and of a fragrant smell.

The Lime tree is like a thick Holly-bush in England, and as full of prickles.
Lime-trees
When they make a Hedge of them about their houses, it is an excellent fence
both against the Negroes, and Cattle. It Is commonly of seven or eight foot
high, extremely thick of Leaves, and Fruit, and prickles. The leaves and fruit
like those of the Limon-tree, yet in the taste of rind, and juice it differs
exceedingly. It Is very fit for sauce, but eats not well alone.

The Prickled Apple Tree grows on a tree with very thick leaves, Prickled Apple
Trees.
large and of a deep green, shaped like our Walnut leaves. The fruit is in
fashion in heart of an Oak, and of that bigness; Green on the outside with many
Prickles on it. The taste is very like that of a musty Limon.

The Pilchard Pear is much purer in taste, Prickled Pear Trees.
and better of shape, not much unlike a Greenfield Pear, of a faint green,
inter mixed with some yellow near the stalk: The body of a mixed red, partly
Crimson, partly stammel, with prickles of yellow near the top, the end being
larger then the middle.

The Pomgranate is a beautiful tree, the leaves small and green, mixed with an
Olive color; Pomgranate Trees
the blossoms large, well shaped, and of a pure Scarlet color. The young trees
being set in rows, and kept in with cutting, make a very fine hedge. The fruit
is well known amongst us.

The Papa is but a small tree; Papa-trees
the bark of a faint willow color, the Leaves large, and of color like the
bark; the Branches grow out four, or five of one height, and spread almost
level from the place where they sprang out; about two foot higher are such
other branches spreading in the same manner. The top is handsomely formed, the
fruit as big Turnips, growing close to the body of the tree where the branches
grow, and of somewhat a fainter willow color. The tree is soft, with a Knife a
man may cut down one that is as thick as a man's leg. They boil the the fruit,
and eat it for Sauce with Pork like Turnips.

The Gnaver-tree is bodied and shaped like a Cherry-tree, Gnaver Trees.
the Leaves somewhat larger and stiffer; the fruit of the bigness of a small
Limon, and near of the color, only the upper end is somewhat blunter: It Is
soft and of a delicate taste, within is a pulpy substance full of small seeds,
like a Figg, some are white, and some of a Stammel color. These when they have
passed through the body of man or Beast, wheresover they are emptied, they
grow, and do much hurt in the pastures where Cattle go that eat of them: For
they over run all, and are hardly rooted out. The fruit differs in taste, some
rank, some sweet. The rind preserved is delicate meat.

Some Cocos there are, Coco-trees
they are seldom above eighty or ninety foot high. Their branches come out in
several parts of the trees, leaving spaces between the several heights: The
Nuts grow where the lower bows break out: The Nuts are of several sizes, mostly
as big as a Football, having a green Skin without* and between that and the
shell a pulpy substance, of which when it is dry they make ropes, being like
Hemp hurds.

The shell is full of a clear and well-tasted Liquor, very delicious; It Is
lined within with a substance as thick as itself, of a white color that tastes
better then a Walnut: The Leaves of this tree in color are like the Olive
leaves.

The Custard Apple grows on a tree full of Branches, Custard-Apple trees
and large leaves: The fruit when ripe, is as big as the largest Pomwater, and
of the color of a Warden; they cut a hole in the lesser end, and so eat out
the meat with a Spoon: It tastes exceeding like to a Custard. It has many
smooth seeds in it.

The Macow-tree is one of the strangest trees in the Island, Mucow Trees.
the Body and Branches being stuck all over with prickles, as black as jet,
from one to seven inches long, sharp at point, and taperwise all the way, and
waved as some Swords are; they are hard and excellent for tooth-pikes. The tree
is of the size of a Willow-tree, the Leaves of that color and shape, but very
stiff and hard.

At the top is a large tuft of Fruit, but not to be eaten, being for shape like
that which the Ciprus-tree bears: The body is straight, the branches comely,
and the top round.

Date-trees are in color like these, Date Trees,
but the leaves longer.

The Mangrave, Mungrave Trees.
though she be not tall, yet is she of large extent. For there drops from her
Limbs a kind of Gum which hangs together till it touch the Ground, and then it
takes root: So that this tree so multiplies, that a troop of Horse may well
hide themselves in it.

Of the Bark they make very strong Ropes: And the Indians spin it into a fine
thread as Flax make. Of it they make Hamocks, and diverse things which they wear.

The Calibash-tree bears Leaves, Calibash Trees.
of a full and rich green, and in great plenty; Her Fruit is as big as that of
a Coco, but not to be eaten: Round as a Ball, and green, smooth, and shining:
they grow close to the body of the tree, or Boughs, without stalks.

Of this round Fruit they make dishes, Bowls, and Cups, and other Utensils.
They look very beautiful on the tree.

There are Bay-trees whose Leaves are so Aromatic, Bay-trees.
as three or four of them will amply supply the place of Cloves, Mace, and
Cinnamon in dressing any Dish of Meat. It Is in shape and color like ours in
England.

The Cedar is the most useful timber in the Island. Cedar
It Is strong, lasting, and not very heavy, and therefore good for building. It
works smoothly, and has a fair grain, and therefore is much used for Wainscot,
Chairs, Stools, and other Utensils; the Leaves are like those of the Ash-trees
in England, but somewhat bigger.

The Mastick-tree is very tall, Mastick Trees.
but the body is slender, and therefore to support her, she has spurs above
seven foot from the ground, fixed into the body, and reach from the tree to the
roots: So broad that they make round tables of them, above three foot and an
half in the Diameter.

This tree has commonly a double top, one side being somewhat higher then the
other. The Fruit is of a Stammel color, and has neither Skin nor stone, and
is unwholesome. The leaves of it grow of such an height, that the form cannot
be discerned till they fall down. Some of these trees are about sixty foot high.

The Bully-tree Bully Trees,
is somewhat less, but excellent wood to work on: It bears a fruit like our
Bullies. Her body is strait, and well shaped, her Branches proportionable; the
timber very lasting.

Red-wood is an handsome tree of a midling size, Red-wood Trees.
the body about two foot and and an half in the Diameter: the timber works so
well that workmen commend it above all other.

Prickled yellow wood is as good as the red-wood, strong and lasting: Good for
building, Prickled yellow wood.
and all work without doors.

Iron-wood is so extreme hard, that it breaks the Axes that fall it. It is so
heavy that it is seldom used in buildings. Iron Wood.
It is good for any use without doors. For neither Sun nor Rain can soften it.
It Is much used for Coggs to the Rollers.

Signum vitae, Lignum vitae.
they use for the same purpose. They send much of it to England: where it is
used for Bowls, Cabinets, Drinking Cups, etc.

The Loust-tree is like a Tuscane Pillar, Locust Trees,
plain and massy: For the burden it bears being great and ponderous, ought to
have a body proportionable thereunto. Some of them are four foot in the
Diameter near the root, and 30. foot high growing taper-wise. The Head is
neither too heavy, nor too light, the branches large; the Springs, Leaves, and
Nuts so thick, that one may lie upon them. The Nuts are 3. inches and a half
long, and two inches broad, and an inch thick: the shell somewhat thick, of an
hair color: the leaves bigger then those of our Ashes. In every Nut are three
or four Kernels. In times of Famine poor people eat them for their sustenance.

There is also a bastard Locust-tree that looks fair, Bastard Locust trees.
but will not last.

The Palmeto has a body of forty five or fifty foot high, the Diameter,
seldom above sixteen inches: Palmeto trees.
the rind, of a poor Ash color full of wrinkles; the Leaves about two foot and
a half long, in bunches as if twenty long flag-leaves were tied together by the
broad ends: with bundles of these they thatch houses very neatly, which is dry,
warm, and lasting.

The Palmeto Royal is the stateliest tree that grows on Earth, for beauty and
largeness not to be paralleled. Palms to Royal Trees.
When she is about ten or twelve years old, she is about seventeen foot high;
that part which touches the ground is round like (...) Inkhorn, above which the
body of the tree is less, like that part which holds the pen.

The body is tawny, and purple, with rings of white and green mixed, that go
round about, and stand at six inches distance. About six foot and an half high,
grow the bottom of the stalks, thin as Parchment, enwrapping one another so
close, as to make a continued stem of the same bigness for two foot and an half
above the others, every one of those Skins bearing a stalk which lessens
insensibly from the Skin to the Point.

These Branches are of several lengths, the most inward are the highest; and
each stalk is adorned with leaves, and each of these leaves sharp at either
end; the Stem is of a pure grass green shining like Velom, and all the Branches
with the Leaves of a full grass green, and speading every way, and the highest
of them eight foot above the stem.

The Branches sprout from the middle of tree, one at once, and as it opens it
spreads the Leaves abroad, at which time the eldest Branch withers, and hangs
down till the wind blows it off.

Then comes forth another, and another, and still there is a Pike, and a dead
leaf, a Pike and a dead Leaf as the tree grows higher and higher, which is
till she be one hundred years old.

About thirty or forty yeas old she begins to bear her fruit, which is of the
bigness of large Grapes, some green, some yellow, some purple, and then they
are ripe when they come to be purple, and fall down; and then the Green turns
yellow, and the yellow purple, and so take their turns till the tree gives over
bearing.

These trees grow till some of them be two hundred, yea three hundred foot
high. The top of this tree is of a vast extent, for from the point of the
branches on the one side, to the point of the stalk on the other side is
seventy eight foot, yet are none of the roots of this tree bigger then a Swans
Quil; But there are many of them, and they fasten themselves in the Rock which
makes the Tree, though so high, and big, able to stand against all wind and
weather. The wood of this tree is so hard and tough, that it breaks the Axes
of those those that fell it.

There are many other sorts of trees, some exceeding large and beautiful, for
which they have no names.

Of Plants.
The Ginger is a Root that brings forth blades like the blades of Wheat, but
broader, and thicker: They are of a Popinary color, and the blossom of a pure
Scarlet. When the Ginger is ripe, they dig it up, being the Root, and scrape
off the outward skin to kill the spirits of it, for else it would grow
perpetually.

Others scald it to kill the spirits, and that will be black and hard as Wood,
whereas the scraped Ginger is white, and soft, and has a cleaner, and quicker
taste.

Red Pepper.
There are two sorts of Red Pepper; the one like Coral, of a Crimson and
Scarlet color mixed: the fruit about three inches long, and shines more then
the best polished Coral.

The other is of the same color, and glisters as much, but is shaped like a
large Button of a Cloak; they have both the same quality; so violently strong,
that when they break but the Skin, it causes them to Cough for a quarter of an
hour after the fruit is removed; But whilst they are grabling of it, they
never give over. It grows on a little shrub no bigger then a Goosbberry-bush.

They have excellent good Cucumbers from the beginning of November, to the end
of February, they eat them cold with Oil, Vinegar, and Pepper. But boiled or
fried they use them for sauce with Mutton, Pork, Turkies, and Muscovy Ducks.

Millions they have likewise for those four months: For the most part larger
then ours in England, and eat moister. Some of them are sixteen inches long.

The Water Million is one of the goodliest Fruits that grows: Some as big as
Cloak-bags; purely Green, engravened with Straw-colour. No inch of the Rind is
alike, and they are as smooth as polished Glass; within, they are like an Apple
for color, but in taste waterish and wallowish. It Is rarely cooling and
excellent against the Stone. The Seeds are of a pure Purple; they are full of
these seeds.

Grapes they have which are indifferently well tasted, but they are never ripe
together: There are always some green, some ripe, and some rotten Grapes in a
Bunch, and therefore they cannot make Wine of them.

The fruit of the Plantane is of great use, Plantanes.
and beauty too. In Planting them they put a root into the ground six inches
deep, and in a very short time there will come out three or four sprouts,
whereof one has the precedence.

As this Sprout grows, it springs from the intrinsic part of the Stem, and the
out Leaves hang down and rot; But still new ones come within, and rise up as
the Palmeto does, like a Pike which opens with the Sun, and becomes a Leaf, and
when it is eight or ten foot high, the Pikes and Leaves will be of their full
bigness, and so continue till the last Sprout comes forth, which is the Soul of
the Plant, and will never be a Leaf: But is the Stem upon which the fruit must
grow.

When the Leaves come to their full bigness, they rot no more, but continue in
their first beauty, a rich green with stripes of yellow.

These Leaves are most of them above six foot long, and two foot broad; smooth,
shining, and stiff as a Laurel Leaf, falling from the middle to the end like a
Feather: And when it comes to the full height, the Leaves will be fifteen or
sixteen foot high, the Stem upon which the fruit grows being a foot higher,
with a green branch on the top, which branch is very heavy, and then the leaves
open and show the Blossom, which is of a pure purple, and like a heart with
the point downwards, being of a pound weight; when this is fallen, the Fruit
grows.

In six months space this Plant will be grown, and the fruit ripe, which is
pleasant, wholesome, and nourishing, yellow when it is ripe: But the Negroes
desire it green, for they eat it boiled, and it is the only food they live upon.
When it is gathered they cut down the Plant, and give it to the Hoggs, for it
will grow no more.

In three months another Sprout will come to bear, and so another, and another
for ever. Groves they make of these Plants of twenty Acres of ground so
planting them in every room that they can walk dry under the leaves, and be
shaded from the Sun.

The wild Plantane grows much as the other does, Wild plantanes.
but the leaves not so broad, and more upright: The Fruit of a Scarlet color,
and almost three square, but good for nothing.

The Bonano differs nothing from the Plantane in the Body and Leaves, but only
that the leaves are somewhat less, tanes. Bonanoes.
and the body has here and there some blackish spots, the Blossom no bigger
then a large Rose bud, of a faint Purple and Ash color mixed, the Stalk that
bears it, is adorned with small Blossoms, of several colors: The Fruit stands
upright like a bunch of Puddings, each of them between four and five inches
long.

The Fruit is sweeter then that of the Plantane, and therefore the Negroes will
not meddle with it. It Is near as beautiful a trees as the ^antane.

The Pine is excellent in the Superlative Degree, both for beauty and taste. Its
a full year before it bring forth ripe fruit, but when it comes to be eaten,
nothing of rare taste that can be thought on that is not there.

A Slip taken from the body of this Plant, and set in the ground, will not
presently take root, but the Crown that grows upon the Fruit itself will sooner
come to perfection.

In a quarter of a year it will be a foot high, and the leaves about seven or
eight inches long, appearing like a Semicircle: The color mostly Frost upon
Green, intermixed with Cornation, and the edges of the Leaves have teeth like
Sawes.

The Leaves fall one over another, the points of the lowest touching the ground.

In a quarter of a year more, the Blossom appears on the top of the stem, as
large as a great Cornation, the colors, Cornation, Crimson, and Scarlet, in
streaks intermixed with yellow, blew, and peach colour-leaves, intermixed again
with Purple, Sky-colour, Orange-tauny, Gridaline, and Gingeline, White, and
Philamot: So that the flower represents the variety to the sight, which the
fruit does to the taste.

When the flowers are fallen, there appears a little bunch of the bigness of a
Walnut, which has in it all these colors mixed, which were disper'st in the
Leaves, and so it grows bigger for two months more; when it is perfect, it is
of an Oval Form, and at the upper end grows out a Crown of Leaves much like the
former in color, but more beautiful.

Some of them six inches long; the out Leaves shorter by degrees.

This Fruit is enclosed with a Rind, which begins with a Skrew at the Stalk,
and so goes round to the top, or Crown, gently rising, which Screw is about a
quarter of an inch broad, and the figures that are imbroidered upon it, near of
the like dimension, and divisions between; Which divisions are never one over
another in the screw, but are always under the middle of the Figures above,
which so vary in their colors, as that if you see one hundred Pines, they are
not like one another; And every of those Figures has a little tuft, some
Green, some Yellow, some Ash Color, and some Carnation.

There are two sorts of Pines, the King and the Queen-Pine. The Queen is far
more delicate, and has her Colors of all Greens, which shadows intermixed with
faint Cornations, but most of all, Frost upon Green, and Sea-greens.

The King-Pine has mostly all sorts of yellows shadowed with Grass-greens.

Some of them are fourteen inches long, and six in the Diameter: Most of them
having heavy bodies, and slender stalks, bowed down till they are on the ground.

Some of them have a dozen little ones round about the prime Fruit, which are
ripe by turns, and all very good.

When it is ripe it has an admirable smell, when they come to eat them, they
first cut off the Crown, and send that to be planted: Then they pare off the
most beautiful Rind, and cut the Fruit into slices in a Dish, and there issues
out a Liquor as clear as Spring Water about six spoonful, which in taste is in a
high degree delicious, and in eating the Fruit, the delicate variety of tastes
will change and flow so fast upon your Pallat, as your fancy can hardly keep
way with them, to distinguish the one from other.

How they Plant their Sugarcanes.
They dig a small Trench of six inches broad, Sugar.
and as deep, in a straight line, the whole length of the ground where they
plant them, then they lay two Canes one by another along the bottom of the
Trench, and so continue them the whole lengh of the trenches, then they cover
them with earth; and at two foot distance they do the like, till they have
planted all the Field.

But they plant not too much together, but so that it may ripen successively,
that their work may come in in order, that they be not idle: for if they be not
cut and used when they are ripe, they will rot.

From these Canes thus buried, comes forth a sprout at every knot. They begin
to appear a month after their setting, and in a month more they are two foot
high at the least, and in the mean time they weed them, and supply where there
are any defects.

These Canes with their tops are about eight foot high, the bodies about an
inch in the Diameter; the Knots five or six inches distant one from the
another. When they are ripe they cut them with little hand Bills, six inches
above the ground, and divide the tops from the Canes; And then holding the Cane
by the upper end, they strip off all the blades, which with the tops they give
to their Horses; the Canes they bind in Faggots, and send them home upon
Asinegoes, each of them carrying three Faggots; two upon crooked sticks on the
sides, and one in the middle. And these Creatures being used to it, will of
themselves go and come without a guide.

The place where they unload them, is a little plat of ground near to the
Mill-house which they call a Barbica.

Being laid in the Barbica, they w^^k them out clean, not suffering them to
grow stale; for in two days the Juice will turn sower, and spoil all; And in
the next place, they grind them with Horses under three Rollers, whose Centers
being of Brass, Steel, turn very easily: But when the Canes are between the
Rollers, it is a good draught for five Oxen or two Horses.

In a little time then all the Juice is pressed out, and then two Negro Girls
take out the Canes, and corry them away, laying them on a heap at a Distance.

Under the Rollers there is a Reciever into which the Liquor falls, and from
thence by a Pipe of Lead, is carried into a Cistern, which is near the stairs
that goes down from the Mill to the Boyling-House.

From thence it passes through a Gutter to the Clarifying Copper: And as it
Clarifies in the first Copper, and the Scum rises, it is conveyed to a second
Copper, where it is again scummed, both which scums being very Drossy, are
thrown away; But the Skimming of the other three Coppers are conveyed to the
Stilling-house, where it stands in Cisterns till it be a little sour.

Thus the Liquor is refined from one Copper to another, and the more Coppers it
passes through, the finer and purer it is. When it comes to the tach it must
have much keeling and stirring, and as it boiles, they throw into the four last
Coppers a Liquor made of Water and Withs, which they call Temp, without which
the Sugar would be clammy and never kern.

When it is boiled enough, they pour two spoonfulls of Sallet-Oyl into the
Tach, and then it gives over to bubble, then after much keeling they take it
out of the Tach with Ladles, and remove it into the cooling Cistern.

This work continues from Monday morning till Saturday night, without any
intermission, day and night, with fresh supplies of Men, Horses, and cattle.

The Liquor being so cool as that it is fit to put into Pots; first stopping the
sharp end of the Pots with Plantane Leaves, they fill them, and let it stand
till it be cold, which will be in two days and two nights; Then they remove
them into the Trying-house, and pulling out the stopples; the Molosses runs out
into a Gutter that carries it into Cisterns again, and that they call Peneles,
which is a Sugar somewhat inferior to Muscovados, which will sweeten pretty
well, and is of a reasonable good color.

When it is well cured, they remove the Pots from the Curing Room into the
Knocking Room, and turning them upside down, they knock them till the Sugar
falls out, in which there are three sorts.

The first is Brown, Frothy, and light; The bottom is of a darker color, Gross
and Heavy, and full of Molosses, both which they cut away and boil them again
with Molosses for Peneles.

The middle, which is more then two thirds of the whole, is a White color, dry,
and sweet, which they send to their Storehouses at the Bridge, there to be put
in Casks and Chests to be shipped away.

Though the Muscovado Sugars require but a months time in making, after it is
boiled, yet White Sugar requires four Months, and its made thus.

They take Clay and temper it with Water to the thickness of Frumentry, and
pour it on the top of the Muscovado-Sugar as it stands in the Potts, and there
let it remain four Months, and when it comes to be knocked out of the Pots,
the top and bottom will be like Muscovadoes, but the middle perfect White, and
excellent Lump Sugar.

The Skimmings before spoken of, when they have stood till they are a little
sour, they still it; and the first spirit that comes, is a small Liquor, which
they call Low-Wines, which they Still over again, and then comes off a very
strong Spirit, which is very Sovereign when they are ill with Colds, which the
Negroes are often subject to, having nothing to lie upon but aboard, and nothing
to cover them.

And though the Days be hot, the Nights be cold, and they coming hot, and
sweating from their days labor, are subject to catch cold; and when they feel
themselves amiss, one dram of these Spirits cures them.

And the Christian Servants, when their Spirits are exhausted by their hard
labor and sweating in the Sun ten hours every day, and their stomachs
weakened, a Dram or two of these Spirits is a great comfort and refreshing to
them.

They make much money also of them by selling them at the bridge, so that they
make weekly so long as they work, 30. l. Sterling, besides what is drunk by
their servants and slaves.

WITHS.
There is another Plant which they call a With, which is exceeding harmful; For
it pulls down all it can reach to, Canes and all other Plants.

If it comes into a Garden, it will wind about all Herbs, and Plants that have
stalks, and pull them down and destroy them.

If into an Orchard, it will climb up by the bodies of the Trees into the
Branches, and draws them as it were into a purse (for out of the main stock
hundred of sprigs will grow) and if any other Tree be near it will find the way
to it, and pull the tops of them together, and hinder the growth of the Fruit;
and cut the main stock at bottom in hope to kill it; the moisture in the
Branches above will cast down a new root into the ground; yea, it will reach
the highest Timber, and so enwrap their branches as to hinder their growth; and
oftentimes it fastens one Tree to another, so that one shall hinder the growth
of another.

If you clear a passage of ten foot broad between a Wood where it grows, and
your Canes over night, and come the next morning, and you shall find the way
crossed all over with Withs, and got near to the Canes, and if they once get
amongst them, you cannot destroy the one without the other; for wheresoever
they touch ground, they get new Roots, and so creep into every place, and as
they go pull all down. Yet have they some good virtues; for they serve for all
uses where ropes or cords are required; as for binding their Wood and Canes
into Faggots, etc. And without them they were in an ill condition, having no
other wood fit for hoops for their Hogsheads, Barrels, and Tubs; and they can
have them of what length and bigness they please; And for such uses they are
very good.

There are several kinds of these Withs, some that bear fruit somewhat bigger
then the Cod of a Bean, which being divided long-wise with a Knife you shall
perceive the most various and beatiful colors that can be, and so well
matched, as to make up a very great beauty.

Many Canes there be in the Island, Canes.
some large enough to hide five hundred men; the runaway Negroes often shelter
themselves in for a long time, and in the nights range abroad, and steal Pigs,
Plantanes, Potatoes, and Pullen, and feast all day upon what they stole in the
night: And the nights being dark, and their bodies black, escape undiscovered.
Old withs.


Another sort of Withs they have that are made of the Gum of Trees, which falls
from the boughs drop after drop, one hanging by another till they touch the
ground, from whence they receive nourishment and grow larger: And if three or
four of them come down so near as to touch one another, and the wind twists
them together, they appear like ropes.

Aloes they have growing there very good, and its a beautiful Plant, and the
leaves four Inches broad, Aloes.
and three quarters of an inch thick, and a foot and half long, with prickles
on each side, and the last Sprout which rises in the middle, bears yellow
Flowers, one above another, which are two foot higher then the Leaves.

These thick Leaves they take and cut them through, and out of them issues the
Aloes, which they set in the Sun that rarifies it, and makes it fit to keep:
They save the first running, for if it run too long it will be much worse.

This Plant in England we call Semper vivens. Of this is there to be be made an
admirable Medicine for a Burn or Scald.

An Ointment foor a burn or Scald, thus,
Take Semper vivens, Plantane Leaves, and the green Rind of Elder, of each a
like quantity, and boil them in Sallet Oil, till all the Tincture be drawn in
boiling. Then strain out the Oil well, and put it on the fire again, and put to
it a small quantity of the Spirits of Wine, and so much Yellow Wax as will
bring it to the consistence of a Linement to keep it for use.

There also the sensible Plant, which closes the Leaves upon any touch with
your hand, or that end of the staff by which you hold, and in a little time
will open again.

There are few flowers in the Island, and none of them sweet.

The White Lilly, and Red Lilly are much fairer then ours, and very beautiful,
but neither of them sweet.

The Saint Jago Flower is very beautiful, but of an unpleasing smell.

Another flower they have that opens not till Sun setting, and is closed all
day, and therefore they call it the Flower of the Moon.

It grows in great tufts, the Leaves like a heart, the point turning back: The
flower is of a most pure Purple.

After the flower appears the seed, black with an eye of Purple, of the shape
of a small Button, so finely wrought, and tough with all, as it may well trim a
suit of Apparel.

There is Purceane so plentifully every where, as makes it disesteemed.

Herbs, and Roots.
There are brought from England, Rosemary, Time, Winter-Savory, Sweet-Marjerom,
Pot-Marjerom, Parsley, Pennyroyal, Camomil, Sage, Tansie, Lavender, Cotton,
Garlic, Onions, Coleworts, Cabbage, Turnips, Redishes, Marigold, Lettice,
Taragon, Southern-wood, etc. all which prosper well.

There is a Root which was brought thither by the Negroes, Large, dry and well
tasted. It Is good boiled to eat with Pork, mixed with Butter, Vinegar, and
Pepper; It Is as big as three of our largest Turnips.

The strength of the Island.
This Island is strong by situation; For there cannot be any safe Landing, but
where the Harbors, and Bays are, which lie to the South-West, and those
places are so Defencible by Nature, as with small cost they are strongly
fortified.

In the year one thousand six hundred and fifty they were able to muster ten
thousand Foot, as good, and Resolute men as any in the World, and a thousand
good Horse, and since then, they are much increased.

Their Laws and Government.
Their Laws are like ours in England, and they are governed by a Governor, and
ten of his Council; four Courts of Justice in Civil Laws which divide the
Country into four Circuits.

Justices of Peace, Constables, Churchwardens, and Tithingmen.

Five Sessions in a year were held for trial of Criminal Causes, and Appeals
from Inferior Courts.

When the Governor pleases to call an Assembly for the last Appeals, and
making new Laws, or abolishing the Old; It consists of the Governor, his
Council, and two Burgesses chosen by every Parish.

There are in the Island eleven Parishes: No Tithe paid to the Minister, but a
yearly allowance of a Pound of Tobacco upon an Acre of every man's Land, besides
Church-Duties for Marriages, Baptizings, and Burials.

Their Weather.
Four Months in the year the Weather is colder then in the other eight, and
those are November, December, January, and February; yet are they hotter then
with us in May.

There is no general Fall of the Leaf, every Tree having a particular time for
it self, as if two Locust-trees stand but at a stones cast distance, one lets
fall her leaves in January, another in March, another in July, another in
September.

The Leaves when Fallen under the Tree, being most of them large and stiff,
when they were growing, and full of veins from the middle stalk to the upper
end, when the thin part of the Leaf is consumed, those veins appear like
Skelletons, with the strangest works and beautifullest Forms that can be
imagined.

Negroes Heads.
They also find in the Sands things that they call Negroes-heads, about two
Inches long, with a Forehead, Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Chin, and part of the Neck:
They are always found loose in the Sands, without any Root. It is black as
Jet, but whence it comes they know not.

TAR.
They have no Mines, not so much as of Coals in the Islands. There flows out of
the Rock an Unctious substance, somewhat like Tar: It is excellent good to stop
a Flux being drunk: And for all Aches, and Bruises, being anointed with it.

It is so subtle that being put into the hand and rubbed there, it works
through the back of it.

PITCH, and MOVNTIACK.
There is another Gumming Substance that is black and hard as Pitch, and is
used as Pitch; they call call it Mountiack.

An Excellent REMEDY Against the STONE.
MY Author relates this Story concerning himself, that during his abode in the
Barbados, he was taken with such a fit of the Stone, that for fourteen days
together he made not one drop of water; But when he despaired of life; God sent
him such a Remedy as the World cannot afford a better. For within ten hours
after this taking of it, he found himself not only eased, but cured: It brought
away all the stones and gravel that stopped the passage, and his water came as
freely from him as ever before, and carried before it such quantities of broken
stones, and gravel that the like has hardly been seen. And afterward being in
the like torment, he used the same remedy, and found the same ease. The
Medicine was this,

Take the Pizle of a green Turtle that lives in the Sea, dry it with a moderate
heat, pound it in a Mortar, and take as much of this Powder as will lie upon a
shilling, in Beer, Ale, or Whitewine, and in a short time it will work the
cure. These Turtles are frequent in the Chariby, and Lucayick Islands near to
the Barbados, to which many of them are brought.

Three sorts of Turtles.
There are 3. sorts of Turtles: The Loggerhead-Turtle, the Hawks-bill-Turtle,
and the green Turtle, which is of a less magnitude, but far excelling the other
two in wholesomness, and rareness of taste.

That part of the Island which is the most remote from the Bridge, (the only
place of Trading) by reason of deep and steep Gullies interposing the passage,
is almost stopped. Besides, the Land there is not so rich and fit to bear Canes
as the other: Yet it is very useful for planting, Provisions of Corn, Bonavist,
Cassavy, Potatoes, etc. As also of Fruit, as Oranges, Limons, Lymes, Plantanes,
Bonanoes: Likewise for breeding of Hoggs, Sheep, Goats, Cattle, and Poultry to
furnish either parts of the Island which wants those Commodities.

The Sugar Canes are fifteen Months from the time of their planting, before
they come to be fully ripe.

From the Island of Bonavista they have Horses brought to them, whose Hooves
are so hard and tough, that they ride them at the Barbados down sharp and
steep Rocks, without shoes: And no Goat goes surer on the sides of Rocks, or
Hills then they.

FINIS.
(Here place the Examples of Minerals and Stones.)
EXAMPLES OF THE Wonderful Works OF GOD IN THE CREATURES.
CHAP. I.
Of strange Stones, Earth, and Minerals.

1. IN Cornwall, near unto a place called Pensans, is that famous stone called
Main-Amber: which is a great Rock advanced upon some other of meaner size, with
so equal a counterpoize, that a man may stir it with the push of his finger,
but to remove it quite out of his place, a great number of men are not able.
Camb. Brit. p. 188. The like is in the Country of Stratherne in Scotland.

2. In Summerset-shire, near unto Cainsham are found in Stone-quarries, stones
resembling Serpents, winding round in manner of a wreath, the head bearing up
in the Circumference, and the end of the tail, taking up the center within: but
most of them are headless. Camb. Brit. p. 236.

3. In Gloucestershire upon the Hills near Alderly are found certain stones,
resembling Cockles, Periwinckles, and Oisters, which seem to be the gaimsome
works of nature, or such shells turned into stone. Camb. Brit. p. 363.

4. In Yorkshire, about Whitby are found certain stones fashioned like
Serpents, foulded and wraped round, as in a wreath, so that a man would verily
think that they had been sometimes Serpents turned into stone. Camb. Brit. p.
718.

5. Also in the same Country at Huntly Nabb, there lie scattering here and
there amongst the Rocks, stones of diverse bigness, so Artificially by nature
shaped round in manner of a Globe, that one would take them to be big bullets
made by the Turners hand, for shot to be discharged out of great Ordnance; in
which, if you break them, are found stony Serpents, enwrapped round like a
wreath: but most of them are headless. Camb. Brit. p. 721.

6. In the County of Cornwall near unto St. Neots, there are a number of good
great Rocks heaped up together, and under them one stone of lesser size,
fashioned naturally in the form of a Cheese lying in press, whereupon its
named Wring-cheese. Camb. Brit. p. 192.

7. In Richmondshire amongst the ragged Rocks, are found stones like unto
Periwinckles, Cockles, and other shell fish. Camb. Brit. p. 727.

8. In the County of Hereford, a hill which they call Marcley-hill, in the year
1571. (as though it had wakened on a sudden out of a deep sleep) roused it self
up, and for the space of three days together moving and showing it self (as
mighty, and huge an heap as it was) with roaring noise in a fearful sort, and
overturning all things that stood in the way, advanced it self forward, to the
wondrous astonishment of the beholders. Camb. Brit. p. 630.

9. In Glamorganshire in a Rock or Cliffe, by the Sea side, there appears a
very little Chink, unto which, if you lay your ear, you shall hear a noise as
if it were of Smiths at Work, one while the blowing of the bellows, another
while the striking of the sledge, and Hammer; sometimes the sound of the
grindstone, and Iron tools rubbing against it, the hissing Sparks also of
Steel-Gads within holes as they are beaten, and the puffing noise of the Fire
burning in the Furnace. Camb. Brit. page 643. This is called Merlins Cave.

10. At Aspley Gowick in Bedfordshire, near unto Woburn, there is a kind of
earth that turns Wood into Stone: For proof whereof there was a Wooden Ladder
in the Monastry of Woburn, that having lien a good while covered in that earth,
was dug forth again all Stone. Camb. Brit. p. 401. I have a piece of Wood
turned into Stone by that earth.

11. In Kile in Scotland, there is a Rock about twelve foot high, and as much
in breadth, called the Deaf-Craig: For though a man call never so loud, or
shoot off a Gun on the one side, yet his fellow on the other side cannot hear
the noise. Description of Scotland.

12. In Argile there is a stone found in diverse places, which being laid under
straw, or stubble, does set it on fire, by reason of the great heat that it
gathers there. Idem.

13. It is most strange, yet true, that the Arms of the Duke of Rohan in
France, which are Fusils, or Lozenges, are to be seen in the wood, and stones,
through all his Country: so that if you break a stone in the midst, or lopp a
bough of a Tree, you shall behold the the grain thereof (by some secret cause
in nature) Diamonded, or streaked in the fashion of a Lozeng. Camb. Brit.

14. In Warwickshire, the Arms of the Shugburies, which are stars, are
found in the stones in their own Manner of Shugbury; so that break the stone
where you will, and there is the exact fashion of a star in the end of it.
Idem, I have some of these stones.

15. In the Kingdom of Fesse in Africa there is a Mountain called
Beniguazeval, in the top whereof there is a Cave that casts out fire
perpetually. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 807.

16. In Prussia there is great store of Amber, which grows like Coral in a
mountain of the North-Sea, which is clean covered with water: by the violence
of the waves beating against this Rock, the Amber is often broken off, and cast
up by the Sea into their Havens.

17. About Bever Castle in Lincolnshire, are found the stones called
Astroites, which resemble little stars joined one with another, wherein are to
be seen at every Corner, five beams, or rays, and in the midst of every ray
is to be seen a small hollownesse. Camb. Brit.

18. We have Corral, Amber, Emralds, Calcedony, Pearl, Onix, Sardonix, Sardis,
Bezar, Hemathist, and the Turquoise from Arabia, Indostan, and Persia. Pearls,
Berils, Saphires, and Adamants, from Zeilan. Jasper, Cornelion, Agate,
Heliotrope, Jacinth, and Chrysolite, from Malabar, Narsinga, and Cochin-china.
Diamonds from Borneo, and Gulkunda. Gold, Silver, Rubies, Saphires, Granats,
Topaz, Emeralds, Smaradg, Espinels, Cats-eyes, and Porcellane, from Pegu, Siam,
Bengala, Sumatra, Japan, and China.

CHAP. II.
Examples of the rare Works of God in the Creatures. Of Trees, Herbs, Plants,
and Gums.

1. OF Date-Trees some are Males, and other Females: the Male brings forth
Flowers only; the Female Fruit, but the Flowers of the Female will not open
unless the boughs, and Flowers of the male be joined unto them: and if they be
not thus coupled, the Dates will prove stark naught, and have great stones in
them, Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 823.

2. Near unto the Grand-Cairo in Egypt, is a Garden environed with a strong
Wall; in the Garden is a large fountain, and in the midst of it grows the
only Balm-tree bearing true balm, that is in the world: it has a short stock
or body, and bears leaves like unto Vine-leaves, but not altogether so long.
Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 838.

3. In the Country of Indostan they have a pleasant clear liquor which they
call Taddy, issuing from a spongy Tree that grows straight, and tall, without
boughs to the top, and there spreads out into branches, somewhat like to an
English Colewort, where they make incisions, under which they hang earthen pots
to preserve the influence: that which distills forth in the night, is as
pleasing to the taste, as any white Wine, if drunk betimes in the morning; and
of a peircing, and medicinable quallity, excellent against the stone. But in
the heat of the day the Sun alters it, so that it becomes heady, Ill-relished,
and unwholesome. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1469.

4. For Cotton Wool, they plant seeds, which grow up into shrubs like unto our
Rose-bushes: It blows first into a yellow blossom, which falling off, there
remains a Cod about the bigness of a man's thumb, in which the substance is
moist, and yellow, but as it ripens, it swells bigger, till it break the Cod,
and in short time becomes as White as Snow, and then they gather it. P. Pil. v.
2. p. 1470.

5. The Cynamon tree is a small tree, and low, having leaves like to our
Bay Tree: In the month of March, or April, when the sap goes up to the top of
the tree, they cut the bark off the tree round about in length; from knot to
knot, or from joint to joint, above, and below, and then easily with their
hands they take it away, laying it in the Sun to dry, and yet for all this the
tree dies not, but against the next year it will have a new bark, and that
which is gathered every year is the best Cynamon: that which grows longer is
great, and not so good. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1709.

6. In India is a tree called Arbore de Ray's or the Tree of roots, it grows
first up like other trees, and spreads the branches, out of which there come
strings, which seem a far off to be cords of hemp, which growing longer till
they reach the ground, there take root again: so that in the end one tree will
cover a great piece of ground, one root crossing within another like a Maze,
each of these young trees will in time grow so big, that it cannot be discerned
which is the principal trunk, or body of the tree.

6. There is also a tree called Arbore-triste, or the sorrowful-tree, so
called, because it never bears blossoms but in the nightime, and so it
does, and continues all the year long: So soon as the Sun sets, there is not
one blossom seen upon the tree, but presently within half an hour after, there
are as many blossoms as the tree can bear, pleasant to behold, and smelling
very sweet; and as soon as the day comes, and the Sun is rising, they all
presently fall off, and not one is to be seen on the tree, which seems as
though it were dead, till evening comes again, and then it begins to blossom as
it did before: its as big as a Plumb-tree: it grows up quickly, and if you
break but a branch of the tree, and set it into the earth, it presently takes
root, and grows, and within a few days after it bears blossoms, which are
like Orange-tree-blossoms, the flower white, and in the bottom somewhat yellow,
and redish. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1780.

8. There is also an herb in India, called by the Portugals, Herba sentida, or
feeling Herb, which if a man touch, or throw Sand, or any other thing upon it,
presently it becomes as though it were withered, closing the leaves together,
and it comes not to it self a gain, as long as the man stands by it, but
presently after he is gone, it opens the leaves again, which become stiff,
and fair, as though they were newly grown: and touching it again, it shuts, and
becomes withered as before, so that its a pleasure to behold the strange nature
of it P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1781.

9. Pepper is planted at the root of some other tree, and runs up it like Ivy:
the leaves are like the Orange-leaves, but somewhat smaller, green, and sharp
at ends: the Pepper grows in bunches like Grapes, but less, and thinner;
they are always green till they begin to dry, and ripen, which is in December,
and January, at which time it turns black, and is gathered. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p.
1782.

10. The best Ginger grows in Malabar; it grows like thin, and young
Netherland Reeds, two or three spans high, the root whereof is the Ginger,
which is gathered in December, and January. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1782.

11. The Clove-trees are like Bay-trees, the blossoms at the first white, then
green, and at last red, and hard, which are the Cloves; these Cloves grow very
thick together, and in great numbers: In the place where these trees grow,
there is neither grass, nor green herbs, but is wholly dry, for that those
trees draw all the moisture unto them. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1783.

12. The Nutmeg-tree is like a Pear Tree, but that its less, and with round
leaves, the fruit is like great round Peaches, the inward part whereof is the
Nutmeg; this has about it an hard shell like wood, and the shell is covered
over with Nutmeg-flowers, which is the Mace, and over it is the fruit, which
without, is like the fruit of a Peach. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1783.

13. Gumme-Lac comes most from Pegu: where are certain very great Pismires with
wings, which fly up the trees like Plumb-trees, out of which trees comes a
certain Gum which the Pismires suck up, and then they make the Lac round
about the branches of the trees, as Bees make Wax; and when it is full, the
owners come, and breaking off the branches, lay them to dry; and being dry, the
branches shrink out, and the Lac remains. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1783.

14. Amber-greese, is usually cast upon the Seashore, which as some suppose,
is the dung of the Whale; or as others, the sperme, or seed of the Whale
consolidated by lying in the Sea. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 772.

15 The Herb Addad is bitter, and the root of it so venomous, that one drop of
the juice will kill a man within the space of one hour. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 850.

16 Of Palm Trees, which they keep with watering, and cutting every year, they
make Velvets, Satins, Taffaties, Damasks, Sarcenets, and such like, all which
are spun out of the leaves cleansed, and drawn into long threads. P. Pil. v. 2.
p. 985.

17. Frankincense grows in Arabia, and is the gum that issues out of trees.
Idem. p. 1781.

18. In Mozambique, Manna is procreated of the dew of Heaven, falling on a
certain tree, on which it hardens like Sugar, sticking to the wood like Rozen,
whence its gathered, and put into jars, and is used much for purging in India.
Idem. p. 1554.

19. Mastick-trees grow only in the Island of Sio: the trees are low shrubs,
with little crooked boughs, and leaves: In the end of August they begin their
Mastick-harvest, men cutting the bark of the Tree with Iron instruments; out of
which the Gum distills uncessantly for almost three months together. Idem. p.
1812.

20. Spunges are gathered from the sides of Rocks, fifteen fathom under water,
about the bottom of the Streights of Gibralter, the people that get them, being
trained up in diving from their childhood, so that they can endure to stay
very long under water, as if it were their habitable Element.

21. In Manica, is a tree called the Resurrection-tree, which for the greatest
part of the year is without leaf, or greenness: but if one cut off a bough, and
put it into the water, in the space of ten hours, it springs, and flourishes
with green leaves; but draw it out of the water, as soon as it is dry, it
remains as it was before. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1537.

22. There is in the Island of Teneriff (which is one of the Canaries) a Tree
as big as an Oak of a middle size, the bark white like Hornbeam, six, or seven
yards high, with ragged boughs, the leaf like the Bay-leaf. It bears neither
fruit, nor flower; it stands on the side of an hill, in the day its withered,
and drops all night (a cloud hanging thereon) so that it yields water
sufficient for the whole Island, wherein are eight thousand souls, and about an
hundred thousand Cammels, Mules, Goats, etc. The water falls from it into a
pond made of brick, paved with stone; from whence its conveyed into several
ponds, thorough the whole Island. They also water therewith their Corn-ground,
for they have no other water in the Island, except Rainwater. The Pond holds
twenty thousand Tun of water, and is filled in one night. Many of our English
that have been there have attested the truth hereof. Idem. p. 1369.

Concerning which Tree, Sylvester the Poet made these Verses: In the I Will of
Iron (one of those same Seven
Whereto our Elders happy name have given)
The Savage People never drink the streams
Of Wells, and Rivers, as in other Realms.
Their drink is in the Air! their gushing spring,
A weeping Tree out of it self does wring.
A Tree, whose tender-bearded-Root being spread
In dryest sand, his sweating-Leaf does shed
A most Sweet Liquor; and (like as the Vine
Untimely cut, weeps (at her wound) the Wine
In pearled tears) incessantly distills
A royal stream, which all their Cisterns fills
Throughout the Island: for all hither hie,
And all their Vessels cannot draw it dry!


23. Aloes grows in the Island of Socotera, which is nothing but Semper vivum,
it is so full of a Rosin-like juice, that the leaves are ready to break with
it: which leaves they cut in small pieces, and cast them into a clean pit made
in the ground, and paved: there it lies to ferment in the heat of the Sun,
whereby the juice flows forth, which they put in skins, and hang them up in
the wind to dry, whereby it hardens. P. Pil. v. 1. p. 419.

24. Indico grows in the Moguls Country, having a small leaf like that of
Sena: the branches are of a woody substance like Broom: It grows not above a
yard high, the stalk about the bigness of a man's thumb: The seed is included
in a small round Cod of an inch long. This once sowed lasts three years: that
of the first year makes a weighty reddish Indico, that sinks in water, being
not yet come to its perfection: that of the second year is rich, very light,
and of a perfect Violet-colour, swiming on the water: that of the third year is
weighty, blackish, and the worst of the three. This herb, when its cut, is put
into a Cistern, and pressed down with stones, then covered over with water,
where it remains till the substance of the herb is gone into the water: then
its drawn forth into another Cistern, and labored with staves till it be like
Batter, then they let it sees, and so scum off the water two or three times,
till nothing but a thick substance remains, which taking forth, they spread on
a cloth, dry it in the Sun, then make it into balls, dry it on the sand, which
causes the sandy foot: That is best, which is of a pure grain; Violet-colour,
is glossie, dry, and light. Idem. p. 430.

25. Sir James Lancaster in his East-Indy Voyage, in the Isle of Sombrero found
on the Sea-sands, a young twig growing up to a tree, and offering to pluck up
the same, it shrank down into the ground, and when it was by strength pulled
up, a great Worm was the root of it, and as the Tree grows in greatness, the
Worm diminishes: This Tree plucked up, the leaves and pill stripped off, by
that time its dried, is turned into a hard stone; so that this Worm was twice
transformed into different natures, after a wondrous manner: Of these he
brought home many. P. Pil. v. 1. p. 152.

26. About Saffron Walden in Essex, there grows great store of Saffron, which
was first brought into England, in the reign of King Edward the third. This in
the month of July every third year, being plucked up, and after twenty days,
having the root split, and set again in the earth, about the end of September
it puts forth a whitish-blew flower; out of the midst where of there come
three chives, which are gathered in the morning before Sunrising, and being
plucked out of the flower, are dried by a soft fire; and so great is the
increase that comes thereof, that out of every Acre of ground, there are made
fourscore, or an hundred pound weight of Saffron, whilst it is moist, which
being dried, yield some twenty pound weight. And the ground which three years
together has brought Saffron, is so enriched thereby, that it will bear very
good Barley, many years together without dung, or manuring. Camb. Brit. p. 453.

27. All along the shores of the Red Sea are abundance of Palm Trees of a very
strange nature: They grow in couples, Male and Female: both thrust forth cods
full of seed: but the Female is only fruitful, and that not except growing by
the male, and having her seed mixed with his. The pith of these Trees is an
excellent sallet, better than an Artechoke: Of the branches are made bedsteads,
Lattices, etc. Of the leaves, Baskets, Mats, Fans, etc. Of the outward husk of
the cod, cordage; of the inward, brushes. The fruit it bears is like a Fig,
and finally it is said to yield whatsoever is necessary for the life of Man. It
is the nature of this tree, that if never so great a weight be laid upon it, it
will lift and raise up it self the more; for which it was given to conquerors
in token of victory. Herb. Trav.

28. In Italy there grows an Herb called Balilisco, which has this innate
property; that if it be laid under a stone in some moist place, in two days
space it produces a Scorpion: Raimunds Mercu. Ital.

29. The Assa-Faetida Tree is like our Bryer in height, the Leaves resemble
Fig Leaves, the root is like our Radish: though the smell be so bace, yet the
taste is so pleasing, that no meat, no sauce, on vessel is pleasing to the
Gusarat^ pallats where it grows, except it relish of it. Herb. Trav.

30 Benjamin is either pure, clear, and white, or yellow, and streaked: This
Gum issues from an high tree, small, and furnished with fruitless branches;
the leaves are not unlike to those of the Olive: Pegu and Siam yield the best.

31. The Coco tree is very rife in the East Indies. In the whole world there is
not a tree more profitable than this is, neither do men reap more benefit of
any other tree than of this. The heart of the Tree makes good timber, planks,
and masts for ships: with the leaves thereof they make sails, with the rind of
it they make cordage: A Gum that grows out of it caulks the ship: the fruit of
it is a kind of Nut, which being full of kernel, and a sweet liquor, serves for
meat and drink: much wine also it yields, and of the wine they make Sugar, and
Placetto. The wine they gather in the spring of the year out of the middle of
the Tree, from whence there runs continually a white thin liquor, at which time
they put a vessel under it, and take it away full every morning, and evening,
and then distilling it, they make a very strong liquor of it. Of the Nuts also
they make great store of Oil: out of the tree they make Bows, Bedsteads: of the
leaves also they make very fine mats, which whilst green, are full of an
excellent sweet liquor, with which if a man be thirsty, he may satisfy
himself: with the bark they make spoons, dishes, and platters for meat. The
first rind of the Nut they stamp, and make thereof perfect Ockam: and the store
of these Nuts serve for merchandise. So that out of this one Tree, they build
and rig ships, furnish them with meat, drink, utensils, and merchandise,
without the least help of any other whatsoever. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1466. and
1704.

32. Mr. Herbert in his Travels thus describes it. The Tree that bears the
Coco, is strait, and lofty, without any branches, save at the very top, where
it spreads its beautiful plumes, and Nuts like Pearls, or Pendants adorning
them. It is good Timber for Canoes, Masts, Anchors: The leaves for Tents or
thatching: the rind for sails, Matteresses, Cables, and Linen: the shells for
furniture: the meat for victualling. The Nut is covered with a thick rind equal
in bigness to a Cabbage. The shell is like the skull of a man, or rather a
deaths-head, the eyes, nose, and mouth, being easily discerned: within it is
contained a quart of sweet and excellent liquor, like new white wind, but far
more aromatic tasted: the meat or kernel, is better relished than our
Phelberds, and is enough to satisfy the appetite of two reasonable men.

-- The Indian Nut alone
Is clothing, meat, and trencher, drink, and Can.
Boat, Cable, Sail, Mast, Needle, all in one. Herb.
And Sylvester has set them forth to the life in these verses.
The Indian Isles most admirable be,
In those rare fruits called Coquos commonly;
The which alone far richer wonder yields,
Then all our Groves, Meads, gardens, orchards, Fields.
What would thou drink? the wounded leaves drop wine.
Lackst thou fine linen? dress the tender rine.
Dress it like Flax, spin it, then weave it well,
It shall thy Camrick, and thy Lawn excel.
Longst thou for Butter, bite the poulpous part,
For never better came to any mart.
Do need good Oil? then boult it to, and fro,
And passing Oil it soon becomes so.
Or Vinegar? to whet thine appetite;
Why, Sun it well; and it will sharply bite.
Or want's thou Sugar? steep the same a stownd,
And sweeter Sugar is not to be found.
It Is what you will; or will be what you would:
Should Midas touch it, sure it would be gold.
And God, all-good, to crown our life with Bays,
The Earth with plenty, and his Name with praise,
Had done enough, if he had made no more
But this one plant, so full of choicest store;
Save that the world (where, one thing breeds satiety)
Could not be fair, without so great variety.
32. The Plantan Tree is of a reasonable height; the body about the bigness of
a man's thigh, compacted of many leaves, wrapped one upon another, adorned with
leaves in stead of boughs from the very ground, which are for the most part
about two else long, and an ell broad, having a large rib in the middle
thereof. The fruit is a bunch of ten, or twelve Plantans, each a span long, and
as big almost as a man's wrist; the rind being stripped off, the fruit is
yellowish, and of a pleasant taste. Pur. Pil. p. 416.

33. The Cedars of Mount Libanus grow higher than Pines, and so big, that four
or five men with their arms can but fathom them; the boughs rise not upward,
but stretch out a cross, largely spread, and thickly enfolded one in another,
as if done by Art, so that men may sit, and lie along upon the boughs: the
leaves are thick, narrow, hard, prickly, and always green; the wood is hard,
incorruptible, and sweet smelling; the fruit like the Cones of Cypress, gummy,
and mavelous fragrant. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1500.

34. In Africa are many Palmeta trees, whence they draw a sweet, and wholesome
Wine, by cutting, or boring holes into the body of the Tree, into which a Cane
is put that receives the sap, and conveys it into Gourds: It tastes like white
Wine, but it will not last above four and twenty hours. Idem.

35. In New-Spain there are many trees which they call Manguey: It has great,
and large leaves, at the end whereof is a strong, and sharp point, which they
use for pins, and needles, and out of the leaf they draw a kind of thread which
they use much to few with. The body of the Tree is big, which when it is
tender, they cut, and out of the hole proceeds a liquor which they drink like
water, being fresh, and sweet. This liquor being sodden, becomes Wine, which
being kept till it be sower, makes good Vinegar: Boil it it a little more than
for Wine, and it makes a fine Syrup; and boil it till it be thick, and it makes
Honey. Idem. v. 3. p. 957.

36. There is a certain Tree in New-Spain called Tunalls, in whose leaves breed
certain small worms, which are covered with a fine web, compassing them in
daintily. This in the season they gather, and let it dry, and this is that
Cochenille, so famous, and dear, wherewith they Dye in grain. Idem.

37. The Jack, or Giack is an high tree, and uneasy to be ascended; the Jack
for show and bigness resembles a Pumpeon: without, it is of a gold yellow, mixed
with veins; within, its soft, and tender, full of golden colored cloves, each
full of kernels, not unlike a great French Bean, but more round, each of them
has an hard stone within it, the fruit is somewhat unpleasant at the first
taste; it is glutinous, and clammy in the mouth, but very restorative, and good
for the back.

38. The Ananas is not inferior to the Jack in bulk, and roundnesse: It
arises from no seed, or sowing, but from a root like an Artichok: when they
are ripe they show themselves, and are not above two foot high: without, it is
covered with a dry rind, hard, and skaley; within, its wholesome and pleasant,
and though a little of it seems to satiate the appetite, yet the stomach likes
it well, and its easy of digestion.

39. The Duroyen is somewhat like the Jack, in shape round, the inward virtue,
is far greater than the outward beauty: at first opening it has an unpleasant
smell: the meat is whitish, and divided into a dozen cells, or partitions,
filled with stones as big as Chestnuts, white and cordial. Its a fruit
nutritive, and dainty, and may well be called an Epitome of all the best, and
rarest fruits in the the Orient.

40. The Arec-tree is almost as high as a Cedar, but more like the Palmeto:
I'ts of a fuzzie, hollow substance, adorned at every top with Plumes, wherein
the fruit hangs in clusters; its in shape and bigness like a Wallnut; white and
hard within; has neither taste, nor smell: they never eat it alone, but wrap
it in a leaf of Bettle, and are frequently chawing of it: some add to it a
kind of Lime made of Oister-shels, it cures the Chollick, removes Melancholy,
kills Worms, provokes lust, purges the maw, and prevents hunger. Its much used
in the East Indies.

41. The Palmeto-tree is long, strait, round, and soft, without leaf, bough, or
branch, save at the top, and those are few, green, and sedgie: under which
branches there appear certain codded seeds: Both the Male, and Female bear
blossoms, but the Female only bears fruit, and yet not that, unless a
flowring branch of the Male tree be yearly inoculated: The leaves serve for
many uses. At the top of this tree there is a soft pith, in which consists the
life of it: for that being cut out, the Tree dies. This pith is in bigness
like small Cabbage, in taste like a nut kernel, and being boiled it eats like a
Colly-flower. But of more value is the Palmeta Wine, which is sweet, pleasant,
and nourishing in color, and taste not unlike Muskadine: It purges, cures
obstructions, and kills the Worms. If it stand two days in the Sun it makes
good Vinegar. The Wine is thus gotten. They cut a small hole in two or three
Trees that grow together, which in a short time are filled with the sap that
issues in them, which with a Cane, or Quill, they draw forth. Pur. Pil.

42. In Summersetshire, near unto Glastenbury, in Wiral Park was that famous
Hawthorn tree, which used upon Christmas day to sprout forth as fresh as in
May; but now its cut down. Camb. Brit. p. 227.

43. In the Marshes of Egypt grow those sedgie reeds, called Papyri, whereof
formerly they made Paper, and from whence ours that is made of rags assumed
that name. They divide it into thin flakes, whereinto it naturally parts:
then laying them on a Table, and moistening them with the glutinous water of
Nilus, they press them together, dry them in the Sun, and then they are fitted
for use. Pur. Pil. v. 2 p. 898.

CHAP. III.
The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Fountains, Rivers, and
Waters.

1. IN the Bishopric of Durham in Derlington field, there are 3 pits of a
wonderful depth, called by the Vulgar Hell-Kettles, in which the water by an
Antiperistasis, or reverberation of the cold air, striking thereupon, waxes
hot; which pits have passage under ground, into the River Teese, as Archbishop
Guthbert Tonstal observed, by finding that Goose in the River which he had
marked, and let down into these pits. Camb. Brit. p. 737.

2. In Yorkshire, near unto Knasburow Castle is a Well, in which the waters
spring not up out of the veins of the earth, but distill, and trickle down,
dropping from the Rocks hanging over it, whence its called Dropping-Well: into
which, what wood soever is put, it will in a short space be turned into stone.
Camb. Brit. p. 700.

3. In Caermardenshire, near unto Careg Castle, there is a fountain that twice
in four and twenty hours ebbeth, and twice flows, resembling the unstable
motions of the main Sea. Camb. Brit. p. 650.

4. In Westmerland, hard by Shape, there is a Well, or Fountain, which after
the manner of Euripus ebbeth, and flows many times in a day. Camb. Brit. p.
762.

5. In Ireland is a Fountain, whose water kills all those Beasts that drink
thereof, but hurts not the people, though they usually drink of it. Ortelius.

6. Near unto Lutterworth in Leichestershire, there is a spring of water so
cold, that in a short time it turns straws, and sticks, into stone. Camb.
Brit. p. 518.

7. In Derbyshire in the Peak-Forrest not far from Buxtone, is a Well which in
a wonderful manner does ordinarily ebb, and flow, four times in the space of
one hour, or thereabouts, keeping his just tides. Camb. Brit. p. 558.

8. Also in the same Country at the spring head of Wie there rise, and walm up,
nine Fountains of hot waters, commonly called Buxton Wells, very sovereign for
the stomach, sinews, and whole body. Camb. Brit. p. 557.

9. In Scotland on the bank of Ratra near unto Stang's Castle, there is a Cave,
wherein the water distilling naturally by drops from the head of the Vault, is
presently turned into Pyramidal stones; and were not the said hole or Cave,
otherwiles rid, and cleansed, the whole space as far as up to the vault, would
in a short time be filled therewith. Camb. Brit. Scotl. p. 48.

10 In Scotland in the Country of Murray, there is a River called Naes, the
water whereof is almost always warm, and at no time so cold that it freezeth,
yea, in the most cold time of winter, broken ice falling into it, is dissolved
with the heat thereof. Defcrip. of Scotl.

11. Also in Galloway, the Loch called Loch-Merton, is of such a strange nature,
that the one half of it does never freeze in the coldest winter. Descrip. of
Scotl.

12. In Lenox is a great Loch or Mere, called Loch-Lowmond, in length twenty
four miles, and eight in breadth, wherein are three strange things: First,
Excellent good Fish without any sins: Secondly, a floating Island whereon many
Kine feed: And thirdly, Tempestuous waves rageing without winds, yea, in the
greatest calms. Desc. of Scotl.

13. There is a certain Island called Lounda in the Kingdom of Congo, wherein
is no fresh water (being a very sandy ground) but if you dig but the depth of
two or three hand breadths, you shall find sweet water, the best in all those
Countries: and (which is most strange) when the Ocean ebbeth, this water grows
brackish, but when it flows to the top, it is most sweet. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 989.

14. Not far from Casbine, the Regal City in Persia is a fountain of a strange,
and wonderful nature, out of which there continually springs, and issues a
mavelous quantity of black Oil, which serves in all parts of Persia to burn
in their houses, and is usually carried all over the Country upon Kine, and
Asses, whereof you may often meet three or four hundred in company. P. Pil. v.
2. p. 1431.

15. About three days journey from old Balylon, is a Town called Ait, and near
unto that is a valley of pitch very mavelous to behold, wherein are many
Springs, throwing out abundantly a kind of black substance, like unto Tar, and
Pitch, which serves all the Country thereabout to staunch their barques and
boats with: every one of which springs makes a noise like to a Smith's Forge in
puffing and blowing out the matter, which never cease day nor night, and the
noise is hard a mile off: the Moors call it Hell-mouth. P. Pil. v. p. 1437.

16. Clitumnus is a River in Italy, which makes all the Oxen that drink of it,
white. Fulk. Meteor. Lib. 4.

17. The River Melas in Boeotia makes all the Sheep that drink of it, black.
Plin.

18. The Fountain of Jupiter Hammon, is cold in the day time, and hot at
midnight.

19. The Fountain of the Sun has its water extreme cold, and sweet at noon;
and boiling hot, and bitter at midnight. Plin. lib. 2. c. 103. Augustine.

20. There is a River in Palestine called the Sabbatical River, which runs with
a violent and swift stream all the week; but every Sabbath it remains dry,
Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 24. Some question the truth of this.

21. In Idumae^ is a Fountain called the Fountain of Job, which for one quarter
of the year is troubled and muddy; the next quarter bloody, the third green,
and the fourth clear. Isiod.

22. The River Astaces in the Isle of Pontus uses sometimes to overflow the
fields, after which whatsoever sheep, or milch-Cattle feed thereon give black
milk. Plin. l. 2. c. 103.

23. Furius Camillus being Censor in Rome, the Lake Albanus being environed
with Mountains on every side, in the time of Autumn when other Lakes and Rivers
were almost dry, the waters of this Lake after a wondrous manner began to
swell, and rise upwards, till at last they were equal with the tops of the
Mountains, and after a while they brake through one of those Mountains,
overflowing and bearing all down before them till they emptied themselves into
the Sea. Plut.

24. The River Dee in Merionneth-shire in Wales, though it run through
Pimble-Meer, yet it remains entire, and mingles not its streams with the
waters of the Lake. Came. Brit.

25. Ana a River in Spain, burieth it self in the earth, and runs under
ground fifteen miles together, whereupon the Spaniards brag that they have a
bridge whereon ten thousand Catle feed daily.

26. Pliny tells us of a Fountain called Dodon, which always decreaseth from
midnight till noon, and increases from noon till midnight.

27. He also tells us of certain Fountains in an Island near Italy, which
always increase and decrease according to the ebbing, and flowing of the Sea.

28. Aristotle writes of a Well in Sicilie, whose water is so sharp, that the
Inhabitants use it instead of Vinegar.

29. In Bohemia near to the City of Bilen is a Well of such excellent water,
that the Inhabitants use to drink of it in a morning instead of burnt wine. Dr.
Fulk.

30. In Paphlagonia is a Well, which has the taste of wine, and it makes men
drunk which drink of it; whence Du-Bartas,

Salonian Fountain, and thou Andrian Spring,
Out of what Cellars do you daily bring
The oil, and wine that you abound with so?
O Earth, do these within thine entrals grow? etc.
31. Aelian mentions a Fountain in Boeotia near to Thebes, which makes Horses
run mad if they drink of it.

32. Pliny mentions a water in Sclavonia which is extreme cold, and yet if a
man throw his cloth cloak upon it, it is presently set on fire.

33. Other waters there are which discolor the fleeces of the sheep which
drink of them: whence Du-Bartas,

Cerona, Xanth, and Cephisus do make,
The thirsty flocks that of their waters take,
Black, red, and white: And near the crimson deep,
The Arabian Fountain makes crimson sheep.
34. And again.

What should I of the Illyrian Fountain tell?
What shall I say of the Dodonean Well?
Whereof the first sets any clothes on fire;
The other does quench (who but will this admire)
A burning Torch: and when the same is quenched,
Lights it again, if it again be drenched.
35. In the Province of Dara in Lybia, there is a certain River, which
sometimes so overfloweth the banks that it is like a sea, yet in the Summer it
is so shallow, that any one may pass over it on foot. If it overflow about the
beginning of April, it brings great plenty to the whole region; if not, there
follows great scarcity of Corn. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 823.

36. In the Kingdom of Tunis near unto the City El-Hamma, is a hot River, which
by diverse Channels is carried through the City, the water of it being so hot
that few can endure to go into it, yet having set it to cool a whole day, the
people drink of it. Idem. p. 821.

37. In Africa, there is a River called Margania, and by it a salt spring which
turns all the wood is thrown into it, into hard stone. Idem. p. 1547.

38. The River Meander is famous for its six hundred windings, and turnings, in
and out: whence that of the Poet,

Quique recurvatis ludit Maeander in undis.
Maeander plays his watery pranks,
Within his crooked winding banks.
39. Groenland in the Hyperborean Sea, was discovered Anno Christi 1380. it
has in it the Monastery of St. Thomas situate in the North-East part thereof
at the foot of a Mountain, where there is a River so hot, that they use to boil
their meat in it, and it serves for other such purposes as fire does with us,
Isac. Chron. p, 275.

40 The river Hypanis in Scythia every day brings forth little bladders, out of
which come certain flies which are thus, bred in the morning, are fledge at
noon, and dye at night. Fit Emblems of the vain, and short life of Man.

41 The famous River of Nilus in Egypt uses once in the year to overflow her
banks, whereby the whole Country is watered. It usually begins to overflow
upon the seventeenth of June, and increases daily, sometimes two, sometimes
three fingers, and sometimes half a cubit high on a day. The increase of it is
known by a Pillar erected in a Cistern, whereinto the water is conveyed by a
Sluice; which Pillar is divided into eighteen parts, each a cubit higher than
the other. If the water reach no higher than to the fifteenth cubit, they
expect a fruitful year: if it stay between the twelfth, and fifteenth cubit,
the increase of that year will be but mean. If it reach not to the twelfth, its
a sign of scarcity. If it rise to the eighteenth, the scarcity will be greater,
in regard of too much moisture. This River continues forty days increasing,
and forty days decreasing. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 838.

42. Another thing is wonderful, which is this: In the Grand Cairo (which is
the Metropolis of Egypt) the Plague uses many times to be very violent, till
the River begins to overflow its banks, at which time it does instantly cease.
So that whereas five hundred a day dyed the day before, not one does die the
day following. Idem. p. 897.

43. In the County of Devon, not far from the Town of Lidford, at a Bridge, the
River Lid is gathered into a strait, and pent in between Rocks, whereon it
runs down a main, and the ground daily waxing deeper, and deeper under it,
his water is not seen, only a roaring noise is heard, to the great wonder of
those that pass by. Camb. Brit. p. 199.

44. In Warwickshire, at Nevenham Regis, three fountains arise out of the
ground, strained through an Allom Mine: the water whereof carries the color,
and taste of Milk, which cures ulcers in the bladder, or kidneys caused by the
stone, and provokes urine abundantly; Green wounds it cleanses, closes up,
and quickly heals; being drunk with salt it loses, and with Sugar it
binds the belly. About fifty years ago these Wells were famous, and in great
request, many resorting to them, and the water by others was sent for far and
near. Idem. p. 562.

45. In Herefordshire, a little beneath Richards Castle, Nature, who never
disports her self more in showing wonders, than in waters, has brought forth a
pretty well, which is always full of little fish bones, although they be drawn
out from time, to time, whence its commonly called Bone-Well. Idem. p. 619.

46. In Yorkshire, upon the Seashore by Sken-grave, when the winds are laid,
and the weather is most calm upon the Sea: the water lying level and plain
without any noise: there is heard here many times on a sudden, a great way off,
as it were, an horrible, and fearful groaning, which affrights the Fishermen at
those times, so that they dare not lance forth into the Sea. Idem. p. 720.

47. Pliny tells us of the Fountain Chymaera, that is set on fire with water,
and put out with earth, or hey. Plin. not. Hist. Lib. 2. c. 106, 107.

48. The same Author also tells us, that in the hot deserts of India grows a
certain kind of Flax that lives in the fire, and consumes not: we have seen
(says he) table-cloathes made of it, burning in fires at feasts, by which they
have been cleansed from their stains, and spots, and made whiter by the fire
than they could be by water.

49. At Belgrad in Hungary, where Danubius, and Sava (two great Rivers) meet,
their waters mingle no more than water and Oil: not that either flote above
other, but join unmixed; so that near the middle of the River I have gone in a
boat (says Sir Henry Blunt in his voyage into the Levant) and tasted of the
Danow, as clear, and pure as a well; then putting mine hand an inch further, I
have taken of the Sava, as troubled as a street-channel, tasting the gravel in
my teeth. Thus they ran sixty miles together, and for a days journey I have
been an eyewitness of it.

CHAP. IV.
The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Fishes.

1 ANno Christi 1204. at Oreford in Suffolk, a fish was taken by the Fishermen
at Sea, in shape resembling a wild man, and by them was presented to Sir
Bartholomew de Glanvil, Keeper of Oreford Castle. In all his limbs and members
he resembled a man, had hair in all the usual parts of his body, only his head
was bald. The Knight caused meat to be set before him, which he greedily
devoured, and did eat fish raw, or sod: that which was raw he pressed with his
hand, till he had squeezed out all the moisture: He uttered not any speech,
though to try him, they hung him up by the heels, and grievously tormented him.
He would get him to his Couch at the setting of the Sun, and rise again at the
Sunrising. One day they brought him to the haven, and let him go into the Sea,
but to prevent his escape, they set three rows of very strong nets before him
to catch him again at their pleasure: but he, straitwayes diving to the bottom,
crept under all their nets, and showed himself again to them, and so often
diving, he still came up, and looked upon them that stood on the shore, as it
were mocking of them. At length after he had sported himself a great while in
the water, and there was no hope of his return, he came back to them of his own
accord, and remained with them two months after. But finally, when he was
negligently looked to, he went to the Sea, and was never after seen, or heard
of. Fabians Chron.

2. Anno Christi 1404. some women of Edam in the Low Countries, as they were
going in their barks to their cattle in Purmer-Meer, they often saw at the
ebbing of the water, a Sea-women playing up and down, whereat at the first they
were afraid, but after a while, encouraging one another, they made with their
boats toward her, and the water by this time being not deep enough for her to
dive in, they took her by force, and drew her into the boat, and so carried her
to Edam, where in time she grew familiar, and fed of ordinary meats: and being
sent from thence to Herlem, she lived about fifteen years, but never spoke,
seeking often to get away into the water. Belg. Commonwealth. p. 102.

3. In the Seas, near unto Sofala are many Women-Fishes; which from the belly
to the neck are very like a woman* The Females have breasts like women's, with
which also they nourish their young. From the belly downward they have thick,
and long tails, with fins like a Dolphin: the skin on the belly is white; on
the back rougher, than a Dolphins. They have arms, which from the elbows end in
fins, and so have no hands: the face is plain, round, and bigger than a man's,
deformed, and without humane semblance: They have wide mouths, thick hanging
lips like a Hound; four teeth hanging out almost a span long like the tusk of a
Boar: and their nostrils are like a Calves. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1546.

4. Upon the coasts of Brasile are often found Meer-Men, which are like unto
men of a good stature, but that their eyes are very hollow.

5. Captain Richard Whitburn in his description of Newfound-land, writes that
Anno Christi 1610. early in a morning as he was standing by the water side, in
the harbor of St John's, he espied a strong Creature swimming very swiftly
toward him like a women, looking cheerfully upon him: Her Face, Eyes, Nose,
Mouth, Chin, Ears, Neck, and Forehead were like a woman's. It was very
beautiful, and in those parts well proportioned, having hair hanging down round
about the head: He seeing it come within a pikes length of him, stepped back,
whereupon it dived under water, swimming to another place, whereby he beheld
the shoulders, and back down to the middle, which was as square, white, and
smooth as the back of a man; from the middle to the hinder part it pointed in
proportion like a broad-hooked Arrow: Afterward it came to a Boat wherein some
of his men were, attempting to come in to them, till one of them struck it a
full blow upon the head: Others of them saw it afterward also.

6. About Brasile are many Meer-Men, and Meer-Women, that have long hair, and
are very beautiful. They often catch the Indians as they are swimming,
embracing them, and kissing them; and clasp them so hard, that they crush them
to death, and when they perceive that they are dead, they give some sighs, as
if they were sorry Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1315.

7. There are also another sort of them, that resemble Children, and are no
bigger, that are no ways hurtful. Idem.

8. The Torpedo is a strange kind of fish, which a man holding in his hand, if
it stir not, it produces no effect; but if it move it self never so little, it
so torments the body of him that holds it, that his arteries, joints, sinews,
and all his members feel exceeding great pain, with a certain numness, and as
soon as he lays it out of his hand, all that pain, and numness, is gone also.
P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1183. See more of it afterward.

9. In Sofala are many River-horses, as big as two of our horses, with thick,
and short hinder legs, having five claws on each fore-foot, and four on the
hinder; the mouth is wide, and full of teeth, four of which are above two spans
long a piece; the two lower stand upright; the two upper are turned like a
Boars tush; they live in the water, but feed on the land upon grass: they have
teats wherewith they nourish their young ones: Their Hides are thicker than an
Oxes; they are all of an ash color Gray, with white strakes on their faces, or
white Stars in their foreheads. Idem. p. 1544.

10. In the mouth of the River of Goa, there was taken a fish of the bigness of
a Cur-Dog, with a snout like an Hog, small eyes, no ears, but two holes
in-stead thereof: It had four feet like an Elephant: the tail was flat, but at
the end round, and somewhat sharp: It snorted like a Hog; the Body, Head, Tail,
and Legs, were covered with broad Scals as hard as Iron, so that no weapon
could pierce them: when he was beaten, he would roll himself round like an
Urchin, and could by no strength be opened, till he opened of his own accord.
Idem. p. 1774.

11. There are also Toad-Fishes of about a span long, painted, having fair
Eyes: when they are taken out of the water, they snort, and swell much: their
poison lies only in the skin, and that being flaid off, the Indians eat them.
Idem. p. 1314.

12. The Cuttle-Fish has a hood always full of black water, like Ink, which
when she is pursued by other fishes that would devour her, she casts it forth,
which so darkens and foileth the water, that she thereby escapes. Idem.

13. There are a sort of fishes, whose wonderful making magnifieth their
Creator, who for their safety has given them fins, which serve in-stead of
wings: they are of such a delicate skin interlaced with fine bones as may cause
admiration in the beholder: These fishes are like to Pilcherds, only a little
rounder, and bigger: they fly best with a side wind, but longer than their
wings are wet, they cannot fly; so that their longest flight is about a
quarter of a mile. The Dolphins, and Bonitos do continually hunt after them, to
prey upon them: whereupon for safety they take the air: but then there is a
Foul called an Alcatrace, much like a Hern, which hovers in the air to seize
upon them.

Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Caribdim. Out of the frying Pan into the
fire, as our Proverb has it.

14. There is often a strange fight in the Sea between the Whale and his
enemies, viz. The Swordfish, and the Thresher. The Swordfish is not great, but
strongly made, and between his neck and shoulders he has a bone like a Sword,
of about five inches broad, and above three foot long, full of prickles on
either side. The Thresher is a bigger fish, whose tail is broad, and thick, and
very weighty. The fight is in this manner; the Swordfish places himself under
the belly of the Whale, and the Thresher above with his tail thresheth upon the
head of the Whale, till he forces him to give way, which the Swordfish
perceiving, wounds him in the belly with the Sword, and so forces him to rise
up again. In this manner they torment him, that the fight is sometimes heard
above three leagues off, the Whales roaring being heard much further, his only
remedy in this case is to get to the shore, which he labors to do as soon as
he sees his enemies: for then there can fight but one with him, and for either
of them hand to hand he is too good. Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1377.

15. Mr. Herbert in his East-Indy voyage, relates of a Shark taken by one of
their men, that was nine foot and an half in length, and they found in her
paunch fifty and five young ones, each of them a foot in length, all which go
out and in at their pleasures: She is armed with a double row of venomous
teeth: and is guided to her prey by a little Musculus, or Pilot-fish that scuds
to and fro to bring intelligence, the Shark for his kindness suffering it to
suck when it pleases.

16. The Sea Tortoise is not much differing from those at land, only her shell
is flatter: by overturning them they are easily taken, being hereby dis-enabled
either to sink, or help themselves: they taste waterish, and cause Fluxes: they
superabound in eggs, one of them having in her near two thousand, which eggs
are pale, and round, and will never be made hard with boiling. Herberts
Travels. p. 26.

17. In the Indian Sea is an Eagle-fish, whose eyes are five quarters asunder,
from the end of one fin to the end of the other are above four yards: Its mouth
and teeth resemble a Portcullis: it has a long small tail, and it is rather to
be wondered at then to be eaten.

18. In Le-Maires voyage about the world, a certain fish, or Sea monster, with
an horn, struck against the ship with such violence, that shook it, whereupon
the Master looking overboard, saw the Sea all bloody, but knew not what should
be the cause, till coming into Port-Desire, where they cleansed and trimmed
their ship, they found seven foot under water, a Horn sticking in the ship, for
bigness, and fashion like an Elephants tooth: yet not hollow, but all solid of
hard bone, which had pierced through three double planks, and was entered into a
rib of the ship, it stuck about half a foot deep in the ship, and by great
force was broken off, which caused that great monster to bleed so much as
discolored the water. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 90.

19. The Mannaty is a strange fish resembling a Cow: Her face is like a
Buffalo's, her eyes small and round, having hard gums instead of teeth: they
feed much on the shore, which makes them taste like flesh of veal: their
intrails differ little from a Cows: their bodies are commonly three yards long,
and one broad, they swim slowly wanting fins, in the place whereof they have
two things like paps, which are their stilts when they creep on the shore to
graze, where they sleep long, sucking in the cool air: they cannot keep under
water above half an hour. The stone generated in their head is most esteemed,
being sovereign against choler adust, the stone colic; and dissenteryes, if
beaten small infused in wine, and drunk fasting. Herb. Trav. p. 26. See more
afterward.

20. The Carvel comes of the foam of the sea, every where floating upon the
surface of the Ocean, of a round form, throwing abroad her strings like so many
lines, which she can spread at pleasure, therewith angling for small fishes,
which she catches at leisure: you may call her a Sea-Spider: for when she sees
her web too weak, she can blow an infectious breath foaming death, or such a
sting as if she had borrowed it from a Scorpion. Idem.

21. In the East Indies is a trade wind, which they call a Briese, or Monson,
which blows West all April, May, June, July, August, and part of September, and
East the rest of the year: Only on the East of Sumatra, it blows five months
East, and five months West, and the other two variable. This is well known to
our East-Indy Merchants.

22. The Torpedo is a Fish like a Bream, but somewhat thicker: some Mariners
having one of them in a net, went to take it forth, but one of them presently
cried out that he had lost the use of his hands, and arms: another that was
bare-legged putting his foot to it, lost the sense of his leg: but after a
while their feeling returned again: whereupon calling their Cook, they bade him
to take and dress it, who laying both his hands thereon, made grievous moan
that he felt not his hands: but when its dead it produces no such effect, but
is good meat. Pur. Pil. p. 1568.

23. About Jamica in the West Indies, is a Fish called a Manati which is of a
strange shape, and nature: It brings forth her young ones alive, and nourishes
them with Milk from her teats, feeding upon grass in the fields, but lives for
the most part in the water: the hinder-parts of it are like unto a Cow, and it
eats like veal. Idem. v. 3. p. 930.

24. In Brasile are Oxe-fishes, which are very good meat: For head, hair, skin,
cheeks, and tongue, they are like Oxen: their eyes small with lids to open and
shut; which no other fish has: It breaths, and therefore cannot be long
under water: Instead of fore-feet, it has two arms of a cubit long, with two
round hands, and on them five fingers close together, with nails like a man's;
under these arms the female has paps wherewith she nourishes her young, she
brings forth but one at once. It has no fins but the tail, which is also round
and close: their bones are all maffie, and white like Ivory: of this Fish they
make great store of sweet Oil: they feed most upon the land. Idem. v. 4. p.
1313.

25. In Sir Fran. Drakes voyage about the world, when they came to the Island
of Celebes, which is wholly overgrown with wood: amongst the Trees night by
night, they saw infinite swarms of fiery worms flying in the air, their bodies
no bigger than of our English Flies, which made such a show, and gave such a
light, as if every twig or tree had been a burning candle. In which place also
were great store of Bats, as big as large Hens. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 56.

26. In Captain Saris his voyage to Bantam, about midnight, they fell into the
strangest, and fearfullest water that ever any of them had seen, the water
giving such a glaring light about the ship, that they they could discern
letters in a book thereby, whereas a little before it was so dark, that they
could discern nothing. This made them fear that it had been the breach of
sunken ground: But finding that they had failed half an hour in it, and saw no
alteration, they perceived at length, that it was a multitude of Cuttle-fish
that made this fearful show. Pur. Pil. p. 352.

CHAP. V.
The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Fowls, and Birds.

1. IN one of the Scottish Islands there is a rare kind of Fowl unknown to
other Countries, called Colca, little less than a Goose: They come thither
every year in the spring, hatch, and nourish their young ones: About which time
they cast all their feathers, and become stark naked all their bodies over, and
then they get themselves to the Sea, and are no more seen till the next spring:
Their feathers have no quill, as other feathers have, but are all like unto
Down, wherein is no hardness. Descr. of Scot.

2. In the North Seas of Scotland are great loggs of Timber found, in which are
engendered after a mavelous manner, a sort of Geese, called Claik-geese: and
they do hang by the beak till they are grown to perfection, and then they
receive life and fall off: they are many times found, and kept in admiration
for their rare manner of Generation: They are very fat, and delicious to be
eaten. Idem. Some question the truth hereof.

3. Storks are so careful of their parents? that when they grow old, and so are
unable to help themselves, the young ones feed them: and when in passing the
Sea their wings fail them, the young ones will take them on their backs, and
carry them over. And this is remarkable about them.

4. The Town of Delph in the Low Countries is so seated for the breeding, and
feeding of those Birds, that it is hard to see an house wherein they do not
build. In this Town upon the third of May, Anno Christi 1536. a great fire
happened when the young Storks were grown pretty big: the old ones perceiving
the fire to approach to their Nests, attempted to carry away their young ones,
but could not, they were so weighty, which they perceiving, never ceased with
their spread wings to cover them, till they all perished in the flames
together. Belg. Common Wealth. p. 63.

5. In America there are certain small Birds called Viemalim, with small and
long bills, that live upon the dew, and of the juice of Flowers, and roses,
like Bees: their feathers are of very curious colors: they dye, or sleep every
year in October, sitting upon the bough of a Tree in a warm place, and in
April following, when the Flowers are sprung, they awake again. I have one of
them.

6. In the Arabian Deserts there are great store of Ostriches, that go in
flocks, and often affright passengers that are strangers, with their fearful
schr^eches, appearing a far off like a Troop of horsemen. Their bodies are too
heavy to be born up by their wings, which, though useless for flight, yet
serve them to run with greater speed, so that a swift Horse can scarce overtake
them: whatsoever they find, be it stones or iron, they greedily swallow it
down, and concoct it: when they have laid their eggs, (which are as big as a
Culverin Bullet) they forget where they left them, and so return no more to
them: but they are hatched by the heat of the Sun in the warm sands: hence
those expressions, Lam. 4. 3. The Daughter of my people is become cruel, like
the Ostriches in the wilderness: whereupon she is made the Emblem of folly,
Job 39. 14. etc. She leaves her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the
dust, and forgets that the foot may crush them, etc.

7. In Brasile there is a little bird, which they call The risen, or Awaken
Bird, because it sleeps six months, and awakes the other six. It has a Cap on
its head of no one color, but on what side soever you look, it shows Red,
Green, Black, and other colors, all very fine, and shining: the Breast also
shows great variety of colors, especially Yellow, more fine then Gold; the
Body is Gray, and it has a very long small Bill, and yet the tongue is twice
as long as the Bill: it flies very swiftly, and makes a humming like a Be. It
always feeds flying. Pur. Pil.

8. In Socotera there are Bats, whose bodies are almost as big as a Conies,
their Heads are like Foxes with an hairy Furr upon them: In other things they
are like our Bats. One of them being killed by some English, his wings when
they were extended, were an ell in length. their Cry is shril and loud. Idem.

9. In Italy are the Flies Cantharides, which by day are of a Green shining
color, but in the night they shine in the Air, like flying Glowworms, with
Fire in their Tails. Raimunds Mercu. Ital.

10. In China there is a Fowl of a prodigious shape, and bigness: It is three
foot high: the body being exceeding great, more than a man can fathom: their
feathers are all white like a Swans, their feet broad like Fowls that swim:
their neck half a fathom long, and their beak half an ell, the upper part of it
being crooked. From the nether part of the beak there hangs a very great and
capable bag of a yellow golden color, resembling Parchment. With these Fowls
the Natives use to fish, as we do in England with Cormorants. They will catch
fish with great dexterity, and when they have filled their great bag, which
will hold diverse fishes of two foot long a piece, they will bring them to their
Masters. Pur. Pil. v. 2. 1643.

11. In the African Deserts is a certain Foul called a Nesir, some call it a
Vultur. Its bigger than a Crane. In flying it mounts very high, yet at the
sight of a dead carcass, it descends immediately. She lives long, and in extreme
old age loses her feathers, and then returning to her nest, is there fed by
the young ones of the same kind. Idem.

12. Near unto the Streights of Magellane, there is an Island called Penguin
Island, wherein are abundance of Fowls called Penguins that go upright, their
wings, in stead of feathers, are only covered with down, which hang down like
sleeves faced with white. They fly not, but walk in paths of their own making,
and keep their divisions and quarters orderly. They are a strange Foul, or
rather, a miscellaneous creature, of Beast, Bird, and Fish: but most of Bird.
Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 536.

13. In the Isle of Man, there is a sort of Sea-Fowles called Puffins, they are
of a very unctious constitution, and breed in Cony-holes (the Conies leaving
their burrows for that time) they are never seen with their young, but very
early in the morning, and late in the evening: they nourish their young (as it
is conceived) with Oil drawn from their own bodies, and dropped into their
mouths; for that being opened, there is found in their crops no other
sustenance, save a single Sorrel-leaf, which the old give their young (as is
conjectured) for digestions-sake; the flesh of them, whilst raw, not savoury,
but powdered, it may be ranked with Anchoves, and Caviare; profitable they are
in their feathers, and oil, which they use much about their Wool.

14. the Isle of Mauritius is a Foul called a Dodo; Her body is round, and
extreme fat, which makes her pace slow: few of them weigh less than fifty
pound: Her Wings are so small, that they cannot lift her above the ground: Her
head is variously dressed, the one half-hooded with downy black feathers; the
other wholly naked, of a whitish color, as if a transparent Lawn had covered
it: her bill is very hooked, bending downwards, the breathing place being in
the midst of it, from which part to the end, the color is light green, mixed
with a pale yellow: Her eyes are round, and small, and bright as Diamonds: her
clothing is of the finest down; her train is of three or four short-feathers,
her legs thick, and black; her tallons sharp; her stomach so hot, that she
digests stones, or Iron, as does the Ostrich.

15. In Lincolnshire there is a Bird called a Dotterel, so named of his doltish
foolishness: Its a bird of an apish kind, ready to imitate what it sees done:
they are caught by Candlelight by the Fowlers gestures; for if he put forth
and arm, they stretch forth a wing: if he sets forward a leg, or hold up his
head, they likewise do the same: In brief, whatsoever the Fowler does, the same
also does this foolish bird, until it be caught within the net. Camb. Brit. p.
543.

16. There is an Island called Bas, bordering upon Lathaien in Scotland, unto
which there resort a multitude of Sea fowls, especially of Soland Geese, which
bring with them such abundance of Fish, that, as it is reported, an hundred
soldiers that lay there in Garrison for defense of the place, fed upon no
other meat, but the fish that was thus brought to them: And the said Fowls also
bring such a number of sticks, and twigs, wherewith to build their nests, that
thereby the inhabitants are also abundantly provided of fuel for the fire: and
such a mighty gain is made of their feathers, and oil, that no man would
scarcely believe it, but he that has seen it. Camb. Brit. of Scotland. p. 12,
13.

17. In Magallanes voyage about the world, the King of the Island of Bacchian
sent the King of Spain two dead birds of a strange shape: they were as big as
Turtle-Doves, with little heads, and long bills, long small legs, and no wings,
but in-stead thereof certain long feathers of diverse colors, and tails like
Turtle-Doves: all their other feathers were of a tawny color; they fly not,
but when the wind blows; and they call them Birds of God. Pur. Pil v. 1. p. 44.

18. In Sofala in the East Indies is a kind of Bird called Minga, green, and
yellow, very fair, about the bigness of a Pigeon, which never treads on the
ground, their feet being so short, that they can scarce be discerned: they
settle on trees, of the fruit whereof they live: when they drink, they fly on
the tops of the water; and if they fall on the ground, they cannot rise again;
their flesh is fat and savoury. Idem. p. 1546.

CHAP. VI.
The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Beasts, and Serpents.

1. WHilst Sir Thomas Row, our English Ambassador, was at the great Moguls
Court, he saw many stately Elephants brought before the Emperor: some of which
being Lord-Elephants (as they called them) had their chain bells, and furniture
of gold, and silver, each of them having eight, or ten other Elephants waiting
on him: they were some twelve companies in all, and as they passed by, they all
bowed down before the King very handsomely. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 550.

2. Though these Elephants be the largest of all beasts, yet are they very
tractable, unless at such times when they are mad through lust: some of them
are thirteen, and some fifteen foot high; their color is usually black, their
skins thick, and smooth without hair; they delight much to bathe themselves in
water, and are excellent swimmers, their pace is about three miles an hour; of
all Beasts they are most sure of foot, so that they never stumble, or fall to
endanger their rider: they lie down, and rise again at pleasure, as other
beasts do; they are most docible creatures, doing almost whatsoever their
Keeper commands them. If he bid one of them affright a man, he will make
toward him, as he would tread him in pieces; and yet when he comes at him, do
him no hurt: If he bid him abuse, or disgrace a man, he will take dirt, or
kennel-water in his trunk, and dash it in his face, etc. Their trunks are long,
grissely snouts hanging down betwixt their teeth, which (as a hand) they make
use of upon all occasions. Some Elephants the great Mogul keeps for execution
of malefactors; who being brought to suffer death by that mighty beast, if the
Keeper bid him dispatch the offender presently, he will immediately with his
foot pash him in pieces: If he bid him torture him slowly, he will break his
joints by degrees one after another, as men are broken upon the wheel.

2. An English Merchant of good credit being at Adsmeer (a City where the great
Mogul then was) saw a great Elephant daily brought through the Marketplace,
where an Hearb-woman used to give him an handful of herbs as he passed by.
This Elephant afterward being mad; brake his chains, and took his way through
the Marketplace; the people being affrighted, hasted to secure themselves,
amongst whom was this Hearb-woman, who through fear, and haste, forgot her
little child. The Elephant coming to the place where she usually sat, stopped,
and seeing a child lie about her herbs, took it up gently with his Trunk, and
without harm, laid it upon a stall hard by, and then proceeded in his furious
course. Idem. p. 1472. The Males Testicles lie about his forehead: the Females
teates are betwixt her forelegs; they carry their young two years in their
wombs: conceive but once in seven years: they are thirty years before they come
to their full growth, and fulfill the accustomed age of a man before they die.

3. As Pyrrus King of Epyrus was assaulting the City of Argos, one of his
Elephants called Nicon. i. e. Conquering, being entered the City, perceiving
that his governor was stricken down to the ground from his back with terrible
blows; ran upon them that came back upon him, overthrowing friends, and foes,
one in another neck, till at length, having found the body of his slain
Master, he lift him up from the ground with his trunk, and carrying him upon
his two tushes; returned back with great fury, treading all under feet whom he
found in his way. Plut. In vita Pyrri.

4. The Lion has the Jackall for his Usher, which is a little black,
shag-haired beast, of the bigness of a Spaniel, which when the evening comes,
hunts for his prey, and coming on the foot, follows the scent with open cry:
to which the Lion as chief Hunt gives diligent ear, following for his
advantage: If the Jackall set up his chase before the Lion comes in, he howles
out mainly, and then the Lion seizes on it, making a grumbling noise, whilst
his servant stands by barking, and when the Lion has done, the Jackal feeds on
the relics Idem. p. 1575. See more afterward, Example seventeen.

5. The Panther has a very sweet smell, so that other Beasts are much taken
therewith, but they are terrified with the ugly deformity of his face; and
therefore as he goes he hides that part between his legs, and will not look
toward them till he has gotten them within his compass, which when he has
done, he devours them without mercy: so deals the Devil with wicked men,
strewing their way to Hell with variety of worldly delights, and profits (the
thorns of affliction must not touch their flesh, nor Hells terrors come within
their thoughts) till he has made them past feeling, then he devours them.
Plin. not. Hist. L. 8 C. 17.

6. The Rhynoceros is so called because of the horn in his nose: he is a large
beast, as big as our fairest Ox in England: His skin lies plated, and as it
were in wrinkles upon his back: Their Horn, Teeth, Claws, yea flesh, and blood,
are good against poison, which, as is conceived, proceeds from the Herbs which
they feed on in Bengala, where are most store of them.

7. The Camelopardalus is the highest of Beasts, so that a man on horseback may
ride upright under his belly, his neck is long, so that he usually feeds upon
the leaves of trees: his color is white and speckled, his hinder legs are
shorter than his former, so that he cannot graze but with difficulty. P. Pil.
p. 1381. He is also called a Jaraff.

8. In India is a certain beast called a Buffelo, which is very large, has a
thick and smooth skin, but without hair: She gives good milk, and her flesh is
like Beef. Idem. p. 1469.

9. In the same Country also are certain wild Goats, whose Horns are good
against poison, Pur. Pil. p. 472.

10. In the Country of Indostan in the East Indies, are large white Apes, as
big as our Greyhounds, which will eat young Birds, whereupon Nature has
taught their Dams this subtilty: they build their Nests on the utmost bows at
the end of slender twigs: where they hang them like Purse-nets to which the
Apes cannot possibly come: yet many times with their Hands they will shake
those boughs till the nests break, and fall down, and then they will devour
them. Pur. Pilgrimage p. 1475.

11. The Camelion is of the shape, and bigness of a Lizzard, it is a deformed
lean, and crooked creature, having a long and slender tail, like a Mouse, and
is of a slow pace. It lives only upon Flys. It changes colors according to
the variety of places where it comes. It is a great Enemy to venomous Serpents;
for when it sees any lie sleeping under a Tree, it gets upon a bough just over
the Serpents head, and voideth out of its mouth, as it were a long thread of
spittle, with around drop hanging at the end, which falling on the Serpents
head, immediately kills him P. Pil. p. 848.

12. There was lately found in Catalunia, in the Mountains of Cerdania, a
certain Monster, that had humane shape as far as the waste, and downwards it
was like a Satyr: He had many heads, Arms, and Eyes, and a mouth of
extraordinary bigness, wherewith he made a noise like a Bull: His picture was
sent by Don John of Austria (now Governor of the Low Countries) to the King of
Spain, and afterward many Coppies thereof were drawn, and sent abroad by
Ambassadors, and other persons to several Princes, and States in Europe. Hist.
of this Iron age.

13. In Brasile is a certain Beast called a Tamandua or Ant-Bear of the
bigness of a great dog, more round than long, and the tail above twice so long
as the body, and so full of hair that under it he shelters himself from rain,
heat, cold, and wind. His head is small; and has a thin snout: his mouth
round, with a tongue three quarters of a yard long: he is diligent in seeking
Ant-hills, which he teareth with his claws, and then thrusts in his long
tongue, upon which the Ants run, and when it is full, he licks them in; and
this is all his food. Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1301.

14. The Armadillo is of the bigness of a Pig, and of a white color: It has
a long snout, and the body is covered with shells like Plates, wherewith they
are armed: for they are so hard that no arrow will pierce them except in the
Flanks, where they are softer: their flesh is good to eat, they dig holes in
the ground with their snouts, in which they lie. Idem.

15. The Porcupine has bristles, or quils, white and black, of a span and an
half long, which they can cast: and they have this quality, that where one of
these bristles enters into the flesh, if it be not pulled out presently, it
will work it self quite through; they are of a good flesh, and taste.

16. The Civet-Cat exceeds the Castor for bigness, her head is little, her
eyes clear; has a long muzzle; sharp, and offensive teeth. Her hair is
parti-colored, harsh, and bristley, yellow above, and whiter downwards; The
pocket wherein the Civet is bred is near the genitory, which is taken forth
with a spoon or stick; But when she is wild, she casts it forth of her own
accord, and by the scent it is found by the passengers.

17. The Lions in Afric, are more fierce than in colder Countries; here was
one of their skins brought into England, which from the snout to the top of the
tail, contained one and twenty foot in length. They engender backwards as do
Camels, Elephants, Rhinoceroses, Ounces, and Tigers. They spare such men as
prostrate themselves to them, and prey rather upon men than women, and not at
all on Infants, except compelled by hunger. His tail is his Scepter, by which
he expresses his passion. He shrinks not at danger, except some covert of woods
hides him from witnesses, and then he will take the benefit of flight, which
otherwise he seems to disdain.

18. The Hyaena has no joints in her neck, and therefore stirs not her neck,
but with the bending of her whole body. She has one continued tooth through
her whole mouth.

19. In Africa are many wild Asses, whereof one male has many females, and he
is so jealous, that he bites off the stones of the young males, if the
suspicious female prevent him not by bringing forth in a close place.

20. The Dabuh is a simple Creature, like to a Wolf, but that his legs and feet
are like to a man's, they which know his haunt, with a Taber, and singing, will
bring him out of his den, and captivate his ears with their Music, whilst
another captivateth his legs with a rope.

21. The Zebra is a very beautiful Creature, resembling a curiously shaped
horse, but not all out so swift, all over-laid with party colored laces, and
guards, from head to tail.

22. In Sofala there is a certain creature called Inhazaras as big as a hog,
and somewhat like, with thin black hair, having on his hinder feet five fingers
like unto a man's, and four on his forefeet; they live merely upon Ants, by
thursting their tongues which are two spans and an half long into an Ant-hil,
whereon the Ants running, they pull them into their mouths, and so eat them:
some call them Ant-Bears. Pur. Pil.

23. There is in Africa a certain monster called Pongo, in the whole
proportion like unto a man, but that it is bigger. It has a man's face, hollow
eyes, long hair upon the brows, his face and ears being without hair: but his
body is all hairy of a dunish color, etc. He differs from a man only in his
legs, which have no calves: he goes always upright upon his legs, and he
carries his hands clasped in the nape of his neck, when he walks upon the
ground: They use to sleep in trees, and live upon fruits and nuts. Idem. v. 2.
p. 982.

24. In Congo there is a strange Creature as big as a Ram, that has wings like
a Dragon, a long tail, and great chaps, with diverse rows of teeth: They feed
upon raw flesh. Idem. p. 1003.

25. In Africa there is a beast called a Dabuk, in bigness and shape,
resembling a Wolf, saving that his legs and feet are like a man's. He uses to
take dead men out of their graves, and eat them. Idem. p. 847.

26. In the Kingom of Mexico there are Kine, with bunches on their backs, about
the bigness of our bulls, having little horns, and more hair on their foreparts
than behind, which is like wool: On the backbone they have maines like horses,
and long hair from their Knees downward, with much long hair on their throats:
They are meat, drink, shoes, houses, fire, vessels, and their masters whole
substance.

27. Other Creatures there are as big as horses, which the Spaniards for their
fine Wool call Sheep: One of their horns usually weighs fifty pounds. P.
Pil. v. 4. p. 1561.

28. In Virginia is a beast called a Possown, the female whereof has a bag
under her belly, from whence she lets forth her young ones, and takes them
in again at her pleasure. Idem. p. 1772.

29. In Socotera are Sheep, whose tails weigh twenty eight pounds a piece,
which therefore are usually cut off from the Ewes, least they should hinder
their breeding.

30. In the Great Mogols Country there are Asses with horns, whereof they make
diverse sorts of drinking cups, of excellent virtue. Some judging them to be
the right Unicorns horn. Idem. p. 436.

31. Most certain it is, that the Irish Cows will not give down their Milk,
unless their own Calves be set by their sides, either alive, or else the skin
of the dead Calf must be stuffed with straw, and set by them. Camb. Brit. of
Ireland. p. 1145.

32. In the Island of Orknay the Ewes are of such fecundity, that they bring
forth constantly two, and many times three Lambs a piece; There be neither
ravenous nor venomous creatures there; nor if transported thither, will they
live in that Island. Description of Scotl.

33. There are three sorts of Camels: the first sort are gross, and tall of
stature: these will usually carry one thousand pound weight a piece; when they
are to be laden, being beaten on the knees, and neck with a cudgel, they will
kneel down; and when they feel their load sufficient, they will rise up again
of themselves. The second sort of them have two bunches on their backs, and are
fit either for burden, or to ride on. The third sort are of a slender, and low
stature, called Dromedaries, unfit for burdens, but they excel in swiftness,
so that in the space of one day they will travel one hundred miles, and will so
continue for eight, or ten days together, with very little provender; and they
will abstain from drink, eight, ten, and sometimes fifteen days together,
without any inconvenience, as they travel through the Deserts.

34. Musk is taken from a little reddish beast, that they beat with many blows
in one place, that so the blood may gather into it: and when the skin is by
this means swollen, and full of blood, they bind it strait, that the blood may
not issue forth, and being put into one, or more bladders, its dried on the
beasts back, till the bladder fall off of it self; and so that blood after a
month becomes excellent musk. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1500.

35. Amongst the Blackmoors, there is a strange beast called a Carbuncle, which
is seen only by night, having a stone in his forehead that shines incredibly,
and giving him light whereby to feed: But when he hears the lest noise, he
presently lets fall over it a skin, which he has as a natural covering, least
his splendour should betray him. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 416.

36. In Abassia are Kine with horns like unto Harts-horns: Others there be that
have but one Horn in the midst of their foreheads of about a span and an half
long, turning upward. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1495.

37. There is in the Country of Mexico a kind of sheep, which all things
considered, is a beast of the greatest profit, and least charge that is: For
from them they draw meat and clothing: They use them also to carry all their
burdens, having need neither of shoes nor saddles, nor yet of Oats, so that
they serve their Masters for naught, feeding only on Grass which they find in
the fields: There are two kinds of these creatures, the one bearing Wool, the
other are bare, which are the better for burden; they are bigger than great
Sheep, and less than Calves; they have long necks like a Cammel. They are of
diverse colors, some white, some black, and others gray, or spotted; Their
flesh is good meat, but that of their Lambs is best: Of their Wool the Indians
make cloth some courser, other finer like half-silk; they also make Carpets,
and Coverings, and other exquisite works of it, which last long, and have a
very good gloss; they die it into sundry colors: upon these the Spaniards
carry their bars of silver; one of these sheep carrying about an hundred and
fifty pound weight.

37. In the stomach, or belly of this beast, is found the Bezar's stone;
sometimes one alone, sometimes two, three, or four: They are different in
form, greatness, and color; some like Filbeards, others like Walnuts: Some as
big as Pigeons Eggs, some as big as Hens Eggs: In form some are round, some
oval, and of other forms. For their color, some are black, some white, some
gray, dark green, and some as if they had been gilded: they are all made of
diverse filmes, and skins one upon another. P. Pil. v. 3. p. 969.

38. There is in Italy the Tarantula (a kind of Serpent) the venom whereof
has such an operation, that whosoever is stung with it, falls a dancing, and
capering, and nothing can allay it but Music. Raimunds Mercu. Ital.

Examples of Dogs love to their Masters.
39. When the Athenians quit their City, and betook themselves to Sea, upon
Xerxes his invasion of Greece, Xantippus the Father of Pericles had a Dog,
which for sorrow that his Master had left him behind him, cast himself after
him into the Sea, swimming still by the Galleys side wherein his Master was,
till he came to the Isle of Salamina, where so soon as the poor Cur landed, his
breath failed him, and he dyed presently. Plut In vita Themist.

CHAP. VII.
Admirable Works done by the art of man.

1. PRotogenes the Rhodian, an exquisite Painter, bestowed seven years in
drawing a most curious picture, which when Apelles beheld, he stood amazed at
the excellency of the workmanship, so that for a while he could not speak, but
afterward he said, This is an admirable work, and of huge labor, yet he wants
an Orator to extol his workmanship to the skies. When King Demetrius besiedged
the City of Rhodes, he took the suburbs, and in them this picture, whereupon
the Citizens sent to him, requesting him not to deface it; to whom he answered,
That he would sooner burn the Picture of his Father, than hurt a piece of such
admirable Workmanship. Diod. Sic. Plut.

Glasses malleable.
2. Anno Christi 1610. amongst other rare Presents sent from the Sophy of
Persia, to the King of Spain, were six drinking glasses so exquisitely
tempered, that they could not be broken. Turk. Hist. p. 1273.

Stone-henge Described.
3. About six miles from Salisbury, upon the plains, is to be seen a huge, and
monstrous piece of work, such as Cicero calls insanam substructionem. For
within the circuit of a ditch, there are erected in the manner of a Crown, in
three ranks, or courses, one whithin another, certain mighty, and unwrought
stones, whereof some are twenty eight foot high, and seven broad; upon the
heads of which, others like overtwhart pieces do bear, and rest cross-wise with
tenants, and mortesses, so as the whole frame seems to hang, whereof its
commonly called Stone-henge. Camb. Brit.

4. In Westmerland hard by Shape, there be hung stones in form of Pyramids,
some of them nine foot high, and fourteen foot thick, ranged directly as it
were in a row for a mile in length, with equal distance almost between them.
Camb. Brit. p. 762.

Mausolus his Tomb Described.
5. Artimesia Queen of Halicarnassus, when her husband Mausolus dyed, built him
a stately Tomb, accounted for the rare workmanship, and costly magnificence one
of the worlds Wonders. It was five and twenty cubits high, and supported with
six and thirty curious pillars, of which Martial thus writes:

Are nam vacuo pendentia Mausolaea,
laudibus immodicis Cares ad astra ferunt.
The Mausolaea hanging in the sky, the men of Caria's praises Deifie.
6. When Sir Thomas Row was Ambassador there, the Great Mogul built a stately
Monument for his Father: it was about twenty years in building, and three
thousand men working daily at it: it was built square, three quarters of a mile
in compass: it was made with seven heights one above another, and each narrower
than other, till you come to the top where the hearse is: At the outward Gate is
a most stately Palace, and Gardens walled about, at least three miles in
compass; all built at a vast charge. Pur. Pil. p. 226.

7. Mr. Herbert, who saw it afterward, thus describes it. It consists (says
he) of four large squares, each about three hundred paces long, the matter is
Freestone polished, having at each Angle, a small Tower of party colored
Marble. Ten Foot higher is another Tarras, on each side beautified with three
such Towers. The third Gallery has two Towers, on each side. The fourth, one.
The fifth, half, and a small square Gallery mounting to a Royal Pyree, within
which is the Mummy of Ecbar; bedded in a Coffin of pure Gold. The whole
structure is built in the midst of a spacious and curious Garden, surrounded
with a Wall of red stone, and planted with beautiful and odoriferous flowers.

Porsennah's Tomb Described.
Porsenna King of Hetruria^, not far from the City of Clusium, built for
himself a Monument of square stone, each side of it was three hundred Foot
broad, and fifty Foot High; within which square Basis, there was an
inextricable Labyrinth, into which whosoever adventured without a Clue, could
find no passage out. Upon this square he erected five Pyramids, four in the
corners, and one in the midst; in the bottom they were seventy five Foot broad,
and each of them one hundred and fifty Foot high, on the top was one Brass
Circle, and covering for them all, from which there hung Bells fastened with
Chains, which being moved with the Wind, gave a sound a far off: Upon this
brazen Circle stood other four Pyramids, each of them one hundred Foot high;
and upon them (being covered with another plain) were again erected five other
Pyramids, the height whereof my Author was ashamed to name: So foolishly did he
waste the wealth of his Kingdom, that in the end the commendation of the
Artificer should be the greatest. Pliny out of Varro; and Greaves out of him.

8. In the Great Moguls Country, from Agra to Lahar (which are the two chief
Cities in this Empire) is about four hundred English miles: The Country in all
that distant, being even without Mountains or Hills: And the Highway betwixt
them, is planted on both sides with Trees, like unto a delicate walk. P. Pil.
v. 2. p. 1468.

The Trees are Mulberry-trees. And in all this way, ever and anon, are Inns
built by several Kings, and great men, for the Entertainment of strangers: In
which you may have a Chamber for your self, room for your Hourse, and
Horse-meat, but little for your Servant: When a man has taken up his Lodging,
no other may dispossess him. In the Morning about break a day, all make ready
to depart, at which time the Gates are opened, and none suffered to depart
sooner for fear of Thieves. P. 520.

The first Invention of Printing.
9. Laurence Jans, a rich Citizen of Harlem in the Low Countries, walking forth
one day into the neighboring Woods for recreation, began to cut in pieces of
wood the Letters of his Name, Printing them on the back of his hand; which
pleasing him well, he cut three or four Lines which he beat with Ink, and
printed them upon Paper, wherewith he much joyed, and determined to find out
another kind of Ink more fastening, and holding, and so with his Kinsman Thomas
Peterse, found out another way to print whole Sheets, but of one side only,
which are yet to be seen in the said Town: Afterward he changed his Letters of
Wood into Lead, and after that into Tin, and so by degrees this famous Art of
Printing grew to perfection. Belg. Commonwealth. p. 57.

11. Some say that John Guttenburg of Strasburg, was the first Inventer of it,
Anno Christi 1440. In which City he first practiced it, and removing from
thence to Mentz, there perfected it. They say that Tullies Offices was the
first Book that ever was printed. P. Ramus Schol. Math. L. 2.

12. It does with wonderful celerity convey Learning from one Country, and Age,
to another.

Imprimit ille die, quantum vix scribitur anno.
The most famous Printers were.
13. Aldus Manutius, and after him Paulus his Son in Venice. In France,
Crispinus, Henry Stevens, Father to Charles; and Charles to Robert; Robert to
Henry, and Henry to Paul, all Printers.

14. Christopher Plantine of Antwerp, was a most Famous and Learned Printer.

15. Frobenius, that was Erasmus his Faithful Printer.

16. Daniel Bombergus, an excellent Printer of the Hebrew Bible, and many other
Hebrew Books, etc.

The first Invention of Guns.
17. A German Friar of the Order of St. Francis, called Bertholdus Swart, being
very studious of Chemistry, as he was one Evening (for the finding out of some
Experiment) very busy in tempering Brimstone, Sulphurous powder of dried
Earth, and certain other Ingredients in a Mortar, which he covered with a
stone: When it grew dark, he took his Tinder-box to light him a Candle, a
Spark whereof by chance flying into the Mortar, caught hold of the Brimstone,
and Saltpeter, and firing, with a sudden flash blew up the stone. The cunning
Chemist gues^ng what it was which wrought this effect, never left till he found
out the certainty, and then taking an Iron Pipe, he crammed it full of the same
Ingredient, together with some stones, and so putting fire to it, he saw that
with great fury, and noise it discharged it self: Soon after which, he
communicated this his Invention to the Venetians, who, having been often
vanquished by the Genowayes, did by the help of these Bombards, or Guns, give
them a notable discomfiture. Anno Christi 1380. Bucholtz.

18. At Middleburg in Zealand, in the Steeple of the Abby-Church, there is a
Bell of eighteen thousand weight to strike the Hours on, and twenty four small
ones which serve for the Chymes. Belg. Commonwealth. p. 162.

A Description of the situation of Utrecht in the Low Countries.
Utrecht in the Low Countries, is so situated, that one may go to what Town he
please of fifty, that lie round about it in one day. And in a Summers day, if
one go early from Utrecht, he may dine at any one of twenty six Towns, where he
pleases, and return to his own House to Supper. Idem. p. 200.

Trajan built a Bridge over the River Ister, or Danow, containing twenty
Arches, each Arch being one hundred and fifty Foot high, sixty thick, and one
hundred and seventy Foot distant one from another: So that the whole length of
it was four thousand seven hundred and seventy Foot, which was almost a mile
long. The River was very deep, and swift, and the bottom not firm ground,
neither could the stream be diverted any other way; all which made the Work far
more difficult, and admirable.

Ancus Martius, the fourth King of Rome, built a Wooden Bridge over the River
Tybur, yet without Nails, or Pins, so that in times of War it might be taken
down: Afterward Aemilius the Consul built it of stone: And lastly Antoninus
Pius the Emperor built it of Marble.

FINIS.
Soli Deo Gloria.

