THE SPEECH OF Sir Robert Clayton Knight. Lord Mayor Elect For the City of LONDON,
at the Guild*Hall of the said City, TO THE CITIZENS There Assembled on the 29th
of September 1679.
For the Electing of a LORD MAYOR for the Year ensuing.
GENTLEMEN,
I Make no question, but every one of You is sensible of the great Burden, the
Honor You have done Me This Day, carries with it, even in the most Sedate
Times: But when Public Calamities seem to Threaten this City, and Nation, so
much the greater ought the Care and Vigilance of the Magistrate to be.

I wish I could truly say, There were no Occasion for any such Apprehensions;
and whatever has been of late of that kind, were without cause.

I have the Testimony of my own Conscience* that I have always had a great
sense of my Unfitness for such a Trust; and that my own Ambition has not had
any share in the Work of this Day.

But seeing the Providence of God, with your good Opinions, has placed me in
this Station, I intend (by His Blessing) to undergo it cheerfully; and
endeavor to understand, and then to do my Duty, as becomes an Honest Man,
without Favor, or Affection, or regard to any Private Interest of my Own.

And I resolve, (according to the best of my Understanding, and with the Advice
of my Worthy Brethren the Aldermen) that the Law shall be my Rule; the
Observation of which, next to our Duties to God, I make no question will by His
good Providence, be a means to preserve Us in our Religion, and Properties,
protect Me in doing My Duty, and be grateful to You and every good Man.

There is One Thing I would beg, That every one of You in your several
Stations, would consider the Duty incumbent upon himself, by the wholesome Laws,
Customs and Usages of this City; and answer to a good Mind the discharge of the
same; lest, whilst we are under such great Apprehensions of the Loss of our
good Government and Constitution by the Attempts of our Enemies, we become
Instruments of our own Ruin, and bring that Confusion upon our selves by a
supine Neglect, which otherwise (I trust) all the diligence of our Enemies will
never be able to accomplish.

Let it never be said of this Famous City, (the present Envy of all her
Neighbors) as once it was of old Rome, (then the Envy of the whole World) Roma
suis Viribus ruit; Rome's Destruction was from her self: but let it never be so
said of London. Rome indeed had many and powerful Enemies Abroad; but, had She
not Divided within Her Self, and fallen into Faction at Home, those could not
have hurt Her. We cannot be Ignorant how Busy our Common-Adversaries, the
Church of Rome, and Her Emissaries, are, in Sowing Seeds of Dissension amongst
us, in hopes of a Plentiful Harvest in our Destructions: Let us therefore, who
Intend to be Protestants, as we tender our own Preservation, be Admonished to
Unite, and Join Together, as becomes Men in the Same Common-Danger to do; I
Mean, in Defense of His Majesty's Royal Person, and Government; The True
Protestant Religion, our Laws, our Lives, our Liberties, and Properties; and,
This Great Metropolis, Against all such Endeavors, and Damnable Plots and
Contrivances, as have been, and (I fear) still are, in Agitation against us;
And, let no diligence of the Adversary prevail to make a Breach amongst us; nor
no Difference of Opinion, amongst Protestants, be so much as Remembered, or once
mentioned in This Our Time of Extremity, When, no less then Utter Ruin is
Threatened to the Whole Protestant Interest; and which, nothing but a Firm Union
amongst Themselves, and Gods Providence, can, in Human Probability, Prevent:
And, if we thus Join our Hands, and Unite our Hearts in Prayer, to that God,
who has so Miraculously Preserved, and Restored this CITY hitherto,
notwithstanding the many Attempts against it, we may reasonably assure our
selves, He will, in His Good Time, Work out a Mighty Deliverance for us;

Which God of His Mercy Grant; and, let all Good Protestants Say, AMEN.
The SPEECH of Sir JAMES EDWARDS, Lord Mayor; at the Election of Sir ROBERT
CLAYTON.
GENTLEMEN,
I Bless God for this Opportunity, That I can see the Face of my Successor; a
Person, from whom you may, and I do promise my self a Supply, of what was
deficient in me. I call God to Witness, that I have endeavored to Serve you
Impartially; for which, I do first Return my Hearty Thanks to that Good God;
and next, to my Worthy Brethren, who were always so near me.

Now, I Pray God to continue his Blessings upon your Persons, and Families;
upon the Governor, and Government of this CITY; Particularly, upon HIS MAJESTY,
and His Government; That God would give Him a Long and Happy Reign.

FINIS.
London, Printed for Tho. Collins, at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet,
1679.


