Canterburies Potion: WHEREIN Is showed the great Art of his Doctor in finding
out the nature of his Disease: TOGETHER With the Medicines he applied, and the
strange effects they wrought in him, To the great ease of his surcharged Body,
Collected from the Doctors own hand.

portrait of William Laud, archbishop of Canterbury

Printed in the year 1641.

CANTERBVRIES POTION.
Canterbury. GOod Mr. Doctor you are welcome.


Doct. I understand by your Gentleman, your Grace was pleased to send for me.


Cant. Yes, good Mr. Doctor, and not before I had occasion: for I find my
self diseased in all parts; insomuch, that without some speedy remedy, I
cannot long continue. I have a great desire to take Physic, me thinks, Mr.
Doctor, in case the time of the year be seasonable.


Doct. Yes (if it please your grace) the time of the year may be seasonable;
but we must have a due care to the constitution of your Lordships body, the
nature of the Malady, and the quality of the Medicine. Our cordial potions,
Electuaries, Pills, Losinges, Oils, Unguents, Emplasters, Sear clothes,
Clysters, Vomits, Supposi^ores, and such like, must be applied according to
the state of the Patients body; and withal, we must be circumspect what
Planet is predominant.


Cant. Now by St. Augustine, Mr. Doctor, I approve your learned skill, in
having respect to the constellations: for I am opinion (though the brethren
forsooth call it superstition) that when the sign is in Taurus, if I be let
blood in the head, I shall bleed to the death.


Doct. That Is without question, my Lord, unless your Graces Chyrurgians have a
more saving skill then the Lord Deputies had. But I beseech your Grace that I
may see your water: for by it I shall easily see the state of your body, and my
Physic accordingly.


Cant. Reach Mr. Doctor that Urinall; look Sir, this water I made after my
first sleep the last night; what do you think of it?

Faith, my Lord, your water is very gross, heavy, black, dense, solid, and a
most impure, putrified and rotten urine. In my opinion (my Lord) your Grace
has kept a very bad diet: There are several raw humors, and unwholesome
things, that lie heavy and indigested upon your stomach; and if they be not
removed, and that speedily, they will daily off^nd until they sti^fle and
suffocate your Grace.


Cant. Good Mr. Doctor, I beseech you, make experience of your approved Art.
For although I owe a death, I have no mind to pay it before it be due. If in
your power it lies to prolong my life, let not any cost be spared for the
effecting of it.


Doct. My Lord, it is within the power of my Art to prolong your life, if it
happen not to be cut off untimely: Wherefore I doubt not but to remove these
crudities from your stomach; to which purpose I have here a costly vomit,
which will undoubtedly remove all the gross matter that is uncocted.


Cant. When shall I take it, Mr. Doctor?


Doct. Out of hand my Lord: for your Grace is fasting.


Cant. First, swallow these three Pills, and then drink this potion, I doubt
not but it will work immediately. Well done, my Lord, your grace shall feel
the operation of it instantly.


Cant. Oh Mr. Doctor, your Physic works most violently, I must vomit already.


Doct. Into this Basin, my Lord, up with it: Well done my Lord; see what is
here! A great piece of Parchment, and a great Seal to it, I cannot read it.
What Is this that comes next? A great Roll of Tobacco, pure Spanish. I protest,
now I know what the writing was! it was the Patent for it. Had your Grace ever
a hand in the Tobacco Patent?


Cant. Yes, Master Doctor, I had, but I could never digest it, it has stuck
in my stomach almost this four years, I am glad I am so rid of it, but stay,
hold the basin.


Doct. What Is here, a book? let me see, those that have been at Church, may
have liberty to exercise lawful Recreations upon the Sunday, what is the
meaning of this my Lord?


Cant. It Is a book I made to tolerate pastimes on that day, I am glad it is off
my stomach, for me thinks I am much eased.


Doct I protest another book, the Title is Sunday is no Sabbath, did your
Grace cause this book to be made? for it is something like the other in matter.


Cant. I licensed it, but Doctor Pocklington made it.


Doct. What? he that looks so like a Negromancer, he that for his pains was
preferred besides his benefices? up with it my Lord, what is that? a paper, O
it is a Starchamber order against Mr. Prinne. Mr. Burton, and Doctor Bastweek,
what is the meaning of this, my Lord?


Cant. Why, I had a great hand in their business, which is sufficiently
apparent to all England, I need not mention it. O here is some other indigested
substance which makes my very back ache, if it were up once I should be at
great ease.


Doct. Here it is my Lord, I do not blame you to be troubled, what a bundle of
Papers are here, what are these my Lord?


Cant. Several papers, as presentations, institutions, inductions, licenses,
suspensions, degradations, and such like.


Doct. I understand you my Lord, these were the instruments wherewith you
created your tongue, had Doctors that preached twice a year at least, and in
their places hired journey men Curates, who would read a Sermon in the
forenoone, and be drunk with their neighbors after dinner, for company, and
with some of them, you silenced the long winded Ministers, as you called them,
who would preach twice on a Sunday, and may chance at Thursday and Friday
Lectures, and hoysed into New England. But what in the name of wonder is this,
that sticks so strong in your stomach, you labor extremely, heavens send it
choke not your Grace. O it is up, as I live the new Canons themselves, with that
ill favored monster, and I am heartily glad this is come up, how does your
Grace find your self? me thinks you look pretty well.


Cant. Truly Mr. Doctor, thanks to your great Art I am something better; but
stay, here is a greater thing then all the rest, what is it Mr. Doctor? it is
up.


Doct. As I am here a Drum: I believe this is the Drum that was beaten by the
Apprentices in Saint Georges fields.


Cant. The very same, but I pray Mr. Doctor what was this vomit made of.


Doct. There were three scruples of Pillory powder, half a scruple of his
brains that looks over London Bridge, three handfulls of the herbs that
were gathered by the said Apprentices, wrapped up in a High Commission Roll,
and boiled in a Pottle of Holywater to the third part, and then strained
through a pair of Lawne sleeves.


Cant. Well, if this be your physic Mr. Doctor, I will no more of it; I fear
it will make me vomit my heart up, O something comes against my stomach, O it
is a Miter, I had rather have vomitted out my heart.


Doct. Nay I must be gone if the Miter come, the Devil is not far off.
Farewell.


FINIS.

