MARCIANO; OR, THE DISCOVERY. A TRAGI-COMEDY, Acted with great applause, before
His Majesty's high Commissioner, and others of the Nobility, at the Abbey of
Holyrud-house on St. John's night: By a company of Gentlemen.

Segnius irritant animum demissa per aurem,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fide libus --
Hor. de art. Poet. Edinburgh, Printed in the year, 1663.

To all humors.
IT was easy to cast the horoscope of this Piece, before it peeped into the
world, it being to appear in a Country, where the cold air of men's affections
nips such buds in their very infancy: But, it was resolved it should live,
maugre all the foul-mouthed, detracting censures of some modern Critics, who,
laboring to deprive this of all applause, do render all others of this kind
despicable in the sight of, otherwise more ingenuous persons then themselves,
such as presume upon a monopoly of wit granted to them and their company, who,
like to the Spaniard, scorns all perfumes, but what his own Country produces,
do extort a larger Preface then was really intended. Although then, it is not
ordinar to apologize for Plays in general, at the publishing of any particular
one; Yet, because this now appears as a City-swaggarer in a Country-church,
where seldom such have been extant; and that the peevish prejudice of some
persons, who know nothing beyond the principles of base, greazy, arrogant,
illiterate Pedants, who, like the grasshoppers of Egypt, swarm in every corner
of this Nation, and plague all the youth accordingly, is such, that they cannot
have patience to hear of a Comedy, because they never see one acted: For these
reasons, you may consider Plays in their antiquity, use and dignity, and then,
ingenue mecum agat Zoilus. We read of such practices among the Grecians since
the first Olymp^^d, now more then two thousand years ago; from whom they were
transferred to the Romans, by them had in such high veneration, that the
greatest Emperors and Princes amongst them, as Julius Caesar and others, upon
the festival days, have made experiment of their gallantry by acting: and it
is esteemed yet so little derogatory from the quality of a Prince, (far less
of a Gentleman) to appear at sol^mnities upon the Stage, that it is laudably
practiced amongst our Christian Monarchs to this day.

The use which may be reaped of plays is so evident, that unless a man
mistrust his very senses, he cannot but confess, that to see, in a well acted
Tragedy, the fatal ends of such as commit notorious murders, rapins, and other
licentious vices represented, would terrify any man whatsoever from attempting
the like. In a Comedy, where ordinarily the paltry vices of the age, such as the
Court vanity and prodigality, the City covetousness, or the Country-simplicity,
etc. are extraordinarly taxed, many are deterred from what formerly they
hugged, seeing their darling crimes exposed upon a public Stage to the
mockery of the world: and hence, he who is even but the least conversant with
the hateful humors of both Sexes of our times, after perusal, may guess why
this carries the Title of The Discovery. Besides, Plays incite the youth to
imitate the virtuous actions of their Predecessors, as Alexander was stirred up
by representation of Achilles actions, Achilles by those of Theseus, etc. with
several other examples, whereof pregnant History can give an ample account. Nor
is the perfection in acting less beneficial to the Commonwealth: For, we read
how all the young Nobility of Greece were trained up in this no^le exercise,
that they might be the better enabled to demean themselves handsomely in
forraig^ Embassies, or such like employments: and we see even in our days, how
all such as are educat in the Jesuit Schools, where no less then amongst
public Actors the stage is daily trod gain an unspotted reputation of complete
Orators throughout all the Christian world. And the defficiency (or rather
wilful contempt of this education) is the reason why many of our pretenders to
wit, now a days forsooth, either whistle of a tedious harrangue with no more
motion then a sta^ue, or else use such a canting constrained tone, with such
ridiculous grimassees, as they seem rather to imitate a Mountebanks Zany, in
his apish gestures, then to aspire to the title of accomplished Orators. Whereas
to deliver a speech naturally, that the action may suit the words, and the
words the action; although dissonant to the pedantry of this age, who vote down
the use of Stage Plays (as they call them) for no other reason, but because in
them, such pilsring stinkards as themselves, are often discovered in their own
colors; so ridiculous in their imperious behavior, that none save them selves
(whose innate stupidity does much excuse their impudence) cannot but see it and
abhor it; although dissonant, I say, to their humors, yet is, by the
approbation of all the intelligent world, the chiefest ingredient of an
ingenuous Orator.

The dignity of Plays is such, as it has been the study of the greatest
Monarchs who ever flourished, to encourage the wit of their respective ages in
such active performances, not only by their open countenance, but likewise
private favors bestowed on the managers of such exercises, as many fair
monumental Theaters built by the most eminent persons of the world, in their
very ruins, do yet eloquently testify.

Nor does there any thing appear in holy Writings to impugn these assertions.
For (which is remarkable) Plays of all sorts, did never so much flourish
throughout all the Territories of the Roman Empire, as in the days of our
blessed Savior and his Apostles; yet we never read that He, or any of them
(otherwise impartial reprovers of their contemporary enormities, did ever,
either directly, or indirectly tax this innocent and useful recreation: But on
the contrary, inveighed against such hypocrites, as deluded the world with a
vain show of piety, such as are now our sneaking detractors of the Stage, who,
its probable) only hate Plays, because such pleasant spectacles divert the
current of our, otherwise melancholy imaginations, and hinder people from
dreaming on rebellion, which our late proceedings may at large instruct: For no
sooner had those hell hounds, assassinats of our liberties, snatched the very
reins of Government into their hands, but as soon they thought it expedient to
vote down all Scenick Plays, so that they should suffer in that same sentence
with Monarchy; upon whom they have such a dependence, that at the thrice
auspicious restoration of our Royal Sovereign, they were not only by him
re-established, but also more gloriously adorned with privileges, then
formerly.

The main intent of this ensuing Tragi-comedy, was to smatter at a complement,
for that noble Hero, whose merits claim more at the hands of all Appollo's
subjects, then the stock of their inventions will ever be able to refound; who,
as he has proved himself (since first he was entrusted) a zealous propogator
of the Royal Interest, so has appeared a very noble Patron to all true wit and
gallantry whatsoever. But least it should seem too serious for the pallats of
those, who expected nothing from the Stage but mirth: It was thought fit to
interlude it with a comic transaction. So that being tied to two different
plots, without the special concurrence of a certain ingenuous Gentleman, to
whose industry this Play owes much of its perfection, it had been a difficult
task to have arrived at a happy Catastrophe, seeing how hand it is to carry on
two different pl^ts in one single Play, is not unknown to any, who kn^w what
belongs to the Stage.

Let this then suffice the judicious Reader, As for such of a seeming serious,
but real saucy apprehension, who condemn this, as an inconsiderate youthful
frolic; when indeed, such clogs of Parnass^s, are as so much rost-beef to
their squeamish stomachs; whose calidum natural, can digest nothing more heavy
then bawdry Ballads, scurrilous Sonnets, and such waterworks of Poetry: it is
below Phoebus to cudgel them, and any, s^^t pitiful, thread bare, ^ringing,
indigent, mercenary dablers, to flatter them. Let them live and die in the
tr^nches of their own nesty ignorance, whilst all lovers of mirth and wit, may
daily challenge the respects of,

Their really devoted.

Dramatis Personae.
CLeon, Duke of Florence. Marciano, a noble Siennois, his General. Strenuo,
Marciano's friend. Borasco, Captain of the rebels guard. Cassio, Leonardo,
two noble Gentlemen of quality. Pantaloni, Becabunga,
two rich gulls, in favor with the Ladies. Manduco, an arrogant Pedant,
challenging power over Becabunga. Two Courtiers. Jailer. A Servant, Partuysans,
Drums, Trumpets, Soldiers, etc.
Women.
Arabella, A Siennois Lady, beloved of Marciano. Chrysolina, Marionerta,
two Ladies of honor.
The Scaen, Florence.

MARCIANO; OR, THE DISCOVERY.
Actus primus, Scaena prima.
A noise within, Trumpets, Drums, Pistols, Shot, Swords clash, etc. Enter
Marciano, wounded, chaffing, etc. LOst -- By heavens -- all lost,
All our hopes blasted
By Jove, without hope of recovery.
O gods, commiserate our despicable estate.
A noise within as before, Exit hastily. Enters again. Oh heavens! this day
were we at push of pike
For our public liberty -- Now we are at our wits end
For our private safety. --
A noise within cry, they fly, they fly. Hark, what a hideous noise -- this
fatal day
Has cancelled all our former victories,
Never to be remembered -- in this hour.
Our ancient splendor suffers sad eclipse.
-- They fly -- They fly -- Oh what a dismal word!
How unaccustomed -- Siennois to fly;
True Siennois -- such as had vowed their lives.
A victime for their public liberty,
To fly, like dust before mechanic slaves;
Such as while now never knew other arms,
Then forks or shovels -- Do the gods intend
To revel in our miseries! -- and prove
Strange paradoxes to the credulous world!
That abject, base, unmannag'd Varlets thus
Should overcome the Cavalry of Siena:
A thing unheard of! O! accursed wretches,
Whose too politic pates first hatched these wartes;
You are least sharers here. My Prince and I
Must suffer this reproach -- I slight my wounds;
-- But O! my honor lost. -- I Will bear it stoutly:
-- Up then my spirits, be not you dejected;
There Is something yet to care for -- there is no time
Now to complain: heavens know what just designs
We undertook; though with unequal success.
Wee've done what lay in humane power -- Pistoia
Bear witness, where so many insolent rebels
Have found this day their sepulcher: thy fields
Can testify how dear some sold their lives.
And thou, the Ensign of all noble souls
Make affidavit of this days behavior.
Holds up his sword. -- Now to my generous Prince, whom cruel fates
Have levelled with my self -- Him will I search,
That if my fates require my quick departure
For Stygian lakes: as in my life I Have been
Eminent in his service, I may now,
Dying courageously in his presence, have
His royal Passport and Testificate,
To raise my honor, and condole my fate.

Exit. Scaena Secunda.
Enter Borasco with Soldiers. Bor. -- SO now the day's our own -- but yet the
Duke
Escaped -- Marciano not prisoner!
The victory is not such as I expected.
But come, my Mirmydons, -- we will not give over;
Let Us, with a party of our choicest horse,
Make narrow search for Marciano:
For, if we find him not, we must not think
To gain the Generals favor. -- Come, my Boys,
He has attempted often to strip the Senate
Of their new power, and so destroy us all;
Whose hopes are nourished by the present wars:
So that if you shall catch him, you may sure
Expect a great reward: -- his excellency,
The brave Lord Barbaro will hugg you for it.

Exit with Sold. Scaena Tertia.
Enter Marciano solus. O Florence! don't insult at this days success,
This unnatural victory over thy lawful Prince
Will quickly make thee sensible of unnatural
And intolerable Tyranny: that Ichneumon,
Who now tickles thee in all thy desires
Will stop thy breath at length, whilst thy good Prince,
Whom thou can blame for nothing but misfortune,
Shall yet be more unfortunate in seeing
Thee too unfortunate. -- But, I perceive
The main design of this preposterous war,
Love and ambition muzles humane souls;
So that when private Subjects covet honor
And power, their lawful Prince must quit his Throne,
No matter for what reason, since they mean
Some reformation; as if private preferment
Were inconsistent with all Monarchy.
-- But what! it is unseasonable for me t'expostulate.
My noble Prince (goodness protect him still)
Is gone for Savoy; I am here commanded
To rally those few forces I can find,
With slender hopes -- but yet I Will do my best
To prosecute his Royal orders -- so,
Good Subjects votes assist me -- it is resolved,
For while Dame nature does allow me breath,
I Will serve my Prince -- naught shall excuse but death.

Exit. Scaena Quarta.
Enter Cassio, Leonardo, as at Florence. Cass. -- O! Leonardo -- How do do
Boy?


Leon. Cassio -- thou art the man I was seeking, welcome effaith, and how
Prithee? Cass Well.


Leon. As well as the Ladies will permit thee? -- ha.


Cass. Yes indeed -- but how goes all with you -- what news do hear.


Leon. Bad news effaith, all our hopes are now perished, it is for certain that
the Duke is beat at Pistoia; whether he has escaped or not himself, is not yet
known.


Cass. -- Sad -- trust me it is most sad, but, prithee, who shall be Duke now
do think, when they have rejected him, who by law of inheritance was their
lawful Prince.


Leon. Why -- thou, -- if thou be weary of thy life; for a Prince now a
days must reign no longer, then his Subjects please his government -- men now
begin to act real Tragedies.


Cass. Good; but how does thy learned cocks-comb judge of the event of all our
present broyls?


Leon. Why, just as a sober Drawer does of a company of young gulls inflaming
the reckoning beyond the faculties of their pockets: -- they will look
pitifully, when the bill is produced -- for they must pay for all.


Cass. How! ^ do think our state-mountebanks will not agree?


Leon. Yes, for a while they may, like heissers in the yoke, but when once got
loose, they will push at one another.


Cass. Well -- no more of that string; these distracted times, I fear, will
afford such discourses every day -- how does thy Mistress, the Lady you know
of, -- ha?


Leon. -- Why, faith as unreasonable as ever.


Cass. How! unreasonable --


Leon. Yes -- unreasonable, she will admit of no terms whatsoever, so that I
fear I shall be forced to storm her: 'slid, I can have scarce liberty to survey
her very parapet and outworks, for fear of a thing (I do not know what they
mean now a days) suspicion, I think she calls it; and for thee, I believe thou
art in no better condition, for her Sister, thy Mistress (otherwise in my
opinion pliable) is ruled by her, and both by an old urinal-peeping,
onyon-breath'd hag, whom they call the Countess of Saromanca forsooth, so that
now she is impregnable.


Cass. A devil she is, 'slid, I think it is become an epidemical disease
amongst that sex, they intend, I think, to imitate the times, and erect a new
Commonwealth of themselves, excluding all masculine society, and so be called
the new assembly of zeal-copyholders.


Leon. Yes, yes, for now they hold it a crime to court.


Cass. Since Monarchy fell, that trade is totally decayed, thou must now either
Marry at first sight or else march off; as if who should throw the Dye for a
maydenhead, Boy.


Leon. Goodness, I think, by and by, we shall be constrained to make love to
one another, and so thou shall be my Mistress, Cassio; for our modern Critics
will not allow us women's flesh, even upon holy days.


Cass. True -- for all the Ladies in Florence have a spice of this disease is
there no remedy for it, do think?


Leon. None but patience, stay while Fortune turn up her wheel again, and then
the Ladies may turn up.


Cass. What! their Petticoats?


Leon. No -- I have not said that yet, I mean may smile upon us more then they
do: for now we must not so much as see any Lady.


Cass. No -- why I hope they will yet admit of a visit in civility?


Leon. No -- by no means, Cassio, thou must not name such a heresy as a visit,
for thou may hinder other suitors: Remember that, Boy.


Cass. You say right -- But who comes here?


Leon. I think they are women.


Enter Chrysolina, and Marionetta. ushered by Pantaloni, at sight of Cass. and
Leon. they pull down their vailes, traverse, etc. Cass. Or else two things
shufled in the form of women: do know 'em Leonarde?


Leon. Know 'em, why, who can know them thus, such masquerades under their
vailes are like nuns at the grate, they may see us, but we cannot see them.


Exeunt Cass. True, for there is no way else to discover them, but by smelling;
and what smell women have now a days, faith, I cannot tell.


Leon. Smell, say thou; they have a most acute smell, a woman can now a
days smell a man's love to her, before ever possibly he be in love with any; I
was rejected by a lady last day, before ever I knew her well; yet such was the
imagination that she had of my respects, that she entertained her companions
with the relation of my adventures for her -- you will think that strange.


Cass. -- Strange! -- No faith, I hope, by progress of time, they will
conceive by the mere wind of report, and so we shall have a hopeful race of
young Florentine-jennets, as light-heel'd as those of Spain, I warrant you:
but, prithee, what was that Lady, you talked of?


Leon. Why, the little handsome Donazella, what do you call her, on the other
side of the river?


Cass. Ho -- Ho -- I know her, a noble Lady effaith, but I am sorry, that she
is infected with that disease, she seems to have a spark of wit.


Leon. Tush, it is become a plague, Cassio, a very plague; do not know the
gentelman, who was rejected of a Lady, having no other evidence of his
affection then the carrying of a letter from one of her friends to her, wherein
he was recommended to her acquaintance, which as a trophee of her conquests she
did impar to her hearts-conquerour -- and yet a Lady of admirable qualities. --
Men now a days breed their female children, as the Chinese do their wives, or
the Grand-signior his concubines, close at home.


Cass. But, prithee, did know that same piece of foppery, who attended them
who by his garb would seem to challenge the title of a man?


Leon. Know him, why, who does not know him; it is Signior Pantaloni, the rich
city-gull, whose golden fleece dazles the eyes of all the Ladies in Town, to
whose chamber he is almost as welcome as a young batchelour of Divinity, who
has lately past his trials, is to a zealous widow of ten months standing,
that would feign repeat her former allegiance, and taste the game again -- But
come, you shall go along with me to the Lady Chrysolina, there I hope we shall
have some favor, if we get access, I mean.


Cass. -- I, with all my heart, but that is the question.


Exeunt Scaena Quinta.
Enter Pantaloni, with Chrysolina and Marionetta. Pant. I take it so indeed,
Ladies, you must excuse me if I do you the honor to visit you sometimes; for
my mother says, Son, says she, it is high time you were married -- I hope you
know my meaning.


Chrysostom. Sir, you shall be welcome.


Pant. I hope so indeed: -- For, I vow I would never desire a handsomer wife
then you are. -- I protest, Mistress, you are very handsome, though I say it
that should not say it.


Mar. You flatter highly, Sir.


Pant. Not indeed.


Chrysostom. Well, Sir, as for your visit, I shall admit it; but for marriage -- you
know --


Pant. Ho -- I know well enough, you are governed by your friends; but I shall
tickle them I warrant you, let me alone for that.


Mar. It is the safest way, Sir.


Pant. So -- then forsooth, since I know the way to your Chamber, I will come
and see you every day; now because my mother is sick and taking physic, I must
go home and keep company with her, else I Will assure you, I would not leave you
thus -- farewell.

Exit.
Mar. You see them Gentlemen, Cassio and Leonardo, as we passed along, Sister?


Chrysostom. But I hope they did not know us, Sister, it is not fit we entertain
them, they are not matches for us.


Mar. But I warrant you, they will render us a visit shortly.


Chrysostom. I should rather wish they would abstain, Sister, you know our friends
will not relish it well; I should be very well content of this Signior
Pantaloni for my husband; I hope no body hears us.


Mar. True, for although the others may be Gentelmen of good parts, yet I know
we are designed for them Signiors; so the Lady Saromanca told me last day.


Chrysostom. And we must follow their advice you know Sister.


Mar. Yes indeed, and reason for it.


Enter Manduco hastily. Man. Hum -- etiam confabulantes inveni? I have it in my
pocket, that will afford them new cogitations,


Chrysostom. Mr. Manduco, you are welcome, pray, how does my aunt?


Man. I have a little negotiation with you in private; for I am legate from
Signior Becabunga, (my sometimes pupil) as more amply shall briefly appear.
And how think you -- marry thus, here is a letter for you -- takes out a Letter
out of a tobacco-box.


Chrysostom. I hope he is in good health, Sir.


Man. O! yes, he is valetudinary, herein he presents (as I co^jecture) his
amorous servitude to you both; he will be in Town next week, for I Will assure you
he flagitates to see you: I hope you will afford him gracious entertainment --
hum -- hum --


Chrysostom. He shall be welcome, Sir.


Man. I will assure you, Ladies, he is an adolescent of eximious candor and
egregious integrity: I have been at much pains and labor in educating him, I
may say, ever since his pubertie: but now that he is come to the years of
intelligency, I have given him over --


Mar. He will make us in love with him e're we see him.


Man. But, for your further satisfaction, I shall, paucissimis, insinuate to
you the method of his education. -- Primo, then, when he came under my
gubernation, which was about the year of his age, Anno Domini, (let me see)
mill^simo, sexcente simo, quadragesimo sexto, it being then Leap year; he was,
inquam, a very perverse youth, vitiat in his behavior, knowing nothing but
what he had learned amongst the ancilla's (what do you call 'em) Chambermaids.


Chrysostom. Now, Sister, you shall have him anatomized to you.


Man. But, so soon as I took him in hand, I did so belabour his na^es with my
ferula, that profecto I have whipped him, whipped him thus -- for half an hour
together, until his abundant lachrymation had moved compassion: but, I knew
that was the only way to discipl^^ate him --


Chrysostom. Indeed Sir --


Man. -- So, I say, having taught him his Orthographia, Etymologia and
Prosodia, having always a fellicitous eye over his behavior: I did learn him
to make his (...), not as your Monfieurs do, but more gravely, (...) how to
(...), etc. take a Lady by the hand^; -- do -- (...) how to kiss, -- in this
fashion --


Mar. A pretty (...)


Man. I gave (...) caution, instructions, and now and (...) Primo, Not to (...)
Vir sap^^, qui (...) you are always wisest when you hold your pe^^ And then
with what gesture to discourse, gravely; (...) and like a School-man; (for, I
have been sometimes Hypodidasealus in the great School of Florence, im^
Hypodidasculus, Ladies) but, as I said, I learned him to be concinne and terse
in his habit, with hair in the same longitude, as you see mine. Secundo, How to
keep a clean m^ndified nose, not with his sleeve, but with his sudarium, or
handkercher --


Mar. He intends to weary us I think.


Man. Tertio, As I said -- (hoc agatur serio) tertio, as I said, tertio,
inquam, to eat his meat with a great deal of circumspection and neatly; that is
to say, with one finger and his thumb -- thus -- Quarto, To contain himself a
capite scalpendo; from scratching of his head, (give ear I beseech you, Ladies,
for it concerns you.)


Mar. He thinks we are his Scholars.


Chrysostom. Peace, Sister, let us hear him out.


Man. Quarto, As I said, (take heed) Quinto, I say, and maxim a crepitando and
eructando; that is, from emitting ventosities or flatuosities from his
concavities: with several other admonitions, according to the dictates of
Joannes Sulpitius, and Guili^lmus Lillius, my two very good and learned friends
--


Mar. Will he never make an end?


Man. But, above, all, Ladies, for respect to his friends (because I am
incarcerate with obligations to all his paternal Relatiosn) I did always
exhort him to abstain from tripudiation or danncing, gladiation or fencing,
lusitation or gaming, equitation or riding, and sic de caeteris; So that now he
is one of the best educate youths in Florence, else Ego operam and oleam
perdi^i.


Chrysostom. He is very much obliged to you, Sir.


Man. Now, I will not molest you with a more ample relation of his good
qualifications; but, he is a friend to modesty and chastity, an enemy to
superbity, in potu moderatus; but, not andum -- he is most locuplete both in
argentary and frumentary rents -- not given to luxury or venery -- ^o, not at
all to venery --


Mar. What a tedious ^arangue for nothing.


Man. But, (to conclude, because now the time is gone) as I said before, as I
say now, and I hope your intelligence does comprehend when he comes into Town,
I shall concomitate him to your domicile, diversory, chamber, cubicular, or
what you please, and -- so farewell.

Exit.
Chrysostom. What a mere Bedant!


Mar. As ever lived, Sister, I cannot love him.


Chrysostom. Peace, Sister, let us appear civil before him; for, he is employed by
that Gentleman B^^ab^^g^'s friends, to sound our humors I warrant you --

And what our friends have ordained, we will do,
What e're it be, there is reason for it too.

Exeunt. Scaena Sexta.
Enter Arabella so^a, as at Sie^^, having got intelligences of the Robels
victory. Ar. -- TOo true -- I feared it always; -- now frail woman,
Has thou no eyes? Art thou not sensible
Already of our slavery? -- Barbare,
A Florentine, a professed enemy
To all Siennois, will become our Master.
-- But hold -- imagine (...) Marciano,
As gods know, and I fear, a (...),
Consequently thy heart in (...) with him,
-- Pray, what would do? Resolve, poor Arabella,
Would not go search him? or would rather stay
Thou at Siena here, he, God knows where.
Love prompts the first, honor pers^des the last,
This fear advises that hope strongly presses;
Fear tests me, I should err; for, may be he
Whom in pr^^perity, I did (...) esteem,
May now forget me too, (a (...) our Sex
Oftimes commit more through infirmity
Then malice^ yet, were I assured he were
Prisoner in Florence, I Would no more debate,
But search and find him, at whatever rate.

Exit. Actus Secundus. Scaena Prima.
Enter Marciano, a boy with him as in an Inn. -- THis Inn is good -- now late
-- I might have here
Convenient lodging, if I durst but stay --
-- Sirrah, go see my horses --
Exit Boy. A chair set out. Good gods! is it come to this? -- must we behold
Rebellion in it^ full Epitasis?
No antidote to save th'empoysoned State? --
-- Those forces, I had rallyed, now undone,
Routed, quite routed -- what shall I resolve --
I Have overcome a tedious voyage -- O!
If I could now have but one half hours rest,
That with good news from my Prince would refresh
Both body and soul -- But yet how can my eyes
Receive their lawful tribute, when my heart
Is tos'd 'twixt hope and love? -- hope bids me live
To see a blessed Catastrophe yet to all
Our present tumults -- love persuades me rather
To dye, then see the virtuous Arabella,
(Although unkind to me, as yet despising
My ardent suit) become a prey to such
As know no love, but in their tyranny.
O heavenly, divine creature -- would thou know sits down
My present flames -- were possible those sig^hs
My troubled heart sends forth, might be condensed
Into one body: -- sure they could inform
Those very stones with breath, those stones should move:
Those stones should speak; and as they are become
The only witnesses of my complaint,
So be the true Ambassadors of my sorrow;
To show the virtuous Arabella -- that --
Thus -- for -- her love -- takes a nap.
Enter boy hastily. My Lord -- the enemy -- the enemy -- Fly -- Fly -- Fly.
Exit boy running. Marciano bolts out of his chair. Fly! Fly! avaunt with that
base cowardly gibbrish;
That Algebra of honor; which had never
Been named, if all had equal courage -- what?
I fly! Poor rogue, had as good bid me dye. draws
I Will force my way, or make a noble end,
Valor does sometimes humane wit transcend.

Enter Soldiers, swords drawn, etc. 1. Soul. This way -- it is he -- take
quarter.

Marc. Quarter! -- no slaves -- I Will see your entrails first.
Thus Dogs --
fight, Sold. falls back, Marciano pursues. Enter again hastily. The hounds
are now at a bay --
-- No way t'escape -- fortune, if not me,
Commiserate at least my Prince -- I prize not
My life, if I must dye, transform my soul
Into some loyal breast, -- I dye contented.
Enter Soul, as before. There again -- villains, are you so bold
-- This Sword shall tame you --

falls back as before, Marciano pursues. A noise within. Enter Borasco,
Soldiers with them, Marciano prisoner, Bor. Sir, your noble courage has
oblidged our care,
The terms of your surrender shall be observed
Faithfully -- now to horse --

Marc. I do obey, Sir, for with such as you
A word does more* then oaths with cowards do.

Exeunt omnes. Scaena Secunda.
Enter Manduco, with Signior Becabunga, knock at the door, etc. Man. HO -- who
is within there?

Boy. Your servant Gentlemen.

Enter Boy. Man. Is the Lady Marionetta within?

Boy. Yes Sir, Pray what are you, who demands?

Man. Why, here is Signior Becabunga newly come to town -- But hark you, is
she occupied?

Boy. How Sir.

Man. Profane Fellow -- I mean, is she not busy -- that is to say, at leisure?

Boy. O, yes -- please you walk in.

Man. Yes -- yes -- heus -- ingrediamur.

Exeunt. Enter again at the other end, chairs set. Boy. Please you to walk here
a little, while I go can the Ladies


Exit. Man. Remember now, when you are in private to propone matrimony with a
great deal of ceremony, and for your complements, you may call her the Lady
that triumphs in the Coach-box of your affections, a bewitching Siren, a
beautiful Tha^, and so forth, as occasion offers. Praise her hair, her eyes,
her ears, her breasts, etc. There is abundance of choice epithetes to be had;
you may say her face is like a Print-book of diverse characters, that puzles the
reader, her nose like the style of a Dyal, her eyes like Stars, her hair like
Gold, her teeth like Ivory, her veins like silk, and her breasts like milk, and
so forth, as I said before: -- you will remember on this now.


Bec. Yes, yes, I warrant you, I shall remember -- let me see now, her breasts,
her shoulders, her toes, her fingers, her nayls and her nose -- But hark you,
must I say nothing of her clothes?


Man. How come you to (...)

Bec. Why? her nose makes me remember on it.

Man. -- So -- so -- come, fall upon the
Ladies -- go -- I say.

Enter Chrysolina, Marionetta, Bec. Salutes. etc Bec. Ladies, I am indeed glad
to see you now.

Man. Ladies, I am your devotionated devotionary.

Mar. You are welcome to Town Sir.

Bec. Protest, Ladies, I am your humble servant.

Man. Man prom^ts him behind his back As before, nam ^oelum non ani^^um mutas.

Bec. As before, nam coelos non animus mutat.

Man. You are wrong -- Say -- I did long vehemently to see you -- as one in
childbed.

Bec. I did long vehemently to see you in childbed.

Man. A mere brutum animal.^

Bec. What Is the matter, Sir, did not I say very well now.


Man. retires in a rage Becabunga follows him Man. No -- it was altogether
sinistruous, I have effo^iate the treasure of my brain in educating you, -- and
yet for all that you are a mere ignoramus.


Bec. O -- I will do well enough yet -- Pray, tell me what I should say, for
the Ladies are waitting upon me.


Man. No -- I will complement them my self -- speak not you -- ne vel unum gru.

Ladies, This gentelman is newly arrived at Florence the desuetude of amorous
conversation, with the assnetude of rural exercises have so, as I may say,
confounded his intellectuals, that if he hesitate in the pronunciation, he
hopes you will merely attribute it to his campestriall, trimestriall
perigri^ation.


Chrysostom. We not only excuse you, Sir, but likewise account our selves honored
by your visit -- Pray sit down Sir.


Man. Yes, yes, without ceremony.

Bec. Why -- I think, you are silent, Madam.

Bec. sits down by M^^ Man sits betwixt the Ladies. Mar. I love not to prate
Sir.

Bec. Nor I either.

Man. Nay so long as he was under (...) I did labor to coerce in him that
loquacious verbosity, o^ rather ve^ bosious loquacity, with which most part of
the perverse temporary adolescency is contaminate, for I hate garrulity, as I
am facundious, I do.


Bec. I vow, Madam, you are very bony, since I see you last -- Man. takes a
pype of tobacco. O, I have had rare pastime in the couotry this harvest, brave
hunting, and hawking of hares; and but the last day coming in to the Town, I
took a couple of them by the way. O, Madam, you will not believe what brave
sport we have now. I wonder why you have stayed in city all this while?


Mar. What should we have done in the country, Sir, hunted, and hawked as you
do?


Man. I hope this does not offend you, Madam. Chrysostom. Not at all, Sir.


Man. Smoakes in Chrysostom. face Smoakes in Mar. face. I should be loath to offend
any man, but I am without ceremony.


Mar. Use your own liberty, Sir.

Man. Nay, I do it to draw down reuthm from my brain, with which my lungs are
much infested: for, do you see, it is a very salutiferous herb: it disposes the
mind for study, and moves in several places; I will show you what by it is
help I made last night; marry a sonnet upon a Lady, whose beauty had almost
tempted me to affect her. -- She walked ^sings. N^y; hold, I have a good voice
for writing, but not for reading. I will read then.

Sonnet
She walked along with such a grace,
And such a catching eye.
That, had her Masque not hid her face
Then -- certainly --
In some degree,
I had become a lover certainly.
I had become
Both blind, and dumb,
For Cupids thundering dart
Had pierced my heart.
It had -- by my facunditie.
But I more prudent was then so
As Soon as she drew nigh
I turned my back to her, and lo
She glyded by.
Immediately.
Then I began to ruminate, and say,
Whit is woe -- man?
Even no -- man.
Why then should we love her,
Seeing we are above her,
And she, at best, man's hacqueney?
Man. arises. -- But hark you, Madam* I believe it is now time we should leave
them to their private confaabulation.


Chrysostom. Yes Sir, with all my heart.


Man. One word then with this Gentelman, and I am gone -- Heus, be attentious
and circumspectious in your be aviour, remember on those elegantes ^hrases I
taught you when you came in: so I will retire, and (...) you for a space.


Exit with Chrysostom. Bec. Now we (...) Madam, I hope you know my errand.


Mar. Not well Sir.


Bec. I am sure, my Father (...) the Lady Saromanca speak to you, or else I am
(...)


Mar. But you had (...) my Uncle, Sir; I am at his disposal.


Bec. You are very modest.

Offers ^o kiss, she refuses.
Mar. And I hope that is a virtue (...) maid, Sir*


Bec. As I am a virgin, it is; I love you ^ll the better for it: and I Will
assure you so long as you are modest, you can never be impudent.


Enter Boy, Madam, Signior Pantal^^^ is below; shall I tell him you are within?


Mar. Yes, yes, by all (...), you must not deny us to such a Gentleman of
quality as he is.


Bec. Signor Pantaloni, say you, my old comrade, I would be very glad to see
him.


Mar. He is in suite of my Sister, a Gentelman of a great estate, I am much for
the match; I Will go cause my Sister come hither.


At the other end enter Signior Pantaloni* Bec. salutes him. Bec. Signior
Pantaloni!


Pant. Signior Becabunga -- welcome to Town in good faith. -- You are very
gallant.

Surveyes Bec. clothes.
Bec. -- It is my winter suite, Sir, it cost my Father a good deal of money,
more then the price of ten bolls of wheat, or barley, I warrant you.


Pant. I am sure, you have had brave sport in the country all this while.


Bec. O yes; you know my dog Springo?


Pant. Yes, and Gasto, gray bitcho, brounhoundo, and all the tribe of them: I
knew them all since they were puppets, and your self too.


Bec. Why, I will let him loose with any his match in Tuscany.


Pant. O what a fool was I, might not I have been with you all this while, if
it had not been for this baggagely Mistress of mine, Madam Chrysolina, call you
her, whom my Mother will have me to woo whether I will or not, I may say; I had
been in the country all this harvest. -- But, what shall I tell you, have not I
learned since I see you to dance forsooth frisks about -- that is a coupee --
that is a circumflex pas: that is a transverse pas etc.


Bec. O brave Pantaloni!


Enter Manduco leading the Ladies. Pant. I, but I can fence too -- zeest --
zeest -- zeest

Thrusts at Bec.
Pant. Ladies, I hope I have not com'd in into you as I may say intrusiously,
or intrusively.


Discover the Ladies. Chrysostom. Not at all Sir, you are very welcome, pray how
does your Lady mother, and your Sisters?


Pant. All in good health, Madam, at your service -- Signior Manduco, you are
welcome to Town.


Man. Signior Pantaloni, I am yours integrally, and quasi exulto in the
prosperity of this our congression.


Enter Boy. Madam, the two Gentelmen you call Casio and Leonardo desire ^o see
you.


Mar. Go tell them we are not within.


Chrysostom. Tell them we are not at leisure, Sirrah.


Exit Boy. Man. What are they?


Pant. Ranting, young blades, like the times, I warrant you, two fellows, that
have frequented all your Stage Plays in Italy, and I heard our Chaplain say;
and my Sister too (which is more) that Plays were very unlawful and impious.
--


Man. Plays are indeed profane, scelerate, abominable, yea, abominably
abominable -- which I will maintain multis argumentis.


Pant. Besides, they are great mockers of such Gentlemen as us, who are better
then themselves.


Man. Are they of the Dukes party?


Pant. Yes, I warrant you.


Man. Hoc satis est -- odi totam gentem: Ladies, you do well not to converse
with them -- but no more of them: Ladies, what would you think of a
perambulation in this calid, aestivous season?


Chrysostom. But whether shall we walk, Sir?


Pant. Any where, Madam* I shall wait upon you.


Bec. And, I shall stick close to my Lady, forsooth.


Mar. We Will have a coach then.


Bec. By all means -- call a Coach.


within* Coach, etc. Man. Let us then pass the Pomeridian hours in
obambulation: for I am defatigate with session.


Exeunt omnes. Scaena Tertia.
Enter Borasco with Arabella prisoner. Ar. GOod my Lord, for the respect to
honor,
Prove courteous to a poor distressed Lady,
And now your prisoner --

Bor. My prisoner -- Not, by this hand, so much,
As I am yours.
kisses her hand.
Ar. I should belie my passion, Sir, if I,
Next to the public destiny of my Country,
Did not resent my own calamity;
But yet your undeserved clemency
Does moderate my misfortunes --

Bor. How! undeserved -- when even Cannibals,
Tamed by the aspect of your radiant eye,
Would quit their barbarous, superstitious rites,
And offer, what their gods usurp, to you.

Ar. Sir, I owe much, I must confess, to nature,
But your applause inflames the bill more high,
It Is now our common fate to be imprisoned,
But not so common to be thus respected.

Bor. Lady, what the Lord Barbaro has (...)
I hold it always justice -- but because
Your face does speak you one, whom all should honor,
That e're have known what love is, I regrate
This your confinement; the causes of which
Are only known to his excellency,
Enter Iaylor. Time will discover all -- but here he comes
Who must be your guardian -- Sirrah --

Jayl. Your pleasure, my Lord?

Bor. By order from the Senate, you are commanded
To take this Lady in your custody --
See you respect her, Sirrah, -- let her not
Be used, as other ordinary prisoners.
Mark what I say, you varlet -- serve her well.

Jayl. I shall, forsooth, my Lord, she shall be as well used as any Lady can be
in prison.


Bor. Madam, I Will visit you sometimes, and see
You treated, like an honorable Lady.
This Fellow shall have special care of you,
Command him at all times; and for my service,
Pray spare it not -- farewell -- she is my prisoner,
aside. I shall have fit time yet t'impart my flames.

Exit. Jayl. Now, forsooth, Madam, will you be pleased to walk -- I Will conduct
you to as neat, a wel-swipp'd, wel-trimm'd Room, as you can have in many parts
of Florence: My Lord Borasco, is a very obliging Gentleman, and I Will assure
you, he loves to be courteous; I will have a care of you for his sake; my Wife,
and I (I must have you acquaint with her, Madam) for she is one of the
loving'st, dutiful, old Sluts, that you have known --


Ar. Come then, let us go --


Jayl. -- My Wife and I, I say, Madam, shall serve you to a hair, for she loves
to be courteous, as well as my self,


Ar. Where are my Countrymen lodged? I rather
Be with them, as elsewhere --

Jayl. A Pisan, Madam?

Ar. No -- a Siennois.
There are many (...) Nobles in my custody.

Ar. The Lord Marciano: since it is my misfortune
To be his Fellow-prisoner.

Jayl. Madam, you shall see him, for I love to be courteous, especially to
strangers, Madam*


Exeunt Scaena Quarta.
Enter Chrysolina, Marionetta, as in their Chamber. Mar. How did you like our
last entertainment, Sister?


Chrysostom. Indifferently well; I love that same Gentleman, Signior Besabunga: he
is none of your ranting young Gallants, but a sober youth as is in all Florence.


Mar. It Is true, but yet --


Chrysostom. -- What -- don't you love him, Sister? you are a fool if you let such a
fair occasion slip -- such a fine Woodcock is not start every day: -- he has a
great Estate, Sister, remember that.


Mar. It Is all true --


Chrysostom. I, and he will not readily spend it; his Tutor, Manduco, has bred him
very sparingly -- honest man, I protest he is an honest man: -- yea, a very
honest man.


Mar. He is indeed --


Chrysostom. And then, Sister, you may have a very contented life with him; he is a
good-natured, sweet youth, he will give you all your will, and I Will assure you
that is a great property in a man.


Mar. -- And what think you of your own Suitor, Pantaloni, all this while?


Chrysostom. Why -- I know not what I shall say of him yet.


Enter Cassio, Leonardo, quietly. Mar. discovers them. Mar. Goodness! how came
they here?


Leon. Nay, my pretty Daph^e, fly not my embraces, I know we have surprised you
now.


Chrysostom. starts back, amazed. Cass. What pretty intrigue of love was the object
of your discourse, pray let us be sharers with you in your entertainment.


Leon. My life for it, you were devising some stratagem, how to cross the
designs of some affectionat Votary: you have no pity on our Sex now a days,
Ladies.


Cass. None, indeed, if you were not visible in this age, then we should not
love: but, when we once conceive flames of affection for you, in lieu of
fomenting us in our delights, you make love a disease to us by your unmercifull
nicety, which deprives us altogether of your conversation: this is sad, Ladies;
trust me it is sad.


Mar. You wrong our Sex, Sir.


Chrysostom. But, do you hear, Sir, seriously I entreat you would forbear such
visits; for, you will but give people occasion to talk of what we never thought
on.


Mar. And besides, Sir, those who challenge power over us will be offended at
this entertainment: we entreat you then, Gentlemen, to leave us.


Cass. to Mar. Farewell then, cruel beauty, but do not imagine such a harsh
repulse will stop the current of my boundless love; absence shall never prove
so fatal: but while my breath shall demonstrate that I live, this heart, this
speech and this hand shall demonstrate that I love you. Farewell bright star of
my fancy.


Exit. Leon. to Chrysostom. Such a fair Lady cannot be so cruel, I will not take
this answer as a repulse, but rather construe it the most favorable way.
Farewell, time, I hope, shall melt the severity of your resolutions.


Exit. Chrysostom. Farewell my ranting gamsters, we are not meat for your mouths. --
What foolish people have we in our house, Sister, to admit them Gentlemen? --
why, they came in upon us while we were serious.


Mar. Yes, Sister, and if one of us had been commenting on the Piss-pot, it had
been all one to them, when doors are left open.


Chrysostom. And knowing that our friends cannot endure them, they should, at least,
in conscience, have denied them access. O! how I shall baffle them same wenches
that did not look to our Chamber door better.


Mar. I protest, Sister, we must marry quickly, otherwise we shall be
constantly infested with such importunate Suitors; and that, in my opinion, is
no great pleasure to a woman, it distracts their spirits, me thinks.


Chrysostom. You say right, Sister, we shall never be well, until we be even well
married.


Exeunt. Scaena Quinta.
Enter Borasco, with Arabella in prison. Bor. LAdy, I have at length obtained
that favor
Of the Lord Barbaro, you may go abroad
To any part o'th city that you please.
Providing you return hither at night --

Ar. My Lord, I thank you kindly, I find you (...)
Exceeded in your favors, since I came
Into this prison: you have (without flattery)
Even overacted courtesy to me --

Bor. I plead not so for every one, but you
May challenge my respects: -- the power (...)
As captain of the Guards, shall be employed
To serve you, Madam, as you please command me.

Ar* Then 'pray, my Lord, amongst others, grant me this,
To see the Lord Marciano.

Bor. Madam, I shall conduct you to his Chamber*
Or, if you please, he shall come hither to you.

Ar. No, I will go to him.

Exeunt. Sceaena Sixta.
At the other end enter Marciano, with him the Jailer, Mar. A Lady, say thou?

Jayl. Yes, my Lord, a young Lady.

Marc. A Lady, and a Siennois, -- strange!
Who can this be! -- but now I have a thought,
Yet I dare not express it -- can it be!
No, sure -- impossible -- prithee begone,
And leave me to my self --

Jayl. She will be here by and by, my Lord.

Exit Jayl. Marciano solus. Marc. Well, who this Lady is, I cannot think,
But in a dream: -- O, may I yet imagine,
It Is she -- Nay, hold -- my hope cannot support
Such a strong thought of bless! I shall offend
Enter Arabella quietly. Even in thinking --
Marciano discovers her. -- A cheat -- a mere cheat -- eyes do not gull me.
The Lady Arrabella! -- No, unless
I hear her talk, -- I Will think it still a phantasme
-- Speak fair ghost -- is it thee?

Approaches to her. Ar. Marciano, it is I, the unfortunat Arabella.

Marc. Then it is no more I -- O -- how I am
Embraces her. Transported! how that divine voice has ravished
My duller senses! -- is it possible, you weep
In sympathy with my afflictions?

Ar. Yea altogether.

Marc. Good gods! it is she -- O does Arabella*
Who, while I was in full prosperity,
Embraces again. Did frown upon my Passions: stoop so low,
As see me now in misery -- unless
She mean, as children, with their hobby-horses,
T'unravell me, that she may thereby see
What stuff I do contain: -- dare I presume
To think that love to me has brought you hither?

Ar. Most true -- naught else --

Marc. Fair innocence, whose presence does revive
My spirits in this agony of sorrows,
While I am cooped up, as a parrot, here,
Expecting every day, when Atropos
Shall cut my thread of life; that you should daigne
To visit me! had your fair hand dispatched
One word in post, it had been too great honor.
But thus to be thy own Ambassador,
^Tis a bewitching happiness; no tongue
Can well express my passion -- good, my stars
Preserve me from an ecstasy! --

Ar. You wrong me, Marciano, I left Siena,
Hearing of your bad success; thence I came
To Luca; there not finding you, to Florence,
To see if I could purchase your enlargement,
Either by art, or favor: but no sooner
Was I come hither, when I was suspected
As one, who keep't secret intelligence
With the Dukes party here, and so committed --

Marc. -- Committed -- how! -- committd -- heathnish wretches!
Barbarous Rebels! to imprison one,
Whom Indians had spared, -- By Mar; -- unheard of
Even amongst Turks, and Tartars!

Ar. Nay forbear,
I am not so unfortunate, as you think,
The Senate meaning thus to punish me
Have rather cherished me: -- your company
May well allay my griefs.

Marc. By this -- and this --
Kisses her hand. You honor me too much, but which is sad,
I never shall be able to repay
That love to you, which I owe, seeing every hour
I do expect my sentence --

Ar. Alas! harsh fates! O frail reward of courage!

Enter Jailer. Jayl. Madam, my duty bears me to conduct you to your
Chamber, it is now high time.

Ar. My Lord, adieu, I shall see you to morrow.

Exit with Jayl. Marciano solus. Marc. Farewell, my souls delight, -- O unkind
Stars!
A fit theater for such entertainment!
An emblem of our love! -- But I exclaim
Unseasonably. -- O how prettily
Fortune has tied me, as a Shrove-tide bird,
While Saturn, Mars and Cupid level at me:
-- A fig for all her tricks -- I scorn her frown,
She can win nothing, while my hearts my own.

Exit. Scaena Septima.
Enter Strenuo with the Jailer. Stren. IS he sentenced already?


Jayl. No, not yet; but he must die.


Stren. Well -- let him go, 'twill learn others to be wise, friend* for,
Soldiers have but shrewd arrears paid them now for their service.


Jayl. I am really sorry for him; as I am true Florentine he is a noble
Genteman, and loves to be courteous --


Stren. But, do you hear, Mr. Jailer, shall we have the other cup the night?


Jayl. I -- at the Siena Tavern, Signior Strenuo, where we may have a cup of
good Canary; I am for you there, Signior Strenuo, and will spend my checquin
most heartily, Signior; for, I love to be frolique as well as courteous,
especially with strangers, Signior.


Stren. -- Come then, brave old Boy, we'll have a cup o'th best on it. Will you
go along now and I Will give you your morning draught?


Jayl. No -- not now; I must wait upon my Lord Borasco, he sent word that he
would be here by and by.


Stren. Farewell then -- at night -- old Hary -- at night.


Exit Stren. Jayl. Yes, yes, I shall not fail you Signior, I warrant you. This
same Strenuo is a notable fellow, as ever I knew of a Siennois: he loves to be
courteous, effaith.


Enter Borasco with Soldiers. Bor. See it be done, I say, the Senate means
To whip most of your stubborn Siennois,
By his example -- sirrah, Jailer.

Jayl. My Lord.

Bor. My Lord Marciano is condemned to die --

Jayl. The time, my Lord --

Bor. Within six days, no more respite --
Here are the Generals orders for it.
-- Sirrah, look to your prisoner, watch him well.
I Will double all the ordinary guards
About the prison; place my Sentinels
In every corner --

Jayl. I shall watch him, my Lord, I Will assure you,

Bor. As you will answer us: now he shall die.
Although he has escaped sometimes before,
His worship shall play fast and loose no more.

Exeunt omnes. Scaena Octava.
Enter Chrysolina, Marionetta, as in their Chamber. Chrysostom. I Profess
ingenuously, Sister, I am ashamed of it.


Mar. And I likewise; for people give easily credit to any report now a days.


Mar. Let Us rather be uncivil as admit them next time, Sister: I love no such
company, I Will assure you.


Enter Signior Pantaloni. Pant. Ladies, I am come to wait upon you again --
according to my duty -- as in duty I am bound to undertake.


Chrysostom. Sir, you are very welcome, I hope your mother is well.


Pant. Yes, forsooth, Madam, how does your self?


Chrysostom. In very good health, Sir, I thank you.


Pant. I am very glad -- But, hark you, Madam -- one word in private with you
-- to Mar. This by your leave Mistress.

leads her aside. Ha^k you me now -- my mother and I were sitting by the
fireside last night, as it is our custom, you know, in the winter-nights after
supper; and -- I do not know what we were talking of: but, amongst the rest I
remember, if I have not forgot, -- that she said -- she said, says she -- Now
-- whether this be true or not, I cannot tell; you know best your self: but, I
am sure she said it.


Chrysostom. What, pray Sir?


Pant. Now -- I vow -- if it were true, I would be as glad of it, as ever I was
of my breakfast in a cold day: -- for, I protest ingenuously, I am sure you
know, I love to be serious.


Chrysostom. Pray what is the matter, Sir?


Pant. Why -- I vow I know you would blush now, else I would tell you it.


Chrysostom. I beseech you resolve me, Sir.


Pant. I vow, I can hardly do it now, I am so stupefied -- with the rarity of
the object of your person.

Kisses her hand.
Chrysostom. I can have no longer patience --


Pan. -- Nay, hold -- here is it now -- I hope you will not tell it again; for
it was told me as a great secret -- why says she -- but, as I told you, I know
not surely if it be true or not: but, shall I tell you what I answered --
Marry, Lady mother, says I -- I fear you are but scorning me.


Chrysostom. But, what was it that she said, Sir?


Pant. Why -- I vow -- she -- even said -- that -- you loved me -- and O but I
was blyth --


Chrysostom. Hum -- and is that all? keep such a long discourse for nothing.


Pant. O! -- I hope you are not angry.


Chrysostom. No, no, Sir.


Mar. Why -- you might have said all that in three words, Sir.


Pant. Nay -- but prithee tell me if it be true: for, (...) it be not, I shall
win two Ryals from my mother: for, she and I ^a^d a wager upon it, and I am
come here for nothing else but to be resolved of it.


Mar. Well -- then, you have win, Sir.


Pant. Nay -- do not mock me now; I profess, I had rather lose a dozen of Ryals
before she should not love me: for, I am sure -- as sure as this glove is upon
my hand -- I love her.


Enter Boy. Boy. Madam, dinner is ready.


Chrysostom. We come. Signior, will you dine with us, and -- afterward we shall
talk of that at more leisure.


Pant. With all my heart, fair Ladies, If you please, I will sup with you, and
lie with you too -- I love your company so well.


Exeunt omnes. Actus Tertius, Scaena Prima.
Arabella sola appears sitting at a table as in her Chamber, etc. Ar. Laden
with cares: o'rewhelmed with misfortunes!
Can female shoulders bear my heavy crosses --
I left my native country of Siena.
To find out Marciano here at Florence:
Now have I found him: but O! how, God knows,
And I too well percieve: -- unhumane fates,
Whether, ah! whether will you hurrie me?
No end to your severity: -- Ay me!
What have I done? pray let me know my crime:
As yet I plead strong innocence: unless
It be a crime to love: pray show my faults,
Or else suspend my pains --
Now (which is sad) I can scarce have repose
For sighs and cares: and when I once awake*
Borasco, therein my true Jailer, waits me,
With fresh solicitations: -- thus my heart
Is rent in pieces; the one half sorrow claims,
The other love -- Ay me! what shall I do?
weeps
Enter Strenuo Str. She Is discontent already: but those news
I bring, will make her sadder: I dare scarce
Declare them, least she swoon -- Madam.

Ar. Welcome, dear Strenuo, pray how does thy Lord?

Str. Well, Madam, -- but e're long, if fates prevent not --

Ar. How -- that again, -- me thinks, thou looks not cheerful
As thou were wont, -- how does my Lord, I say?

Str. (If I dare tell you) he is condemned to dye.

Ar. -- To dye! -- Ay me -- be merciful, and kill me
Good Strenuo, honest friend -- prithee dispatch --

Str. Stay Madam, you are mad --

Ar. -- Condemned to dye --
O how my heart strings, by that pin of grief,
As by an unexpert musicians hand,
Who strives to raise his Lute to highest notes,
Tuned up above the nick begin to crack.

Str. Forbear, fair, Lady, it is no time to weep,
Now we must do; now we must muster all
Our wits to plot his escape --

Ar. As how -- Alas fond Strenuo: -- escape!
Dream not on that, rather invent some means,
How we may dye together, like true lovers.

Str. Madam, you wrong your self, I Will undertake.
By your assistance, to effect my purpose.

Ar. By my assistance, prithee doubt not that,
What will I not do, if I can, to save him?

Str. Then, Madam, here is aquafortis for you.
Look -- this will do it, Lady, this applied
To th'iron grate o'th window, will consume it
In a short space; then in the silent night
By help of a small rope he may escape.

Ar. It Is well, but all depends on the aquafortis,
I cannot safely carry it to his chamber;
That Cerberus, that ugly cat-e'yd Jailer
Will sure discover me --

Str. Nay, as for him,
I Will keep the villain tippling all the while
He never shall suspect you; I Have provided
A soldiers habit for my Lord, in which garb
The devil himself shall never smell him out.
I Will so disguise him: -- go good Madam, go
Tender my love to him, and press him by
All means to use it quickly I Will wait on him
At th'hour appointed --

Ar. I go, pray heavens, it may succeed.

Str. Fear not.

Exeunt severally. Scaena Secunda.
Enter Cassio and Leonardo. Cass. SO -- you intend thither again, Leonardo, you
were highly entertained, Boy.


Leon. And I believe, Cassio, you had but small encouragment.


Cass. Small encouragement indeed; but you must know, love is never in it is
height, so long as limitate within the sphere of reason: I love her so much the
more that she appears unreasonable, as you call it.


Leon. But, aside, here comes Don Quixot and Sancho Pancho.


Enter Becabunga and Pantaloni discoursing. Cass. 'Slid, let us accost them.


Leon. No, let us first observe their behavior.


Pant. Say you so: O! I long furiously to travel.


Bec. I mar'le you delay so long.


Pant. Why, I vow my trunk has been twice a shipboard for Marsei^^es, and my
self at Ligorn, but, I vow my mother weep'd so, that I could not find in my
heart to leave her.


Bec. And it may be the Lady Chrysolina would not permit you.


Pant. O -- no; I know she would wait upon me some half year, or so yet while I
saw France and came back again; although I vow, she is a pretty, pretty, pretty
Gentlewoman, as I know betwixt me and her.


Bec. You will have her yet, I warrant you.


Pant. I hope so; for I am sure she loves me, or else I have no skill.


Bec. Does she so, and that is some encouragment though.


Cass. Prithee let us interrupt them, enough of such discourse in all conscience.


Leon. Yes, now we will accost them -- Gentlemen, the general character of you
in this City, has rendered us ambitious of your acquaintance.


Cass. Signior Becabunga, you are most auspiciously returned to the City.


Bec. Your humble servant, Sir; your extollation of me is undeserved.


Leon. Leon. to Pant. Sir, I do but what all ingenuous persons should do, no
question you are conscious of your own merits.


Cass. takes B^c. aside. Pant. Sir, the faculty of my expression -- is not
capable to entertain -- as I may say -- or express the motion of my affection,
to uphold -- as I may say, acquaintance, familiarity with you -- I hope you
understand me, Sir.


Leon. Yes, and admires your wit too, Sir.


Pant. Sir, I am your very humble servant; I hope I need not back it with an
oath; nam, nemo tenetur (you know) jurare in suum detrimentum.


Cass. Good, and what said they?


Bec. Why, they said you were a couple of idle youths.


Leon. How! -- Cass. Prithee let me hear out this discourse.


Pant. -- Ho, ho, very true, I protest I think they wronged you: for, for my
own part, as I am Gentleman, I think you are very civil, although I say it in
your face.


Cass. Good, and no more prithee?


Bec. Nay, now I have not leisure, Manduco will be seeking me through all the
Town; O he will chide me, if he find me not.


Cass. Hang him a Loggar-head.


Bec. A Loggar-head, I would not for never so much he heard you say that; he
thinks himself no small man I Will assure you.


Adieu, Sir -- Pantaloni, will you go?


Exit, Bec: Pant. Annon, Sir -- Gentlemen, I shall be very willing and desirous
that we may entertain our present conversation willingly: and, for my part, I
have the honor to drink one cup of wine with you. I will wait upon you at any
time or place convenient, if there be no lawful impediment why these parties
may not be joined -- Oh, I crave you pardon, Gentlemen, -- Lapsus linguae non
est atramentum. Farewell.


Exit. Leon. Now, go thy ways, Signior Pantaloni, thou art this day as
complete a gull as lives in Florence, without disparagement of any Gentleman
whatsoever.


Cass. He has discovered all to me, Leonardo, I never read of such humourous
Ladies.


Leon. And they will be so always, while we can render them gulls despicable in
their sight.


Cass. Let Us think then how to affront them.


Leon. I Will rack my invention, but I will set them by the ears together.


Cass. That were good, if you can do it handsomely.


Leon. I Will do my best; come -- let us go consult upon it.


Exeunt. Scaena Tertia.
Enter Merciano, Arabella. Marc. Persuade me not, I cannot but abhor
Such a preposterous attempt --

Ar. My Lord --

Marc. Dear soul of sweetness, do not torture me
With fruitless plots -- within four days I die --
Should I escape and leave you prisoner --
-- Think, think on that --

Ar. You may escape, my Lord;
I have brought hither t'you, some aquafortis
Which your friend Strenuo gave me this morning;
You may apply it to the grate o'th'window --

Marc. And what then --

Ar. Your friend assures me 'hath a Soldiers habit
In readiness for you. This same aquafortis
Will do the business -- quick, apply it quickly --
Look to your self, now it grows late, my Lord.

Marc. May I trust this --

Ar. You may, indeed, it is true.
Now, now, or never, you must soon apply it --
This night you may as easily escape.

Marc. I Will try this trick for once --

Ar. Fear not the Jailer; he is fox'd already,
So Strenuo did assure me --
Apply it then, and if you don't escape --

Marc. I Will undertake it then -- leave this with me,
I Will go about it presently -- mean time,
I Will cause put all in order -- you must return
Within an hour hence: -- and cause Strenuo
Be ready at the window --

Ar. Fear not that.

Marc. Farewell then.

Ar. May my choycest prayers assist you.
Exit Marciano. Arabella sola. And if this fail, what can a woman's wit
Invent, that will succeed? -- Alas, I fear,
Still, still, I fear, while he be safely hence.
I have used all means, nothing left untried
For his enlargement; yet could not prevail.
-- O love! -- who can define thee -- hopes and cares,
In constant balance; hovering up and down --
Here Is a poor heart, within this troubled breast;
That like a malefactor at the bar,
Trembles at this design: -- O powerful love --
What have thou not persuaded me to do --
Sings behind the arras. -- But hark, a song, I will give ear to it,
I know Borasco has ordained it for me --

Song.
1.
So, so,
Lo Lillies fade, before the Roses show
Themselves in bow-dye, summers-livery.
Feasting the curious eye,
With choice variety,
While as before
We did adore
Narcissus in his prime.
Now Roses do delight
The nycer appetite:
Such is the vast disparity of time.
2.
So, so,
One woman fades, before another know
What it is to be in love; but in a trice
All men do sacrifice
To th'latter, and despise
Her, whom before
They did adore
Like Lillies in their prime.
Since now her sparkling eyes
Are darkened in disguise:
Such is the sad disparity of time.
Ar. A proper simile -- now I see in what
Article his pulse beats: -- no Siren shall
Bewitch my soul to love: -- O Marciano,
How I lament thy fate: heavens lend me tears,
Since by my prodigal expense of sorrow,
I Am become banquerout: or else I beg
A period to my days: since certainly,
Life without love, is but calamity.

Exit weeping. Scaena Septima.
Enter Manduco, Marionetta. Mar. CAn he not speak for himself, Sir? he must
court by his ambassadors, forsooth.


Man. The reason is, in promptu, Madam; for the youth is endued with pudicity:
he cannot be his own buccinator, or Trumpetter of his own fame; but he bid me
assure you that he (...) vehemently, imo toto cord affect you. And so it may
appear by his own manuscripts; as, exempli gratia, read the 3, page, (...) line
of that luculent Epistle of his to you, dated, 1. Call. Mart^* You will* find
that a man cannot express himself more lovingly: (...) calls you, enim, the
prototype of all beauty, the Archetipe of modesty, the source from whence all
other rivolets of chastity d^ Scaturiat, etc. Is not that amantissimum?


Mar. No, it is not enough Sir.


Man. No -- why he told me, that you would not permit osculation, and what else
can he do when he is in private with you, for I taught him not to be loquacious
--


Chrysostom. Be merry, Sister, you are happy, you are a Lady, Sister --


Enter Chrysolina h^stily Man. A Lady! -- quid sibi vult, to whom is she
desponsat, Madam?


Chrysostom. The business is now at a close, Sister, Cassio may go to his travells
now, he dare trouble you no more, Sister.


Mar. What do you mean? shall I be married, and not know to whom?


Man. Yes, Sicuti nunc mos est, you may be colloc^te in nuptials, before you
know cui, quando, and quomodo. a est, to whom, how, or when.

Aside.
Chrysostom. Don't you know, Sister, Signior Becabunga?


Mar. Is he the man?


Chrysostom. Who else do you think?


Man. Ho now omnia recte again -- Lady, I congratulat the immense, ineffable
felicity and secundity of your sagacious election --


Chrysostom. Has not he been wooing you all this while? who else should be your
husband but he, pray? Man. Hum --


Mar. Well I am content. Man. Recte --


Chrysostom. Content, -- marry I should willingly change conditions with you. Man.
Been habet.


Chrysostom. He is a good match, I Will assure you.


Man. I can add a jurament to that.


Chrysostom. Mr. Manduco, she owes much to you for it.


Man. To me, Madam: O I am obligate to your ingenuity.


Chrysostom. She does indeed, Sir: -- Come, Sister, let us in, and devise what rare
fancies we must have against the wedding, we will send to the Mercers
presently, and have the best Sattins, taffatas, ribbons and such other toys,
that can be had for money, come, come, -- Farewell good Sir -- honest friend
Manduco, farewell.


Man. Well, he may be a good husband yet for all that --

Exeunt. Manduco solus Friend Manduco, says she, notatu dignum: now am I their
friend, their amicall relation: so, this matrimony is, I may say, now almost,
very high, altogether consummate: for which I expect a large honorary from both
parties: O the pregnant wit of an intelligent Scholastic! now if I can
effectuat the like for Signior Pantaloni, I shall have likewise aliquid
amplius: so that I must at length provide for a matrimonial relation to my
self: for, although, I be quinquagenarius, or fifty years of age, yet what
Virgin in Florence will respuat me when I abound in riches, and shall be --
Dives agris, dives, positis in foenore nummis.


Exit. Scaena Quinta.
Enter Pantaloni with Chrysolina. Pant. NOw, Madam, since I have got you all
alone, I protest, I must make a little bold with you -- Embraces her.


Chrysostom How Sir!


Pant. In civility only, I mean in civility, Madam, for I would only ask you
one question, and that is not two, videlicet, whether or no, that is, when we
may be Joined in the lawful band of matrimony, betwixt these parties
following, to wit* for you see Becabunga has not been long a doing, he has
taken your Sister to be his lawful spo^se already, I hear, although he has
been but a fortnight a wooing of her, and yet I have been woing you one time
with another these three months, I wot well, and I am sure that you love me --
Chrysostom. Are you sure, Sir?


Pant. Yes indeed, and I think there is as much reason for the one as for the
other: and to be free with you, a my conscience I might have had a bony
Gentlewoman (just such another as your self) with twelve thousand Ducats in
portion, a month since, had it not been for you: consider, pray you, what you
promised to my mother last night.


Chrysostom. You will allow me a time to consult with my self, Sir, will you not? --


Pant. That Is a strange consulting! what have you been doing ever since I see
you first? I am sure you have had time enough to consult all this while: and
I Will tell you now, when your friends and mine have agreed, there is no time to
consult, but presently to be matrimonyed; you know that as well as I now.


Chrysostom. You will do well to press me no further at this time, Sir.


Pant. I Will let you alone for once then; but, the next time I shall come to see
you, you must not consult any: for, to test you truly, as I heard my mother
say, you may be glad of me for your husband -- Chrysostom. Pray, no more, Sir.


Pant. And then, when I have spent so much money in wooing you, you will yet
go, may be, and marry another. ^y for shame.


Chrysostom. I shall not marry while I give you an answer, Sir.


Pant. I, but as my mother says, it is good to be sure, if any other man
should beat me out of my st^rrops now: I would come to a peeled egg, would not
I? Chrysostom. No more of that, Sir.


Pant. I Will refer my self to your own discretion then -- but, O! -- I had almost
forgot, I vow, that is very well remembered; was not I mounted on Peg-a-sus last
night? (now this Peg-a-sus is the muses horse, he has wings and flies, God
bless us) and what think you I have done? marry you shall hear what rare Verses
I have made. O! Madam, are you there? you are come in very good time; I was
just a going to read Enter Mar. my Verses, but you shall hear an Anagram first
-- It is a pretty thing, Madam; you can read and Takes out his Verses, etc.
write I warrant you; see you there your own name -- reads. You see, --

Chrysolina (Anagram)
You're even like a cherry.
I Will be judged if that be not pretty now: for, do you see, I have only borrowed
some four letters, or so* out of, Madam, your Sisters name, here, because she
is a nigh relation and may spare them; and I have added two (I think) out of
the quickness of my self.


Chrysostom. Excellent indeed, Sir. Mar. Good, upon my word.


Pant. I, but you have not seen all yet; here are brave Verses upon your name,
Madam Chrysolina.


Chrysostom. An acrostick, Sir.


Pant. I, I, an accurstick, the same. And thus it is -- take notice now. reads.
there is the C. now.

Can thou not see, Pantaloni,
How thy Mistress is so bony?
Now I am speaking to my self, as't were.
Revera, she is even such,
You cannot match her, and that is much.
Now there is C. H. R. Y. that is Chry.
She is handsome, neat and fine,
O, now if she were but thine.
There Is S. O. now that is Chryso: now I am speaking to my self you must
understand all this while.

Live then in hopes, and know it is constantly thy duty,
Is always, everlastingly, to extol and upbraid her beauty.
But, now take heed, here comes the tongue of the trump --
Nar^issus, Roses, and every flower,
All must yield to her fair, rare, bright, sparkling color.
That Is Chry-so-li-na: Now, is not that right now? say any of you, if you dare,
if these Verses be not as good as any you have seen.


Chrysostom. Mar. They are extreme good, Sir.


Enter Boy, rounds Pant. in the ear. Pant. So, so, tell him I come: -- Ladies,
I must leave you, but I will not go home yet: Becabunga has sent for me to a
collation; we will drink both your healths e're we go to bed yet, and to morrow I
shall see you e're you can get on your petticoats, Madam Chrysolina: for, I
must be more familiar with you, since I have got such a good commodity of
frequenting you -- I shall show my mother all that has past betwixt us, Madam;
So farewell.


Exit. Mar. How do you like him, Sister?


Chrysostom. As formerly, I find him a very discreet Gentleman.


Mar. I would you had him for your husband.


Chrysostom. I should wish that same, in a fair way, Sister.


Mar. Considering especially, it is best to marry while you are now in your
prime.


Chrysostom. Right -- for old maids are mere dogs-meat, they spoil the trade of
wooing -- Go by -- go by.


Exeunt. Scaena Sexta.
Enter Marciano, Borasco. Bor. It Is true, my Lord; yet, I don't much approve
Your Dukes severe proceedings; Florence will not
Endure the lash of Monarchy, like France
Or Spain: -- No, they must be their own carvers.
-- I hope the Lord Barbaro, who is now
President of the Senate, will reform
Many of our abuses -- Marc. Well, you will
Come all to taste of your own vintage yet;
So I believe: for, never yet, rebellion
Escaped unpunished: -- But, you remember
You promised that the Lady Arabella
Might see me e're I dye. Bor. She shall, my Lord;
-- So -- by this hand, a plot, in going ^ff.
A very plot: he is my Rival sure --
But shortly, Signior, you shall carry your head
Upon a Seaffold; and then, who dares
Claim her, besides my self.
Exit Bor*
Marciano solus. When men begin to quarrel with their Prince,
No wonder if they crush their fellow Subjects.
We are eye-sores to th'State: their black designs
Are crossed by us; and therefore we march off. --

Enter Arabella weeping. Marc. Am I not yet sufficiently plagued
With crosses: but you must add one, which is
Heaviest of all, -- why weeping -- prithee cease
To vex thy self: I am all resolution,
And long to show my courage: since my stars
Have ordained my departure: rest contented.

Ar. Alas -- and is my plot thus come to naught --

Marc. Peace, prithee, for although I am not able
To pay what your perfections claim, yet sure
All generous souls (my true executors)
Shall pay my debt, fair Nymph.

embraces her. Ar. My Lord, your death can be no more courageously
Endured by you, then deplored by me --

Marc. Tush, as for death, I fear the varlet not,
I Have often stare'd him out of countenance:
I have considered, that love to my Prince,
Should over-sway all others: have chosen
Rather to endure one stroke, and dye, then live,
And undergo the censure (of all crimes,
The most detestable) Disloyalty.

Ar. Ay me! incensed heavens, can nothing else,
Appease your wrath but such an offering?
O, cannot I, (speak) I, although a woman,
Supply his place: I Will be an Amazon,
Expose my naked breast to steel, and show
All women are not fettered to the distaffe.

Marc. Be not so cruel: all good things forbid,
The world should see such a fair soul expire,
And not dissolve it self: thou cannot dye,
(Although thou would) and Marciano live,
No, no more then a watch can move, if once
The cord be broke; can I live after thee*

Ar. Alas, Alas, unheard of tyranny!
Unjust, even in injustice: thus to be
So cruel, as to murder him, and yet
Spare me; as much as if I should become
My own soul murderer; villains, how unjust!
-- But here is my passing bell.
A bell rings within. I must away -- farewell -- Oh, oh, my heart,
My heart dissolves, my Lord, I must away.

Marc. Away -- farewell bright love --
embraces.
Ar. Farewell, my Lord --

Marc. Farewell -- now all good things preserve thee here,
The gods hereafter: thus -- and thus I leave kisses, etc.
My heart in legacy: -- thus, I take my last
Morsel of pleasure: never shall my lips
Kiss any thing hereafter, save the block --

Ar. So, thus -- and thus, I willingly resign
All, what is yours, this heart: and so farewell.
Farewell for ever -- oh -- Farewell, my Lord.
Exit.
Marciano solus. -- So, down goes dust and ashes, powers and honors,
Riches and joys, the smoke of our desires,
With all we can call ours: our youth, our strength,
Fly like the sullen clouds, when Boreas swells
Their entrails with his breath: we, suddenly,
Like wilde-fire, disappear, and straight another
Steps in our place; and so we are no more --
-- Then heart, as thou have still afford me courage,
Inspire me now, that I may valiantly
Act the last part of this my Tragedy.

Exit. Actus Quartus, Scaena prima.
Enter Manduco solus, drunk. WHere is this same unhappy Boy? this Signior
Becabunga I have been making investigation, scrutination, exploration, and
speculation for him this hour, and yet I cannot find this in dividuum vagum, as
I may say -- so, what are (Enter Cass. Leon you, boni viri, I know, you have
hurryed this Gentleman for who^ I search to some compotation, or else ad
lupanar; yea, I am sure o (...) -- how sad it is to see young men, even,
impuberes adolescentes, ^ndulge venery, and ebriety so much, and quid Venus
ebria curat? ^s a friend of mine says.


Cass. The fellow's drunk, sure --


Man. -- Drunk! O pervicacem hominis indolem! accusing ^ne of ebriety, when I
am, even in sana mente constitutus, constitute in san^ty of mind: it is true,
indeed, I have been drinking; out it was with some of my brethren, imo fratres
fraterrimi.


Leon. What were they?


Man. Why, there was Light-body, Laurie, Latie, Cheisly quoque Brounie, Bowique
Hi enim sunt Tuscanii gloria summa soli: besides our hospes, what do you call
him, Architabernarius, or Arch-taverner, who is one of the commissioners for
administration of -- drink -- to the people of Tuscania.


Cass. Don't you enquire for Signior Becabunga, Sir.


Man. Yes, the very same, where is he? ubinam est?


Cass. You will find him at the Verona^tavern, hard by, with some of his
comrades.


Man. Say you so, I will go find him then, profecto I think I could scarce
abstain from vapulating him for this his contumacy.


Exit. Cass. Now Leonardo, it is time we were stirring, if we do not, this match
will go on.


Leon. Nay, I Will do any thing for thee, e're thou lose her, Cassio,

Cass. Come then; I have almost gulled Pantaloni into a belief, that Becabunga
wrongs him, for which he swears he will be revenged: now, if you can do the
same with the other, our design may succeed yet.


Leon. Well, go you about your business then, fear not me.


Exit. Cass. Now, wit and art assist us both, I Will search my gamester and
accomplish the trick.


Exit. Scaena Secunda.
Enter Arabella, with the Jailer. Jayl. MAdam, I will conduct you to him once
again, but you must be very secret, for I hazard my life and reputation, if my
Lord Borasco have intelligence of this, for he gave me strict command this
morning, that I should admit none to him but his confessor.


Ar. I shall be very secret, I warrant you.


Jayl. Come then, soft Madam, soft.


Ar. For heavens sake good my Lord,
Exeunt, she enters again with Marciano. Upon my knees I beg it --

Marc. This is impossible; I cannot do it;
Prove not a sweet Remora any more,
I Am now resolved: look to thy self, fair gemme.

Ar. Cannot the tears of innocence prevail.
Where is your courage now? what? are you cool?
Is all that noble blood, that formerly
Run in your veins exhausted? must a woman
Become your Trumpeter, and stir your spirits
Since it is but death at all hands --

Marc. Prithee hold,
I would most willingly (as what man will doubt)
Procure my liberty by what ever means
But -- O here lies my fear, thou, thou bright love,
May come to suffer by it --

Ar. Ah my Lord.
Consider pray' that I have liberty
To go abroad at pleasure: I have gained
The Lord Borasco's favor: he will grant me
That which some dare not ask, nay must not think on.
I Will follow you without the least suspicion.
Consider that -- Strenuo has promised
To entertain the Jailer in his cups,
While you be safely escaped.

Marc. I Will hazard then:
Bright angel of my fancy, see you follow
Immediately, for e're you should endure
The rebels censure, I would rather forfait
A thousand lives.

Ar. Doubt not of that, my Lord.

Marc. Then once for all -- O my good stars direct me.

Ar. Farewell, my Lord, goodness protect you still

Marc. Farewell pure quintessence of my affection
Embraces. Farewell, pray heavens grant us a joyful meeting.

Exit Ar. Now, now at length, I hope he shall escape;
O supreme powers, assist him now, or never,
And ease my soul of its long burning fever.

Exit. Scaena Tertia.
Enter Cassio, Pantaloni. Cass. SIr, (as your friend, I speak it) Leonardo and
he have joined their wits together to affront you; and you will not believe
what impression their false suggestions of you have taken upon the Lady
Chrysolina.


Pant. I! So I thought, when she told me last day that she would consult
forsooth: A pox take all your consulting tricks, say I, for I never knew any
good come of women's consultations yet.


Cass. Right Sir, you might easily smell Leonardo's plot in that same word, for
he intends that Becabunga shall have Marionetta, and he himself Chrysolina: for
which Becabunga does solicit your Mistress all this while: if you look not to
your self quickly you are undone, Sir.


Pant. I, so I guessed always, for, do you see, some women, are the most
humourous little creatures, a man shall not know when he is in their favor,
and when not: but as for Becabunga -- I Will say no more at this time: but I vow
I Will cudgel him to death so soon as I can see him.


Cass. And please but command me, you shall not want my assistance, I Will assure
you.


Pant. No^ Sir, I shall not need your help to beat such a puppet as he is: what
would you think to write a challenge to him, Sir?


Cass. So you know, I advised you at first, when I sent for you to the Taberna
del. Reina, while you believed that Becabunga had sent for you.


Pant. Hang him, I will hear no more of him: I will write a challenge to him
presently.


Cass. And if you will please to take my advice in pe^ning on it, I will so
terrify him.


Pant. With all my heart, Sir, for I would have it such language as might make
him hang himself for fear: and for Leonardo, after I have discussed Becabunga
then have at him.


Cass. If you please to employ me to carry it to him?


Pant. Yes Sir, you shall go along with me, and help me to write it, for the
truth is I am not much used with such challenges, and my mother bid me always
have a care of quarrelling, but an she were burned I Will fight with that
rascal, who has affronted me so.


Cass. A most generous resolution.


Pant. Come with me Sir.


Cass. Now, Leonardo, play thy game, or never.


Aside. Exeunt. Scaena Quarta.
Enter Marciano solus, disguised as having escaped -- THanks to my stars! as
yet unknown
I have cheat all the sentinells; and now
I suck free air again: -- you powers above
Direct my sudden course: and save my love.
Exit quietly Within.

Jayl. Ho, where is the pisse-pot there.

Str. Sirrah drawer, 'tother quart of sack, you raggamuffin you.


Courtain drawn appear Str. and the Jailer, drinking. Jayl. You shall do me
reason Signior Strenuo: -- it is my noble Generals health, Signior Strenuo --
Ho, where is the piss-pot there? -- you shall drink it, Signior --


Str. Come then, we'll drink his good health, although he has but two days to
live.

drinks.
Jayl. No matter for that, I love to be courteous to the last breath, Signior;
come, give me the cup: drinks. Sack, good Sack, Signior drinks again. -- O
brave Sack; come, lets have a catch, Signior.


Str. Come then -- Here Is a health to the pretty little thing,
With the bony, bony radiant eyes,
And the bony, bony, plump, round thighs;
Let us sing -- let us sing --
drinks.
Jayl. Let us sing, let us sing -- O brave Strenuo, here is a cup to thee for
thy catch. drinks.


Enter a Servant, beckens to Str. Str. approaches to him. Ser. He is escaped.


Str. It Is good, no more, silence I command you.


Ser. He waits for you.


Str. Plague on you, no more I say.


Ser. My Lord is escaped I say.


Str. Pox take you, hold your peace, or you will spoil all I say.


Jayl. Come young man, how does my noble General? you are his servant, I know
-- here is to him, a brimmer of Sack.

drinks.
Str. Drink and be gone, you cocks-comb you --


Jayl. You shall pledge me neighbor.


Ser. I shall, Sir.

drinks.
Str. My Lord has ordained me to present his love and respects to all friends
at my return to Siena -- get you gone whoreson, get you gone, or you will spoil
all.


Exit Ser. Jayl. Well, he is a noble Gentleman, Signior, although I dare not say
it: but, no more of him, this cup is yours, Signior, we'll have the other fl^ggon
of Sack e^re we part; for I love to be merry as well as courteous, especially
amongst strangers, Signior -- Ho, drawer, Sirrah, Loggar-head, the piss-pot,
Bastard, shall a man spoil his breeches, you son of a whore you.

Courtain draws.
Enter Strenuo quietly with the Servant. Str. You puppet you, could not you
hold your peace when I bid you -- come, where is my Lord?


Ser. At the Colonna in the Strada del Popolo, there he lurks quietly while you
come to him.


Str. Let the rogue the Jaysor slip then, and we'll bid adieu to Florence;
come, come quickly.


Exeunt. Scaena Quinta.
Enter Arabella sola, traverse quietly. -- SO, now he is gone: O! how my heart
does leap,
My pulse begins to move, since now I know
He Is past the rebels reach, before this time.
All Is well: this day, by order of the Senate,
Am I to be enlarged: had Marciano,
Whose understanding soul, dived in the deepest
Gulfs of suspicion, even but conjectured,
How e're they could accuse me for his flight.
Had rather died, e're he had condescended
To any such attempt -- but now he is safe,
I Will follow close my self: So hope assist me.

Exit. A noise within of many voices, crying confusedly, Soldiers searching
for Marciano. Enter Jailer, weeping and railing. Jayl. A pox on all your
Stennois tricks, say I, plague on that villain Strenuo: my noble General's
gone, fled, gone: what shall I do? How the devil came I to be gulled by that
^ame Strenuo! The last night while he and I were deep in our cups, my noble
General breaks the prison and escapes. O! plague on his crazy cocks-comb, I
could have trusted him as soon as any in Florence, and yet he has played me
such a trick as may bring me to a ropes end yet --

W^thin, Jailer Jailer, etc. Hark -- my Lord Borasco searching me, I shall be
hanged without doom or sentence --


Enter Borasco with Soldiers. Bor. Where is this villain?

Jayl. Here am I my Lord.

Bor. You ugly scarabe, what do you deserve?
Sirrah, you shall be hanged.

Jayl. Alas! my Lord,
I was deceived, grossly cheated, gulled,
Fox'd and what not, by Signior Strenuo;
A plague on him, may I say --

Bor. Peace, you wretch,
My Lord Barbaro will cause punish you
For your neglect, For he had never escaped
Had he not bryb'd you --

Jayl. I never see his coin.

Bor. Good gods! this day was he to be beheaded,
Now none knows where he is -- this Siennois Lady
Will be examined: for she seemed to carry
A great respect to him: and (this I know)
aside. The Senate will suspect her accessory,
No doubt: So she shall be condemned to die:
But I Will prevent their severe resolutions
By all means possible -- Come, you Scoundrel, come
You may be hanged yet, Sirrah, e're all be done.

Jayl. O! no more of that word hanging, my neck itches already.

Exeunt. Scaena Sexta.
Enter Leonardo, Becabunga. Leon. CAn you desire any more? look you, Sir, a
direct challenge.


Bec. I know not what belongs to your challenges; but I am sure, as you say, he
has affronted me.


Leon. Sir, the very words of this challenge would encourage one; considering
especially, that he is the basest coward that ever breathed for all this.


Bec. Think you so?


Leon. Yes indeed, Sir, I warrant you he dare never appear in field against
you: he is but a bragging fellow.


Bec. Nay, if I thought he would not appear, I might say something.


Leon. Trust me, Sir, he dares not.


Bec. I, but do you hear, Sir, if we can be handsomely reconciled, what needs
fighting?


Leon. Fie, Sir, you cannot honorably refuse, when he has writ a challenge to
you.


Bec. Not, Sir, why cannot I write another to him, and call him a coward, a
rascal, a slave, a villain, and what not, and still preserve my honor, as you
call it?


Leon. Alas! good Sir, there is no time now to talk, now you must fight, and I
will assist you.


Bec. I, if you will hold him to me while I beat him, there may be something
on it too.


Leon. Doubt not, Sir; but, as I told you, he dares not appear, you have no
more to do, but come armed to the fields, and if you find him not, brandish
your Rapier in the air thrice, proclaim him a coward, and so return.


Bec. With my honor, Sir?


Leon. Yes, Sir, with your honor entire.


Bec. aside. Well, I see I must fight; but if he does not appear now, I shall
be in a brave condition: for, then I will swear, rant and domineer, by my word
of honor, as my fathers foot-groom does. But will he not come, think you?


Leon. My life for it, he dares not appear; courage, we will out-dare both him
and Cassio.


Bec. Well, but when all is done, Sir, betwixt you and me, were I at home in the
Country again, all your honor, and honor above honor, should not cause me
fight: for, Pantaloni has learned to fence, Sir, and I know not what belongs to
fencing, not I.


Leon. Tush, fear not him, I tell you, he dares not appear, and if he does, I Will
fight him my self.


Bec. Will you do so, Sir, and I will be your tres humble serviteur Monsieur:
for, do you see, Sir, I am to be married shortly, now if I should chance to be
killed, (as who knows but I may) you know then, Sir, I cannot be married; why?
because I shall be dead, that is a good reason, Sir.


Leon. aside. Plague on him for a coward, how he talks; I shall have more ado
to allure him to this duel, then a cracked Courtier has to persuade an Usurer
to become surety for him.


Bec. And then you know, Sir, Pantaloni is to marry the one Sister, and I the
other: now it is not fit that we should fight together, who are to be brethren
shortly, for I know not what.


Leon. Why, Sir, you must resolve to fight: go along with me to the field: and
if he offer to thrust at you, I Will step in betwixt, and save you both.


Bec. Will you be as good as your word, Sir? Leon. I will indeed.


Bec. Then have at him -- But hark you, Sir, you must have a special care he
touch not my face, for so he may put but my eye (God bless us) and then where
is your honor forsooth?


Leon. He shall not touch you Sir, come, delay is dangerous.


Exeunt. At the other end Enter Cass. Pant. traverse etc. Pant. You may stand
by, and see fair play, Sir, I shall beat him to some purpose: Cass. As you
think fit, Sir.


Pant. Come on then -- O Becabunga! thou knows not how nigh thy fatal hour
approaches -- for I am sure he dares not appear.


Exeunt. Scaena Septima.
Enter Arabella sola in Prison, more closely confined, then formerly upon the
report that she was to be beheaded. Ar. O gods! is this the height of all your
wrath:
May I expect a requiem in this stroke?
Yes sure -- then graciously be pleased to hear
My ardent votes: -- O may my blood appease
Your incensed minds: restore my lawful Prince:
Let Marciano live: Let nothing hurt him:
O hear him, hear him, if there be a faith
Able to reach your mercy, let him have it.
I plead none for my self: -- O love assist me,
Courage, beyond the ordinar of my sex,
Support my spirits in this agony:
Death's but the thaw of all our vanity.
weeps,
Enter Borasco quietly. Bor. Nay now my soul dissolve: it is but a trouble
To keep thy quarter in this perplexed body.
O unkind Se^ate! eyes have not seen a fairer
Model of beauty -- Sure, no hatchet dares
Be horse-leech to her veins: or if it does,
All iron shall be quite accursed hereafter.
-- No, there is an angel keeps that paradise
A fiery angel guards her: Virtue, virtue,
Ever, and endless virtue! O rare beauty!
The nearest to her maker, and the purest,
That ever dull flesh showed us: such another
Could make atonement for half her sex.
-- See how she weeps --

Ar. Discovers him. Ar. -- So, now my torturer comes --

Bor. Now all good angels bless thee, fairest, truest
Heart-ravishing beauty: cruel, yet lovely tyrant.
Why still in sorrow? shall I never have
One gracious smile -- A las, how willingly
To save thy precious life would I submitt
My neck to cruelty -- by this hand, I would --
Kisses her hand.
Ar. Since it is ordained, Sir, I Will not endeavor
To prove a malcontent. Sir, I have done
What I intended; she is a cowardly Girl,
Who cannot endure one stroke for him, whose safety
Is so dear to his prince and country, vex not
Your self for my misfortunes: nothing can
Affright my resolutions --

Bor. Strange love! not to be paralleled?

Ar. Pish -- I contemn the fury of your base,
Malicious senate: reason does disdain
To dwell with such, whose souls are stiffled with rage,
They sentence, whom they will, no matter why,
Since innocent, or guilty, we must dye.

Bor. Madam, you shall not dye I will solicit
The Senate for you: if I cannot prevail
As I expect, before it come to th'worst
I Will set you free, although their fury reach
In going off. My person for it -- who does enterprise
To serve his fancy, must all fears despise.

Exit. Ar. Ah vain fomenter of vain, fruitless hopes,
Thy windmill-thoughts will break their axel-tree:
Go foolish enterpriser: hope no favor
From one, who e're she suffered thy embraces,
Would rather undergo a thousand tortures.
-- No, if e're woman was, or may be found,
That for fair fame, unspotted memory,
For virtues sake, and only for it is sake
Dares challenge room in history: O love
Let me be only Martyr in the case.
O Marciano, were it not thy safety
That did support my soul, I should prevent
The executioner: but since thou art
Free from the ravenous clutches of the rebels,
Poor Arabella from that spark alone
Derives her present courage --
-- Then blessed hour approach, I Will boldly show
That for his life, I can endure one blow.

Exit weeping. Scaena Octava.
Enter Cassio, Pantaloni. Swords drawn, Cass. THis is the place, this is the
hour appointed.


Pant. Yes, Sir, but, you see, he has not appeared, may not I put up my rapier
now, and go home again with my honor, may I not?


Cass. Not Sir: you must have a little patience.


Pant. Ho, Ho, that is very true, I must proclaim Leonardo and him both cowards
-- Oyes -- Oyes --

One coughs, and whispers within. But (a pox) I hear them coming hither. Come,
Signior Cassio, we have tarried too long, we will now return.


Cass. No, no, stay a little yet.


Pant. I see this fellow has a mind I should be killed: would I had that
unlucky challenge in my pocket again.


Cass. 'Slid, here they come; to your posture, Sir.


Enter Leon. Bec. swords drawn. Bec. O! look you there is Pantaloni, Sir, and
Cassio too, you said he durst not appear.


Pant. Nay faith, now I see it is no more jesting, there they come both with
their Rapiers drawn.


Cass. Courage, Signior.


Bec. What shall I do now, Sir?


Leon. Fight, what else?


Cass. We'll fight all four at once.


Leon. Yes, yes, by all means:


Cass. Have at thee then, villain, Leonardo.


Leon. At you, Sir.

Thrust.
Cass. Come, to it Becabunga.


Bec. Not I, Sir; as I am honest I will fight none at this time: for I have
some business to do in the City, Sir.


Leon. What, you sneaking gull, will you not fight for your Mistress, Sirrah.


Bec. No, Sir, I will fight for no Mistress at this time; I must go about
business of more importance, Sir -- aside. O! if he had not appeared now.


Leon. Not for the Lady Marionetta, Sir?


Bec. No, Sir, I will renounce all the right I have to her, before I fight, at
this time at least.


Pant. I like that well.


Cass, 'Slid, shall we come to the fields with you, and return thus affronted?
fight it out bravely, or by this hand I Will run you both thorough.


Pant. Nay, it shall not be so, Sir, you see we cannot fight at this time: for,
the truth is, (now when I remember) I have an appointment too, within less then
a minute of an hour hence, with some Ladies of my acquaintance.


Leon. That Is all one to us, Sir.


Pant. I see I must do it, there is no way else to escape -- aside. Gentlemen,
I know what will please you: because we have brought you into the fields, that
you may not be angry, as Becabunga says, I will renounce all the right I can
have or claim in the Lady Chrysolina.


Leon. Good --


Pant, For, do you see, Sir, I care no more for her, then a Roarer does for his
old Punk.


Leon. Excellent.


Pant. I protest to you, Sir, I think they are fools that fight for women, let
them fight for themselves a Gods name, it is sufficient we love them.


Leon. Admirably good!


Bec. So I say too Sir, and if you have wronged me, I here freely forgive you.


Cass. Sir, that is not enough, you shall both seal this paper, that we may
testify to other Gentlemen, how we were ready to fight.


Bec. What paper, Sir?


Leon. No matter for that, Sir, you shall both seal it, or by these hilts --


Pant. Nay hold, good Sir, I shall seal it -- what terrible oaths these
fellows use.

Pant. seals.
Cass Come, you must seal too.


Bec. Yes, yes, Sir.

Bec. seals.
Leon. Now get you gone both of you for a brace of infamous puppets, cowardly
cocks-combs, you arrogant, empty-skull'd wittals, not worthy of the least
favorable smile from any Lady: you have resigned your interests in two
honorable Ladies, and therefore deserve no less then to be kicked -- thus to
be kicked --

kicks him.
Pant. What do you mean, Sir?


Cass. Thus to kick you, you brace of bastardly Baboons --


Leon. And so we leave you as we found you, a pair of impudent filchers of
reputation, not worthy the name of Gentlemen.


Cass. Farewell my Cob-webs --


Leon. Farewell good Spanniels, farewell --


Exeunt ambo. Pant. Marry pox take you both, what notorious rascals are they.


Bec. Come, come, we must be friends again; let them go hang themselves if they
please.


Pant. If I had them in another place --


Bec. But hark you, what if they show the Ladies that we have renounced our
interest in them? what will you say then? think you that ever the Lady
Chrysolina will look upon you again.


Pant. I should have made them both black and blew.


Bec. Will you let us go and prevent them, I say.


Pant. By all means -- this trick shall do Leonardo no good, what a fool was I
to believe Cassio?


Bec. So I say always: but come, quick -- he that speaks first is always best
heard.


Pant. I Will to them yet, for all this, he has not beat me out as I thinks.


Exeu^^ Scaena Nona.
Enter Marciano solus, having got intelligence that Arabella was to die. --
HEart! art thou thunder-proof? can nothing break (...)
Shall Arabella die, and tho ^still live?
-- Burst stubborn piece of flesh -- O! heavens forbid,
Those eyes may live to see the world without her.
-- The Senate has condemned her -- O! base wre^^
Unhumane Tyrants; Monsters of this age;
O! barbarous villainy; what bloody thoughts?
It is not because she was accessory
To my escape: No sure, but 'cause I love her,
That she must die; as if those hell hounds mean'd
To strike the Stars, and all good things above,
Regardless of her deity: no devil
Could be more cruel -- But, hold, Marciano,
Thou ar't the executioner: thou alone.
Say, wretched man, was thou afraid to die?
Could fear prevail so far? Alas! thy fame
Has lost it is right wing by thy too rash flight,
Leaving so rare an hostage in thy place.
Yet, who had said, or who had ever thought,
A thing so closely carried could have ever
Thus come to light. She was to be enlarged
That very day: for so she did assure me,
Else had my wearied soul resigned it is casket,
And I, by this time, sleep'd with blessed shades
Of my Ancestors, maugre all her tears.
-- But what, I dream, I must do something more
Then only mourn for her: if art assist,
^l study to preserve her; either return,
Submit my self to mercy of the Rebels,
^f otherwise those goblins cannot be conjured,
Or else by open force, or private means.
What e're be the event, I Will procure her freedom:
May be the gods are more propitious
Then I imagine. Come -- it is resolved
in going off. She shall not die -- fools are amazed at fate,
Griefs but concealed are never desperate.

Exit. Actus Quintus, Scaena prima.
Enter Borasco solus. NAy hold, my spleen; do not burst yet --
How this same Lady has abused my favor,
Escaped, no man knows how; gone, God knows whether.
If I fly not, I shall supply her place,
That is resolved I know -- Fortune, you shall not
Play upon me; although you now begin
To frown upon most of our Senators:
For, since the brave Lord Barbaro is dead,
All such as were his creatures are discarded;
Amongst whom, I am one -- a plague on all
Your base seditious cocks-combs: your proceedings
Will strengthen Cleons interest. Hell Hounds, Tygars,
Adieu base Elves: I Will post to Venice straight,
And there evite the ruin of your State.

Exit. Scaena Secunda.
Enter Pantaloni, Becabunga, with Chrysolina, Marionetta. Pan. TUsh, these are
all but stories, Madam, I was but jesti^ with them when I did it.


Mar. Sir, I will hear no excuse.


Bec. I vow it is true, Madam


Pant. Nay, but hark you, Madam Chrysolina, if you come to that with it, I can
make you love me yet, whether you will or no.


Mar. Will you, Sir? Chrysostom. Pray, how do you that, Sir?


Pant. Why, thus I instruct it, Madam; I can show you several Letters under
your own hand and seal, day and date, etc. that you are my humble servant,
which you dare not for your ears deny, dare you? Chrysostom. You had best be silent.


Pant. Nay more, I know you love me yet, because the last time I was with you,
you gave me a knot of Ribbons, which my mother keeps well locked up in her
Cabinet yet, as a love-token: and moreover, when I said I will come and see you
again to morrow, you said, says you, you shall be welcome.


Chrysostom. This will not do it, Sir, you have renounced us, and therefore --

she offers to remove.
Bec. Nay hold, Madam, we were but in jest.


Pant. And then they forced us to do it.


Bec. I, and if we had not done it, they swore (God bless us) that they would
kill us.


Pant. And then, you know, it was better to seal a piece of paper then to be
killed.


Chrysostom. What strong arguments they use.


Mar. Sister, we must shake them off now or never.


Bec. And then, Madam, if we had been killed --


Pant. Yes, if we had been killed, it had been small advantage for you.


Bec. aside. I, and then, Madam -- and then, I say, Oh! if Manduco were here to
plead for me now.


Pant. Nay, if you will not hear us, take your pleasure.


Chrysostom. No more, Sir, get you gone, henceforth I disclaim you.


Pant. And I you too, do you see; I care no more for you, Miris, then you do for
me: I am as good a Gentleman as your self; and if you were not a woman I would
tell you more of my mind.


Bec. I knew it would always come to this at length, I vow; think you Gentle
women do nothing but entertain us with vain ^opes for a while, and then cast us
off.


Pant. M^stris, shall I tell you, there are more Ladies in Florence ^he^ you
that will be blyth of me yet; and so long as I have ^oney in store, I am sure
to have Mistresses in store.


Chrysostom. Are you so, Sir?


Pant. I that I am; but I will complain to your Uncle, to the Lady Saromanca,
and to all your kindred, that you have cheat me, for all your fair promises.


Chrysostom. You are a prating fool.


Pant. I am no more prating then your self, Mistress; but if there be justice to
be had of you, I Will have it.


Mar. Come, let us leave them, Sister, else they will both fall a weeping.


Pant. For whom, for you, Mistress? I Will let you know we are no such children.


Bec. No, but, I protest, I cannot but weep though.


Chrysostom. Mar. Farewell, farewell, march to your travels my Gamesters, farewell.


Exeunt ambo. Pant. Peugh -- Farewell; I believe you are the greatest fool of
the two, Madam Chrysolina, call they you.


Bec. I protest, Pantaloni, I am very sorry for the loss of this bony Lady
though. O! how my father will chide me now: for he had given Manduco orders to
provide my Wedding-cloaths, and now all is blown up.


Pant. Come, come, we know the worst on it: let them go, we will never want
great matches yet; let us think now to be revenged on them villains, Cassio and
Leonardo: the first time I meet any of them, I will cut the tongue out of their
heads that they shall never talk more.


Bec. I, so will I too: but we must have Manduco with us then, for he will make
them stand in awe of him.


Exeunt. Scaena Tertia.
Enter Marciano solus, as at Pisa. THat she is escaped, that, I know certainly,
So letters from Siena have informed me.
But by what means, or where she is, I know not.
Never remembers him, who, if he should
Forget her but one hour, would think he had
Offended highly, yet she is silent still.
If I receive no letters from her, shortly,
I Will become jealous of her, sure; that she,
Who was all love, is now so quickly cold
In her affections. -- But what! I blaspheme
The virtuous Arabella, she is all virtue,
And cannot prove unconstant --
Now let me meditate on what my Prince
Has ordered me to do: He Is still the same,
And bears a mind, that floats above the waves
Of all adversities, as who should say,
Fortune, even do thy worst. His Counselors,
Like to wise Mariners, affray'd to stretch
The top sails of their courage in this tempest,
Least both they, and their Prince should suffer shipwreck.
Only was I commanded some years since
Upon an expedition to Siena,
Encouraged by th'affectionate expressions,
And actions of the valiant Cassanaeo,
And others of our loyal countrymen.
But fortune crushed our enterprises, so
I did return to Savoy, where my Prince
Did then reside: and now, I am commanded
To second here an enterprise at Pisa,
Which whether it succeed or not; my duty
Is yet at least to prosecute it --
A post-horn sounds within. How Is this -- a post-horn: good --

Enter Strenuo with a Letter Str. All Is well, my Lord, now do our joys begin.
To flourish after such a tedious winter.
The Duk's restored, and now intends at Florence.
Here, here is a letter for it, from himself.

Marc. Restored! -- Nay hold my heart -- I Will read this letter.
reads -- True, True: -- O fortune how I hug thee now.
And thou my good friend Strenuo --
embraces him.
Str. Brave days, my Lord; the Court does fill apace,
The Ladies crowd in throngs: the glory of
Her sex, your darling, the fair Arabella,
Since clouds of melancholy are overblown,
Does now appear in loves full horizon.

Marc. O how propitious! lend me moderation,
Reins to my joy, as well as to my sorrow,
Else, I shall quickly burst to death: this blessed,
And unexpected Tarantula: of news
So ticles all my senses: -- joyful tidings!
My Prince restored! my dearest Arabella
At Court I now my felicity lacks nothing
But sight to be complete: that my eyes may
Persuade my yet almost incredulous soul,
To what my fancy never durst have prompted
-- To horse -- To horse, I Will post to Florence quickly.

Exit. post-horn sounds. Scaena Quarta.
Enter Pantaloni, Becabunga, and Manduco with swords by their sides. Man. O
Tempora! O mores! O the effraenate, licentious perversity of untamed
adolescency! what a villainous, scelerate attempt to entice two young Gentlemen
to a Duel: who besides, that they are both innocent Boys, why, their very
Uncles and other friends, are employed in serious negotiations of the Senate.
Prob Deum, atque hominum fidem! Is all my industry in solicitation, my immense
study and lucrubrations for framing familiar epistles, my oratory in private
commendations and exhortations for both these Gentlemen come to naught! -- Proh
facinus ingens!


Pant. Peace, Mr. Manduco: you must not only teach us how to beat, but likewise
assist us in beating these dissolute fellows; for I have sworn, Sir, and that
is enough --


Bec. I, so I say too, for, you know we wear our swords here for no other end;
look you, are not my hilts very handsome, O now, I will swear, By these hilts,
as well as Leonardo himself.


Man. And for that effect, I have got my sword too: I am lenis in puniendo: but
when I am provoked, invenient me ^^onem, they shall find me a very Lion: my
scholars at Santo Burgo, where I was sometimes ludimagister, can yet testify
that: and for my severity in castigando -- Probatum est.


Pant. Although Leonardo has got my Mistress, yet I Will have about with him,
albeit he be a Senators son in law, with a mischief to his heart, when such
Gentlemen of estates as I, am shak'd off.


Bec. And for me, since Cassio has got my Mistress: let him keep her: I must
look out for some other great match in time; for they say, Manduco, that now
since the ^uk's restored, they who were active in the late rebellion, must be
forfeit of their estates: and what will become of my Patrimony then: for you
know my father has been a great man all this while, (I fear he never be so
again) now, you know, if I loss my Estate, how shall I have a wife then? what
think you, Pantaloni?

Pant, draws.
Pant. Nay, I can think on nothing now, but how to thrust at Leonardo.


Bec. So, I will draw too, if you come to that with it.

Bec. draws.
Man. And for me -- I love no dimication -- but when I am provoked, I will
assist you -- Et sic arma amens capio, nec sat rationis in armis.


Man. puts the hilts of his sword betwixt his feet, and tuggs at it violently.
Enter Cassio, Leonardo, with Chrysostom. Mar. Cass. to Mar. Madam, my resolution was
always unfeigned to serve you: your coy refusal diminished nothing of my
affection, but did rather incite me the more to love you.


Mar. I did always esteem my self honored in your love, S^r, though the
capricious humors of my self-seeking friends did countermand my desires,


Bec. runs away, Man. and Pant. retire to a corner of the Theater. Leon. to
Chrysostom. Nay then, unspotted beauty, answer those gracious obligations your self:
it passes the activity of my invention. I have been always your devout
admirer; but now I am so much bound to love you, that although my affection
should super-erogat, yet I can plead no merits.


Chrysostom. Sir, your merits have made conquest of my affections --


Cass. Prithee, Leonardo, would see good sport --


Leon. As how?


Man. Nay, you must stay, I will not fight alone.


Pantaloni and Man. justles, Pant. wrestles loose, Man. solus to Cass. and
Leon. Pant. Fie, not before women, Sir, that were unhandsom --


Exit Pant. running. Man. Keep off, boni viri; for, if you approach, you shall
find the vinegar of my wrath. I have chastised many such in my time, I Will make
you know what it is rem habere cum Professore, to bell the cat with one to whom
you owe respect.


Leon. takes hold on Man. Leon. Thou slovenly, greazy Pedant, glass-gazing,
superfi^ial affected piece of ignorance, get you gone, speak no more ill of
Gentlemen; or if you do, you may come to carry your joints in a box yet --


Man. Never again, Sir -- lets fall his sword.


Leon. If you do -- Man. Ita me Deus amet, never, Sir.


Cass. We'll put you to the stripado, if you don't behave your self more civily.


Man. Never again, as I am erudit^ -- So help me, God -- never.


Exit. Mar. Poor fellow, he must have his humor.


Chrysostom. If he could hold his peace sometimes, he is a good honest fellow; but
he can speak good of no man, but those of his own profession.


Cass. We have punished him sufficiently, let us think no more upon him.


Leon. Nor upon our quondam Rivals either. Come, we'll continue our progress to
Court.


Exeunt omnes. Scaena Quinta.
A joyful noise within, Trumpets, Ketle-drums, H^-boyes, with all sort of
music. Enter the Duke, Marciano, with others of the Nobility, Courtiers and
Attendants, at his entry. Song.
NOw breaks our day,
Fairies away,
Pack hence, I say,
Your power's undone.
Room for Jov's progeny,
Full of divinity.
Cleon, brave Cleon, natures Paragon,
Rebellion breathless lies,
Hell sings her obsequ^^s,
Usurping Traitors quick be gone.
Now, Cleon, divine Cleon mounts His Throne,
Room -- room -- room -- room for Him alone.
Cleon. Heavens yet are just: they now have paid us home
Our former losses with large interest --
-- A good while lost is never known to many,
An ill while feel'd is scarcely known to any:
For men, like butter-flyes, rush on the candle
Of war at all occasions, until some
Are burned to ashes: others hurt their wings;
Then they recoil amazed, and not while then,
They blame the projects of their troubled brain.
-- Now (gods assume our thanks) we, who before,
Were tossed in waves of war, are so no more --
-- Florence, take heed, jest not with supreme Powers,
It Is hard to thrive, when heavens do countermand
Thy foul designs: -- But wisely learn to know
Thy former errors, and commit no more.

1. Court. -- A Prince's word is good divinity --

2. Court. -- While Subjects oaths are downright perjury,
And serve for nothing but to feed Rebellion.

Cleon. How! Marciano, you seem discontent,
What sullen cloud amid'st this calm of joys
O'^casts you noble soul? -- Marc. Not I, dear Prince,
I am not discontent.

Cleon. Come, Marciano, you shall feast your senses
On what we know your soul entirely loves.
-- Now let us in, it is time we were at counsel.

Exeunt omnes. Within, music as before. Song.
Dull man, do not see in his countenance
Such rare becoming grace,
As one might freely say he did enhaunce,
Majesty in his face.
Why art become
So grossly dumb?
Cannot thy tongue pay tribute to his praise?
Hark how all Florence sing,
In such a cheerful spring,
And every one their voices raise.
Why silent then, when after all our tears,
Clouds which did shroud the light, our Sun appears?
Appears -- Appears
Dissolving all our jealousies and fears.
Scaena Sexta.
Enter Arabella sola. Ar. ALl now rejoice, but I: my former griefs
Still dwell with me, until the noble, constant,
Generous Marciano does appear --
-- Goodness! it is he -- O!
how my heart begins,
Enter Marciano discoursing quie^ly with a Courtier. Exit Court. Even as a
murdered carcass, to distill
Gross drams of blood at sight o'th murderer.

Marc. discovers her. Marc. -- Cold virtue guard me -- if I dream not -- it is
she.
-- Merciful heavens, can Marciano see
His very soul? yet not in ecstasy.
-- O! Arabella, fairest, ever worthy,
embraces her. I offer thus my heart -- thus -- thus -- and thus --
O! art assist me -- sudden joy had never
Sudden expression --

Ar. Sure, my Lord, you cannot
Be more surprised then I am; pray imagine
A heart abstract from cares, and hois'd in high
Raptures of joy; even such you may define,
Mine-thine -- thine-mine -- the gods could never have been
More gracious then now --
embraces. Then, thus, my Lord, pray let me evidence
The temper of my heart, since you went hence.

Marc. O! thou, the loadstone of my else-wandring fancy,
That keeps my soul still fixed -- what can I render
Conform to thy fair merits --

Ar. Love, my Lord,
-- Love, love -- I say, I cannot ask for more.
Next, if you will oblige me, prithee honor
Our friend Falasse, one deserves your favor.
-- He entertained me kindly in your absence,
During your long exile.

Marc. Heavens thank him for it,
I shall esteem him highly, and recommend
Him to the Duke -- But now, my heart's in flames --
aside. -- Never was man more happy in his choice
Then I in mine -- Such Mistrisses are rare --
You were my fellow-sufferer; sprightly Nymph,
If love connive, would you not willingly
Be sharer with me in my prosperity?

Ar. Those, who know all things, know my great ambition.

Marc. No more -- no more -- we wrong our joys to stay
On such discourse -- it is time we supplicate
The gentle Hymen, he shall us unite,
That Florence may behold our joys complete.

Exeunt. Scaena Vltima.
Enter two of the guard with Partuysans, 1. Part. COme, Come, all things will
now resume their ancient splendor.


2. Part. Yes, yes, now we begin, like Mariners after a tempest, to suck our
bottles at ease again.


1. Part. O brave days! who would have dreamed on this sudden revolution some
years since.


2. Part. No more of that discourse, look to the Court-gates, for there shall
be such a crowd of Gallants with their Ladies, Apprentises with their Wenches,
Citizens with their Wives, and all the confused rabble, by and by, that we
shall have a great labor on it to keep the half on'em out.


1. Part. Right, for the Lord Marciano is to be married to night, and we shall
have a Masque, I warrant you.


2. Part. I believe we shall have a merry night on it.


1. Part. You are welcome, my masters, walk toward the further corner, pray
you, there you shall have best room.


Enter Cass. Leon. Chrysostom. Mar. Cass. The Duke will be here by and by. 1. Part.
We expect so Sir,


Leon. Come then, we will aside, Cassio.

A flourish within, Music, etc. Enter more Partuysans. Part. Clear the way, the
Dukes a coming.

Enter Cleon, leading Arabella by the hand* Courtiers, Attendants, etc. Cleon.
-- Remember no more, fair Lady,
O^ by gone miseries --

Cass. Leon. Chrysostom. Mar. kiss the Duk^s hand, etc. Enter Marciano with Strenuo,
presents him to the Duke, etc. Marc. May it please your Highness --
This was my friend, my very trusty friend
In all my exigencies, very kind
To both me and the Lady Arabella.
Here only, I present him to your Highness --

Str. kneels, etc. Cleon. Whatever favors were bestowed on you,
We do account them done to our selves --
-- You are his friend, so, Signior, you are ours.

Str. arises, Str. May all the blessings of the heavens combine
To raise your highness to a pitch divine --

Cleon. My Lord Marciano, we have always had
A narrow eye over all your proceedings,
Wee've found you loyal, without spot or blemish,
Val^ant, at all adventures, ever faithful,
And therefore after mature deliberation,
We here entrust the Government of Siena,
Your native country, to your managing --
gives him a Patent. Here Is our Commission -- take it, and remember
Our honor, and the humors of Siena.

Marc. Great Prince, whose daring eye strikes traitors dumb,
Revives all loyal souls: disperses all
Rebellions foggy mists: you have this day
Conferred such honor on your highness servant,
As were I a base Infidel, yow'd persuade
My heart to faith, my tongue to oratory --
-- Thus -- thus, dear Prince, I tender solemnly,
All homage to your highness, while I dye.

Cleon. Arise, enjoy those honors, and approve
Your self a pattern of both fear and love.

Cleon takes him by the hand. Man. -- Sere^^ssime, Augustissime -- dux

Court. -- Remove, remove that fellow.

Part. -- Come -- come S^rrah, you think you are in your school. Man. Dux --


Enter Man. Bec-Pant. Strenuo presents them severally to kiss the Dukes hand.
Man. harangues. Part. Come you villain.

Man. Princeps -- Tus -- Tus -- caniae.

Part. dragges him off. Court. What an impudent rogue is this?

Cleon. -- As for this Lady, whom thy gentler fates
Have still reserved for your chaste embraces,
We still will honor her, as having seen
Evident signs of her affection,
And loyalty to us --

Ar. And still shall be,
Dear Prince, so much as in a Woman lies,
I Will offer prayers and tears, and sacrifice,
The first fruits of my wishes; I Will implore
Such blessings, as the gods have heaped in store,
May rain upon your royal highness head,
That in your eyes heavens favors may be read --

1. Court. May foreign Princes his great power envy --

2. Court. May he his treacherous enemies plots defye --

Leon. May he restore our former happiness --

Cass. And Medicis great princely house increase --

Marc. While all his faithful Subjects long to see
The royal hopes of his posterity --

All. -- Long live our Prince, and may he still appear,
The brightest Star in all our Hemisphaere.
A joyful noise within, etc.

Exeunt omnes. Plaudite. FINIS

