THE LIVES Of Two and Twenty English Divines, EMINENT In their Generations for
Learning, Piety, and painfulnesse in the Work of the Ministry, and for their
Sufferings in the Cause of CHRIST.

Whereunto are annexed the LIVES of Gaspar Coligni, that famous Admiral of
France, slain in the Parisian Massacre; and of Joane Queen of Navarr, who died
a little before.

By Samuel Clarke Pastor of Bennet-Fink London.

Qui sanctum virum imitatur, quasi Exemplum aliquod intuetur, seseque in illo
quasi speculo prospicit, ut adjiciat, quod deesse virtutis agnoscit. Minus enim
seipsum homo considerat: sed dum alterum intendit, id quod minus est virtutis
addidit.

Isiod. de summo bono. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Thomas Underhill and John
Rothwell in Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

The Names of those whose Lives are contained in this Part.
Dr. Collet. p. 1 Bishop Coverdale. 4 Dr. Sands. 7 Mr. Richard Greenham. 14 Mr.
Thomas Cartwright. 19 Mr. Paul Baines. 27 Mr. William Bradshaw. 32 Mr. Richard
Stock. 78 Mr. Richard Rothwel. 85 Dr. Preston. 95 Mr. Arthur Hildersam. 144 Dr.
Thomas Tailor. 157 Mr. Hugh Clarke. p. 160 Dr. Sibs. 166 Dr. Chaderton. 168 Mr.
John Ball. 171 Bishop Potter. 182 Mr. Richard Sedgwick. 184 Mr. Julines
Herring. 188 Mr. John Dod. 198 Mr. Robert Balsom. 213 Mr. Herbert Palmer. 218
Gaspar Coligni Admiral of France. 243 Ioane Q. of Navarr. 297
To his loving Friend Master CLARKE upon his Lives of these eminent DIVINES.
SAMUEL CLARKE. Anagr. Make us recall.
MAke us recall the lives of Worthies dead,
(Herein thou art, blessed soul, our learned Clark.)
In suffering times thereby to hold up head,
And live their lives, (Herein thou art our Mark)
To soar aloft their Glories to ascend,
And sing such Praises, (here thou art our Lark)
To live when we are dead, and so to end
Our Pilgrimage, and enter Noah's Ark.
Thy pains and pattern Make us to recall
Their Graces, Glories, and their Lives withal.
John Herring, Mr. of Arts, and Minister of Gods Word.

The Life of Doctor Collet Dean of Paul's, who died Anno Christi 1519.
JOhn Collet was born of Worshipful Parents in London; His birth and education.
his father [ Henry Collet] having been twice Lord Mayor of London, by whom he
was carefully trained up in learning. In his younger days he traveled into
France and Italy, His travels.
whereby he much improved his learning. His going to Oxford.
At his return into England he went to Oxford, commenced Doctor of Divinity,
and began to read publicly upon Paul's Epistles instead of Scotus and Tho.
Aquinas, which before were only in request in that University.

When he came to London he Preached often, He is famous for preaching. His
character.
and had a very great Auditory both of Courtiers and Citizens. His diet was
very frugall; his life upright and unblamable: In discipline he was very
severe, in so much as being made Dean of Paul's, his Canons complained that they
were held in too much by him. He always preferred the honest and honorable
estate of Matrimony before the unchaste single life of Priests. At dinner time
he used to have some portion of Scripture read to him, either out of Paul's
Epistles or Solomon's Proverbs. He used no supper at all.

He was no friend to the irreligious religious orders of Monks and Friars. He
was an enemy to the barbarous Divinity of the School-Doctors, as of Scotus, and
Thomas Aquinas, insomuch as when Erasmus highly commended Aquinas for his
learning and acuteness, His judgment of T. Aquinas.
Doctor Collet answered; What tell you me of the learning of that man, who
unless he had been of an arrogant and presumptious spirit, durst never have
taken upon him to discuss and define all things so boldly and rashly as he
did? And except he had rather been worldly minded then heavenly, he would never
so have polluted Christ's wholesome Doctrine with man's profane Doctrine, as he
has done.

The Bishop London at this time was Fitz James, who of a long time bore a great
grudge to Dr Collet, The Bishops hate him. And article against him.
and therefore joining with two other Bishops, they entered an action of
complaint against him before Dr Warham Archbishop of Canterbury. The Articles
exhibited against him were three. First, For preaching against the worshipping
of Images. Secondly, About hospitality, for that he preaching upon those words
in the Gospel, Feed, feed, feed; having expounded the two first for feeding by
Doctrine and example, the third he expounded for feeding by hospitality; yet
not so much for feeding the body as the soul by good counsel and conference.
The third was for speaking against such as preached bosom Sermons, declaring
nothing to the people but what they bring in their Papers with them: This the
Bishop of London used to do, and therefore took it as spoken against himself,
which much irritated him against Dr Collet. But the Archbishop more wisely
weighing the matter, and being well acquainted with the worth of Collet, The
Archbishop frees him.
so took his part against his Accusers, that at that time he freed him out of
trouble.

The Bishops implacable malice.
Another design of Fitz James was to make him an heretic for translating the
Pater noster into English, but the Archbishop holp him out of that also.

Yet the Bishops malice was restless, for when he could not prevail against Dr
Collet before the Archbishop, he laid a train to accuse him to the King, and
the occasion thereof was this: About this time King Henry the eighth was
preparing War against France, and the Bishop with his accomplices took advantages
against Dr Collet, for that in one of his Sermons he had seemed to prefer
Peace before any kind of War, though never so just. For this they inveyed
against him in their Sermons, They accuse him to the King.
and traduced him also before the King; Yet on good Friday after, Dr Collet
preached before the King, at which time he treated upon the Victory of Christ,
exhorting all Christians to fight under Christ's standard against the devil;
adding moreover what an hard thing it was so to do. He showed also that all
they who upon private hatred or ambition took weapons against their
adversaries, one Christian to destroy another, they did not fight under Christ's
Banner but under Satan's. He exhorted therefore all Christians in their Wars,
rather to make Christ their Prince and Captain in fighting against their
enemies, then to imitate Julius Caesar, Alexander, etc. The King hearing this,
The King favoures him.
and fearing lest the hearts of his soldier should by these words be withdrawn
from the Wars, took him aside into his Garden after Sermon, and had much
private conference with him. Bishop Fitz-James and his a associates seeing
this, were now confident that they should see Collet presently sent Prisoner to
the Tower, and therefore they waited for his return out of the Garden; But
contrary to their expectation, the King used him very courteously, bad him put
on his Cap, much commended him for his learning and integrity of life, and
agreed with him in all points that he had taught; only he desired him, lest
the rude Soldiers should misinterpret that which he had said, that in his next
Sermon he would explain himself more fully to them, which afterward he did
accordingly: And so after long communication, and great promises of favor, the
King gently dismissed him with these words, Let every man have his Doctor as
himself best likes, this shall be my Doctor. His adversaries seeing and
hearing this, dust never after that time molest him any further.

He did many excellent works of Piety and Charity, and amongst the rest he
erected that famous foundation of Paul's School London, His Charity.
where one hundred fifty three poor men's sons should be taught freely, and for
this end he built a very convenient dwelling house for the Schoolmaster. He
assigned also a large annual stipend both for the Head-Master and Usher, whom
he willed rather to be chosen out of the number of married men, then of single
Priests with their suspected chastity. He left sundry rents and houses for the
payment of those stipends, which he committed to the oversight of the
Worshipful company of Mercers in London. He caused to be engraven upon the
School in Latin, Schola Catechisationis puerorum in Christi Opt. Max. fide,
and bonis literis, Anno Christi M.D.X. The first Moderator of this School was
Mr William Lilly, a man no less eminent for his Learning then Dr Collet was
for this Foundation; he made the Latin Grammar which ever since by authority
has been used in all Schools.

Dr Collet was very expert in the Scriptures, especially in Paul's Epistles,
which he has illustrated by his Commentaries. He held Justification freely by
the merits of Christ's, and not by our own works. He was an enemy to the idle
and unchaste life of the Popish Clergy. He abhorred those that persecuted the
Professors of the truth. He died Anno Christi 1519. and was buried in Paul's
Church, His death.
upon whose Tomb Mr Lilly engraved this Motto, Disce mori mundo; vivere disce
Deo.

The Life of Miles Coverdale sometimes Bishop of Exester, who died Anno Christi
1568.
His Birth and Breeding.
MIles Coverdale was born in the North of England, and from his childhood was
much given to learning, and by his diligence and industry profited exceedingly
therein; so that in the reign of King Henry the eighth, he was one of the first
that professed the Gospel in England. The Bible translated.
He was very well skilled in the Hebrew, and translated the Bible into English,
and wrote sundry Books upon the Scriptures; which Doctrine being new and
strange in those days, he was much hated and persecuted for it, His flight.
his Bibles printed.
especially by the Bishops; whereupon he was forced to fly into the
Low Countries. There he printed the Bibles of his Translation, and by sending
them over, and selling them in England he maintained himself. But John Stokesly
Bishop of London, hearing thereof, and minding to prevent their dispersing in
England, enquired diligently where they were to be sold, and bought them all
up, supposing that by this means no Bibles would be had; but contrary to his
expectation it fell out otherwise; for the same money which the Bishop gave for
these Books, the Merchant sent over to Miles Coverdale, by which means he was
enabled to Print as many more, which he also sent into England. This caused the
Bishops to pursue him with such eagerness, He removes into Germany.
that he was forced to remove himself out of Flanders into Germany, and to
settle himself under the Palsgrave of the Rheine, where he found much favor.
At first he taught children for his subsistence; but having learned the Dutch
language, the Prince Elector Palatine gave him a Benefice at a place called
Burghsaber, where he did much good by his Ministry and holy life; maintaining
himself partly by his Living, and partly by the liberality of Thomas Lord
Cromwell, who was his good Lord, and relieved him very much.

At length, when by the happy coming in of King Edward the sixth, Religion was
altered in England, and the Gospel had a free passage, he returned into his
native Country, His return into England.
where he did very much good by Preaching.

At the time of the commotion in Devonshire for Religion, he was appointed to
go down as Chaplain with the Lord Russell, who was sent to suppress the same;
He is made Bishop of Exester.
and after the work was over, for his excellent learning and godly life he was
made Bishop of Exester, being consecrated thereunto at Lambeth, by Tho. Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno Christi 1550.

He most worthily performed that Office that was committed to him. He preached
constantly every Sabbath and Holy day, His diligence in his place.
and most commonly twice in the week he read a Divinity Lecture in one Church
or other within the City of Exester. Considering his Means, he was a great
lover of Hospitality, and kept a very good house. He was sober and temperate in
his diet, holy and blameless in his life; His character.
friendly to the godly, liberal to the poor, courteous to all men, void of
pride, full of humility, abhorring covetousness, and an enemy to all
wickedness and wicked men, whose society he shunned, and whom he would in no
wise intertain or keep in his house or company. His Wife was a most sober,
chaste and godly Matron: His household another Church in which was exercised all
godliness and Virtue. He suffered no one person to abide in his house, His
care of his Family.
who could not give an account of his faith and Religion, and who lived not
accordingly. And as he was very careful to promote Religion in his Diocese, so
was he as ready to give direction for good Government in all Ecclesiastical
affairs: And because himself was not skillfull therein, neither would be
hindered from his godly studies, nor encumbred with worldly matters; and yet
judging it meet that the Government should be carried on with all uprightness,
Justice and Equity, he sent to Oxford for a learned man to be his Chancellor;
and by the assistance of his Friends, he obtained Mr Robert Weston Doctor of
the Civil Law (and afterward Lord Chancellor in Ireland) unto whose fidelity
he committed his Consistory, and the whole charge of his Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, allowing him, His liberallity.
not only all the Fees belonging thereto, but also lodged, and found him, his
Wife, and Family, horse and man within his own House, and gave him a pension of
40lb per annum besides, which was a very great matter in those days; so
liberal was this good Bishop in the allowance which he made to this good
Chancellor. And surely the Bishop was no more godly and careful in performing
his Office of preaching, then his Chancellor was diligent, strict and just in
doing of his Office without the reproach of partiality or bribery. Yet
notwithstanding that this godly Bishop lived most holily, painfully, and
virtuously, He is hated by the Papists.
the common people (whose old bottels were not capable of new wine) could not
brook nor digest him; and when they could find no other cause, this was judged
a crime sufficient, that he was a Preacher of the Gospel, an enemy to Papistry,
and an honest married man. Hereupon many devises were set on foot for his
disgrace, and removing him out of his place; sometimes by sly and false
informations against him, sometimes by open railing and false libels; sometimes
by secret backbitings; yea at last their malice proceeded so far that they
practiced his death by poisoning; but by Gods good providence the snares were
broken, A special providence.
and he was delivered.

Having thus continued Bishop about three years, it pleased God to take away
that famous English Josiah, King Edward: and his sister Mary succeeding him,
the face of Religion was soon altered, and this good Bishop amongst others was
deprived, His imprisonment.
and clapped up in Prison: And though the malice of the then Prelates and
Arch-Papists against him was very great, who also had sworn his death; yet it
pleased God most miraculously to preserve and deliver him out of their hands,
which was effected by this means.

The good King Christian of Denmark, having formerly known him at his being in
Germany, His deliverance.
wrote diverse times, and sued so earnestly and effectually to Queen Mary for
him, that at last he was dismissed out of Prison, and suffered to go over into
Denmark. There he stayed a while, He goes into Denmark.
and afterward, with the leave of the King, went into Germany to his former
worthy friend the noble Elector of the Rheine, who most willingly received him,
and restored him to his former Benefice of Burghsaber. The reason why he stayed
no longer with his deliverer the King of Denmark, but chose rather to go into
the Palatinate, was, because he could Preach in the Dutch language, To the
Palatinate.
but not in the Danish Tongue.

At Burghsaber he remained a faithful and painful Preacher all Queen Mary's
days, till hearing of her death, and of the change of Religion under Queen
Elizabeth, he once again returned into his native Country.

His return into England.
His Bishopric was reserved for him till his return, and then sundry times
proffered him, but he would by no means accept thereof, but chose rather to
live a more private life, yet not out of action; for he continued in London,
teaching and preaching the Gospel so long as the strength of his body would
permit; and at length being very old and stricken in years, His death.
he died comfortably and peaceably in the Lord, being about eighty years old,
January 20. Anno Christi 1568. and was honorably buried under a fair Stone in
the Chancel of Bartholomews Exchange in London, upon which Stone is engraven
this Epitaph.

In obitum Reverendissimi Patris, Milonis Coverdale OGDO ASTICHON.
Hic tandem requiemque ferens, finemque laborum,
Ossa Coverdali mortua Tumbus habet:
Exoniae qui Praesul erat dignissimus olim,
Insignis vitae vir probitate suae.
Octoginta annos grandaevus vixit, and unus
Indignum passus saepius exilium.
Sic demum variis jactatum casibus ista
Excepit gremio terra benigna suo.
Dr. SANDS
The Life of Doctor Sands Archbishop of York, who died Anno Christi 1588.
EDwin Sands was born of an ancient and worthy Family about the year 1528. and
being trained up in Learning, he so profited therein both in the Country and
University, that he was chosen Master of Katharine Hall in Cambridge, and
having Commenced Doctor, he was made Vice Chancellor of that University; at
which time that blessed King Edward the sixth dying, and the Lady Jane Gray
being proclaimed Queen, as we have heard before, the Duke of Northumberland was
sent with an Army to apprehend the Lady Mary. And when he came to Cambridge he
sent for Dr Sands the then Vicechancellor, and some other Doctors to sup with
him; and at supper required Dr Sands to preach on the morrow. The warning was
short for such an occasion and Auditory, yet he refused it not, but went home
and so to bed: The next morning he arose at three a clock, and having prayed a
good while, rose up, took his Bible in his hand, and closing his eyes earnestly
prayed to God that it might fall open at a fit Text for the present occasion,
and accordingly it opened, and the first Text that he cast his eye upon was
Joshua 1.16, 17, 18. And they answered Joshua saying, All that thou command
us we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us we will go; according as we
hearkened to Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee; only the Lord
thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses. Whosoever he be that does rebel
against thy commandment, and will not hearken to thy words in all that thou
command him, he shall be put to death, only be strong and of a good courage.

This Text he prosecuted with such prudence and affection, as drew many tears
from the eyes of his Auditors. After Sermon the Duke and other Nobles desired
him to Print his Sermon, and he only required a day and an halfs time for the
writing of it, at the end whereof he delivered it to Mr Leaver, who was
presently to carry it to London to the Press: But just at that instant came
one of the Beadles to him weeping, and bad him shift for himself; for, said he,
the Duke is retired, and Queen Mary is proclaimed. Dr Sands was nothing
troubled herewith, but delivered his Sermon to Mr Leaver, and so went to dinner
to Mr Moors one of the Beadles, his great Friend: At dinner being of an
undaunted courage, and cheerful disposition, he was very merry, Mistress Moore
drinking to him said, Mr Vicechancellor, I drink to you, this being the last
time that ever I shall see you: A Prediction.
which accordingly proved true.

That night the Duke sent for him to join with him in proclaiming Queen Mary,
and then told him that the Queen was merciful, and that he hoped for a
general pardon; to which Dr. Sands answered, My life is not dear unto me,
neither have I done or said any thing that troubles my conscience. For what I
spoke of the State I have instructions signed by sixteen Counselors to warrant
me therein, neither can speeches be treason; nor yet have I spoken any thing
but what the Word of God and the Laws of the Land will bear me out in,
therefore the will of the Lord be done. But be you assured my Lord, you shall
never escape death; for if the Queen should spare you, they that now shall
rule, will kill you.

That night the Duke was apprehended, and some were as busy about Dr. Sands,
but Sir John Gates that lay in the Doctors house, drove them away. The next day
Dr. Sands was walked into the fields, when the University in an irregular
manner meeting together, ordered Dr. Mouse and Dr. Hatcher to go to Dr. Sands
his house to fetch away the University Statutes, the Keys, and such other
things as were in his custody, which accordingly they did; Dr Mouses
inconstancy and ingratitude.
and Dr. Mouse, who the day before was an earnest Protestant, was now turned a
zealous Papist, and a great enemy to Dr. Sands, from whom he had received great
courtesies.

That afternoon a Congregation was appointed by them, and the bell rang to it;
when Dr. Sands coming out of the fields, sent for the Beadles, asking what the
matter meant, requiring them to wait upon him to the Schools according to their
duty, which they did, and Dr. Sands took the Chair.

Mr. Mitch and a rabble of unlearned Papists seeing this, withdrew, and
conspired amongst themselves to pull him out of the Chair. In the mean time Dr.
Sands began his Oration, Dr Sands his Oration.
expostulating with the University about their dealings, and charging them with
great ingratitude toward him, affirming that he had said nothing in his Sermon
but what he was ready to justify, and that if he were faulty, they were as
deeply guilty in concealing and consenting to that which he had spoken. In the
midst of his speech in came Mitch with his associates, some laid hands on him
to pull him out of the Chair, telling him it was not his place, others called
him traitor, etc. Dr. Sands seeing that they used violence, being of a great
courage, felt for his dagger to have dispatched some of them, as Gods enemies;
but Dr. Bell and Dr. Blithe prayed him for Gods sake to hold his hands, and
patiently to bear that great wrong; to which he assented, and so the tumult
ending, he went on, and finished his Oration, and having some money of the
Universities in his hand, he delivered it up, together with all other things
belonging to the University, and then resigned his Office, praying to God to
substitute a better in his room, and to give them better and more thankful
hearts, and so he repaired to his own College.

On the morrow came to him Mr. Germingham and Mr. Tho. Mildmay; Mr. Germingham
told him that it was the Queens pleasure that by two of the guard he should be
conveyed to the Tower, together with the Duke; Mr. Mildmay told him that he
wondered that so learned a man as he, should speak so unadvisedly against so
good a Prince. Dr. Sands answered, I shall not be ashamed of bonds, His courage.
but if I could do as Mr. Mildmay can, I need not to fear them: for you came
down in arms against the Queen, and now you are in arms for her; I cannot thus
blow hot and cold with one mouth.

Presently Dr. Sands his stable was robbed of four excellent Geldings, and an
Inventory was taken of all his goods, and he was set upon a lame jade that
halted to the ground; whereupon a friend of his desired that he might lend him
a Nagg to ride upon. As he went out at the end of the Town some Papists
assembled to jeer, and some of his Friends to mourn for him. He was carried
through London in scorn, and as he entered in at Bishops-gate a base woman threw
a stone at him, and hit him so full on the breast that he was near falling from
his Horse. To whom he mildly said, Woman, I pray God forgive thee. Meekness.
As he went through Tower street, a woman in her door said to him, Fie on thee
thou Knave, thou Knave, thou Traitor, thou Heretic. At this he smiled,
whereupon she said, Look, the desperate Heretic laughs at it. Another woman on
the other side of the street, said, Fie neighbor, thou art not worthy to be
called a woman, railing thus upon this Gentleman whom thou know not, nor yet
the cause why he is thus used: and turning to the Doctor, she said, Good
Gentleman, God be thy comfort, and give thee strength to stand in Gods cause
even to the death: and thus he was carried Prisoner to the Tower, He is
imprisoned in the Tower.
where the Yeoman of the Guard took from him his borrowed Nagg, and whatsoever
else he had: and whereas his man brought some linen after him, that also was
taken from him.

The first three weeks he was in a very bad prison, at the end whereof he was
removed to another, where was put to him Mr. John Bradford.

On the day of the Queens Coronation his prison door was left open, and there
came to him one Mr. Mitchell, a special friend of his, and said, Dr. Sands,
there is such a stir in the Tower that neither gates, doors, nor Prisoners are
looked after this day; therefore take my cloak, hat and rapier, and get you
gone, save your self and let me do as I may. Flight refused^
The Doctor refused his offer, saying, I know no just cause of my imprisonment,
and if I should do this I should make my self guilty, I will expect Gods good
will; yet am I much bound to you for your love. Mr. Mitchell not prevailing
departed.

Dr. Sands and Mr. Bradford continued in prison twenty nine weeks, one Bowler,
a perverse Papist being their Keeper; yet by their affable and loving carriage
and converse, he began to mislike Popery, A Jailor converted.
and to favor the Gospel; yea he was so far at last wrought upon, that on a
Sabbath, when others went to Mass, he carried up to them a Service Book, a
manchet and some wine; at which time Dr. Sands administered the Sacrament to Mr.
Bradford and him, and so Bowler became their son begotten in their bonds.

When Wyat was up in Arms, that room might be made for him and his in the
Tower, Dr. Cranmer, Dr. Ridley, and Mr. Bradford were put into one prison; and
Dr. Sands with nine other godly Ministers were removed to the Marshalsey.

As they went, the people every where prayed God to comfort them, and to
strengthen them in his truth, whereupon the Keeper of the Marshalsey said to
Dr. Sands, His Name was Thomas Wyat.
I perceive that the vain people would set you forward to the fire, but I hope
you will not prefer your own knowledge before the judgment of so many worthy and
learned Prelates; if so, you shall find me as strait a Keeper as one that
utterly mislikes your Religion. Dr. Sands answered, I know my self young, and
my learning small, its enough to know Christ crucified; and he has learned
nothing that sees not the great blasphemy that is in Popery. I have read in
Scripture of some godly and courteous Keepers, God may make you one; if not, I
trust he will give me strength and patience to bear your hard dealing with me.
The Keeper replied, Do you then mind to stand to your Religion? Yea, said the
Doctor, by Gods grace I do. Truly, said the Keeper, I love you the better for
it; I did but try you before, and what favor I can show you, you shall be sure
of it, and I shall think my self happy if I may die at the stake with you, and
ever after he showed the Doctor much favor, suffering him to walk into the
fields alone, where sometimes he met with Mr. Bradford, who being removed to
the Kings Bench, found the like favor with his Keeper. He also lodged him in
the best Chamber, and would not suffer irons to be put on him, as other
Prisoners had, and suffered his Wife, a beautiful Gentlewoman, both in body
and soul, to resort to him. He lodged also Mr. Sanders with him.

To these two holy men there was much resort, and much Money was proffered to
them, but they would receive none. Three or four times they celebrated the
Sacrament, and had many Communicants, at which times Dr. Sands gave such
exhortations as drew many tears from his Auditors, and wrought in them an
utter abhorrency of the Mass and all Popery.

Sr Tho. Wyat profers him his liberty.
When Sir Tho. Wyat with his Army came into Southwark, he sent to Dr. Sands in
prison, desiring his company and advice, telling him that the prison doors
should be set open for him and the other Prisoners: Dr. Sands bad the
Messengers tell him, His prudent answer.
that if his rising were of God he should stand, otherwise he should fall: and
that for his own part he was committed by order, and that he would never depart
thence except he were discharged by the like order; the like answer made Mr.
Sanders, and the other godly Ministers that were prisoners there.

Dr. Sands having thus lain there nine weeks, at last by the mediation of Sr
Tho. Holcraft, then Knight Marshall, he was set at liberty; the manner of it
was thus: His release from prison.
Sir Tho. Holcraft made great suit to the Bishop of Winchester in the behalf of
Dr. Sands, yet could get no grant from him except he would turn to their
Religion, which if he would do, he should have great preferment; yet at last by
importunity he extorted from him, that if the Queen would grant him his liberty
he would not oppose it. Then did Sir Thomas, by two Ladies of Honor, prevail
with the Queen that he should have his liberty if Winchester liked of it: Sir
Thomas having this grant, watched the Bishops next going to the Queen, and then
again moving the business, he at last prevailed with them, and gat a Warrant
signed by them for his deliverance; yet Winchester afterward commanded him not
to release him, till two Gentlemen should give a thousand pound bond for him
not to depart the Kingdom without License. Sir Thomas seeing this, procured two
Gentlemen to be willing thus to be bound with him; and then sending for Dr.
Sands he imparted all the business to him; to whom Dr. Sands said, I give God
thanks who has moved your heart to be so careful of me; I think my self much
bound to you for your love, which God will requite, and I will never prove
ungrateful. But as I came a free man into Prison, so I will not go out a
bondman; for as I cannot benefit my friends, so neither will I hurt them; and
if I be set at liberty I will not stay six days in the Realm, if I can get
out. Therefore if I may not go free, send me back to prison, where you shall be
sure of me. Sir Tho. Holcraft was much troubled at this answer, yet seeing the
Doctor immovable in his resolution, he said to him, Since I cannot change you,
I will change my own mind, and am resolved to set you at liberty come of it
whatever will come, therefore get you gone quickly over-sea, and never write
any thing back hither, for so you may undo me; and so friendly kissing him, he
bad him farewell, and commanded his Keeper to take no fees of him.

Dr. Sands returning to the Marshalsey tarried all night, and on the morrow
gave his prison-fellows a dinner; bad his bedfellow, and sworn stake-fellow,
if it had so pleased God [Mr. Sanders] farewell, they kissing each other with
many tears. Then went he to the Kings bench to Mr. Bradford, and Mr. Ferrar,
comforting them, and they praising God for his happy deliverance; and so he
went into London to a private friend, and the next night changed his lodging,
hearing that search was made after him. He is again sought for.
For Dr. Watson and Christopherson went to the Bishop of Winchester, and told
him that he had set at liberty the greatest Heretic in England, and one who
had most corrupted the University; whereupon the Bishop sent for all the
Constables in London, commanding them to make diligent search for him, and
promising five pound to him that could apprehend him. Dr. Sands suspecting the
matter shifted from place to place, and appointed his man to provide him two
Geldings, purposing the next day to go into Essex to his Father-in-law Mr.
Sands, with whom his Wife was: But that night having a pair of Hose too long
for him, A special providence.
which were made without measure whilst he was Prisoner in the Tower, he then
lodging in Cornhill, requested the good Wife of the house to send them to the
next Tailor to be cut shorter; and it so fell out, by Gods providence, that the
next Tailor was a Protestant, and the man that made them; he knowing the Hose,
went at midnight to the Doctors lodging, and being admitted into his Chamber,
wished him not to be troubled at their unseasonable coming in: to which he
answered, Nothing can be amiss, what God will, that shall come to pass: then
the Tailor told him of the Bishops sending for the Constables, whereof he was
one, and of their hopes to find him; for, says he, it is known, that you have
provided Geldings, and that to morrow you are to go through Algate, where you
will certainly be taken: therefore let your man walk booted and spurred to
morrow near where your horses stand; and in the mean time they shall be
conveyed privately to Bednal-green, and at a fit season I will come and convey
you thither also: as you go along the streets look wildly, and if you meet your
Brother in the mouth, know him not, etc.

Accordingly Doctor Sands attired like a Gentleman, and looking wildly, went
with the Tailor the next day, who conveyed him through back lanes to
Moore-gate, and from thence to Bednal-green; where having his horses ready, he
kissed the honest Tailor, and would have given him the greatest part of that
little which he had, which yet he would not receive, and so with tears they
parted: yet afterward Doctor Sands requited him thankfully. That night he rode
to his Father-in-law, and within two hours after his coming, his Father was
informed that that night two of the Guard would seek to apprehend him there;
whereupon he was presently conveyed to an honest Farmers house near the
Seaside, where he was locked up two days and two nights in a chamber all
alone, and then removed to one Mower a Master of a Ships house at Milton shore,
attending a wind for his departure: and while he was there, Mower brought forty
or fifty mariners to him, to whom he gave such an exhortation, that they being
taken with it, resolved all of them to die rather then he should be apprehended.

May the sixth the wind served, and he took his leave of his Host and Hostess,
who had been married eight years and had no child, and when he took his leave
of the woman, he thanked her kindly for his entertainment, and gave her his
handkerchief with an old royal of gold in it, A Prophecy.
saying, Ere a year be past, be of good comfort, God will give you a Son; and
accordingly it came to pass; for when there lacked but one day of a
twelvemoneth, she was brought to bed of a fair Son.

He flies beyond sea.
Doctor Sands and Doctor Coxe were both in the same Ship, and ere it was out of
ken, two of the Guard were upon the shore to have apprehended Doctor Sands: but
God gave them a good passage; so that they arrived safely at Antwerp, and were
invited to dinner to Master Locks house; and as they were at dinner Master
George Gilpin, Secretary to the English house, came to them, and whispering to
Doctor Sands, A special providence.
said, King Philip has sent to make search for you, and to apprehend you:
hereupon he immediately rose from dinner, and though it rained very fast, yet
he went out at the gate that leads toward Cleveland, where meeting with a
Wagon, he hasted away, and came safely to Ausburg in Cleveland, where he
tarried fourteen days, and then traveled to Strasbourgh; where after he had
continued one year, his Wife came to him. There he fell sick of a great Flux,
which held him nine months, and brought him to deaths door: His sickness.
He had a child also that fell sick of the Plague, and died. His Wife died.
His godly, and virtuous Wife also fell sick of a Consumption, and died in his
arms.

Whilst he remained there, he was chiefly maintained by one Master Isaac, an
English Gentleman of Kent, and one that suffered exile for the same cause of
Christ: he so entirely loved him, Charity.
that he was always more ready to give, then Doctor Sands was ready to
receive; so that he gave him above a hundred marks, which Doctor Sands
afterward thankfully repayed again.

After the death of his Wife, he traveled to Zurick in Switzerland, and there
sojourned in the house of Peter Martyr for five weeks space, at the end whereof
as they sat at dinner, news was brought them of Queen Mary's death, and Doctor
Sands by his friends was sent for back to Strasbourgh. This news occasioned joy
to all but Doctor Sands, who was stricken to the heart to think that he was
called back to new sorrows.

Master Bullinger, and the other Ministers feasted him before his departure
from Zurick, and so he returned back to Strasbourgh, where he preached, and so
in the company of Master Grindall, His return to England.
he came for England, arriving at London upon the Coronation-day of Queen
Elizabeth.

By her, for his singular piety and learning, he was advanced to the Bishopric
of Worcester An. Christi 1559. and afterward he was removed to the Bishopric
of London, An. Christi 1570. And lastly, He is a Bishop.
he succeeded Doctor Grindall in the Archbishopric of York, Anno Christi 1576.
In all which places he governed the Church with singular prudence, and modesty;
and having finished his course on earth, he went to receive his Crown in
Heaven, August the eighth, His death.
Anno Christi 1588. being about the age of sixty, and lies buried in the
Collegiate Church of Southwell in Nottingham-shire. He was a man of whom it is
hard to say, whether he were more famous for his admirable virtues, or great
learning, as his Sermons yet extant in print do manifest. He left many
children, of which three were Knights, excellently qualified both in mind, and
body, especially Sir Edwin Sands, who deserved so well of his Country.

The Life of Master Richard Greenham, who died about the year, 1591.
I Can yet learn nothing concerning the Country, Parentage, or first Education
of Mr. Richard Greenham. The first place, where I find him, was in
Pembrook-Hall in Cambridge, where he followed his Studies so hard, He was
Fellow in Pembrook-Hall.
and was so eminent for his proficiency in learning, that he was chosen Fellow
in that Society, and after a while he was called to a Pastoral charge at
Dry-Drayton, His remove to Dry Drayton.
not far from Cambridge, and like a faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, he
spared no pains amongst his people, whereby he might advance the good of their
souls. His constant course was to preach twice on the Lords day, and before the
evening Sermon to Catechize the young people of the Parish. His extraordinary
pains.
His manner also was to preach on Mundayes, Tuesdayes, and Wednesdayes, and on
Thursdayes to catechize the youth, and again on Fridayes to preach to his
people; and that on these week days, the people might have the better
opportunity to attend upon his Ministry, his course was to be in the Pulpit in
the morning so soon as he could well see. He was so earnest, and took such
extraordinary pains in his preaching, that his shirt would usually be as wet
with sweating, as if it had been drenched in water, so that he was forced so
soon as he came out of the Pulpit to shift himself, and this wonderful and
excessive pains he took all his time. Twice a day he prayed in his Family, and
after Sermon he used to call his servants together, and examined them of what
they heard, and what they remembered. His hard Studies.
And besides all these his public labors, he studied very hard, rising every
day both Winter and Summer, at four of the clock in the morning.

His Charity.
He was very eminent for his charity to the poor; whereof we have this notable
Example: In a time of scarcity, when Barley was at ten groats the Bushel,
(which in those days was an extraordinary price) he by his prudence brought it
to pass, that the poor had it sold to them for four groats the Bushel of
every Husbandman in the Town; and thus he effected it. There were about twenty
Plough-holders in the Town, all which he by his holy persuasions drew to an
agreement amongst themselves, to hire a common granary, and therein to lay up
Corn for the poor, some more, some less, every man accordingly to his ability;
so that some laid up one Coom, some a quarter, some three Cooms, and Master
Greenham himself laid in five Cooms, all which was delivered out to the poor at
a groat a peck. There was one day in the week appointed for all the poor to
come and be served, at which time every one received according to their charge;
where there were but two in a Family, they received one peck a week, and so
more according to that proportion; only no Family had above three pecks a week.

He kept but two Beasts himself, that the poor might have his straw, and when
other men sold their straw for two Shillings the days thresh, he sold his for
ten pence: So that in that dear time all the poor in the Parish had been well
near famished, had it not been for his prudence, and liberality, which he also
continued, till the price of Corn abated, which was suddenly, and
extraordinarily; for that Corn which was sold for a noble the Bushel, was
within one month after sold for fourteen pence the Bushel.

But during the forementioned dearth, by public Order, the Bushels were cut,
and made less; This Master Greenham preached much against, and publicly
reproved wheresoever he came, and withal gave his man a charge, that if the
Clerk of the Market sent for his Bushel to cut it, he should not carry it in,
which was done accordingly, for which he came into some trouble, but the Lord
delievered him out of the same. Also at this time though his Bushel was bigger
then other men's, yet he would often charge his man not to strike off all the
Corn. He used not to trouble himself with reckonings and accounts, but would
sometimes ask his man when he came from the Market, how he sold Corn? and if it
was dear, he would say, I pray God bring down the price of it; and if it was
cheap, he would heartily bless God for it. Yea, his Charity was not only
extended to the poor of his own Parish, but to others also; for if at any time
he had seen a poor body at a distance from him as he rode abroad, he would send
his man with money to him, and when at any time he rode by the Castle at
Cambridge, the Prisoners would never ask him for any thing, nor any one that
was with him, for if he had any money in his purse, they were sure to have part
of it. By reason of his great liberality, though his living was worth a hundred
pound per annum, yet he usually wanted Money to get in his Harvest, so that his
Wife (formerly Doctor Bounds widow) was forced to borrow money to supply that
want: Yet was he so well content with his present condition, that though he had
proffers of livings worth three of that which he had, yet would he by no means
be persuaded to accept of them.

He was a great friend to, and promoter of peace and concord amongst his
Neighbors and acquaintance, A great Peacemaker.
insomuch that if any had come to him who were at variance, he would either
have made them friends himself, or if he could not prevail, he would have made
use of other friends to reconcile them together, thereby to prevent their going
to Law.

When Martin Mar-Prelate came first out, Master Greenham being to preach at
Saint Mary's in Cambridge, (...) ^isliked Martin Mar-Prelate.
spoke freely against that Book, manifesting his dislike of the same: For (said
he) the tendency of this Book is to make sin ridiculous, whereas it ought to
be made odious.

On a time the Bishop of Ely sent for him to appear about his Nonconformity:
He is convented before the Bishop.
at which time the Bishop told him that there was a great Schism in the
Church, asking him where the blame was to be (...), whether upon the
Conformists, or Non-conformists? To which ^e readily answered, His Prudence.
that it might lie on either side, or on neither side: For (said he) if they
loved one another as they ought, and would do all go^^ Offices each for other,
thereby maintaining love and concord, it lay (...) neither side: otherwise,
which party soever makes the rent, the Schism lies upon their score. The
Bishop was so pleased with this answer, that he dismissed him in peace. He is
dismissed


He was much troubled with a bad concoction, whereby he had frequent sick
nights, which kept him much waking; but then his manner was (as much as
possibly he could) to spend the time in meditation and prayer. His Piety.


We have before heard of his great Charity to men's bodies: His Charity to souls
was not less exemplary. For having great experience, and an excellent faculty
to relieve and comfort distressed consciences, he was sought to, far and near,
by such as groaned under spiritual afflictions and temptations; all whom he
entertained friendly and familiarly, without respecting the person of the rich
more then of the poor.

Yea the fame of this spiritual Physician so spread abroad, that he was sent
for to very many, and the Lord was pleased so far to bless his labors, His
skill in curing spiritual diseases.
that by his knowledge and experience many were restored to joy and comfort,
out of unspeakable and insupportable terrors and torments of conscience. If
the Lord had not so soon translated him out of this sinful and miserable
world, there was none more fit, nor willing to have prescribed Rules, and a
Method to be observed in this so little a known Art. Of his good will herein,
let his own words testify the forward desires of his heart: For upon a special
occasion he thus speaks of himself; I have had (says he) for a long time a
settled resolution, (which I hope is from God) to study the cases of
conscience, that thereby I may be the better able to succor the tempted and
perplexed in spirit.

He was filled with bowels of compassion toward the afflicted, sympathizing,
as if he had been afflicted with them.

Many godly and learned friends of his, perceiving his abilities and
inclination thereto, did labor much to excite and encourage him in those
studies, upon these and the like grounds. First, that he might hereby the
better train up some young men in the like studies, communicating his knowledge
and experiences to them therein. Secondly, that he might leave to posterity a
Commentary of such particular Maladies as God had made him instrumental in the
cure of, together with the means by him used for effecting of the same. And
because Precepts are wanting, Rules of direction might be framed, partly by his
own observation, partly by conference with other learned and experienced
persons, whereby in that, and the age following, that Art might be brought into
some form and method, to the public good and benefit of many, not only for the
fruitful curing, but also for the healthful preventing of manifold mischiefs.

To such as complained to him that they were troubled with ^^^sphemous
thoughts, his counsel was, that they should not fear them, but abhor them.
And when some poor Christians were miserably afflicted with fears, that they
had committed that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, he used to tell
them, that if they would not have committed it, it was certain that they had
not fallen into it.

The graces of Gods Spirit did all abundantly shine forth in this man of God:
all tempered, as with unfeigned love to Christ, so with bowels of love and
compassion toward men; and he again was greatly beloved of all men.

In the whole course of his Ministry, he was very careful ever to avoid (as
much as was possible) all occasions of offense, desiring in all things to
approve himself as a Minister of Christ, and Workman that needed not to be
ashamed.

He much rejoiced in, and praised God for the happy government of Queen
Elizabeth, and for the blessed calm and peace which the Church and people of
God enjoyed under the same, speaking often of it, both publicly, and
privately, as he had occasion, endeavoring to stir up the hearts of all men
(as much as in him lay) to praise God with him for it, and to pray also for the
continuance thereof. Yea this matter so affected him, that the day before his
departure out of this world, his thoughts were much troubled, for that most men
were so unthankful for those wonderful and happy deliverances, which the Lord
of his mercy vouchsafed to that glorious Queen, from the conspiracies and
dangerous practices of her Popish Adversaries.

He was a special Instrument and means under God to encourage, and train up
many godly and learned young men in the holy service of Christ, in the work of
the Ministry; and to restrain, and reduce not a few from errors and schism;
striving by all means to retain them in obedience to the Laws of the land,
and to provoke them highly to prize, and preciously to esteem the peace of the
Church, and people of God.

Having continued at Dry-Drayton about the space of twenty, or one and twenty
years, he left it, and went from thence to London, about the year 1588, or 89.
His remove to London.
Yet was very careful before his remove to get an honest and able man to
succeed him in that place.

The causes of his removal, were partly the untractablenesse and
unteachablenesse of that people amongst whom he had taken such exceeding great
pains. For besides his public Preaching and Catechizing, his manner was to
walk out into the fields, and to confer with his Neighbors as they were at
plough: And partly he did it upon supposall that he might do far more good in
a more public place by comforting afflicted consciences, wherein the Lord had
given him such an admirable dexterity.

He wholly spent himself in the service of God and his Church, and therefore
often made use of that saying of the Prophet David: The zeal of thy house has
eaten me up.

He was a little man of stature, and usually indifferent well in health; but
when at any time he was sick, he would suffer no body to sit up and watch with
him, that so he might more freely converse with God.

He continued not in London above the space of two years, but being quite worn
out, he comfortably and quietly resigned up his spirit unto God, His death.
Anno Christi, 1591. and about the sixtieth year of his age.

He has a Volume of Sermons, and Treatises of Divinity in Print.

Mr. THO: CARTWRIGHT.
The Life of Master Thomas Cartwright, who died, Anno Christi, 1603.
THomas Cartwright was born in Hertfordshire, about the year 1535. and being by
his Parents kept at School till he was fit for the University, His Birth.
He went to Cambridge and was admitted into Saint John's College, Anno 1550. He
there followed his Studies exceeding hard, and being a man of excellent natural
parts, he profited in learning more then ordinary; He never used to sleep above
five hours in a night, His studiousnesse.
which custom he continued to his dying day.

Three years after, at the death of King Edward the sixth, he left the
University, and betook himself to the service of a Counselor, yet followed his
studies very hard, as taking more pleasures therein, then in the study of the
Law; He is a Lawyers Clarke.
Thus he continued till the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, at which time
his Master meeting with Doctor Pilkinton, Master of Saint John's College in
Cambridge, he told him of his man's learning and studious disposition; the
Doctor desired to speak with him, and thereby perceiving his great abilities,
and hopefulnesse, with his Masters consent, he took him again to Saint John's
College, His return to Cambridge.
where his proficiency and Progress both in the Arts and Tongues, was so
eminent, that Anno 1560. he was chosen Fellow in that College, and about three
years after he was removed to a fellowship in Trinity-Colledge, where for his
great worth, he was ere-long made one of the eight Senior-fellows.

Anno 1564. Queen Elizabeth coming to Cambridge, great Preparation was made for
her entertainment, His Disputation before the Queen.
and four of the eminentest men in the University, being chosen to keep a
Philosophy act before her, he was one of them, who performed it with
extraordinary abilities, to the great content and satisfaction both of the
Queen and his other auditors. Anno 1567. He commenced Bachelor of Divinity,
and three years after he was chosen to be the Lady Margarets Divinity-Reader.
He read upon the first and second Chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, He is
chosen Professor.
and performed it with such acuteness of wit, and solidity of judgment, as
caused admiration in his hearers: and even at that time he was so famous for
his Ministry, that when his turn came to preach at Saint Mary's, the Sextone
was fain to take down the windows, His multitude of hearers.
by reason of the multitudes that came to hear him.

In his Lectures he was occasioned to discover his judgment about
Church Discipline, which the Doctors and Heads in the University took very
hainously, as being dangerous and destructive to the present Hierarchy,
whereupon he was convented before the Vice Chancellor, Doctor May, and other
Doctors, and examined upon sundry Articles, or Propositions of Doctrine
delivered by him publicly in his Lectures, He is questioned before the
Vice Chancellor.
and elsewhere, which they affirmed to be contrary to Religion received, and
allowed by public authority in this Realm, and thereupon they demanded whether
he would stand to, or revoke the said Opinions and Doctrines delivered by him.

Master Cartwright upon deliberation, desired that he might have leave to set
down in writing what his judgment in those things was, and what he would stand
to; which being granted, he drew up in six Propositions what his judgment was;
and setting his hand to it, delivered it to the Vice Chancellor, who thereupon
admonished him to revoke the same, and upon his refusal, punished him by the
substraction of his stipend, and so he continued in his Lecture that year. But
the year after, Doctor Whitgift being chosen Vice Chancellor, he again
convented him before him, requiring his absolute answer whether he did mind to
teach his Auditors otherwise, revoking that he had before taught, or whether he
would abide in the maintenance of the same? Unto this Master Cartwright
answered, that for the Propositions delivered by him under his hand to Doctor
May, and now showed to him, they were his own hand writing, such as he had
openly taught, and still continued fully determined to maintain and defend as
Truths. Hereupon after Master Cartwright had a while withdrawn, and the
Vice-Chancllor had conferred with the other Doctors, Master Cartwright was
again called for, and this definitive sentence was pronounced against him by
the Vice Chancellor, Doctor Whitgift, that perceiving that no admonition would
help, but that he still persisted in the same mind, he did therefore pronounce
him, the said Master Cartwright, to be removed from his said Lecture, and by
his final decree or sentence did then and there remove him, and declare the
said Lecture to be void; and that he minded, according to the foundation
thereof, to proceed to the Election of a new Reader. He is expelled the
University.
And further he did then and there by virtue of his Office, inhibit the said
Master Cartwright from preaching within the University and the Jurisdiction of
the same.

Now that the Reader may be better satisfied what the Arricles were which
Master Cartwright drew up, and signed with his hand, and for which this
sentence was passed upon him, I shall here set them down in his own words, as I
have them transcribed out of the Original, standing upon Record in the Registry
of the University of Cambridge.

The Articles for which he was expelled.
1. Archiepiscoporum, and Archidiaconorum nomina simul cum muneribus, and
officiis sunt abolenda.

2. Legitimorum in Ecclesia ministrorum nomina, qualia sunt Episcoporum, and
Diaconorum separata a suis muneribus in verbo Dei descriptis, simpliciter sunt
improbanda, and ad institutionem Apostolicam revocanda: ut Episcopus in verbo,
and precibus, Diaconus in pauperibus curandis versetur.

3. Episcoporum Cancellariis, aut Archidiaconorum Officialibus, etc. regimen
Ecclesiae non est committendum, sed ad idoneum ministrum, and Presbyterum
ejusdem Ecclesiae deferendum.

4. Non oportet ministrum esse vagum, and liberum, sed quisque debet certo
cuidam gregi addici.

5. Nemo debet ministerium tanquam candidatus petere.

6. Episcoporum tantum autoritate, and potestate, ministri non sunt creandi:
multo minus in Musaeo, aut loco quopiam clanculario: sed ab Ecclesia electio
fieri debet.

Hisce reformandis, quisque pro sua vocatione studere debet (vocationem autem
intelligo) ut magistratus authoritate, minister verbo, omnes precibus
promoveant.

Per me Thomam Cartwright.

Master Cartwright being thus driven from the University, not long after,
finding the way for the exercise of his Ministry in England obstructed, he went
beyond the Seas to visit other reformed Churches, His travels beyond sea.
where he grew acquainted with the famousest men for Piety and Learning in
Christendom, with whom he kept correspondence all his life after. He was also
highly prized by them, insomuch as Beza writing about that time into England to
a Friend of his, has this expression; Beza's testimony of him.
Est quidam Anglus nobiscum, nomine Thomas Cartwright, etc. Here is now with us
your Countreyman Thomas Cartwright, then whom I think the Sun does not see a
more learned man, etc.

He was also chosen Preacher to the English Merchants at Antwerp, He is
Preacher to the English Merchants.
and afterward at Middleburrough, where he did very much good by his Ministry,
the Lord blessing his labors exceedingly in those parts; and when he
understood that the Merchants, by whom he was maintained, through their great
losses decayed in their estates, he returned his salary to them again.

Not long after he came over into England, being earnestly solicited thereunto
by Letters from Master Dearing, Master Fulk, Master Wiburne, Master Leaver, and
Master Fox; about which time the Non-conformists having drawn up an admonition
to the Parliament for the Reformation of the Church, Doctor Whitgift, who was
then preferred to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, answered the same in
Print; whereupon the Ministers which wrote the Admonition, consulting, He is
chosen to answer Dr. Whitgift.
but not agreeing upon the choice of one to reply to Doctor Whitgift, Master
Cartwright was at last chosen by lot to undertake it, and performed it so well,
that his very Adversaries were heard to advance and commend him for it.

Yet was he with diverse other of the Non-conformists brought into the High
Commission Court, where, for refusal of the Oath ex Offiicio, they were clapped
up in prison, His imprisonment.
and afterward proceeded against in the Star Chamber; but it pleased God so to
order it by his Providence that those very witnesses which were brought to
accuse them, did so clear them, that they were dismissed, and sent home much
more honored and beloved then they were before.

Whilst Master Cartwright was Prisoner in the Fleet, he had thirty pounds sent
him from a noble friend, His contempt of the world.
of which he took but ten shillings, returning the rest with many thanks to the
Donor; and when the Earl of Leicester offered him the Provostship of
Eeaton-Colledge, saying, that it was a hundred pounds a year more then enough,
His favor with the Earl of Leicester.
besides the convenience of the place; Master Cartwright answered, That the
hundred pounds more then enough was enough for him.

About the year 1580. His fame was so spread through the Reformed Churches,
King James sends for him into Scotland.
that King James, then King of Scotland, sent for him, profering to make him
Professor in the University of Saint Andrews: whereof twenty years after, upon
King James his coming into England, Master Cartwright makes mention in his
Epistle before his Commentary upon Ecclesiastes, which he dedicated to King
James, returning humble thanks for that Royal favor. The Archbishop of Dublin
also sent for him into Ireland, proffering him preferment in that Kingdom.

He is sent to for counsel.
He was sent to from diverse eminent Divines beyond the Seas, wherein they craved
his advice for the direction of young men in the method of their studies, as
also in the behalf of the Churches in general, for his counsel in regulating
their proceeding in the waightiest affairs.

He is made Master of the Hospital at Warwick.
Also about the same time the Earl of Leicester preferred him to be Master of
his Hospital at Warwick, which place was worth to him about one hundred pounds
per annum: His employment was to pray with the poor men twice a day, to
catechize twice a week, and to preach once on the Lords day at the Parish
Church: This place he willingly and thankfully accepted of, because he was
therein exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Prelates.

His carriage and deportment was such, that there was not a Nobleman or
Gentleman of quality in all the Country that looked Heavenward, His esteem in
the Country.
or was of any account for Religion and Learning, but they sought to enjoy his
company, and found much pleasure and content therein; for his conversation was
such, that scarce a word came from his mouth that was not of some good use and
concernment.

He was of a very laborious and indefatigable spirit; it was his meat and drink
to be doing the Will of his heavenly Father; so that besides all his pains in
Writing, and in the Hospital, he preached every Sabbath Day in the morning
about seven a clock in the lower Parish of Warwick, His diligence in the
Ministry.
and, when he could be suffered, in the upper Parish in the afternoon; Besides
which, he preached a Lecture on Satturdayes in the afternoon in the upper
Church, in which he went over a great part of the Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes
with singular judgment and profit; and this he did of his own free Will,
without demanding or receiving one penny for his pains. And whereas he was
sometimes suspended by the Bishops from preaching in the Churches, his manner
was at those times to preach in the Hospital, whither many resorted to hear
him, though they were sure to be brought into the Bishops Courts for the same.

Presently after his coming to Warwick, the English Seminary at Rhemes
published their Version of the New Testament, and Annotations upon it in
English, which coming over into England, it was looked upon by all as a Book of
dangerous concernment, and therefore fit to be answered by the ablest pen that
could be found; He is importuned to answer the Rhemist Testament.
Hereupon (as I have heard) Queen Elizabeth sent to Beza to request him to
undertake the answer; but he modestly excused it, and returned answer that she
had one in her own Kingdom, far abler then himself to undertake such a task,
and upon further enquiry declared that it was Master Thomas Cartwright.

Then Sir Francis Walsingham, a man of eminent place and power, Encouraged by
Sir Francis Walsingham.
who herein, as in other affairs, was accounted the mouth and hand of the Queen
and State, wrote to Master Cartwright, earnestly requesting him to undertake
the work, assuring him also of such aid as should further him in the finishing
thereof; for which end he sent him one hundred pounds toward the charges of
buying Books, and procuring Writers which were to be employed by him therein;
This was Anno 1583.

The same year also he was earnestly solicited by the most learned men of the
University of Cambridge by a solemn Epistle, He is solicited thereto by the
Doctors of Cambridge.
with joint consent written to him to undertake the answer, wherein amongst
other passages they have these expressions; With you we are earnest (most
Reverend Cartwright) that you would set your self against the unhallowed
endeavors of these mischievous men, either by refuting the whole Book, or at
least some part thereof. It is not for every man Work-man-like to frame Gods
Tabernacle, but for Bazaleel and Aholiab; neither is every one rashly to be
thrust forth into the Lords battles; but such Captains are to be chosen from
amongst David's Worthies; Of which, as we acknowledge you to be one, by the
former battles undergone for the walls of our City, the Church Church Discipline.
; we doubt not if you will enter this War (which truly you ought to (...)
according to the Zeal and Piety you bear to your Country and Religion) but
that you fighting for Conscience and Country (yea even for the very inmost
holy place of the Temple) will be able to tread underfoot the forces of the
Jebusites, which set themselves to assault the Tower of David. Moreover, (which
may marvellously sharpen the edge of your courage) you are not now to fight
with a Brother, or fellow of the same Religion (which makes the Conflict more
faint) but with the most inveterate enemies of Jesus Christ, etc. Then they
thus conclude: You see to what an honorable fight we invite you. Christ's
business shall be undertaken against Satan's Champions. We stir you up to fight
the battles of our Lord; where the Victory is certain, which the triumph and
applause of the Angels will ensue. Our Prayers shall never be wanting unto you.
Christ without doubt, whose cause is defended, will be preset with you. The
Lord Jesus much increase your courage and strength, and keep you very long in
safety for his Churches good. Vale. This was subscribed by Roger Goad, William
Whittaker, Thomas Crook, John Ireton, William Fulk, John Field, Nicholas Crane,
Giles Seintler, Richard Gardener, William Charke, etc.

And by the Ministers of London and Suffolk.
But besides these, the Reverend Ministers of London, and Suffolk did by their
several letters earnestly exhort him to this work; and Master Cartwright, was
at last by these importunities drawn to undertake it, and neither diligence nor
constancy was wanting in him to have carried it on to perfection; but he met
with such great discouragements and hindrances from Potent Adversaries, that
he was forced often to lay pen aside; His discouragements in the work.
yea Archbishop Whitgift sent him a positive command that he should deal no
further in it; yet afterward by an Earl and privy Counselor of great note,
and some other noble Personages, he was at last drawn to take pen in hand
again; But receiving new discouragements, The work left imperfect.
and having such continual employment in the Ministry, he lived not to perfect
that work.

His going into Gernsey.
Whilst he was at Warwick, being silenced by the Bishops, he was requested by
the Lord Zouch, Governor of Gernsey, to go with him into that Island, with
whom he continued some time, and in the mean space he substituted one Master
Lord, a godly and holy Minister, then living at Woolstone, in his room at the
Hospital in Warwick, allowing him the greatest part of the profits of the place
during his abode there; and the rest he caused to be distributed amongst the
poor.

His contempt of the world.
He was far from seeking after great places or great things in the world, and
for riches he sought them not, yea he rejected many opportunities whereby he
might have enriched himself; His usual manner was, when he had good sums of
gold sent him, to take only one piece, lest he should seem to slight his
Friends kindness, and to send back the rest with a thankful acknowledgement
of their love, and his acceptance of it, professing, that for that condition
wherein God had set him, he was as well furnished as they for their high and
great places.

His manner was not to keep any more money in his purse, but what might serve
for charitable uses; He was very bountiful to poor Scholars; His charity.
He distributed money every Sabbath Day amongst the poor of the Town of
Warwick, besides what he gave to the Prisoners, and upon other occasions both
at home and abroad.

For his Household affairs, he never troubled himself with them, but wholly left
them to be ordered and managed by the Prudence of his Wife.

He was very careful to regulate and order the businesses of the Hospital for
the best advantage of the poor Brethren. His Prudence.
He continued his diligence and assiduity in his studies even in his old age,
His studiousnesse.
and his usual manner was to rise at two, three, and four a clock in the
morning at the latest, both summer and winter, notwithstanding that his bodily
infirmities were such, that he was forced to study continually kneeling upon
his knees.

He was of a very meek and quiet spirit, as appears in those conflicts which he
had with Doctor Whitgift, and Doctor Sutcliffe, His meekness.
wherein he used soft words and hard arguments; he could not endure, so much as
in private, to hear his adversaries reproached, and if any in his presence used
disgraceful speeches of them, he would sharply reprove them for it, saying,
That it is a Christians duty to pray for, and not to reproach his adversaries;
and when Martin Mar-Prelates Book came forth, he showed much dislike of the
Satirical and tart language used therein.

He was also very humble, His humility.
not enduring to hear any thing spoken in his own commendation, or any titles
given him, which in the least measure savoured of ambition; He affected not
popularity, but avoided it as much as possibly he could.

Indeed all his ambition was to advance the Kingdom and cause of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to promote Gods glory. His sympathy with the Church.
It was the great joy and rejoicing of his heart to hear of the welfare and
prosperity of the Churches at home and abroad; for this he earnestly and daily
prayed; and when he heard any ill tidings, with Nehemiah he sat down and
mourned, and fasted, and prayed before the God of Heaven, so that all that
conversed with him, might easily discern that nothing did affect him in any
degree, like the good or ill tidings of the Churches state.

He was frequent in Prayer every day, His frequency in Prayer.
and in his younger years has risen many times in the night to seek our
private places to pray in. And as his labors were very great in the work of
the Ministry, so it pleased the Lord to make them very successful for the
conversion and confirmation of many, The success of his Ministry.
and for terror and restraint unto others.

There was one Master Chaplin, a woollen Draper, in Warwick, who made a
Profession of Religion, but many times brake out into scandalous practices;
Master Cartwright on a time walking with him in his Garden, dealt plainly and
faithfully with him, A remarkable judgment upon a loose Professer.
rebuking him for his miscarriages, and showing him the dishonor that he
brought to God, and the Gospel thereby; This so wrought upon Chaplin, that he
presently sunk down, and being carried home, died within a few hours after.

In his old age, he was much troubled with the stone and gout, which much
empaired his strength, yet would he not intermit his labors, but continued
preaching when many times he could scarce creep up into the Pulpit. The Sabbath
before his death, which was the last Sermon that he made, His last Sermon.
December the 25. he preached upon Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to
the earth, and the spirit shall return to God who gave it. The morning before
his death which was the Tuesday following, he was two hours on his knees in
private Prayer: In which (as he told his Wife) he found wonderful and
unutterable joy and comfort, God giving him a glimpse of heaven before he came
to it, Joy unspeakable.
and within a few hours after he quietly resigned up his spirit unto God, His
death.
December the 27. Anno Christi, 1603. And of his age sixty eight. Master Dod
preached his Funeral Sermon.

During his abode in the University, he was of great power, and credit in the
Regent-house, so that the Doctors feared lest the Precisians (as they were then
called) should choose him Vice Chancellor, whereupon they procured the
alteration of the Statute, whereby the choice was formerly in the Regent-house;
and confined the Election of the Vice Chancellor to one of those two whom the
Heads should prick.

After long discontinuance Master Cartwright coming to Cambridge, was
importuned to preach on a week day in Saint Mary's, where there was a great
confluence of all sorts to hear him; grave men ran like boys in the streets to
get places in the Church. After Sermon he dined at Master Chaddertons, and many
went to the house to see and hear him speak.

The Life of Master Paul Baines, who died Anno Christi, 1617.
PAul Baines was born in London, and had his Education in his younger years at
Withersfield in Essex, under one Master Cosens, his Schoolmaster, His Birth,
and Education.
from whence, being fitted for it, he was sent to the University of Cambridge,
and admitted into Christ's College, where his conversation at first was so
irregular, that his Father being grieved at it, before his death, being
intimately acquainted with one Master Wilson, a Sailes-man in Birchin-lane, His
Fathers Prudence.
he left with him forty pounds by the year, desiring him, that if his Son did
forsake his evil courses, and become an honest man, he would then give him that
forty pounds per annum, if not, that he would never let him have it. But it
pleased God, not long after his Fathers decease, to show him his sins, and to
work effectual repentance in him for the evil of his ways; so that forsaking
his former evil company and practices, His conversion.
he became eminent for Piety and Holiness, and according to that of our
Savior, Much being forgiven him, he loved much. After which gracious change
wrought in him by the goodness of God, it was not long before Master Wilson
fell dangerously sick, and hearing how God had dealt with his Master Baines, he
sent for him and desired him to pray with him, by which, as also by his savoury
discourse, finding that what he had heard of him rather came short of the truth
then exceeded it, according to that trust reposed in him, perceiving himself to
be upon his deathbed, he told Master Baines of the forty pounds per annum,
Mr. Wilsons fidelity.
which his Father left with him, and so faithfully delivered up to him those
writings of the agreement which had passed betwixt his Father and him, and
being like to leave behind him a Wife and two Children, he entreated Master
Baines, Mr. Baines his Gratitude.
that as he had faithfully and carefully discharged his trust toward him, so
when God should take him away hence, that he would have a care of his Wife and
Children, and be a Friend to them. And Master Baines, after Master Wilsons
death, that he might fully discharge that trust which was reposed in him, and
also by way of gratitude for that friendship and fidelity, which he had found
in Master Wilson, married his widow.

But before this, for his eminency in learning, He is chosen Fellow.
he was chosen Fellow in Christ's College, where he so much (through Gods
blessing on his studies and endeavors) improved his time, and talents, that he
became inferior to none for sharpness of wit, variety of Reading, depth of
judgment, aptness to teach, holy, and pleasant language, wise carriage,
heavenly conversation, and all other fullness of grace. By his holy life and
coversation also he did largely preach to all such as came near unto him: and
for the heavenly frame of his spirit, what it was, his incomparable Writings
will sufficiently demonstrate to all future generations.

When Master Perkins, who was Lecturer at Saint Andrews in Cambridge, had there
for many years held forth a burning and shining light, the sparks whereof did
fly abroad into all the corners of the Kingdom, and after he had served in his
generation, was taken up into Heaven, there was none found so meet to receive,
as it were, the Torch out of his hand, and succeed him in that great Office of
bearing it before such a people, as Master Baines, He is chosen Lecturer.
upon whom also the spirit of that Elias was by experience found to be doubled.
In which station he so demeaned himself for some years, that impiety only had
cause to complain. But all that favored the ways of God, or savoured of
Religion, rejoiced, and gloried in him and his Ministry, as in a spiritual and
heavenly treasure.

But at length the hour of darkness came from Lambeth, when Archbishop
Bancroft sent Master Harsnet to visit in that Diocese, which was but a trick
to suppress those which were not friends to the Bishops Kingdom. At which
time, though there were multitudes of unable, and notoriously scandalous
Ministers, yet none were found worthy of censure, but only Master Baines, of
whom indeed the world was not worthy, and one other godly Minister like unto
him.

It Is yet hard to say, whether the silencing of this good man were more odious,
or the manner of it more shameless, which was thus: Their custom was, for
fashion sake, at their visitations to have a Sermon, and Master Baines was
chosen out by the Visitor to preach it at this time, not out of love and
respect to him, but from a design, either to ensnare him in his words if he
did not apply himself to their humor, Prelatical malice.
or else to grace their ungracious courses if he did. But it succeeded not
handsomely either way; for Master Baines delivered holy and wholesome Doctrine,
appertaining to the present audience, in such a wary manner, that no specious
occasion could be taken whereby to deprive him of his liberty. Yet they were
resolved to spit forth their malice against him, whether by fair or foul
means, which they thus effected.

Master Baines having heat his weak body by much straining his voice to speak
to so great an Auditory, Sermon being ended, he retired himself presently to
provide for his health, which otherwise would have been much endangered. They
in the mean time going on with their business, according to their accustomed
Lordly way, called for Master Baines amongst the rest, and upon his not
answering, though he was not cited thither as to a Court, but only entreated to
preach, as he did: Yet for not appearing, he was immediately silenced. But
afterward the Chancellor being informed that that gross sentence was
illegal, and therefore a mere nullity, he went another way to work, and sending
for Master Baines, he urged him about subscription and conformity, and upon his
refusal, to make sure work, silenced him over again. In which business he was
so conscious to himself of unreasonable and ridiculous dealing, He is silenced.
that when Master Baines, standing to receive that unjust sentence from so
corrupt a man, lifted up his heart and eyes toward God, with an heavenly
smiling countenance, as his manner was, the Chancellor interpreted that
gesture to be a scorning of his authority.

After this Master Baines was persuaded by some of his Friends to make trial
of the Archbishops courtesy, to whom when he had addressed himself, at the
very first salutation, the gravity, and severity of Archbishop Bancroft, led
him sharply to rebuke the good man for a little black-work edging upon his
cuffs: telling him in a very Episcopal strain: that it were a good deed to lay
him by the heels for it.

After which time Master Baines would have no more to do with such absurd and
unreasonable men: but preached sometimes where he might have liberty, and as
the weakness of his body would suffer. His painfulness and piety.
The rest of his time he spent in Reading, Writing, Meditation, and Prayer,
saving that upon occasion he instructed and comforted those that came to him in
private, wherein he had a very happy and heavenly gift. He was indeed all his
life after pressed with want, And poverty.
not having (as he often complained to his friends) a place to rest his head
in. Yet did he never so much as consult with himself about his denying his
sincerity and complying with the Bishops; of whom, and their courses, he was
wont to say, They are a generation of the earth, earthly, and savor not the
ways of God.

Whilst he lived a private life his Wife died, and being thunderstruck by the
Bishops bolt, he had time and leisure to apply his able wit and judgment, about
the discussing of many questions, which if the Prelates had not forced such
leisure upon him, it may be he would have passed by with others.

He was of such an holy and heavenly temper, that he was reverenced by all good
men that knew him. His manner was in the summertime, to go from one Gentleman's
house to another, and happy were they that could get his company. He had such a
Divine and heavenly Majesty in his countenance, that it would awe any man to
look upon him. Little recreation he used, but sometimes to play at Chesse.

The Bishops malice.
Once he was called by Bishop Harsnet, to the Councel-table, the Bishop having
laid a design to suspend and banish him under the pretense of keeping
Conventicles, the reason whereof was this. He was an excellent Casuist, and
thereupon many doubting Christians repaired to him for satisfaction in cases of
Conscience, which the Bishops would needs have to be keeping of Conventicles.
When he was accused hereof before the Privy-Councel, Gods Providence.
one of the Noblemen said to him, Speak, speak for your self: Whereupon he
made such an excellent speech, that in the midst thereof a Nobleman stood up
and said, He speaks more like an Angel then a man, and I dare not stay here to
have a hand in any sentence against him; upon which speech they dismissed him,
and he never heard more from them.

Upon a time he went to the House of Mistress Sheafe who was his Wives Sister,
at Cranbrook in Kent; where observing that she, and others of the Family used
to play much at cards and such like games, as the custom was, and still is too
much used in Gentlemen's Houses, he took occasion on the Sabbath day in his
Sermon to speak against such games: And it pleased the Lord so to work upon
Mistress Sheafes heart by that Sermon, His faithfulness and prudence.
that when she came home, she came crying to him, saying, Oh Brother, Why would
you thus suffer me to live in sin, to the dishonor of God, and would never
tell me of it before? To which he replied, that it was best of all that God had
wrought on her by the public Ministry, and that it might not have been so well
if he had spoken to her in private.

He was a man of much communion with God, and acquaintance with his own heart,
His Character by Dr Sibbs.
observing the daily passages of his life, and was much exercised with
spiritual conflicts, whereby he became the more able to comfort others with the
same consolations which himself had received from God. He had a deep insight
into the Mystery of Gods Grace and man's Corruption, as appears by his
Commentary upon the Epistle to the Ephesians. He was one that sought not after
great matters in the world, being taken up with comforts and griefs unto which
the world is a stranger. One that had not all his learning out of Books: Of a
sharp wit, and clear judgment. So that though his Meditations were of an higher
strain then ordinary, yet he had a good dexterity, furthered by his love to do
good, in explaining dark points with lightsome similitudes.

His Prayer in his Family was not usually above a quarter of an hour long, and
having respect to the weakness, and infirmities of his Servants and Children,
he used to dissuade others from tediousness in that duty.

It pleased God to make him an instrument of the conversion of that holy, and
eminent Servant of Jesus Christ Doctor Sibbs.

In his last sickness he had many doubts and fears, and God letting Satan
loose upon him, he went out of this world, The manner of his death.
with far less comfort then many weaker Christians enjoy. He resigned up his
spirit into the hands of God, in Cambridge, Anno Christi, 1617.

The Life and Death of Master William Bradshaw, who died Anno Christi, 1618.
IT has from time to time been the lot of diverse persons of singular worth,
and eminent parts, that they have lived in obscurity, and in a low condition,
and past their time without that due respect, and regard, which their excellent
endowments might justly have claimed; partly through the shortness of outward
supplies; (for, they get not up easily, though never so well deserving, that
are scanted in that kind) partly by reason of an inward bashfulnesse, and
over-awing modesty, accompanied with an undervaluing repute of themselves, and
their own abilities; and partly through the iniquity of the times, wherein they
have lived, and the disaffection of those who have swayed most in the State and
Government under which they have resided. Such was the condition of that worthy
and faithful servant of the Lord, Master William Bradshaw, though a man richly
endowed, as well with such spiritual graces, as in truth are of highest esteem,
being peculiar to Gods favorites, that have interest in his Christ, as with
such gifts and parts also, as might, and did render him useful and
instrumental for the public good of Gods people; yet never enjoying any
plentiful condition; howsoever never prone to complain of want; nor forward at
any time, or in any place to put himself forth, as having ever a very low and
mean conceit of his own parts, and admiring in others, what his own eye either
could not descry, or would not take notice of (howsoever to others conspicuous
enough) in himself; and being never suffered to continue long quiet in any
settled place of more public employment, through the envy and malice of some
that had a jealous eye on him, and the disturbances of him in the work of his
Ministry, set on foot by others ill-affected toward him, but accrewing from
the same, pursued by some of those, who were of greatest power and authority in
Ecclesiastical affairs, and could not brook any, that did not in all
particulars comply with them and their courses, as they conceived him not to do.

He was born at Bosworth, a Market Town in Leicestershire, famous for the
Battle fought near to it, wherein that bloody Usurper, Richard the third lost
his Crown, (attained by the unnatural murder of his two Nephews in their
nonage,) together with his life. His Parentage.
His Father Nicholas Bradshaw, though descended from an ancient Family of the
Bradshaws in Lancashire, with the crest of whose Coat therefore being a Buck
browzing, this our Brother used to seal; yet living but in a mean condition,
and being not so well able therefore to train this his Son up in learning as he
desired; an Uncle that he had at Worcester undertook the education of him; His
Education at Worcester.
whether being Master of the Free School there, as some have supposed, or of
some other Profession, as some other conjecture: for that he has been heard to
report, that Master William May, (who was sometime by the Turkey Merchants
employed at Aleppo, and afterward lived and ended his days in or about London,
a man of more then ordinary skill in the learned languages, and in Exposition
of Scripture very accurate and exact) was Teacher in a public School at
Worcester, while he lived there; relating withal, what a neat man he then was,
howsoever in his after-dayes he grew Cynically sordid, and by his uncouth
deportment and jealous disposition, made himself nothing so useful to others,
as otherwise he might have been. But however it was for his Uncles Profession,
under him (who by some Relations of his may not improbably be deemed to have
been a Scrivener or public Notary) he was brought up and kept at School,
until it pleased God to bereave him of this support by his death. After whose
decease, returning home to his Father at Bosworth, His return to Bosworth.
he was enforced, though very much against his mind and desire, to intermit
the prosecution of his studies in literature for some space of time; His Father
now designing him to some other course of life out of despair of maintaining
him in a way so chargeable, as his means, being not large, would not reach
unto; especially having other Children, three Sons and two Daughters to provide
for, besides him. But while the disposal of him hung thus in suspense, it
pleased the Lord (who is wont to have a more special Providence over those,
whom in his secret purpose he has fore-designed unto the work of his Ministry,
Gods Providence in providing for him
to have them fitted for the same) to stir up the spirit of one Master
Ainsworth, a man of much worth, then Schoolmaster at Ashby de la Zouch in
Leicestershire, to divert his Parents purpose of disposing him to any other
employment. For by his favor, (having taken notice of his capacity, industry,
eager desire of farther progress in good literature, fitness of disposition
to be wrought upon to that purpose, and by some buds sprouting out from such
seeds thereof as had already been sown in him, conceiving good hopes of such
future fruits, as did accordingly ensue) he was taken into the Free School
there; where he so profited, and made so successful a proceed, that after a
years continuance, being then about eighteen years of age, he was deemed
sufficiently fitted and furnished for the University; and in the year 1589.
was, His going to Cambridge.
together with that worthy man of great renown, Joseph Hall, after Bishop of
Exceter first, then of Norwich, and Hugh Cholmeley, (who had both been trained
up in the same Schooll with him, and did continue also afterward a kind
affection to him, and friendly correspondence with him) he was admitted into
Emanuel College in Cambridge; Admitted into to Emanuel College.
where with them also he followed his studies under the tuition of that
reverend Divine Master Gilbie, then Fellow of that College; being there
maintained, partly by the allowance of some Gentlemen his fellow-pupils under
the same Tutor; and partly by some supplies afforded him from two noble Knights
of the honorable house of the Hastings, Sir Edward and Sir Francis, (on the
latter of whom his Father also had some dependence) upon the recommendation,
and at the motion of that worthy servant of God, now with God, Master Arthur
Hildersham, who was himself also allied to that Family. In the College with
these supports he continued, husbanding his time to the best advantage, with an
abundant blessing of God upon his sedulous endeavoures, His diligence in his
studies.
to a clear evidence of large improvement, manifesting it self in such
scholerly exercises, as his time and place there required (in the performance
whereof special notice was taken of him, as an acute and eager disputant)
until he had taken both Degrees, first that of Batcheler, and after that of
Master of Arts. But then, being not capable of a Fellowship in that College,
for that the Statutes of the House admitted not above one of the same Shire,
and of that one for Leichestershire Master Joseph Hall beforementioned, being
of the same time and standing with him, was already possessed; and having
refused a Vicarage, endowed with some competent yearly revenue, by that Noble
Knight Sir Edward Hastings one of his Patrons tendered him, not daring yet to
adventure on a work of that nature; Master Laurence Chaderton then Master of
the College, and the first from the very foundation of it, Dr Chadertons care
for him.
bearing a singular affection to Master Bradshaw, as well for his parts of
learning, as for his pious deportment, but being unable for the cause
abovementioned to bring him in there, cast about with himself, how to procure
a place, and get some employment for him elsewhere.

Some years before, that right Honorable and thrice Noble Lady, Frances
Sidney, Sidney College built.
Countess of Sussex, had by her last Will and Testament given order for the
erecting and endowing of a College in Cambridge, to be furnished with a
certain number of Fellows and Scholars under one Master or Head. The College
was now in building, by the provision of the Right Honorable the Earl of Kent,
and Sir John Harrington, instructed by her for the performance of that work;
and Master James Mountague Son to Sir Edward Mountague, then living as
Fellow-Commoner, but Student in Divinity, among the Fellows of Christ's
College, was designed for Master. With him dealt Master Chaderton in Master
Bradshaws behalf; To have him set down for a Fellows place there: which through
his Mediation was from those Noble Trustees without difficulty obtained. But
because some space of time would run out, ere the building of the College
could be consummated and made fit for receipt; it was thought good in the
interim, to dispose of Mr. Bradshaw for some employment elsewhere, until he
might be settled there. It fell out (God so disposing it) that Sir Thomas
Leighton Governor of Guernsey, wanting one to be employed about the
instruction and education of his children, and having requested that worthy
servant of Christ Master Cartwright, abiding then at Cornet-Castle with him, to
write unto Master Chaderton, to furnish them with one fit for such a charge,
this Letter of Master Cartwrights arrived with Master Chaderton in that
juncture of time, wherein he and Master Montague had this business in
agitation about Master Bradshaw: and the matter being by them broken to him,
who referred himself wholly to what they should advise; it was jointly agreed,
that Master Bradshaw should be sent, or lent rather, unto them, to undertake
that charge, and continue in the discharge of it, until the College building
were completed, wherein upon return thence he was then to reside.

Thither therefore long without delay, being furnished with Letters of
recommendation from those here to them there, he addressed himself; His journey
into Guernsey.
and, through Gods goodness, arriving safe there, was with all kind and
courteous entertainment by them received. By this occasion he became thoroughly
known to, and inwardly acquainted with Master Cartwright, who highly esteemed
of him, renewed, or pursued rather his acquaintance with him, after both Master
Bradshaws, Mr Cartwrights love to him.
and his own return also into England, (as may appear by intercourse of Letters
yet to be seen, written by him to Master Bradshaw, while he stayed behind him
in Guernsey, and from Warwick also after his departure from thence) and to his
dying day continued expressions of entire affection to him, and due respect of
him, as also both before and after his decease, his Children, both Son and
Daughters, and those that they were matched unto, rnd his Widow also, did. And
indeed such was his demeanure, wheresoever he came, that he left behind him a
grateful memory of him, in the hearts and minds of all well affected, that had
occasion to take notice of it; not unlike therein to musk or civet, that leave
a sweet sent behind them, even for a long time after they be gone, in the boxes
wherein they were formerly kept, the which continued after his departure
thence, not among the French Ministers alone in that Island, but among such
also of the old Garrison Soldiers, on whom Master Cartwrights Ministry had had
some efficacious and gracious work; Who, as Sir Peter Osburn, who had afterward
the government of that place, has been heard to relate, would be often talking
of one Master Bradshaw, that had lived sometime there, and speak with much
affection of him. But for his constant carriage during his abode there, his
piety, industry, integrity, fidelity in discharge of the trust reposed in him,
and charge committed to him, His carriage in his place.
together with his course of life and conversation otherwise unreproveable; as
also the love and affection to him, earnest desire, if it might have been, of
his continuance with them, and loathnesse to leave him, with these, who were,
after some time spent among them there, then to part with him; all these things
will by no means better appear, then by the Letters of that sincere Servant of
God, and constant Champion of Christ, Master Thomas Cartwright of holy memory,
and the relations concerning him therein contained, being written and directed
to diverse in these parts, either near upon, or at Master Bradshaws departure
from thence.

Among others, in one to Sir Francis Hastings of September the fifth, 1598.
wherein he assures him of his diligence in following his studies, His return to
Cambridge. Mr Cartwrights commendation of him.
and of his sharp and ready capacity, likely through Gods blessing to bring
forth such fruit of learning, as he might have good cause to rejoice over any
cost that he had been at with him, or should farther bestow that way on him; as
also, of his love to the best things, and his conversation in the Family
without reproach, for ought he could learn, having had an eye constantly on
him. In another to Master Chaderton of December the fifth, (the time, it seems
of his departure thence) wherein he thankfully acknowledges the great benefit
they had received by Master Bradshaw, procured by him to take so long and
painful a journey to them, and his wise and loving care in so good provision
for them; returning thanks also to him, from Sir Thomas Leyghton the Governor,
and his Honorable Lady for him; and withal requesting him, that they may once
again taste of his accustomed love and care in that kind.

And in another yet more fully of the same date to Master Mountague in these
words; The Law commands, that of things borrowed great care should be had for
the well usage and due restoring of them. Both which we have endeavored in
Master Bradshaw: But the full performance must rest rather in yours and his
acceptance, then in pay. For as touching the former of them, his desert of
care to profit those committed to his charge, and his Behavior otherwise in
the house, has been more then every one is able to esteem, and therefore in
all respects not so fit to reward. For the other, (unless unwilling parting
with him on all hands be against duty) you shall (we hope in the Lord) have him
duly restored; Out of all doubt with all thankfulness to your Worship, by whose
kindness, both we have enjoyed him some good time, sithence you of right might
have taken him away, and he has received a supply of recompense for that we
were not able to make good unto him. And so with hearty thanks and
commendations from the Governor and his Honorable Lady, and my humble thanks
for your love, and this fruit I have received thereof by Master Bradshaw, I
commend you to the gracious keeping and blessing of God in Jesus Christ. Unto
this Letter Master Mountague now Master of the College, upon Master Bradshaws
access thither, returns answer, both thanking him, for the remitting of him
to them; (so that on no side thanks for him were wanting, His gracious
deliverance in his return.
so well was he esteemed of on either part) and withal advertising him of a
very great danger, and no less deliverance, that near unto his journeys end
had betided him.

Whereunto Master Cartwright in a Letter of March 7. the same year thus
replieth; Sir, It comes from the abundance of your love, to thank me for that
which duty it self required at my hands toward Master Bradshaw, and therefore
the thanks are returned unto you, who esteem so highly of duty, as to let it go
in the account of a Benefit or good turn. My hope is the same with yours, that
the Lord, who by deliverance of him from so great a death, binds him to a
straighter obedience, has set such an impression of it in his mind, as will be
in stead of a watch to waken him every morning to all cheerful service, which
his place will require. And indeed the Letter he wrote of that matter, carries
that sound, and even undertakes so much in his behalf. And in one to Master
Bradshaw himself, after receipt of that from him, touched upon in the close
foregoing; That the Lord our most merciful Father delivered you from so great
a death, it pledges unto you deliverances hereafter, especially if they be
inferior to this. So much the rather, as the swimmer sunk like a piece of
lead, and he that could no more swim then the Iron-head of the Scholars
hatchet, was graciously born up: and therefore by how much the Proverb is true,
(...), by so much we have cause to praise God, that by the Angel of the waters
saved you: And withal you may help to encourage others against the excessive
fear of drowning in passing the Seas: Seeing it was more safe to you to pass
the winter-Seas, even when they rage most, then the small brook of Hawston-
Mills. I remembered you to Sir Thomas and my Lady; who told me that if any
entertainment would have holden you, they would not have suffered you to have
gone from them, and rejoiced much at your gracious escape. Subscribed, Your
assured loving Brother and Fried, Thomas Cartwright.

The Escape in those Letters mentioned was this: Gods special Providence over
him.
Master Bradshaw being to leave Guernsey, shipped himself for England. Nor was
his passage by Sea wholly free from hazard, for with so violent a storm were
they surprised at Sea, that the Passengers most of them expected nothing but
wrack, and a Gentlewoman among them, with another, whom she much affected
attending upon her, did in a cord, by the waste fasten themselves either to
other, that they might perish together, and draw their last breath, or breath
it out rather, in the mutual embraces either of other. But that storm being
allaied, and the danger of it over, and the Ship with her Passengers now
arrived in safety, Master Bradshaw having attained London, did there hire a
Hackney, such as are commonly used on that Road, to convey him to Cambridge,
there to enter upon the Fellowship prepared for him, and assigned unto him; by
help of which Beast, he got so far on his way in safety, that he was now within
three miles of his journeys end. But danger often lies in wait for us, where we
least of all either expect or suspect it; and then many times overtakes, and
surprizeth us unawares, when we deem our selves wholly past danger, and are
near approaching our intended, much desired, and now fully expected Port, and
have always need therefore both of an eye of Providence constantly on us, and
of an hand of protection continually over us. For being there to pass a small
Brook crossing the road near to a Village called Hawston, and the Water-mills
seated on it, thence Hawston Mills; he that had escaped so eminent and apparent
a danger at Sea, lighten on, and fell into that unexpectedly, that proved much
more hazardous on land, where no appearance was of ought in that kind: for
being unacquainted with the course of the stream, otherwise passed ordinarily,
and that daily without danger, and having not fetched a compass far enough, as
he ought to have done, the Beast that bare him plunged suddenly into the
Mill-pond, or pit; and being not able to recover it self, therein perished, and
there left him floating in a strong vertiginous current, unskilful in
swimming, (nor had any such skill in likelihood been available in such a case
to have saved him) and altogether unable to shift for himself; where he must of
necessity have gone the same way with the Beast, had not either some one
occasionally looking out of the Mill, A Miracle of mercy.
or some Passenger on the way, espying one floating in that manner, and at the
very pinch of perishing, called hastily on the Miller, or those next at hand to
let slip down the Floodgates; by means whereof the stiff current of the
watercourse was stayed, and this Servant of God, though not without much
difficulty, rescued out of the water, and delivered unexpectedly out of that
his, in a manner, even desperate distress.

And it may indeed justly be deemed a wonder of wonders, (in regard whereof
that venerable Minister of Christ beforementioned, seems to have apprehended
the ministry of an Angel used in it) that he was not suddenly in an instant,
either swallowed up in that whirling gulf, or hurried away with the violent
course of the current, and that he should bear up and keep above water, so long
in a place of that nature. For he has been heard to relate, that while he
continued thus floating and struggling with that wheeling surface, it troubled
him not a little, that he could not address himself as he desired to prepare
for his departure, though having nothing but death in his eye, while his ear
was taken up with the voice of some talking in the Mill, from whom he supposed
yet some help might come, though neither was he able to call unto them, nor
they to hear him.

Thus even Gods Children themselves find a defect often in themselves, that they
cannot with such an exact composure of spirit, in times of distress address
themselves unto God, until he have pulled away all outward prosperity, as well
hopes, as helps from them. But being by a special Providence of God thus
recovered, and as another Moses drawn out of the water, and brought into the
Millers house, he was there shifted, and put into such dry apparel, as the
Miller himself used to wear; in which garb when some of his acquaintance found
him, who upon tidings of of this occurrent, came posting over to him from
Cambridge, they could not forbear smiling to see him sitting in that habit,
though not a little affected with the casualty occasioning it, and no less
heartily gladned for the gracious issue that God has pleased to afford it, and
expressing much thankfulness for his mercy and goodness therein manifested.
The Lord it may seem would hereby fit this his servant reserved to other hot
and hazardous services, unto a farther and firmer dependence in and under them
upon him.

But thus his Horse lost, (which to the Carrier its owner, as by his default
mis-carrying, requiring it, was made good) being after his escape and recovery
somewhat revived and refreshed, and fitted again with a wonted Suit, he was
with some of those his acquaintance accompanied to Cambridge, and repaired to
the College; where having presented himself to the Master, he was entertained
in the Chamber of one of the Fellows, that assigned him, being not yet fit to
receive him, (as indeed they came all to very raw Chambers at first) and the
use of that offered him, until his own could be fitted and furnished for him:
He is admitte-Fellow in Sidney College.
which being his first entertainment there, albeit but a sorry courtesy to
speak of, yet did so affect him, as upon occasion, to some of his familiar
friends he afterward professed, (of so ingenuous and grateful a disposition he
was, and so prone with thankfulness to acknowledge, His Gratitude.
and to set an high rate on the least kindness showed him, or meanest office
done for him) that it laid the groundwork, or first stone thereof at least
with him, for such an Union of inward and entire affection, and well fastened
knot of unreserved familiarity and strictest friendship, as did afterward ensue
between them two, and so continued, not only while they abode in the College
together, by a mutual communication of their studies, counsels, courses and
purposes either to other; but even after also, when through distance of abode
they were severed the one from the other, by a constant course of
vicissitudinary writing, therein advising either with other, and discussing
mutually such questions and doubts, wherewith either of them were occasionally
encountered; by means whereof they received much help and light either from
other; and albeit in some particulars either not so clear, or not so cleared to
their joint apprehensions, their judgment might, and did sometime differ,
(which having on occasion professed to a Friend, desiring to know their joint
judgment in a case then questioned, and seeming to marvel that they two should
be of diverse minds in ought, he made answer, that it was no wonder at all, it
might rather be wondered, considering man's condition in intellectuals, so
impaired and clouded, that any two seriously set upon the search of truth,
should not in many particular cases dissent; yea that if in every particularity
they should wholly concur, it might seem to savor rather of a cunningly
contrived compact or conspiracy, then a real and rational consent) yet where
by force of argument they seemed convict, or any mistake manifested, they were
ready to yield, and did indeed in not a few things, come home either to other,
His humility.
unto their mutual much advantage; nor did their remaining differences ever
produce any breach, or abatement of affection between them, but that the knot
once knit, from the first to the last, continued firm and inviolate, never
loosed nor slackned, so long as God was pleased to lengthen out the line of his
life. His inviolable friendship.


In the College he so demeaned himself, that though the Fellows were not all
of one mind, or one way, and there were among them (as usually in Societies of
that nature) men of diverse dispositions, and sub-divisions consequently of
companies, consisting of such as more familiarly consorted, and more inwardly
conversed with some few, whom selected from the rest they most affected; yet so
loving and lowly, yielding to all, and complying with all, was his carriage,
that notwithstanding he were by some deemed over-strict, and would freely as
occasion was, speak his mind, and deliver his judgment, yet he retained ever
the, professed at least good liking, His prudent and winning carriage.
and external kind usage from them all: Where it will not be amiss to relate a
speech of one of them, (a man by occasion of some discontents strongly and
strangely possessed with a spirit of jealousy and suspitiousness of every one,
even his inwardest and entirest friends, which in the end proved his overthrow)
who having entertained a conceit, that something spoken by Master Bradshaw in a
dispute should have a glance closely at somewhat that concerned him, and having
discovered that his suspicion to a common bosome-friend of them both, (by whom
also upon disclose of that groundless conceit, he was evidently convinced of
his error therein) he used these words of him, Although I am sure, he had a
gird at me, yet the man is of so kind and loving a disposition, that I could
not be angry with him, though be had broken my head. But I cannot let pass one
remarkable Instance that may evidently manifest in him a due temper (which is
not over-frequently found) of freedom of spirit, and discreet demeanure,
wisely mixed, and well consistent the one with the other.

During his abode in Guernsey, a Question was on foot, among Divines of special
note, on either side yet in debate, concerning the lawfulness of some pecuniary
contracts, wherein Master Cartwright having by writing declared his mind, in
way of answer to some arguments objected against it: Master Bradshaw being
required by him freely to discover his judgment therein, and seriously to
consider of that his answer, albeit of himself he would not have adventured to
undertake such a task; yet being so put upon it, he did it freely and largely,
with as much strength of wit and argument, His Prudence.
(it may not without ground be deemed) as any have done, that have hitherto
dealt on that subject; and yet so discreetly and respectively managing the
business, that though being then of a contrary judgment, he used his best
forces and strongest endeavoures to shake and shatter Master Cartwrights
grounds, yet did it not breed any breach between them, nor did it (that could
be discerned) lessen Master Cartwrights either affection to him, or esteem of
him; which from time to time, as occasion was, and as in part has already been
showed, he was ever ready to express. Howbeit it must withal for a truth be
ackowledged, that Master Bradshaw, howsoever in the College performing a
Divinity-Problem, His self-denial
as they term it, did still stiffely maintain that his former Tenet; yet upon
farther consideration in his latter days, he is known to have altered his
judgment therein.

While he stayed in the College, that he might with the more freedom employ
that talent that the Lord had committed unto him, he entered into the Ministry;
He enters into the Ministry.
the rather advised (as some other also were) so to do, while admission was yet
more easy, and the way of entrance less obstructed, in regard of some things,
which out of diversity of judgment, and tenderness of conscience he stuck at;
then was by prudent men, observing how State-businesses began to be carried,
deemed like to last long. And at the motion of one Master Pigot, a religious
Gentleman residing at Abington about eight miles from Cambridge, His employment
at Abington.
he rode weekly over thither, there to preach every Lords Day for some good
space of time; joining also in a weekly Lecture, as he had opportunity, with
some other neighbor Ministers, at a greater Town called Bassingborn not far
thence distant. Afterward he was drawn over to Steeple-Morden in the same
shire, by one Master Martin, And at Steeple-Morden.
an ingenuous Gentleman, who enjoying the appropriation, entertained him as a
Lecturer, in regard of the infirmity of the party that was possessed of the
Vicarage.

But while he was thus taken up with employments abroad, there arose a storm
against him at home, and that upon this occasion. About that time two
Leicestershire Ministers of his acquaintance, The occasion of his first trouble.
Master Darrel and Master Moor, being questioned about the dispossession of
William Summers and Thomas Darling, (besides some others) supposed to be by evil
spirits possessed, the one of them, to wit, Darling stood stiffely in avowing
the truth of the thing, and refused to acknowledge any deceit or collusion
therein; yea though many slights were used to enduce him thereunto, and Letters
forged and tendered to him in Master Darrels name, as beginning to grow
somewhat suspicious of the business, yet nothing could prevail with him; but
the other, to wit, Summers, The Bishops subtlle practices.
being in like manner dealt with, and enticed by large Promises of such
provision to be made for him, that he should be sure not to want, nor should
need to go down into his own Country again, was persuaded to accuse Master
Darrell to have set him on work, and taught him how to act sundry strange feats
and gestures, whereby he might be deemed to be a Demoniak. Whereupon some of
the Bishops, London specially, in whose house the boys had been kept apart,
eagerly pursuing the business, the two Ministers were cited into the High
Commission Court, and there being charged with imposture, were suspended and
imprisoned until further cognizance, and Master Harsnet [Londons Chaplain]
mean while set on work to pen and publish a virulent Pamphlet against Master
Darrell, traducing him therein as a Grand Impostour and Jugler, and the whole
action about the possession and dispossession of William Summers, as a mere
Puppet-play. Hence Master Darrell thus traduced, was enforced to write and
publish something for the defense of himself, and clearing of his guiltlesness
herein; and so did first in a briefer Narrative concerning the manner of their
proceedings with him, entitled his Trial; and afterward in a larger Answer to
Harsnet, in way of farther Apology for himself. Of these Books some Copies
being sent down to Cambridge, were directed to Master Bradshaw, and a parcel
of them by him delivered to one Underwood a Tailor, who dispersed of them as
well in the Colleges as in the Town. Intimation hereof being given to Bishop
Bancroft at London, that such Books were in diverse hands at Cambridge, he
writes to the Vicechancellor to make diligent enquiry after the dispersers of
them. He lights on Underwood, whom upon examination, confessing that he had
received a certain number of them from Master Bradshaw, he binds in a bond to
appear upon warning before the High Commission, and charge him withal not to
give notice of ought to Master Bradshaw.

The next morning by seven of the clock Letters came from the Vicechancellor to
the Master of the College, requiring him at eight of the clock to repair unto
him, and to bring Master Bradshaw with him. About the same time that these
Letters came to the Master, an unknown Scholar repairing to Master Bradshaws
Chamber, tells him, that Underwood was in trouble, and he should do well to
look to himself. Master Bradshaw upon these tidings thus brought him, went
presently to Master Wright the Senior Fellow of the house, A special Providence.
to ask advice of him what to do in this case: he wished him to withdraw
himself, and withal, directed him to Gransden, a Town about nine miles distant
from Cambridge, as a fit place of retire, where one Master Castle a Gentleman
well-affected, and Master Wrights Brother-in-law, he well knew, would be
right-willing to receive him. But Master Bradshaw resolved first to have an
assay made by some other, whereby it might be discovered, what the Masters mind
herein was. Hereupon Master Ward was sent for, who being requested to break the
matter to the Master, was right-willing and ready to undertake that Office. The
Master mean while upon receipt of the Vicechancellours Letter, had sent his man
presently to enquire for Master Bradshaw at Master Gatakers Chamber, which in
his absence then discontinuing he had the charge of, and kept most in, being
more convenient then his own; he not finding him there, was returned back, just
as Master Ward came in to the Master: Who upon his repair to him, having but
named Master Bradshaw, the Master, before he could deliver any part of his
errand, demands of him where Master Bradshaw was, and says he must speak
with him. Master Ward told him, It was not safe for Master Bradshaw to come to
him, because he was in danger of the Vicechancellour. The Master replied, That
therefore he must come; for that he had Letters from the Vicechancellour to
bring him presently to him. Which Letters while he stepped into his closet to
fetch, that he might show them to him, Master Ward a fast and true-hearted
friend, more careful of Master Bradshaws safety, then fearful of the Masters
displeasure, and his own danger, stayed not the Masters return, but slipped away
with all speed to acquaint Master Bradshaw how things stood. The Master at hs
return missing Master Ward, was exceedingly enraged against him, and threatened
to punish him, by setting a deep fine for example upon him. But the hour being
now elapsed, which the Vicechancellour had set, the Master wrote back to him,
that Master Bradshaw could not as yet be found. Master Bradshaw hereof
advertised, albeit that all his friends there, were earnest with him to
withdraw, yet for the present refused, and requested Master Wright to repair to
the Master, that by him he might understand from him, what his resolute will
was, which he purposed not to withstand. Master Wright, according to his
request, repairing to the Master, found him in much heat: no nay he would have,
but Master Bradshaw must needs go; it would else endanger him, and endanger the
College, etc. Master Bradshaw informed hereof by Master Wright, not at all
fearing to suffer in a good and just cause, as he deemed it to be, and no less
loath to have any other endamaged, or endangered for him, (notwithstanding that
his friends were all utterly against it) without farther dispute or delay, went
presently to the Master, and presented himself to him; who entertaining him
with hot and high terms, the good man answered him in a calm and meek manner,
that he had no cause to be so much offended with him, His courage.
or incensed against him; he knew not of any such Commission that he had, when
he sent at first to him; but sent only to him for counsel in that case,
deeming it better for him to do it by some other rather then by himself; and
being loath to come into trouble in those turbulent times: (for the Earl of
Essex his business was then on foot) and that so soon as he understood his
pleasure, he readily condescended thereunto. The Master thereupon charged him
by the authority of his place, to bring him all Master Darrels Books, that he
had in his hands, and to go presently with him unto the Vicechancellour; which
without farther reply he yielded unto. But while he was gone to fetch the
Books, the Vicechancellour sent his servant to the Master, desiring him to come
to himself; and the Master, his man to Master Bradshaw, charging him to stay
within until he returned. At his return Master Bradshaw of his own accord
repaired to him; who then charged him, at twelve of the clock to repair to his
Chamber, that he might take his Answer, and a Bond for his forthcoming. But
Doctor Barwell Master of Christ's College in the mean space coming to him,
(whether about that business or upon some other occasion, uncertain) by his
advice (it seems) the Master altered his mind; and in likelihood the rather,
after much mutual consultation, and better consideration past between them,
because both the Masters had themselves bought of the Books: for he sends for
Master Wright, and now tells him, that it would be the best course for Master
Bradshaw to go out of the way: which accordingly he did. He withdraws from the
College.
The Bishop of London not long after wrote again to the Vicechancellour to
imprison Underwood, and to make farther enquiry after Master Bradshaw,
concerning whom the Master being by the Vicechancellour demanded; made answer,
that he was not in the College: whereunto he replied, that it was best so for
him, not willing (as may be deemed) to be used as an instrument in molesting
him, if it might be avoided. The carriage of this business, together with the
several overtures and circumstances of it, is out of a Narrative of his own,
the more particularly related, to show both the discreet and modest, and yet
ingenuous and courageous disposition of this Servant of God; and the
remarkable passages of Gods Providence in a concurrence of occurents so
unexpectedly managed, that he should thereby be kept out of the clutches of
those that were so exceeding thirsty to seize on him, and so fiercely bent
against him.

Master Bradshaw being thereof informed by some Friends, and considering how
the Bishop persisted in enquiry after him, conceived that Cambridge for the
present could be no safe or quiet place for him: and having therefore withdrawn
himself, though retaining his place still there, he spent his time for the
space of some months, partly with Master Pigot at Abington, and partly at
Morden with Master Martine, in which places he had formerly exercised his
Ministry, and as occasion required, so still did. Thus there hovering, in a
Letter to a special Friend, whose good opinion of him he much valued, he thus
writes; I fear it will be somewhat offensive unto you, His Letter to a Friend
about it.
and that you will condemn me for being too rash and indiscreet in this matter.
But I trust you will consider that the thing I have done, was to pleasure most
good and Christian Friends; that the cause, it is the cause of God, and the
glory of God has been much increased by it, by reason of the truth of God
shining therein; unto which I could not perform a less duty; there being
nothing in the Books (as I am persuaded) against the State; howsoever there are
many hot words, that might have been spared, though none that have not been
deserved. I wish they had past my poor censure before the coming forth of them,
they should not then have given so much advantage to the enemies of the truth.
I will (God willing) fly the danger as much as I can, especially in these
troublesome and tragical times, which seem of purpose to be chosen, that they
might do the more injury, and the speech may be the less. And in another to the
same party; My danger for Master Darrel troubles me not a whit, I thank God;
neither do I repent of any thing I have therein done, so long as you think
never the worse of me: other matters trouble my mind more, yet such is the
goodness of God, that though they distract my mind from other studies needful
for me to wade into, yet when I come to exercise my poor Ministry, and to study
for my Sermons, my mind is free enough. Thus is the Lord wont in more special
manner to support the spirits of his servants, for such particular employments,
as he has more specially assigned them unto.

The matter that more troubled him, was concerning his entrance into any settled
place for the exercise of his Ministry, which he supposed would be, and upon
some trial indeed found, every way so obstructed, that, albeit places of
employment enough were offered, and his employment in them much desired, yet he
could not conceive how it might be cleared in regard of the tenderness of his
conscience, and scruple of some things that he stuck at, which were like to be
tendered unto him, and pressed upon him, before admission thereunto; and that
the rather in probability in regard of the prejudice now had of him for the
business concerning those Books. For he had been offered the Rectory of
Abington by Master Pigot the Patron, who would have compounded with the present
Incumbent for the bringing of him in: And Master Wendy likewise, a Religious
Gentleman in those parts, had, together with some others, been endeavoring to
bring him in at Basingborn: but neither of them took effect. He was invited
also to New Castle in Staffordshire, whither also he repaired, but found not
matters to his liking there: and after unto Yarmouth, to be Lecturer with them,
with assurance of a liberal maintenance from them; for they very much affected
him. But that their design was crossed by the Bishop of the Diocese, having a
jealous eye as well on them as on him, and being desirous to prefer and place a
Chaplain of his own therefore there. To the College he returned again after
some time spent abroad, His return to the College.
the storm seeming now to be over-blown, and howsoever there he met with no
renewed molestation about the forementioned business, yet had he no heart at
all there to continue; partly in regard of the departure thence of a special
friend, whom he entirely affected, of whose return thither, being now elsewhere
settled, he was wholly out of hope; and partly because he perceived, that the
Master did not then so affect him, as formerly he had done.

Amidst these distractions, a Preachers place falling vacant at Chatham in
Kent, where a great part of the Navy Royal, and Officers of the same attending,
did usually reside; the business of supplying them with an able and faithful
Teacher was by general consent referred to Master Chaderton, being at that time
in Kent not far from thence, thither drawn over from Cambridge, about the
consummating of a marriage between that reverend man of God Master Josias
Nicols, who had passed many sharp bickerings and brunts in those times, and the
relict of that famous worthy Doctor Whitaker deceased. He commended Master
Bradshaw to them. Concerning whom the piously affected party, after diligent
inquiry, received such ample testimony, that (whereas diverse other made first
for the place, and by their laboring with some friends had wrought a siding
among them, to prevent such obstructions as thence might arise) they sent an
express to Cambridge on purpose with instructions, in the first place to Master
Chaderton, to entreat him, that he would not any wise give consent to have any
other designed to the place, but him only whom he had already propounded: for
that they rested in his choice; and longed much to see and hear him. And in the
next place to Master Bradshaw, to request him, that he would make no doubt or
delay of coming to them; wherein he would not be slack, if they knew how
earnestly they longed to see and enjoy him; and withal to signify to him,
what had been delivered to Master Chaderton from them; He is sent for to
Chatham.
that they desired only the sincere milk of Gods Word, and a Pastor bearing a
sincere affection and tender heart to his people: that they had wrought great
means to obtain him; that if he refused to come to them, he did not know what
he did; and if he came, and found them not worthy of him, yet his labor and
charge should be fully made good. Thus being importuned, (as by his own Letter
to a Friend of July the eighth 1601. appears) though by some still pressed
for Abington, with hopes suggested of clearing the way there for him; he came
up to London, and after advice had with some Friends in the City, from thence
went down to Chatham. He goes to Chatham.
And though it go for a common buy-word, often verified, that personal presence
abateth much of foregoing reports, and great expectations preconceived are wont
seldom to receive full satisfaction; and it be true, that Master Bradshaw was
not a man of much out side, nor forward to put out himself, of a very bashful
and demiss, but not fawning deportment; insomuch that his bodily and personal
presence might (as the Apostles sometime,) seem weak, and not to promise much,
with such especially, as look no further then the face: Yet when he came and
was heard, and his meek and discreet carriage by the generality observed, by
the wiser sort well weighed, he was by joint consent agreed upon; and a solemn
Letter of invitation appointed to be drawn up by Master John Cook, sometime
Fellow of Trinity College, then enjoying an Office under Sir Fulk Grinvel
Treasurer to the Navy, and afterward Secretary of State to King James,
subscribed by the Officers there belonging to the Navy, and the most of any
note and repute in the place; intimating their election of him by joint consent
to the place, professing a willingness to submit themselves to his Ministry,
and promising to afford him all due support and assistance in the same. Upon
the receipt hereof he fully now resolved without farther delay, to entertain the
call, and accept of the place; and having signified so much unto them, was very
lovingly received by them, and quietly for some good space of time (to wit, His
faithfulness in his place.
from July 1601. unto April 1602.) labored in the Word and Doctrine among
them, (together with Master John Philips, who enjoying the Vicarage did as
Pastor of the place therein join with him) with good success and much comfort,
and to the great contentment and gladsomness of people well affected in those
parts. Being thus then settled there, A motion of marriage made to him.
with good hope of continuance, motion was made to him by some of his Friends
there (supposing that might be some means of farther engagement of him for to
stay with them, of a match with a Widow an houswifely Woman, and one that had
lived always in good repute with them. Which not foreseeing in likelihood,
what would afterward ensue, he did not unwillingly so far forth hearken unto,
as to entertain some good liking of the Woman; howsoever in regard of the
ensuing change of things, the business was no farther then proceeded in, but by
mutual agreement between them laid aside, and delayed, until God should see
good to make way by some means, for their more convenient coming together, and
comfortable cohabitation of either with other.

For those Halcyon seasons lasted not long; the common adversary of God and
man, who out of his inveterate envy and enmity can in no wise brook the
propagation of the Gospel, and dilatation of Christ's curtains, began at first
more covertly and under hand to contrive some course, whereby to cast a rub in
his way, and to procure a restraint of his farther proceeding in a course so
successful and advantageous for the glory of God and the good of his people.
For about the time abovementioned, Satan's malice against the progress of the
Gospel.
some neighbor- Ministers, envying the recourse of people to his teaching,
began secretly to plot against him, though they would not be seen in it; by
suggesting to the Bishop of the Diocese, that he was a man not conformable to
the Rites of the Church, He is accused to the Bishop.
nor well-affected to the present Government. This how far forth it prevailed
with the Bishop that then sat there, does not appear; but the business being
smelt out, and by some means discovered, to prevent trouble from him, and
settle Master Bradshaw (as they supposed) more surely in the place, it was by
diverse of his people and friends there deemed most expedient, (though therein
peradventure much mistaken) to have some means used to obtain a Confirmation of
him therein from the Archbishop of Canterbury, unto whom Rochester was as
Suffragan, and no man being deemed fitter to deal in this business with the
Archbishop then that Noble and Religious Knight Sir Francis Hastings, he was by
a Letter from Master Bradshaw requested to make some trial of his interest in,
and power with Archbishop Whitgift, to that purpose in his behalf. He upon the
receipt of Master Bradshaws Letter, the very same day, April 22. 1602. returned
him this most kind Christian, and affectionate Answer, My love to your self you
know, and shall ever know it in any thing, wherein I can make it known: my
duty, your duty, and all our duties to God, his Church, you know better then my
self; and my duty to further a good people to a good Minister, a longing people
to hear, to a a laboring speaking Minister to teach them, is a bond of duty
that I may never forget, and a work of duty that I must ever be ready to
perform. Assure your self therefore, my velle shall not be slack; and if my
posse can prevail, I shall be glad, I will say no more: but pray to my God to
increase his graces in you, to teach profitably; to increase grace in your
people, to hear diligently; and to multiply his graces both in speaker and
hearer, that they may speak and hear fruitfully, etc. Subscribed, Your true
Christian Friend, Francis Hastings. Nor was he more ready to promise, then
forward to perform. For within three days after, to wit, April 25. he wrote to
the Archbishop this modest, pious, and zealous Letter: May it please your grace
to pardon me, Sir Francis Hastings his Letter to the Archbishop in his behalf.
that I do not personally attend you, but presume to write: -- I make bold to
become suitor to your grace, for your favor to a young man, being one that I
hold my self interessed in, and to whom I owe my best help, to further him to
some place of employment and maintenance, which causes me to become an humble
suitor for him to you, not without a special regard to that people, who so
Christianly thirst after knowledge and instruction. The man for whom I sue is
one Master Bradshaw, a Master of Arts of Sidney College in Cambridge: The
matter I sue for, your graces favor and allowance that he may preach: the
place where his labors are desired, is at Chatham. And I most humbly beseech
your grace, that however you may find or bear, that he is fearful to do some
things that may be urged on him; yet seeing he is well qualified with gifts,
and of honest carriage sitting for his calling, let not his fearfulness
prejudice him with your Lordship, but vouchsafe him liberty to bestow his
talent; and I will undertake to your grace for him, that he shall not offer any
disturbance to the peace of our Church either in word or action; but shall
painfully bestow himself in that place, to preach Christ crucified, and to arm
his people with some measure of knowledge, to stand Christianly and
courageously for the truth of Christ, and to resist all Errors broached
against that holy Doctrine. And the rather I make hold to tender this suit to
your grace for him, because I find plenty of practicing by Seminaries and
Jesuits to corrupt and pervert the peoples hearts both in knowledge and
obedience; and that through penury of preaching in some places it may prove
dangerous. I never heard the young man preach my self, but I hear his gifts
greatly commended; and I know him to be learned, and painful also, and
careful in that he takes in hand. And though I know the tenderness of his
Conscience some ways, yet I dare engage my credit again, (as before) to your
grace for him, that he shall walk dutifully, wisely and discreetly in the whole
course of his preaching, without all offer of disturbance to the peace of the
Church. And so longing to hear that my suit may find my desired success with
your grace, I commend mine humble duty to you, and commit your grace, and all
your godly proceedings to the protection and directian of the Lord Almighty.
Subscribed, Your graces most bounden, and ready to be commanded, Francis
Hastings. What Answer the Noble Knight had from the Archbishop, or what effect
this his Letter had with him, we cannot certainly say; but by what followed it
may well be deemed, that of the Archbishop it was not very well relished; who
in cases of this kind, was seldom wont to do ought without the advice of
Bancroft, another Bonner, Bishop Bancrofts malice.
as well in regard of place, as of disposition and practice, in eager pusuit of
many of Gods faithful Ministers in those times, so far as the power of his
place would permit, in whose stomach the memory of Master Darrels business
stuck still, and of Master Bradshaws act about his Books. For not without some
animation in likelihood from above, those Master Bradshaws back-friends, who
had before dealt in the dark, did shortly after begin to disclose themselves,
and to manifest their malice, which had formerly lain hid, as embers raked up
in the ashes. Master Bearblocks malice against him.
The first of them that openly appeared in the business, was one Master
Bearblock Minister at Strowd, a Town or Village adjoining to Rochester, a man
of very mean parts for learning, and of a very scandalous life; but one of
those whom the Prophet Jeremy speaks of, that had a singular faculty of
slicking and smoothing his tongue, to sooth men up in their sins. This man
(among other) vexed at the concourse of people that repaired from the places
adjacent to Master Bradshaws teaching, (although Master Bradshaw desirous to
comply, so far forth as without offense he might, with him) used to frequent
his week-dayes Lecture; He is charged with Heresy.
stuck not both in private meetings to tax Master Bradshaw for delivering
heretical Doctrine, and publicly also in a Sermon on the Lords Day so to
charge him therewith, that the Auditory, though he named him not, might well
know whom he meant. Now albeit the man himself were of no esteem, and his
censure consequently little to be regarded, yet Mr. Bradshaw deemeed, that a
public charge of that nature, should not be let pass with silence. Howbeit,
not willing, nor esteeming it meet to pester the Pulpit with Apologies, he
chose rather to deal with this his Opponent and Traducer by a Letter, which it
will not be amiss here to insert.

His Letter to Master Bearblock about that charge.
Master Bearblock, I was informed by some of your Christian Auditors at Strowd,
that in your forenoons Exercise, you took occasion in the repetition of your
former Sermon, to add thereto something in bitter terms, against some
Heretical Doctrine lately broached in some neighbour-Church; which diverse of
your most charitable, and the most of your judicious hearers, conceived to be
directed against me. At the first, I had no cause easily to entertain the
report, because I was no way guilty to my self, so much as of the least show of
any occasion given unto you, to break out in that manner against me; and did
presume you had better learned the Laws of Charity, then in such an open manner
to traduce a fellow Minister of the Gospel, before you were better possessed of
the cause. Besides, I thought, that reproachful reports, that have been
bruited against your self, should have taught you, if you be innocent, that a
Minister of the Gospel may be much abused and mis-reported of, both for life
and doctrine; and therefore that you would not teach by your own practice me or
any other thus in open manner, to make the reports of men a sufficient Text to
preach against your life, as you have made them to preach against my Doctrine.
But since that time I am given to understand, that you have given it out at one
Master Morelands Table, that I was the man; that you then before God and his
holy Angels endicted and arraigned; and that of no less a crime then gross
Heresy; and that some of your Congregation were purposed to proceed in Law
against me for it. You know there was a Law, (and it were well if it were now
in force, to bridle distempered tongues) that if one were accused of a crime,
which could not be proved, the Accuser should suffer the punishment due to that
crime; and then Master Bearblock, if heresy deserve a punishment, if you
should but accuse me of that, which methinks you have already condemned me of,
your back should bear the punishment of two Heresies. For first, it is most
untrue that I have taught any such Doctrine; and secondly, if you could not
prove that Doctrine, as I know you cannot, this you here so tax to be heresy,
your Doctrine that calls it heresy, deserves no less lege Talionis, then
heresy; which I speak not so much in regard of your weakness, as in grace of
the strength of the cause; wherein though with the dim eye of mine own judgment
I could see nothing, yet I have cause to be confident, in regard of their
judgment whose shadows it would become you and me to give room unto, yea, and
to run away from. And I am verily persuaded, that though some of your spirit
may be found to judge it an Error to hold, That a bare Reading Minister, is
not a lawful Minister before God; yet that none that deserves the name of a
man of judgment, will push with such horns against it, as you do, that it is an
heresy, and that a gross and abominable one. I would I might be worthy to
know, upon your better consideration of the point, whether that heart of yours,
that set your tongue on fire so against this poor Heresy, would serve to set
fire to the pretended Heretic. But blessed be God, that Supreme Authority
keeps the firebrarnds from the hands of such furies; else there were some
cause to fear, lest the Saints of God (I give them no other title, then your
own conscience gives them, nay then your own mouth in public has given them)
should find your hands as hot, as they now feel your tongue; for methinks in
your Divinity, to make but a question of any thing in Religion established by
Law, is no less then Treason and Heresy. There must be some Mystery in it,
that every poor man must not presume to look into; that one that is so full of
charity toward Adulterers, Drunkards, Blasphemers and other sinners that swarm
in the Church, should be so fiery against these new Heretics of your own
making. What? Are they of all other past hope of repentance? Or do not the
mercies of God, wherewith your mouth is so often sugared, of all other, belong to
them? My self on the weekday am one of your Auditors, and I hope, none of the
worst-minded, and then you seem (as often as ever I heard you) as if your soul
did overflow with Charity toward us all. You cannot be ignorant of the words
that so often were in your lips; That none that hear you, but they are Gods
faithful Children; That though they be foul, grievous sinners, yet they are
repentant, and Gods mercy belongs unto them; That no man is without sin, but
the best and holiest are unclean. This has been your tenor for this half year;
the Sermon is yet to come, that ever with the least zeal you spoke against
lewdness of life: And yet now how full of zeal are you against errors in
Doctrine, of this sort especially? whereas considering the slanders that run of
you, (for I call them so, as I desire for the Gospels sake they may prove) you
could take no better course, then to be most zealous in Doctrine against those
sins, that fame has gone about to brand you withal; and to condemn such with
your own mouth to hell, rather then to set open Heaven gates so wide unto them,
as you use to do; as though your self were out of hope of Heaven, except the
lewdest of your Congregation go to Heaven. I may be bold being the injured
party, and knowing you better then you me, to take this leave to tell you thus
much of your self, who have so freely given leave to your self, to speak to
others worse things of me; that if the Lords judgments should pursue me so
fast, that mine inward corruptions should break out into notorious crimes, and
yet should dare for all that to exercise an holy Ministry; that then of all
methods of teaching that ever I heard, I would surely follow yours. To keep you
from advantage, I acknowledge the Doctrine that you have taught in my hearing
to be very sound and true: But this is it that I affirm, and you may keep it to
your self if it please you, that in dealing against sin, in all the Sermons I
have ever heard you, you have said no more in substance, then what you shall
have always running in the wickedest mouths; That All men are sinners; That
the godliest do fall seven times a day; That men must not despair of Gods
mercy; That they are sorry for it, when they have done; That it is their
corruption of nature, etc. which are all very excellent and comfortable
Doctrines to a broken heart, but very poison to an impenitent; so that if a
Minister should preach them to the stews, he should have as many applauses and
Amens there to them, as any where else. If therefore a foul life be as
abominable in the eyes of God and man, as false Doctrine; if this zeal of yours
against false Doctrine were of God, you would blow as strong a blast against
the other, as you do against it, and a stronger too, considering that the other
having borrowed the wings of fame, is flying continually in your own face:
This, if you could have let me alone, would never have bitten you. But to draw
to an end, if my bare denial, and the voices of them, that with best
understanding heard me, and are best able to repeat the heads of that Sermon,
can persuade you, that there was no such Doctrine then delivered, I hope you
will satisfy that Congregation, whose ears you have abused with that report;
and especially the Gentleman, to whom you related the particulars. If you
cannot be moved to this; yet be contented, since you say the Law must proceed
upon me, to stay the proceeding of your tongue against me, till you have tried
me guilty or not. If you tannot yield to this, but have a purpose to pursue the
matter, let Religion overruled you thus far, to deal with me in the points by
private writing. But if you have resolved to go on in this indirect course,
openly thus to injure me; do it I pray you, in your weekly exercise, that I may
not trust to the report of others, but may be a witness to my self of mine own
abuses; and then I shall know the better how to satisfy you. It is the humor
of most of your stamp, under pretense of a zeal to her Majesty's proceedings in
matters of Religion, to take your liberty of speech against some, that are
persuaded some things might and should be reformed, if the State had leisure to
look into them: and you know it full well, that such as you are, shall find
ears enough to receive your accusations against such; else upon equal ground
you would not be so confident, thus hand over head to condem as good Subjects
(without any disgrace) as your self, of no less then Heresy and Treason. As
for my self, I thank God, I have had that care, both of mine outward
conversation and Doctrine, that none of any civility, I trust, shall find a
face to reproach me for the one, nor any of any judgment in Religion, will
accuse me of the other. And as for those Reports, that are given out against
me, out of yours and others mouths; your shame shall send them home again, and
I will wear them about my neck as Chains and Garlands. In particular, for your
self, (though I desire the love, acquaintance, and favor of any well-gifted
Minister) it will be no great disgrace to me, to sit at home without your
countenance, except your self were in greater countenance with them that truly
fear the Lord. Thus leaving you at this time to a better spirit, then that
which set you so greedily on work against me, I commit you to the grace, mercy,
and pardon of God; and my self to his wise direction, hereafter to take heed,
how I give mouths, so readily open to reproach my Ministry, any just and
direct occasion.

Chatham the last of April 1602. Your Fellow Laborer and Minister in the Lords
work, desirous of peace, and if it were possible, of love also, William
Bradshaw.


This Letter, though somewhat large, it seemed not amiss at full to relate;
because it represents to the life, both the Character of many such Teachers,
as were forwardest to oppose Gods faithful Messengers in those times, and the
manner of their teaching, which the most of our Antinomian party that give out
themselves as the only Gospel-Preachers, The Antinomians practice.
come so near unto now adays; and the most unequal and unchristian courses
also, that were by such then commonly practiced, to work them into disgrace
with the people, and to procure trouble to them from the State. But the malice
of the man stayed not here; which of it self for ought he was able to do, was
not much to be regarded. For being netled by this Letter, upon consultation had
with some of his accomplices, a Knight of note in that County, a man of some
parts of learning and wit, but of loose life, utterly averse from, and adverse
to the profession and practice of piety, was by them procured, to come down
from Rochester, A Spy sent to entrap him.
where he then was, to Chatham on a Lords day, to hear Master Bradshaw, and
that for no other end, but to pick somewhat, (if it might be) out of his
teaching, for which, upon his information against him, (a practice most
unworthy a man or his rank) his mouth might be stopped, or he inhibited at
least from farther employment in that place. And according indeed to their
wicked design and ungodly desire the plot proceeded. For, whereas Master
Bradshaw being then entered upon the handling of the story of Christ's
Temptations (related by two Evangelists; on which his Sermons, much desired by
many that heard part of them, and though not fully perfected by him, yet by
some small supplies being made up, may peradventure hereafter see light) had
observed, that this was the main scope of Satan in his first encounter, to bear
our Savior in hand, that howsoever he had been put in some hope by a voice, as
from Heaven, that he was the beloved Son of God; yet God by his present
neglect of him, and leaving him in such difficulties, destitute of all
necessaries, did thereby manifest that he did not respect, or regard him at
all; hereupon he took occasion to admonish all true Christians, to arm
themselves diligently against this temptation, and to strengthen their Faith in
the assurance of Gods favor toward them, care of them, and undoubted truth of
his Promises made to them; using this as an Argument to incite them unto the
greater care in this kind; for that (said he) If this temptation do once fasten
upon us, that we shall come by Satan's sleights to be persuaded, that there is
no such matter, that God has no such respect or regard unto us; it cannot but
cool our love unto God. Which words of his, He is falsely accused.
very wholesome and good, the Knight perverting and misreporting, informed
underhand against him, that he should deliver, That a man was not bound to love
God, unless he were sure that God loved him. He is summoned before the Bishop.
Hereupon Master Bradshaw was shortly after, by a short note under Doctor
Buckeridges hand bearing date May twenty six 1602. and directed unto him at
Chatham, made acquainted, that it was the pleasure of his Lords Grace of
Canterbury, and his Lord of London (the main prosecutor of the business against
him) that he should the next day by nine of the clock appear personally before
them at Shorn, He is summoned before the Bishops.
a Town situate between Rochester and Gravesend: whither accordingly he
repaired, and there appearing, after some questions moved, and answers
thereunto returned, the Bishop of London began to charge him with teaching of
false and ungodly Doctrine, such as had been suggested by the Knight
beforementioned; whereunto when he answered Negatively, relating withal truly
and sincerely, what he had delivered, and offering to produce not a few of good
credit, who could and would testify what then he taught, that would not be
admitted; London affirming, that what had been informed, was averred by such,
as were able to conceive, being learned; and to understand aright what it was
that he delivered, and received it not by report from others, but had been
ear-witnesses of it themselves. However at last to strike all dead sure,
Subscription made a snare.
subscription was tendered to him; whereat they knew he would stick: which
because he professed that he could not condescend unto, they inhibited him to
preach any more at Chatham, and having bound him to appear, when he should be
farther called upon, for the present so dismissed him. The next Lords day was
one suborned, He is suspended from Chatham.
in the habit of a traveller, to repair early in the morning to Master
Bradshaws lodging at Chatham, who asking to speak with him, pretended that he
came on purpose out of his way to hear him, and demanded of him whether he
preached that day or no? whereunto he answering, that he did not, Another Spy
sent to entrap him.
being by authority inhibited, he made show of much sorrow, as being frustrated
of his expectation, but he was descried to be no other then a Spy, sent to
found Master Bradshaw what he intended to do; so greedy were they to have
farther ensnared him, if by any means they might. The same day Master
Bearblock was observed at Strowd, as triumphing after a Victory achieved
against some great adversary, to have appointed to be sung before his
fore-noon-Sermon, the former part of the 27. Psalm. Those of Chatham much
affected with the inhibition of their faithful Teacher, and grieved in their
souls for the restraint of that precious food, which they had formerly received
from him, were not backward to use what means they might for the taking off of
the inhibition, and removal of the restraint. To this purpose a Supplication
was framed in the Name of the Parishoners of Chatham unto the Bishop of
Rochester their immediate Diocesan, in these words; Right Reverend Father, and
our very good Lord, The Inhabitants of Chatham Petition for him to the Bishop.
If we were not by manifold trial and long experience assured of the love that
you bear, and the care that you have over that flock, which the Lord has
committed unto your charge, we could not with so good hope and comfort, as now
we do, become Petitioners unto your Lordship in the behalf of our too much
wronged Preacher Master Bradshaw; Unto whom, in sincrity of a good conscience
we do voluntarily yield this testimony, that he is a man so far in every
respect from desert of those misreports, wherewith his causeless adversaries
have endeavored to incense your good Lordship against him, as his accusers
have been from the remembrance of that duty, which they ought to bear to your
Lordship, whom they have abused with sinister and unjust informations; his
Doctrine always holy, wholesome, true, and learned, utterly void of faction
and contention; his life so thoroughly garnished with unblemished virtues and
graces, as malice it self cannot reprove, or suspect him; directing all his
labors only to the beating down of sin and wickedness, the comfort of the
faithful, and the instruction of the ignorant, without intermedling at any
time, with the needless and conceited controversies of this factious age. May
it therefore please your good Lordship with favor (according to your wonted
goodness) so to tender this your little poor flock of Chatham, as to restore
unto us our virtuous and faithful Teacher; lest otherwise we be as sheep
without a Shepherd. Which being obtained, we your humble Suppliants will
account it so great a blessing of God from the hands of your Reverend
Fatherhood, as that we shall hold our selves bound faithfully to pray unto the
Almighty, for your good Lordships endless prosperity. This their Petition after
their own frame conceived, is the rather here inserted, to show their reverend
estimation of Master Bradshaw, and their earnest desire to have retained him
still with them. But the business was in higher hands. London was the man that
must do it, if ought were done. With whom Master Chaderton going up to London
upon occasion of some Colledge-affairs, promised to deal in Master Bradshaws
behalf; and in likelihood did: but (as appeared) without success.

Thus was this blessed Servant of God tossed to and fro, and could not be
suffered to abide long in any place; though a man of peaceable carriage, a most
meek and humble spirit, and a kind and loving disposition. Gods Providence for
him.
But Gods pious providence over his, and gracious provision for them, never
fails. He is often working for them, when they least see it, and where or
whence they least look for it. He was then preparing a retiring and resting
place for him, when he seemed to be now utterly out of hope of any. He departs
from Chatham.
For being now driven from Chatham, he came up to London, whence after some
short stay with a Friend, having at present no employment, he thought good to
look down into Leicestershire to visit his Friends there. And he indeed
intended the journey only as a visit: howsoever the Lord in his hidden
disposal, unknown unto him, had a farther aim in it then he was then aware of,
as by the event appeared, and he afterward took special notice of, and did
thankfully acknowledge. For upon his coming down into those parts, by the good
hand of God, using that his worthy servant of blessed memony, Master Arthur
Hildersham (as formerly sometime, so now again) as an instrument therein, he
was brought into some notice with, and commended unto one Master Alexander
Redich, a religious Gentleman, then residing at Newhall, an house of note,
situate near to Burton upon Trent, in the confines of Darbyshire, He is settled
at Newhall.
Leicestershire, and Staffordshire. He not only received him into his house,
but obtained also for him from the then Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield,
being a moderate man, a License to preach in any part of his Diocese: which
favor and liberty, being by a Present of Venison at first procured, and
afterward maintained by a yearly gratuity of a brace of Bucks out of the
Gentleman's Park, Master Bradshaw without any interruption enjoyed in those
parts during that Bishops life, yea, and after too, without any trouble (a
light and short storm only excepted, and that soon again laid, the year before
his decease, (whereof somewhat hereafter) unto the time of his releasement. For
his entertainment there, His small means of Maintenance.
though the means allowed him were very small, in regard that the Gentleman's
estate was much encombred, and he by reason thereof disabled to do what he
otherwise desired; the Lady Ferrers his Wives Mother yet surviving, who had an
estate for life in that part of the Land, which was to come to his Wife,
whereon he then resided; nor in regard of Religion (for a strong and zealous
Papist she was) so well-affected toward them, being forward another way; and
some other part of it, by concealment of some Evidences being wrongfully
detained from him, as in process of time upon discovery thereof did evidently
appear. His contentation.
Yet the small pittance that was allowed him, together with their kind carriage
toward him, and the loving affection to him that he found generally in the
Family, did give him very good content. For in a Letter to an inward Friend he
professes, that he found both the Gentleman, and his Wife, very tenderhearted
and sincerely Religious so kind unto him, His Letter to a Friend about it.
as his heart could not desire more; and that in gifts they were otherwise
beneficial unto him; and the truth is, (says he, for you have his own words)
it is impossible to find more love in a place, then I do find more and more
both of great and small in the House: so that the Lord, I see, has not clean
forsaken me. And in another to the same party; Never let your mind be troubled
about the smallness of my Maintenance, it is more then he from whom it comes
can well spare yet; His humility.
as much as my labors upon them deserve; and more then many of my betters
have. To add hereunto some farther matter of encouragement and contentment, he
withal signifies, that the Lord had blessed him there with a most kind
neighbor, (abiding in a house not far from thence with the Lord Paget) a young
man of Oxford, and a Londoner by birth, one Master Hassal, a man of very rare
parts for all kind of learning, of most prompt and ready speech, and of a very
courteous and affable disposition. With him he entertained familiarity, and
maintained a good correspondence, while they abode so near together. For he was
not nice to embrace acquaintance with any moderate man, of endowments
especially; and very forward to take notice of the good parts of others, and to
set them out as occasion was offered, to the utmost: so far was he from that
malevolent humor so rife with too many in these times, of extenuating or
blurring the endowments and abilities of others; such especially as do not in
every particular conceit, though but groundlessely often fancied, comply with
themselves; as also together with his ingenuous composure of spirit, his pious
disposition may herein be observed, in taking notice of, and acknowledging a
passage of divine providence in every accommodation, that might any way, or in
any measure, improve the comfort of his present condition.

But that the great moderation of mind in one of such worth as was this Servant
of Christ, may the better appear, we shall compare the means of maintenance
afforded him, and his employments, whereof he professed before, not to deserve
so much as so small a pirtance amounted unto the one with the other. That the
allowance was very small, may very justly be deemed, when his friends were so
much troubled and grieved, to think that one of his endowments should be driven
to accept so low and slender conditions: and the truth is, as by his own
relation appears, the allowance at first agreed upon, was but ten pounds by the
year, his diet, fire, candle, and all kind of attendance, as himself draws it
out at length to make the most of it. That which is here specified, not in any
wise to asperse the Gentleman, whose present condition would not then well
afford better terms; and yet showed his good will by free addition to what he
stood engaged for, even in his first year of abode with him; and afterward
also, as charge grew upon Master Bradshaw: though means were not much amended
with him, yet strained himself unto a farther enlargement, as hereafter shall
be showed; but to manifest the excceeding, and almost unparalled modesty of
the man, esteeming his labors beneath so poor an allowance. For his
employments that himself so much undervalued, what were they? Besides his
private exercises at set times performed in the Family; he preached at first
constantly twice every Lords day in a Chapel of some capacity, His great pains.
belonging to the Gentleman's House, and situate within the Park wherein the
House stood; and afterward, when the resort from other parts more remote, grew
so great, that the place could not well contain them; (that the more might
enjoy the fruit of his Ministry, and with the more ease to them, though the
less to him and the Household) he was easily induced, the Governors of the
Family, out of their religious disposition, well approving thereof, and
condescending thereunto, to bestow his labors, as he had before done in the
Chapel, in a more public place, at a Parish Church (where a Reading Vicar
only was) at a Village called Stapenhill or Stapenhall, about a mile distant
from the place of his abode. And this he did constantly for above twelve years
at least, at such times as the Gentleman abode with his Family at Newhall,
which was the principal place of his settled abode: receiving for such his pains
among them, no consideration at all from the people of the place; Monstrous
ingratitude.
(the most of them deeming him more beholden to them, for coming and staying to
hear him, then themselves to him for coming to preach to them; and some of them
complaining, that they had lost many a good Pistle and Gospel for his
Preachings;) save that on the Lords day for his better ease and refreshment,
between his forenoon and afternoons employment, he was usually entertained at
the House of one Master Alexander Buckley, who had sometime belonged as a
Bailiff or Steward to Master Rediches Family, and whose Wife Mistress Anne
Buckley, a very sweet natured, humble and godly woman, was both a Mary and
Martha to him, no less diligent to attend his teaching with the one, then
sedulous to make fitting provision for him with the other; and that some of the
better affected sort among those that heard him, would now and then gratify
him with some kind of Countrey-courtesies, when he kept house by himself.

Having thus spent above a twelvemoneth or more with Master Redich, his
thoughts began to be more solicitously renewed concerning that business of
marriage propounded to him at Chatham, and so far forth, as has been
formerly shown, embraced then by him; which in regard also of some other
emergent occasions had hung hitherto in suspense. This to proceed in and
consummate he much desired, not so much in regard of himself, as in regard of
the other party, who had been held in expectation thereof so long already, and
might deem it some wrong, if it should be still so delayed. But how this might
consist with his continuance in Master Rediches Family he was not able well to
conceive; and how very loath he was to part with a Family, where he had found
so much love. Howsoever he resolved to break the matter unto them, before he
would proceed any farther therein, that if no fit means of compliance there
could be contrived, he might with their good leave look out for some other
place of employment, and they have some convenient space of time for the
fitting and furnishing of themselves with some other to succeed with them in
his room. Upon relation hereof, according to such his resolution, (having taken
a fit time for it) made unto them, enforming them truly and freely in all
circumstances, how the case stood with him, and how he stood affected toward
them, it was strange to see (it is in his own words related) how great
affection they showed to bear unto him, expressed even with tears; that on no
condition he must depart from them; such course should be taken, as that, when
he should in that kind change his condition, he might still conveniently and
comfortably abide with them. Whereunto he subjoyneth; And this indeed is the
first hour of my solid comfort, that the Lord has vouchsafed me a standing
place, where I may settle my self. And indeed God was pleased to work in some
particulars somewhat strangely and unexpectedly, beyond what he was then able
to foresee or forecast, toward the farther acomplishment of his desire in this
kind; as hereafter shall be showed.

Mean while Master Redich being by occasion of businesses drawn up to London,
and having taken some lodgings for himself and his retinue near unto Christ
Church, with purpose to make stay some good space of time in the City, Master
Bradshaw abiding there with him, was requested to preach sometime at Christ
Church: which accordingly he did, and that with such approbation and good
liking of the well-affected in the Parish, that the afternoons Lecture there
becoming vacant, albeit Doctor Milward a man of some note in those times stood
for it, yet by the greater number of votes, in a Vestry purposely for that end
assembled, Master Bradshaw was chosen to be their Lecturer; He is chosen
Lecturer at Christ Church London.
though not having sought it himself, but having been without his privity
propounded by some such of them as had been much taken with his former Sermons.
But the will of God (it seems) was, that he should still adhere to that Family,
which he was fallen into, and where he had found so much affection; that which
to his dying day also he did. For though by some of those, who earnestly
desired him, great means were made to the Bishop, Bishop Bancrofts malice.
yet would he in no wise condescend to give way thereunto. Yea, such was his
malignity against Master Bradshaw, that having cited him, but by a wrong
forename, to appear before him, to answer for preaching in his Diocese without
his License; (in which regard also the Churchwardens were checked and
threatened that suffered it) upon his nonappearance he proceeded so far, as to
send out an Excommunication against him; which he for the mistake
beforementioned, little regarded; only by advice, for some time kept out of
the way, until the Bishops translation, or evection rather, unto the lofty
pitch of his Primacy, which shortly after did ensue.

During his stay in these parts, looking down to Chatham, he there consummated
that business, which hitherto had been delayed. And in regard that Master
Redich with his Wife and retinue were by reason of his urgent affairs in diverse
kinds likely to continue for a longer space of time in the City then at first
was expected; His marriage.
Master Bradshaw having brought up his Wife with him from Chatham, did for a
while board her with a sister of hers, before married and seated in the City,
and afterward took part of a tenement for himself and her, who being a woman
that affected employment, for their better support, taught there a few
Scholars. Much about this time, by occasion of that formal conference acted
and transacted at Hampton Court, wherein some of our chief Prelates endeavored
to possess the Kings Majesty with a prejudice against those that made suit for
a Reformation of things amiss in Church Affairs, (his disaffection to whom he
had himself also in some writing of his partly discovered already) and to
persuade him, that for Ecclesiastical affairs all things were so well settled,
that no Reformation needed, Conformity strictly pressed
but some strict injunction only of a precise conformity unto, and constant
observation of things already established; which began thereupon in many places
with much vigor to be pressed; It came to pass that many Books came abroad,
being privately printed, wherein diverse godly Ministers, who were of a contrary
judgment, declared their grievances, laid down their exceptions, set forth
their grounds of dissent, and returned answer to the Arguments produced and
urged against them to induce them to Conformity. For Books of this nature
search was made in the City; for one, more especially among the rest, that had
(it seems) given our great Clergy-Masters most offense, and Master Bradshaw
being known to abide then in the City, a man in much suspicion with them, two
Pursuivants, accompanied with Master Norton the Kings Printer, were sent with
Commission to search his house both for it and him. Whither accordingly
repairing, but not finding him at home, they enforced his Wife to open his
Closet or Study, the Chests, Trunks, Boxes and Presses, to make search for such
Books, but found nothing. For the truth is, (and there was a good Providence of
God in it (after that Master Bradshaw was that morning gone out, not above half
an hour before that this business fell out, Gods good providence over him.
his Wife looking into his Study, and seeing some of those Books there, to
prevent future danger, (which yet she then little deemed or dreamed to be so
near at hand as it proved to be afterward) had taken them out from thence, and
cast them into a hole between two Chimneys, where being covered over with old
besomes, they remained undiscovered. But howsoever they could meet with nothing
of that which they looked for, yet on his Wife they seized, who would rather
have had him; The trouble of his Wife.
her they took and led unto Doctors Commons, where having presented her before
Doctor Stanhop, Doctor White, and a third party, whom she knew not, a number
sufficient to make up a complete High Commission Court; they examined her, yet
without oath: first, Where her Husband was? whereunto she answered, she knew
not; then, What means of Maintenance she had, and from whom? to which she made
answer, that she gat her living by her work, and teaching of a few young
Children; after that, What Children she had? she told them, none yet; but one
she hoped in her belly, being then great with Child: which was her firstborn
Son, now a Minister of the Gospel, afterward born in that House they then
dwelt in, in Thred-needle-street, and baptized in the Church near thereto
adjoining, where the Minister of the place, somewhat thick of hearing, by a
mistake, instead of Jonathan, naming him John, which name therefore he bare
afterward, and does to this day. But after diverse such questions to little
purpose propounded and answered, in conclusion they told her, that they knew
well enough that the Book they then searched for* was none of her Husbands
making, though he might have a hand in the venting of it; and withal, that if
they had been disposed, they could have had him, for all his keeping in a
Lancashire Gentleman's house. So they termed Master Redich, Gods mercy.
because his own Lands of Inheritance lay in those parts. Thus having parlied
with her, they dismissed her, not suffering those greedy Harpyes the
Pursuivants, who were eager upon her for their fees, to exact ought from her;
only binding her at a days warning to appear again before them.

Thus through Gods goodness and watchful eye over his Servant, too regardlesse
in some sort of his own safety, having escaped the snare that was set for him,
he returned after some space of time, Master Rediches main businesses being now
dispatched, together with him and his, unto their former place of abode at
Newhall, taking his Wife and little one together also along with him. Being
there arrived, the Gentleman both enlarged his maintenance, His return to
Newhall.
and assigned him and his Wife certain Chambers in his own House conveniently
furnished* as also herbage in the Park for a certain number of Kine, and of
Swine, and some Poultry, together with a convenient room for a Dary, wherein
she might exercise her huswifery; which she very well could do, and accordingly
did. Now while they thus lived together in Master Rediches House, Master
Bradshaw went on cheerfully in his wonted course, both of private exercises for
the instruction of the Family, and of public employment on the Lords day for
the benefit of others also abroad. But the old Lady Ferrers, Mistress Rediches
Mother, a woman of a great spirit, and a resolute Papist, though not an
absolute professed Recusant, could by no means brook Master Bradshaw, and the
less now because married, and for that he had brought his Wife also to live
with him in House with them: yea she had conceived such an extreme hatred
against him, professing to hate him above any man in the world; that she had
made a vow, that she would never set her feet in the house where he was; and it
was therefore feared, not without some just ground of suspicion, that the
Family might from her fare the worse for him. But the hearts of all men, and
women also, are in Gods hand, and he can wind and turn them which way he will:
and when a man's ways do please the Lord, he can, if he see it good, yea, does
often, when he sees it will be for the good of his, make of his utter foes, his
Friends. And even so fell it out here. For the Lady notwithstanding this her
extreme disaffection, so deeply rooted, and so vehemently expressed, yet in
process of time being enduced by some that were in credit and repute with her,
to visit her Son-in-law and Daughter, and make stay for some time (which they
much desired) in house with them; and being withal informed and assured by
them of Master Bradshaws mild and moderate demeanure, and his meek, kind, and
lowly carriage, she was overwrought by them, contrary to that her former
unnatural and irreligious engagement, to repair thither, and take up her
lodging with them: where it pleased God withal, not long after her access
thither, (being now an eyewitness her self of what she had formerly heard by
report of him from others) so to alter that her former disaffection to Master
Bradshaw, and to cast it into a clean contrary mould, that all that beheld and
observed her carriage on all occasions toward him, The Lady Ferrers respect to
him though a Papist.
wondered exceedingly at it, to see so strange an alteration, and such not
unexpected only, but unusual carriages in her. For, albeit she were otherwise,
a Gentlewoman, as of very proper and personable presence, and in that regard
much admired by the Scottish Queen that suffered here, whom she also much
affected, so of her self no less forward to take and keep state; yet she used
Master Bradshaw with very much courtesy and complement, at table drinking to
him, and carving for him; resorting twice a day constantly to prayer with him
and the Family, and speaking reverently of him; yea whereas formerly she could
not be induced to hear any of our Ministers preach; howsoever for fashion sake,
and to escape penalty of Law, she might sometime repair to hear the Liturgy
read; yet was she content to hear Master Bradshaw, and commended his Sermons.
Which the better to work upon her, he wisely framed to such subjects as he
deemed would best serve, His prudence in his Ministry.
to take off such false imputations, as are wont by the adverse party to be
cast upon our Profession and Preaching, as if we were utter enemies to
mortification and good works. For first out of Matthew. 5.16. he took occasion to
speak of the necessity and nature of good works; the ground from whence they
spring, and the end that must be aimed at in them; and after that out of Psalm.
51. of repentance and mortification, with both which discourses she seemed to
be very much affected. What farther work these things had upon her after her
departure thence, we are not able to say; but certain it is, that while she
abode there, she seemed to be much better disposed, not toward Master Bradshaw
only; but (contrary to what was formerly feared, and strongly suspected) toward
her Son-in-law and Daughter also. For before she went thence, she sealed them a
Lease for three years, of the Land they held from her, with abatement of an
Hundred pounds by the year, of the rent formerly paid, and a remission of
thirty pounds by the year besides, otherwise accruing to her, (God might bless
the House for his Joseph's sake) and her continued good opinion of, and
affection to Master Bradshaw she farther manifested, by her free consent, to
have an House built for him and his Wife to live in, on a parcel of land that
she had interest in; which was accordingly with as much speed as might be, not
long after effected. Then which (says he, so modest and moderate were his
affections for the things of this life) I desire no more worldly things, then
that I may be settled in that little House, and rest there in quiet, which these
times give small hope of.

This he conceived the less hope of, because the Bishop under whom he had
hitherto lived quietly, about this time, deemed not like long to continue; and
indeed shortly after deceasing, it was given out, that Bishop Neal, translated
from Rochester, was to succeed (that which he much dreading, in diverse of his
Letters had often up, Lord keep us from Rochester) and so he did indeed, though
not immediately; yet not long after. For Doctor Abbots Dean of Winchester, who
came in between them, sat not long there, but before many months expired,
stepped from Litchfield to London. But Bishop Neal was the man, whom all the
pious, as well private men as Ministers, in these parts mis-doubted would do
the most mischief. Bishop Neals malice.
And indeed presently upon his entrrnce, that boisterous Prelate began in so
fierce and furious a sort to bestir himself, and kept such a busseling and
blustering among them, that (howsoever one that then abode thereabout, writing
somewhat freely of him, says, The more he shufflled in his Lions skin, the
more he made his Asses ears to appear, and exposed himself to derision and
contempt even with the meanest) yet it was by the most feared, that unless God
in much mercy should put a ring into his Nose, he would in likelihood root up
all effectual means of piety, within the precincts of his power. And the rather
had Master Bradshaw cause to expect little favor, all rigor rather that might
be, from him; in regard of some neighboring loiterers, that should have been
laborers, as he was, in the Lords work; who not enduring to see others
affected and followed, for doing that, which they should have done, but did not
themselves, were therefore bitter enemies to him, and were in great grace with
the Bishop. Besides that, it was reported, that the Bishop was minded to reside
some space of time at Drakelow, a place not far distant from Newhall; whose
neighborhood was like to prove no more beneficial to Master Bradshaw, Gods
Providence over him.
then the brass pots company in the Fable to the earthen pitcher. But, as
dangers often befall us, where we least mis-doubt or suspect ought, much less
expect any; so (the Lord on that wise disposing things for the safety of his
servants, and the enuring of them to a constant dependence on his providence)
it falls out sometime on the other side, that we prove least assailed or
annoyed from thence, whence we have been most affrighted with the greatest
expectation of much damage, or sore distress. So it fell out with Master
Bradshaw here. For, howsoever in one of his Letters he manifests his fears to
that purpose, that in regard of the considerations beforementioned, he much
doubted that Zone would be too hot for him, yet in another afterward he
signifies that he had not as yet heard ought from him, or of any complaints
that had been made to him against him. Nor indeed does it appear that he was at
any time after molested, or disturbed in the exercise of his Ministry by either
of them, by what means soever the Lord was pleased so either to repress or
divert, as well the malice of the one, as the might of the other, that neither
of them should fasten to any purpose upon him, until the year before he died.

About this time Master Redich bestowed his eldest Daughter Mistress Grace
Redich in marriage with Sir Robert Darcie, Son and Heir to Sir Edward Darcie a
Kentish Knight, a very religious Gentleman, in great favor and repute with
that Illustrious Prince Henry, of rare parts, and great hopes, of whom this
land was not worthy, and one that highly esteemed Master Bradshaw, as he justly
deserved. He making his abode most at Newhall until his Fathers decease,
(where his Lady a very gracious Gentlewoman according to her name, not
inferior to her Husband, either in piety, or in sincerity of affection to
Master Bradshaw, was the second time delivered of twins, and became Mother of
four Children, within compass of a year) Master Bradshaw by his company there
received much comfort and encouragement in the work of his Ministry, and
furtherance also in his Studies. For Sir Robert being a Scholar and studious,
had a Library furnishnd with many of the best Writers, as well in Divinity, as
in other kinds of literature, whereof Master Bradshaw had the free use; and he
brought also upon his motion diverse other on purpose, that might be useful for
him. And this his affectionate and courteous carriage to Master Bradshaw,
toward whom he ever demeaned himself with much reverence and due respect, was
continued by him until his decease, which did not many weeks precede Master
Bradshaws.

In the year 1613. it pleased God to take from him that worthy Gentleman Master
Redich his Patron, who in a very holy and Christian manner at Newhall departed
this life. His frequent removals from Newhall to Longford, another house that
had befallen him in those parts not long before his decease, was occasion of
much distraction to Master Bradshaw, now settled with his Family at Stanton Ward
near to Newhall; but his decease much more: Concerning which he thus writes,
among other things in a Letter to a Friend; His Letter about Master Rediches
death
Master Rediches decease has made an heavy alteration in this Family; and for
mine own estate, Mistress Redich giving over house, as she intends to do, and
to live somewhere hereabout, as privately as she may, for the better
discharging of her Husbands debts, it will be the less comfortable, and more
chargeable to me then it has been. But I am willing for her good to undergo
any thing. Master Redich on his deathbed was willing to have assured me of
something during my life. But the force of his disease did so grow upon him
that he could do nothing. If God lend Mistress Redish life, till the debts be
discharged, or a sure course taken for them, I hope she will, if it lie in her
power: for she has promised so to do; and I assure me, she will do her utter
most to effect it. But whatsoever fall out, I trust I shall be content, having
been hitherto at the Lords finding; who has showed himself at all times a
loving Father to me his unworthy Child; and our time here, though it be full of
wants, is but short. Thus it pleased the Lord to inure this his Servant to a
dependence from day to day for provisions upon his Providence; and as a grave
man of God sometime said, Whereas many other have, and eat their bread stale;
to receive his bread, Note.
and eat it daily new from his hand; that which he also, you see, was very well
content to do. Mean while the good Gentlewomans encumbered and unsettled estate
she was left in, being to take course for the payment of her Husbands debts,
and to compound for the Wardship of her younger Daughter, who was afterward
matched to one of the Lord Chief Justice Cooks Sons, could not but exceedingly
distract Master Bradshaw, as well as her self; and drew him up to London
together with her, oftener then he had any mind of himself, or desire thereunto.
But from that Family the main means of his maintenance accrued; and to it
therefore he constantly addicted himself, as in duty he deemed himself obliged
to do. At Stanton Ward, not far from Newhall, as was before intimated, his
Family still abode in the little house there built for him: Where, while
Mistress Redich abode in those parts, or when he had any liberty to get down
from these parts, while she was longer then usually detained in or about the
City; he went on constantly in his wonted course, teaching freely at Stapenhill
every Lords day, as formerly he had done. Only in the year 1617. coming down
from London, (upon what occasion, or through whose instigation, uncertain) he
was welcomed home by the Bishops Chancellor a corrupt man, He is inhibited
from preaching.
with an inhibition to preach there, till he heard further from him. But by the
mediation of a couple of good Angels, the one from himself, (so willing and
forward was he to redeem his liberty, for the benefit of others, But soon
restored.
without advantage to himself) and the other from a Friend, the Chancellor was
soon pacified, and the restraint removed; whereby it appeared that the
Prohibition proceeded principally from his own avarice, rather then from
misinformation from any thereabout, or injunction from above.

Amidst this his restless and distracted condition, and constant pursuit of
his religious employments, the Lord was preparing a place of settled rest for
him, and a royal reward in the highest Heavens, for his faithful service here
upon earth, drawing on apace now to its utmost period. For in the year 1618.
being come up from Stanton, to attend Mistress Redich, while he lodged with her
at Chelsey, not far from the City, His last sickness.
visiting a Friend at Rederith, whose house he usually frequented when he was
in these parts, he complained of some malady, that by his present distemper he
mis-doubted might be growing upon him, and though by his friend being earnestly
urged, to take some speedy course, by the Physicians advice, for preventing the
farther growth of it; yet being too regardlesse of himself, while he neglected
so to do, he was suddenly surprised with a violent, and (as the Physician
affirms) malignant Fever, which so fiercely set upon him, that in its very
first apparent encounter it cast him down upon his couch. And notwithstanding
all the means used, that either were desired, or could be procured; no care
being omitted, or cost spared, by that worthy Gentlewoman, who most tenderly
and entirely affected him, for advice of Physician, who constantly repaired to
him, assistance of Apothecary, according to direction with all requisite
necessaries supplying him, and diligent attendance, as well of those in the
Family, as of some other also for that end procured from abroad, without
intermission successively about him; even the Gentlewoman her self (though
advised to forbear, in regard of some malignity deemed to be in the disease)
frequently resorting to him, sitting by him, and with her own hands offering
for his better ease to be helpful unto him, which yet he was very loath to
admit; in all which from the first to the last she expressed a very great
measure of cordial affection unto him, and no less an earnest desire, both of
his present relief, and future recovery also, if God should see it so good; yet
the time being now come wherein the Lord had determined to put an end to his
faithful Servants labourious employments, continued distractions, and
restless condition, and to translate him hence to a place of endless rest,
and peace never to be interrupted again; the force of the disease within the
space of a few days fretted asunder those bands that kept soul and body
together, and leaving the one behind to be laid up in the bowels of that
element whence it had its first original, His Death An. Christi 1618.
set the other at full liberty to return unto him, from whom alone it
immediately received its existence at first.

During the short time of his sickness, wherein yet through Gods goodness he
continued free from any notable sense of pain, and was accompanied with much
freedom of mind and memory, His behavior in his sickness.
he had his heart and tongue in meditation set wholly upon God, acknowledging
his special favor and goodness unto him, who had so far forth vouchsafed to
cast a gracious eye upon him so vile and loathsome a creature, while he yet
continued in his native condition, as to give him an interest by Faith in his
Christ; yea so far farther to grace so unworthy a wretch, as to call him to
be a Minister of his Word, and Publisher of his Will, and to make his weak
endeavors and worthless labors, at any time in any measure efficacious to
any of his people, (as he hoped in some sort with some at least they had been)
either for the conversion and bringing of them home unto him, or for the
establishing and building of them up in the saving knowledge and belief of his
truth, and in the graces and comforts of his Spirit. Withal seriously
professing this to be his comfort, the testimony of his conscience in the sight
of God bearing witness in his behalf, that in sincerity of heart, though with
much weakness, and amidst many failings, through the whole course of his
Ministry, his main end and scope in all his labors and endeavour's had been
both in public and private, to seek the glory of God, the delivery of his
truth, the peace of his Church, the spiritual good of his people; in all things
to approve himself to him, and continue faithful with him, who has been
pleased to take him into his service; and desiring now nothing more, then that
he might be so enabled through the support of his good Spirit, that by his
Christian and comfortable carriage under his Fatherly hand, in this close of
his day-work, he might confirm and seal up to others the truth of those things
that he had formerly professed and taught. Withal earnestly exhorting all that
came about him, to learn now to die before they came to it, His counsel to his
friends.
to be sure to lay a good foundation in time of life and health, for matter of
firm support and sound comfort in time of sickness, and at the hour of death;
and to make as much provision and strong preparations against that time as they
could, assuring themselves, that they should find all their utmost endeavors
and carefullest addresses to be little enough, when they came once to that
Work. Amidst these and the like Religious Meditations and Pious Employments,
peceiving his desired end now to approach, and having requested prayer to be
conceived in his behalf by a special Friend, who had accompanied him most part
of his sickness, not long after that Office performed by him, he quietly and
peaceably resigned his soul into the hands of his blessed Savior, no less
ready (doubtless) to receive it from him, then himself was desirous and
forward to recommend it unto him.

His Funeral rites were performed at Chelsey, where he drew his last breath;
most of the Ministers of better note about the City, His Burial.
either constantly residing, or occasionally detained there, besides a very
great multitude of private persons well affected, repairing thereunto. Who were
all there, after the usual manner in such cases and on such occasions,
entertained at the charge and by the bounty of that worthy Gentlewoman of
singular Piety, in whose house he deceased. From which place his Corpse being
conveyed on the shoulders of six of his Reverend Brethren of the Ministry, who
of their own accord offered themselves unto that Office, to the place of
public Assembly, where it was to be interred: Master Thomas Gataker his
ancient and inward Friend, though full of grief for the loss of one, who so
entirely affected him, and whom as well for the high esteem he had of him and
his worth, as for that entire affection which he constantly bare to him, was
most deservedly exceedingly dear to him; and in regard thereof not so free or
fit for performance of that Office; yet enforced himself to preach at his
Funeral, and to give, though very briefly, such Testimony of him, as was
generally approved of by his Reverend Brethren there present. And he was indeed
a man of very eminent parts, His excellent parts.
for sharpness of wit, clearness of apprehension, soundness of judgment,
exactness of method, and powerfulness of delivery, of singular dexterity in
beating out perplexed and intricate debates, descrying and discovering where
the knots lay, stating of Controversies aright, and dissolving of difficult
cases of conscience; to which purpose not only many even from remote parts
resorted unto him, either of their own accord, or directed and recommended unto
him by other his Brethren of the Ministry, as one most likely of any to give
them satisfaction in their doubts; but diverse of them also, of good note, (as
by their Letters to him may appear) deemed it no disparagement to seek
resolution from him in questions of that nature themselves. Neither was he one
that kept his talent wrapped up in a Napkin; but though he were cooped up mostly
in an obscure corner, through the harsh courses of those, that would not suffer
his light to shine forth in any eminent place; yet was he exceeding laborious
in those parts wherein he lived, both in private employments at constant set
times in the Family, and in public also, where he might be permitted, though
without benefit to himself: that which may appear by abundance of papers and
note-books yet extant, though by many casualties a multitude of them have
miscarried. Besides his constant course of preaching at Stapenhill, for the
most of his time from his first admission into that Family, save only by
interruption, through occasion of removals, which neither usually lasted
overlong, nor, though distracted him in his Studies, did any whit lightly
lessen his labors; he was frequently drawn forth to join with other his
Reverend Brethren in their meetings and exercises, at Ashbie de la Zouch in
Leichestershire, at Repton in Darby-shire, and at Burton upon Trent; at some of
which meetings the manner being, that some one of them preached his hour on the
Scipture propounded the meeting before, and the rest or a certain number of
them spent afterward, each one his half hour or thereabout on some other
portion of Scripture, one being appointed to moderate, by minding each that
spoke, if occasion were, of the time, and to close up all with some succinct
rehearsal of what had been delivered, together with an additament, if it seemed
good, of somewhat of his own. It has been reported by some of those Ministers,
who frequented these exercises, that when they could get this our Brother, into
that number, or into the chair, which latter he could hardly be drawn into, he
was observed to have a reach still beyond the rest; and in regard of his depth
of judgment, and dexterity in due ballancing of points controverted, and
differences in opinion concerning the same, he was commonly styled among them
The weighing Divine, as has been attested by that worthy Servant of Christ now
at rest with him, Master Oliver Bowls, from the mouths of some of them, who in
his hearing related it.

His method in teaching.
For his ordinary manner of teaching, it was in some kind somewhat different
from the usual Method of the most Teachers in those times. For he seldom made
any excursion into the handling of common places, or drew his subject matter
out at length by any prolixly continued discourse: But the main frame both of
his public Sermons and private Exercises, for the most part, if not wholly,
consisted, after some brief and genuine resolution of the context, and
explication of the terms, where need required, of notes and observations, with
much variety and great dexterity drawn immediately from the text, and
naturally, without constraint, issuing and flowing either from the main body,
or from the several limbs of it, with some useful application annexed
thereunto: which though neither of them long insisted upon, yet were wont with
that vivacity to be propounded and pressed by him, as well might, and often did,
pierce deep into the hearts of his hearers, The efficacy of his Ministry.
and not only rectify and clear their judgments, but have a powerful work
also upon their affections. Nor was it his manner to quote many Scriptures,
finding it troublesome to his memory, and supposing it would be so to his
Auditors also: (that which was the practice and opinion also of Doctor
Chaderton, as they well know, that heard him on Matthew. 21.13.) besides deeming
it the less needful, in regard that his Observations being grounded
immediately on the Scripture he handled; and by necessary consequence thence
deduced, seemed to receive proof sufficient from it. A constant form of prayer
he used, as in the Family, so in his public Ministry; He used a form of
prayer, and why.
only varying or adding upon special accasions, as occurences intervening
required; the reason he gave thereof, was this, because hesitation, (which he
said he was much subject unto) was in prayer more offensive, then in other
discourse; unto profane ones especially, whereof in mixed multitudes, and
meetings, some lightly, too many usually, were; that which he affirmed also to
have been Master Cartwrights practice, with whom sometime he conversed.

In such manner of teaching he went over diverse portions of Scripture: Among
others, the fifty first, The Scriptures which he preached over.
and the hundred and nineteenth Psalms: the story of Hanna, 1 Samuel 1. and of
Naaman the Syrian, 2 Kings 5. Part of Christ's Sermon on the Mount, Matthew. 5.
the Parable of the Sower, Matthew. 13. and of the rich man and Lazarus, Luke 16.
the relation of Christ's Temptations, recorded by two of the Evangelists: the
whole History of Christ's apprehension, araignment and execution; together with
Judas his end; the four first Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans; the three
last Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews, beside many other more particular
parcels of Scripture.

Of this sort was by himself published in his lifetime, A Preparation to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; His works that were published.
at first written out at the request of that right religious Lady Darcy for her
private use, and by importunity afterward, made more public for the farther
benefit of others. Therewith many have been much taken, (by means whereof it
has often been reprinted) and among others one Thomas Foster a Mercer by trade,
living at Shefford in Bedfordshire, a very honest, humble-minded, and
sincere-hearted Christian, has been heard to profess, that that Book, and
that part of it more specially wherein are laid down certain marks and signs of
Faith and Repentance, was as far (as he was able to deem) the only outward
Isntrumental means of his Conversion, through the gracious cooperation of
Gods Spirit working powerfully and efficaciously upon his heart in the reading
thereof. And since his death have been published, A Nuptial Sermon, entitled,
A Marriage Feast, on Joh. 2.1. -- 12. A Meditation of Man's mortality, on Psalm.
90. His Sermons on the second Epistle to the Thessalonians. A Treatise of
Christian Reproof, on Matthew. 18.15, 17. And another of the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, on Matthew. 12.22. -- 32. which in his lifetime he had been by that
worthy Knight Sir Robert Darcy, who died not long before him, much pressed to
publish; but could not prevail with him, being very backward in that kind, much
undervaluing his own works, and very rarely, if ever, satisfying himself in
ought that he undertook. For the use of the Family wherein he lived, he drew up
a twofold Catechism as they term it; the one somewhat large, the other more
brief, for young beginners extracted out of the former; which latter, to save
labor of transcribing, he permitted to be printed.

What spare time he had from his constant employments either private or
public, when not taken off by occasional Occurrences, he spent most of it
principally three ways.

First, In laboring to clear some Points about the Do^trine of Faith and
Justification; Concerning the latter whereof, after many debates (first
occasioned by some Lectures of Doctor Gray, sometime Fellow of Trinity College
in Cambridge, then reading on that Subject at Gresham College in London) that
passed to and fro by reciprocal Letters between him and a special friend of
his, he began to set upon an exact Treatise of that Argument: Which being upon
the first draught of it communicated to that friend of his, upon some
advertisements from him, he in diverse particulars farther cleared; and being
afterward imparted to diverse of prime note in either University, he was by them
not much encouraged only, but earnestly incited to divulge it; that, which
though by much difficulty drawn unto, yet at length he did. And howsoever that
accurate piece was but coursely entertained by one of his Brethren in the
Ministry, then living in the City, traducing it publicly in a Lecture at
Paul's, quarrelling with him who had licensed it for the Press, and framing a
bitter Invective against it; which upon perusal was found so virulent, that he
could not get it permitted to pass to the Press; yet was the work so well
approved by many learned and judicious in both our Universities, that diverse of
them have professed to have received more light thence in that Point, then they
had ever before from the writings of any that had dealt in that Argument. Hence
it was that having occasion to be sometime on the Act-day at Oxford, one of
those that had seen it, and deeming not underservedly of the workwan by the
work, seeing him pass along in a plain russet cloak, is reported by some that
were then in company with him, to have said to them, Do you see the man that
goes yonder, in that plain habit, and in that self-neglecting garb and
posture? he has more sound learning in his head, then twenty of us have. And
that famous Professor Doctor Prideaux, after his decease, in some company
hearing his Son yet surviving then present there named, demanded of him whether
that Master Bradshaw, that wrote the Treatise of Justification were his Father?
and being informed that he was, he professed himself heartly glad to see the
Son of that man, for the old acquaintance he had, not with his Father himself,
but with that work of his, for those were the Doctors own words. Hereunto may
be added the Verdict of that great and grave Counselor of State, so much
esteemed for his judgment in Law-Cases, the Lord Cook, who visiting the
Gentlewoman (by the marriage of her daughter to his Son, noe nearly linked to
him) at her house where Master Bradshaw then lay sick, and finding the Book
lying accidentally in a window, after the perusal of some good part of it,
freely professed, That he had seldom read a thing more pithily and pregnanly
written.

Nor was this work of his in such esteem at home only, but with other learned
also abroad. Among whom Master Lewis Cappel a man of special note for variety
of learning, and Professor of Divinity at Salmure in France, having received
the Book sent him from London by Master Aaron Cappel his kinsman, then Minister
of the French Church there, returns him many thanks for it; requesting him
withal, to enquire after the Authors place of abode, and convey from him unto
him the Letter enclosed; In the Superscription whereof he styles him,
Doctissimum, ornatissimun, clarissimumque virum; and in the Subscription, out
of his respect to him, and estimation, yea admiration of him, in regard of that
piece alone, thus writes of himself, Tui non studiosus modo; sed cultor and
admirator. In the body of the Letter, after signification, how upon some
occasion being to part with the Book, he had taken pains, before he would let
it go out of his hands, to translate it out of English into French, he passes
this censure of it, A little Book, small for bulk, but for learning, wit and
acuteness a grand one. -- To speak ingenuously, I never hitherto read ought in
any humane writing of Doctrinal Divinity, that so exceedingly liked me; so
learnedly, acutely, soundly, pithily, plainly, and yet with admirable brevity
is this Argument so fully comprised, and thoroughly handled therein, I want
words wherewith to commend and extol it according to its due desert; I have
often read it over, and yet never have enough of it; but the oftener I return to
it, and read it over again, the more eagerly is mine appetite stirred up unto
it, so much light and brightness of learning, wit and art shines forth in it.
And whereas treading then precisely in Piscators steps, he propounded his
doubts withal, concerning some particulars, wherein Master Bradshaw seemed to
swarve from Piscator; Master Bradshaw to give him farther satisfaction therein,
and yet save much writing at large to and fro, reviewed his own work, and
endeavored to clear those things somewhat better; wherein also he was
farthered by some Exceptions from Master Wootton imparted unto himself, unto
which he had returned an Answer; and having turned it so revised into Latin,
he sent a copy of it in writing unto Master Cappel, who upon receipt thereof,
wrote back at first briefly, but not long after more fully, in these words;
Right worthy Sir, I wrote before to you, that I had received your truly golden
Book, enlarged by you and turned into Latin, and that presently I read it
over, but in haste; so eager an appetite had I unto it, by reading the other
Edition of it in English before. Since that I have read it over again, not
once, but often, and taking leisure thereunto. Which the oftener I read over,
the more it pleases me, and is approved of by me, so accurately and exactly is
it composed by you, I hope this birth and issue of your mind will find
approbation with peaceable and moderate dispositions, on whether side soever,
albeit you condescend not unto them in all things that they require. You so
space in the middle between either opinion, that neither of them ought to be
displeased with you, if they truly love peace and concord.

Thus that learned man word for word translated out of his Letters in Latin,
which in the same language have been represented also, and published elsewhere.
Whereby may appear, what entertainment, approbation, and estimation this
Treatise (which yet the Author speaks so meanly of himself in private Letters
to his Friends) found with the learned in foreign parts, and he himself also,
where otherwise wholly unknown, for it. And whosoever shall with a regardfull
eye read over the generally well approved, and deservedly much esteemed
writings of those worthy Servants of God, now with the Lord, Master William
Pemble and Master Samuel Torsel, concerning this subject, collated with this of
Master Bradshaw, which came forth some good space before either of them had
writ ought; he shall easily discern, on whose foundation they built, in whose
steps they trod, with whose heifer they ploughed, at what Torch they lighted
their Tapers, and from whence they received much of their light in that
Argument. For it may be with good ground of truth be averred, that amids the
extreme opposition of Divines in this point dissenting, this our Brother did
herein beat out such a middle tract between them, as appears not to have been
formerly discovered by any, wherein these two men of special note coming after
him, for the main matter of their principles, have kept close to his footsteps,
in the path by him cut out and cleared to their hands. Of this latter in
Latin, a Copy being sent over by him to Doctor Ames not long before his
dicease, was by him not long after it printed. Unto this his purpose was to
have added a Treatise of Justifying Faith, the proper nature, peculiar act, and
Office of it in that work, and great pity it was that such and head as this one
piece shows him to have had, was not set apart for such like employments. How
many points of much difficulty might happily been clear, if one of his parts had
received encouragement, and means of support, to apply himself and his main
studies unto so useful an employment? Surely what he says of another, might
be well said of him, That if such as he was, had the handling of Controversies,
Questions would not be so infinite and intricate often as they are, and being
aright stated, some that now fight most eagerly one against another, would be
found to agree, being brought at length aright to understand either other.

A second business whereunto he applied himself, about which he took much
pains, was in the discussion of the matters then in controvesie, for which he
so much suffered, about Subscription, the Ceremonies then pressed, the Civil
Power, and the Prelatical, in affairs of that nature. Of this kind discourses
penned by him were underhand printed, and published, as they could be secretly
got out and dispersed, these following: A Protestation of Supremacy: The English
Puritanism: A Treatise of True and False Worship: Twelve Arguments against the
Ceremonies, and conformity thereunto: Of the Nature of things Indifferent. Of
which Argument also he wrote in Latin an Answer to Master Gabriel Powel, which
yet was not published. And it is well known to some yet surviving, that the
greatest part of that which was done in that grand Controversy with Doctor
Downham concerning Episcopacy, for the main matter of it, came forth of his
forge; (howsoever of his labor and pains therein taken, another bare the
name, and received the reward of the work) the tart and bitter language only,
wherewith it was rather pickled then seasoned, proceeding from another pen,
somewhat too much steeped in Vinegar and Gall, that which he complains of, as
much misliking, in a Letter to a Friend: for he was a man of a very mild and
meek spirit, and of a moderate disposition; and how far forth in his judgment
and practice he could have acknowledged, submitted unto, and complied with some
kind of Superintendency, or Episcopacy, as it is commonly styled, may appear by
his demands propounded to Master Francis Johnson in his Answer to his Reasons
for Separation, of which more anon. Diverse other subjects he had set upon, and
made entrance into, but afterward laid aside; whether for want of time and
opportunity, or for what other causes, uncertain: among others, of the former
sort, was a Refutation in Latin of Dutch Thomsons Diatribae, de amissione and
intercisione justificationis and gratiae; which upon notice given him of Doctor
Abbots undertaking of that task, he surceased; of this latter sort, in English,
An Answer to Master Hookers Ecclesiastical Polity, a work so much cried up;
and admired by the most, and it were greatly to be wished, that he had had life
and leisure (had the Lord seen it good) to have gone through with it: but the
Lord had otherwise disposed.

In the third and last place, amids these his labors about, and suffering for
those controversed matters, he bent his forces as much also another way; to
wit, against Sectaries and Separatists. To this purpose he had diverse
bickerings with them, and with some of the chief leaders among them, His zeal
against Sectaries and Separatists.
both by Conferences with them, and by writings against them and the courses
taken by them, whereby many were stayed from going those ways, and some also
reclaimed and brought back again. Among other, at the request of a Gentleman of
Lincolns-Inne, (for the stay of some that were staggering, and warping that
way, that one Master Clifton had gone before them, seduced by Master Smith
sometime Fellow of Christ's College, who had thrice been baptized) having
imparted to him a Relation in writing, of what had past between Smith and
Clifton, who by that their mutual Collation pretended, as upon good and just
grounds, being convict in conscience, to have past over to him; he wrote a
large Discourse, wherein he discovered a great deal of weakness, as well in
the Arguments of the one, as in the Answers of the other; thereby making it
manifestly to appear, by what slight and ill-wrought twine rather then twist,
that might have easily been snapt asunder; Master Clifton had been drawn away,
and induced to leave his former station, and abandon his wonted profession; nor
was his labor herein without its desired success with those, for whom it was
undertaken: As also thereby he took occasion to write A Defense of the Baptism
of Infants, against the same parties. Against Master Francis Johnsons Reasons
for Separation, he wrote a Book entitled, The Unreasonablness of Separation,
and that upon this occasion. One that was deemed to be a man of an ingenuous
disposition, was earnestly solicited by some with whom he conversed, to
withdraw from our Congregations, and seeming to be much perplexed with Master
Johnsons Arguments, was yet persuaded by some of his discreet Friends, to do
nothing inconsiderately in a business of that concernment and consequence, but
to consider seriously first of it, and have conference with some grave and
godly Ministers, such as he deemed as well judicious as conscientious; whereby
it might be descried, whether the grounds that he was in this course intended
to go upon, were such as would endure trial or no; this advice of theirs was
hearkened unto, and choice made by himself of Master Bradshaw and another, whom
he conceived to be both understanding and moderate men. A Disputation.
The place for conference was agreed upon to be in a common Friends house, and
the meeting intended to be very private, not above two or three of that party,
besides himself, the two Ministers and those of the house; but such of them
whose presence alone he desired, having acquainted diverse others of their
accomplices therewith, a multitude of them intruded themselves. Now in regard of
such an unexpected company, it was deemed meet to proceed the more warily. And
the party in the conference principally concerned, being put to his choice,
whether he would Argue or Answer, was willing rather to Argue, and to make use
of Master Johnsons Arguments, then to frame others of his own: that which very
well pleased those of the separating side, as deeming Master Johnsons Arguments
unanswerable. To prevent mis-reports, it was mutually agreed, that two persons,
one of either side, should write down each Argument, as it was propounded, and
each Answer, as it was returned thereunto, and should read audibly, what had
passed in the prosecution of any Argument at the close of it, before entry upon
a new, which was accordingly done; and so many of Master Johnsons Reasons
discussed as the straits of time would permit; in pursuit whereof was so
evidently showed how grossly Master Johnson had abused diverse passages of
Scripture, quoted for proof of those propositions, whereunto he had affixed
them, that the whole company of them were exceedingly puzzled with it, and some
of them to save their Champions credit, would fain have fastened some fault upon
the Printers, but could not well find how to do it. The evening coming on, the
debate ceased for that day: and Copies on either side taken, being read,
collated, and interchangeably delivered, the conference was adjourned till
afternoon the next day, what time the other Arguments were to be scanned. But
the party, whom the business concerned, being persuaded by the rest of them,
(as it seemed) to desist, did the next morning make known his unwillingnesse
for some pretended causes to go on; and so it brake off. Howbeit Master
Bradshaw having waded so far in examination of Master Johnsons Reasons, was
much importuned to proceed on therein, and to go through with the rest,
considering how needful a work it was, and how useful it might prove. Which
being at length drawn unto, and that the rather because Master Johnson had
fetched some Arguments from grounds laid by him in that Treatise against
Conformity, which it stood Master Bradshaw upon therefore to consider of, and
give satisfaction unto; that which was drawn up by him, after perusal and
approbation of some, on whose judgment he much relied, was by their advice sent
over to Master Ames, who with an Epistle of his own prefixed, caused it to be
printed in those parts, where he then abode. Neither was there any Reply ever
returned unto it, in defense of Master Johnson, either by himself, while he
lived, or by any other in his behalf, so long as Master Bradshaw survived; only
many years after Master Bradshaws decease, an attempt was made against it by
one Master Can of Amsterdam, which was not long after returned back upon its
Author by a Friend of the deceased.

And indeed to Separation he was ever very adverse, and to withdrawing from the
public places of Assembly, or from any part of Gods Worship there used. To
which purpose shall be related out of his papers in his own words the ensuing
passages; delivered by him in a Sermon at Longford on Matthew. 5.1. It is the
great mercy of God toward us, that we have no cause to seek the word in deserts
and wildernesses, in woods and caves and desolate mountains; but such worthy
edifices as these to assemble in, dedicated only to this use. And where Gods
people have by public authority such places as these appointed and allowed
ordinarily to assemble and meet in, we are foully at least to suspect those
Assemblies, and the worship done therein, which forsake those places, and fly
into woods and deserts. It is true, that among the Jews at this time there was
the Temple, and besides sundry Synagogues, answeriing to these Churches of
ours; and which is more, the doors of the Pulpits were generally open to Christ
himself; and yet our Savior often taught in other places, but this was upon
extraordinary occasions, such as seldom or never fall out with us; and so
carried by our Savior, that there was no Schism or Separation made by him, or
any of his special Disciples or followers, from the Assemblies then
established. And after concerning the places of Assembly themselves: It is
indeed an honor, that those which are in Authority and ability, should do to
the Worship of God, to see that comely and seemly places be dedicated and
separated from other common uses thereunto; and it is a disgrace and contempt
to Gods Worship, when men that may remedy it, care not how base and
contemptible the place of Gods Worship is; when men have not that care of the
place, where the holy Assembly of God meets, as they have of their barns and
stables. As also concerning some circumstances of Gesture used in them; From
Christ sitting to teach, we learn in such external behavior to follow our
Saviors example; that is, in matters not doubtful, and controversal, at least
to conform our selves to such outward fashions as are generally used in those
times, and that Church wherein we live. For example, in the like case; It is
the general custom in our Church, that the Ministers preach standing in a seat
higher then the People, and bare-headed: and this gesture is no peculiar
gesture, but borrowed from the common practice of Orators and such persons as
make speeches to solemn Assemblies. It Is meet therefore in such cases, that we
should not be singular and odd, but conform to the received fashion of the
Church. So that if we should sit and preach as Christ did, we should not
conform to Christ; because we should cross that, which was the ground why
Christ sat. Lastly, concerning repair to all parts of Gods service, from those
words; And his Disciples came to him, etc. This also is a matter of order,
that, as much as may be, divine Worship should begin, when the Congregation is
assembled and come together. Therefore the Members of an Assembly should make
more conscience then usually they do of coming together sooner. I urge this the
rather, because it is a general fault in our Assemblies, not committed only by
them, that care not which end of Religion goes forward, but generally of most,
that so they come to some part of Gods Worship, it is well enough, especially
if they can come time enough to the beginning of the Sermon. Hence many times
the Minister with the Clerk are fain to perform a great part of the public
Worship of God alone, or with one or two at the most, and the rest of the
Church come dropping in one after another at their own leisure; as though the
public prayers of the Church, and reading the Scriptures were a Worship that
concerned the Minister, and Clerk only, and not the whole Church. This is the
rather related, and here inserted, because not published, to manifest the
moderation of the man, notwithstanding so much hard measure as he sustained
from the hands of those, who so grievously abused the power they had in those
times.

Thus have you a rude and crude delineation of this blessed and faithful
Servant of Gods course and race, whose life was indeed as a continual
peregrination here upon earth; extracted, partly from Letters written to him by
others, communicated, for the better making up of this module, by Master Samuel
Hildersham, Pastor of the Church at West-Felton in Shropshire, Son to that
famous man of pious memory Master Arthur Hildersham, and Master John Bradshaw,
at present Minister of the Word at Echingham in Sussex, Son to this worthy
Champion of Christ Jesus, both genuine heirs of their Parents best parts; and
partly from relations of his own and others of good credit, his Letters
especially to a bosom Friend, whom he was wont from time to time thereby to
acquaint with most occurrents of note that befell him, or did any way concern
him, while they lived at a distance. It might have been more exactly and
entirely performed, had not some Letters of his been lost, and a bundle of
others to him miscarried, torn by Rats in his absence from the place where they
lay, the loss whereof in a Letter he much laments, and wishes that as many of
his Books, to save them, had undergone the like ill-usage.

His death was much lamented, as by all that knew his parts, and how useful he
might farther have been to Gods Church, had the Lord been pleased to lengthen
out the line of his life; so more especially by the well-affected of that
Family, whereunto he had adhered; but in a degree far above the rest by the
head thereof, Mistress Katharine Redich the relict of Master Alexander Redich,
deprived now of a second stay, and principal support, for spiritual helps
especially, since her Husbands decease; a very tenderhearted Gentlewoman, much
addicted to hospitality, and of very remarkable devotion and piety, reported
by those who were inwardly acquainted with her more retired courses, to have
been wont constantly to spend privately twice a day, at several set times an
hour at least, in meditation and prayer mixed often with many tears. She good
soul, was so affected with his departure, and so feelingly apprehensive of her
own loss thence ensuing, that albeit she survived him about, if not above some
twelve years; yet was it observed by those that conversed with her, that to her
dying day, she could very seldom with dry eyes, either speak of him, or hear
him spoken of by others; that which made diverse forbear speaking of him, what
they well might, in her presence, for the renewing of her grief. Nor was her
hearty affection to him, and due esteem of him manifested in such kind of
expressions alone, (where, in even counterfeits, though not so constantly, yet
can at sometimes exceed) but it was made to appear in beneficence to her
ability, and in careful provision to her power for those he left behind him;
for what by her Husband was intended, though she met with many obstructions in
the pursuit of it, the state was so entangled, she at length got made good, and
settled according to his desire. And for his eldest Son, (for he left three,
whereof two yet survive, and a Daughter,) being set apart for a Scholar, she
maintained him at Grammar School, until he was fitted for the University, and
at the University in part also, so long as she lived.

With those in general, among whom he lived, and that knew him but at a
distance, he left behind him the estimation of one very studious, humble,
plain, honest, loving, free, liberal, charitable and compassionate. Very
studious they deemed him, because they seldom saw him walking abroad without a
Book in his hand; and reading usually, if alone, on it, as he walked, though he
walked commonly somewhat fast, being therein farthered through the quickness
of his eye, and the steadiness of his hand. And for his humility, it so
readily offered it self to the eye in his whole deportment, that they could not
but take notice of it, reading it as written in text letters, therein, that saw
ought at all in him. A plain man he was, as Jacob, without welt or guard; and a
plain-dealing man, as Nathaniel, without craft or guile; free from all
courtship, either for counterfeit, or complement. Among the meaner sort he was
the more beloved, because, though his means were but mean and scant, yet they
perceived him to be of a free and liberal disposition; and were willing
therefore to work with him ordinarily before any other, His Charity.
because he used to give them somewhat above their hire or agreement, which few
others did. His charitable mind and tender-heartednesse many ways manifested
it self. It has been known, that he has borrowed money, when he had none
about him, or by him, to relieve some that have been in want; and to have been
as careful to repay it, as forward to part with it. While he was at Chatham,
some galleys that had sometime been built for service, and lay a long time
after there idle, being found unusefull for our Seas; yet being then on foot,
and some put into them; he walked down one day with some company to see the
manner of them: which when he had viewed, it seemed to him so dismal a sight,
to see men, Christian men, put to such kind of servitude, that he could not
endure to behold it without tears, and having given them a little money, so
left them, returning back in a very sad and pensive mood. Yea, he was one of
those, whom Solomon speaks of, whose commiseration reaches even to the bruit
beasts, which he could not endure to see unmercifully used: and would often say
he was persuaded that men took too much liberty to themselves in killing and
misusing some, even contemptible creatures, without cause. Riding homeward
sometime with his Son behind him, whom he had taken out with him, the ways
being bad and deep, and the beast that bare them traveling heavily and
wearisomely, he took occasion thereby to enter into a discourse to the lad
behind him, what hardship the poor unreasonable creature was put to, to be
serviceable to us, what misery such sustained for man's sin; and so
affectionately he spoke of it, that to his Son, whom he spoke to, he seemed
to weep with it.

He may be thought to have had some presage of his end, approaching, before his
last access to the City. For it is reported by his Son now in the Ministry,
and treading in his Fathers steps, that being very earnest in soliciting of
him, that he might then go up to London with him, which since he sucked, it
seems he had never seen, he willed him, not to be so desirous to see London;
for whenever he saw London, he should see it to his cost. And to his great
grief indeed he did, coming up with his Mother a heavy Widow, not long after
his Fathers departure hence, and funeral rites here performed.

We shall close all, with that free and ingenuous Character, which that
Illustrious late Bishop of Norwich, his old, true and loving Friend (he is
pleased so to style himself in some Letters to him) truly gives of himself: He
was, says he, of a strong brain, and a free spirit; Doctor Halls character of
him.
not suffering himself for small differences of judgment to be alienated from
his Friends; to whom notwithstanding his seeming austerity, he was very
pleasing in his conversation, being full of witty and harmless urbanity: he
vas very strong and eager in arguing, hearty in his friendship, regardless of
the world, a despiser of complement, a lover of reality, full of digested
learning, and excellent notions; a painful labourer in Gods work, and now, no
doubt, gloriously rewarded.

This Life was drawn up by my Reverend, Learned, and worthy Friend Mr. Thomas
Gataker of Rederich.

The Life of Master Richard Stock, who died Anno Christi, 1626.
His birth and breeding.
RIchard Stock was born at York, and after he was thoroughly furnished with
Country Learning, he went to Cambridge at the age of eighteen or nineteen
years, as most in those Northen parts in those times used to do; where he was
admitted into St. John's College, and after a while was chosen Scholar of the
House. At this time Dr. Whittaker was Master of St. John's (under whom his
younger Brother had a Sisers place) who favored Mr. Stock very much for his
ingenuity, industry and proficiency in his Studies.

There he remained till he had taken his degree of Master of Arts, at which
time he had had a fellowship, but that his Country was full; whereupon he left
the College, His remove from Cambridge.
and lived some space of time with Sir Edmund or Edward Cope, at Cannons Ashby
in Northamptonshire; from whence he afterward removed to the Lady Lane at
Burton on the water in Gloucestershire, to be her Chaplain.

Before he left the University he was designed to a Fellowship in Sidney
College, then intended and beginning to be built, but having long discontinued
before the building was accomplished, he had then no mind to return to the
University again.

His coming to London.
But coming up to London he was chosen Lecturer at Austins in Watling-street,
after which he preached twice every Lords day at Mildreds Bredstreet, during
the life of an old man who had the charge there: Whence he removed a little
higher to All-hallows, where he continued preaching constantly, one Mr. Edmunds
retaining the charge, but by reason of age and infirmities accompanying it,
unable to Officiate and discharge the place himself. His Ministry was so
grateful and acceptable to the people, that after the death of Mr. Edmunds,
the Pastoral charge of that place was conferred upon him, which he held to his
dying day.

His marriage.
Being settled there he married a Wife yet surviving, by whom he had three
daughters.

He was a grave and reverend Father in the English Church, a faithful Minister
and Servant of Jesus Christ, His character by Mr Gataker.
and a vigilant Pastor over his Congregation. His life and courses and constant
labor in the work Mr. STOCK
of the Lord were well known through the whole City of London; wherein he
constantly continued the work of his Ministry by the space of about thirty two
years. During his abode in St. John's College in Cambridge, even from his first
beginnings, His study of Humanity.
he was of eminent note for his unwearied industry, and singular proficiency in
those studies of humanity, that are as handmaids to Divinity, and help to lay a
good ground for any future Profession. So that his care was to intertwine piety
and humanity the one with the other, that as web and woof they ran on ever
along together through the whole course of his studies. Nor was he only
careful of this practice himself, but (according to that of the Apostle, Heb.
10.24. (...).
Observe one another to whet on to godliness and well doing;) he was no less
forward to incite others to the like practice: Yea, not only to incite them
thereunto, but to assist them therein, and to afford what helps he could (which
well also he could do) unto any that were desirous, yea or but willing to
embrace them, so that many of his Friends had cause to bless God that ever
they came acquainted with him. In a word, whilst he stayed in the College he
gave before hand e're he came to it, evident signs of one likely to prove a
skillfull Master Builder in Gods work, and a winner of many souls unto God.

Nor was he one of those rath-ripe wits, that promise fair in the blossom, but
fail in the fruit; that like Comets, blaze brighter then the fixed Stars for
a time, but after a while vanish and come to naught, the matter of them being
either wholly spent or dispersed. But his proceedings in public were
correspondent to his beginnings in private. When it pleased God to call him
out, and to set him apart to that employment, that he had ordained him to
before, he proved a painful and faithful Minister of Jesus Christ; a skillful
and powerful dispenser of Gods Word. And if any proof hereof be desired, Not
to insist upon his constant and incessant employments with general approbation
and applause of those that were Religious and judicious, continued for so many
years (as aforesaid) together; His painfulnesse.
not a Sabbath intermitted, wherein (if health served) he preached not twice,
either in his own charge (where he was most frequent) or elsewhere abroad,
besides his Catechizing of the younger sort in the week days at certain times,
and other such Offices as to the Pastoral function are necessarily annexed,
and are privately to be performed; wherein also he was no less diligent then
in the execution of his public Ministry. Not to insist (I say) upon this
(which yet were sufficient proof of it) as the Apostle says of the
Corinthians, You are the seal of my Apostleship, and my Letters Testimonial. 1
Cor. 9.2. The effectualnesse of his Ministry.
So may it well be said of this reverend man of God, Many Christian souls
having professed themselves to have had their first effectual Calling and
Conversion from him; the like whereunto few others could say at that time;
besides the multitudes of those which have acknowledged themselves to have been
edified, built up, and bettered by him, are the seal of his Calling, and of
Christ speaking in and by him, and not verbal or vocal, but real Letters
testimonial of the efficacy of his Ministry, through Gods blessing upon the
same.

One says that the Apostles were like Fishermen, the succeeding Ministers like
Huntsmen. The Apostles like Fishermen that caught many at one draught: The
succeeding Ministers like Huntsmen, that with much toil and clamor running up
and down all day, scarce take one Deer or Hare e're night. And such is the hard
condition of many of Gods Servants, that notwithstanding the faithful and
painful discharge of their duty, yet are enforced to complain with the
Prophet, Who has believed our report? Isa. 53.1. and 49.4.
and, I have labored in vain. Scarce able to produce, or instance in any one,
of whom they can with some good ground of assurance presume that they have
gained at least him unto God. But well might this worthy Servant of Christ,
through Gods blessing upon his labors, stand out and say, not of one or two,
but of troops, Isa. 8.18. 1 Cor. 4.15.
in the words of the same Prophet, Behold I, and the children that God has
given me. And with the Apostle, These have I begotten unto God by the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.

Yea more then that, many famous lights in Gods Church, and faithful Ministers
of his Word do profess to have lighted their candles at his Lamp; yea some of
them to have received their first beginnings, not of light only, but of
spiritual life and grace (without which all light, be it never so great, is no
light, but mere darkness) from his Ministry. It Is no small honor for a man to
win, if it were but any one soul ( He has saved a soul, says St. James, as a
matter worthy the glorying in. Jam. 5.20.
) For to win a soul, is to win more then the whole world besides is worth. But
what an honor then is it to be, not a winner of a soul, but a winner of such
as prove winners of souls; and so by winning of some one immediately, to be a
mediate winner of many others by him? They shall shine (says he) as the
Heavens, that instruct; and they that convert others as the Stars. Dan. 12.3.
And how gloriously then (suppose we) does this blessed man of God shine now in
the Kingdom of God, that was an instructor of those that are instructers of
others, that was a converter of those that are converters of others themselves!

Luke 1.16.
Many then did this worthy man (as the holy Ghost says of John the Baptist) win
unto God. Many he won, though all he could not, that was more then the Apostle
Paul was able to do. The Jews opposed themselves against his Ministry, and
blasphemed, Act. 18.6. and 2 These. 3.2. All men (says he) have not faith; But
yet many he won, Romans 10.1.
and his desire and endeavor (with the same Apostle) was to win all, his own
Flock especially, of whom he used to protest, That it was more comfort to him
to win one of them then twenty others. But some refractory spirits (as what
Minister does not?) he met withal, that would not be reclaimed; that by their
crosse-grain carriage and behavior, were as thorns in his eyes, and as goads
in his sides, and proved a vexation of heart to this faithful Servant of
Christ. But against such persons, not only the dust of the Ministers feet, but
the sweat of his brows, and the tears of his eyes, The danger of unprofitabe
hearers.
and his strength wasted amongst them, and his spirits spent upon them, shall
one day rise up in judgment against them, to make their doom the heavier, if it
be not prevented by speedy and unfeigned repentance.

But because a man may win others, and yet lose himself, he may save others,
and yet not save himself; They may beget life in others that have none
themselves. The Word may work by a man, and yet not work in him. He may be like
a stone-gutter (says St. Austin) or a leaden pipe, that conveyeth water into a
Garden, yet receives no benefit thereby it self. Or like the hand on the
highway that points others the way, but never walks therein it self. Or like
an Harp (says the Heathen) that makes others melody, or a Trumpet that sounds
loud, but hears nothing it self. Or like to the water in Baptism (says
Gregory) that helps men to Heavenward, but afterward is poured down the sink
it self. He may preach to others, and not preach to himself. He may convert
others, and yet himself prove a castaway. Though yet indeed it is seldom seen,
1 Cor. 9.27.
that much good is done where a due consent is wanting between tongue and hand,
between lip and life. It was far otherwise with this reverend man of God; he
was none of those that say and do not; but as he taught so he wrought; his
Doctrine and practice concurred, and went hand in hand together. Mat. 23.3. His
exemplary life.
His actions were, though silent, yet real and effectual Sermons of that which
he preached in the Pulpit. The course of his life was uniform with the tenor
of his teaching; and both joining and concentring in one, were a means to draw
on many; who by the one alone probably had not been so easily won to Christ.

In a word, for his teaching, many that were his constant Hearers, have given
him a large testimony; and they that knew his conversation have done the like
for his life. He was not a flash, one of those which show all in a Sermon, or
that spend all upon one curious good work that they mind to make their
Masterpiece. But both in his life and teaching he held on such a constant
tenor, that the more men, especially such as were wise and judicious, were
acquainted with either, the more they reverenced and esteemed him for both.

There are two things (says one) that make a complete man, What makes a
complete man.
Integrity and judgment; the one whereof is but lame and maimed without the
other; and yet in few they use to meet together; yet there was an happy
conjunction of them both in this worthy man. One sign whereof will appear by
the frequent practice of many who made use of him for to be an overseer of
their last wills, and craved his assistance by way of direction for the
disposal of their outward estates (and all know how cautious men use to be in
that kind.) Another testimony of it was by those Reverend Brethren of the
Ministry, as well as others, who either by Letters or otherwise, out of all
parts of this Realm, did usually seek to him, as to one more then ordinarily
able to give them satisfaction for the resolution of their doubts.

What makes a complete Minister.
These two then made him a complete man; but there is something more required to
make a complete Minister, viz. That he be able to speak his mind fitly (for
what use can there be of a mute Messenger) and that he dare do it freely (for
of whom is courage and freedom of speech more required then of Gods
Messengers?) Nor was Mr. Stock defective in either.

For as for the former, how well able he was, not to express only, but to urge
and press too; His manner of preaching.
not to confirm alone, but to commend also that that he delivered with clear
method, sound proof, choice words, fit phrases, pregnant similitudes,
plentiful illustrations, pithy persuasions, sweet insinuations, powerful
enforcements, allegations of antiquity, and variety of good literature; that
both the learnedest might receive satisfaction from him, and the very meanest
and dullest might also reap benefit by him, and so as might well leave a deep
impression in the hearts and minds of the Hearers, they cannot be ignorant,
that for any space of time heard him. In a word, in this kind he was such an
one as many strove to imitate, but few attained to equalize him.

Again, Because it is in vain to be able to speak to good purpose, if a man
dare not use his tongue: if (as one said of the Eretrians) he belike the
sword-fish, that has a sword in his head, but no heart in his body: or like a
cowardly companion, that carries a weapon to ruffle with, but dares not draw or
make use of it, though just occasion be offered. For his freedom of speech
therefore in reproving of sin, and that even to the faces of the greatest,
whether in public or private, when occasion (...); many even now living are
able to testify, and some accidents made it more publicly known, then his
desire was that it should have been.

His zeal for the Sabbath.
He was very zealous and earnest for the reformation of some proph^nations of
the Sabbath. Wherein he prevailed also for the alteration of something
offensive in that kind, as well with the main body of the City, as with some
particular Societies; as for their meetings upon St. Thomas day. He persuaded
also some of the companies to put off their solemn Festivals from Mundaies to
Tuesdaies, that so the Lords day might not be profaned by their preparations
for those Feasts.

His prudence also appeared in his order of Catechizing the young persons of
his Parish; His prudence.
by examining them apart, the youths on one day, and the maids on another. The
riper and forwarder first in the presence of the ruder and rawer, and the ruder
and rawer apart by themselves, when the former were departed, that so they
might reap what fruit they could by hearing the others, and yet might receive
no discouragement by being heard of them.

His care of his Family.
Neither was his pious diligence and care less seen in the Religious
instruction and education of those that were under his private charge, as
Children and Servants, for whom his care was greater to provide for their souls
then their bodies, for their spiritual then for their temporal estate (yet
not neglecting that neither) by bringing them up in the nurture and fear of the
Lord. In a word, time and speech would sooner fail then matter, If I should
proceed to write of all the gifts, graces and praiseworthy qualities of this
eminent servant of Christ.

In his public Ministry his usual manner was upon occasion to quote the
sayings of many of the Fathers, which some taking exceptions at, he thus
Apologized for himself, His Apology for quoting the Fathers.
If any (says he) take exceptions at my alleging of Fathers (as some have
taken offense at my using of Reasons to confirm the Doctrine, but with very
little Reason as I suppose) I must pray them, to give me leave to use them,
till I can see that unlawfulness which they affirm to be in the practice, and
to censure me in charity for the use of them, as I do them for not using them.
I will look as well to my heart in the use of them, as God shall enable me; and
when I shall see the hurt of them, I will endeavor as much to avoid them. In
the mean time I will make as much use as I can of them, to edify the Church of
God.

In his younger days being called to preach at Paul's Cross, he dealt somewhat
plainly and freely in taxing some abuses in the City in unequal Ratings,
whereby the meaner sort were overburthened, His faithfulness in reproving sin.
whilst the rich and great ones escaped with more ease. This was ill taken by
many of them, who checked him as over-rash for dealing in such matters, calling
him a green-head: but in his latter days being called to preach at the Lord
Majors Election, he fell again upon the same subject, and told them a gray-head
spoke now what a green-head had done formerly.

But to draw to an end together with his end; the end of his labors, but the
beginning of his rest; the end of his work, but the receipt of his reward. In
the aformentioned and such like employments, public and private, he spent his
time: His last sickness.
He spent his strength like a Torch or Taper, wasting and consuming himself for
the profit and benefit of others, having his work with God then, and his reward
for it from God afterward. And for these employments sake was it principally,
that he desired recovery of health and strength: Unto the performance whereof
also (though therein injurious to himself, and contrary to his own desires) he
often strained himself, and that in the midst of his infirmity and weakness, not
to uncertain hazard only, but to evident impreaching and impairing of either.
What is the sign (says Hezekias, when he promised recovery) that I shall go up
to the house of the Lord? as desiring continuance of life, and recovery of
health for no one end more then that. And therefore also was it that this
worthy man was desirous of recovery, that he might repair to Gods house again,
and that he might return to Gods work again. To which purpose the very last
Lords day before his disease, having after many relapses recovered a little
strength, he made shift to get out to a neighbor Congregation, there to join
with Gods people in public performance of such solemn service of God, as that
day is usually spent and employed in. And having held out with them to the end
in both parts of the day, he rejoiced much therein that he was able so to do,
the rather because he thereby conceived some good hope, that he should be
strong enough ere long to return to his wonted work and employment again. But
the Lord saw it better (for his will appears by his work) to put an end to his
incessant labors here, His death.
and to transhate him to the place of his endless rest elsewhere, and that
upon the twentieth day of April, Anno Christi 1626. having been Preacher at
All-Hallows Bredstreet during the spence of thirty two years, 1 Timothy 4.12.
where he was an exmple to his people in word, in inconversation, in charity,
in spirit, in faith, in purity. But as one says, An exact face is seldom drawn
but with much disadvantage; so neither is his character; so that we may well
say as one does of Basil, There wanted but his own tongue to commend him with.

The Life of Master Richard Rothwel, who died Anno Christi, 1627.
RIchard Rothwel was born in Lancashire, at, or near Bolton in the Moors, about
the year of our Lord, His birth, and education.
1563. After he took the Ministry upon him, and God gave him another heart, he
disposed his temporal estate amongst his friends, and (...), 1 Cor. 9.11.14. He
lived of the Gospel.

His education was in the Schools, and afterward in Cambridge; in the one he
attained to an exact knowledge of the tongues, (especially Greek and Hebrew,
wherein he was a Critic) and in the other of the Arts, so that he became a
skil-Linguist, subtle Disputant, copious Orator, and of a deep insight into any
kind of knowledge, Humane or Divine.

In this first course of his studies appeared presently to his observers, the
buds and blossoms of that fame which after he attained; for he had a prompt
wit, a quick apprehension, a clear understanding, a sound judgment, a ready
speech, and a strong memory. All these seldom meet in one man, but did in him
very eminently, His natural, and acquired parts.
and were improved by diligent study, which (out of a desire of learning and
knowledge) he continued to his last without weariness.

His constitution of body, and moral endowments of mind, were great props and
supporters to his intellectual habits, Gratior est virtus veniens e corpore
pulchro. This is not the ordinary lot of Scholars; He was tall, well set, of
great strength of body and activity, of a stern countenance, of invincible
courage, of approved valor, and of a very goodly and majestic presence: Grief
nor any misery could ever break him, but joy would presently melt him into
tears.

He was of a generous spirit and deportment, yet withal very humble and
courteous; His language was sententious and proverbial. I have heard many
others say, what I must needs my self, Nunquam illi accedo quin doctior evadam;
I never came to him, but I went the learneder from him. He had a great
dexterity in communicating his mind to another, and speaking to his
understanding, God gave him a great inlet into the hearts of men.

After many years spent in the University, His entering into the Ministry.
he betook himself to the Ministry, and was ordained Presbyter by Doctor
Whitgift then Archbishop of Canterbury, who forbade him meddling with
interpretation of Moses Types, the Book of Canticles, Daniel, and the
Revelation. Which then he thought himself, as the Bishop did, were not so
useful for him to study as some other Scriptures.

But alas! all these natural dispositions, intellectual habits, personal
deportments were but as so many weapons in the hands of a mad man: Judge how
able by these to resist the truth; for he remained some years without any
change of heart, or sensible work of grace upon his soul, but preached
learnedly as they called it, and lived vainly; His course of life before his
Conversion.
abhorring debauchery, and debauched companions, through the height of his
spirit, but gave himself to hunting, bowling, shooting, more the^ became a
Minister of the Gospel; and sometimes he would swear Faith and Troth, and in
his passion greater blasphemies. I have heard him tell that there were two
Knights in Lancashire fallen out, and great fewd betwixt them; That the one had
a very good Park with store of Deer; That the other had excellent good
Fish Ponds, and store of Fish: He robbed the Park of the one, and presented
what he got to the other; and the Fish Ponds of the other, and presented the
Fish to his adversary; thus he pleased himself in the days of his vanity, with
such kind of follies. In doing this one night, the Keeper met with him, his Dog
having killed a Buck; at the fall of the Buck the Keeper came in with his
fauchion and staff, and met Master Rothwel who had a staff also; They fell from
words to blows; He got the Keeper down, bound him by the thumbs, and drew him
up to his full height, that he could but touch the ground with his toes, and so
left him tied to a tree till next morning, when others found him and loosed
him. At length God pleased, who separated him from his Mothers womb, as he did
Paul, and called him by his grace to reveal his Son in him. Which because it
was famous, and he himself afterward proved the means of the Conversion of so
many, I shall set it down as I remember I have heard him speak it.

He was playing at Bowls amongst some Papists and vain Gentlemen, upon a
Saturday, somewhere about Rachdale in Lancashire; there comes into the green to
him one Master Midgley, a grave and godly Minister of Rachdale, whose praise is
great in the Gospel, though far inferior to Master Rothwel in parts and
learning; The means, and manner his Conversion.
he took him aside and fell into a large commendation of him, at length told
him what pity it was, that such a man as he should be a companion for Papists,
and that upon a Saturday, when he should be preparing for the Sabbath Day.
Master Rothwel slighted his words, and checked him for his meddling.

Power of Prayer.
The good old man left him, went home and prayed privately for him; Master
Rothwel when he was retired from that company, could not rest, Master Midglys
words struck so deep in his thoughts; The next day he went to Rachdale Church
to hear Master Midgley, where it pleased God to bless that Ordinance so, as
Master Rothwel was by that Sermon brought home to Christ. He came after Sermon
to Master Midgley, thanked him for his reproof, and besought his direction and
prayers, for he was in a miserable condition of nature; and under the spirit of
bondage he lay for a time, till afterward, and by Master Midgleys hands also
he received The Spirit of Adoption, His Faith, and comfort.
wherewith he was so sealed, that he never lost his assurance to his dying day.
Though he was a man subject to many temptations, the devil assaulting him very
much, yet God was mightily with him, that out of his own experience he was able
to comfort many. He esteemed and counted Master Midgley ever afterward for his
spiritual Father. This makes me think upon Augustines speech to God, when he
came to hear Ambrose preach: non ut Doctorem veni (but upon another account) ad
eum; per te ducebar nescius, ut ad te per eum sciens ducerer. Confess. l. 5. c.
13, 14.
So did the Lord by Master Midgleys plain kind of teaching, put forth the
evidence of his spirit upon this mighty and learned Rabbi.

Whether it was before or after this his Convesion that he went a Soldier, His
going into Ireland.
and Chaplain to a Regiment under the Earl of Essex into Ireland, I know not;
but there he was, and did very great things. And certainly his wisdom and
courage were so eminent in him, that there were few of his Calling his equals,
I think none at all his Superiors.

He now becomes another man, forsakes all his wonted courses and companions,
preaches in another manner then formerly, opens the depths of Satan, and
deceitfulness of the heart, so as he was called the Rough Hewer. The efficacy
of his Ministry.
He had the power of God that went with his Ministry, when he preached the Law
to make men tremble, yea sometimes to cry out in the Church: and when he
preached the Gospel, he was another Barnabas, and had great skill in comforting
afflicted consciences.

He studied now the point of Nonconformity, which was as the joints in Ahabs
armor, through which the Prelates hit, and deprived so many godly and able
Ministers in those times. In these Controversies he was so well versed, that he
satisfied many, and silenced any that disputed with him. He was so fixed in his
judgment, that he would never either marry, (expecting daily persecution; and
the word he used in all his Books, was Persecutio pignus futurae felicitatis;)
nor take any Benefice, (though diverse great livings were proffered him) because
he would still say, My head is too big to get into a Church-door. But he betook
himself first to a Chapel in Lancashire, as a Lecturer, The places of his
first employment.
and afterward (to decline the storm of the Prelates) to be a Domestic
Chaplain to the Earl of Devonshire, and at that time I first knew him, and came
(I bless God) acquainted with him.

There now ran nothing more in his mind, but why the Bishop should forbid him
preaching upon those Scriptures before mentioned; and he began to conceive that
there was sure something there, could he find it, The study of the Prophesies.
which would mightily batter bown their Hierarchy; He prayed therefore much to
God, (wherein he was mighty) and studied them, and God opened those mysterious
passages of his Book to him more then to other men, that he seldom preached
abroad out of any other Scriptures, and did write an exact Commentary upon
Moses Types, which he unveiled with very much profit and delight to the Reader;
but that Book is lost to the great loss of Gods Church thereby.

Learned and godly Master Cotton enquired of me whether that or any thing else
might not be found amongst his papers after his death I told him there was
little found, but what was in Characters. He prayed me to send him what I could
gather, to Boston, where men were that were expert in Characters. I did so, but
I believe they could make nothing of them. That and some other of his learned
and judicious labors he has lent out, I suppose, and I fear they will not be
recovered. Learned men that have seen them, judge them a rare treasure.

His contests with the Bishops.
He had some contests with the Prelates, especially with Bishop Neal then of
Litchfield, afterward of Durham; in the which the Bishop, I dare say, was more
afraid of him, then he was of the Bishop: But I forbear that story.

At length he came to spend most part of his time in the Bishopric of Durham,
by means of an honorable and Elect Lady, the Lady Bows, afterward the Lady
Darcy in the North. Of whom it was truly preached at her Funeral, (Alas, that
it was at her Funeral) Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole
world, Mat. 26.13.
there shall also this, that this woman has done, be told for a memorial of
her. She gave about one thousand pounds per annum, to maintain Preachers where
there were none, The Lady Bows her great charity.
nor any means for them, and all her Preachers were silenced men by reason of
Nonconformity: Such as Master Baynes, Master Dike, etc. She would lay out all
her interest to get them their liberty, and then she would dispose of them,
where there needed in the North, or in the Peak in Darbyshire, or other places,
and allow them pensions; O! That God would raise out of the ashes of this
Phoenix some more such Mothers in Israel. Sir William Bows her husband dying,
his Funerals were kept at Bernards-Castle, where he had some honor: Master
Dike (Father of the Writers of that name) was then her household Chaplain, and
went into the North to that Funeral; at his return he represented the state of
the people destitute of a Minister to my Lady, who would have sent him thither;
but he told her he durst not venture on so surly a People, but commended Master
Rothwel to her. She sent to him, then at the Earl of Devonshires house, and
proffered him this employment; His answer was, he would go thither, and if the
people called him, he would then accept of her motion.

At his first days labor, they all desired him, he returned to the Lady, and
told her he would go; she replied, though for their sakes she was glad, yet she
was afraid to send him; understanding that they were of a fierce disposition,
and having never heard the Gospel, might deal unkindly with him; he answered,
Madam, If I thought I should never meet the devil there, I would never come
there; he and I have been at odds in other places, and I hope we shall not
agree there.

He desired to have me with him, and with much ado prevailed; and so (I bless
God) he not only fitted me for the University, but was a means to bring me to
the first saving knowledge of Christ; I remember, and shall do ever, the first
Sermon and point which God blessed to my soul for that purpose. I was about
eight years his bedfellow and eye witness of the great success he had in his
Ministry there, and over all the Country, where he was worthily called, The
Apostle of the North. The Lady allowed him forty pounds per annum, and such as
God wrought upon by his Ministry contributed to him, but he would not have a
penny from any other.

There was once in his absence collected 30. li. by Sir Talbot Bows, His
self-denial.
that lived there, from the people; but when he returned and knew it, he caused
it to be restored to the Parties, that gave it, and told them, He sought them,
not theirs.

At his first entrance he had great opposition, and sometimes was waylaid to
take away his life; but he overcame all that with his patience and courage, His
patience, and courage.
and at length his greatest enemies were afraid of him; and few Sermons, but it
was believed, he gained some souls.

His manner was to spend the forenoon at his Studies, His carriage amongst his
people.
and the afternoon in going through his Parish, and conferring with his people;
in which, as he excelled, so he gained much upon them; and within four years
had so many judicious and experimental Christians, that they came from London,
York, Richmond, New Castle, and many other places, to see the order of his
Congregation: And many lewd Gentlemen came often, ten or twelve miles to hear
him, to carp and get somewhat to accuse him: many of which God took hold on,
and they returned, some convinced, and some converted. Special Providence.
Neal (the said Prelate of Durham) bestirred himself, and outed many worthy
men, and endeavored his removal. Once he sent three Pursivants to apprehend
him, and promised them one hundred pounds, if they brought him. His persecution
by Bishop Neal.
He was then out of Town, and had notice by me of their purpose; a Gentleman
being with him, one Master Israel Fielding, a true Israelite, desired him to go
with him to his house, within a quarter of a mile of Bernards Castle, which was
out of the Bishops jurisdiction: to whom he answered, I had thought you had
been my friend: what is the devils greatest name? I answered Beelzebub. And what
(says he) is Beelzebub? The Master of a fly: and if he be but so, what are
these? Midges Gnats.
: I will go therefore to my people, and let the devil do his worst.

So he came and sent to the Pursivants to come to him, when they came, he took
his sword in his hand, (which he always rid with) and bad them Keep their
distance and not come too near him, but if they would do their errand, let them
come, for there was his supersedeas. God struck them amort, they had no spirit
left in them to meddle with him. He bad them go to their Lord, and tell him, if
he had any thing to say to him, he would meet him on Bernards Castle bridge,
(which parts the shires) and if he could pull him over to him, let him take
him: But, (says he) do you serve a better Master, else he that sets you on
work will pay you your wages; and so he left them.

Not long after, I went to the University, and after eight years continuance
there, came over into England upon some opportunities, His last sickness.
and stayed about half a year, ere I returned. When I came to Mansfield in
Nottinghamshire, His last sickness.
I found him there their Minister, and sick unto the death; at my coming he
revived, and in the strength of that joy so far recovered, that within a week
he went about the Town with me to diverse places; but relapsed, and engaged me
to preach for him once the next Sabbath following, and in the afternoon at
Mansfield Woodhouse, within half a mile of Mansfield. On friday we looked for
no life from him, he was almost past his understanding; There came a drunken
Vicar of Mansfield, one Master Britain to see him, and desired him now, that
he was not like to live, to tell him what he thought of the Ceremonies, he knew
he was learned, and therefore would be glad to be informed by him. Master
Rothwel either understood not, or minded not what he said, but answered
sometimes Yea, sometimes No, as he apprehended. Master Britain went away
telling him he was satisfied, and reported in diverse Alehouses, and amongst
his companions, that Master Rothwel recanted his judgment of Nonconformity.

When he was gone, I desired the company to stay, the chamber being full, and I
asked Master Rothwel if he knew who had been with him, and what he said to him?
He answered, No: I told him it was Master Britain, and that he reported he
had recanted his judgment. He answered, If I should do so, I were in a most
miserable condition. No, (says he) I have written a Treatise, and called the
Ceremonies Dulcissima. And why? (said I) peradventure because as in the itch,
scratching pleases, but draws blood: at that he laughed, I asked him if I
should send for Master Britain, and that he would declare his mind to him; he
answered, no: If he come I shall prove him to be a very Knave; but he desired
me to go to him, and let him know his mind, which I did, and took some
understanding Gentlemen with me, that were present, and so (I thank God,)
cleared Master Rothwel, both to Master Britain, and afterward to all the
Congregation publicly, from that wicked aspersion.

The next day [ Saturday] he had some lightning, and sat up in his chair, and
discoursed freely, cheerfully and heavenly all that and the next day; some sent
to enquire on the Sabbath how he did, he answered, I am well, and shall be well
shortly; and whispering with me, said, Do you know my meaning? He foretells his
death.
I shall be with Christ ere long, but do not tell them so. He caused me to
repeat my Sermon preached in the forenoon for him, after which, with tears in
his eyes he laid his hands on my head, and lifted up his eyes to Heaven, and
with a short Prayer blessed me: Then he bad me go to preach at Mansfield
Woodhouse, and tarry there all night, (for he had promised it to one Master
Dand there,) but to be sure to come when he sent for me. This he did next
morning about six a clock, when I came I found him in pangs of death, he had
known nor spoken to any of an hour before: the chamber was full, and one was
praying for him; after Prayer, I spoke to him, he turned about his head, took
me by the hand, and bade me pray, pray; I desired a Reverend Minister to go to
prayer again; Master Rothwel said, Pray you, pray you; I did so: after that he
smiled, Now (says he) I am well: Happy is he that has not bowed a knee to
Baal; he bad us sing Psalm. 120. he sung a while, but in the singing of the
Psalm he died, His death.
Anno Domini 1627. and in the year of his age 64.

Thus have I given you as true an account as I could of this famous Champion of
Christ, who notwithstanding his Nonconformity, may be called with Austin,
Haereticorum Malleus, The Hammer of Heretics, and with Ambrose, Orbis terrarum
(Anglicarum) oculus. The eye as bright as any other in the English Orb.

Two things (amongst many others) I think worthy the inserting into his life,
which have been omitted in the foregoing story.

The one is a strange sickness and recovery he had once at Bernards Castle.
His sickness was a Vertigo capitis, His strange sickness, and recovery.
he would have forty fits at least in an hour, and every one of them
accompanied with mischievous temptations, which when the fit was over, he
dictated, and I writ down; these held him about three weeks, in which time he
had the advice of learned Physicians from London, York, New Castle, Durham, and
other places, they all jumped in their judgments, imputing it to much study,
fasting, and inward trouble of spirit; their Prescriptions wrought kindly, but
removed not his disease; He desired diverse Christians to pray for him on a day
prefixed, and promised to join with them as well as he could, with some others
that should be with him, assuring them, That he was confident that disease
would not he removed but by Prayer and Fasting. The morning of that day he had
a fit continued four hours together upon him, and the devil set upon him all
that while, with most dreadful temptations, Satan's malice.
telling him he would make him the scorn of Religion, and every man should
reproach it for his sake, that had before by his means looked toward it: That
he should never preach more, but should blaspheme the name of God he had
preached, with many like suggestions: God gave him courage, comfort and Victory
over them all. The devil told him if he did fast and pray that day, he would
torment and hinder him, etc. We met at the time appointed, and Master Rothwel
would needs have me to perform the duty, which through Gods goodness I did,
and the devil was not permitted to hinder or interrupt him or us, and God heard
our Prayers, The power of prayer.
so that he had never a fit after that; and the Sabbath-seven night following
he preached, but after many wrestlings with Satan, who told him he would make
him mad, and before all the people in the Pulpit make him a scorn if he did
adventure to preach; Nevertheless his Faith in Christ overcame his fear of
Satan, and he preached with great assistance and comfort upon that text, Psalm.
116.9. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. Nevertheless
that sickness did so weaken his brain, that ever after he was enclining to
some infirmities, Which love must cover.

The other is a relation which I had from himself, and from diverse others to
whom the story was known, that are yet alive. His dispossessing of the devil.
As well as I can recollect it, it is thus; There was one John Fox living about
Nottingham, who had no more learning then enabled him to write and read: This
man was possessed with a devil, who would violently throw him down, and take
away the use of every member of his body, which was turned as black as pitch in
those fits, and then spoke with an audible voice in him, which seemed sometimes
to be heard out of his belly, sometimes out of his throat, and sometimes out of
his mouth, his lips not moving. He lay thus (if I mistake not) some years: many
prayers were put up to God for him, and great resort, especially of godly
Ministers, to him: amongst the rest Master Bernard of Batcomb, then of Worksop;
and Master Langley of Truswel, betwixt whom and John Fox, I have seen diverse
passages in writing, he relating by pen his temptations, and they giving
answers when he was stricken dumb.

As Master Rothwel was riding to see him, the Devil told all that were in the
House, Yonder comes Rothwel: but I will make a fool of him before he goes. The
people looked forth, and saw him coming aabout a quarter of a mile from the
house. As soon as he entered the room, the Devil said, Now Rothwel is come: and
as some say spoke thus. Rothwel, Thou say there is no possession, what
think thou now? Here is a man opens not his lips, and yet he speaks? And
after a while he further said:

Devil: Say nothing to me of this man, for I tell thee he is damned; and he
added thereto many fearful blasphemies.


Rothwel: Thou art a liar, and the father of lies; nor art thou so well
acquainted with the mind of God concerning this man, which makes thee thus to
torment him; therefore I believe thee not, I believe he shall be saved by Jesus
Christ.


Devil: He is a murderer, and thou know no murderer must come into Heaven.


Rothwel: Thou lie again, for David murdered, and is in Heaven; and the Jews
with wicked hands crucified the Lord of Glory, yet both Christ prayed for them,
and Peter exhorts them to repentance, that their sins may be blotted out.


Devil: But this man has not, cannot, shall not repent.


Rothwel: If he had not, thou would not have told him so; but if he have not,
I believe God will give him repentance, and thou shall not be able to hinder it.


Devil: Thou art a murderer thy self, and yet talkest thou thus?


Rothwel: Thou lie again, I have fought the Lords Battles against his known
enemies, the idolatrous and bloody Papists in Ireland* Rebels to the Queen my
Sovereign, by whose authority I bore arms against them; otherwise I have
killed no man.


Devil: (Swore and blasphemed) Thou did murder one this day, as thou came
hither, and there is one behind thee will justify it.


Rothwel looked over his shoulder, and with that the devil set up a hideous
laughter, that nothing could be heard for a great while, and then said:

Devil: Look you now, did not I tell you I would make Rothwel a fool? and yet
it is true, thou did murder one this day; for as thou came over the Bridge
(which he named) there I would have killed thee, and there thy horse trod upon
a sly and killed it.


Master Rothwels horse you must know stumbled there, it seems the devil had
power to cause it, but without hurt either to Master Rothwel or his horse.

Rothwel: Thou have often beguiled me, I hope God will in time give me wisdom to
discern, and power to withstand all thy delusions; and he it is that has
delivered me out of thy hands, and will I doubt not also deliever this poor man.


The Devil blasphemed fearfully, quoted many Scriptures out of the Old and New
Testament, both in Hebrew and in Greek, cavilled and played the Critic, and
backed his Allegations with Sayings out of the Fathers and Poets in their own
language, which he readily quoted, so that the company trembled to hear such
things from one that understood no learning, and that moved neither tongue nor
lip.

Master Bothwel was mightily enabled by God to detect the devils sophistry.

Devil: What stand I talking with thee? All men know thou art BOLD ROTHWEL, and
fear no body, nor carest for words, therefore I will talk to thee no more,
(that name he carried to his grave; They would say, That is he the devil called
BOLD ROTHWEL.)


Rothwel (turning to the people) said, Good people, you see the goodness of
our God, and his great power; though the devil made a fool of me now, through
my weakness, God has made the devil dumb now; do you see how he lies?
therefore let us go to prayer; that God who has made him dumb, will (I doubt
not) drive him out of this poor man.

Devil raged, blasphemed, and said, And will thou go to prayer? If thou do, I
will make such a noise, that thy prayer shall be distracted, and thou know
God will not hear a distracted prayer: but thou have got a device, because thou will not be distracted with thy eyes in prayer, thou winkest (so he always
did,) but if thou pray, I will pull out thy eyes.

Rothwel: I look to find thee as great an enemy in this duty now, as I have
done heretofore, but I fear not thy threat, I know thou art limited; God
hears the Prayers of the upright, has promised to give his Spirit to supply
infirmities, therefore in confidence of his promise, and powerful assistance
of his Spirit, and in the name and intercession of his Son Jesus Christ we will
go to Prayer.


They did so, Mr. Rothwel kneeled by the bed on which the poor man lay; The
Devil for a quarter of an hour together, or more, made a horrid noise;
nevertheless Master Rothwels voice was louder then the Devils. After a while
the Devil roared at Master Rothwels face (this was the first motion of any part
of the man's body) Master Rothwel opened his eyes, met, and brought down the
hand, which he held with great ease, two men being scarce able to hold the
other hand: Prayer was still continued; at length the Devil lay silent in the
man, and after that departed from him. The man fetched diverse deep sighs,
insomuch as they thought he had been expiring, but his color returned to him,
and the use of all his members, senses, and understanding; and at the next
petition, he said (to the glory of God, and amazement, but comfort of all the
company,) AMEN: and so continued to repeat his Amen to every petition: Prayer
was now turned into thansgiving, and so concluded. After prayer, John Fox said,
Good Master Rothwel, leave me not, I shall not live long; for the Devil tells me
he will choke me with the first bit of meat that I eat. Master Rothwel
answered, Will thou believe the Devil that seeks thy destruction, before thou
will trust in God through Jesus Christ, that seeks thy salvation? Has not God
by his Almighty power dispossed him? Had he had his will, thou had been in
Hell before now; but he is a Lier, and as he is not able to hinder thy souls
life, so neither shall he be able to destroy the life of thy body. Wherefore
get me something ready (says he) for him, and I will see him eat before I go,
and will crave a blessing upon it.

When it was brought, eat says Master Rothwel, and fear not the Devil, showing
him that he might do it in faith of that Ordinance by which God appoints meat
for means to preserve life, and urged that place of Jairus Daughter restored to
life: He commanded to give her meat, Luke 8.55. With much ado, and in great
trembling at last, them an took, and eat it. Look, (says Master Rothwel) you
all see the Devil is a Lier, the first bit has not choked him, nor shall the
rest. Master Rothwel left him, after which he was stricken dumb for three years
together. I had a Book written with his own hand, of the Temptations the Devil
haunted him with afterward, and the Answers diverse godly and reverend
Ministers gave to those temptations: but the Cavaliers got them, and all my
Books and Writings.

Thus the poor man remained tempted, but no longer possessed; At length by
Prayer also (which was instantly put up to God for him, every Sabbath and
Lecture day, in many places,) the Lord opened his mouth, and restored his
speech to him: one using this petition, Lord open thou his mouth that his lips
may show forth thy praise. He answered in the Congregation, Amen: and so
continued to speak, and spoke graciously to his dying day.

This Life was drawn up by my reverend Friend Master Stanly Gower of Dorchester.

Dr. PRESTON.
The Life of Doctor Preston, who died Anno Christi, 1628.
John Preston, the Son of Thomas and Alice Preston, was born at Heyford in
Northamptonshire, a town divided by a little River into the upper and lower
Heyfords, His Birth.
and is in Maps often written in the plural number; It is a Rectory, and has a
fair Church in the lower Heyfords, but yet stands in diverse Parishes. That
Farm wherein Master Thomas Preston lived, is in Bugbrook Parish, where they
buried and baptized, where we find that John the Son of Thomas Preston was
baptized, October. 27. 1587. but was descended from that Family of the Prestons,
that lived at Preston in Lancashire, from whence his great Grandfather removed,
upon occasion of a fatal quarrel with one Master Bradshaw, a neighbor
Gentleman, whom in his own defense he slew, and satisfied the Law, and was
acquitted for it; but not the Kindred, who waited an opportunity to be
revenged, as the manner in those Northern Countries then was. It fell out not
long after, that Master Bradshaws next Brother meets Master Preston, near to
the place where he had slain his Brother, and told him he should do as much for
him, or he would revenge his Brothers blood. Master Preston told him he had
slain his Brother against his will, and in his own defense: that he bare no
evil will unto them; desired him he would forbear, but when no thing would
prevail, they fought, and Bradshaw fell again.

But Master Preston, was troubled and grieved at it, for he saw a fire was
kindled that would not easily be quenched, and therefore resolved that he would
leave that fatal and unlucky Country, though he was a Gentleman of a very
fair estate; and walking one day pensive in Westminster Hall, one Master Morgan
of Heyford, with whom he was acquainted, came unto him, and asked why he was so
sad? To whom for answer, he relates the former story. Master Morgan knowing him
to be a gallant man, was very sensible of his estate, and told him if he would
go with him to Heyford, he should have a good Farm to live in for the present,
and what accommodation he could afford him. Master Preston thanked him, and
after some consideration of the matter, resolved to take his offer, and so
Master Preston of Preston in Lancashire, became a kind of Farmer in
Northamptonshire, where he afterward lived and died, and his Son succeeded
him, and so it came to Thomas Preston, as we have said.

His Mothers name before she married, was Marsh, but she had an Uncle by the
Mothers side, whose name was Craswel, a man of means and good esteem in
Northampton where he lived, and where he had been several times Mayor. This
Uncle being rich, and having no Child, was very careful of her, His education.
and took this Son whilst he was young unto himself, and sent him to the
Free School in Northampton, where he was a Scholar under the Government of
Master Sanderson, then Master of the School, and after under Master Wastel, who
succeeded him; and when he had been there some time, his Uncle was persuaded to
remove him into Bedfordshire, unto one Master Guest, who had sometime taught a
private School in Northampton, and was accounted a better teacher of the Greek
tongue, from whence after he had perfected his Studies in the Greek, he was
sent to Cambridge, and admitted of Kings College, under the tuition of Master
Busse, one of the Fellows, Anno Dom. 1684. where he did, His going to Cambridge.
as young Scholars use to do, that is, applied himself to that which was the
genius of the College, and that was music; and finding that the Theory was
short and soon attained, he made account the practice would also be so; and
accordingly adventured on the Noblest but hardest Instrument, the Lute, but
here he found that Art was long, and was not willing to attend it; he used to
say within himself, while he was fingering of his Instrument, quantum hoc
tempore legi potuit: and whilst his fingers were thus distempered and foundred
upon the Lute, it fell out that his Tutor, Master Busse, was chosen Master of
the School at Eaton, and so removed from the College about two years after he
was admitted. Coming not from Eaten School, but from another, he could not be
of the foundation, and was therefore incapable of those preferments in the
College that were of most worth, and the sooner persuaded also for to remove,
which he did unto Queens College, His remove to Queens College.
where he was received and admitted under the tuition of Master Oliver Bowls,
one of the Fellows of that House, a very godly learned man, and a noted and
careful Tutor, under whose Government he settled to his Book and left his
music, and by whose conduct and directions he grew in knowledge, and was
improved unto very thriving and undertakings in his Studies.

It is not nothing to be well descended, fortes creantur fortibus and bonis,
Sheep and Neat bred in Lancashire, or on the Peak-hils, and after driven into
Northamptonshire, and planted there, produce a very gallant race. These
Prestons though removed from their native soil, and much impaired in their
Revenue, retained yet the garb and metal of their Ancestors, they carried
themselves and were accounted Gentlemen; something there was in this young
Prestons spirit that was not vulgar, I have seen in a Book of his, under his
own hand, when he was young, such sparklings of aspiring ingenuity, as argued
in him something that was not common.

He was as yet but Junier Sophister, but looked high, and grew acquainted with
those that were Gentile, and fancied state affairs and Courtship, that had
desires or dispositions to be Secretaries or Agents in Princes Courts; thought
it below him to be a Minister, and the study of Divinity, a kind of honest
siliness, and accordingly got in with a Merchant, by whose means he did procure
that he should live in Paris, and learn the language and garb of France; and
another Gentleman in recompense, should be received and entertained in London,
to learn our garb and language. Master Creswel of Northampton was by this time
dead, and had bequeathed certain Lands in that Town to him after his Wives
decease; These Lands he sels to put himself into a posture fit for that design;
but here he now began to find that he had reckoned without his Host, and that
he should have said, if the Lord will I shall live and do this or that, Jam.
4.15. for the Merchant dies before the exchange could be accomplished, and so
these blooming hopes, that had thus long held up his imagination died with the
Merchant.

He was of an able, firm, well-tempered constitution, brown, His Character.
comely visage, vigorous and vivide eye, but somewhat inclining to that kind of
melancholy, that arises from a dust and parched choler, which now began a
little to be discovered in him. For being mated in his first design, he grew
discouraged, went not so much abroad among the Gallants, but struck sail to
fortune and retired; yet his appetite was rather dammed then dried up; for
after a very little pause and boiling over of his sullenness, he begins to
steer again the same course, although by more certain and domestic mediums,
and if he must be shut up and confined to the Muses, resolves to be no ordinary
Servant to them; his genius led him unto natural Philosophy, which by that time
was become his proper task; which he undertakes, not as boys use to do, to
serve their present use, but with devotion, resolves to leave no secret
unattempted; adoreth Aristotle as his Tutelary Saint, and had a happiness to
enter often where others stuck, and what broke others teeth, was nuts to him,
no dark untrodden path in all his Physics or Metaphysics, but he was perfect
in it; and so drowned and devoted was he, that he seldom or never could be seen
abroad, to the wonder and amazement of his former brave companions, so that no
time passed, sine linea; His studiousnesse.
not that between the ringing and tolling of the Bell to meals; and for his
sleep he made it short; and whereas notwithstanding all endeavors, there was
one in the College that would always be up before him, he would let the
bed-cloths hang down, so that in the night they might fall off, and so the cold
awaken him; insomuch that his Tutor was constrained to read unto him
moderation, and to tell him, as their might be intemperance in meats and
drinks, so also there might be in studies; but the evil of it as yet he felt
not, the sweet and good he did, came off with honor and applause in all his
acts, and was admired in the Regent House when he sat for his degree, both by
the Posers and all the Masters that examined him, and from that time much
observed throughout the University.

About this time his Tutor [Master Bowls,] was called to the Rectory of Sutton
in Bedfordshire, and so left the Coledge, and another of the Fellows, then
Master, (afterward) Doctor Porter became his Tutor, a very learned man and
great Philosopher, who never went about for to dissuade him from his studies,
but gave him all assistance and encouragement. The year following it came unto
his Tutor to be Head-Lecturer in the College, and Sir Preston being to
problem in the Chapel, made such an accurate and strong position, and
answered so understandingly, that his Tutor borrowed his Position of him, when
he had done, to look on and peruse; and finding it elaborate, resolved to make
more use of it, then ever his Pupil did intend. The Master of the College at
that time was Doctor Tyndal, who was also Dean of Ely, and resided for the most
part there; thither his Tutor goes, and carries his Position with him, which he
showed it to the Master, and acquainted him with what he had observed, that he
was a youth of parts and worth, and deserved some encouragement; the Master was
an honest gallant man, and loved a Scholar, and was glad of any oppotunity to
show it, and so bids his Tutor send Sir Preston over unto Ely to him, where he
assured him, he should not want what was in him to do him good; and bad him
hold on, and he would take care for him: and there being an Election in the
College, soon after he was chosen Fellow by unanimous consent of Master and
Fellows, and his Tutor Master Porter brought him word of it, as he was at
study, not thinking any thing, and told him that he must come down into the
Chapel presently to be admitted, He is chosen Fellow.
and accordingly was admitted Fellow of Queens College in Cambridge Anno Dom.
1609. That is, five years after his first admission in the University: he was
not so much moved at it, as young Students use to be, because he looked still
at higher things, and had not quit in his retired thoughts his first design of
being some body at Court, to which he thought this honor might be a bar, this
courtesy was compes to him, yet it was not manners to be discontent, but
attend what should ensue; he was by this time grown a Master in Philosophy, had
waded far in Aristotle, and had met with few that were able to encounter him,
and therefore now resolves to go another while to School, to Hippocrates and
Galen, and verify what is so often said, ubi desinit Philosophus, incipit
medicus; He had a very penetrating wit, and exact and solid judgment, to
conjecture at effects in causes, He studies Physic.
and prognosticate events; and being skillful in Philosophy before, soon made
the Theory his own, but because perfectio scientiarum est in summitate, the
life and vigor of a science, is in the practice, he resolves to make enquiry
after that. Books make not men Practitioners in any Art, Nemo ex libris evasit
artifex, he retires unto a friend of his in Kent, who was very famous for his
practice, where he earnestly attended and waited on the trade and way of
knowing Simples, and compounding Medicines, wherein he attained to that
sufficiency, that had Divinity failed, he might have been another Butler; yet
what he had was not in vain; for when any of his Pupils were amiss, though he
sent them always unto Physicians, yet himself perused, and many times
corrected their Prescriptions.

It was not easy to allay his eager, and unsatisfied appetite and apprehension
with any one art, Eccl. 5.10. He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with
silver. Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit. The more you put into
the soul, the wider presently it retcheth. He thought he could not be a good
Physician, that could not read the powers of the Herbs and Plants in Stars and
Planets, His study of Astrology.
acquaints himself with Ptolomy, and other Authors in Astrology, and other
curious Arts and Calculations, as they are called, Act. 19.19. that he might be
able to study, not only Books, but Men, and to read men's fortunes in the
heavenly bodies; but he could not, nor did not read his own. There was a
Soothsayer that told Agathocles he should be slain the next month: who asked,
How long he thought he should live after him? He answered, Many years. He told
him he would prove one of the two false, and leave the other to the issue, and
so commanded for to hang him presently. Master Preston was very busy among the
houses of the Planets, but saw not there his own Domestic doom, nor what his
Maker had determined concerning him, for as he was in these celestial
contemplations, it fell out, that Master Cotton then Fellow of Emanuel
College, preached in Saint Mary's, where Master Preston hearing him, His
Conversion.
was set about another exercise, constrained from his contemplations in
Astrology, to look into himself, and consider what might possibly befall him;
it was his manner, as it is of other Students, when they come home from Saints
Mary's Sermons, to run unto their studies presently, or what is worse; but this
young Student was forced to retire and ruminate: This Sermon had breaved him of
two beloved notions, one was his low opinion of the Ministry and Preaching, for
he saw an overruling gravity and majesty in that Sermon, that he thought had
been impossible to Pulpits. I have heard it often in the College, that he took
away sixteen Answers in a Problem in the Chapel; but here was one he knew not
how to take away: Sed haeret lateri lethalis arundo, no cunning in Philosophy,
or skill in Physic would suffice to heal this wound. Another was his great
opinion of, and ambition after State-employments, for these were higher things
that now were offered to him, concernments of eternal influence, which nothing
could divert that he had studied hitherto; there have been diverse eminent and
great Physicians that began in meddling with their own infirmities. Self-love
rides always on the fore-horse. His own accounts and aching conscience, set
Luther first upon the study of Divinity. Master Preston after this affront and
baffle in the Pulpit, wanted ease, and when he could not find it in his other
Books and Studies, begins a little to look into the Bible, and to consider of
the study of Divinity. In the prosecution of his study in Philosophy, he found
many of the Schoolmen quoted, and so was willing for to look a little into
them, and finding those he light on, pithy and sententious, went on; it gave
him ease, that he was now a Student in Divinity, and had left Albumasar and
Guido, and such high-flown speculations, yet it pleased him for to see and find
his Master Aristole, so often quoted, and in such request among them, and
thought if that were to be a Preacher, he might adventure well enough upon it,
and so was drawn on very far in the study of the School-Divines. I have heard
him say, There was nothing that ever Scotus or Occham wrote, but he had weighed
and examined; he delighted much to read them in the first and oldest Editions
that could be got. I have still a Scotus in a very old print, and a paper not
inferior to parchment, that has his hand, and notes upon it throughout; yet
he continued longer in Aquinas, whose Sums he would sometimes read as the
Barbar cut his hair, and when fell upon the place he read, he would not lay
down his Book but blow it off, and in this tune he continued, until a rumor
came into the University that the King would shortly come to visit them. King
James was happier in his education, then his Mother would have had him. It
pleased God to breed a Buchanan on purpose, for to guide his younger years, and
by that time he was ripe, Scotland was grown acquainted with Geneva, and the
King no stranger unto Calvin's way. The News awakened all the University, and
there were few but promised to themselves some good from this fair gale, that
seeing promotion came neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the
South, Psalm. 75.6. it must and would come from the North; and the Proverb be
inverted, and be, Omne bonum ab Aquilone.

Doctor Harsnet, Master of Pembroke-hall was then Vice Chancellor, a prudent
well-advised Governor, who knowing well the critical and able apprehension of
the King, was very careful and sollicitous to pitch upon the ablest in every
faculty, for Actors in that solemn entertainment, and himself made choice of
Master Preston to answer the Philosophy Act, and sent unto him to provide
himself. He was ambitious enough by nature, and had this news come a little
sooner, nothing had been more suitable to his design and inclination. But now
the Gentleman was Planet-struck, grown dull and phlegmatic; Master Cottons
Sermon had so invaded him, that Kings and Courts were no such great things with
him, especially when he understood that another was resolved on for answerer.

Doctor Wren was then a very pregnant Scholar in Pembroke-hall, and also
Chaplain unto Bishop Andrews, and thought fit to be employed in this
Commencement service, but was not willing to have any other place but answerer:
the Vice Chancellor urged his promise and engagement unto Master Preston, and
his opinion of his great ability, but nothing would serve. The Vice-Chancellors
College, and the Bishops Chaplain must have Precedence, which he most
seriously excused to Master Preston, He is chosen to oppose before the King.
and endeavored to reconcile him to the first opponents place, which he
declined, as being too obnoxious unto the answerer, who is indeed the Lord and
Ruler of the Act; but there was no removing now, and so he goes about it with
much unwillingnesse, being rather driven then drawn unto it.

His great and first care was to bring his Argument unto a head, without
affronts or interruptions from the Answerer, and so made all his Major
Propositions plausible and firm, that his adversary might neither be willing
nor able to enter there, and the Minor still was backed by other Syllogismes,
and so the Argument went on unto the issue: which fell out well for Master
Preston, for in Disputations of consequence, the Answerers are many times so
fearful of the event, that they flur and trouble the opponents all they can,
and deny things evident, which had been the case in all the former Acts; there
was such wrangling about their Syllogismes, that fullied and clouded the
debates extremely, and put the Kings acumen into straits; but when Master
Preston still cleared his way, and nothing was denied, but what was ready to be
proved, the King was greatly satisfied, and gave good heed, which he might well
do, because the question was tempered and fitted unto his content; namely,
Whether Dogs could make Syllogismes.

The opponent urged that they could, an Enthymeme (said he) is a lawful and
real Syllogism, but Dogs can make them; he instanced in an Hound who has the
major Proposition in his mind, namely, The Hare is gone either this or that
way; smells out the minor with his nose; namely, She is not gone that way, and
follows the Conclusion, Ergo this way with open mouth. The instance suited with
the Auditory, and was applauded, and put the Answerer to his distinctions, that
Dogs might have sagacity, but not sapience, in things especially of prey, and
that did concern their belly, might be nasutuli, but not logici; had much in
their mouths, little in their minds, unless it had relation to their mouths;
that their lips were larger then their understandings: Which the opponent still
endeavoring to wipe off with another Syllogism, and put the Dogs upon a fresh
scent, the Moderator Doctor Read began to be afraid, and to think how
troublesome a pack of Hounds, well followed and applauded at last might prove,
and so came in into the Answerers aid, and told the Opponent that his Dogs, he
did believe, were very weary, and desired him to take them off, and start some
other Argument; and when the opponent would not yield, but hallowed still and
put them on, he interposed his authority and silenced him. The King in his
conceit was all this while upon New Market heath, and liked the sport, and
therefore stands up, and tells the Moderator plainly he was not satisfied in
all that had been answered, but did believe an Hound had more in him then was
imagined. I had my self (said he) a Dog, that straggling far from all his
fellows, had light upon a very fresh scent, but considering he was all alone,
and had none to second and assist him in it, observes the place and goes away
unto his fellows, and by such yelling arguments as they best understand,
prevailed with a party of them to go along with him, and bringing them unto the
place, pursued it unto an open view. Now the King desired for to know how this
could be contrived and carried on without the use and exercise of
understanding, or what the Moderator could have done in that case better, and
desired him that either he would think better of his Dogs, or not so highly of
himself.

The Opponent also desired leave to pursue the Kings game, which he had started
unto an issue, but the Answerer protested that his Majesty's Dogs were always
to be excepted, who hunted not by common Law, but by Prerogative. And the
Moderator fearing the King might let loose another of his Hounds, and make more
work, applies himself with all submisse devotion to the King, acknowledged his
Dogs were able to outdo him, besought his Majesty for to believe they had the
better; that he would consider how his illustrious influence had already
ripened and concocted, all their Arguments and Understandings; that whereas in
the morning the reverend and grave Divines could not make Syllogismes, the
Lawyers could not, nor the Physicians; now every Dog could, especially his
Majesty's.

All men acknowledged it it was a good bit to close with. It was grown late,
and so the Congregation was removed unto the Regent-house, and the King went
off well pleased with the business. The other Acts were easily forgotten, but
the discourse and Logic of the Dogs was fresh in mouth and memory, the
Philosophy-act applauded universally. The King commended all the Actors, but
above all, the Opponent. It was easy to discern that the Kings Hound had
opened a way for Master Preston at the Court, if he were willing; yet many of
the great ones put him in mind, and promised all assistance and encouragement.
Sir Fulke Greevill, afterward Lord Brook, was taken greatly with him, and after
many demonstrations of his real love, settled at last a stipend on him of fifty
pounds per annum, and was his friend unto his last hour; but his ambition after
Courtship was well allayed, so as he did not ravenously pursue it. But being
now resolved to be a Minister, fell to the study of modern Writers, especially
Master Calvin, whose very style and language much affected him. The Corutiers
wondered that he did not bite, Prove. 19.15. In the light of the Kings
countenance is life, and his favor like a cloud of the latter rain. That a
young man should not be ambitious, that a good eye should not see; began to be
a little jealous of him.

He was reserved naturally, and could keep counsel; few knew how Master
Cottons Sermon had affected and wrought upon him. But this not sailing when the
wind blew, begat suspicion. Some judged he was modest, and wanted opportunity
to bring him on; some that he was melancholy, and so neglected what was proper
for him to intend; some busy and intent upon his Pupils, who now began to come
from all parts. But the Politicians assured, it was some inclination unto
Puritanisme, a name now odious at Court; for it could not be, (said they) that
he should let so fair an opportunity miscarry, if he had not something else in
view. Kings think themselves exreamly undervalued, if a word be not enough;
Cardinal Poole being chosen Pope at midnight by the Conclave, and sent unto, to
come and be admitted, desired it might be let alone until the morning, because
it was not a work of darkness. An honest Argument, but not Italian enough;
Quis nisi mentis inops? And so they went back and chose another. When Balaam
came not at the first call, see how Balak reasons, Numb. 22.37. Am I not able
to promote thee? But Master Preston had indeed another King in his thoughts,
when he had found treasure in the field, he parts with all for that, Mat.
13.44. A purchase is not worth the having, that has not either some
convenience annexed, or may not some way be improved. God was a greater good
then man, Heaven then earth, a Crown of Glory then a crown of gold. But this
neglect and self-denial, was well interpreted by good men, and that opinion of
affecting Puritanes, which blasted him at Court, began to blazon him at home,
and work a reputation, that to him was more acceptable. Men thought him meet
for to be trusted with the care of youth; and many had their eyes upon him, for
their Sons or Friends. Master Morgan of Heyfords, His many Pupils.
had been sometime dead, and had left his Son and heir an Orphan, in trust with
some that were his Kinsmen, and like to manage his estate to most advantage.
This Master Morgans Son, under whose shadow these Prestons had for some time
lived, was by his Guardians now commended to his care; not only for that
relation he had to Heyfords his native Town, and to the Family, but also that
by that means the young Gentleman might be preserved from the influence of his
other Friends, who were many of them popish. King James had been so well
pleased at the Commencement held before him lately, that he resolves upon
another visit. The Heads agree to entertain him with a Comedy. There was one
Fuggles of Clare-hall, that had made a jeering Comedy against the Lawyers
called Ignoramus. This was resolved on for to be acted before the King, and
great care was taken for to furnish and accommodate all parts, with Actors
answerable. Master Morgan was a comely modest Gentleman, and it was believed,
would well become a woman's dress, and accordingly his Tutor [Master Preston
sent to,] that he would give way and all encouragement unto the service. He
liked not the motion, His zeal.
could not believe that his Friends intended he should be a Player, and so
desired to be excused. But the Guardians were not so exact and scrupulous, but
though if he played this Game well, he might win more then could be hoped for
elsewhere; and so Master Morgan was allowed by his Guardians to play his part,
and afterward removed unto Oxford, and suffered to play what part he would, and
so relapsed unto Popery, which has proved fatal and unfortunate to him and his.

But here was matter for Mr. Prestons back Friends, to argue he was not a
Courtier, that would envy so small a courtesy to those, that had so freely
offered greater unto him; and it was resented with a kind of angry indignation,
that their offers had so little influence upon him; and there were some that
watched opportunities to make him sensible of this neglect. There is no such
Soloecisme at Court as Independency. S^ non vis ut per illos tibi been sit,
efficient ut sit male. But Master Preston by this time had cast up all
accounts, and resolved to stand unto his bargain whatsoever it cost him. Only
he thought if he must be a Puritan, and bid farewell to all his carnal and
Court-designes; He would not be one of the lower rank, but would get places if
he could. Mediocribus esse Poetis, non dii, non homines, non concessere
columnae. That counsel of the wise man, Eccl. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand
finds to do, do it with all thy might, he always practiced. And what is
commonly said, was true in him. In magnis ingeniis nihil mediocre. This
faithfulness to Master Morgan, attended with so great a shadow upon himself,
increased his reputation in the Country, His diligence.
so that now he was accounted the only Tutor; and being careful to read unto
them, and direct their studies, he found himself abridged of his own time, and
was constrained to take up time, that should have been bestowed on his body. He
also grew acquainted now with many eminent and godly Ministers, as Master Dod,
and Master Hildersham, who would come often to his Chamber, and he was so
hardened in his way, that he would get them many times to go to Prayer with his
Pupils, a boldness not adventured on by any other; but by these labors his
able body was debilitated. It was a great Orator that said, Primo desii velle
causas agere, deinde desii posse. At first, said he, I would not plead, at last
I could not. Master Preston in his youth would not sleep, but let the
bed-cloathes hang down, and awaken him: Now he could not, but about midnight
still awakened, and slept no more; whereby in time his body languished, and
could not answer as in former times. Master Butler of Clare-hall, was then the
Oracle in Physic, to him he goes, and opens his condition to him; who after
some few questions bids him take Tobacco, and so leaves him. He knew that
Butler was odd and humourous, and thought he might give this advice to try
him, and therefore resolves to wait a while before he meddled with so odd a
Medicine, which Hippocrates and Galen had never ordained to any of their
Patients, and was at that time not so common, and of no good report; but his
want of rest continuing, and his appetite unto his Book increasing, he goes
again to Master Butler, as a stranger, and propounds the case again. Master
Butler gives the same advice, and being satisfied that he was serious now,
falls to taking of it, and found that this hot copious fume ascending, did draw
those crudities from the stomachs mouth, that hindered concoction of his meat,
and vapors from it that occasion sleep, and so restored his rest, and that in
time his strength, and so he went on in his work, until Doctor Tyndal [Master
of the Colledge] died. He was an old man, and that preferment of the Mastership
of Queens, was more accounted of then now it is. There were very many that had
their eyes upon it, but Doctor Mountain in a special manner, who was often
heard for to profess he would rather be Master of that College then Dean of
Westminster. But Master Preston had another in his eye, Doctor Davenant, was a
Gentleman descended, and was a Fellow-Commoner, when under Graduate, but very
painful, and of great capacity, and grew accordingly in learning and in
reputation, and for his worth and parts was already chosen Margaret Professor,
and read in the Schools with much applause, those excellent Lectures upon the
Colossians which now are printed; him Master Preston pitched upon, but knew it
must be carried very privately; for the mountain was already grown into some
bigness, was one of parts, and first observed in acting Miles gloriosus in the
College, and had been Chaplain unto the Earl of Essex, but like the Heliotrope
or flower of the Sun, did now adore Sir Robert Carr, already Viscount
Rochester, the only Favorite. When it was agreed among the Persians, that he
should reign, whose horse first saw the rising Sun, and neighed at it, one
turned his horse head toward the mountains, beleiving that the Sun would first
arise there; but it fell not out so here. Master Preston having laid his plot
beforehand, and seen what mountain was in his way, had taken care that word
should be daily brought him how the old Doctor did, and when he found him
irrecoverable, laid horses and all things ready; and upon notice of his being
dead, goes presently and was at London, and in White Hall before any light
appeared on the mountain top; the Court was quiet, and he had some Friends
there. His business only was to get a free Election, which he made means for
to procure: but knowing also with whom he had to do, makes some addresses unto
Viscount Rochester, in the behalf of Doctor Davenant, who being unacquainted
with his Chaplains appetite to that particular, was fair and willing to
befriend a learned enterprise. So Master Preston returns unto the College
before the Masters death was much took notice of; and assembling Doctor
Davenants Friends, acquaints them with what had past at Court, and so they went
immediately to Election, and it was easily and fairly carried for Doctor
Davenant, who being called, was admitted presently. But when Doctor Mountain
understood that Doctor Tyndal was departed, he sends and goes to Court and
College for to make friends: But alas the Game was played, and he was shut
out. Never did Aetna or Vesuvius more fume, but there was no cure; only he
threatens* and takes on against the Actors, but they were innocent and not
obnoxious. This Doctor had made great promises, gave a very goodly piece of
Plate unto the College with this Inscription, Sic incipio, but now he vowed it
should be Sic desino. However the College for the present was well apaid, and
grew in reputation very much; and because they wanted room to entertain the
numbers that flocked to them, built that goodly Fabric that contains many fair
lodgings both for Scholars and Fellows, toward Kings College.

It was not long before it came to Master Prestons course for to be Dean and
Catechist, which he resolved to improve by going through a Body of Divinity,
that might be a guide unto the Scholars in their Studies in Divinity: for it
was not his opinion that others should do as he had done, that is, peruse the
Schoolmen first, and then come to the modern Writers; but first read Sums and
Systemes in Divinity, and settle their opinions and judgments, and then read
Fathers, Schoolmen, or what they had a mind to. This being known, and some
honest Townsmen hearing him at first by chance, there came the next day very
many for to hear him, and the next day more, both Townsmen and Scholars from
other Colleges, so that the outward Chapel would be often full before the
Fellows came. Master Preston was of a very meek and quiet spirit, never
resented injuries, nor provoked any unto averseness, yet had some enemies: Si
injuria multos tibi fecit inimicos, faciet invidia multos. What had Paul done,
Act. 13.45. for to deserve so sharp an opposition, but envy moved them? There
had been other Deans and Catechists before this Gentleman, yet no such
crowding. Complaint was made to the Vice Chancellor of this unusual kind of
Catechizing, it was assured, not only that Townsmen and Scholars mingled, but
other Colleges intruded also, that the Fellows for the crowd and multitude
could not get through, and come to Chapel to their places; that it was not
safe for any man to be thus adored, and doted on, unless they had a mind to
cry up Puritanisme, which would in short time pull them down; that the Crosier
staff would not support them long, if such Assemblies were encouraged: Obsta
principiis, sero medicina paratur, etc.

Well, upon the whole an Order was agreed on in the Consistory, and sent unto
the College, that the Scholars and Townsmen should be confined to their proper
Preachers, that no stranger, neither Townsman nor Scholar, should presume on
any pretense whatsoever, to come unto those Lectures, that were proper only to
the Members of the College. The Edict was observed punctually, and the
Auditory by it much impaired. Had strangers still been suffered to attend,
those Sermons had been printed as well as others: for there were diverse that
exactly noted, and wrote out all fair, unto the time of this restraint, but no
one after that could go on with it, and so it rests. But he went on, and was
assiduous to the years end, and waded through it, which was a very great help
unto many of his Pupils, who made the greater benefit of those things, because
they were not common and in Print.

About that time the Lecture at Trinity-Church, and the Sermons at Saint
Andrews were prohibited, and the Scholars all confined to Saint Mary's, which
did occasion Master Preston to read Divinity unto his Pupils on the Lords days,
at three of the clock in the afternoon, which he also often did upon the week
days; but the Townsmen and the Scholars of other Colleges, that had tasted of
his spirit in the Chapel, endeavored that he would do it where they might
hear. Buttolphs belongs unto Queens College, and is usually supplied by one of
that House; there he is willing to make a trial, how it would take, and
resolves the next Lords day to preach at three of the clock after Saint Mary's
Sermons should be ended; which though but very little known, occasioned such a
throng and crowd, as was incredible. Men were not cloyed with preaching then,
nor waxed wanton. There dwelt then in the Parish one Doctor Newcombe, a
Civilian, and Commissary to the Chancellor of Ely, who being in the Church,
and seeing the crowd, commanded that evening Prayer only should be read, but no
Sermon; the Minister entreated that for that time Master Preston might be
allowed to preach, so did the Earl of Lincoln and others in the Church; but he
was resolute, and because he would not be further importuned, went home with
all his Family, and left them to determine at their peril what they would do;
so upon advice it was concluded that the Sermon should go on, and Master
Preston preached a very favoury and holy Sermon, upon 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. There
was so much time spent in debates about it, and messages before the Commissary
left the Congregation, that it was too late to do both, and therefore they
adventured for that time to forbear Common Prayer, that so the Scholars might
depart, and be at Colledge-Prayers. But this instructed Doctor Newcomb in his
complaint. The Court was then near hand, that is, at New Market; thither the
Commissary goes the next day, and having the Bishop of Ely there, and many
other Clergy men, assures them that Master Preston was in heart, and would
quickly be in practice a Nonconformist, and was so followed and adored in the
University, that unless some speedy course were taken with him, they might
cast their caps at all Conformity, and see their power trodden underfoot, and
told them gentleness was not the way, for he was cunning, and would recover
all if he were not seriously and thoroughly dealt with.

There was no Advocate for Master Preston, but the Doctor being first in his
own cause, seemed just, Prove. 18.17. And spoke to those that were willing to
believe. The Puritans began to be considerable, and they doubted he might come
in time to head them. It Is a great security to a man to be despised: Contempto
nullus diligenter nocet. A Fellow that has nothing in him, nor is not owned,
may be exorbitant, as he of one in his time: Contemptu jam liber erat. But
David that has a Party following him, must have an Army to attend him. And
therefore he did wisely to profess himself to be a dead dog or a flea, 1 Samuel
24.14. The King was made acquainted with this complaint, and assured that
Master Preston had as strong an influence into the Puritants as the principal
of the Jesuits, which was Aqua Viva, had upon them, and therefore it behoved
him to consider what to do. A word was enough to a wise and jealous King, who
did not love to play an after Game, and therefore hears himself the Doctors
information; enquires whether the Bishops and Chancellors Jurisdiction extended
unto Members of a College, and finally concludes to proceed against him by the
power of the University. A Letter is framed unto Doctor Scot, Master of
Clare-hall, Vice Chancellor at that time, and to the Heads, to call before
them Master Preston, to give a strict account of that notorious disobedience
unto the Commissary; he answers mildly, that he was not guilty; refers himself
unto the Auditory, that evening Prayer was omitted, because the Scholars might
depart in due time, seeing the time alloted for it, was spent in treating with
the Commissary, not out of any disrespect unto the service, which he himself
did usually attend at other times. When the Wolf complained that the Lamb had
fouled the water, that he was to drink; The Lamb answered that if he had
defiled it, yet that could not prejudice the Wolf who was above, and the mud
would certainly be carried downward; but this answer did not fill the hungry
belly of the Wolf. Master Prestons innocence did aggravate his crime, which was
his popularity, and therefore they told him they were engaged to support by all
just means the Bishops Jurisdiction, that the King had honored him, in
leaving that affront to be examined by his proper Judges, and that except he
could take off the Court, they must and would proceed to a very round and
serious censure.

Musa mihi causas memora, quo numine laeso,
Quidve dolens regina deum, tot volvere casus,
Insignem pietate virum, tot adire labores
Impulerit; tantaene animis coelestibus irae?
That a Fellow of a College for preaching of an innocent and honest Sermon, in
a Church belonging to the College, by the consent and in the hearing of the
Incumbent, should be thus vigorously undertaken.

Among many other Gentlemen of quality, that were Pupils unto Master Preston at
this time, there was one Sir Capel Bedels, an Orphan, of a very fair estate in
Huntingtonshire, a Daughters Son of old Sir Arthur Capel, who being Guardian
to his Grandchild, had recommended him as he had done many of his own Sons
unto his Government. It was a great trust, and Master Prestons care was
answerable. And because plus vident oculi, he had his spies, that gave him
notice of all their carriages and correspondencies; by one of these he was
informed that Sir Capel haunted Doctor Newcombs house, and was familiar with
his Daughter [Mistress Jane Newcomb,] a very proper well-bred Gentlewoman; his
Tutor asked if they were contracted, he answered, no, but would be very
shortly, as he was told, for he was resolved to have her. Master Preston
charged him to keep all secret, that Sir Capel might not think he was
acguainted with it, and immediately appoints a journey unto Saffron-walden, to
take the air, and see that stately pyle at Audley-end, and takes diverse of his
Fellow-Commoners along, as he used to do at other times; and among others, this
Sir Capel Bedels: When they had dined and viewed the house, it was propounded
by one of them, that they might go that night to Haddam, and visit old Sir
Arthur Capel, seeing they were thus far on their way, and it was late. Master
Preston seemed to be indifferent, and so the Proposition took, and with none
more then with Sir Capel, who knew his Grandfather would fill his pockets, and
that would sweeten his Newcomb Mistress next embraces, and make him welcome to
her. The old Knight was glad to entertain such welcome guests, and that night
there was no discourse, but of the stately Rooms, and goodly Gallery at
Audley-end, and so the young men went to bed pleased, that the Colledge-bell
next morning would not awaken them; but Master Preston slept not in utramque
aurem, but awakened betimes, and acquaints Sir Arthur with all the business,
advises him, by no means to permit the Gentleman's return unto the College;
for though the wound might seem quite cured, and he never so much engage
forbearance, yet frequent apparitions would redintegrate: Et nihil facilius
quam amor recrudescit. Sir Arthur was a very wise man, and had experience of
the world, thanks Master Preston for his faithfulness; pretends Sir Capel
wanted something, and desires his Tutor to give him leave to stay a little
while until he could be furnished, and then he should be sent, to which the
Tutor easily consented, and so the rest went home; and after a while the old
man tells Sir Capel he grew in bigness, and it would be fit for him to travel
before he settled, and he prevails with him to be content.

But what says Mistress Newcomb, who is robbed by this means of her vowed and
resolved servant, and her crafty Father that beholds so good a morsel snatched
from between his teeth; do ye think he had forgotten this when Master Preston
came to preach within his Jurisdiction? Pulvere qui laedunt, sed laesi marmore
scribunt, other injuries perhaps may be forgotten, but loss of money is not;
ploratur lachrym^s amissa pecunia veris.

Master Preston was not altogether a stranger at the Court, however now there
was no remedy; when he came to New Market, he found that Bishop Andrews, then
Bishop of Ely, was chief, and that his Jurisdiction in the Commissary, was it
that was pretended to be affronted, and therefore applied himself to him, and
told him that he did not purpose to offend, but being engaged for to preach at
that time, could not with honor disappoint the Auditory; if he suspected him
for any thing, desired he would examine him, and satisfy himself. The Bishop
told him the King was told he was an enemy to Forms of Prayer, and held no
Prayer lawful but conceived; and therefore being popular, his judgment and
opinion might do hurt. Master Preston answered that it was a slander, for he
thought Set Forms lawful, and refused not on all occasions to be present at
the Colledge-Prayers, and when it was his turn, to read them. The Bishop
answered, that he was glad, and would inform the King, and do him all the good
he could, and bad him wait a while, and then repair again to him for
satisfaction in it, and so time passed on, and there was nothing done. There
were some at Court that wished well to Master Preston, Sed lapsuro assistere
formidant, were loath to undertake a drooping cause; only there was one Doctor
Young, an honest Scotchman, that was Dean of Winchester, and he told Master
Preston plainly, The Bishops Hypocrisy.
that Bishop Andrews was his greatest adversary, and though he gave him good
words, yet had assured the King, that if Master Preston were not for this
expeld the University, Lord Bishops would not long continue; but because Master
Preston was accounted, and not without cause, a learned man, he was not willing
to appear against him; but desired the punishment might be inflicted, where the
fact was done, and that was in the University.

Master Preston saw now that the Bishop was a Courtier, and could give words,
where deeds were not intended, and therefore goes again unto the Bishop, and
tells him plainly that he or none must put a period to his attendance, His
courage.
and that either he would speak unto the King in his behalf, or tell him
plainly that he would not, that he might know whence all this trouble flowed.
The Bishop paused a while on this bold carriage, and at the last bad him come
to him such a time again, and he would deal with the King in his behalf.

So he goes unto the King, and tells him that however Master Preston was very
dangerous, and it would be a very great security if he were handsomely
expelled, yet he doubted it would not hear well, if it should be done for this
offense; for he would be absolved in the opinions and minds of men, and be
owned and applauded as their Martyr, and might perhaps recover, and live to be
revenged; and therefore thought it would be better, for to enjoin him to
declare his judgment about Forms of Prayer; for that would be accounted a
recantation, and however would weaken his reputation, with the Puritans, which
would be enough: for if they could divide him from his Party, they should not
fear him; for he said, his carriage argued confidence in some assistance, which
when they had removed, they should be strong enough at single hand. All that
the Bishop spoke, was as if ex tripode; and order presently was drawn, and sent
to the Vice Chancellor, that Master Preston should in Buttolphs Church declare
his judgment, concerning Forms of Prayer, on such a Sunday, or else they
should immediately proceed against him, according to their first instructions.

Master Preston was glad there was a way out, but sensible of the hard hand,
that had been carried toward him; but now there was no remedy, and it was vain
to strive against the stream; but before he could come home, the news was all
about the Town, that Master Preston was to preach a Recantation Sermon at
Buttolphs Church on such a day. This was good sport to the brave blades, who
now came crowding as fast as any, for to hear, and it was no sin now for any
body to be from Prayers; and indeed there was a very great Assembly, though he
did all he could to have concealed it. So he went on upon his former text, and
preached a very profitable Sermon, concerning growing in grace, and directed
Prayer, as a special means to make men grow in grace. Now that (he said) was
of two sorts, His Prudence.
either that which was sudden, extemporary, and conceived; or set, enjoined,
and prescribed before, not only for the sense and scope, but also words and
phrases. And whereas some thought this was to stint the spirit, he said, there
was a liberty to use conceived Prayer at other times, wherein the spirit might
expatiate, and enlarge it self; and also the intention of the mind, though not
in extension and variety of language. The Blades that came to laugh, had no
great cause to do it, for this passage was at the very close; and the Sermon
all along before, was sharp and searching; both sides were silent and went
home, not without some prints of good upon their spirits: Optimus Orator
censendus, non qui meruit auditorum judicium, sed qui abstulit. He makes the
best speech that binds his Hearers, rather to think what was said, then who
said it. The good fellows were nothing so merry at the end, as at the beginning
of the Sermon. Indifferent Hearers praised all, and were confirmed in a good
opinion of the Preacher. Good men were glad he came so well off, and was at
liberty to preach again, where they might hear him: himself was troubled, lest
any thing he said, should be mistaken or mis-interpreted, as he was apt to be.

But there were many eyes upon this action, and all men waited to see the
issue. The Courtiers did not like it, that after all these tossings to and fro,
he should thus light upon his feet, yet would not meddle for the present, but
wait occasions. Those that were well-affected, were glad he was engaged against
the Court and Bishops, and did presage he might be instrumental to their
downfall, and every body labored to engage him more and more against them. The
Spanish match was then the common talk, and great unwillingnesse appeared in
the people generally; and Doctor Willet had presumed to offer Arguments unto
the King against matching with Idolaters. The King was greatly vexed at this
adventure, and took great pains to persuade the Doctor, that a Papist was not
an Idolater: Sed non persuadebat etiamsi persuaserat. The people were
unsatisfied, and there being then a Parliament, a very Honorable and able
Member of the House of Lords prevailed with Master Preston to write some
Arguments against it. And though there were severe Edicts and Proclamations
against scandalous Papers, and intermedling with Mysteries of State, yet he
promised, it should be scattered and divulged unto fit persons, and none should
know from whence, or from whom it came; accordingly when it was finished and
written fair, one gave it to a Porter, whom he met in Holborne, and bad him
leave it, according to the direction. The next day a great Lord comes unto him,
that had persuaded Master Preston unto the service, and tells him, that he had
met with such a piece against the Spanish match, as he never saw, and protested
he was convinced, that he must speak against it in the House, what ever came of
it. The other asked him who made it, and where he had it: he assured him, he
knew not, but it was left at his lodging, by he knew not whom. The Lord desired
he might see it, and so it was copied out, and spread among those of the
Parliament they thought fit, but the Author of it never known.

King James had something always in his Writings and Speeches against the
Puritans, which was ill taken, for that it was apparent, those meant thereby,
were godly, conscientious persons. The House of Commons was the only mote in
King James his eye, the Remora, (as he conceived) unto his absolute dominion,
for he knew not how for to engaged them, as he did the Lawyers and Divines; but
if he stopped one mouth with preferment this Parliament, there would be others
open the next against him. There were some now that adventured to apologize for
Puritans, and to say in Parliament, that honest men were wounded under that
name; and to propose that godly Ministers might not be silenced, and thrown out
of their Free-holds for trifles and Ceremonies. But King James would none of
that stuff, breaks up the Parliament, and sets out Proclamations: Sed quid
prodest totius regionis silentium, si affectus fremant. People love not to be
enforced unto duty: Homines duci volunt non cogi.

The Chaplains that attended monthly at the Court, were not ambitious of
preaching over-often, and so a Combination was agreed on for Preachers before
the King, when ever he should lie within twelve miles of Cambridge: The King
did not despair of making Scholars his, and therefore used all endeavors to
oblige them, especially Cambridge men, where a seed of Puritans had been a long
time; and though the Plains about Royston and New Market afforded better
Winter-game then elsewhere; yet Scholars he conceived might be caught
sometimes, as well as Hares, and so was willing they should preach before him.
Young men he knew would preach themselves: Omnis oration docet, aut rem, aut
animum dicentis. He should learn either things, or persons.

By this means it came to Master Prestons turn to preach before the King at
Royston; he was so muffled at Court in Doctor Newcombs business that he knew
not what to do, could not decline it altogether, for that would have exposed
him unto too much observation; and yet he greatly feared what might befall him
in the doing of it: therefore he changed his course with one that was to preach
a little after, and did it very privately, that if his enemies should have
designs, they might be disappointed, and so it was not much known. When he was
to preach, it fell out that his course came upon a Tuesday, when the King did
lie at Finching brook; the Court was very thin, and the Prince and Duke of
Buckingham were both abroad, and the King himself was for an hunting match that
day, and gave order that the Sermon should begin at eight of the clock. Master
Preston had some at the Court that were solicitous as well as he, and they told
him it would give very great content, if he would take some occasion in the
Sermon, to show his judgment, as he had done before about Se^ Forms. Doctor
Young Deane of Winchester, Master Preston preaches before the King.
(of whom we spoke before) did then attend, and when the King came in, and sat
down in the chair, he told him who it was that preached, and said, he hoped he
would give content; I pray God he do, said the King. The Sermon is in print,
upon John 1.16. which he so clearly opened and applied, that the King sat all
the while as quiet as could be, and never stirred nor spoke to any body, but by
his looks discovered he was pleased; when all was done, he came unto him as the
manner was to kiss his hand; and the King asked him of what Preston he was
descended, he answered of that in Lancashire: Then said the King, you have many
of your name and kindred very eminent; and Preston the Priest, although a
Papist, is a very learned man.

Great haste was made to bring in dinner, and the King was very pleasant all
the time, had his eye continually upon Master Preston, and spoke of diverse
passages in the Sermon with much content, especially that of the Arminians
putting God into the same extremity, that Darius was put in, Dan. 6. when he
would have saved Daniel, but could not: but as soon as ever he was retired, the
Marquess Hamilton kneeled down, and besought him, that he might commend the
Preacher to him for his Chaplain, protested he did not so much as know him, but
that he was moved by the weight and strength of that he had delivered; told
him, he spoke no pen and ink-horn language, but as one that comprehended, what
he said, and that he could not but have substance and matter in him. The King
acknowledged all, but said it was too early, remembered New Market business,
and was reserved.

Sir Ralph Freeman, one of the Masters of Requests, had married a Kinswoman of
the Duke of Buckhinghams, and was a Kinsman unto Master Preston; he makes
relation of the business unto the Duke, and told him, if now he would appear
in favor of his Cousin Preston, he might oblige the Puritans, and lay a
groundwork for his own security, if tempests should arise; assured him that
Master Preston was ingenuous, and might be made, that the King and all the
Court were taken with the Sermon, and did approve it. The Duke of Buckingham
was a wise man, and apprehensive of what Sir Ralph suggested seasonably, saw
those they called Puritans were growing, and in the Parliament were thought
considerable, knew that the Kings affections might cool, and he might need
friends, and took Sir Ralphs discourse into his most serious thoughts. An
honest man, one Master Packer, was then his Secretary, and he set on what Sir
Ralph Freeman had suggested, and so it came unto a resolution, that Master
Preston should be owned; and the Duke commanded Sir Ralph Freeman, to go to
Master Preston from him, and acquaint him with his good opinion of him, and
desire to see him; and indeed there was such a concurrence, and concentring of
opinions and desires among the Courtiers, that it was assured Master Preston,
he might be Chaplain unto whom he would, and that was now the deliberation,
which of these offers he should accept, and whom he would acknowledge his
Patron and Protector for the time to come. There was not so few Clergy men at
Court at any time, and so no kind of opposition; yet the King himself hung
back, and would do nothing hastily; he was not reconcilable unto the Puritans,
and so desired not in that respect for to engage him; but he desired to deprive
them of Master Preston, and to divide him from them, and would do any thing
that might drive that on; and considering how many he had won, that Master
Preston was a young man and might be drawn on, he would not hinder nor oppose;
so it was the joint opinion of all his friends, that the best preferment was to
be the Princes Chaplain, who then was grown and had an household. This therefore
was represented unto Sir Ralph Freeman, and his opinion required, who quickly
yielded and proposed it unto the Duke: both Prince and Duke had been abroad,
and neither of them heard the Sermon; when therefore Master Preston was brought
unto the Duke, he very seriously received him; told him it was the Prince his
unhappiness and his, to be absent when he did preach, and therefore desired
him that he would vouchsafe a Copy of his Sermon to him, and believe that he
would be ready, to the best and utmost of his power to serve him.

There were many other Courtiers that desired Copies of the Sermon, and the
Court not staying there, Master Preston came home to furnish Copies. He never
penned Sermon word for word but wrote what came into his mind, and as it came,
and that in no good hand; and so it was a business to provide these Copies,
which yet he seriously attended till they were written fair, and then to Court
he goes, where the Duke presents him to the Prince, and so he was made and
admitted Chaplain to the Prince in Ordinary; He is made the Prince his Chaplain.
for as then the Prince had not completed the number he intended, which was
six, who were accordingly to wait two months by the year, and preach unto the
household upon the Lords days, and perform such duties as were required of them.

But God was making other work for Master Preston; for Doctor Tolson, Bishop of
Salisbury dies, and leaves a Wife and many Children unprovided for; for he had
been Bishop but a little while. This Wife of his was Doctor Davenants Sister;
in pity therefore and commiseration of her case, it was proposed to the King by
those that were his Friends, that Doctor Davenant, a single man, and
well-deserving, might succeed his Brother in the Bishopric, and so make some
provision for his Children. The King thought very well of Doctor Davenant, not
only for his singular abilities and labors in the University, but for his
pains also, and service in the Synod of Dort against Arminius; and it was
looked on as a deed of charity, and so believed he would carry it, and be the
man.

But this created Master Prestons cares; Doctor Davenant had been his constant
and faithful Friend, and given countenance upon all occasions to him and all
his Pupils. But now who should succeed? and where should Master Preston find
another shelter? The Fellows for the most part were not his Friends, envied his
numbers, and great relations, and there was no man like so to befriend him.
Besides, the Margaret-Professors place would be void also by this remove, and
many able stirring Batchelors in Divinity, proposed unto him that place, and
assured him the Election would be easily carried for him.

The truth is, he had no great hope to do any great good in the Election of the
Master of the College, and one Doctor Mansel being named, a very moderate
good-natured man, he let that care fall, and was more anxious about the
Professors place; for though sound doctrine in the University was of much use,
yet English preaching was like to work more, and win more souls to God.

He always highly valued, and frequently consulted with Master Dod; and he
persuaded English preaching, as that wherein God was more immediately served,
and said, there were others that might supply the University in the Professors
place, that either could not, or would not labor men's Conversion. And indeed
the Master of Sidney-Colledge Doctor Ward, a vast Scholar, was then in view and
nomination for the Professors place; yet Master Preston was so solicited by
honest men, that he knew not what to do: Two things he thought he wanted to
enable him. The one was a Latin tongue, the other a Latin style; in both
which, by reason of desuetude, he was unready. For his style therefore, he
resolves upon an exact and logical Analysis of all the Epistles, which would
actuate and exercise his style, and acquaint him with the Scripture Phrase and
language; and if he were called to be Professor, might serve for Lectures in
the Schools; which work he immediately applied himself unto, and very happily
completed a work of great pains unto him, and in it self of great worth; but
being Latin, and written only with his own ill hand, was not thought popular
enough to come abroad, but lies in the dark.

For the exercising of his Latin tongue, he resolves a journey into the
Netherlands, where he should have much occasion of speaking Latin, and see
those Colleges and Universities; but there was no traveling beyond Sea,
without a License under the hands of Privy-Counsellors; this he procures among
his Friends with all the secrecy that could be, and a great while before he
meant to use it, that he might conceal it from the College and University;
but this his secrecy begat suspicion that there was some plot. Velle putant
quodcunque potest: It is not safe for men to have abilities. It was resented so
much the more, because no Clergy man was made acquainted with it, and the
opinion was, that something was brewing against Episcopacy. This they were sure
of, that Amsterdam was in the Netherlands, and ever had been fatal to the
Hierarchy. The Lord Keeper then was Bishop Williams, he sees this plague afar
off, Prove. 22.3. and provides a Messenger to go along unknown to Master
Preston, that should observe and give intelligence weekly of all that passed:
Integer vitae scelerisque purus, non eget Jaculis nec arcu. A breast plate of
righteousness is a better guard then a shirt or coat of male. It was David's
uprightness that did preserve him, Psalm. 25.21. so was it Master Prestons, for
he knew nothing of this attendance, till after his return, but gave out in the
College, and among his Pupils, that he would go the next Vacation into Kent,
to visit Sir Richard Sands, and drink if he saw cause, the Tunbridge waters,
concludes to take one of his Pupils with him, a Yorkshire Gentleman, Sir Henry
Slingsbys Son and Heir; and did accordingly acquaint his Father and make
Provision for it long before. The time came, His travel in the Low Countries.
and he goes into Kent, and is received in the passage boat for Rotterdam, in
the garb and notion of a Gentleman, with his skarlet cloak and gold hatband,
and all things answerable; and so goes over all the Provinces, both Protestant
and Popish, where there was any thing observable, and encounters frequently
with diverse Priests and Jesuits, professing himself a Protestant Gentleman
that was willing to find out the truth, and try all Tenants, and accordingly
was courted by them very much, and solicited to be a Papist; and they gave him
very many popish Books, and so he came back into Kent, and to the College at
the time appointed, unknown to any in the College, but only one of his Pupils,
from whom he seldom concealed any thing. He was no sooner settled in the
College, but a rumor flies abroad, that Master Preston had been beyond the
Seas; he showed them that it was incredible, and wonders at their silliness,
that they would believe so unlikely a relation; the matter was not great, now
all was past, and so it rested doubtful and undetermined.

He had a long time been successful in the way of Pupils, but Doctor
Davenants leaving of the College troubled him. A great Tutor, has much
occasion to use the Masters influence, for accommodation and advancement of his
Pupils, which now he saw he could not promise unto himself; and it fell out
much about this time, that Doctor Dunn, Preacher at Lincolns-Inne died, and
some in that society proposed that Master Preston might be tried whether he
were willing to accept that place for Term time: He was himself, neither
careless, nor cracking of his good name: Famae nec incuriosus, nec venditator.
But it was much grown by reason of his success in the conflicts and encounters
he had at Court. It was some refreshing unto honest men, that Master Preston,
so resolute, and constant in the ways of God, was yet the Prince his Chaplin,
and helped forward the desire of these men; it suited with him, to have an
opportunity to exercise his Ministry in a considerable and intelligent
Congregation, where he was assured, many Parliament men, and others of his best
acquaintance would be his hearers; He is chosen to Lincolns-Inne.
and where in Term time, he should be well accommodated, so he consented and
undertook the place; the Chapel then was very little, and at the first, the
numbers that attended on his Ministry, besides their own society, were few, but
when the Chapel was new built, as now it is, the numbers were exceeding great,
that were his constant hearers, and foundations laid, that will not easily be
ruined.

This was some ease unto his grieved mind, for Doctor Davenants leaving of the
College and University; but filled not his great capacity and large desire of
doing good; the College he gave over in his thoughts, but not the University,
where his Preaching was much resented, and made great impressions; and though
at Lincolns-Inne he had Gown-men to be his Hearers, yet they were not like to
propagate and spread it. A Preacher in the University, does generare patres,
beget begetters, and transmit unto posterity, what God is pleased to reveal to
him; In a word, does what the Apostle does enjoin, 2 Timothy 2.2. and he of all
men, thirsted after opportunities of doing service, and might well say with the
Spouse, that he was sick of love, Cant. 2.5.

Some of the Fellows of Emanuel College were very eminent for parts and
learning, yet clouded and obscured, (as they thought) by an opinion that lay
upon the College, that they were Puritans, that is, not only Godly and
Religious, (for so they were, and were content to be esteemed) but
non-conformists, and averse to Government; for which cause there had been
lately some alteration made, both in their Chapel, and manner of their diet;
they thought therefore, if they could prevail with Doctor Chaderton their
present Master, to resign, who was established in it by the Founder, and named
in the Statute, but was grown very old, and had outlived many of those great
relations, which he had before, they might perhaps procure that Master Preston
might succeed him, and bring the College into reputation, being a good man,
and yet a Courtier, the Prince his Chaplin, and very gracious with the Duke of
Buckingham. But this was sooner said then done, the old Doctor was exceeding
wary and jealous not only of his own disparagement, but especially of the good
and welfare of that brave foundation that had grown and flourished under his
Government so long; for if it were but known that he were out, there were
diverse lay in wait to get a Mandate, and come in against their minds; a fresh
example whereof they had lately seen in their next neighbors, Christ's
College, where after Master Pemberton was chosen, Doctor Carew Dean of Exeter,
was forced on them, and did all he could to mould a new, and alter the
constitution and genius of the College. But the Fellows answered, that this
might be better hindered and prevented whilst he was alive, then at his death;
for his resignation might be carried privately, but his death could not, and if
all the Fellows were content, the Election might be past before the resignation
were discovered; and so they promised to found and try the judgment of the
other Fellows, and then repair again unto him.

There were two things in the College that (in their Opinions) greatly pinched
them. The one was the Statute for attendance and continuance whilst they were
Fellows, so that they had not opportunity to live in Noble-mens Houses, or take
Lectures to exercise their Ministry, and make themselves known unto such as had
it in their power to prefer them. Another was the Statute of departing at such
a standing, whether they were provided or not provided; and there was then a
fresh example in Doctor Traverse, a man of great worth, yet forced to sojourn
as a Fellow-Commoner in Christ's College until he could be better
accommodated; the Fellows therefore were easily induced to affect this change;
for they thought Master Preston might be an instrument by reason of his great
acquaintance, either to get some mitigation of the Statute, or procure more
livings to be annexed to the College for their preferment.

So they returned to the old man, and told him that the Fellows were all
agreed, and ready to do what he should prescribe, and it rested now in him to
prevent the danger that did threaten, not only them in their particular
concernments, but the growing good and welfare also of the College. The poor
man wist not what to do; to outlive the Mastership he thought was to outlive
himself, and to go into his grave alive; yet he honored and loved Master
Preston very much, and could not answer that dilemma of the Colledge-safety;
therefore he told them he would not be wanting to the Colledge-good, but it
concerned them as well as himself, to provide they were not cheated, and
another forced on them, whether they would or not; and therefore desired that
Master Preston might be requested to deal with his Friends at Court, and
procure some promise that there should be no Mandate granted, in case his
resignation should be known; he told them likewise how unprovided he was for
maintenance, when that was gone, and how unseemly it would be for him now in
his old age for to want, and therefore desired he might be taken in this
particular into consideration. But Master Preston quickly eased the old man of
all these fears, by procuring a Letter from the Duke of Buckingham in these
words.

Sir,
The Duke of Buckinghams Letter.
I Have moved his Majesty, concerning Master Preston's succeeding of you, in
the Mastership of Emanuel College, who is not only willing, but is also
graciously pleased to recommend him to the place in especial manner before any
other; so that in making this way for him, you shall do a very acceptable thing
to his Majesty, as also to the Prince his Master, of which I am likewise to
give you notice, and to put you out of all doubt, that another may be thrust
upon you; you shall not need to fear any thing, in regard that from his Majesty
there will be no hinderance to his succession; and for that point of supply of
maintenance, I shall (as I promised) take care for to procure it, when fit
occasion shall be offered; so taking kindly what you have done, I rest.

Theobalds, Sept. 20. 1622. Your very loving Friend, G. Buckingham.


When the Doctor had received and read this Letter, he was in all things
satisfied, as to the Court, but they all knew that Doctor Traverse lay in wait
for this preferment; for being outed by the Statute at Emanuel College, he
sojourned at Christ's College as Fellow-Commoner, and presumed either by his
Friends at Court, to get a Mandate, or be chosen in the College by a party of
the Fellows, whom he thought his own; therefore great care was taken to keep
all secret, and though the Statute do ordain a vacancy of seven days, and
notice by a Schedule passed upon the Chappel-door, yet such was the concurrent
uniform agreement of all the Fellows, that it was not discovered to any of the
Scholars until the day of Election; and because there is a Sacrament to be
immediately before it; they were constrained to lock up all the gates that none
might come in or go out till it was past; and then two of the Fellows were
dispatched to Queens College, to acquaint Master Preston with what they had
done, He is chosen Master of Emanuel.
and to desire that at two of the Clock he would repair unto the College to be
admitted, and undertake the charge.

It was strange news at Queens, and all the College were much affected with
it, wondering extremely that such a great transaction should be carried with so
much secrecy, and that amongst Master Prestons twelve Disciples (as they called
them) there should be never a Judas but all concentre in it; but there was
order given presently, that all the Scholars should be ready against two of the
clock that day, to attend Master Preston and the Fellows to Emanuel College,
in habits suitable unto their several qualities, which was done accordingly;
and a very goodly company attended him from Queens unto Emanuel, where they
were cheerfully received and entertained according to the custom, with a
generous and costly banquet, and then returned unto Queens again; but left
Master Preston, the prop and glory of it, at Emanuel.

In the plantation of Emanuel College at the first, the godly Founder, took
great care to store his College with godly and able Fellows from all the other
Colleges, and some were after added that were eminent; but now a Master is
bestowed, God in mercy has enabled that good society to pay their debts, by
sending not only Members, but also Heads into very many of the other Colleges,
so as they may now well say, Quae regio in terris nostri non plena laboris.

Sir Walter Mildmay their Noble and Religious Founder, was wont to say unto his
Friends, that he had set an Acorn, that might perhaps in time become an Oak;
blessed be God our eyes have seen it, not only grown and flourishing, but
fruitful, seasonable showers, a great promotion unto a new plantation, and
earnest Prayers unto God, a special means to bring these down, of which I think
no College ever had more, which in these last years have returned a glorious
Harvest; to God be praise.

This news ran swiftly all the Kingdom over, and was received as men were
affected. Good men were glad that honest men were not abhorred, as they had
been, at the Court, and presaged much of that enlargement and deliverance,
which we have lived to see; The Courtiers made full account that he was theirs,
and would mount up from one step to another, until he were a prelate;
especially the Duke of Buckingham, who from this time seemed sincerely to
affect him, Multum fuit ad amorem, dedisse beneficium, thought he had given
earnest and could not be defrauded of the purchase. The Earl of Pembroke, and
the Countess of Bedford had a great interest in him, and he in them; and all
men looked on him as upon a rising man, and respected him accordingly. As for
Lincolns-Inne, they made account they had a special influence into this honor,
as having first expressed their good opinion of him, and there was an honest
godly old man, one of the Benchers, Master Airs, that upon hearing of the
news, would needs be young again, and make an Anagram upon his name, though he
was uncertain how he wrote it in Latin, for he had seen it written diverse
ways. Being therefore resolute, and loath to miss it, he resolves to write it
both ways, as he that used to say his Prayers in Latin and English, that both
might not fail, and so first he wrote it, Johannes Prestonius with this
Anagram, En stas pius in honor: And this distitch: Doctrina, ingenium, virtus
tua, praemia poscunt;
En dedit Emanuel, stas in honor pius.


But lest this should be mistaken, he writes it Johannes Prestonus: with this
Anagram, Se nosse, non tupiar. And this distitch: Turpia non novisse, bonum; se
nosse, beatum:
Ista doces alios, sed prius ipse facis.


The rest of that Society rejoiced, that their Lecturer was Master of Emanuel,
and took occasion to express it according to their several dispositions and
relations, when he came to them in the Term, which shortly followed. There was
one thing in the Colledge-Statutes that greatly troubled him; and that was that
the Masters absence from the College was confined to a month in every
quarter, and he saw not how he could attend at Court, and preach at
Lincolns-Inne in Term time, but he should transgress; but the Fellows soon
consented to an interpretation, that absolved him from the rigid sense, there
being in the Statute a double liberty; first that in case of violent detention
it should not hold; they resolved that not only a natural, but also a moral
violence was to be understood. The other was, that in case of
Colledge-businesse he should not be esteemed absent. Now the College was at
that time in suit for a Living in the West, of good value, with one Master
Ewins, a Gentleman in the Parish, who had bred up a younger Son to be a
Scholar, in relation to that Living; and therefore contended for it, as it had
been his own Inheritance; and when he was worsted at Common Law, prefers a Bill
in Chancery, and thought by money to carry it against the Colledge-right. Bishop
Williams the Lord Keeper then, was his great Friend, and when after many
delays it came at last to hearing, would not allow the Counsel for the
College to speak; Master Preston being present, craved leave to speak in the
cause himself, but was not only silenced, but severely reprehended for it; it
was Trinity-Tearm, and the plague was very hot in London, so that Michaelmas
Term was wholly adjourned, and the next Term was proclaimed at Redding, and
the Records removed thither; but before that, the Lord Keeper was removed from
his Throne, and Sir Thomas Coventry, one of the Colledge-Council that were not
permitted before to speak, succeeded him; by whose integrity and justice, the
College was restored to their right, which ever since they have enjoyed, and
so his following the College business excused his absence all his time.

Being therefore now established, and greatly minding the good thereof, he
observed that the Scholars kept Acts but seldom, and accordingly when they
came unto it, performed it but meanly; he therefore advised with the Fellows in
it, and after many consultations, it was resolved that the number of Acts
should be in a manner doubled, of those under Masters of Art, which was a great
advancement to learning of all sorts in the College.

About this time Sir Arthur Chichester, afterward an Irish Baron, was chosen to
go Ambassador into Germany, about the Palatinate affairs, and Master Preston
was by the Duke of Buckingham and other Friends, designed to go along with him;
he did not greatly fancy the employment, but would not contradict; only it was
considered, that though he was the Prince his Chaplain, and Master of a
College, yet he was not Doctor, which they thought might sound ill abroad, and
reflect upon his Master, and there was not time to go unto it, in the ordinary
way of Acts and Exercises, therefore a Mandate was addressed to the
Vice Chancellor and Heads, that forasmuch as Master Preston was to wait upon
my Lord Ambassador, and could not in so short a time perform his Acts, he
should be forthwith admitted Doctor in Divinity, that he might be ready to
attend the service, which was done accordingly with all alacrity.

Being therefore thus engaged, and not knowing what might befall him in the
voyage, he resolved to settle his temporal estate before he went. He was not
willing to be accounted rich; would often say, Manifestus thesaurus cito
expenditur. And therefore though he had great Incomes from his Pupils, and was
not Prodigal, yet he was not Master of his money; for he had been advised to
adventure in the East India Company, then newly set up, and because estates
there were invisible, he was the willinger, but by that means wanted money; for
there was paying for many years, but no returns; yet there was hope it might at
last come in, and so it did without diminution of the principal, but not in his
lifetime. Therefore he thought it needful to make a legal disposition of his
estate by Will, and so he did, and named a very Honorable person his Executor,
who lived to enjoy that money as well as other by virtue of it. But the voyage
came to nothing; for Sir Arthur did not go as he intended, yet this was his
last Will, and according to it all was enjoyed, though he made additions by way
of request or direction, which were accordingly performed.

It was ever his ambition not to be mercenary in his Ministry, but at liberty
to preach where he might do most good, without relation or respect unto the
wages; and he considered that the Master of Emanuel could have no Living that
had cure of souls annexed, and therefore was willing to give ear unto the
solicitations of the Townsmen, who greatly pressed him to be their Lecturer at
Trinity-Church; for they had applied themselves to Doctor Andrews Bishop of
Ely, and propounded to him Master Jeffries, one of the Fellows of
Pembroke-Hall; and he had given way, and Master Jeffries did preach at Trinity
some years, but was desirous of a more settled condition, and had desired Doctor
Preston to procure him to be Chaplain unto some Nobleman, that was like to
help him to a Living, which was a very easy thing for him to do, having so
much interest in many great ones; so he pitched upon Marquess Hamilton, who
presently admitted Master Jeffries, Chaplain to him, and showed him much
respect, as well for Doctor Prestons sake, as for his own, and long it was not
before a Living fell, namely the Rectory of Dun-mow in Eessex, which the
Marquess procured and bestowed upon his Chaplain Master Jeffries; for he had
not then commenced Doctor, and by that means the Lecture at Trinity was shortly
to be void.

The Townsmen made account that now they had what they desired, namely an
opportunity to settle Doctor Preston in the Lecture at Trinity; and great care
was taken to increase the stipend from forty or fifty pounds per annuum unto
fourscore, that the Doctor might have twenty pounds a quarter paid him; for
they thought the former inconsiderable, not knowing what principles the Doctor
lived by; and when they had effected that, they employed some of the chief to
propose the matter to the Doctor very solemnly; who was easily persuaded to
accept their offer, without relation to the stipend; but there was one of the
Fellows of Sidney-Colledge, Master Middlethwite that put in for it, and though
few or none of the Contributors or Townsmen sided with him, yet he procured
Letters from the Bishop of Ely, and engaged all his friends, both in the Court
and University, that it came unto a very great contest. Doctor Preston who was
offered any Bishopric he would resolve on, and told at Royston by the Duke of
Buckingham, that the Bishopric of Gloucester was then void, contends with
Master Middlethwite to be Lecturer at Trinity-Church, for a stipend of
fourscore pounds per annum, as the upshot of all his hopes, and fruit of all
his great atchievments at the Court; and the contention was so great on all
sides, that it could not be concluded by any mediation, but was referred to an
hearing at Royston before King James, who was really against the Doctors
preaching in the University, the consequence whereof he well saw, and was
informed fully of. I confess I often wondered why Master Middlethwite, an
eminent Scholar, and like enough to get preferment, as afterward it is known he
did, should stickle for so small an opportunity to preach, against the
inclination and disposition of the Townsmen; until I understood that he was
set on by the Prelatical Heads, who told him that it was a service acceptable
to the King, and he should be rewarded for it. At the time appointed it came
unto an hearing, and an Argument was urged against the Doctor namely; that it
was a Lecture maintained by six-pences, a thing unseemly for a Master of a
College and the Prince his Chaplain; but the Duke had taken care that nothing
should be ordered and concluded against the Doctors mind; for the Duke resolved
not to lose him, so the meeting was dissolved and nothing done; but that night,
Sir Edward Contvey then Secretary, invited Doctor Preston to supper, and after
supper told him, that the King had ordered him to tell him, that if he would
give over his pursuance of that Lecture, and let the Heads dispose of it, he
should make his choice of any other preferment, that was more honorable and
profitable for him; but the Doctors end was to do good, not to get good; the
Kings, to make him useless, and divide him from the Puritans. The Duke was
more indifferent, who labored in him to win and gratify the Puritans, whose
power in Parliament was now grown very formidable; therefore when nothing else
would content him, he was confirmed Lecturer at Trinity-Church, the last
preferment he ever had, where he preached after all his time, and did much good.

The Duke had now obliged Doctor Preston in the judgment and opinion of all the
honest Party, and much displeased the Prelatical; and he saw apparently that
King James approved not his siding with him; yet he was more express then ever
in his affections to him, and freeness with him. He had indeed a very happy
and rare composure of sweetness and solidity, would play and dally with the
King, as if he were a woman, and yet enquire, and apprehend, and argue counsels
and debates of State, as if a Burleigh or a Walsingham: saw clearly the
affections of the King were fading, which the Puritans (though never so much
his Friends,) could not repair, and therefore eyed and adored the rising Sun,
who now was grown, and fit for marriage, but no Preparatives to find a Consort
for him. He knew the Spanish match was but a color, and a Treaty dandled
between Bristol and King James, to fool the Prince off, and shut his ears
against the French proposals. This he discovers to the Prince, tells him Kings
did not love an Heir apparent, how near soever; that the daughter of Spain was
designed to a Monastery, and kept for a reserve unto the house of Austria; that
in France there was a Lady much before her; that if he pleased, he would wait
upon him into Spain in a disguise, and take the French Court in their way, and
see that Lady, and so discover Bristols, and his fathers juggling; the Prince
resents and hugs this overture. They tell King James, the Earl of Bristol and
the Spanish Ministers abused him; that it was time to bring that Treaty to some
Conclusion, desire they might go into Spain, and play the game out.

The King saw who had ploughed with his Heifer, feared, (as he was apt to do) a
check-mate; yet for the present urges only his affections to them both, and
asks them how he should subsist so long, without their companies? But they
persisting, signs a Warrant with his own hand for Jack Smith, and Tom Smith,
with each of them a servant and their horses to go Beyond Sea.

The Duke even now was not unmindfull of Doctor Preston, but leaves order with
the Duchess and Countess of Denbigh, to be careful for him; and Sir Ralph
Freeman having a child to baptize, Doctor Preston is entreated for to preach,
and the Duchess and Countess were both Gossips, who showed to the Doctor
very great respect, and gave him hopes of doing good; and some he did, for he
procured by their means, Master Hildershams liberty, and restitution to his
place at Ashby de la zouch, and gave great hopes unto good Ministers of fairer
times, then had been formerly; only he would relate with much regret, that he
often found Doctor Laud, then Bishop of Saint David's with them, and therefore
doubted of the issue and event.

The Doctor saw by the debates about the Lecture, that he had enemies as well
as friends at Court; that the Duke was mutable, as well as mortal; knew that
the King abhorred that journey into Spain, and would remember it, if able:
Dulcis inexperto; cultura potentis amici expertus metuit. And therefore though
now he were settled and assured in the University, yet would not leave his
Lecture at Lincolns-Inne; but being still in London in the Tearm-time, about
the Colledge-businesse, continued Preacher at Lincolns-Inne, and thought it
might be a good reserve, in case the naughty Heads or Factions in the Court
should fall upon him; and it was well he did, for the Prince and Duke returned
the next October, highly offended with the Spanish gravity, and both they and
all their train did nothing but tell stories of the Spanish baseness; so a
Parliament was called, and the Duke cried up by all the godly Party in the
Kingdom. The Spanish Agent at the Court had order from his Master out of
Spain, for to defy him and protest against him at the Counsel-Table, but
seriously he could not have done him a greater courtesy, for the people
universally did hate the Spaniard, and now the Duke became the peoples Martyr.
I have seen Verses made in his defense and commendation; and Agents presently
dispatched in France, to treat of that Match. King James liked not this stuff,
but the Prince was able now to go alone, and especially when he had the Duke
for one of his Supporters; all things are fairly carried for Religion, and the
Duke of Buckhingham, the Princes and peoples Favorite. The people seemed now
to have the better, and the Court-affairs for to decline and droop. Doctor
Preston like another Mordecai was very great, the Prince his Master, and the
Duke his Friend, and the Courtiers eyes upon him, because they saw he came not
thither for preferment, as all men else. Pisoni in imperium adoptato nihil in
vultu mutatum, quasi magis imperare posset, quam vellet. His honors altered
nothing in him, but gave encouragement to all the godly Party; and his Sermons
at Lincolns-Inne much wrought upon the Parliament, so that a bold Petition was
contrived and presented to the King at Whitehall, from both Houses of
Parliament, April 23. 1624. against the spreading and increase of Popery, and
the Indulgence given unto Priests and Jesuits. King James was in the evening
of his glory; his Party in the Court under a cloud; another Sun almost in view,
and the (...), or day star already risen, and accordingly he answered warily to
their Petition, bewails his want of information, as the real ground of this
their trouble, which otherwise he had prevented; acknowledged that whilst the
Treaties lasted with Spain and Austria, he was obliged to comply; but now both
being broken off, he would be rigid and severe against the Priests and
Jesuits; bids them find out a way for to restrain the growth of Popery, and he
would second them; but resolves to pay the Duke of Buckingham for all this, and
gives order to the Earl of Bristol to prepare an information for that end; but
the Match with France, and other intervenient accidents obstruct it, for the
present.

The Duke having told tales out of School, and broken off the Match with Spain,
was much obliged to further and promote the French, which he did seriously
excuse to Doctor Preston, upon this ground, that there was not any Protestant
for to be had: and for to marry with a subject had always been unlucky and
fatal to the Kings of England; that the French would not be ridged in religious
observations, but the Doctor constantly opposed; only acknowledged this
difference, that Spanish Popery was an absolute ingredient to their intended
Western Monarchy, but French was not so, and so this was less evil.

But the French found out this obligation, and were untractable, unless the
Duke would aid the King of France against the Rochellers: This was a hard
chapter for one so much obliged unto the Puritans and Doctor Preston, and he
therefore declined all he could, but nothing else would serve, and he knew King
James lay ready to take advantages, so in Conclusion, eight Ships were granted
to oppose the Rochel-fleet, and many colors sought to cloud it, and hide it
from the world, but from that time Doctor Preston doubted of the Saint-ship of
the Duke of Buckingham, whom otherwise he honored and loved very much.

But it was high time for the Duke to look about him; King James was not to
learn now how for to play his Game, he was an old, but not a foolish King,
Eccl. 4.13. and therefore failed not to make Provision, and lay rods in piss,
that he might use upon occasion. Kings use for to account an ague in the Spring
their Physic, yet Physic till March be past is not good, but this ague
antidates the months, and comes in February. The King was then at Theobalds,
and the Ague was made but small account of. He feared death, but was the most
impatient and disordered of any living, what rules soever the Physicians gave,
he would observe none; which intemperance might very well occasion the growing,
strength and vigor of the disease, which howsoever more and more increased,
and at last began to be considerable, then he began to take advice and to
submit to rules, but now it was too late; for March 27. 1625. on the Lords day
in the morning, about ten of the clock at Theobalds the King dies. Doctor
Preston then attended in his month, and was sometimes hastened to the Prince
to comfort him, and sometimes to the Duke; and indeed it was a very mournful
morning. Death is a serious thing, and knocks alike at Palaces as at the
meanest Cottage. King James was very much beloved of all his servants; some of
the Huntsmen could not be gotten from him; the Prince and Duke were both of
them retired and wept exceedingly. But Sir Edward Conwey and some of the Lords
drew up a Wiring, and proclaimed Charles Steward King, with all his Titles; and
have was made to pack away to London. The Prince and Duke, and Doctor Preston
in Coaches shut down, hasten to White Hall, and there he is proclaimed again
with more formalities, and the Lord Mayor and the City sent to, where it was
done with much solemnity, and great rejoicing of the people; for the Prince had
that exceeding happiness to come upon the stage unprejudiced. For he had never
interposed nor acted, but in the Spanish business, and that succeeded to his
great advantage; so that if he listed he might have been as popular as ever any
were.

This fall occasions many alterations in the Court; the Bishops generally, and
Doctor Prestons enemies, and all that had contended with the Duke were
Crest-fallen. King James was like enough to have outlived the Duke of
Buckingham, who had been very sick since his return from Spain, but all is
altered, and the Duke does all.

But he had many things to do; the affronts received in Madrid, and at the
Counsel-table by the Agent, were to be sent back by a puissant and mighty Navy,
and Provisions made accordingly. King James to be interred; a Parliament to be
summoned; the French Lady to be sent for, and brought into England, which the
Duke especially intended, and spoke to all the Gallants of his Retinue to
attend him, and to many other of the Gentry and Nobility throughout the
Kingdom. But he found it hard thus in the morning of the Kings affairs to be
abroad, there being then a Parliament, and the sickness much increasing in the
City, so he was constrained to employ the Earl of Holland, and attend himself
at home. All were not gratified in this great revolution and mutation of
affairs, and the discontented Party murmured, and let fly at the Duke, and the
sickness much increasing, began to make a mutiny, and it was much desired that
the Parliament might be prorogued till some other more healthful and less
dangerous time. But the Navy against the Spaniards, and the pressing wants of
all sorts that depended on the Court would not permit; so it was only adjourned
to Oxford; yet there the sickness was as soon as they, and some of their
Members smarted for it, but have was made to gratify the new King, and the
Provisions for the Navy went forward, many men engaged, and the King resolved
to attend that business, as admitting no delay.

There was one thing that invited Doctor Preston to a journey that year, and
that was a strong suspicion that the plague was in the town, in which case
there is a liberty to dissolve the College, without any detriment unto the
Officers and Members of it. He was not willing to omit the opportunity, because
he had many invitations into the West. The Bishop of Salisbury he desired to
consult withal, about a Book of Master Montagues, that was commended to him by
the Duke of Buckingham to peruse and give his sense upon it. Master Shervil the
Recorder of Salisbury was a Bencher of Lincolns-Inne, and a very good friend of
his; he had diverse Friends at Dorchester, and was desirous to be sea-sick, and
was still enticed forward, and at last resolved to wait upon the King and Duke,
at Plimmouth, whether they were gone to see the Navy set sail. Whilst he was
there, the Rochel fleet was broken by those ships the King lent, and Mounsieur
Sabeeza came into Falmouth with the remainder, and thence to Plimmouth, with
most lamentable outcries against the Duke, who seemed to be very much affected
with it, and made mighty Promises of wonderful repairs, but Doctor Preston
failed not to set that business home, he did believe the Duke was overruled
to lend them, and sorry when he saw the sad effects.

But whilst the Duke was thus detained in the West, the Earl of Bristol and
the Lord Keeper Williams combined against him, and drew in many to their Party,
among others the Earl of Pembroke, and diverse great ones in the House of
Commons, and was so encouraged and heartned in it, that the Earl of Bristol,
May 1. 1626. preferred in the House of Lords twelve Articles against the Duke
of Buckingham, tending to prove, That the Duke had promised unto the Pope and
Ministers of Spain, to make the King a Papist; and overruled him, against the
judgment of the Earl of Bristol, to write unto the Pope with the title of
Sanctissime Pater; That his carriage in the matters of Religion was so
offensive, that he stuck not to kneel before the Host as often as he met it;
That he was so licentious and unchaste in his behavior, that the Spanish
Ministers resolved not to have any thing to do with him; That when he could not
bring about the Match to his own particular advantage, he used means to
obstruct it and break it off; That he had informed King James of all these
things, who promised to hear him, and leave the offender unto Justice, and that
not many days before his sickness.

The Duke had now reason to look about him, and was very able so to do, and
first he labors to divide the Party by drawing off the Earl of Pembroke, by
promising his Daughter to the Earl of Mountgomeries Son, which afterward he
did accomplish, then he endeavored to oblige the Puritans, by gratifying
Doctor Preston all the ways he could, and particularly in the business of the
Colledge-suit, by depriving Bishop Williams of the Seal, and giving it to Sir
Thomas Coventry, who was one of the Colledge-counsel; yea he went so far as to
nominate the Doctor to the King to be Lord Keeper, and the King was so firm to
him, that the Earl of Bristol could do no good, and so withdrew his Articles.

Doctor Prestons Friends were Newters all this while, and looked on, neither
engaged for him, nor against him, which was sadly represented to the Duke by
the Bishops and that Party, who wondered he should dote upon a man that either
could not or would not own him in his need, bad him consider whether Puritans
were like to be his Friends, whose ways were toto coelo different, and told
him plainly he could not have them both. If he adhered to those that sought
their ruin, they must adhere to such as would support them: so that the Duke
was in a great strait, and knew not what to do.

Doctor Preston also was importuned to put it to an issue, and if he would not
leave the rotten and corrupted Clergy, then to leave him, and because there had
been informations against that Book of Master Mountagues, they propounded it
might come to a debate, and not remain as now it it did, unsettled. The Doctor
and the Duke were both of them unwilling to an open breach, loved for to
temporise and wait upon events. But Doctor Prestons friends would not be
satisfied, but urged a conference, whereunto they were encouraged by some
Orthodox and very learned Bishops, and at last it was concluded by two
religious Noblemen, that a conference there should be, the Bishop of Rochester
and Doctor White then Dean of Carlisle, on the one side, and the Bishop of
Coventry and Litchfield, and Doctor Preston on the other. A day was set, a
Satturday in Hillary-Tearm, at four of the clock in the afternoon, the place
was York-house, and Doctor Preston sent to in the morning for to attend it. The
Noblemen came unto the Bishops lodgings, about two of the clock, and sent for
Doctor Preston to them, who gave many reasons why he could not go, but they
were resolute, and taking the Bishop with them went without him; but the Doctor
considering, and fearing his absence might betray the cause, and give
encouragement unto the other side, went afterward himself unto the place, and
sat by as an hearer silent until all was done; but talking afterward
occasionally of falling from grace, the Bishop showed that a godly man might go
far and yet return, by the instance of the Prodigal, Luke 15. but Doctor White
exclaimed against any that should think the Prodigal in acts of drunkenness
and whoredom not to be fallen from grace, and urged that of the Apostle, Romans
1.32. That those that do such things are worthy of death, that is, said he, in
a state of everlasting death, and therefore fallen from grace; so 1 Cor. 6.9,
10. shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; that is, are not sons, for if sons
then heirs, Romans 8.17.

But Doctor Preston answered, that these sins made indeed a forfeiture of all
their interest into the hands of God, and he might make the seizure if he
pleased, but did not unto those which were his children, and in Covenant with
him; as two Tennants, by not paying of their Rent, or keeping Covenants
forfeited their Leases, yet the Lord might seize the one, and not the other, as
he pleased. But the Bishop and the Dean both cried out, this was the way to all
licentiousness and looseness. To which the Doctor answered, That the seed of
God, as the Apostle calls it, 1 John 3.9. remained in the sinning Saint, or
Son, and would repair him; as in water, there remains a principle of cold,
even when it boyleth over, that will undoubtedly reduce it, when the heat and
fire is removed, as in Peter, David, Sampson, and others, was apparent; so that
they could not run out into all licentiousness, for the spirit lusted against
the flesh, that they cannot do the things they would, Gal. 5.17. and though he
did not disinherit them, and blot their names out of the Book of life, Phil.
4.3. yet he might, and would withdraw his favor, imbitter all their comforts,
Mat. 26.75. raise trouble to them from their dearest interests, 2 Samuel 12.11.
fill them with anguish, Psalm. 38.3, 4. which in reason will keep them from
running out, seeing the evil is commensurable unto that good of pleasure or
profit their sin afforded; and if need be, he can add unto it eternal
apprehensions, and make them feel the fierceness of his anger, Psalm. 88.6, 7.
without any hope of being eased; and after this can restrain and withhold them,
as he did Abimelech, Genesis 20.6. For if one cease to be a Son, because he
commits a sin that does deserve eternal death, then every sin a child of
Gods commits, rends his relation or sonship off; for every sin deserves
eternal death, Romans 6.23. and because in many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2.
we should be always out of sonship and have neither certainty nor comfort in
our estate, unless he could give some ground out of Scripture, to assure what
sins put us out, and what did not.

The Duke had sent to Doctor Preston to decline this clashing conference, and
assured him he was as much his Friend as ever, and would have stopped it if he
could, but the Bishops had overruled it, which the Doctor at the first
believed, and so was backward. But when he saw the confidence of Doctor White
and his Companion, he doubted the sincerity of that assurance, and was
afterward informed, that there had been a meeting at the Countess of Denbies,
and the Duke had promised to leave him; this gave him resolution and
encouragement against the second conference, which was managed in a manner by
him alone, against Master Mountague and Doctor White. For when the Doctor saw
the Duke begun to double with him, he was less fearful to offend him, though
the Duke still carried it, with all the fairness that he could, and appeared
not in person.

When the time came for the second Conference, the Doctor readily appeared; and
the first thing he charged Master Mountague withal, was about his doctrine of
Traditions, which he affirmed he had delievered as grossly and erroneously as
any Papist, Gag. page 38, 39, 40. For he justfied that place in Bazil, where he
says, The doctrine retained in the Church, was delievered, partly by written
instructions, partly by unwritten traditions, having both a like force unto
Piety; which was so unlike to Bazil, and the opinions of those times, that it
was generally believed to be put in by the Papists of later times. Master
Mountague confessed, it was suspected by some of the preciser cut; but Doctor
Preston told him, Bishop Bilson was none of them, yet he did judge it
supposititious; and it must be so, or Bazil acknowledged to be erroneous. For
he instanceth in praying toward the East, and use of Chrisme or Oil in
Baptism; both which being rejected by the Church of England, argues they held
that place of Bazil not Canonical.

Master Mountague answered, that (...) there used by Saint Bazil, might
signify a thing that seemed so, and so the sense might be, that some things
that seemed true, of less esteem and consequence, might be delivered by
tradition, as long as matters more substantial were taken from the Scriptures.
But Doctor Preston showed that (...) signified oftentimes doctrine, and was
used here by Bazil for those Heads of doctrine that were more principal, and
less exposed, comparing them unto those places in the Temple, whereunto the
people had not access.

Master Mountague answered farther, that his assertion was hypothetical, that
if a doctrine came from the same author, it was no great matter, whether it
were by writing or word of mouth, for either had the same authority. But Doctor
Preston told him, Bazil was positive, and spoke directly, and him he justified,
and therefore could not be hypothetical, as he pretended.

It is a great step unto victory for to divide. Paul sets the Pharisees against
the Sadduces, Act. 23.6, 7, 8. that he might save himself. The Jesuits are so
good at it, that though they have but one to be their adversary, they will
endeavor to divide him from himself, by moving passion, or compassion, or some
affection of his own against him. Doctor White had openly in the Commencement
house, maintained that Election is not ex praevisis operibus, and therefore
Doctor Preston resolved to pinch Master Mountague in that particular, that he
might bereave him of his animating Champion Doctor White.

There were four several places that Doctor Preston had observed to make good
this charge, the first which he produced, was Gag. page 179. Some Protestants
hold, that Peter was saved, because God would have it so without respect unto
his faith and obedience; and Judas damned, because God would have it so,
without respect unto his sin. And added, this is not the doctrine of the
Protestants, this is not the doctrine of the Church, the Church of England has
not taught it, does not believe it, has opposed it.

Now Doctor White was very fierce and eager to engage, told him it was no
doctrine of the Church of England, but a private fancy of some, that Judas was
condemned, without respect unto his sin; for the wages of sin is death, Romans
6.23. The soul that sins shall die, Ezekiel. 18.4. But Doctor Preston answered,
he did not charge that upon Master Mountague, but the former part of the
assertion, that Peter was not saved, without respect unto his believing and
obedience, and so Election should not be absolute, but grounded upon faith and
works foreseen. Then says Dr. White, I have nothing against that, but leave
Master Mountague to answer for himself.

Dr. Preston was glad that he was eased of Dr. White, and yet resolved to make
advantage of it, and therefore told Dr. White, if he thought Election was not
ex fide Praevisa, he desired to know whether saving grace were an effect, and
fruit of Election, or no? Dr. White acknowledged readily it was; then said Dr.
Preston, Whosoever has saving grace is Elected. Now you know than an Elect
person, can never finally miscarry, or fall away; therefore whoever has true
grace, can never fall away. The old man saw the snare, and would have avoided
it, by denying the consequence. But the Dr. urged, that wheresoever the Effect
is, there must be the Cause, but Saving Grace is an Effect of Election. This
Dr. White would have denied, but the hearers murmured that the Effect could not
be without the Cause, as the day is not without the presence of the Sun. Then
Dr. White answered, that Saving Grace was an Effect indeed, but a common
Effect. But Dr. Preston urged, that it was not more common then Election; for
all the Elect had Saving Grace, and none but they; and therefore they could
never fall away. But this (said he) is by the way, I will now apply my self to
Mr. Mountague.

But when Mr. Mountague perceived that his great Goliath Dr. White, forsook him,
he was greatly troubled, and cavilled at the words a while, but the book
adjudging it for Dr. Preston, he said, The Church of England had not declared
any thing against it. Dr. Preston alleged the seventeenth Article, but told
Master Mountague, that he affirmed the Church of England did oppose it, and he
desired to know where?

But after one of the Lords had whispered with Mr. Mountague, he confessed,
that for Arminius, he had never read him, and that he had written some things
negligently in that book, which he never thought should thus be scanned among
friends, and therefore promised to write another book in Butter and Honey, and
therein more exactly for to acquit himself.

Some of the good Lords proposed, that in stead of this Book which Mr.
Mountague had promised to write, the Synod of Dort might be received and
established as the doctrine of the Church of England, seeing there was nothing
there determined, but what our Delegates approved. But Dr. White opposed this
mainly; for (said he) the Church of England in her Catechism teaches to
believe in God the Son, who redeemed me and all mankind, which that Synod did
deny.

Dr. Preston answered, That by Redemption there, was only meant the freeing of
mankind from that inevitable ruin, the sin of Adam had involved them in, and
making of them savable upon conditions of another Covenant, Joh. 3.16, 17. so
as now salvation was not impossible, as it was before the death of Christ, but
might be offered unto any man, according to the tenor of that Commission, Mark.
16.15, 16. Which could not be unto the devils, for they were left in that
forelorn condition, whereinto their sin and disobedience put them, Heb. 2.16. 2
Pet. 2.4. that the Jailer was a boisterous bloody fellow, Act. 6.24, 27. yet
Paul makes no doubt for to tell him, verse. 31. That if he believed on the Lord
Jesus, he should be saved with his house.

But Dr. White in no sort received this, but affirmed earnestly, that Christ
died for all alike in Gods intention and Decree, for Cain as well as Abel, for
Saul as much as David, for Judas as much as Peter, for the reprobate and damned
in hell, as well as for the Elect and Saints in heaven.

But Dr. Preston answered, That there was a special salvation afforded to
Believers, 1 Timothy 4.10. That Christ was indeed a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6.
but the Savior only of his body, Ephesians. 5.23. that he redeemed all, but called,
and justified, and glorified whom he knew before, and had predestined to be
conformed to the image of his Son, Romans 8.29.30. that to whom in this sense
Christ was given, to them were given also all things appertaining unto life and
godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. as faith, 2 Pet. 1.^. Phil. 1.29. Ephesians. 2.8. Repentance,
Act. 11.18. 2 Timothy 2.25. A new heart, Ezekiel, 36.26. His Spirit, Gal. 4.5, 6. So
that nothing can be charged on them, but Jesus Christ has undertaken, and is
engaged to discharge them, Romans 8.31, 32, 33, 34. So that they can never
perish, nor be taken out of Christ's hand, Joh. 10.28, 29, 30. but as they are
begotten again unto a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. so they are kept by the power of
God through faith unto salvation, verse. 5. whereas Judas was lost, Joh. 17.12.
and is gone to his own place, Act. 1.25. and there are many nations and people
of the world, that have no outward offer made unto them in the Gospel, Psalm,
147.19, 20. Act. 16.6, 7. and those that have it, have not hearts given them to
understand it and believe it, Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4. Esa. 6.9, 10. Mat. 13.13, 14,
15. and therefore they are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. and are damned, 2 These. 2.10,
11, 12. For he showed that in Adam all men were lost, Romans 5.12. and none
recovered but by Christ; therefore such as had not Christ's intercession, could
not recover; but Christ prayed not for some, Joh. 17.9. and therefore such
could not be saved, Heb. 7.25.

Dr. White acknowledged there was a difference; for though all had so much as
by good improvement might serve their turn, yet the Elect had more, for God
abounded toward them, Ephesians. 1.8, 9. Romans 5.15, 17, 20. As all the Troop have
horses, but the Officers have better. Both Travelers have staves to leap over
the ditch, but the one a better and stronger then the other. The worst had
grace enough to keep corruption, and the renitency of their natures down; but
the Elect, such as would do it easily; for Christ had tasted death for every
man, Heb. 2.9. and died for those which yet might perish, 1 Cor. 8.11. and
bought those, that yet brought upon themselves swift damnation, 2 Pet. 2.1.
because they did not husband and improve the favor offered to them.

Dr. Preston answered, That Christ was in himself sufficient to save all, and
might be said to be provided for that end and use, as a medicine is to cure
infected persons, though it cure none actually, but those that drink it, as
Prosper. Habet in se quod omnibus prosit, sed si non bibitur non medetur. As 1 John 5.11, 12. but many did not thus apply Christ, because they had him not so
offered and exhibited as others had, Mat. 11.21. Luke 10.13. for God gave some
faith and repentance as we have showed; as the Serpent Moses was commanded for
to make, was in it self sufficient to cure those that were bitten, Numb. 21.8,
9. yet cured none, but only those that looked on it. So as Moses lift up the
Serpent in the wilderness, shall the Son of man be lift up, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting, Joh. 3.14, 15.

But Dr. White urged that place Esa. 5.4. that God had done all he could, but
they neglected and rejected the counsel of God against themselves, Luke 7.30.

Dr. Preston answered, That God had done all that they could challenge of him,
for he had given them in Adam power, Eccl. 7.29. and proposed another way of
mercy in a Mediator, and therefore he appeals to any one that was indifferent,
Esa. 5.3. but this was unto Israel, he dealt not so with other nations, Psalm.
149.20. Beside, he had done what he could, without reversing and rescinding his
Decree, Joh. 12.38, 39, 40. for otherwise he could have given them the same
spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. the like gift that he did unto others who
believed on the Lord Jesus, Act. 11.17. could have wrought in them both to will
and to do according to his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. could have healed them as
he promised, Esa. 57.18. and as he did persecuting Saul, 1 Timothy 1.6. but God
had other ends, Romans 9.17. and attributes, Romans 9.22. which he was willing to
discover, Prove. 16.4.

But Dr. White asked how then he could require faith and repentance, Mark.
1.15. Act. 17.30. which was all one, as if he should require one to give his
judgment and opinion of a color, that had his eyes shut, and then shut his
eyes as fast as he could.

Dr. Preston answered, That he might do it to show and discover our impotency,
as we bid our little children rise, that by their own fault fell, that we may
let them know their inability, and be the more beholding unto us to help them
up, as Mark. 9.23, 24. and because the call and command of Christ is the
Vehiculum and Conduit-pipe of strength and power, Act. 14.10. Joh. 5.8, 9. as
Lazarus, Joh. 11.43, 44. Thus God by bidding and commanding men to take grace,
does thereby fit them and enable them to do it, as that Creeple, Act. 3.6, 7,
8. was by the command enabled; so Saul, Act. 22.13. being commanded to receive
his fight, was enabled the same moment to look upon him; and so verse. 16. being
commanded to wash away his sins, had the blood of Christ provided ready for to
do it. So these commands are not like those the Apostle speaks of, Jam. 2.16.
for here is something given; when God bids, he does not, Verba dare, sed rem.

But it was further urged by the Doctor, that God had no pleasure in the death
of wicked men, Ezekiel. 33.11. but that he would rather they should repent and
leave their sins, Ezekiel. 18.23. and verse. 32. if therefore God were not ready to
the utmost of his power to give them grace, he could not be excused from
dissembling and double-dealing.

But Dr. Preston answered, That superiors may command unable persons for many
reasons, but cannot be said for to dissemble, unless they refuse to give when
the required condition is performed. As if I bid one come unto me, and I will
give him sixpence, if I refuse when he is come, I did dissemble; but if he
comes not, he cannot charge me; for their not coming may be for want of will,
Joh. 5.40. as well as for want of power, Joh. 6.44. Now if I know a Creeple
will not come, though he could, I may punish him for it. It Is true, God
delights in nothing but himself, his joy and comfort, is terminated only in
himself, not in the creature, but as some way served and represented by it; for
God made all things for himself, Prove. 16.4. yea for his pleasure, Rev. 4.11.
That is, the exercise and illustration of some one of his attributes; as his
power, Exodus 9.16. Romans 9.17. his wrath, Romans 9.22. Never did strong man glory
of his strength, more then God does of his Sovereignty and Omnipotency, Job
40.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Now, if it fall out, that in the illustration and
exercise of these his glorious attributes and excellencies, some creatures
smart, yet he delights not in their smart and sufferings, but in the
demonstration of his own Omnipotency. Ahashuerus makes a Feast to all the
States and Orders of his Kingdom, to show the riches of his glorious Kingdom,
and the Honor of his excellent Majesty, Esth. 1.3, 4. This was not done
without the smart and suffering of many of the creatures, yet he delights not
in their sufferings, but in his own magnificence and bounty. When Christ was at
the Feast, Joh. 2.1, 2. he does not condole the death of all those innocents
that went to make it up; Qui fruitur poena, ferus est: but rejoiced in the good
cheer, and good will of the Friend that bade him.

There were few present of Doctor Prestons Friends, and accordingly this
conference was represented and reported with all the disadvantage that could be
to him; insomuch that many Parliament men that were his friends, were much
offended at it; which occasioned him as soon as he came to Cambridge, to write
the several passages, and send them to those friends that were unsatisfied. But
it was an evidence that the Duke and Dr. Preston were not so great, but that he
sticked to the Prelates, and would in the issue leave Dr. Preston and the
Puritans, which much abated good men's affections to the Duke; and it was
believed that he had no such footing in the Kings affections, as he did pretend
unto: Postea Maecenas speciem potius, quam vim tenuit in amicitia Principis.
They thought his greatness began to languish; and it was believed in the
University, that there was another favorite in being, though yet obscure: for
the Earl of Suffolk much about this time died, who had been a long time
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, and great means was used to set the
Duke up for to succeed him; but good men were fallen off, because of his
deserting Dr. Preston, and others did believe his glory was departed; and so
the Earl of Berkshire, the former Chancellors second Son, was set up against
the Duke, and many visited for him that loved greatness, and were servants
good enough unto the times; and it is believed, it had been carried for him
against the Duke, if the wisdom of Dr. Goffing, then Vice Chancellor, and some
others in the scrutiny had not prevented it; but it was pronounced for the
Duke, and great care was taken for the investing of him in a very solemn
manner. A representative of the University is designed to attend him at
York-house in their habits, and a sumptuous Feast provided for their
entertainment; the Duke sat in the midst of the Table among the Doctors,
where, by some body, there was an health begun unto the King. When it came to
Dr. Preston for to pledge it, he was uncovered and bowed as others had done,
but drank but very little, and so delivered it unto the next; but one of the
Doctors took notice that he drank not all, and told him, he had seen him drink
as great a glass of wine, and did believe he could have drunk this if he would,
but that he loved to be singular. The Dr. acknowledged he was not skillful in
the laws of drinking healths, and therefore if he had offended, he desired it
might be imputed to his ignorance; but he thought the end was to show respect
unto the persons named, which was done best by the Ceremonies that preceded, as
being bare, standing up, and such like; wherein (he said) he had not willingly
offended; but if it were an Engine to Court-intemperance, and engage men unto
greater quantities then themselves liked, it fell short of that modesty and
freedom of the Heathens, Esth. 1.8. and was a sin in all, but in men of their
degree and rank and an abominable wickedness.

The Duke misliked this incivility, and frowned on the Doctor that occasioned
it; but it was believed it could not have been done, without assurance that the
Dukes affections were ebbing toward Dr. Preston. And no wonder; for his end
being to make impressions of good upon the Court, he could not but see, if they
did not succeed, they would recoil. If you manure and sow your land, if the
seeds subdues it not, and conquers it, it is enabled to bring forth the
stronger weeds, Heb. 6.7, 8. If your Pearls be cast before swine, they will
also turn again and rend you, Mat. 7.6. The Duke had now seen the worth and way
of Dr. Preston; he had found that he could not win him, and make him his, he
could not therefore in the way of policy, but labor and resolve to wrack and
sink him. When Herod was convented by prevailing conquering Augustus, for his
great assistance of Mark Anthony his adversary, and knew it would be in
Augustus power to take his head off, he settled his affairs, but gave peremptory
order that his beloved Mariamne should be put to death; for this only reason,
because another should not enjoy so great a beauty. So the Duke would not
another should enjoy the great abilities of Doctor Preston, but was resolved to
break him if he could; yet in a civil Court way.

But the Doctor was too knowing, not to see this afar off, Prove. 22.3. Quae
alii levia faciunt, diu patiendo; ea sapiens, diu cogitando: and had
accordingly provided a succession of reserves, wherein to hide himself. The
first and surest was his conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
world. If a man be welcome into his conscience, he need not fear the storms
and blusters that he meets abroad. In te recedas, cum cogeris in turba esse.
When a man is forced to be where he would not, as Peter was foretold he should
be, Joh. 21.18. yet he may in despite of them retire into himself. Paul made it
his business to have his conscience always void of offense, Act. 24.16. and
so did Dr. Preston; for though his actings, being many of them above the common
size were not always understood, and very often mis-interpreted, yet he was
innocent and upright always in them. An undeniable argument whereof was, that
he never sued for the least preferment, as we have said, but studied, and often
consulted, how without breaking, he might avoid them. And though he lived like
himself, and gave relief to others, yet it was ever of his own, as very many
yet alive can witness. And indeed he was a man of very much Communion and sweet
Society with God; prayed much in private, and by himself, besides as Tutor with
his Pupils, and after, as Master in his Family. Whatever weakness he was in, or
business did occur, kept many private days of Fasting by himself, especially
before the Sacraments and Sabbath-daies; and accordingly enjoyed a constant
clearness and assurance of his Justification, and interest in the blood of
Christ; even then, when frailties and infirmities did most of all afflict and
wound him. He never (that I know,) was troubled or perplexed about Adoption,
though very often about the imperfection of his graces, and the unconstancy of
Sanctification; so as he studied most exactly that Treatise of the Saints
Infirmities, and there is nothing in all his works that may more properly be
called his.

His next retreat was Lincolns-Inne; for now he said, the Duke was Chancellor,
and would endeavor to ingratiate himself, and be a Benefactor; and had bought
Erpenius Manuscripts, and did verily intend to found a Library; and so it would
be easy, and in his power, to out him of the College and University. For
there was a resolution in some of the Fellows, to petition the Duke without
him, and to annul the Statute of continuance or Commoration in the College;
yet he conceived the Lawyers would pretend a kind of freedom and exemption. For
he saw, when that holy blessed Dr. Sibbs was outed, both of Fellowship and
Lecture in the University, yet by the goodness and prudence of Sir Henry
Yelverton, that constant Patron unto godly Ministers, (a virtue yet running in
the veins of his posterity) he was received and retained at Grayes-Inne unto
his death; therefore he would in no sort leave his title unto, and interest in
Lincolns-Inne, but reserved it in his power unto his dying day.

But he knew Kings had long hands, and that the Dukes were nothing shorter; and
that Lincolns-Inne, though a great deal stronger and better built then
Grayes-Inne, yet would not hold out long, in case the Duke should seriously
beleagure it; therefore he pondered of removing farther off if need were. And
having weighed all retreats, resolved upon Basil in the Switzers Country, as a
place which the longest handed Kings had seldom touched, even when it was a
receptacle of their greatest enemies; and therefore he resolved, in case he
could not be free in England, to settle there, and spend the residue of his
surviving days, in writing what he was not suffered to preach, or had not
published according to his mind.

He was naturally very affable and courteous unto strangers of any Country,
and by conversing much with them, endeavored to preserve his knowledge in the
French and Italian languages. But after he had thus resolved upon Basil, he was
very friendly to all he Germans, that were dispersed from several Universities,
especially from the Palatinate; for whom he procured several sorts of
entertainments, both in the Country abroad, and in the University; for which,
as he had very many Gratulatory Epistles from particular persons, so one of
note from the King of Bohemia, under his Hand and Seal.

But he knew that these were but the Foxes earths, that might successively be
taken and possessed. He therefore also thought upon that unum magnum of the
Cat, or rather of the Holy Ghost, Prove. 18.10. the Name of the Lord, that is,
the goodness, mercy, power, of the mighty God; where he was well assured, he
should for ever be free enough from Kings and Dukes. Yet these did no way
retard his industry in using means. Obstructions quicked industrious and active
minds, but damp and clog the dull. There is a Statesman of no mean esteem, that
writes professedly against the use of Cittadels and Forts, because it makes the
Soldier less resolved in engagements. And the Spartans were forbidden to wall
their City, because it would encourage Cowardice. But it did not take off Dr.
Preston from his duty. For finding that his standing at Court was untermined,
he resolved upon Buttresses to underprop him in the Country.

There was in the Country of Northampton, a Gentleman of very able parts, and
clear affections to the public good, no stranger to the Court in former times,
nor to the Duke of Buckingham, with whom the Doctor used to communicate
affairs, and who was then a Parliament man of much esteem; to him, the Doctor
in a Letter discovers all, shows him the hopeless posture of the Duke, how
much they both were disappointed in him; lays some directions what to do, and
urges activenesse. This Letter by a sad misfortune was let fall, by him that
was entrusted to convey it, about Temple Bar, and handed from one to one,
until it came to Sir Henry Spillers; who having viewed and pondered the
contents, concluded it was a purchase that would ingratiate him unto the Duke,
and so immediately presents it to him.

The Duke was troubled to read his faults and face so shrewdly intimated and
presaged. His temper was exceeding good, and he could manage his affections
many times, with much serenity and moderation; but now he was quite off, and
could not think of any thing but a revenge. I have not known any thing so
trouble and afflict the Doctor as this did, that the Duke should have his hand
against him, and that he had involved so good a man to whom he wrote. But it
pleased God to cut the Duke out other work; for the cry of Rochel, and the
Protestants of France, was so exceeding great, and so much resented by the
Parliament, that the Duke resolves to vindicate his honor by relieving them.
And whilst he was busy to set that fleet out, and furnish forces for
surprising the Isle of Rhees, he could not undertake that work of revenge
intended against Dr. Preston. But the Doctor thought not that he had done
enough, unless he proclaimed in the Pulpit what he had often told the Duke in
private; according to that Command of Christ, Mat. 6.27. What I tell you in
darkness, that speak you in light; and what you hear in the ear, that preach
on the house-tops. As Chrysostom to his people; Cum verum singuli audire non
vultis, public audietis. When the French Match was concluded, he preached that
Sermon of the pillar and ground of truth, against the mingling of Religions,
and mixing truth with falsehood; and showed how impossible it was to mingle
truth with error, or make up one Religion of theirs and ours. For, should they
leave out any tenet of their Church, it would follow, that the Church, in that,
before had erred; and so that pillar would be overthrown, on which have hanged
so many necessary points of Popery. Neither could we part with any one truth;
for Religion is of a brittle nature; break it you may, bend it you cannot. It
cannot be accommodated to respects of policy, and interests of States and and
Kingdoms; but as Elements, when mingled in a compound body, do close their
proper Forms. So Religions, when made ingredients, and compounding parts of
any other, do lose their Forms, and cease to be Religions in Gods account, 2
Kings 17.33, 34. Pillar and ground, page 16.

And when the Rochellers were in distress, and laid their ruin and disasters
at our door; fathered their losses and calamities on us; he preached that
Sermon of the new life, where Page 48. we have these words: We cannot stand
alone; what measure we mete to others in their distress, men shall measure the
same to us in our necessity, Luke 6.38. And how soon the fire may take here
also, we know not. And page 52. If any be an impediment, nay, if any do not do
their best; I pronounce this, in the Name of the most true God, that shall make
it good sooner or later, that they and their houses shall perish, Esth. 4.14.
The Court was hood-wink't in all these Comminations; for by Church, they
understood the Prelates and their Party; and the King thought if he adhered to
them, and did their work, he was absolved. But those that read the Commentaries
that have been written since in red letters, will have occasion to believe the
contrary.

And when the Duke was in the Isle of Rhees, in which voyage he had engaged
many of his very good Friends, and much of the Nobility and Gentry of the
Kingdom, the Doctor preached that Sermon, called the Demonstration of the
Deity, where Page 81. ye have these words: It is certain, that evil is intended
against us, and will come upon us, except something be done for to prevent it;
for there is a Covenant between God and us, and breach of Covenant causes a
quarrel; now the quarrel of God shall not go unrevenged. Lev. 26.25. I will
send a sword upon you, which shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant. Gods
quarrels are not rash and passionate as men's are; and therefore he will not lay
them aside without some true and real satisfaction. If we will not believe his
Word, yet will we not believe his Actions? Are not our Allies wasted? Are not
many branches of the Church cut off already, and more in hazard? In a word,
have not our enterprises been blasted, and withered under our hands for the
most part? Have not things been long going down the hill, and are even now
hastening to a period? This Sermon was preached to the King at Whitehall, on the
Lords day, and on the Wednesday following, the news came of the total routing
of our Army in the Isle of Rhees; which was such a ratification of his
Prediction, but the Sabbath day before, as made many to believe he was a
Prophet; and they called him Micaiah, because he seldom prophesied good unto
them. And Dr. Neal, then Bishop of Winchester, said, That he talked like one
that was familiar with God Almighty. And they were the more affected with it,
because the Doctor had another course to preach before his month was out, (for
every Chaplain was to preach twice, once upon the Lords day, and also upon the
Tuesday;) but the Doctor was desirous to exchange his course upon the Tuesday,
for a Sabbath Day. So Dr. Potter preached on the Tuesday, and Dr. Preston was
to preach upon the Lords day following, and was resolved to proceed on the same
text, but to handle a point relating to the third verse. For having showed in
this Sermon, that things were not done by chance, but by God; he now resolved
for to show, that God did things that men do not look for. Which being known
among the Bishops, and they affrighted with that disaster at the Isle of Rhees,
they interceded with the Clerk of the Closet, that (seeing Dr. Prestons turn
was past already, and this was Dr. Pottors) another might be put up, and he
deferred till another time; which was consented and yielded to: and so upon the
Friday before, a Messenger was sent unto the Doctor, to tell him, A special
Providence.
that another was provided to preach for Dr. Potter, and he might spare his
pains. The Dr. wondered at the Providence; for he was resolved fully to have
said that in that Sermon, if he had been suffered, that would in reason have
deserved Micaiahs entertainment, 1 Kings 22.27. but God was merciful unto him,
and used his enemies as instruments to save him from the danger. It would have
damped some men to be thus refused. He might have said with him, Mat. 22.4.
Behold, I have prepared my Dinner, my Oxen and my Fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready. But he considered what he had preached before, That a Sparrow
fell not to the ground without Gods will. That his Will and Resolution for to
sacrifice his all, was now accepted as Abraham's was; that his Sermon, whilst
an Embryo, and only in intention, had an efficacious operation upon the
Auditory. For as they had showed and discovered their fears, so good men did
their joys; and the Sermon was more talked of at Court and in the City, then
any Sermon that ever he had preached before. For all men enquired what the
Sermon was, that Dr. Preston was not suffered to preach; and many wise men were
persuaded, that it did more good, then it would have done, in case it had been
preached. So that in stead of being damped and dejected at the affront, he was
enlivened and encouraged: Repulsus generoso excitatiram, languido tristitiam. I
never knew him come home from the Court more satisfied, then he did this time,
nor more encouraged in his Ministry at Cambridge; for he was then upon those
Sermons of the Attributes, that since are printed, and God was greatly with him
in them.

Those Fellows at Emanuel, that had been active in making of him Master there,
were much satisfied, because the Doctor never would consent to the annulling of
that Statute, De mora sociorum in Collegio. For he was convinced, that the
Founder had added it upon very weighty grounds; and he saw it was a means to
make the Fellows Preach, and look abroad, and less intend the actings of the
Master; that young Scholars were heartned in their studies, with hopes that
there would be preferments ready for rhem. And it was ordinary among the
Scholars, to observe how long some Fellows were to stay. Therefore observing
these affronts at Court, they Petitioned the King, that that Statute might be
abrogated. The Duke was glad of this occasion to be revenged upon his old
Friend Dr. Preston, and did embrace it with all alacrity. Commissions were
dispatched for to hear and consider their Allegations, and many meetings and
debates were had about it; in which it was acknowledged, it was a Statute of
equal power and validity with the rest, though added three years after; and
upon that, one of the Fellows that had Petitioned fell off. The Doctor used all
his Friends, for to support and keep in power and effect this Statute, and
found very many very forward to assist him in it; but above all, a very Noble
Grandchild of the Founder yet living, did much encourage and enable the
defense: for though a Courtier, and much obliged, yet adventured, and waved all
his interests, rather then he would behold his Grandfathers pious and prudent
care so overthrown. So a temper was at last agreed on, that it should be
suspended from effects in Law, until six livings of an hundred pounds per
annum, should be annexed to to the College.

The soul is the undoubted Sovereign of the body, and has therein Despoticum
imperium, an absolute and uncontrolled Jurisdiction; and in case of injury or
over-burdening, there is no action lies. But souls should consider, soft and
fare goes far: Qui vult regnare diu, languida regnat manu. It was Hobson that
told the Scholars they would come time enough to London, if they did not ride
too fast. It was incurable in this good man to over-ride himself; for the body
is pars compositi, when it is tired, we cannot take a new one at the next
stage, as we do Horses. But he thought all was one; some lived as much in seven
years, as others did in seventy. Non diu vixit, sed diu fuit was his opinion of
many men: that our life is like to iron that will consume with rust, as much as
employment: Vita sicut ferrum, exerceas, vel perit. These were his principles,
and his actings were according; the most unmercifull unto his flesh of any
living. And it is true, that not time, but action should be the Metwand of all
men's lives. Non annos meos, sed victorias numero: Not how long I have lived,
but how? yet God does usually allow his dearest servants time to do their work
in. Moses 120 years of age, Deuteronomy. 34.7. David an old man before he dies, 1 Chronicles. 29.28. Paul aged, Phil. 9. notwithstanding all his labors and activity;
but the Doctor had a shorter period put unto his days: all men's is set, Job.
7.1. his was short. It was no disparagement to good Josiah to die about the
Doctors age, 2 Chronicles. 34.1. Our glorious King Edward, that scarce outlived his
minority, out-stripped notwithstanding all his longest living Predecessors in
doing good: God that had set his time, hastened his service, and so he did the
Doctors. His preaching and studying labors were exceeding great; but that
which spent and wore him, was his care and troubles for the Churches safety and
prosperity; Often he would inculcate that, 2 Cor. 11.28. That which comes upon
me daily, the care of all the Churches.

His last sickness.
When his body therefore began to be sick and languish, he was content a little
to abate and take off, and thought a Counttey house in some good air might
help, as formerly it had done; and accordingly took one at Linton, near the
hills about six miles off, which he furnished and purposed to be in all the
week, and come on Saturdays to preach upon the Lords days; and had this course
been taken time enough, much might have been. But now he feared, solicitude
would but be changed into solitude, the air of subitable converse he doubted
would be wanting there; and being alone, he saw, would too much gratify his
melancholy* the Spring therefore approaching, he was willing to consult with
some Physicians; and London being far off, he sent to Bury for Dr. Despotine.
His present malady was want of rest, which now Tobacco would not help him to,
as formerly it had done; and therefore he proposed letting blood. The Doctor
plainly told him, that might perhaps allay his heats, and purchase sleep; but
if it were within the verge of a Consumption, it would be fatal to him. He was
enticed notwithstanding with the deceitful hopes of present ease, and so was
let blood, but never lived to repair that loss. For sinking more and more, he
went to London, and took advice of those that were best acquainted with his
state of health; by their advice he retired a little unto Newington, unto a
loving Friend of his that lived there, and then to Harefordshire unto a thinner
and more penetrating air. The malady they all agreed was in his lungs, which
were not Ulcerated neither, but obstructed and oppressed with stiff and clammy
matter, that he could not void, and perspiration was that he wanted, and they
supposed a penetrating air might do the cure; but that was found too searching
and corrosive for the other parts, which were pervious enough and penetrable.
He therefore thought upon Northamptonshire, his native Country, which would in
reason be most propitious unto him. However he would leave his breath where
first he found it, and thankfully return what had been serviceable now along
time to him. He had at Preston four miles from Heyford, a very dear and bosom
friend, that was ambitious of entertaining good men; old Master Dod was but a
mile off, being seriously invited thither, he pitched upon it, where he enjoyed
with great contentment, what air, converse of friends, and loving entertainment
could afford, and at the first was much refreshed by it; but nature being
spent, and no foundation being left to work upon, all his refreshing quickly
flagged. He had before made use of Dr. Ashworth, and he was one of much
experience, and knew his body well; therefore he thinks of riding over unto
Oxford to him, which he did, and there continued about twelve days, and
consulted with such as were there of any note. Men die and perish when their
time is come, as well errore medici, as vi morbi. Doctor Ashworth was persuaded
that the Scorbute was his disease, and that the London-Doctors had all mistook
their mark, and therefore pitcheth upon applications suitable: A great error
for so experienced and grave a Doctor. Desire of restitution into a state of
health, made shift to flatter him into belief it was so. The old man upon this
persuasion, comes over unto Preston with him, strains and steeps Scurvy Grass,
and gives him Drenches able to have weakened a stronger man then he was now; and
having stayed and tampered with him about three weeks, and finding nothing
answer his expectation, he takes his last leave of him, giving such order and
direction as he thought good, and so leaves him, and returns to Oxford, July 9.
1628.

When this dream and fancy of the Scorbute failed, and Dr. Ashworth was gone,
he resigned up himself to God alone, and let all care of Physic and the
Doctors go. He had a Servant who had been laborious with him, and whom he often
used as a Friend; he would say, Servi sunt humiles amici was very true of him.
To him he therefore now unbosomed himself, not only touching the vanity and
emptiness of all things here below, but his own belief and expectation of a
sudden change; not of my company (said he,) for I shall still converse with
God and Saints, but of my place, and way of doing it. His Will was made (as we
have said) some years before, but he was doubtful, if it come to proving, it
might be baffled and affronted, and therefore purposed to wave it, and make a
Deed of Gift to him that was in that Will his Executor, with such restrictions
and limitations as he thought good, all which he set down with his own hand;
wherein he carefully provided for his Mother during life, and both his
Brothers. His Books, and all the furniture and goods belonging to, and in his
lodgings at Emanuel-Colledge, he gave one of his Pupils that was Fellow there,
whom he always greatly favored. Some exhibitions he gave Scholars there to be
disposed of from time to time, by him that was Executor. And as he truly
valued, so he liberally rewarded his Servants faithfulness, who lives yet in
very good condition and reputation; of whom is verified what is said, Prove.
27.18. Whosoever keeps the fig tree, shall eat the fruit thereof; so he that
waits on his Master, shall surely come to honor. And having thus discumbred
himself of worldly cares, he took care for the places he now possessed, prayed
for the College, that it might continue a flourishing Nursery of Religon and
Learning, told those about him as David before his death, 1 Chronicles. 29.2, 3,
etc. what he had done toward that goodly building since erected, and what care
he had taken to get those Rectories in the Kings Letter mentioned, whereof we
spoke before; prayed God to furnish Lincolns-Inne from time to time with able
preaching Ministers, and so the Lecture at Cambride, that had cost so much
trouble in the procuring. Then for his Sermons, that they might not come into
the world like Vagabonds; but seeing the Father lived not, to see them settled
and provided for, those would be careful whom then he named, and is long since
intimated upon occasion. In all which great things God has so answered him, as
I think no man was since Elisha, 2 King. 2.9, 10.

The night before he died, being Saturday, he went to bed, and lay about three
hours desirous to sleep, but slept not; then said, My dissolution is at hand,
let me go to my home, and Jesus Christ who has bought me with his precious
blood. And so lay still as in a slumber, till about two of the clock in the
morning; then drinking and resting on his servants arms, he fell into a cold
and clammy sweat, which he told them was the Messenger of death; and so
continued for about two hours very silent. About four of the clock, he said, I
feel death coming to my heart, my pain shall now be quickly turned into joy.
And so his Friends were called that were present in the house, who spoke unto
him, but had no answer from him as they were used to have. They kneeled all
down, and a Reverend Divine there present prayed. When Prayer was ended, he
looked on them, and turning away his head, gave up the ghost. It was about five
a clock on the Lords day, but to him an everlasting Sabbath. He never (by his
good will) rested that day, since God was truly known unto him until now; God
gave him therefore now an everlasting rest. No man deserved better Funeral
solemnities. But Master Dod was much against it; and his Friends at Cambridge,
who did highly honor him, and desired nothing more, then to have waited on his
dust unto its long home, were now obliged to attend the Election of another
Master, that they durst not so much as make it known, or do any thing, from
which it might be gathered. So he was buried decently, but without state, in
Fawsley Church in the County of Northampton. Old Master Dod, the Minister of
that place preached, and a world of godly people came together, July 20. 1628.
being within a little of one and forty years of age.

Dr. Preston just before his death, asked what day it was, and being answered,
that it was the Sabbath day; A fit day (said he) to be sacrificed on: I have
accompanied Saints on earth, and now I shall accompany Angels in Heaven. Also,
Mrs. Chaterdon telling him of his preaching so profoundly on Gods Attributes,
he answered; If it shall please God to prolong my life, I will make all so
plain, that every one shall be able to understand it.

This Life was written by my Reverend Friend, Master Thomas Ball of Northampton.

The Life of Master Arthur Hildersam, who died Anno Christi, 1631.
His Parentage
ARthur Hildersam was born at Stetchworth, near New Market in Cambridgeshire,
October. 6. 1563 He was Son of Thomas Hildersam of the said Town (a Gentleman
of an ancient Family) and Anne Poole his second Wife, daughter to Sir Jeffery
Poole, fourth Son to Sir Richard Poole, (who was Cosen Germane to King Henry
the seventh) and Margaret Countess of Salisbury, that was Daughter to George
Duke of Clarence, (the second Brother to King Edward the fourth) and Isabel the
eldest daughter and Coheir of Richard the great Earl of Warwick, His education.
and Salisbury. Thus much for his Birth. For his Education; In his childhood he
was brought up in the Popish manner; taught to say his Prayers in Latin, both
his Parents and their Kindred, specially his Mother, being zealous Papists.
When he was to be sent abroad to School, his Fathers aim was only to send him
to a good School, where many Gentlemen's Sons were taught; but God so ordered
it, (by his good Providence) that his Father unawares placed him at
Saffron-Walden School in Essex, with one Master Desborough, a godly man, and a
Religious Protestant, who taking great affection to him for his wit and
disposition, His conversion.
was very careful of him, and taught him not only that humane learning that
was fitting for his years, but the grounds of the Protestant Religion. A
special Providence.
This his Schoolmaster, was the first blessed Instrument that God was pleased
to make use of, to work in him a liking and relish of the Reformed Religion. He
continued with him, till he was fit for the University, which was not long. For
when he was but about thirteen years of age, he was placed by his Father (the
good hand of God still overruling him) with a very godly and Religious Tutor
in Christ's College in Cambridge, His going to Cambridge.
where he concontinued till after he was Master of Arts, where he gained much
love and esteem for his Piety, Learning, Ingenuity, affability and harmless
inoffensive witty Converse.

When he had continued in Cambridge some two years, or thereabouts, his Father
sent him up to London, intending to send him to Rome, (being confident he
should neither want respect, encouragement, nor preferment, for his great
Uncles [Cardinal Pooles] sake, Brother to his Mothers Father) but he refusing
to go, his Father kept him long at London, taking him from one Popish Ordinary
to another, Mr: ARTHVR HILDERSAM
hoping that such company, would at length have prevailed with him, to have
gone according to his desire. But he continuing firm in his resolution, not to
go to Rome, his Father resolved to cast him off; His Father cast^ him off.
which soon after he did. Thus he, whom God had appointed to suffer much for
him, began to bear the yoke in his youth; Lam. 3.27.
and in his tender years, became a Confessor in forsaking, Father, Friends, all
present maintenance, and probable hopes of great future preferment for Christ's
sake.

Being in this dejected and forlorn condition, God that comfort those that
are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6.
comforted him by meeting with Mr. John Ireton (then Fellow of Christ's
College, A special Providence.
after Rector of Kegworth in Leicestershire, a man famous for Piety and
Learning) in London, who at their meeting, said unto him; Arthur, why art thou
so long from thy Book, and losest so much time? Alas Sir, said he, I shall go
no more to Cambridge; and thereupon told him his condition, and the occasion of
it. Be not discouraged, (says Master Ireton) thou have a Noble Kinsman, whom I
will acquaint with thy case: and I doubt not but he will provide for thee.
Accordingly Master Ireton soon after went to the Right Honorable Henry Earl of
Huntingdon, Lord President of the North (whose Mother and Master Hildersams
Mother, were Brothers Children) and represents to him the sad condition of
his poor Kinsman: The Noble Earl gladly embraced this opportunity of doing
good; and sent for him, encouraged him, promised him maintenance, and gave
order to Master Ireton to send him back to Cambridge, and to place him with a
good Tutor; For (said he) I suppose his Father did place him with a Papist. But
when Master Ireton assured him the contrary, he gave order he should go to his
former Tutor, of whose love to him, and care of him, Master Hildersam was wont
often to speak.

When Master Hildersam was Master of Arts, he was soon after to Commonplace,
[a Colledge-exercise in Divinity, not different from a Sermon, but in length]
he being loath to adventure upon that Exercise, entreated one of the Fellows
(his special Friend) to supply his place the first time; but he, out of love,
refused to gratify him in that, and wished him to remember one Master Sidney
Zouch, Master of Arts of that College, who getting one to supply his place the
first time, and hearing afterward some of his own year perform that Exercise
so well, that he despaired of doing the like; could never after, be persuaded
either to Commonplace, or preach, though he were a very able Scholar. The
first time he was to Commonplace, His first Sermon.
he was much afraid; but observing that there sat a very godly man (his
Friend) on the other side of the Chapel, he thought that that man prayed for
him, which much encouraged him.

He was of so good repute for his Piety and Learning, that by the major part of
the Fellows he was chosen Fellow of that College; He is chosen Fellow of
Christ's College, but opposed.
but Dr. Barwell (the Master) making use of his negative voice, stopped him;
and the matter came to the Visitors, two of which, viz. Doctor Perne, and
Doctor Goad, favoring his Competitor, Master Willet, (who was afterward
Doctor Willet) made him Fellow. Not long after, he was chosen Divine of
Trinity-hall in the said University; where he continued till September. the 14,
1587. at which time, by the foresaid Right Honorable Earl, he was called to
be, and placed Preacher at Ashby de la zauce in Leicestershire. His remove to
Ashby.
The impropriate Tithes of the same Parish being settled upon him for his life
by the said Earl, and continued to him by the favor of the two succeeding
Earls, George, and Henry, until his death. He has given public notice to
the world, of his duty and thankfulness to that noble house, in his Dedicatory
Epistle to his Lectures on Joh. 4.

His marriage.
January 5. 1590. He married Mistress Anne Barfoot (Daughter to Master Barfoot
of Lamborn-hall in Essex, who was a very loving and careful Wife of him, and
the like Mother of his Children;) she survived him about eight years. His first
silencing.
He was silenced in June 1590. and restored again in January, 1591. He was
instituted and inducted into the Vicaridge of Ashby, October. 4. 1593.

He preached at the Assiises at Leicester in the time of a great dearth, July
20. 1596. a godly, learned, zealous, plain, and powerful Sermon, upon those
words, 1 King. 18.17, 18. And it came to pass when Ahab saw Elijah, His Sermon
before the Judge.
that Ahab said unto him, Art thou he that troubles Israel? And he answered, I
have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in that ye have
forsaken the Commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim. In the
handling of which Text he so offended Judge Aderson, that he manifested his
anger and displeasure, both by his countenance and gesture, arising to go away;
But Master Hildersam speaking some words unto him with ministerial authority,
Judge Aderson angry with him.
he stayed till the Sermon was done. After Sermon, the Judge would have had the
Grand Jury to have indicted him; but in those days, it would have been hard to
have found a Grand Jury in Leicestershire, that would have done that. Some
further and greater danger Master Hildersam was in, by reason of that Judges
displeasure for that Sermon; but God in mercy prevented it.

In the year 1598. there was an attachment sent out of the High Commission for
his apprehension. In the beginning of King James his reign, when many
petitioned for Reformation, (which Petitions were very modest, and moderate,
subscribed by above seven hundred and fifty godly able Preachers, in but twenty
five Counties; which Petition was directed to the Parliament, He manageth the
Petition for Reformation.
and other Petitions to his Majesty, and the Lords of the Council, and to the
Bishops:) he with some few others of his Brethren, were chosen, and chiefly
entrusted to manage that important business, to prosecute the Petitions, to
solicit the cause; and if required, to dispute it. And whereas there were some
appointed to deal (for those that desired Reformation,) in the Conference at
Hampton Court, he, with Master Stephen Egerton of London, and Master Edward
Fleetwood of Lancashire, delivered to them some ten demands and requests, made
by thirty Reverend Ministers, in the name of themselves and many others, which
they entreated them to solicit his Majesty for, in the behalf of the Church.

He was deprived and silenced by William Chaderton, then Bishop of Lincoln,
April 24. 1605. for refusal of subscription, and conformity; His second
silencing.
yet after some time, by the connivance and favor of William Overton, then
Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, he preached sometimes in that Diocese,
specially at those two famous Exercises at Burton upon Trent in Staffordshire,
and Repton in Derbyshire, which were the means of great good to the souls of
many, The success of his Ministry.
both Ministers and private Chaistians in the parts adjacent. He was the main
upholder of these two Exercises for many years.

In January 1608. by the favor of William Barlow, then Bishop of Lincoln, he
was allowed to preach again at Ashby aforesaid, He is restored to Ashby.
where he began his Lectures on John 4.10. January 31. and continued that
Lecture weekly on Tuesday, till November. 12. 1611. His Lectures on John 4.
These Lectures being one hundred and eight, he published in his life time,
1628. having them all written by himself, before he preached them; which course
he took when he began those Lectures, and continued it to his dying day,
blaming himself much that he began it no sooner, and by that neglect, both
himself and others were deprived (in a great part) of the benefit of his former
labors.

November. 1611. he was silenced by Richard Neales means, His third silencing.
then Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, who complaining to the King of him, the
King commanded the Archbishop, to write to the Bishop of Lincoln, to send for
Master Hildersam, and to silence him, which was accordingly presently done. The
occasion of Bishop Neales complaint to King James was this: One Edward
Wightman, a damnable Heretic (afterward burnt at Lichfield for Blasphemy and
Heresy, Wightman burnt for Heresy.
) dwelling in Burton upon Trent aforesaid; and coming sometimes to the Exercise
there, the Bishop and his Friends gave out, that Wightman learned his Opinions
(at least that of the souls sleeping) of the Puritans, and at the aforesaid
Exercises, and of Master Hildersam by name. Slander.
Bishop Neal informing King James of this, the King commanded him, (when he
went into the Country) to send for Master Hildersam, and to hear what he could
answer Wightman in this matter. The Bishop accordingly sent for Master
Hildersam, but would not hear his defense till Wightman came. Wightman being
called to his second public hearing, November. 26r. 1611. (in the hearing of
more then five hundred people) charged the Bishop with sundry wrongs he had
done him, naming this for one; That he had given it out, that he had learned
his Opinions from Master Hildersam: whereas I profess (said he) he never
taught, nor confirmed me in any of them; but was of all men ever most opposite
unto me in them, and caused mine own Friends to reject me for them. Master
Hildersam had long before in a private conference, in the presence of Master
Aberly the Minister of Burton, (who had entreated him to take some pains to
reclaim Wightman,) showed him that his Opinion of the souls sleeping, was
directly repugnant to the holy Scriptures, and an Heresy long since condemned
in the Church. The places of Scripture he urged against him, were these, Luke
16.22, 23. and 24.43. Phil. 1.23. Soon after, he received a Letter from
Wightman, March 10. 1608. and perceiving by that, and the report of others,
that he grew more and more obstinate in his errors, and labored to draw
others unto it, Master Hildersam took occasion in the next Exercise held at
Burton, viz. upon March 15. 1608. publicly and at large to confute his
error; the text that fell out that day to be handled, leading him directly
unto it, viz. Heb. 9.27. Above a month after the said exercise, viz. April 21.
1609. Wightman sent him another letter, wherein he revileth him for the said
speech, at the said Exercise, and took upon him, after his manner to answer it.
Yet after this, viz. November 27. 1611. before the Bishop, he impudently
avouched to Master Hildersams face, that at the conference forenamed, he should
say, that the whole drift of the Scripture indeed, did make for the Opinion of
the souls sleeping, but that the Church had otherwise judged of the matter.
Master Hildersam did protest, that he never spoke or thought so; and offered by
Oath, or any other means that should be required to avow, that he ever held
this his Opinion, to be directly contrary to the Scriptures, and a most
detestable Heresy: Master Aberly also, who was present at the conference, was
ready to depose that Master Hildersam spoke no such thing at that time, but the
direct contrary. So that not only the rest that were there, were fully
satisfied; but the Bishop himself also openly professed, that he was assuredly
persuaded, that Wightman had greatly wronged him in this that he had said of
him. Thus was Master Hildersams innocence cleared in a public audience,
during the time of Wightmans trial at Lichfield; yet he remained under the
censure of silencing, which was procured to be inflicted on him upon this
occasion; and the two forenamed Exercises were put down. Concerning which, all
the chief Gentlemen of worth in those parts, certified unto the Archbishop
Bancroft a little before his death, that the profit which that Country (which
above most other places of the Land besides, was known to stand in great need
of such means of instruction) received by them was exceeding great.

Master Hildersam continued silenced a long time, yet could not live peaceably
from men, though he lived quietly with men. For December 8. 1612. He is cited
into the High Commission Court.
Letter missive were sent out of the High Commission Court, requiring his
appearance there; accordingly he appeared. April 22. 1613. at which time he was
judicially admonished and enjoined, that (saving the catechizing of his own
Family only) he should not at any time hereafter preach, Silenced.
catechize, or use any part of the office, or function of a Minister, either
publicly or privately, until he should be lawfully restored and released of
his said suspension.

In the Spring, 1614. he fell into a violent Fever, which held him long, His
sickness.
the malignancy of which, struck up into the roof of his mouth, and the gristle
of his nose, which endangered him much; but by the blessing of God, upon the
care and skill of Physicians and Chyrurgeons, he was recovered.

In Easter term 1615. by Letters missive he appeared in the High Commission
Court again, which committed him to the Fleet, His second summons into the
High Commission Court.
(for refusal of the Oath ex officio,) where he continued a Prisoner diverse
weeks; at length he was removed by Habeas Corpus unto the Kings Bench, where he
continued a great while. In both places, His imprisonment.
he endured imprisonment three months. Then he was delivered out of prison,
upon bond to appear the first Court day, Term. Mich. 1615. but by dangerous
sickness (whereof affidavit was made in Court,) he was hindered from appearing
at that time.

September 4, 5, 6. 1616. The Commissioners, Doctor Lamb, Master Owen, Master
Middleton, and others sat at Ashby, to examine witnesses to prove the Articles
exhibited against Master Hildersam, and his neighbors, Master Dighton, and
Master Holt, where the deponents were, many of them, professed adversaries,
specially Master Hacket, (then Vicar of Ashby) who was the principal accuser
and informer of the Court against them; and so his testimony ought not in Law
to have been received against them. He is falsely accused.
It might well have been discerned by the disposition of many of the deponents,
what little credit was to be given to them; and that Master Hildersam might
have had the most odious and capital crimes desposed against him by such
Witnesses, who did not only in matter of fact affirm upon oath, that which all
the Parish knew to be notoriously false; but did also take upon them to know
and deliver upon their oath, the reason and ground of his pretended practice,
which (they having ever been, as all the neighbors knew, mere strangers to
him) was impossible for them to do it.

The next term the cause came to be heard and censured; but Master Hildersam
hearing of the heavy sentence against Master Dighton, and Master Holt, November
21. 1616. ( viz. to return back to prison, there to remain till they conformed
themselves; they were also fined a thousand pounds a piece, pronounced
excommunicate, and ordered to be so publicly denounced, and enjoined to make
their submissions, in conceptis verbis, in three several places; and lastly,
they were condemned in expenses and costs of the suit) concealed himself, and
did not appear at the day of his calling and censuring, but did eight days
before send a Copy of his answer to the several points that were desposed
against him, to his Advocate, Doctor Hussy, to be showed to the Court; Which
Answer, in the judgment of rational, honest, indifferent men, was full and
satisfactory.

To instance but in the proof of one Article, and his Answer thereunto. One
George Reding deposed, That upon Palm Sunday was two years, he was one of those
that came up to the Communion Table in Ashby Church in several companies, and
(though Master Hacket had before given warning, that he would admit none that
would not receive it kneeling) refused so to receive it, but would have
received it standing, and when he could not have it so, yet stood still among
them that kneeled, till the Communion was done. To which disposition Master
Hildersams answer was, That it is notoriously known to all the Inhabitants at
Ashby, that I was at that time sick in my bed, and for many weeks before, and
after, utterly unable to stir out of my Chamber; neither did I ever at any
other time present my self in that manner to the Communion Table, neither does
Master Hacket, or any other deponent charge me with any such matter. And this
fellow that has devised this against me, (whereof there was no color at all
of truth) would in all likelihood have sworn any thing that might have done me
hurt, if he had been required to do it. Notwithstanding this his answer to
that, and his answer to all the rest, delivered as aforesaid to his Advocate,
the Court proceeded to censure him, November 28. 1616. whereby he was
pronounced a man refractory and disobedient to the orders, His censure in the
High Commission Court.
rites, and ceremonies of the Church of England. And because he yet refused to
submit himself, and to join in the administration of public Prayer, and
divine Service and Sacraments, as they are here lawfully administered; therefore
he was by the Court pronounced a schismatic person, and a Schismatic, and
thought well worthy of severe punishment. And in respect that he was the prime
Ringleader of all the schismatical persons in that Country, both of the
Clergy and Laity, he was first fined two thousand pounds to his Majesty's use,
pronounced excommunicate, and ordered to be so publicly denounced; as also
was ordered to be attached and committed to prison, and so to be brought before
the Commissioners, to be degraded from his Ministry; and was further ordered,
to make his public submission conceptis verbis, (as shall be prescribed him
by this Court;) and lastly, he was condemned in charges.

A special Providence.
When he heard of this terribly cruel sentence, it was his wisdom now to conceal
himself, which accordingly he did for a long time in the City; and God so hid
him under the shadow of his wings, that his adversaries could not meet with him.

He is sent for Leyden.
During this time of his keeping close, one Master John Hartly, one of the
Elders of the English Congregation at Leiden in Holland, came with Letters of
Credence from the Congregation, making offer to him of the Pastors place, then
vacant; which he resolved to have accepted of, had not his Wives unwillingnesse
to go over the Seas, retained him here. The foresaid fine of two thousand
pounds was estreated without abatement into the Exchequer, March 12. 1616.
whence several Processes were issued to the Sheriffs of Leicestershire, to
enquire of his estate; but they, by several returns, answered, They could find
none. At length, the said fine was begged and granted by his Majesty, King
James, under the Great Seal, to Master Williams, Page to the (then) Marquess
of Buckingham; whereupon Master Hilderdsam compounded both with him, (giving
him a great sum of money,) and with the Registers also of the High Commission
Court, for their part of the fine, and obtained a discharge from them both. I
suppose it will be hard to find that any man was before, or scarce has been
since in that Court, so deeply fined, and heavily censured, merely for his
judgment and conscience; having done nothing either factiously, or
contemptuously against that Government, and those orders of the Church, that
were then established. He was indeed always from his first entering into the
Ministry, a resolved and conscientious Nonconformist, as appears by the
foregoing story, and so continued to his dying day, witness that clause in his
last Will: His constancy.
I do hereby declare and protest, that I do continue and end my days, in the
very same Faith and Judgment, touching all points of Religion, as I have ever
been known to hold and profess, and which I have, both by my Doctrine and
Practice, and by my sufferings also, given testimony unto. He was a great
admirer, follower, and friend of Master Thomas Cartwright (famous for Religion
and learning) who left his papers to Master John Dod and him, to peruse and
publish what they thought fit.

Though he himself was a constant Nonconformist, yet such was his ingenuity
and Christian Charity, that he respected, esteemed, and was very familiar with
those he knew to be religious and learned, though of another judgment. He did
always oppose the separation of the Brownists, and the semi-separation of
Master Jacob, with whom, His humility and charity.
as also with some Ringleaders of the former sort, he had diverse conferences
and disputes. He opposes the Brownists, and Independents.
He is called by Doctor Willet (his Contemporary, and sometimes Competitor) The
Hammer of schismatics, whom they commonly call Brownists; as you have it in J.
C. his Epistle to the Reader, before the forenamed Lectures on John 4. That is,
Master John Cottons of New England, (his dear and familiar Friend,) who there
expresses his high opinion of the Author, those Lectures, and his Treatise of
the Doctrine of the Lords Supper, printed 1608. annexed to a little Treatise of
the like Argument, set forth by a godly learned man (his intimate Friend)
Master William Bradshaw, of which Treatise of Master Hildersams, Master Cotton
gives this Testimony: That it has been of singular good use to many poor souls
for their preparation to that Ordinance. Master Cottons testimony of him.
And in very deed (says he) those questions and answers do more fully furnish
a Christian to that whole spiritual duty, then any other, in any language (that
I know) in so small a compass. Master Cotton also mentions in the foresaid
Epistle, a Letter of Master Hildersams, to a Gentlewoman, against separation,
which, without his consent, a Separatist (Master Francis Johnson) printed and
refuted; Which (says Master Cotton) has so strongly and clearly convinced the
iniquity of that way, that I could not but acknowledge in it, both the wisdom
of God, and the weakness of the Separatist; His wisdom, in bringing to light
such a beam of the light of his truth, by the hand of an adversary, against the
Authors mind; and the weakness of the other, to advance the hand of his
adversary, to give himself and his cause such a deadly wound in open view, as
neither himself, nor all his associates can be able to zeal. His judgment and
testimony of the Author, and his Lectures on John 4. you may read in that
Epistle. In a private Letter of his from Boston, February 3. 1629. to him; he
mentions a Letter he received from a Dutch Minister in London, (one Timotheus
Van Ul-eren) who tells him, he had sent sundry of the Books on John 4. to
Ministers beyond the Seas, who do read them with such great satisfaction, that
the said Dutch Minister did, in the name of many others, entreat Master Cotton,
to beseech Master Hildersam to put forth his Sermons on Psalm. 51. and other his
lucubrations. And accordingly Master Cotton in that Letter writes thus; Since
the Sermons already on part of the Psalm, do arise to a just and full volume,
be entreated to hearken to the desires of so many at home and abroad, and give
them leave to be doing good, whilst the rest are preparing. You have cause to
love the Lord your God with all your might; and therefore, since those Sermons
might be showing your love to God in working his work, before their fellows, do
not hold back any part of their service to the Church, for the present time.
This his request he renewed, in another Letter of July 23. 1629.

Having mentioned the testimony and judgment of the Reverend Master Cotton
concerning Master Hildersam and his labors, whom in his Reply to Master Roger
Williams answer of his Letter, p. 117. he styles A man of a thousand; I shall
insert another testimony of a man deservedly famous in the Church, Doctor
Preston, then Fellow of Queens College in Cambridge, concerning the
formentioned Lectures on John 4. He having long desired, at length obtained of
Master Hildersam the Copy of them, which he kept a long time, and perused, and
being desired to deliver his opinion of them, in his Letter to the Author, Dr.
Prestons testimony of his Lectures on John 4.
November 28. 1615. speaks thus: I will say to you faithfully and ingenuously
what I think, without adding a word more then mine own heart is persuaded of.
First in general, for putting them to the Press, I do not only think that they
are worthy of it, but so far as any entreaty of mine might prevail, I should
press you to it, as depriving Gods Church of a very great Benefit, if you
should refuse. In particular, besides the profitablenesse of the matter, these
two things I observe in the reading of it: First, throughout the whole
carriage, there appears a continued strength (that I may so call it) without
any failing or deficiency, without any inequality, unevenness of deformity of
some parts with the rest. Secondly, it is press and succinst (though large)
the things choice and pertinent, and thoroughly depending each on other. In
brief, so it is, there is nothing that need be added, and nihil quod amputem.
So that when I went about to take out some things for mine own use briefly, I
could not almost tell what to leave out. To say all in a word, Sir, I do think
it is such, as will answer to your name, and such as men would look for from
you. There are very few writings, but wherein we commonly see some failings in
these two particulars, which I mentioned. Besides, the method I much like, as
very judicious; which has not ruled you, but you it, in a seasonable changing
it, as your matter lies, so casting the frame of it, that it extorteth not
more then is necessary from you, nor cutteth off any thing that you would
deliver: which one precise, uniform method strictly kept, often does. I hope it
will be a good help to Ministers when they read it, and bring the metod of
Doctrine and Uses into more credit. These are Doctor Prestons own words in his
Letter. Unto this ample and laudable testimony given, by these two Worthies,
this may be added, that his most grave and authoritative manner of preaching,
did give an edge and excellency unto his Ministry.

Though Master Hildersam, in the judgment of these eminent Divines at home and
abroad, and most others that knew him, were a man of such worth and ability,
and whose labors were so useful in the Church; yet was he for a long time, by
the then prevailing power in the Church, cast aside like a broken vessel.

After his censure in the High Commission Court, His studiousnesse.
he lived privately a long time, sometimes in the City, sometimes in the
Country.

He was always, whether silent or having a liberty to preach, a constant
student; when he was in the Country, and had convenience of place and weather,
he used to walk alone every morning near an hour, to meditate. In the morning
he read constantly a Chapter, whence he gathered some observations, and wrote
them in a Book, with the reference to some commonplace in the margent, which
he referred to his Commonplace Book by numbers. The like he did out of many
Books that he read; in others which he read, he referred the most observable
things in them to his Commonplace Book, by the pages in them. As he was much
in secret Prayer, so was he fervent therein; yea frequent in holy ejaculations
audibly expressed, as was observed by some godly friends, whose occasions
brought them often near to the place where he studied.

He was always a diligent frequenter of the public Assemblies, His care to
profit by the Word.
whether he were in the City or Country; he used often even in his old age to
write Sermons in the Church. He so highly prized the Ministry of the Word, that
he would often say, He never heard any godly Minister preach, though but of
weak parts, but he got some Benefit by him.

He sojourned in many Families, and always by his godly and amiable carriage,
got love and esteem of all in the house.

In all places where he did reside, or whether he came occasionally, he was
always helpful in Family-Prayers, in expounding the Scriptures read, and in
the repetition of the Sermons preached in the public Congregation; being also
willing by private conference to instruct the ignorant, to satisfy the
doubtful, to settle the wavering, to comfort the dejected, and to encourage
all sorts in the exercises of Religion.

He was much in the house of Mistress Katherine Redich of Newhall in
Derbyshire, (widow to Alexander Redich of Redich in Lancashire Esquire, his
bosom Friend) his ancient acquaintance, and constant dear Friend to his death,
who survived him not above eight days; the grief for his death hastening (as
it was supposed) her end. In her house at Hamstead near London, His sickness.
August 21. 1624. he fell sick of a violent Fever, which put him into such
danger, that the Physicians doubted of his Recovery; he over-hearing some
intimation of it, when he thought none were in the room, the Curtains being
drawn about his bed, he was overheard by one in the room, to speak audibly
those words of Psalm. 118.17. I shall not die, but live, and declare the works
of the Lord. At that time there was as little hope of his preaching, His
recovery.
as of his recovery. But God, in great mercy, soon after restored him both to
health and liberty. The next year, viz. June 20. 1625. he was licensed by
Doctor Ridley, then Vicar General to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to preach
in the Diocese of London, Lincoln, and Coventry, and Lichfield under the Seal
of that office. By virtue of which License he began to preach, August 3. 1625.
in Ashby Church aforesaid, His Lectures at Ashby, on Psalm. 35.3.
those eight Sermons on Psalm. 35.13. concerning Fasting, Prayer, and
Humiliation for sin, which were published since his death, viz. 1632.
according to his own Copy left under his hand, by his Son Master Samuel
Hildersam.

September 28. 1625. he began his one hundred and fifty two Lectures on Psalm.
51. published in the like nature, His Lectures on Psalm. 51.
1635.

After the last forementioned licensing, he was silenced again, March 25. 1630.
by notice given him from the Court at Leicester of the Kings instructions, He
is again silenced.
for every Lecturer to read service in Surplice and Hood, and he began to
preach again, Aug. 2. 1631. and so continued till December 27. 1631. which was
the last Sermon that he preached.

His last sickness.
Soon after he fell sick of his last sickness, and discerning it to increase, he
sent for his forenamed Son dwelling at West-Felton in Shropshire, forty nine
miles from Ashby; He with his Wife came to him withal convenient speed,
January 13. and stayed with him till his death.

Their company and attendance at that time (as always formerly,) was very
contenting and comfortable. And of his Daughter-in-law (who was by himself
propounded as a meet Wife for his dearest Son, and in whom he ever took much
delight) he was heard, with affection to ingeminate these words, Never man had
a kinder Daughter-in-law.

His disease (though not discerned to be so at the first) proved the Scorbute,
the which being a dull and melancholic distemper, indisposed him to speak
much; yet, as he showed wonderful patience through his whole sickness, so he
used many holy and heavenly expressions to those that attended him, or came to
visit him, who (he being so much beloved and honored in the Country) were not
a few.

He suggested unto some dear Friends, his fears that Wolves would ere long come
in amongst them, and thereupon earnestly exhorted them to continue steadfast in
the truth, which they had received. And occasion being given to mention those
words, 1 Timothy 3.5. How shall he take care of the Church of God? looking to his
Son, he said, Oh Son, Son, that care of the Flock, is the main thing.

The most godly people in those parts, his constant hearers (who had been
either converted to Christ, or edified and confirmed in grace by his Ministry)
being very sensible of the great loss, which not themselves only, but the
whole Church of God also would sustain by his death, (that they might not seem
negligent in the use of any means within their reach, to prolong his life and
their own comfort) did resolve amongst themselves to set apart a day, that they
might solemnly in public seek the Lord by fasting and Prayer in his behalf,
wherein they had the hearty help of Master Simeon Ash, both in the morning and
afternoon by Sermons, and Supplications, who did more owe himself unto Master
Hildersam, then to any other man, having been first placed in the University,
under the tuition of famous Master Thomas Hooker, fellow of Emanuel College,
and afterward directed and encouraged in his Ministry, by his great care and
love.

March 4. being the Lords day, he grew very weak, and was prayed for in the
Congregation in Ashby Church, both at the morning and evening exercise. His
Son prayed with him diverse times that day, and whilst he was praying the
last time, he departed, and slept in the Lord, between nine and ten of the
clock that night, His death.
viz. March 4. 1631. Thus he who had diligently heretofore, kept the holy rest
of the Sabbath, did in the close of the Sabbath rest from his labors; and
having glorified God often, both in public and private, on that day before,
was at last on that day received into glory. Master Herring (his dear and
familiar friend) being then at Coventry, was sent for the next day, and came
and preached the Lecture in Ashby Church on Tuesday, March 6. in the morning,
(Master Hhildersam having taken order in his Will, that there should be no
Funeral-Sermon at his Burial,) and then spoke like himself, holily, discreetly,
learnedly, and affectionately, concerning the loss that that Congregation, the
Country and whole Church had sustained by the death of him that was lately
dead. In the afternoon of that day, his body was born by neighbour-Ministers to
the grave, accompanied by a great multitude, His burial.
both of Ministers and others, who expressed much sorrow and lamentation.

He lived in Ashby aforesaid for the most part (yet being often forced to
remove his dwelling) of forty three years, and six months, with great
success in his Ministry, love and reverence of all sorts. He was very
charitable to the poor himself, and in exciting of his auditors to contribute
toward their relief. His charity.
In few Countrey-Congregations in England the Collections for the poor were so
large, as they were at the Quarter-daies at his Lectures.

The loss of poor Ashby by his death, was exceeding great; for he was the
Peacemaker amongst neighbors, and the Patron of the poor; wickedness was
checked, and godliness cherished by his great care and wisdom. He was a
Friend to every one in a good cause, and it was his unwearied delight to be
Christianly seviceable in any kind.

He lived to a great age, (considering that his pains in preaching did
ordinarily weaken him so much) sixty eight years and five months; yet this
happiness God vouchsafed to him, which was more then ordinary, that he
outlived not his parts, but as his graces increased toward his end, so his
abilities of invention, judgment, memory, elocution decayed not in his age. He
left a precious memory behind him; had Letters of commendation written in the
hearts of many, of which some live here, some in glory. His Books will prove
more durable Monuments of his name, then that his Son erected for him in
Ashby Church.

And yet his Name, with the lively picture of his Person, lives in his worthy
Son, Master Samuel Hildersam, whose learning Cambridge knew, while he was
Fellow of Emanuel College; and whose present ministerial labors, and pious
conversation at West-Felton in Shropshire, do perpetuate the honor of his
reverend Father, whose very memory he does much reverence, and whose rich
Virtues, both personal and ministerial, he does happily imitate. And his good
help from his Fathers Papers, and other ways, has most conduced to the
drawing up of this faithful relation, that God may be glorified, and many
souls may be edified by this famous example, thus presented unto public view.

Dr. TAILOR
The Life of Doctor Thomas Tailor, sometimes Pastor of Aldermanbury London, who
died Anno Christi 1632.
THomas Tailor was born at Richmond in Yorkshire, of worthy and godly Parents:
His Parentage and education.
His Father was Recorder of that Town, and a very Gaius or Onesiphorus to the
silenced Ministers of England, and to the exiled Ministers of Scotland. He
brought up diverse Sons into the Ministry. This Son of his (as the other)
was of a Child trained up in the holy Scriptures, which are able to make wise
to salvation. Afterward, as age came on, he was well grounded in other
Learning, and was sent to Cambridge, His going to Cambridge.
where he became Fellow of Christ's College, as one that should do the Lord
Christ abundance of good service. He was there most painful and unweariable in
the study of Tongues, Arts, Sciences, all sorts of Exercises about them; and
especially for Divinity, which was his Profession. One while he was Hebrew
Reader to the College. Being soon ripe, he entered into the Ministry at the age
of one and twenty years.

In Queen Elizabeth's time, he was called to preach at Paul's Cross, and
preached the Sermon in King James his time. His Sermon at Paul's Cross.


In the course and work of his Ministry, he spent thirty five years, with all
diligence and painfulnesse, even to the very end, His painfulnesse in the
Ministry.
when by right he might have spared himself; living in all sincerity and godly
pureness, with entire love of souls, with all watchfulness, with meekness,
wonderfully quickened with zeal. He was an utter enemy of Popery, Arminianisme,
Antinomianisme, and other Sects which crept up in those times, as appears
partly by his writings. Amidst all his pithy Discourses, he was also an
excellent and nimble Orator, and wound up his matter with a good farewell, even
when at times it was but ordinary. And from this course he would scarce suffer
himself to be withdrawn at any time, to refresh his spirits by a little
freedom. Yea, sometimes when he was drawn forth into the Country for
recreation, by the solicitation of Gods people, he escaped not without his
usual burden: Or he spent his vacant time in preparing Books for the Press,
which were both many and very useful, and will be to posterity; who have cause
to bless God, who gives gifts to men, and public minds, that they may
profit far and near, both hearers and strangers, all debtors to him. And men
of understanding observed a great Seal put to his Ministry, The success of his
Ministry.
in several places whereto he was called: Some converted, others confirmed,
others comforted in the way of God: And in these times of division wherein many
Professors have turned into by-waies, those that were his constant Hearers,
continue in that way steadfast and unshaken in faith and love, which is in
Christ Jesus. Yea at Reding there was a generation of young Preachers, who
under his Ministry grew up in knowledge and holiness, and some eminency of
gifts, profiting by him and his pains there; and some profess it at this day:
Perhaps also in the great City of London, and at Cambridge.

His piety in private.
Neither was he altogether for the public, but pious in private; and not only
in the course of his Family, but in keeping Fasts among the godly of the place,
which in those days was something a dangerous exercise. And, to make them
solid Professors indeed, he put them upon a weekly way of handling
Chatecheticall points of Divinity; that is, every week to confer of one of
the heads of Religion, according to the Catechism subjoyned to Mr. Dods
Treatise on the Commandments, still proving the Doctrines by Testimonies of
Scripture. For other personal qualifications, he was a man full of love,
alms-deeds, and merciful consideration of the needy, though not with a
Trumpet. And he was a man blessed of God with all the blessings of wisdom, Prove.
3.16. Length of days, riches and honor. He had every where both godly and
great Friends, and is likely still to have, among those that shall converse in
his worthy works.

His sickness.
In that his holy and blessed course, he drew on toward his end. It was his
Clymacterical year of 56. Having over-laboured himself with preaching in the
City, he betook himself to his Countrey-house at Isleworth, to be a little
refreshed. But having inflamed and corrupted his blood by preaching, he soon
fell into his mortal disease, a Pleurisy; for curing whereof, though no
means were wanting, His prudence therein.
yet the desired effect (through the Counsel of God) followed not. In the
beginning of his sickness he set his house in order most holily, and as became
so worthy a Father; and then bad farewell to all, as one thoroughly prepared for
his departure; full of Faith and Patience, and joy in the holy Ghost, a great
help in that acute disease: Careful of the welfare of the Church at home, then
in danger to be corrupted; grieved for the evils he knew in some men's dealings:
Rejoicing greatly (in the midst of the apprehension of death) for the happy
proceedings of the heroical King of Sweden, then victorious in Bavaria. And
once when he was told, he must a little help himself by cheerfulness, he fell
into a most contentfull discourse of those noble deliverances and victories,
and more would have spoken, if weakness had permitted. But especially his joy
in God, and in the conquest of Christ: Oh (said he) we serve a good Lord, who
covers all imperfections, and gives great wages for little work; and in mercy
he has provided for me some of the greatest. With other holy speeches, full of
faith and joy, which his infirmity would not suffer him to utter perfectly. His
death.
In which manner he languished by degrees, and at last on the Lords day, being
the usual day of his principal labors, he was dismissed of all, and went to
keep a perpetual Sabbath in heaven; where now he rests from his labors, and
his works follow him, even a full reward in endless glory, which eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither can enter into the heart of man to conceive, what
things those are which God has prepared for them that love him.

The Life of Master Hugh Clark, who died Anno Christi 1634.
His birth, and breeding.
HUgh Clark was born at Burton upon Trent, in the County of Stafford, August
15. 1563. of honest Parents, who were very careful of his education, both in
Religion and Learning, and when he was fitted for the University, they sent him
to Cambridge, where he was admitted into Jesus College under the tuition of
Master Duport, His going to Cambridge.
(afterward Doctor Duport, and Master of that College) in that place he
followed his study very hard, and his Proficiency was very exemplary; but after
two years and an half, the air not well agreeing with his constitution, His
remove to Oxford.
he removed to Oxford, and continued there till he was Master of Arts. He was a
good Logician, and a very acute disputant. The first place that he was called
to exercise his Ministry in, His going into Northamptonshire.
was about Oundle in Northamptonshire, where he met with a people, that for the
generality of them, were very ignorant and ungodly, and much addicted to the
Profanation of the Lords day, by Whitson-ales, Morris dancing, etc. which
sins Master Clark in his Ministry much set himself against, endeavoring from
Gods Word to convince them of the evil, and denouncing Gods judgments in case
of their obstinate perseverance in such provoking courses; but they, having
been always trained up in such practices, and having their hearts hardened
against admonition, still persevered in their former courses; and that the
rather, because they were opposed by the Word of God therein; but the judgment
of God found them out for this their wickedness. Gods judgments on
Sabbath Breakers
For shortly after, on a Lords day, the Leader of the Dance, being a lusty
young man, in the midst of their profane pastimes suddenly fell down and
died. Yet these obdurate persons (though a little affected for the present)
soon shaked off their fears, and returned to their vomit again.

Master Clark the Sabbath following, took occasion from this sad dispensation
of God, to show them the greatness of their sins, and how highly God used to
be displeased with those which took liberty to profane his holy day, withal
quoting, Jer. 17.27. If thou will not hearken unto me to hallow the
Sabbath Day, etc. Then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall
devour the Palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched; opening,
urging, and pressing it home upon their consciences: yet still they kicked
against these warnings, and the evening following, returned to their sports
again. Amongst these there was a Smith that was a chief Ringleader; But it
pleased God the very next day, that two Husbandmen coming to his Shop to
sharpen their plough-shares, a spark from the red hot iron as he beat it on the
anvil, flew into the thatch, which both the Smith and his neighbors saw, and
stood gazing upon it, and might at first with one of their fingers have pulled
it down, that thatch being low, but God took away their power of moving toward
it; so that they saw it at first burn like a candle, then like a torch, and
presently the whole shop was on a fire, and the men running out, both Shop,
House, and all the Smiths goods were consumed in the fire, and yet a Neighbors
House that stood very near it escaped.

The second remarkable judgment was again by Master Clark pressed upon their
consciences, yet nothing would prevail, Isa. 28.15.
but as if they had made a Covenant with death, and were at an agreement with
hell, they still persisted in their ungodly practices, and God who threatens to
walk contrary to them that walk contrary to him, pursued them with one judgment
after another; and amongst others, Levit. 26.27, 28.
this was very remarkable: That upon the Sabbath day, which they had highly
profaned, by drinking, dancing, etc. in the night, when they were retired to
their several homes, there was heard a great noise, and rattling of chains up
and down the town, which was accompanied with such a smell and stink of fire
and brimestone, that many of their guilty consciences suggested unto them, that
the devil was come to fetch them away quick to hell. This so terrified and
wrought upon them, that they began to give better heed to the Ministry of Gods
Word, and to break off their profane courses for the greatest part, so that
there was an eminent reformation wrought amongst them; at least, sixteen of
those poor souls being effectually wrought upon, and brought home to Christ;
and some others that relapsed to their former ways, God pursued them with his
judgments till he had brought them to beggary.

During Master Clarks abode in this place, he had experience of Gods gracious
protecting him from the rage of some desperately wicked men, and amongst
others, this is very remarkable: Master Clark, having on a day pressed Gods
judgments against some sins, that he saw some of the people much addicted to,
there came the next morning, a lusty young man [a serving man] to enquire for
him, as desirous to speak with him. Master Clark being made acquainted with it,
A special Providence.
sent for him up into his chamber, and knowing his vicious life, took occasion
sharply to the reprove him, and to tell him of the danger that he was in by
reason of the same, in case he persevered in his lewd courses. This round and
faithful dealling, through Gods mercy, wrought so effectually upon him, that
falling upon his knees, he entreated him to forgive him: Master Clark answered,
that he should beg pardon at the hands of God, against whom he had sinned, for
he knew not for his own part, wherein he had offended him; yea, said the other,
I have not only offended God by sinning thus and thus against him, but you
also; for I came hither with a full resolution to stab you with this dagger
here at my back, but God has so overawed my spirit, that I have not had power
to move an hand, to acccomplish such a wickedness; and this resolution of
mine, proceeded from the Sermon which you preached yesterday, which so
terrified my conscience, that my whole body fell into such a trembling, that I
was not able to sit, whereupon I rose up, and set my back to a Pillar to stay
me, yet neither would that prevail to stay my trembling, etc. But now if you
please to forgive me, I shall, by Gods grace, never entertain any such
desperate thoughts again. Maher Clark freely forgave him, and after some
wholesome and seasonable admonitions, dismissed him.

About this time, the schism and errors of the Brownists began to spread in
Northamptonshire, and Master Clark had many bickerings and disputations with
some of the chief of them, whom he mightily confuted, and through Gods grace,
reclaimed some of them.

His remove to Woolstone.
Anno 1590. He was sent for by Roger Wigstone Esquire, who lived at Woolstone
in the County of Warwick, by whom he was chosen to succeed Master Lord, an able
and eminent Divine in the pastoral charge in that place, and having preached
sometimes amongst them, he was freely chosen by the People also. Then having
his presentation from Master Wigston (who was a Gentleman of eminent Piety in
those days, and a great friend to godly Ministers.) He went to Doctor Overton,
Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, for his institution; but the Bishop having
designed the living for one of his Chaplains, he endeavored to persuade Master
Clark to desert his title to it, He is opposed by the Bishop.
promising that he would remember him when some other preferment should fall.
Master Clark considering his fair and direct call to the place, and therefore
hoping that God had a work for him to do there, he absolutely refused to
gratify the Bishop in his request, telling him, that he could not with a good
conscience do it, and therefore importuned him for his institution. Then did
the Bishop set his acutest Chaplains upon him, to examine and dispute with him,
hoping thereby to get some ground of exeception against him; but when that
prevailed not, he framed other excuses to defer the instituting of him, one
while alleging that his Register was not with him, and then that he had so
many days allowed by the Law to make enquiry after him. And hereby he made
Master Clark to ride three or four journeys without attaining his desire, and
this the Bishop did, that the Living might fall into the Lapse. Master Clark
perceiving his drift, told him, that if he refused any longer to grant him
institution, he would bring his Quare impedit against him, which occasioned the
Bishop at last to grant it him; but withal, he sent at several times,
sometimes an Apparitor, sometimes one of his Chaplains, and other subtle
persons to attend his Prayers and Sermons, to see if they could catch any
advantage against him, and upon trivial occasions cited him often to his Court,
and thereby much molested him. At last the Bishop himself being at Coventry
upon a Sabbath day, he with some of his Servants came in the morning to
Woolstone, being but four miles off, and coming into the Church, he set him
down in a seat just before Master Clark, none else of the Congregation knowing
him. Master Clark seeing the Bishop, abated nothing of his zeal and fervency in
preaching and applying of the Word; insomuch as the Bishop being much netled by
the Sermon, His courage.
shifted and shufled up and down, as if he had sat upon thorns; an honest man
by, observing it, fetched him a quishion, first to sit on, and then another to
lean on, but yet the Bishop seemed very restless.

The Sermon and Prayer being ended, the Bishop said openly, This is an hot
fellow indeed, but I will cool him. Master Clark hearing it, replied, My Lord,
if I have not fa^thfully delivered the truth of God, I beseech you declare what
I have said amiss, that I may make my defense here before my people. The
Bishop answered as before, You are an hot fellew indeed, but I will cool you;
and so departed. Master Clark replying, It Is good to be zealous in the work of
the Lord.

After this the Bishop picked a quarrel against him, and suspended him from
preaching, whereupon Master Clark used to expound the Word; He is suspended,
and excommunicated
then did the Bishop suspend him from expounding; whereupon he catechized with
exposition and application; then was he suspended from catechizing also.
Whereupon at the usual times, in the Church, he caused an honest man, that was
his neighbor, to read a Chapter, and at the end of every verse, to ask him the
meaning of it, and what instructions and uses might be gathered out of it. This
so angered the Bishop, that he proceeded to Excommunicate him. Whereupon Master
Clark repaired to Doctor Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury, Absolved by the
Archbishop.
and from him procured his Absolution; and as he returned homewards, about
Dunstable he met Bishop Overton going toward London, to whom he showed his
Absolution, and so went on in his Ministry as before. This so irritated the
Bishop, that he still suborned some to watch him in all his public Prayers and
Sermons; about which time the persecution growing hot against the
Non-conformists, Master Clark in his Prayer, requested of God to forgive the
Queen her sins, though in modest expressions. This the Bishop being informed
of, He is accused of treason, and imprisoned.
and supposing that he had now gotten that advantage, which he had long waited
for, he charged Master Clark with treason, and caused him to be committed to
the common Jayle in Warwick, where he lay (bail being refused) till the
Assizes; and then the Bishop caused him to be arraigned at the Bar, and had so
exasperated the Judge against him, that he would have had the Jury to find the
Bill. But it pleased God to stir up the heart of a noble Gentleman, Sir T. Lucy.
a Justice upon the Bench, from that good report which he had heard of Master
Clark, to stand up, and publicly to tell the Judge, that before Master Clark
should have any wrong, he would kneel before the Queen for him. This so
prevailed with the Jury, that he was acquitted. He is acquitted


Upon his release, Master Clark repaired again to Archbishop Whitgift,
complaining to him of all this wrong which he had received from the Bishop; the
Archbishop (very worthily) sent for the Bishop, and upon a fair and equal
hearing of the business betwixt them, The Bishop enjoined to ask him
forgiveness.
he enjoined the Bishop to go down, and in Master Clarks Church, upon a Sabbath
day, before the Congregation, to acknowledge the wrong which he had done him,
which the Bishop accordingly did perform, and ever after upon all occasions was
Master Clarks great friend so long as he lived.

Not long after, the Devil stirred up new adversaries against him in his own
Parish, his Ministry being very quick, powerful and searching, so that some
wicked persons that found themselves to be galled by it, railed upon him,
threatening to kill him; so that Mr. Clark, being a strong lusty man, for a time
walked not abroad without his Rapier in his hand, P. Petiver.
for his own defense. At last, one of these wicked men, whose conscience the
Ministry had galled, vowed his death; and as Master Clark was coming from
Coventry, Binley Wood.
he way-layed him in a Wood. Master Clark in the evening came alone homewards,
with nothing but a wand in his hand; A special Providence.
whereupon this man rod up to him, and falling into discourse with him, Master
Clark took the opportunity to reprove him for his disordered life, and so laid
open Gods judgments due to him for the same, that he fell into a great
trembling, confessed his intention to have killed him, and begged pardon. Yet
still he persisted in his wicked ways, and Gods judgments found him out at
last; for though he had a very good Living, yet he fell into misery and want,
and died in Warwick Jayle for debt.

Master Clark had in his Parish a Chapel of Ease, which had two townships
belonging to it, His great pains.
one of them two miles from the Parish Church, the Chapel it self near two
miles from it, and the profits of both (the tithes being impropriated) scarce
amounting to a competent maintenance for one man. Master Clark was fain to
supply them both himself. And indeed God had extraordinarily fitted him for it,
having given him a very strong, able, and healthful body, so that for the
greatest part of his life there, which was about forty four years; he rod four
times a day winter and summer between the two Churches, read the Word, and
preached four times a day, administered the Sacraments, and performed all other
ministerial duties in them both. He preached upon several texts in each of the
Churches, so that diverse godly persons, old and young, went betwixt the two
Churches, hearing several Sermons to their great profit and comfort. Besides
this, every Holiday he supplied both the Churches, sometimes preached, but
constantly expounded in each of them, and for the most part twice a day also;
and God so blessed his labors, The success of his Ministry.
that he begat many Sons and Daughters unto God.

He was very careful in the education of his children, first to train them up
in the knowledge and fear of God; His care in the education of his children.
for which end he would take all opportunities to whet the Word of God upon
them, when he lay down, and when he rose up, and as he walked by the way, etc.
and God so blessed his labors, that he lived to see, to his great comfort, the
work of grace wrought in the hearts of all his seven children. And next to
this, his care was to train up his children in learning, and to honest
callings; often saying, that if he could leave them no other portion, yet he
would give them that education, that they should be able to get their own
livings in any part of the world, where God should cast their lot.

Toward the latter-end of his life, came forth the Book for Recreations on the
Sabbath day, and some young persons in the Town where he lived, being
encouraged thereby, and by a Popish Landlord which they had, would needs have a
Whitson-ale, and Morris-dance, an heathenish sport, long before, through Gods
goodness, banished out of that town. Master Clark labored by his Ministry, to
beat down the first rising of this motion; but these persons were so backed and
encouraged by some that set them on, that they would needs prosecute their
design notwithstanding all the warnings given them by their faithful Pastor.
But God that has said, He that despises you, despises me, etc. made their
sin quickly to find them out in a terrible judgment that suddenly ensued; for
in that very Barn, standing near a Smiths Shop, Gods judgments on
Sabbath Breakers
where their revels were most kept, there was a violent fire kindled, which
notwithstanding all help, quickly burnt it down, and in a strange manner flying
against the wind, it went from house to house, burning down all the houses of
the chief of those which had an hand in these profane sports.

Master Clark was a man (like Apollos) mighty in the Scriptures, and so studied
in the Body of Divinity, that upon short warning, he could preach very
pertinently and profitably. He had an excellent pair of lungs, and was
exceeding powerful in his Ministry, His powerful manner of preaching.
striking shame and terror into the hearts of the wicked, to whom he was a
Boanerges, and yet withal, he was a Barnabas to humbled, broken, bleeding
souls.

His old age was accompanied with a lingering and painful disease, His last
sickness.
which yet he bore with great patience, and as he came nearer to Heaven, so his
motion thitherward was more quick and lively. Many godly persons came to visit
him in his disease, and none of them went away without some spiritual, and
comfortable instructions from him. At last, having long glorified God on earth,
and finished his work, His death.
he went to receive his wages, quietly resigning up his spirit unto God,
November 6. 1634. having lived seventy one years, two months, and nineteen
days, and having been Pastor of Woolstone forty four years.

This Master Hugh Clark was my Father.

The Life of Doctor Sibs, who died Anno Christi 1635.
His Country.
RIchard Sibs was born upon the edges of Suffolk, near Sudbury, and being
trained up at School, when he was grown ripe and ready for the University, he
was sent to Cambridge Anno Christi 1595. and was admitted into St. John's
College, His going to Cambridge.
where he by his sedulity and industry so profited in Learning, and approved
himself by his godly and blameless conversation, that he was promoted from one
degree to another in the College; being chosen, first Scholar, and then Fellow
of that House. His promotion in the College and University.

His conversion.


He also took all the Degrees of the University, with general approbation and
applause. It pleased God to convert him by the Ministry of Mr. Paul Baines,
whilst he was Lecturer at St. Andrews in Cambridge. And when Mr. Sibs had been
Master of Arts some while, he entered into the Ministry, and shortly after was
chosen Lecturer himself at Trinity Church in Cambridge: He is chosen Lecturer
in Cambridge.
To whose Ministry, besides the Townsmen, many Scholars resorted, so that he
became a worthy Instrument of begetting many Sons and Daughters unto God,
besides the edifying and building up of of others. He sometimes had a little
stammering in the time of his preaching, but then his judicious hearers always
expected some rare and excellent notion from him.

About the year 1625. or 26. he was chosen Master of Katherine Hall in
Cambridge, Master of Katherine Hall.
the Government whereof he continued till his dying day; and indeed like a
faithful Governor, he was always very solicitous and careful to procure and
advance the good of that little House. For he procured good means and
maintenance by his interest in many worthy Persons, for the enlargement of the
College, and was a means and Instrument, to establish learned and Religious
Fellows there; insomuch as in his time, it proved a very famous Society for
Piety and Learning, both in Fellows and Scholars.

But before this, viz. about the year 1618. he was chosen Preacher to
Graies-Inne, Preacher at Graies-Inne.
one of the Learnedest Societies in England, where his Ministry found such
general approbation and acceptance, that besides the Learned Lawyers of the
House, many Noble Personages, and many of the Gentry and Citizens resorted to
hear him, and Dr. SIBBS
many till this day, The success of his Ministry.
bless God for the Benefit which they received by him.

His Learning was mixed with much humility, whereby he always esteemed lowly
of himself, and was ready to undervalue his own labors, though others judged
them to breathe spirit and life, to be strong of Heaven, speaking with
authority and power to men's consciences. His prudence in the Ministry.
His care in the course of his Ministry was to lay a good foundation in the
heads and hearts of his hearers. And though he were a wise Master Builder, and
that in one of the eminentest Auditories for Learning and Piety that was in the
Land, as was said before; yet according to the grace which was given to him
(which was indeed like that of Elisha, in regard of the other Prophets, 2 King.
1.9. the elder Brothers privilege, a double portion) he was still taking all
occasions to preach of the Fundamentals to them, and amongst the rest, of the
Incarnation of the Son of God, one of the chief Fundamentals of our Faith, one
of the chief of those wonders in the Mercy-seat, which the Cherubims gaze at,
which the Angels desire to pry into, 1 Pet. 1.12. And preaching at several
times, and by occasion, of so many several texts of Scripture concerning this
Subject, there is scarce any one of those incomparable benefits which accrue to
us thereby, nor any of those holy impressions, which the meditation hereof
ought to work in our hearts, which was not by him sweetly unfolded, as may
appear by those Sermons now in Print. And therefore (says a Reverend Divine)
the noted humility of the Author I less wonder at, finding how often his
thoughts dwelt upon the humiliation of Christ.

As for his Sermons upon Cant. 5. Reverend and holy Mr. Dod upon the perusal
of the Manuscript, was so taken with them, Mr Dods testimony of his Sermons on
Cant. 5.
that he professed that he found them so full of heavenly Treasure, and
containing such lively expressions of the unvaluable riches of the love of
Christ toward all his poor servants that sue and seek unto him for it, that by
his great importunity he prevailed with Dr. Sibs, otherwise much undervaluing
his own meditations, to commit the same to the Press; to which Mr. Dod gave
this attestation.

I (says he) judge it altogether unmeet, that such precious matter should be
concealed from the public use. I judge these Sermons a very profitable and
excellent help, both to the understanding of that dark and most Divine
Scripture, as also to kindle in the heart, all heavenly affections toward
Jesus Christ; the whole frame whereof, is carried with such Wisdom, Gravity,
Piety, Judgment and Experience, that it commends it self to all that are godly
wise: and I doubt not but they shall find their temptations answered, their
fainting spirits revived, their understandings enlightened, and their graces
confirmed; so that they shall have cause to praise God, for the worthy Authors
godly and painful labors.

Indeed he was thoroughly studied in the holy Scriptures, which made him a man
of God, perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work; and as became a
faithful Steward of the manifold graces of God, he endeavored to teach to
others the whole counsel of God, and to store them with the knowledge of Gods
will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.

His piety.
He was a man that enjoyed much communion with God, walking in all the Laws of
God blameless; and like John the Baptist, was a burning and shining light,
wasting and spending himself to enlighten others. His charity.
He was upon all occasions very charitable, drawing forth, not only his Purse
in relieving, but his very bowels in commiserating the wants and necessities of
the poor Members of Christ. He used sometimes in the summertime, to go abroad
to the houses of some worthy Personages, where he was an Instrument of much
good, not only by his private labors, but by his prudent counsel and advice,
that upon every occasion he was ready to minister unto them. And thus having
done his work on earth, His death.
he went to receive his wages in heaven, peaceably and comfortably resigning up
his spirit unto God, Anno Christi 1631. and of his age 58.

The Life of Doctor Chaderton, who died Anno Christi 1640.
His Parentage
LAurence Chaderton was born of an ancient Family at Chatterton in Lancashire,
about the year 1546. and his Parents being both Papists, they trained him up in
that Religion, yet bred him to learning; and when he came to some maturity of
years, his Father sent him to the Inns of Court: But he being not pleased with
that kind of life, through the motion of Gods holy Spirit, who had a work for
him to do in another Calling and place, left the Inns of Court, His remove to
Cambridge.
and went to Cambridge about the twentieth year of his age, and the sixth year
of Queen Elizabeth. And getting some acquaintance in Christ's College, it
pleased God that the Master and Fellows took such a liking to him for his
ingenuity and industry, that they admitted him into a poor Scholars place.

Then did he write to his Father, to acquaint him with his present condition,
and to request some means of maintenance from him: But his Father disliking his
change of place and studies, His Father casts him off.
but especially of Religion, sent him a Poke with a groat in it, to go a begg^
withal; further signifying to him, that he was resolved to disinh^^^^ him,
which he also did: Yet did the Lord support his spirit, to prefer an heavenly
before an earthly Inheritance; and seeing that he had nothing else to trust to,
he fell close to his studies; and through Gods blessing upon the same, he so
eminently profited in all sorts of Learning, that Anno Christi 1567. being but
yet Batchelour of Arts, he was chosen Fellow of Christ's College. He is chosen
Fellow.
Anno Christi 1578. he commenced Batchelour of Divinity; and the same year,
October the 26. he preached a Sermon at Paul's Cross, which he also Printed.

He was chosen Lecturer at St. Clements Church in Cambridge, which place he
supplied about the space of sixteen years, and by his Holy, Learned and
judicious Sermons did very much good, and was succeeded therein by Mr. Michael
Bentley Fellow of Christ's College, a godly, plain and profitable Preacher.

He was a man famous for Gravity, Learning and Religion; so that when Sir
Walter Mildmay (Counselor of State to Queen Elizabeth Chancellor, and
under-Treasurer of the Exchequer) Founded Emanuel College, Chosen the first
Master of Emanuel.
Anno Christi 1584. he made choice of this man for the first Master: and when
Master Chaderton showed himself not willing to undertake that great charge, Sir
Walter replied, saying, If you will not be the Master, I will not be the
Founder of it.

In the beginning of King James his reign, he was one of the four Divines for
the Conference at Hampton Court, chosen by the Ministers that desired a
Reformation in the Church Government; and for his Learning and sufficiency, was
the same year chosen to be one of the Translators of the Bible.

Anno Christi 1612. when the Prince Elector Palatine came to visit Cambridge,
He commenced Doctor.
he would needs have Mr. Chaderton commence Doctor of Divinity, which
accordingly he did.

He deserved very well of Emanuel College, His care of the College.
for whereas the Founder gave allowance for the maintenance of three Fellows
only, together with the Advouson of Stranground Rectory in Huntingtonshire,
near Peterburrough, Dr. Chaderton procured by his friends and acquaintance,
allowance for twelve Fellows, and above forty Scholars of the House, besides
the Advousons of Auler and Northcudberry Rectories; as also of the Vicaridge of
Dulverton in Summersetshire, Piddle-Hinton in Dorcetshire, and Loughburrough in
Leicestershire, of the Noble Henry Hastings Earl of Huntington, which Noble man
was a great friend to godly Ministers.

After he was Master of Emanuel, His care for young Students.
his manner was not to suffer any young Scholars to go into the Country to
Preach, till he had heard them first in the College Chapel. All his younger
days he used to expound a portion of Scripture twice a week in his Family.

He was married fifty three years, His care of Servants.
and yet in all that time he never kept any of his Servants from Church to
dress his meat, saying, that he desired as much to have his servants know God
as himself. If at any time he had a Servant upon trial, though they could do
as much work as three others, yet if they were given to lying, or any other
vice, he would by no means suffer them to dwell in his house.

Toward his latter-end Arminianisme began to sprout up apace in the
University, and he being fearful that an Arminian might come to succeed him in
his place after his death, resolved if he could procure a godly and worthy man,
He resigned his place.
to resign his place to him in his life time, which accordingly he did to
famous Dr. Preston, whom he yet survived, and saw after him Dr. Sancroft, and
after him Dr. Holsworth to succeed in his Mastership.

He was of a very charitable disposition, insomuch as if he heard of any godly
Minister that was in want, he would send them forty or fifty shillings at a
time.

Though he lived till he was very old, yet his sight remained very good, as may
appear by this example:

A little before his death, an old Servant of his came to see him, and found
him reading on a Book, so that at the first he took no notice of her, but when
she came nearer, lifting up his head, he spoke to her, asking her what a clock
it was* She told him eleven. I have (said he) here got a Book that I have been
reading of ever since eight a clock, for I like it very well; and yet all that
time he had read without Spectacles.

He lived eighteen years after the Resignation of his Mastership, and in
November, His death.
Anno Christi 1640. resigned up his spirit unto God, being about the age of
ninety four years, and was buried in S. Andrews Church; Dr. Richard Holsworth,
the then Master of Emanuel, preached his Funeral Sermon, and gave him a large
and deserved Commendation.

The Life of Master John Ball, who died October 20. 1640.
John Ball was born about the year 1585. at Casssington, an obscure village,
His birth, and education.
(a mile from Hanborough) in Oxfordshire: he being set to School at Yarnton,
was found so apt to learn, that the Schoolmaster prevailed with his Parents,
(though of low estate) to continue him Scholar there, till he was fitted for
the University. Gods Providence, by means of friends, His going to Oxford.
made way for his placing in Brazen-nose College in Oxford, where he improved
very much in the knowledge of the Arts, and he proved a quick disputant. When
he was Batchelour of Arts, (wanting means for his maintenance to continue
longer in the University) he accepted a motion made for his removal into the
Country, and was placed in the Lady Cholmleys house in Cheshire, as Tutor to
her Children, His remove into Cheshire.
where many other Children also were taught by him. And though he came raw and
ungrounded in Religion (as himself was wont to express it) from Oxford, yet
within a short time there appeared (with the increase of his scholastical
abilities) the breakings forth of the power of Godliness in his conversation,
His improvement of his parts.
unto them who were most religious and judicious there, who thereupon took him
into their society for mutual edification in the ways of Gods fear. Whereas
there was great scarcity of godly painful Preachers in that corner of the
Country, in those times, he did much frequent the Ministry of Reverend Master
John Foord, whereby he was not a little edified.

He had few Books, and therefore perused the more seriously such as he had
underhand. Calvin's life published by Beza, and his Commentary upon the Psalms,
made deep impressions upon his spirit. Growing into acquaintance with the most
godly people in those parts, who much lamented the evils of the times, he often
associated with them, in keeping private days of Fasting and Prayer. His
frequent Fasts, and Prayers.
Himself with some other honest Christians, were often convented to Chester,
and much troubled there, for keeping a Fast on Ascension day, their fault being
aggravated by the Bishop and his Officers, because they fasted upon that holy
day. As he took not up, any opinion or practice, till he had well weighed it:
His constancy.
So was he not much moved by any trouble which assaulted him in his way. When
others judged him ripe for the Ministry, he was not hasty in adventuring upon
that Calling, because he was sensible of the weight thereof, and also desirous
to satisfy his conscience concerning the way of entrance by Episcopal
subscription. And upon the serious studying of the points in controversy,
betwixt the Bishops and Non-conformists, His Nonconformity.
he was dissatisfied to yield unto that subscription which was then strictly
commanded.

Some conflicts he had with the then Bishop of Chester, about Nonconformity;
but though he looked upon a Bishop in those times as a formidable creature, yet
he came off unshaken. Having resolved (upon the encouragement given by
judicious Divines) to enter into the Ministry, when God should make a fair way
for his admission, without subscription, He is ordained Minister.
by the intercession of Friends, he with Master Julines Herring, (who
afterward was famous for the work of the Lord in Salop,) were made Ministers
by an Irish Bishop, (being occasionally in London,) with freedom from the
formentioned snare. About the year 1610. he was called to be Minister at
Whitmore, His call to Whitmore.
(a small village near unto New Castle in Staffordshire) where he was
entertained into the house of Edward Mainwaring Esquire, a pious and much
esteemed Gentleman.

His marriage.
Here he married a godly Wife, whom God had provided as an help meet for him
(he himself being always a mere Scholar, neither much minding nor intermedling
in worldly affairs, beyond the bounds of his Calling,) by whom he had six
Sons and one Daughter. Six of his Children were born unto him while he
continued in Master Mainwarings Family, where he found much love, and did much
service; for every evening he expounded a portion of Scripture, which was read
in course, and many mornings also was helpful in Catechizing of the Family.
Hither many Ministers and others had often recourse unto him for counsel,
where they were always friendly entertained; and the Lord blessed that Family
very much, which does still show much kindness unto the Children of this good
man. Afterward he removed with his own Family unto an house which Master
Mainwaring had built for him, where he had his seventh and last child born to
him, and where he dwelt till his death.

He was a great lover of Learning, and therefore laid out in the first years of
his Ministry, all the money which he could spare, from necessary expenses, in
buying good Books, with which he was so well acquainted (having both a quick
understanding and strong memory) that he could readily give an account of all
passages most remarkable in them. His diligent studies.
He had so well studied Bellarmines controversies, that it is scarcely credible
what relation he could make ex tempore of them from point to point; and show
from particular to particular, where the fallacy and the weakness of his
Arguments did appear. And the like might be truly attested in reference unto
the Arminian disputes, and the other Church-Controversies both in former and
latter times. It was his custom to read over a Book, when once he undertook it,
and no man could be more cautious in entertaining opinions without much mature
consideration, having well weighed all arguments produced on both sides both
for and against them; and wherein his apprehensions were different from his
Brethren, he did wisely forbear to vent them in such sort, as might occasion
any division or offense.

Oh how well had it been with England, if all other men had managed their
studies and practices according to this pattern! for then, so many sparks
(cried up as new lights) had not been kindled amongst us, which being blown
abroad by pride and ignorance, do threaten to set the whole world on fire. But
to proceed in the Narrative of this worthy man's life. He was so enriched with
knowledge both in Practical and Polemical Divinity, he was so able to interpret
and reconcile difficult Scriptures, His skill in comforting afflicted
consciences.
he had such dexterity in dealing with afflicted consciences, and he was so
well furnished with Ministerial gifts for Preaching, Prayer, and the
administration of both Sacraments, that it was not easy to discover wherein he
most excelled. His ability to counsel and comfort dejected, tempted
Christians, was occasioned, (as himself would acknowledge,) by his conversing
with Mistress Sarah Mainwyaring, (Wife to the Gentleman in whose house he
continued many years, as was before mentioned) who was much exercised in that
kind, and was an unparalled Gentlewoman for holy tenderness and exactness
in Religion.

Willing he was to trade every Talent with which God had trusted him, as
opportunity was offered; His indefatigablenesse.
and he was a man most unwearied in all ways of service.

As he took extraordinary pains in public, so did he also in private,
especially on the Lords day. His unwearied pains on the Sabbath.
For having by way of Preparation upon the Saturday in the afternoon, spent
about two hours in his house, in praying and expounding some Scripture, (to
which exercise diverse did resort,) on the Sabbath-morning, he expounded a
portion of Scripture in his Family, (whereof many neighbors were partakers)
then he preached twice in public, read diverse Chapters, and Catechized also
in the afternoon, spending much time therein, especially in the summer season)
after the evening Sermon, he went unto Master Mainwayrings house (being near at
hand,) where he repeated both his Sermons, and prayed; likewise after Supper he
had another exercise in his own Family, equivalent to a Sermon, unto which
diverse well-affected of the neighborhood did repair. These his great labors
were the more wonderful, in that they were so excellent and solid, as many
Ministers and Scholars yet living know, who did often frequent them. He taught
a School also (both from a desire to do good, and that he might provide the
more comfortable subsistence for his Family,) having not only the children of
poor neighbors, (for he refused none who were willing to learn, but of persons
of better quality sent unto him; some whereof were tabled in his own house, and
the rest placed in the neighborhood. Every morning of the six days in the
week, he instructed his own Children and Scholars in the Principles of
Religion, whereby many young ones (of whom some are now Ministers) were well
seasoned and settled in the grounds of godliness. Every night likewise he
opened and applied some portion of the Scripture, for the edification of his
Family.

And besides his frequent preaching at Lectures, at Madeley especially, where
he was the principal upholder of a weekly Sermon, and a monthly Fast, His
frequent Fasting, and Prayer.
and his helpfulnesse in holy Fasting and Prayer elsewhere, (when desired) it
was his custom to set apart days (when freed from attendance upon his School)
for the solemn seeking of God, with his godly neighbors, as the necessities of
the times did require.

He was most ready to communicate his learning, graces, experiences, yea, His
readiness to do good.
his All, for the profit of such who conversed with him: the remembrance
whereof, is very smarting upon the hearts of some of his surviving friends,
because they made not a fuller improvement of him for their own advantage.

In the latter part of his time, he had some scholars, whom he instructed in
Academical Learning, reading Lectures to them in Logic and Philosophy, and
hearing them to dispute, which often they did during his dinnertime: And while
he was at supper, other scholars read a piece of Greek, or Latin, (so
exceeding diligent was he in Husbanding the shreds of time, as he called them)
the residue of the day, till very late, he spent in his private study.

His temperance, and meekness.
And as he was incomparably abstemious and moderate in the use of meat, drink,
sleep, and apparel, so he had an admirable command over his passions. For those
who most conversed with him, never saw inordinate out-breaches of anger, or
other affections in his conversation. This Character was given by a Friend who
was much with him, (viz.) That as Master Dod did turn earth into heaven, by a
spiritual improvement of all earthly affairs, so Master Ball did reconcile
earth and heaven, because worldly occasions were no distractions unto him in
his journey thither. His frugality.
He lived upon a small maintenance, ( viz.) twenty pounds per annum, for
serving the cure at Whitmore, and the keeping of one Cow, both summer and
winter, by Master Mainwayring aforesaid, with what he got by teaching School.
Yet he would often say, that he thought never man passed through this world
with less care. God indeed stirred up some Friends, (who knew his great worth
and mean outward condition) to be helpful unto him, toward whom he was
always really respectfull, requiting their love by his daily Prayers, and his
readiness upon all occasions to do service unto them and theirs. Through Gods
singular blessing upon his yearly incomes, His charity.
he lived very comfortably, was given to hospitality, and also unto liberality
to the poor, (considering his estate) and left a good competency unto his Wife
and Children. Yea, such was this holy man's gratitude and contentment, that he
would say, I have enough, and enough, and enough. Whereas he went once every
year into Oxfordshire, to express his dutiful respect unto his aged Parents,
he made choice of that time for his journey, that he might enjoy the Benefit of
Oxford-Act. And as his love to learned disputations was large, so by strength
of memory, he could give a punctual account of all the most considerable
Arguments urged, and Answers returned, upon the several Questions discussed.

And still this Journey was made profitable unto his Christian Friends (near to
whose dwellings he traveled) by conference, his assistance in private Fasts
and other exercises of Religion.

It would be too tedious and tiring unto the Reader, if relation should be made
of all those memorable passages in this Reverend man's life, (which his friends
surviving, do well remember) which did proclaim the high degree of holiness,
with which God adorned and crowned all his other great abilities, therefore
some few of them only shall be reported. His constant carriage toward all who
conversed with him, His humility.
did speak out his deep humility. For always he was apt to prefer others
before himself; and he was never observed, by any reproachful speeches, or
behavior, to cast the least contempt or discouragement upon the meanest
Christian.

He was all his life-long, His esteem of the weight of the Ministry.
very apprehensive and sensible of the weightinesse of the Ministers Calling,
saying, That no man should dream of ease in that Function; and would often much
bewail before the Lord in Prayer, his own inconsiderate entrance upon it. A
Friend being weary of teaching School, and acquainting him with his purpose to
enter into the Ministry, Master Ball told him, That he would find it a far
heavier task to teach men then boys. And a Fellow-Minister telling him of his
danger to be silenced by the Bishop, he returned this answer, If he should deal
so with me, I would put off my hat and thank him^

Having experimentally poysed the weight of the Ministers work, he would say
unto his Nonconforming Brethren, (when Prelatical persecution threatened to
drive him out of England,) If we be necessitated to transplant our selves, you
shall preach, and I will teach School. His humility.
And always when other Ministers were in company, he would endeavor earnestly
to put them upon the performance of Family Duties, as judging them to be better
able then himself.

Such who knew this man's learning of all kinds, and rich ministerial gifts,
will admire (upon the consideration of these passages) at the forwardness of
illiterate Mecanicks in these times, to intrude upon the Ministers Office. And
whereas the blessed Apostle himself cried out, Who is sufficient for these
things! we may do more then guess what spirit animateth those men, whose
practices speak thus; Who is insufficient for these things!

He did lay to heart the want of labourious learning amongst godly Ministers,
because so many neglected to acquaint themselves thoroughly with the
controversies of the times; The necessity of stadying controversies.
and he thought that positive Divinity, might be best gained by the study of
controversy; when the main Principles were first well drunk in. He would say,
that a subtle Jesuit would make wild work in many places of England, because
neither the people nor their Ministers, had sufficient insight into the points
of difference betwixt us and the Papists. Now what other errors (no whit less
dangerous,) have for the same reasons been entertained of late years, (as he
foresaw and feared) it is too notorious.

Although he himself was much pleased with sober, profitable disputations, yet
he would shrink with trouble upon the appearance of their audacity, who dared
to question Fundamentals in Religion, or to speak slightly of the matters of
God. Once observing a man in the heat of conference, carried beyond the bounds
of modest inquiry after the truth, he used these words with holy admiration;
And whither will the love of arguing carry a man!

He compared many Professors of late times, unto young Travellors, who so soon
as they are mounted, begin to gallop, and do out-ride their fellows, but they
either fall short, or come late (if not lame) home.

The danger of Separation.
And he called the ways of separation a Labyrinth, wherein men tire themselves
and grow giddy, as in a maze; but when all is done, there is no way out, but
that whereby they entered.

He made it his business to raise and maintain high and honorable thoughts of
God at all times, as himself would always speak of the titles of the Almighty
with much gravity and reverence, endeavoring to draw forth holy thankfulness
in all conditions of life. His high esteem of God.
Here two or three things shall be touched upon, to give a taste of this good
man's gracious spirit.

He with a Neighbor Minister, having occasion to meet at a place where they
had only bread and cheese to their dinner, the Master of the house expressing
trouble, that he had no better provision for so good unexpected guests:
Hereupon he said, that it would cost a man many years labor to be truly and
througly thankful unto God for one piece of bread and cheese, His gratitude
for mercies.
proceeding to discover, most divinely, the many mercies which were to be
acknowledged in that meal and meeting.

And whereas at that time Rochal was besieged, and the inhabitants were in
great distress through want of food, he moved a serious consideration, how
much bread and cheese with peace and fellowship would be valued at Rochel: yea,
he seriously made his demand, whether their obligations at the present place
and meeting, were not much greater, because they in their instant enjoyments
had not experienced Rochels fears and sorrows.

At another time a dear Friend relating his great danger by a fall off his
horse in a journey, and saying that he never had received such a deliverance.
Master Ball answered, Yea an hundred times, (viz.) so often as you have ridden
and not fallen; because the preventing of perils is to be prized as much as our
rescuing out of them.

At a Marriage Feast, where Christian Friends were civilly rejoicing in the
good occasion of their meeting, the many good blessings provided for their
comfort, and in their mutual society, this speech came from him with much
gravity; His high esteem of Jesus Christ.
One thought of Jesus Christ reaching the heart, is more to be valued, then all
Creature-contentments whatsoever, though they should be enjoyed in their
fullness for a thausand years without interruption.

That he might keep Gods servants of the lowest parts, His prudence.
always high in his own estimation, he would wisely weigh their peculiar
serviceablenesse in some kind or other, though they were inferiors in sundry
excellencies. Hereupon when one admiring worthy Master Dods holy conversation,
said, Oh how well would it be if all Ministers were like unto him; Master Ball
answered, The Church would be quite undone if all others were like him. For
though no man more honored Master Dod, (which not many years before his death
he witnessed, by listening unto his fatherly counsel bare-headed, with his hat
in his hand) yet he knew, that other men, much inferior in graces, had some
special way of advantage to the cause and the people of God.

He was a zealous opposite to passionate frowardness, His distaste of
frowardness.
observing the lamentable fruits thereof, in many persons and relations, and he
had an extraordinary dexterity to calm them who were boisterous. He would thus
advise them, Put judgment into Office; for Affections are good followers, but
bad guides. Look well to your hearts, The means of cure.
for Passion is the effect of pride. And he would say unto them, You had need
to get a strong bit and bridle, for you ride an unruly horse. Observing one
bitterly to bewail the death of a dear Friend, he said, Rather labor to get
good by it.

He was wont to humble passionate Professors, who in their heat would speak
unadvisedly, by this position, which he would undertake to prove, (viz.) That a
moral heathen who never heard of Christ, might possiby by watchfulness secure
himsel from uttering one froward word all his life long; And therefore it was a
great shame for Christians to be worse, who had more grace and greater helps to
suppress sin. This was one parcel of good counsel, which he commonly
bestowed in all cases, Inform judgment; Set Faith on work; Be of good courage.
As he used to be large in his Prayers in behalf of the Church of God,
(according to the peculiar concernments thereof) both at home and abroad, His
love to the Church, and to his Children.
so was he particular in minding his special Friends before the Lord, and the
spiritual welfare of his children was so much upon his heart, that he daily
desired to lodge them in Gods bosom; yea, he seldom gave thanks either before
or after meat, (especially toward the end of his life) without some touch of
tendency toward his children, in reference unto whom this was one constant
Petition, His contentedness.
That they might never seek great things for themselves in this world. And his
own practice from his youth, proved the sincerity of his heart in this suit,
because he never looked after, nor would entertain any motion of removing for
wealth or worldly promotion, though his charge was great, and his eminency,
both in ministerial and scholastical gifts, with the power of godliness, which
did shine in his whole conversation, gained him many Friends, and rendered him
in their account, a man more meet for a place of public note and resort, then
the village where he dwelt.

When the Prelatical opposition against the Non-conformists was hot and high,
he spoke thus unto a Neighbour-Brother; Be confident, that although all who are
now known Non-conformists were dead and gone: yet God would rather raise some
out of our ashes to protest against Episcopacy, and the Ceremonies, then suffer
that cause to fall unto the ground. He would say, The Fathers wanted some of
our light, but we want more of their heat.

He was exemplarily careful to preserve Gods Ordinances from pollution and
contempt, His care to keep the Sacraments from pollution.
and therefore did always take great pains with his people, to prepare them
for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. In his Sermons he was wont to tell his
Auditors, that their persecuting, impoverishing, imprisoning, and thrusting
daggers into their Ministers bodies, would not be more grievous, then their
unworthy communicating at the Lords Table, and their unanswerable walking unto
the Ordinances of grace dispensed amongst them. And when Parents presented
their children in the Congregation to be baptized, he would very affectionately
lay open their duty, pressing Sacramental engagements home to their hearts,
with strong Arguments and authority ministerial; Though no man was known by his
Friends, His dislike of separation.
who more dis-relished the corruptions in Church Government, and in
administrations of holy worship, yet he has sufficiently published unto the
world his great dislike of the way of separation from our Church Assemblies
upon such pretenses. Thus he spoke unto a Friend who had moved him to maintain
our Church Communion against the Separatists, How little am I beholding unto
you, who drew me from more profitable studies, to peruse those sapless
speculations?

His judgment about Independency.
He much lamented in his Prayers before God, the first breakings out of
Independency in England, both in respect of the present offense, and the woeful
consequences thereof, whereof he was much afraid: yea, he did very often tell
his Friends (both in the time of his health and last sickness) that if God
should give opportunity and hopes of Church-reformation, that we might be eased
of our present grievances, the Brethren of the new separation, would be found
the greatest obstructers thereof.

His remembrance of the History of former Separations (with which he was fully
acquainted) and his prudential foresight of the diducts which would
necessarily follow from their Principles, ( viz. Anabaptisme, etc.) together
with his wise insight into the dispositions of some persons who then appeared
therein; these were the grounds of his foretelling the confusions, the
spreading of pernicious errors, and hindrances of Reformation, which we since
have sadly suffered under. These Reasons of his Prediction (which is noised
abroad) are expressed, lest any should imagine him to have inclined to regard
injections and impulsions of spirit, His judgment about revelations.
which some cry up as prophetical. His distaste whereof may be evidenced by
this one instance, ( viz.) Being asked by one who much pretended unto immediate
inspirations besides Scripture, whether he at any time had experience thereof
in his own heart; His answer was this: No, I bless God; and if I should ever
have such fantasies, I hope God would give me grace to resist them.

When there was discourse concerning the new, (or rather the renewed) errors,
which were broached, he would ordinarily say, A good Treatise of the
sufficiency of the Scriptures would put an end unto these matters. His
exceeding love to study, and his great modesty caused unwillingnesse to go far
from home, or to appear public in any kind. And if the extraordinary
importunity of some much esteemed Friends, His humility and modesty.
had not conquered this averseness, he would (in probability) never have
printed any thing in his own name, or have come into the company of persons of
chief place and quality; yea God was pleased in both these ways to make him
serviceable. For besides the profit which many have received from his printed
Books, he was happily isntrumental by conference to preserve, some men of
chief esteem, (in regard of their Piety, Parts, and places of command) in the
Countries where they lived, from warping toward the ways of new separation,
upon the solicitation of such who were busy sticklers therein.

Upon the calling of the Parliament, in the year 1640. some hopes being
conceived that he might be an instrument of public benefit to the Church, by
dealing with some Parliament Men, that (if further Reformation of things
woefully out of order, could not be procured,) men unconformable to the
Ceremonies might not be thrust out, and kept out of the Ministry in that
regard. He thereupon took a journey into London, with his neighbor and
endeared Brother Master Langley; but receiving small encouragement to his hopes
and endeavors in that kind, he returned home with sorrow upon his heart,
complaining of the many symptoms of Gods displeasure, which he saw ready to
break out against poor England, and resolved to do what service he could in any
other way.

And being convinced that his labors might be profitable to the Church, both
in the present and succeeding ages, he was resolved to lay forth himself for
public service in any kind, as his good Friends should advise; and in
pursuance hereof he designed these three works. viz. 1. A Treatise of the
Church. His intended works.
2. An Exposition of obscure Scriptures out of all the original Languages. 3. A
more full Systeme of Divinity by the enlarging of his Catechism. For all which
he had much good Provision under hand, when the Lord saw cause to put an end to
his labors. And here, all those must silence their hearts, (who knowing him,
may be apt to judge his removal at this time to be unseasonable) with these
words, (which were much in his mouth when God checked hopes by cross
Providence) The Lord is wisest: God is most wise. His great abilities.
Many conflicts he had with men of greatest strength, (as was imagined) to
maintain the new paths, into which diverse had stepped aside. But the truth is,
never was any of them able to stand up under his Arguments. Though God was
pleased to take him away (whom some in scorn called The Presbyterians Champion)
yet he has raised up other Worthies, who do strenuously gainsay those
extravagancies.

His last sickness.
When his nature was enfeebled by constant study, and great long-continued
labors, he passed the time of his languishing sickness with a sweet, humble,
divine, peaceable spirit. He preached in public so long as bodily ability
could bear it; and he continued to pray in his Family till strength failed. Now
his addresses to God were most holy and heavenly, as Swan-like Songs, the
sweetest at last. Though he spoke not very much during his bodily decays, yet
the words which he used were solid and savoury.

Being asked what he thought of himself, whether he should now die or recover?
he answered, I do not trouble my self about that matter. He often bewailed the
infirmities of his life, and in special (now as at former times) his
inconsiderate entering upon the weighty Calling of the Ministry; His Faith.
but he manifested withal an holy child-like confidence in Christ, still
strengthening his heart, after his humble mourning for sin, with this
consideration, that the Scripture mentions weaknesses in the choicest Saints,
which were neither total hindrances to the exercise of their faith in Christ,
nor to their salvation through grace. This question being propounded to him,
what he now thought concerning his labors (part whereof were then printed)
against the present separation in England? He answered, that though he had been
weary of those controversies, which hindered his going on in more profitable
studies, yet he did not repent of that which he had done, only he desired God
to pardon the defects, which had cleaved unto that and his other services. When
any mention was made before him of his great labors to do good, he would say,
(and this was a speech which he much used) If the Lord were not a God pardoning
sins, I was in a miserable condition.

And however he did say with tears, that he had too much respect amongst men,
and that many judged that to be in him, which was not, (such was his humility;
His humility.
yet friends expressing ardent desires of his health, for service sake, he told
them, that he could have been content to have lived longer, (if the Lord had
been pleased) that he might been further useful in his place, and have born
his share in sufferings with his Brethren. For he expected a very sparp storm,
though he hoped it would be but short. And he called it, The last combat which
we should have with Antichrist. When toward his end he was asked, how he did?
he would thus answer with a cheerful contenance, Going to heaven apace. And as
his conversation had for many years been in heaven, the Lord, (who had ripened
him for immediate Commu-with himself) took him unto himself, His death.
October. 20. 1640. and of his age about 55. The materials of this Narrative,
(concerning the pious, fruitful life of that faithful Servant of Christ,
Master John Ball,) were received from these Ministers of the Gospel, and men of
known integrity, ( viz. Master John Tailor of Checkley in Staffordshire, (who
was his Countryman, and of his most ancient acquaintance.) Master Thomas
Langley of Middlewich in Cheshire,) who besides his former intimatenesse,
continued under his Ministry above five years, he being taken off from the
exercise of his own Ministry by Episcopal power,) Master Simeon Ash of St.
Austins London (who for the space of many years had been his bosom Friend,)
and from Master George Cross of Clifton in Staffordshre, (who daily conversed
with him for sundry months, both before, and in the time of his last
sickness;) who all of them do acknowledge themselves obliged to God, for the
spiritual good, gained by this their dearly respected, and much honored Friend
and Brother, who since his death, have been very sensible of their great loss
by his removal. But they and all others must learn to live upon
Divine-immutable-All-sufficiency, when creatures do fail.

Now the Just shall live by his Faith.

The Life of Doctor Potter, who died Anno Christi 1642.
BArnaby Pottor was born in Westmerland, Anno Christi 1578. within the Baronry
of Kendal, His birth, and education.
and brought up at School there, till he was fitted for the University; Thence
he was sent to Queens College in Oxford, His preferments at Oxford.
where he was chosen first a Scholar of the House, then a Fellow, and afterward
Provost. Whilst he was Fellow, he was a very careful Tutor to many worthy
Gentlemen's sons, whom he trained up in Learning, but especially in true
Religion. He was a very humble and meek man, His humility.
a man of few words, a sweet Preacher, and a favourer of strict Professors of
Religion. It was the fashion and custom of the Fellows after dinner, to sit or
stand a while at the Hall door, and discourse usually of diverse points of
Religion, or of good Writers, and sometimes of other trivial matters. This man,
on a certain time, when he heard them talk of many trivial things, said
nothing, but observed what they said; His holiness.
and when they had done talking, he thus bespake them: Now, my Masters, will
you hear all your extravagant discourses? for I have strictly observed and
marked what you said; and he told them every whit, and they admired him for his
memory.

It was his custom first to write one part of his Sermon, and to commit it to
memory presently, and then another, so that he could preach with much facility,
His Lectures at Abington, and Totnes.
and upon a little warning. He was for a while Lecturer at Abington, and at
Totnesse in Devonshire, where he was much respected. Then he proceeded Doctor
in Divinity, and was preferred by Sir Edward Giles to a Pastoral Charge, which
Knight was a worthy Gentleman in his Country, and often chosen a Parliament
man for Devon.

Doctor Potter married the Lady Giles her daughter, when he was Doctor but of a
years standing. Not long after, Doctor Ayray, a worthy Provost of Qeens
College died; whereupon he was chosen to succeed him in the Provostship, He is
chosen Provost of Queens College.
with the unanimous consent of the Fellows, when he was far from the
University, and never dreamed of any such preferment.

He was also Chaplain in ordinary to Prince Charles, and accounted at the Court
the penetential Preacher. When he had been Provost about the space of ten
years, he resigned his place, and went to his Pastoral charge in the Country,
and there resided; yet he had not been there long, but King Charles his Master,
cast a favorable aspect upon him, and seeing he had not rewarded him for his
long and faithful service, he chose him to be Bishop of Carlisle; He is chosen
Bishop of Carlisle.
and though many sued for the place, yet he said peremptorily that none but
Potter should have it; and surely his gracious Master honored not him so much
as he did himself and that age, in the freedom of his noble and unexpected
choice.

That which Nazianzen said of Basil, may be fitly and properly said of this
Bishop; He was promoted, he did not steal or shuffle himself into the chair, he
did not invade it, the honor sought and followed him. When he was Bishop, His
painfulnesse.
he was a constant Preacher and Performer of Family-duty both evening and
morning, and kept his Servants and Attendants in good order.

Being called to London, in the beginning of the Parliament, he made at
Westminster a worthy and zealous Sermon, His Sermon at the beginning of the
Parliament.
wherein he inveighed against the corruptions that were crept into the Church,
especially in respect of Ceremonies so eagerly pressed by sundry Bishops, as
bowing to the Altar, and such like innovations. His Sermon was well approved of
by the best; but he seeing the tumults that were then raised in London about
the Parliament House, and hearing that he himself was censured as Popish,
because a Bishop, he took it grievously to heart, His death.
sickned, and died there, about the great climactericall year of his age.

He was a great favourer of zealous Professors and Lecturers, A favouerer of
godly Ministers.
and therefore he was accounted by many a Puritanical Bishop; and indeed some
at the Court in King James his time, said, That Organs would blow him out of
the Church.

He was well skilled in the Hebrew tongue, and for his further Progress
therein, disdained not to learn of one of the Fellows, Mr. Thomas Richardson
now Pastor of Newbold Pace in Warwickshire.

An enemy to the book of sports.


even when he was Provost.

He utterly disliked the Book of sports for Recreation on the Sabbath day, and
told a Minister with whom he was acquainted, that if it were sent down to his
Diocese, he would slight it, and urge none of his Jurisdiction to read it.

He was of a weak constitution of body, melancholic and lean, as being a hard
Student, and therefore to recreate his spirits he loved vocal music, and to
this end, he sent diverse times for such Scholars in the College as could sing
well, and he would bear a part with them in his lodgings after supper, where
they made most excellent melody. He was the last Bishop that died as a Member
of the Parliament, and was Bishop of Carlisle some fourteen years.

The Life of Master Richard Sedgwick, who died Anno Christi 1643.
RIchard Sedgwick was born at East Deereham, in the County of Norfolk, His
birth and education.
Anno Cbristi 1574. His Father was a Clothier; but by reason of a great loss
by fire, fell into decay. He had an Uncle living in Yorkshire, who was very
rich, and of large yearly revenues, having no Children; whereupon he took this
Richard in his tender years home to himself, and put him to School, with an
intent to make him his heir; but God had laid up a better portion for him. His
Uncle and his Family were profane, hating the power of godliness, and wedded
to games and sports; yet even in such a Family God visited him in mercy, His
conversion.
and awakened his soul by working in him hearty desires after himself. While
the rest of the Family were at their games and dancings, he would be in a
corner mourning. His Uncle at first thought his retiredness to have been
bookishnesse, and therefore rebuked him gently, and called upon him to take
more liberty; but at last perceiving the truth of the thing, he began to hate
him, and to deal roughly with him, and not being able to bring him to his will,
cast him out of his Family, saying, He is rejected by his Uncle.
that a Puritan should never inherit his land. Before this, his Father died,
and his Mother being industrious and sparing, out of the little means she had
left her, His going to Cambridge.
maintained him at Peter-house in Cambridge, where he profited greatly in all
kind of learning. He began the exercise of his Ministry in Kent; where he being
called to preach in the Cathedral at Canterbury, in his Sermon touching the
corruption of the Prebends, and their Cathedral service, he so far displeased
them, as that by threats they brought him to condescend, Humane infirmity.
through weakness, to promise to recant, and a day for this was appointed.

Upon his return home, and his second thoughts, he became very sad, and in his
perplexity took his Bible and opened it, and at the first, A special Providence.
lighted on that encouraging Word of God to Jeremiah, Jer. 1.7, 8. Whatsoever I
command thee thou shall speak; be not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee
to deliver thee, says the Lord. By this he was so strengthened, that he
resolved to stand to what he had formerly delivered, whatsoever dangers did
attend him. At the time appointed, he preached again in the Cathedral, having a
very large Auditory, both of the Country and City, in which Sermon he
confirmed what he had before delivered, earnestly pressing the Prebends to
reform the abuses amongst them. By this they were so offended, His recovery.
that they complained of him to the Bishop, and so persecuted him, He is
persecuted.
that he was forced to forsake his place, and to retire himself into private,
and was entertained for a time by Sir Edward Bois the elder, And entertained by
Sir Edward Bois.
a man eminent for Piety in those days.

During this his retirement, he came upon occasion to London, and by the means
of Master Egerton Pastor at Blackfriars, was received into the Family of Sir
Edward Anslow, By Sir Edward Anslow.

His great pains


who lived in the City during the winter, and in summer at Crawley in Surrey, a
place destitute of a preaching Ministry. In this Family his encouragement was
great, but his labors abundant. Every day his usual course was to pray in
the morning at six a clock with the Husbandmen, and at ten to pray with the
rest of the Family, and expound a Chapter, His faithfulness.
in which course he went through the four first Books of Moses. His course at
night was after Prayer, to catechize the Family by turns, wherein he used no
respect of Persons, the meanest not being left out, and the chiefest not
forborne. On the Lords day, during his abode at Crawley, he preached twice
constantly, and after public exercise, called the whole Family in private to
render an account of what was delivered in public. In the winter, when the
greatest part of the Family was at London, under an able Ministry, he was ready
to help others, and by Providence, was called to improve his talent at
Battersey in Surrey. Master Wybourne, a Reverend Divine, who constantly
preached in that place, His preaching at Battersey.
having by a fall broke his leg, and being disabled thereby to continue his
labors, desiring his assistance. At this place the people were so affected
with his Ministry, that they requested him to continue to preach among them,
promising to strain themselves to provide him maintenance.

He had a fair call and opportunity (denying himself) to answer it, for Sir
Edward Anslow about this time had an estate befallen him in Hertfordshire,
whither he resolved to go to dwell, in which place was an able and godly
Minister, Master Sedgwick seeing that, by continuing in this Family, he should
not have occasion of exercising his public Ministry, relinquished fifty
pounds annuity during his life, His self-deniel
assured to him by this worthy Knight, and accepted of this call to preach at
Battersey.

Before his departure out of this Family, His marriage.
he married a Wife of an honest and Religious stock in the City of London. He
had not long exercised his gifts at Battersey, bringing glory to God, but the
devil again raised up persecution against him. One Master King, He is again
persecuted.
Churchwarden of the place, was offended at him, because he freely reproved
sin, and boldly spoke against the corruptions that were then in the Church;
by this man he was presented into the Commissaries Court, and by his means
cited to appear to answer certain Articles. This was about the latter end of
Queen Elizabeth's reign, not long before the coming in of King James. Upon this
citation he resolved to appear, and came to London, and being at the door of
the Commissaries house, Master Egerton his faithful and Reverend Friend, by
Providence passing by, came to him, and having saluted him, told him he had
heard of the opposition made against him at Battersey, and asked him if he
would accept of a Call to go beyond the Seas; his answer was (having returned
thanks for his kindness) that he could not as yet resolve him, forasmuch as he
stood accused at present, His Courage.
and was resolved what ever came of it, to defend those Truths that he had
publicly delivered; but yet professing a willingness to follow Providence,
whithersoever the Lord should call him. Appearing before the Commissary, he met
with courteous usage, and was friendly dismissed; for at this time those men
feared a change to be brought in by King James.

Not long after this he was called by the Merchant-adventurers to be Minister
to their company beyond Sea, He is chosen by the Merchants.
whither, breaking through all discouragements, he went. During his abode
beyond the Sea at Stoade, and Hamborough (which was about the space of eleven
years and an half) he by the advice of the godly learned, He erects discipline
in the Church.
erected and established Discipline in that Church. God did greatly bless his
Ministry, and he begat among that little company, many Sons and Daughters unto
God. Conversion.
He had Communion with the Netherland-Dutch Church at Stoade, and at Altenon
near Hamborough, and with the godly that came out of England, admitting them,
being desirous to come to the Lords Table.

The efficacy of his Ministry.
In his Ministry he was very searching, many coming and confessing those things
which he had never heard of, till it came out of their own mouths.

In his carriage he was affable and courteous, yet grave and awful, so that
many durst not for fear do those things that otherwise they were disposed to.
The Merchants here found the benefit by the orderly carriage of their Factors
there. Yet here the Devil was not quiet, for one of the prime Merchants taking
exceptions against his impartial dealing in his Ministry, Gods judgment on a
persecutor.
and the order in the Church, threatened by such a day, naming it, to have him
over into England; but before that day came, himself was summoned by death to
another place.

His charity.
He was very charitable himself, allowing something yearly toward the
maintenance of the suspended Ministers here, and greatly furthered charity in
others. By his direction and encouragement Master Jones, a rich Batchelour, and
one of the Elders of his Church, bequeathed many thousands of pounds to pious
uses, which to this day speaks his praise.

He was eminent in self-denial; for being made Executour by the said Master
Jones of his last Will and Testament, His self-denial.
whereby he might have gained much to himself, he never rested till he had
caused him to alter his Will, and to place others in his room.

His return into England.

His Lecture in Wales.


Upon the dissolving of that company of Merchants he came over into England, and
being disappointed of a place in London, intended for him by Master Jones, he
went to Monmouth in Wales, and for some time held the Lecture settled there.
Afterward a Chapel being erected at Wapping, he was called to that place, His
call to Wapping.
and became the first Minister there. Here he abode to his death, being holy
and exemplary in his life and conversation, and abundant in labors, preaching
constantly thrice a week, and catechizing on the Lords day besides.

The tenderness of his fatherly care and love of this people, he expressed all
the time of his living with them, His painfulnesse.
but especially in the time of the great sickness, when, remaining with them,
he preached constantly every Lords day, and the Fast days, notwithstanding all
the danger that he was in, the infection in that place being much spread, and
very violent. The Providence of God over him at that time was very remarkable.
For although all the Families round about him were infected, and his house
adjoined to the place of Burial, A special Providence.
yet neither himself nor any of his Family were any ways smitten with it.

Many were his labors in private, being much sought unto both for counsel and
for comfort. What success God gave unto his Ministry, was evident by the many
souls won and built up by him. He was very studious, and wrote much, His
humility.
yet was always averse from publishing any thing, though often requested;
saying, that the many Books that were daily set forth, hindered the study and
reading of the Holy Scriptures. Once, he committed to the Press a Catechism
fitted for his own Congregation, and before his death had finished a large
Tractate of the body of Divinity, which still lies by.

He sought the good of all, and was a precious savor unto some, in whose
hearts to this day his memory flourishes. He foresaw the ensuing distractions
with a grieved heart, and raised himself up to comfort by contemplating the
approaching time wherein Christ and his truth, and his ways shall have the
pre-eminence. His judgment concerning some has proved true, asserting often
that their principles would not (if they continued in them) suffer them to sit
down on this side Anabaptism. He was a Friend of truth and peace, and an
Instrument of refreshing the bowels of the poor, many strangers for his sake
giving in largely toward their relief. Having finished his course, being spent
with labors, he quietly and comfortably ended his days, and according to his
last words, His death.
went unto his God Anno Christi 1643. and of his age 69. having continued his
Ministry at Wapping six and twenty years.

The Life of Master Julines Herring, who died Anno Christi 1644.
His Birth.
IUlines Herring was born in Flamber-mayre Parish in Mountgomery-shire, 1582.
His Father within three years after returned with his Wife and Family into
Coventry, where his Ancestors had been chief officers of the City, in their
course almost for the space of two hundred years, and where he himself also was
Sheriff and Mayor, living and dying in good estimation there. This Julines his
Son, having had his first education in Shropshire, with Master Perkin Minister
(at More-Chappel,) his Mothers near Kinsman, (where he learned the Principles
of Religion) was brought home unto Coventry, His education.
where he was trained up in Learning, under Reverend Master Tovey, who then was
Head Schoolmaster there. While he was a schoolboy, he was noted for his
diligence in reading the holy Scriptures, His love of the Scriptures.
delighting in those Chapters especially, which treat of Faith in Christ, and
of repentance from sin to God. And even then in his childhood, he with two or
three School-fellows were so religiously disposed, that on play-daies they
would pray together, and repeat the heads of their Catechism, with the Sermons
which they heard upon the last Lords day, before they went unto their Lusory
exercises. Thus this Timothy grew acquainted with God and his Word, and the
ways of Religion while he was a Child.

His remove to Cambridge.
Being very well fitted for the University, he was sent unto Cambridge, bout the
fifteenth year of his age, and admitted into Sidney College, where he was
studious and a good Proficient in Academical Learning. When he was Master of
Arts, coming home to his Father, he preached often in Coventry, with very good
approbation amongst those, who were best affected toward the ways of
Godliness. Here he had special encouragements in the study of Divinity, from
Master Humphrey Fen, famous for his Ministry and Nonconformity at Coventry,
(who in the Preface to his last Will and Testament, made so full and so open a
Protestation against the Hierarchy and Ceremonies, that the Prelatical Party
would not suffer it to be put among the Records of the Court, when the Will was
tendered to be proved) and his conscience was unsatisfied to enter into the
Ministry by Episcopal subscription, but through a good Providence, he with
Master John Ball, were made Ministers by an Irish Bishop without that
subscription. The first place of his settled Ministry was Cawk in Derbyshire,
His call to Cawk.
(a small village) whither he was called by means of his much honored good
Friend Master Arthur Hildersam, and where he had good encouragements from
Master Bainbridge, a Gentleman there of good estate and estimation for
Religion. In this place, (which was six miles from Derby, and three from Ashby
de la zouch,) his peace and liberty was the better preserved, because it was a
peculiar, and so not subject unto Episcopal visitation. Here God was pleased to
set a broad Seal to his Ministry, making him an happy Instrument to build up
many, who were brought to Christ by Master Hildersams labors, and also to turn
many others from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.

At this time there was great scarcity of good Preachers in those parts,
whereupon people from twenty towns and villages flocked unto Cawk-Chappel, (as
Doves to the windows) every Sabbath day, where more congregated, (especially in
summer and in afternoons,) then the Chapel could contain; yet standing at the
windows without, they might hear the Sermons preached, and Scriptures read,
because Master Herrings voice was clear and strong. Hither great companies came
in the morning, with joyful expectation of wholesome soul-provisions; here
they continued all day with cheerfulness, (some bringing their victuals from
home with them, and others going to a third ordinary, provided purposely for
the refreshing of strangers) and they went from hence in the evening in
companies, repeating the Sermons, and singing Psalms in their return home. Here
amongst many others, Master Simeon Ash received some of his first impressions
and bents toward Religion, whom Master Herring loved from his childhood, and
who lived in his heart and Prayers unto his death.

And this is a matter considerable, that few (if any) in those parts, who were
hopefully brought unto God, and by the Ministry of Master Hildersam and Master
Herring, have been turned aside into the bypath of error and separation in
these broken dividing times, but they continue sound in their judgments, and
holy in their conversations, well remembering the principles whereof they were
well instructed and grounded by those two Worthies, their Fathers in Christ.

When he had continued at Cawke about the space of eight years, he was forced
from thence for Nonconformity by the Prelatical power, being informed against
by ill-affected men, who maligned the great service which he did, and envied
the great respect which he had in those parts. Before he removed from thence,
the Lord provided for him a most gracious yoak-fellow, who was no
discouragement, but an encouragement rather unto him always, both in his
services and sufferings for Christ and his cause. His Wife was the third
Daughter of Master Gellibrand, (sometimes Preacher to the English company at
Flushing in Holland) and Grandchild to that man of God Master John Oxenbridge,
(Minister of Southam in Warwickshire, and afterward of Bablick in Coventry,
where he died) and as she came out of a godly stock, so she has expressed, and
still does express the power of godliness, in every condition and relation of
her life, to Gods honor. By her he had thirteen Children; The education of her
children.
and as they were happily, mutually helpful in the ways of holiness, so it
was their joint care to educate their posterity in the nurture and fear of the
Lord. They were taught the Principles of Religion from their childhood, and
their tender good Mother (according to their Fathers appointment) caused them
to learn the Proverbs of Solomon by heart. Neither was this gracious care in
vain; for the blossoms and fruits of grace, sweetly appear in their lives, to
the comfort of their Parents, and Christian Friends. And here this one thing is
notable and imitable in this worthy man, in reference to his Children, (viz.)
That ever before he gave them correction, he endeavored to convince them of
their sin against God, and sought by tears and prayers for Gods blessing upon
that means for their good.

When the course of his Ministry was interrupted at Cawk, and there was no hope
of his peaceable continuance there, God (by means of Master William Rowley, a
wise religious man, and his faithful Friend) was pleased to open a door for
the more public exercise of his Ministry in Shrewsbury. His call to
Shrewsbury.
Here he preached at Alkmares Church, every Tuesday morning, and upon the
Sabbath also, (so long as liberty was allowed) which Sermon was at one a clock,
that neither the Ministers of the town might be offended, nor other
Congregations emptyed, by the peoples flocking unto his Ministry.

The Sermon which he preached on the Lords day, he repeated it the same night
before Supper, at the houses of Master Edward Jones, Master George Wright, and
Master William Rowley by course; and whereas some spies were usually sent
thither, (crowding in with the company) to pick quarrels, he behaved himself so
prudently, and prayed always so affectionately for the King and present
Government, that his adversaries gave this testimony of him, ( viz.) Though he
be scrupulous in matter of Ceremony, yet he is a loyal subject unto the King,
and a true Friend unto the State.

Beside the great good service which was now done in Salop, by his Ministry,
and private conferences with Christians: in reference unto him many other
Ministers had the more frequent recourse unto the town, (Master Pierson, Master
Nicols, etc.) who were put upon preaching once or oftener, before they departed
thence, whereby knowledge was much increased, and the power of Godliness much
cherished and promoted there. But Satan maligning those opportunities of
service unto Christ, Satan's malice.
some envious ill-affected persons, (amongst whom Master Peter Studley was the
chief) were stirred up, to lay in complaints against him as a Nonconformist:
for such was his prudence, sweetness, and peaceablenesse of spirit, that other
objections could not with any color of truth be made against him. Hereupon
Doctor Morton (then the Bishop of that Diocese,) referred him unto two
neighbor Ministers for satisfaction; and in pursuance of this order, Master
Herring gave in his scruples in writing, and also replied upon their answer.
The consequence of this paper-dispute was a Certificate to the Bishop from the
Ministers, that they believed Master Herring from conscientious grounds, in his
own apprehensions remained unsatisfied, and the Bishop himself told Master
Herrings Friends, that he was satisfied in his integrity. But such were those
times, His suspension.
that he was suspended from the use of his Ministry, though by mediation of
Friends, the suspension was diverse times taken off, and then brought on again
by persons of contrary minds and ways. Thus he continued in Salop for the
space of seventeen years, sometimes enjoying, and sometime wanting liberty for
the exercise of his Ministry in public. But when the Pulpit door was shut
against him, he was the more frequent in keeping private Fasts, and in
expounding the Scripture three times a day in his own Family; by which exercise
some of the neighbors were edified also. Always upon the Lords day, (whether
he was at home or abroad) he frequented the Ordinances of God administered in
public, professing thereby (as himself said) that his practice should declare
his judgment against separation from the Congregations in England, though
there were corruptions in them. When some seeds of separation were scattered in
Salop (by Daniel Chidley and his Wife,) their growth was checked by his
appearing against them. He had many bowels toward them who were misled in this
kind, as was expressed by the many prayers with tears, which he poured forth
before God in their behalf. And having upon this occasion, studied that point
the more thoroughly, he would often say, It is a sin of an high nature, His
judgment against separation.
to un-Church a Nation at once, and that this would become the spring of many
other fearful errors; for separation will eat like a Gangrene into the heart
of Godliness. And he did pray, that they who would un-Church others, might not
be un-christianed themselves. When the Plague was in Salop, he gave himself
unto prayer for the town, and in particular for the persons infected; and many
from the Pest-houses returned thanks unto him, for the spiritual comfort
received by his Prayers. He took great delight in his studies (having a very
good Library) and was often willing to miss a meal, that he might the more
satisfy himself in conversing with his Books. He was seldom hungry, His
studiousnesse.
(as himself was wont to say) while he was in his study, and those who best
knew him, could easily render the reason thereof; for as he was afraid of doing
Gods work negligently, so it was his meat and drink to converse with his God,
and to do the will of his heavenly Father. And yet such were his compassions
toward afflicted consciences, that he gave charge unto his whole Family, to
send none such away till they had spoken with him: yea, unto them, his manner
was to give full liberty of speech, that they might not go away without some
clearing and satisfaction. His experience, humility and sweetness of
disposition was such, that seldom any one who was troubled in spirit, departed
from him without some relief and comfort; whereto may be added his great
faithfulness toward them in perplexed cases, who opened their hearts into his
bosom for spiritual satisfaction.

When he was not allowed liberty to preach in public at home, he was willing
to bestow his pains abroad; and every where he in his Ministry proved himself a
solid well-studied Divine, A Workman who needed not to be ashamed. It may truly
be affirmed concerning him, that when he was in journeys, he imitated the Lord
Christ his Master, Who went about doing good. His painfulnesse.
For in the Families whither he came, (if there was not opportunity of more
public employment, wherein he might appear with safety in those Prelatical
times,) he was always ready by Prayer and Exposition of Scripture, to be
serviceable unto the souls of such who desired to improve him. He was a man of
an ingenuous and cheerful spirit, yet very grave and inoffensive; yea, the
lightsomeness of his behavior being accompanied with holiness and humility,
did make his serious services the more acceptable, and more taking upon the
hearts of those who conversed with him.

Amongst many other rare gifts, with which God had enriched him, this did shine
forth brightly unto all them, His humility, and charity.
who were acquainted with his way, in performing Family duties, whether in his
own house, or elsewhere, (viz.) That he would always most aptly and
affectionately enlarge himself upon the Sermon lately heard, or the Chapter
read, by confession, complaint, petition, thansgiving, etc. unto the advantage
of them, who joined with him in that exercise. He was indeed a man made up of
love and meekness, for the discovery whereof, take two instances, which will
tell the Reader, that he was Dove-like, without gall. The one is this; Doctor
Lamb having broken his leg by a fall, was brought into the same Inn in
Norhamptonshire, where Master Herring had taken up his lodging, being in a
journey; and that night he prayed very affectionately for him, though Doctor
Lamb was a notorious violent Persecutor of Non-conformists, both Ministers and
people; yea though he had been a bitter opposite against Master Herring
particularly. He being asked the reason why he expressed so much respect
toward so unworthy a man, returned this answer; The greater enemy he is to the
Church, the more need he has of Prayers. And then wished those who were with
him, To prove themselves Christ's Disciples by loving their enemies, and by
praying for their Persecutors. The other instance is this, ( viz.)
understanding that Archbishop Laud said unto some of his Friends (Petitioners
for the liberty of his Ministry) I will pickle up that Herring of Shrewsbury;
he used these words, If he will abuse his power, let it teach Christians the
more to use their Prayers. And he then prayed, that the Non-conformists enemies
might by observation, know that they have a good God to trust unto, when
trampled upon by ill-despised men.

His servent Prayers.
He was a constant mighty Wrestler with the Almighty in Prayers for England,
that the Gospel might not be removed, but that the Kingdom of Christ, might be
here advanced more and more. He much feared that bad times would overtake this
Nation; and at a conference about the affairs of England, he used these words:
Gods rod (I much fear) will be homebred War in the State, and Errors and
Heresies in the Church, with Gods visible departure from us.

When all hope of regaining the liberty of his Ministry in Shrewsbury was quite
gone, and therefore his continuance there, in wany regards, was judged
inexpedient; he removed with his Wife, and such of his Family, who were not
disposed of elsewhere, His remove to Wrenbury.
unto Wrenbury in Cheshire, where he sojourned with his Wives dear Sister
Mistress Nicolls, a godly woman, the Widow of worthy Master Robert Nicolls,
who had been very famous in those parts, both for his labors and great
abilities; of whom this true character may be given: A character of Mr.
Nicholls.
He was a man who had a clear head, and a tender heart, who led an holy life,
and abounded in the work of the Lord. Here Master Herring lived privately and
comfortably, under the Ministry of his good Friend Master William Peartree,
doing what service he could by comforting afflicted consciences, and confirming
the hearts of Gods people in the Faith of the Gospel, as opportunities were
offered. Before any further progress be made, in making known his call unto
Amsterdam, here may seasonably be inserted, the description given by a Reverend
Neighbor Minister, which is as follows.

Whereas you desire my opinion in writing, Mr. Herrings character.
concerning that Reverend and Religious man of God, Master Herring deceased;
The truth is, I fear my Pen may rather darken his Honor, then my Pensil can
draw out his Character; yet as the Martyr counted it a great mercy to be cast
into prison, if it were but to see the face of that blessed Angel of God,
Master Bradford; so I have looked on it as no small happiness, that the Lord
in his Providence did cast me into these parts, to see the face, and hear the
voice of Master Herring, that blessed Angel of a Church in Salop. And I bless
God, that I had some intimate acquaintance with him, and knew his Doctrine,
manner of life, etc. as Timothy did Paul's, 2 Epist. 3.10. And I should wrong
him, if I should withhold this just testimony. He was one of whom the world was
not worthy, a Messenger, one of a thousand, a faithful Minister of Jesus
Christ; A Boanerges (a son of thunder) to brawny-hearted sinners; A Barnabas
(a son of consolation) to brokenhearted sinners. As sweet a grace he had in
Elocution, as ever I heard man in the Pulpit, whose gift of utterance did set a
fair gloss on all his holy Sermons; Another Apollos, eloquent and mighty in
the Scriptures; and you know the common saying, Bonus textualis bonus
Theologus. His Sermons preached in the Congregation, were printed in his
conversation; In Doctrine, showing incorruptness, gravity, sincerity, (for he
was a pious and learned Divine) and in life, showing himself a Pattern of good
works; free from visible blame, (saving humane unavoidable infirmities,) none
could say (justly) black was his eye. He was endued with an admirable gift of
Prayer, and was frequently employed in days of private humiliation, even then,
when meetings in that kind were branded with the odious names of Conventicles;
yet the perils (to which he rendered himself obnoxious,) could not stave him
off, from opening his window (with Daniel) toward Jerusalem. He was very
fruitful in conference, discreet in carriage, and cheerful and courageous in
his sufferings, of which this good old Nonconformist had his share. And when
every door was barred, and no hope left to enjoy his public liberty, he left
the land of his Nativity, and (on a clear call) went into the Netherlands,
where (after some years spent in the work of the Lord) this bright star did
set, to the no little sorrow of his dear Christian Friends, etc.

This faithful Servant of Christ had many invitations into New England, but
received not satisfaction in his spirit, to transplant himself thither.

His call to Amsterdam.
Afterward in the latter end of the year 1636, he was propounded by some
friends unto Master Rulice, (who was sent from the English Reformed Church in
Amsterdam unto London, to provide a Minister to succeed Master John Paget) as a
man most meet to undertake that place. For the case there was this, (viz.)
Master John Paget (whose works praise him in the gate) being through old age,
rendered unable to uphold his wonted work in that Reformed Congregation, was
eased of his Pastoral attendance there, (though the Lords of the City,
according to their commendable custom, continued his competent maintenance till
his death,) therefore Master Rulice his Colleague, was employed to find out an
Assistant.

The reason of his remove.
This motion made known to Master Herring, was the rather hearkened unto,
because his suspension from preaching was a burden to his active spirit, and
he espied no ground of hope that he should ever be suffered by the Prelates to
enjoy his much-desired liberty in England any more. Hereupon coming up to
London, after much seeking of God, and serious consulting with godly Brethren,
he was persuaded that this call came from God, and therefore might not be
gainsaid.

Now having resolved (in the pursuance of this Providence) to leave England,
amongst other difficulties to be encountered, he was much affected with a double
conflict, the one relating unto his Manuscripts, the other unto his near and
much endeared Friends. He had many papers and letters (which he much prized)
containing both the spiritual breathings of gracious hearts, and matters of
great concernment: and those he durst not adventure to take with him (fearing a
search,) nor yet did he judge it safe to leave them, because he knew not into
what hands they might come; therefore upon advice he burnt many writings,
though both then and afterward he did with tears think of that Letter
martyrdom, His Letter martyrdom.
(for so he called it,) wherein many of the best thoughts of his dearest
friends were committed to the flames. If this was so grievous, then let the
Reader guess, with what grief of heart this thought was entertained, that now
he must leave thousands of his precious Friends, without any hope of seeing
their faces any more in the land of the living.

And truly his labors and his lovely conversation had gained him multitudes of
Friends, in every Country and corner where he was known; for no man was more
generally and entirely affected, by all sorts, who feared God, then good Master
Herring. Although it be not possible to give a particular account of the Gentry
and Ministry, (most eminent for Religion) who highly prized and heartily loved
him, yet the virtuous Lady Margaret Bromley, (who then dwelt at Sheriff Hales
in Shropshire) deserves an honorable remembrance, The Lady Bromleys love to
Christ's Ministers.
because she was a constant and unparalled favourer of all good Ministers and
People, being both tenderhearted and open-handed toward such who suffered
under Prelatical pressures and otherwise; and at her house, the most famous
Ministers in all neighbor Countries, had hearty welcomes, with manifold sweet
opportunities of service unto God, and of mutual edification. Besides the
frequent soul-helps which the Parishoners of the Congregation, to which she was
related, had upon Sabbath days for her sake; there were few Holy Days, (days
of vacancy from worldy businesses,) in the year, wherein they had not one
Sermon at least, preached by some able Minister of Jesus Christ, amongst whom,
Master Pierson, Master Ball, Master Herring, and Master Nicolls, (before
mentioned, who died at this good Ladies house,) were of chief worth.

Oh! what pathetical Blessings, with Exhortations, Encouragements, and Prayers,
did this worthy man of God bestow upon this, and the Families of other choice
Friends, before he took his last farewell of his dear native Country! This
Narrative would swell too big, if report should be made of generals only in
reference unto them, who were naturally, nearly related unto himself and his
gracious Consort, besides such who were very dear unto them both, in the spirit
of Jesus Christ. Some who beheld the last greetings betwixt him and Reverend
Master Ball of Whitmore, profess that they stick too deep in their breasts to
be forgotten: for after they had spent together well nigh one day and one night
in conference, they did (like Jonathan and David) frequently fall upon one
another with mutual embracings, they parted and closed again a third and a
fourth time, and when Master Herring was on horseback, and Master Ball on foot,
they went together, often shaking hands over the hedges; and upon the final
salutation they comforted each other with this consideration, That though they
should never see one another again on earth, yet they should meet in heaven.
And Master Herring was so deeply affected with those passages, that he said to
some of his company, Two or three more such partings would hinder my journey
beyond Seas; and yet adding withal, Master Ball has conquered my passions. In
his passage out of England, he with warm affections and heavenly benedictions,
took his leave of his own and his Wives Sisters, with their Husbands, whose
dwellings were in diverse Countries. Those two eminently worthy Reverend
Divines, Master Oliver Bowls of Sutton in Bedfordshire, and Master Barry of
Cotsmore in Rutland, (who had married two of his Wives gracious Sisters) as
they had Brotherly respect in his bosom, so they had special visits in his
journey toward Holland. He was necessitated secretly to take shipping at
Yarmouth, (whither his Brother-in-law Master Bowls did accompany him,) because
the then Archbishop had given order, that no Scholar nor Minister should
pass, without License from the Councel-table. Now whereas in his journey he
had often prayed, that God would yet further clear his call into Holland, by
two special Providence, viz. 1. That he might not be examined whether he was a
Minister, (for he professed that he durst not deny his holy calling.) 2. That
God would strengthen him at Sea, and grant him a comfortable voyage. He had
answers of singular grace returned in both. His arrival in Holland.
He landed at Rotterdam September 20. 1637. and went aside from company so soon
as with convenience he could, to bless the Lord for his safe arrival, and for
all other favors vouchsafed unto him, who had never before been upon the Sea.
The next day he went in a Wagon to Amsterdam, and was met on the way, by his
dear Colleague, with the Elders and Deacons of the Church, His entertainment
there.
and many of the English Merchants, who expressed much joy for his safe coming
unto them. By them he was accompanied to the house of his good Friend, Master
Whittaker, where he continued till his removal unto his own house, upon the
coming over of his Family into Holland.

His first Sermon was upon Psalm. 24.1. The earth is the Lords, etc. wherein he
much insisted upon this consideration, His first Sermon.
That Gods Children still tread upon their Fathers ground, whithersoever his
Providence does remove them; and he preached with such satisfaction unto the
hearts of his hearers, that thereby way was made for his future acceptance and
service. The week following he was presented first unto the Honorable Lords,
the Magistrates of Amsterdam, (who kindly accepted him, and gave him a gratuity
toward the charges of his journey,) and afterward to the Reverend Classis,
where he was lovingly received into that Society, and thanks were given unto
God for bringing him safe unto them. Whereas it was his custom to pray every
night before he went into his bed, the night before a fasting day, (appointed
by the States, to seek direction in their Counsels, and success upon their
Armies now before Breda) he spoke thus to his Son who attended him, My heart is
more fit for a thansgiving day, and it would be so unto me, if God would bring
over my dearest Christian (for that was his Wives name) thy tender Mother with
her company. Come let us pray for them. And the next morning when he was ready
to go to the Congregation, he heard that his dear Wife was come unto Amsterdam,
by which Providence his spirit being raised unto holy astonishment and
admiration, he uttered these words; Return of prayers.
Oh what a God do I serve! How exceeding merciful is my God unto me? What his
prudent and pious coversation was, and what high estimation he had in
Amsterdam, may be understood by the testimony of Master Rulice, written by his
own hand, March 2. 1650. which is as follows.

How acceptable and dear Master Herring, ( my once Reverend Colleague) was to
us all, Church, Classis, Magistrates, yea to all who knew him, it is publicly
known. How faithfully he employed those excellent gifts, which God in a large
measure bestowed upon him, in public, in private, in his Sermons, in his
Advices, in Consistory and Classes, etc. what need I mention, for all well
know. For his private conversation, what sweetness and inoffensiveness, yea
exemplary godliness did not he show upon all occasions.

His sickness was lingering, his death like a sleep. As in his life, so in his
sickness, and to his last breath; he showed that his heart was truly stored
with patience, faith, love to God and his People, heavenly-mindednesse, zeal to
the honor of God, and with entire love to his Wife and Children.

But I must break off; I hope that Reverend man, who undertakes to publish the
life and death of my most dear Brother and Colleague, will so set it out, that
it may be a spur to provoke the living to follow such a worthy Pattern, and
be a means of quickening many, not only to walk faithfully in the way to heaven,
but also in that great function of the Ministry. Thus far Mr. Rulice.

The strangeness of Independent Brethren of England, His fear of Independency
when they came over into Holland, was a great trouble unto this real Saint:
and his constant Prayers were, that they might neither be deceived themselves,
nor do any hurt unto the Government of the Reformed Churches. He often said,
that those men had need of much caution, because the devil in the times of
purest Reformation, would be a more subtle Angel of light then he was in
Luthers days.

When his Son returned into England, he warned him to take heed of joining with
any part, against the Presbyterial Government of the Reformed Churches; For I
am sure (said he) it is the Government of Jesus Christ.

When the Scots first came into England, it was his constant and affectionate
Prayer, that they might be instruments of much good, but of no blood nor
division between the two Nations.

He was one of Gods special Remembrancers, in behalf of England, begging
fervently that the Lords and Commons in Parliament, might be preserved from the
two destructive rocks of pride and self-interests. He poured out his soul
before the Almighty, that he would appear for the Non-conformists cause in
England, and set up the Presbyterial Government according to the Scripture
Rules. He often professed himself to be no enemy unto the Persons of Bishops,
but an opposite to their Pride and Prelaticall Rule. When news came unto him of
the Battle at Edgehill, thus he spoke with tears: Oh Lord, will thou write
Englands Reformation in red Letters of her own blood; yet preserve thine own
People, and maintain thine own cause for Jesus Christ sake. He greatly bewailed
the obstructing of Church reformation in England by them, who professed
themselves zealous for Reformation, and it was no small offense unto him, to
hear of the Letters which came from some Independents at London into Holland,
wherein falsehoods were reported, to the reproach of some Presbyterians, his
known, godly Friends in England. He was a true Nathaniel indeed, in whose
spirit there was no guile; and therefore all falsehood and unworthy juglings
were an abomination to his heart. There was an holy harmoniousnesse in his
whole conversation; his life was a well-spun thread, from the beginning to the
end, and tended much to the honor of his Profession and particular Calling.
Although he walked exactly with God, and maintained the comfort of constant
peace with him, yet Satan was suffered to give him one furious assault the
night before he died, as was perceived by those who were then with him; for
rising upon his knees, with his hands lifted up, he spoke these words: He is
overcome, overcome, through the strength of my Lord and only Savior Jesus,
unto whom I am now going to keep a Sabbath in glory. His death.
And next morning, March 28. 1644. being the Sabbath day, (about the time when
he was wont to go unto ministerial work in the public Congregagation,) and
the sixty two year of his life, he was taken from his labors into rest, unto
the spirits of just men made perfect in Heaven, where he shall sing Hallelujahs
for evermore.

The Life of Master John Dod, who died Anno Christi 1645.
John Dod was born in Cheshire, at a town called Shotlidge, bordering on Wales,
not far from Malpus. His Parents had a convenient estate, His birth and
education.
worth a hundred marks a year, which went to the eldest Brother. This John was
the youngest of seventeen, and much beloved of his Parents. He was sent to
School to West-Chester, and when he was about fourteen years old, he was
disposed of to Jesus College in Cambridge, where (though he had little
acquaintance, His first going to Cambridge.
yet) the Lord prospering his studies, he was chosen first Scholar, and after
Fellow; in that College he there remained near sixteen years. His conversion.
The manner of his Conversion was thus:

The Steward, or Boucher of the College, accused him to the Master, for the
non-payment of a considerable sum of money due for one of his Pupils, which
Master Dod had truly paid, but he forgot to set it down. Hereupon there was a
vehement contest betwixt them about this business, and the vexation of mind
that he should be accounted a defrauder, did so trouble Master Dod, that he
fell into a Fever, and was dangerously sick; yet all this while he was but in
a natural estate. For though he had some good skill in the Theorick part of
Divinity, yet he was without any application; and his affliction was this, that
he should be blamed for that, which he from the Law and light of nature hated.
All his sorrow as yet was but worldly sorrow; and as himself says, he neither
did, nor could tell how to pray. At length the Lord put into his heart that
Scripture, Romans 7. The Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, and sold under sin;
and presently his sins came upon him like armed men, and the tide of his
thoughts was turned, and he left musing how he was wronged, and seriously
considered how he had offended God, and he betook himself to great humiliation,
and earnestly besought the Lord for pardon and peace in Jesus Christ. Yet for
some time he could find no comfort, but going on to seek the Lord, there
follows after much humiliation, much consolation, and the Lord sealed to him
that his sins were washed away with the blood of Christ. Then did he desire his
accuser to come to him, and told him, that though he had accounted him to be
his great enemy, yet now he acknowledged him to be his good Friend, for that he
was a means to bring him unto God. And afterward it so fell out (by Gods good
Providence) that it came to this man's remembrance that Master Dod had paid him
the money, and he was very sorrowful for the wrong which he had done him, and
did him all the right he could for the healing of his name; and Master Dod
said, that he had not a more faithful Friend in all the College, during his
abode there, then this man proved.

When he was some years standing Master of Art, he was appointed to oppose in
the Philosophy Act at the Commencement, which he did with great approbation,
His disputation at the Commencement.
insomuch as it was desired that he should dispute again the next Commencement,
but that he avoided. When he preached his first Sermon in the University, he
had bestowed much pains about it, binding himself to words and phrases; but in
his Sermon he was at a Nonplus, whereupon he resolved afterward never to pen
his Sermon verbatim, Note.
but his usual manner was to write only the Analysis of his Text, the proofs
of Scripture for the Doctrines, with the Reasons and Uses, and so leaving the
rest to meditation, in which course he never found defect. And whereas Doctor
Fulk, Doctor Chaderton, Doctor Whitaker, and some others had their frequent
meeting to expound the Scriptures, and therein they chose the Epistle to the
Hebrews, they were pleased from their loving respect to Master Dod to take in
him amongst them.

While he continued Fellow of Jesus* College, by the importunity of some godly
people of Ely, He preached a Lecture at Ely.
he went weekly, and preached amongst them in that City, where the Lord gave a
great blessing to his Ministry. His removal from Cambridge to Hanwel in
Oxfordshire, was thus occasioned; Master Cope (afterward Sir Anthony Cope) a
man of eminent note, who was much wrought upon by Master Dods Ministry, sent a
Letter to Doctor Chaderton, to provide him a Minister for Hanwel, which was
then vacant. Doctor Chaderton moved Master Dod to go to the place, His removal
to Hanwel.
and after he had been a while, and preached several Sermons, by the desire
and consent of the people, and by the approbation of the neighbor Ministers
who had heard him, he was settled as their Pastor. While he was at Hanwel he
preached twice every Sabbath, His great pains there.
catechizing also in the afternoon, and kept a Lecture on the Wednesday
constantly, and besides this, he was one of the five Ministers who held up the
Lecture at Banbury. He gave himself much to Fasting and Prayer, His frequency
in fasting and prayer. His hospitality
and as his seeds-time was painful, so his Harvest was gainful, hundreds of
souls being converted by his Ministry. He was given to Hospitality, delighting
therein, keeping a constant Table on the Sabbath, and on the Wednesdays
Lecture; upon which days he had not under eight or twelve persons commonly
dining with him, and he spent the time amongst them in spiritual exhortation
and conference.

He was about thirty years old when he came to Hanwel, and continued there
above twenty years, where he had twelve Children by his dear Wife, formerly
Anne Bound, Daughter-in-law to the worthy Servant of Jesus Christ, Master
Greenham of Draighton near Cambridge, and Daughter to Doctor Bound, she was one
that truly feared God, and after her decease (by the persuasion of some
Friends) he took to Wife Mistress Cleiton, who then lived at Stratford Bow;
she also was a godly woman, His second marriage.
and he was contracted to her by Master Egerton of Blackfriars, and married by
his ancient and loving Friend Doctor Gouge.

But to return back again to Hanwel, it pleased the Lord to give a great
blessing to his Ministry in that place; The great success of his Ministry.
yet he had much trouble from the envy of some Ministers that lived about him,
who though they seldom preached themselves, yet they would not suffer that
their people should go from them, and hence he was frequently questioned in the
Bishops Courts. And besides this (though some of Hanwel were very courteous and
kind, yet) there were some others who were glad to get from him what they
could, and to keep from him what they could, thinking that that which he had
was too much.

Upon a time Master Dod took a journey to Draighton, to bemoan himself to his
Father-in-law Master Greenham, by reason of his crosses and hard usage; Master
Greenham heard him what he could say, and when he had done, answered him thus:
Son, Son, when affliction lies heavy, sin lies light. This deserves the
rather to be remembered, because Master Dod used often to bless God for it,
saying also, that if Master Greenham had bemoaned him, which he expected, he
had done him hurt; and he forgot not this speech in his old age, but made
excellent use of it for himself and others.

He was suspended from his Ministry at Hanwel by Doctor Bridges, Bishop of
Oxford. His deprivation.
And (suspecting what would follow) the Sabbath before he went to the
Visitation, he gave his hearers a farewell Sermon out of that text, I will
smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered; the people did attend
unto him with sad countenances, and weeping eyes. Being thus driven from
Hanwel, His preaching at Fenni-Compton.
he preached at Fenni-Compton in Warwickshire, where he had but small means,
but he was desirous to be doing good. From thence he had a fair call unto
Cannons-Ashby in Northamptonshire, where he lived quietly diverse years, His
removal to Cannons-Ashby.
preached over the whole Prophecy of Danel, with some other Scriptures, having
much kindness from Sir Erasmas Dryden, (in whom there was a rare mixture of
Piety and Learning) and good affection from Master Cope. He was silenced from
preaching at Ashby, upon a complaint made against him by Bishop Neal, to King
James, He is again silenced.
who commanded the Archbishop Abbot to silence him. Then he ceased for some
time to preach publicly, yet in regard of his heavenly gift in conference, He
had an excellent gift in conference.
he might have been said daily to preach privately; he was in his element when
he was discoursing of heavenly things. And God in goodness so ordered it, that
when he was restrained from public preaching, yet himself conceived that at
that time his life was no less profitable then it had been in former times.

He had much employment in comforting such as were wounded in their spirits,
being sent for, not only nigh at hand, but also into remote Countries.

His comforting of afflicted consciences.
There was a Gentlewoman who had a great worldly estate, and a loving Husband,
but she was so sadly assaulted with tentations, that she often attempted to
make away her self. Master Dod was sent for to come to her, and the Lord so
blessed his Councels, Exhortations, and Prayers, that she did not only recover
out of her anguish of spirit, but she was afterward taken notice of for her
singular Piety; and the Lord so ordered, that this affliction was not only the
means of her Conversion, but also of her Husbands, so that both of them were a
great mercy in the Country where they lived, promoting Religion according to
their power, and entertaining and cherishing godly people: She lived diverse
years quieted in her heart, and being rich in good works; and when she lay on
her deathbed, Master Dod was sent for to her again, who spoke of heaven, Joy
unspeakable.
and to fit her for that glory, she told him, that she felt the comforts of
God, and that she could as hardly at that time forbear singing, as formerly in
childbearing she could forbear crying, and shortly after she died.

There was a Gentlemen related to a noble Family, so perplexed in his mind,
Note.
that he has been known in hard frosts to go barefooted, that the pain of his
feet might divert his thoughts. Master Dod was sent for to him, who was his
spiritual Physician to heal him.

It would be long to insist on all particulars of this nature, the Lord having
made him a happy Instrument for the good of many.

When he had spent some years in this kind of service, by the care and industry
of Master Richard Knightley of Preston (a worthy Patriot,) after the death of
King James, his liberty was procured for preaching again publicly, He is
placed at Fausley.
and then he was setld at Fausley, where he preached twice every Lords day.
There he went over the Gospel of John, the Epistle to the Colossions, and other
Scriptures.

His hospitality
He was much given to Hospitality at Fausley, as he had formerly been at Hanwel,
so that there was scarce any Sabbath in the year, in which he did not dine both
poor and rich, commonly three or four poor persons, besides those that came
from other places to hear him. He had so large an heart, that upon occasion, he
has given to some three shillings, His charity.
to some ten shillings, to some twenty shillings; and when the poor came to buy
butter or cheese, he would command his maid to take no money of them.

At Fausley he had quietness from the Courts, as also at Ashby; for in neither
of those places was there any Churchwardens. He was beholding at Fausley, to
the Right Worshipful Family of the Knightleys, where his bones was laid.

He used to bear crosses with much patience and meekness, being wont to say,
The benefit of afflictions.
that Sanctified afflictions were great promotions, quoting that of the Apostle
Peter, 1 Pet. 1.7. (...), etc. is much more precious then gold, which he
conceived to signify the affliction that tries faith, and that the word
should be rendered exploratorium, rather then exploratio.

He always expected troubles, and prepared himself for them, and put this
difference between the affliction, Troubles to be expected.
for which we are provided and others; that the one are but blows on the
Harness, but the other are blows on the flesh.

Upon a time when an affliction was upon him, which went to his very heart, and
in the expectation whereof he wept; yet when he saw that it was the Will of God
that it should be so, he said to one whom he loved, I will go and bless God,
for I believe this shall be for my good.

He gave himself much to Fasting and Prayer, and when he fasted, His frequency
in Fasting, and Prayer. His diseases.
his custom was to abstain from the dinner of the day before, to the Supper of
the day after. His diseases till he was above threescore, were only Fevers,
and these for the most part high and violent. In the sixty third year of his
age, he had a Fever in which there was small hope of life. Doctor Oxenbridge
was his Physician, who waiting for the breathing out of the disease by
sweating, (in which at last he had his desire) he came to Master Dod, and in
the presence of diverse, said unto him; Now I have hope of your recovery: To
which Master Dod answered, You think to comfort me by this, but you make my
heart sad; His desire of death.
it is as if you should tell one who had been sore weather-beaten on the sea,
and conceiving he was arrived at the Haven where his soul longed to be, that he
must come back again to be tossed with new winds and waves. In his greatest
health and prosperity, he would speak how he desired to be dissolved. Upon a
time, a Gentleman blamed him for it, saying, he liked not servants who would
have their wages before they had done their work; but he seemed to be constant
in this desire, The reasons of his desire.
alleging these reasons amongst others, that God had given him a settled
assurance of Heaven, and a sight of the excellency of Heaven, and that the
earth was but a prison, and Heaven the Palace; and there was perfect holiness
and happiness.

He took all occasions to do good; when he was in company, by godly speeches,
seasoning those which came to him, His taking occasions to do good.
that unless it were their own fault, they might be the better for him. Being
invited to a great feast where there were sundry Gentlemen, and some of them
began to swear, he stopped them by discoursing of the greatness of that sin; How
he prevented swearing.
and that he might not burden their memories, he quoted three Chapters, every
one was the first: as the first of Zachary, the first of Matthew, and the first
of James, and he opened those Scriptures in such sort, that they were all
hushed, and did not again offend in that kind while he was present amongst them.

The Word of God was his great delight, His delight in the Law of God.
his meditation was of it in the night, and his discourse in the day. When
those that were with him were speaking of earthly things, he would find out
some way to bring in heavenly. When he could not sleep in the night, he would
say, that the meditation of the Word was sweeter to him then sleep. When he had
preached twice on the Sabbath, and was aweary, yet to those that came to him,
he would go on afresh in holy Discourses; and the comforts which he found in
his soul, made him sometimes forget his body, that he has been speaking till
he was ready to faint.

His eminency was in frequency, aptness, freeness, and largeness of godly
discourse; in which respect it may be said of him, that in the Country where
he lived, none were known who therein were equal to him. But he was Micans
inter omnes, velut inter ignes luna minores.

His mercifulness.
He was very merciful himself, and to move Parents that were rich to mercy, he
would say thus; You are caring and contriving to lay up for your children, but
lay up for your selves a good foundation against the time to come, being rich
in good works; you will lay up treasure in the earth, which is an unsafe place;
lay up treasures in Heaven, that is the sure and safe place.

His love, and charity.
He loved and honored those that feared God, though in point of Subscription
and Ceremonies they were not of his judgment; and as he sowed, so he reaped. He
was full of love himself, and greatly beloved of others. Doctor Preston, whom
good men loved for his excellent Piety and Learning, was a faithful friend of
Master Dods, and often entertained him at his chamber, Dr. Prestons love to him.
and esteemed much of him for his spiritualnesse in conference and
conversation, and for his ability to open Scripture, and to comfort troubled
spirits. When the Doctors Consumption was upon him, which put an end to his
life, he came to Master Richard Knightleys at Preston in Northamptonshire,
which was but a mile from Fausley, where Master Dod had his abode, and desired
him to speak to him of death and heaven, and heard him with patience and
thankfulness. Master Dod prayed by him when he lay a dying, and preached his
Funeral Sermon.

Also Master Throgmorton, a pious and painful Preacher of the Word; an
approved good man, dying the same year of a Consumption, came to Ashby not far
from Fausley, to have the help of Master Dods comforts and counsels. He was
oppressed with melancholy, and a little before he gave up his soul to Christ,
he asked Master Dod, What will ye say of him that is going out of the world,
and can find no comfort? To whom he answered; He comforts Mr. Throgmorton.
What will you say of our Savior Christ, who when he was going out of the
world found no comfort, but cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? This speech refreshed Master Throgmorton, and within a little space of time
after this, he went to his heavenly inheritance.

Master Dod, as he was of a weaned disposition from the world himself, His
weanednesse from the world.
so he labored to wean others. He put this difference between rich Christians
and poor, that for poor Christians their Father kept the purse, but the rich
Christians keep the purse in their own hands. But it might oftener fall out, and
did; and therefore the purse was better in the Fathers hand then in the
Christians. He was wont to compare wicked men to waves of the Sea; those which
were of a great estate, were great waves; those which were of small estate,
were small waves, What wicked men are like.
but all were restless as waves.

To a Friend of his that was raised from a meaner estate to worldly greatness,
he sent word, that this was but as if he should go out of a Boat into a Barge
or Ship; but there ought to be a serious and godly remembrance, that while we
are in this world, we are upon the Sea.

He often repeated this, that nothing could hurt us but our own sins; and they
should not hurt us, if we truly repented of them; Note.
and nothing could do us good but Gods favor, and that we should be sure of,
if we unfeignedly sought it. Speaking of David's penning the 51 Psalm, after his
murder and Adultery, he put this gloss upon it, That hearty and true
repentance shall have cause to praise the Lord for his pardoning mercy.

He said Afflictions were Gods Potions, Afflictions Gods potions.
which we might sweeten by Faith and faithful Prayer, but we for the most part
made them bitter, putting into Gods Cup the ill ingredients of our own
impatience and unbelief. He gave this reason why many of Gods people lived
uncomfortably, for that they shut their ear against what God said, where they
should open it; and they opened their ear to what their carnal reason, and
Satan, and the world said, where they should shut it. But (said he) the
Psalmist was wiser, Psalm. 85.8. He would hear none of them all; I will hear
what the Lord God will speak.

His preaching was searching; and when some did suppose that he had Informers
and Spies, because he came so close to them, The power of his Ministry.
he answered; that the Word of God was searching, and that if he was shut up in
a dark vault, where none could come at him, yet allow him but a Bible and a
Candle, and he should preach as he did.

He had an excellent gift in similitudes, His excellency for similitudes.
Benefits of death.
which did flow freely and frequently from him, as all those knew, who either
heard him preach publicly, or discourse privately. He called death, the
friend of grace, though it were the enemy of nature: and whereas the Word, and
Sacraments, and Prayer, do but weaken sin, death kills it. Benefit of Prayer.
Speaking of Prayer, he said, a man was never in a hard condition, unless he
had a hard heart, and could not pray.

Having preached out of that text, O woman, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee
even as thou will; he invited some women to dinner, and told them it was a
usual saying, Let a woman have her will, and then she would be quiet. Now the
way for a woman to have her will, is to have a strong Faith, Benefit of Faith.
and to pray as that woman in the Gospel did.

Upon a time when he had preached long, so that it was somewhat late before he
went to dinner, We should not be weary of hearing.
he said, you shall have some Gentlemen will follow hounds from seven in the
morning, till four or five in the afternoon, because they love the cry of dogs,
which to me was unpleasant hearing; so if we love the Word, we should be
content though the Minister stood above his hour. And he added, methinks it is
much better to hear a Minister preach, then a Kennell of hounds to bark.
Speaking of Recreation, he said, he marvelled what the vocation of many was,
who were so eager for recreation. And if we should come into a house, and see
many Physick-boxes and glasses, we would conclude some body is sick; Sinful
recreations.
so when we see Hounds, and Hawks, and Cards, and Dice, we may fear that there
is some sick soul in that Family.

He told some Friends, that if he were to pass sentence who was a rich man,
Promises great riches.
he would not look into his purse or chest how much gold he had laid up, but
look into his heart what promises were treasured up there. For we count him
rich that is rich in bonds, and the pleading of the Promises in Prayer, is
suing of the bonds.

Speaking to a Minister who was to go to a place where there was but small
means, he told him, that his care was to preach, and do God service, and then
God would provide for him. When he preached at Fausley, and was much resorted
unto, as it was with him in other places, he told a godly man of his
acquaintance, His humility.
that if the Country knew so much by him, as he knew by himself, they would
not have him in so much admiration.

Speaking about going to Law, his Opinion was, that it was better to buy Love
then Law. Love better then Law.
For one might have a great deal of love for a little, whereas he could have
but a little law for a great deal. He would frequently say, That was well,
which ended everlastinly well; and that was ill, which ended everlastingly ill:
And that a man was never undone till he was in hell.

This was a speech which he often used, that if it were lawful to envy any,
The benefit of turning to God betimes.
he would envy those that turned to God in youth, whereby they escaped much sin
and sorrow, and were like unto Jacob that stole the blessing betimes.

This was a remarkable passage of Providence, that upon a time when it was late
at night, A special Providence.
it came into his mind that he must see a Friend of his some two miles off; he
had business, and would have put it off, but his thoughts were restless;
whereupon he went, and when he came to the place, all the Family were in bed,
but only his Friend, who was esteemed truly godly, but at that time was
overwhelmed with tentations; the occasion whereof was, some cruelty offered to
his Children. Master Dod knew nothing, either of the tentation or occasion of
it: But knocking at the door, his Friend opened the door to him, to whom he
said, I am come to you, I know not why my self, but I was restless in my
spirit until I had done it. To whom his Friend answered, You know not why you
came, but God knew why he sent you; and withal, pulled out a halter wherewith
he had intended self-murder at that time, which by Gods goodness, was by this
means prevented.

Speaking of losing for Christ, he testified from his own experience, that for
the loss of one carnal Brother he had two hundred spiritual Brethren.

Before he was married, he could not maintain himself, and thereupon he was
thinking, how he should maintain a Wife and Children, his living not being
great; but looking out of his study window, he saw a Hen and Chickens
scratching for their living, His Faith.
and he considered thus with himself, The Hen did but live before, and had
nothing to spare, and now she had as much with that great Family.

When he saw a Christian to look sad, he would use that speech which Johnadab
did to Amnon, Art not thou a Kings Son? He would say to those that complained
of losses and crosses, that which Eliphaz did to Job, Do the consolations of
God seem small to you? God has taken away your children, your goods, but he
has not taken away himself, nor Christ, nor his Spirit, nor Heaven, nor
eternal life.

He used to instruct Christians how they should never have a great affliction,
nor long, How afflictions may be lessened.
and that was by looking upon things which were not seen, which are eternal, 2
Cor. 4.17, 18. What can be great to him that counts the world nothing? And what
can be long to him that thinks his life but a span long?

To persuade them that are Christians not to return railing for railing, he
would say, that if a dog bark at a sheep, Meekness.
a sheep will not bark at a dog.

In these times of war, at the first beginning of them, when many well-affected
people came to him, being affrighted with the Cavaliers, he encouraged them,
using this speech, that if a house were full of rods, what need the Child fear,
Comfort in dangers.
when none of them could move without their Fathers hand; and the Lord was a
loving Father; state and life, and all was in his disposing. When afterward
the Cavaliers came to his house, and threatened to knock him on the head, he
answered with confidence, that if they did, they should send him to Heaven,
where he longed to be, His Faith.
but they could do nothing except God gave leave. They broke open his Chests,
and Cupboards, and plundered him of his goods; but he said to a Friend of his,
that he would not do them that honor to say they had taken ought from him, but
it was the Lord, alleging that of Job, who when he was spoiled by the
Chaldeans and the Sab^ans, yet he did not so much as name the Instruments, but,
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

At length they came to him, when through weakness he was unable not only to
stir out of his chamber, but also out of his bed; Cavaliers cruelty.
they cut the Curtains of his bed, and pulled away the Pillowbeers from under
his head, asking him whether he could speak Latin, in all which losses, which
were great, he never uttered one word of impatience. His patience.
In his sickness, when extreme pain was upon him, as soon as the fit was over,
he would say to his maidservant that attended him; O think well of God for it,
for it is most justly and wisely done, whatsoever he sends or does. When his
servants came to visit him in the morning, he would say, have ye been with God
to bless him for your sleep this night? He might have made your bed your grave.

He would often say in his sickness, I am not afraid to look death in the
face; Death not feared.
I can say, death, where is thy sting? Death cannot hurt me. He spoke how death
was a sweet sleep to a Christian; adding, that if Parents should tell little
children, who had played all the day, that they must go to bed, they would be
ready to cry; but a laboring man is glad when night comes that he might go to
rest. So wicked men, death is unwelcome unto them; but a Child of God, who has
labored and suffered, is glad when death comes, that he may rest from his
labors.

When he had been long speaking to those who came to him, and used to ask him
questions, and has been persuaded to spare himself, he would say, hear but
this one thing more, it may be I shall never speak to you again; but if it
should be so, Blessed is the servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so
doing. Hearken to a few words more; God has heard all the words we have
spoken, and considered with what hearts and affections we have spoken them.

Passionate rebukes unprofitable.
He used to compare rebukes uttered in passion to scalding potions, which the
Patient could not take down. And his opinion was, that if we would do good unto
others, we should labor for meekness of wisdom, whereby we shall be enabled
to use soft words and hard arguments.

What contention should be amongst married persons.
He allowed to Husbands and Wives only one contention; which was this, who
should love one another best; and advised them, that when either of them were
in passion, they should not answer passions with passions, but with compassions.

He was very plain and familiar both in preaching and conference, yet very
spiritual, His manner of preaching.
and performed all with much gravity.

The chief things he sought God for, in his frequent secret fastings and
prayers, The Scope of his Prayers.
(as himself said) were the knowledge of the Scriptures, and a blessing upon
his Ministry, in both which God answered him abundantly.

As for the Scriptures, God had so enlightened him, that he was able to give
account of the drift and scope of the Spirit of God in the greatest part of
them, His exposition of Scripture.
with great clearness, and to open them in such sort as proved very effectual
for the bringing of Scripture Light into simple men's understandings, who were
not able to reach the obscure and scholastic interpretations of many.

His manner was to compare Scripture with Scripture, seldom naming the
dissenters, and but sparingly different readings, but making out the truth
positively, or by necessary consequence.

His custom in preaching.
In preaching, he usually took some portion of Scripture in order before him,
opening a verse or two, or more at a time, first clearing the drift and
connection, then giving the sense and interpretation briefly, but very plainly,
not leaving the text until he had made it plain to the meanest capacity; then
raising those Doctrines that were most agreeable to the mind and meaning of the
Spirit of God in that text, clearing and exemplifying his points excellently
out of the Word, opening his proofs, (not multiplying particulars for
oppressing memory,) not dwelling so long as to make all truth run through a few
texts. He spoke most largely and very home in application, mightily convincing
and diving into men's hearts and consciences, and leaving them little or nothing
to object against it.

He took great care to speak to the meanest capacity, and to feed the Lambs,
saying, he must stoop to the lowest capacity, and if he could reach them,
others might help themselves. He could not endure that Ministers should use
hard and unusual English. He said, What preaching is unprofitable.
that most Ministers in England usually shoot over the heads of their hearers.

He did not strive to speak all that might be said to a point, nor to show
variety, or please curiosity, but to speak to the heart. He would say, that
there were many tricks and devices that some men used in preaching, but they
seldom did good. The pure Gospel, and that preaching which the world counts
foolishness, was that that works most kindly.

He was very Evangelicall, striving first to make men see their lost condition
clearly, and to be convinced of it, saying, Sense of misery was a goo^ step to
the remedy. And then largely and excellently opening the Promises, and the
grace of God in Christ according to the Gospel, looking at that as the most
effectual preaching. Some (says he) labor still to keep men under terrors,
and load them with threatenings, etc. lest they should not be humbled enough;
but the Gospel works true humiliation, not the Law; True humiliation.
it arises from sense of sin and misery joined with hope of mercy. The damned
have terror and sense of misery enough, but that did not humble them.

He desired to speak distinctly, not giving the childrens bread to dogs, but to
discover hypocrisy and sincerity by lively characters and signs, His
preaching by signs.
but yet with great tenderness to babes in Christ, striving to discover a babe
from an hypocrite.

He was excellent for practical Divinity and living by Faith, as to spirituals
and temporals, and self-denial; and very consolatory, rendering Religion the
most sweet and comfortable life, notwithstanding sufferings.

He used to press much after the seeking of spiritual illumination, in hearing
and reading, etc. and divine assistance in religious duties, not contenting our
selves with the use of parts and accomplishments, or grace received, but to
look higher, saying, David that could preach excellently, and had Nathan and
Gad the Prophets also to preach, yet cries out for teaching; thereby showing,
that all that teaching would not do, unless God teach also. And David's cries,
Open mine eyes; he had the light without, but he must have light within, viz.
sight, else he could not see the wonders of the Law, though he had the Law.

Christians should be cheerful.
He used to press much to meekness, and a sweet disposition to affability,
charity and cheerfulness, not to be rigid, sour, tart, nor sad, least the
world should think that we served an hard Master.

Being above eighty years old, his pains were very great, yet not painful to
him. His indefatigablenesse.
He preached almost all day long on the Lords day, yet said, it was no great
matter to pay money when one had it, all the labor was to get it. He opened a
Chapter, and prayed in his Family, after preached twice in public, and in the
interim discoursed all dinner while, but eat very little. He brought in many
with him to dinner, besides his four or six constant Widows; if his Wife began
to doubt of her provision at sight of so many, he would say, Better want meat
then good company, but there is something in the house, though cold. This is
not a day to feast the bodies but souls. At first sitting down, he would bid
them help themselves and one another, and see that none want. Let me (said he)
bid you but once, for I would not speak a vain word to day. After both Sermons,
the house would be filled; and he being sat in his chair, used to say, if any
have a good question, or a hard place of Scripture to open, let them say on;
and when he was faint, he would call for a small glass of Wine and Beer mixed,
and then to it again till night.

The benefit of plain preach-king.
He was excellent in preaching occasionally from the creatures, as he walked or
rode.

His Ministry was so spiritual, and yet so plain, that poor simple people that
never knew what Religion meant, when they had gone to hear him, could not
choose but talk of his Sermon. It mightily affected poor creatures to hear the
Mysteries of God, (by his excellent skill that way) brought down to their own
language and dialect.

He was so holy and spiritual both in life and doctrine, that he silenced even
desperate and devilish opposers of Religion. His holy life.
It was a discredit for any to speak evil of him, because it must needs
express much malice, and all men most generally (in his latter time at least)
honored him.

His peace-maing.
He was very successful in making peace, though between desperate and almost
implacable adversaries, and some of them wicked, mightily convincing them with
Gospel-arguments, to the overcoming and quieting of their spirits.

His acuteness.
He would answer any questions propounded, that were but fit for a Divine to
speak to; yet showing his approbation or dislike of the question according to
the honesty and spiritualnesse, or curiosity and lightness of it.

When mean inferior people came to speak with him, if he was walking in the
Church, His humility.
where he used most to study, that he might have room to walk in, (being
troubled with the stone) or elsewhere; if he thought them bashful, he would
meet them, and say, Would you speak with me? And when he found them unable to
state their question, he would help them out with it, taking care to find the
sore; but would answer and deal so compassionately and tenderly, as not to
discourage the poorest soul from coming again to him.

If any questioned him about Ceremonies, His modesty.
about which many then suffered, he was very wary in dealing, (not shy in
speaking his judgment) but careful of advising them according to their
strength. He would bid them take heed of being led merely by the imitation of
any body, (...) other men's arguments, but look to their Scripture Light, and
see (...) ^^guments they had to bear them out; and whether they could (...)
alone in that case if they should survive their patterns. He would not have
them make a business about lesser things, and then fall off from what they
began to profess.

Being to advise a young man in his choice of a yokefellow, What Wise should be
chosen.
he bad him look principally after Godliness. Men talk of a portion, grace is
the b^st portion. The wise woman builds up the house, viz. The godly, etc.
Not the rich. Some use to say, There is a portion and civility, and we will
hope for grace; But, says he, rather make sure grace, and hope for riches;
There Is far greater reason for it. For Godliness has the Promises, riches
has none. A Son or Daughter of God shall be provided for.

He would say, he that could answer two questions well, How we may always have
comfort.
might have comfort in any place or condition, viz. Who am I? and what do I
here? Am I a Child of God? and am I in my calling or way? He has given his
Angels charge to keep thee in all thy ways.

And that the knowledge of two things would make one willing to suffer or die,
viz. What Heaven is; And that it is mine; What will make us willing to suffer.
I (said one) if a man were sure. To whom he answered, Truly Assurance is to be
had, and what have we been doing all this while?

He used to say, Assurance to be labored for
they that hope to go to Heaven (as most do) and had not good evidence for it,
were like a man, that passing by a great house and estate, would say, This is
mine; but being bid to show his title, would say, some body must have it, and
why not I? Such is most men's title for Heaven.

During the time of his last sickness, it pleased the Lord to try him by
grievous pains, most bitter and sharp, of the strangury; but when he had any
intermissions, he was breathing out such speeches, as tended to the praise of
God, and to the edification of those that attended him. Thankfulness* in
afflictions.
He slept little all the night or day long before his death, in all which time
he employed his attendants which were about him, to read the Scriptures, which
he expounded to them. And when his strength was spent with speaking, he retired
himself to Prayer and Meditation. Prayer.
When he felt his pains returning, he would entreat those that were about him,
to pray to God for him, either to give him deliverance or patience. His
tentation a little before his death, and his wrestlings with Satan were great;
His tentation, and victory.
so were his victories. He spoke to one that did watch with him all night,
about two of the clock in the morning, that he had been wrestling with Satan
all that night, who accused him that he neither preached, nor prayed, nor
performed any duty as he should have done, for manner or for end, but he said,
I have answered him from the example of the Prodigal and the Publican.

His faith, and patience.
His Faith and Patience were increased and perfected by his sufferings. He
longed and thirsted to be with Christ, which words he often uttered. One of his
last speeches was this, with his eyes and hands lifted up to Heaven, he sighed,
and said, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. His pains left him
not an hour before his death, his speech also then leaving him; he could not
eat nor drink two days before his death. And so quietly and patiently he ended
his life, His death.
making a happy change, being fourscore and sixteen years old, Anno Christi,
1645.

The Life of Master Robert Balsom, who died Anno Christi 1647.
RObert Balsom was born at Shipton-Montague, in the County of Somerset. Having
spent some years in New-in-hall in Oxford, upon his removal thence, he was
entertained by Master Bernard of Batcomb, in the aforesaid County, to teach
School, and preach sometimes as his Assistant; under whom he greatly improved
his abilities for preaching. Upon the death of Master Bernard, preaching
occasionally at a neighbor village called Stoke, His call to Stoke.
among a company of poor untaught people, one that lived thereabouts, told him,
that if such a Minister should come and preach among that people, where there
was so small encouragement, he should think that God had a great work to do
upon them. Hereupon Master Balsom promised to be their Minister, where he
enjoyed about forty pounds a year. The great success of his Ministry.
The success of his Ministry there was very great, insomuch that he has been
heard say, that there were but few Sermons that he preached there, but he had
intelligence, that some one or other were converted by them.

The troubles growing in those parts, by reason of our Civil Wars, after one
or two years abode there, he was forced for his own safety, to betake himself
to Warder Castle in Wiltshire, His flight to Warder Castle
where he had not continued long, but the Castle was besieged by the Kings
party. Upon the news of their approach, he was minded to have gone for London,
but being desired by Colonel Ludlow, the Governor of that Castle, he remained
there during the siege. A little before the Castle was delivered up, as they
were in Treaty about the surrender of it, Master Balsom walking upon the roof
of the Castle, heard three Soldiers say, That they had sworn upon the Bible,
to take away the life of one in the Castle. He asked one of them, Who is that
ye mean? Is it our Minister? They replied, Yes; for he is a Witch: which they
affirmed upon this ground, because the Castle had diverse times been very
strangely relieved with provision. Special providence.
As at one time with a herd of Swine coming down to the gates, which they took
in; and at another time by some Deer, and Conies, the siege then being not
close, but straightning them at a distance. He asked them, what was their
names? They told him, they were the three merry boys: He replied, your names
are very unsuitable to the times. And so after some farther discourse, parted
with them.

After the surrender of the Castle, and the enemies entry, they presently
seized on Master Balsom, and clapped him up in a close low room. About twelve a
clock at night, the key of the room was given to the three Souldiets that had
sworn his death: They having received the key, presently entered the room where
he was with another Soldier, who was hanged the next morning: No sooner came
they into the room, but they put off their hats, and standing still, looked on
him at a distance, saying nothing to him. He suspecting them to be the men that
had sworn to take away his life, spoke to them thus; Friends, what is your
business? are not ye the men that have sworn to take away my life? They
answered to this purpose, We have taken a wicked oath, God forgive us, but we
will do you no hurt. He desired them to come near unto him, but they stood
trembling, persuaded him to make an escape, voluntarily offering him their best
assistance. He answered, now I suspect you, you are ashamed to take away my
life, now I am in your hands, but would persuade me to a flight, that you might
with the more color kill me in the pursuit. They assuring him, they intended
really the setting of him at liberty; He asked what they thought would become
of them? They answered, they would go along with him. He replied, That you
shall not do; for if I be taken again, I shall be but in the same case I am;
but if you be taken, it will cost you your lives. And therefore I will rather
suffer the utmost that God shall suffer them to inflict upon me, then hazard
the lives of those that have showed themselves so friendly to me.

Upon this, they had him forth into the fresh air, and in the mean time made
clean his room, and so left him. The next morning, a Council of War was called,
and as they were debating to put him to death, a Captain of the Council stood
up, and said, I will have no hand in the blood of this man, and so went out of
the room, and no farther progress was made as concerning him. Afterward they
carried him in a Cart to Salisbury; His remove to Sarum.
As he was carried through the town to the Prison, the people of the town
entertained him with great scorn and contempt; and that night another Council
of War was called, and packt for the purpose, by which he was condemned to be
hanged. He is condemned to be hanged.
Hereupon the High Sheriff of the County went unto him into the Prison, and
after much ill language that he used toward him, he told him that he was come
to tell him, that he must prepare himself to die, for he was condemned by the
Council of War, to be hanged the next morning at six a clock; but withal,
assured him, that if he would ask pardon of the King for his offense, and serve
his Majesty for the future, as he had formerly served against him, he should
both save his life, and have what preferment he could reasonably desire. He
answered, for me to ask pardon where I am not conscious of an offense, His
courage and constancy.
were but the part of a fool; and to betray my conscience in hope of
preferment, were but the part of a Knave; and if I had neither hope of heaven,
nor fear of hell, I had rather die an honest man, then live a fool or a knave.
The next morning he rose about five a clock, being something troubled that he
had slept so long: About six a clock the Officers came into the room to bring
him forth to execution. While he was preparing to go with them, he heard a Post
ride in, asking hastily, Is the Prisoner yet alive? A special Providence.

His remove to Winchester.


who brought with him a Reprieve from Sir Ralph Hopton, to whom he was carried
to Winchester. As he came to the gates of the town, Sir William Ogle the
Governor met him, and told him, that he would feed him with bread and water
for two or three days, and then hang him. Then he was brought to Sir Ralph
Hopton, who spoke to him thus; Master Balsom, I little thought one day that you
should have been my Prisoner, and I cannot but wonder, that such men as you
should be engaged in a rebellion against the King. To whom he replied, Sir, I
cannot but wonder, that such men as you should call this rebellion. Sir Ralph
desired him to give him an account of the grounds, upon which he and his party
proceeded, promising him, that he should not suffer for any thing that he spoke
to him. After about half an hours discourse, he committed him to his own
Marshall, with this charge, Keep this man safe, but use him well. The Marshall
received him, and after some little rough entertainment, upon his entrance into
his house, he at length used him with great seeming respect. Long he had not
been there, but a Gentlewoman came to him with a pottle of Sack, He is urged to
recant.
urging him to preach a Recantation Sermon the next morning before the Lords,
promising that if he would so do, the King would make him a Doctor. He replied,
Sure you do but mock me; for should I preach upon such short warning, the Lords
would never hear such extempore stuff; but if you be in good earnest, and would
make me a Doctor indeed, then let me have the same Law ye use to give your
Doctors, viz. a quarter of a years time to make a Sermon, and by that time you
may know more of my mind.

The next morning an Order was brought for the conveying of him to Oxford,
whither he was accordingly carried. His remove to Oxford.
He lighted first at the Blewbore, whither they brought a company of the Queens
followers, who with much fury oftentimes swore, that he should not go alive out
of the room. But the Musketeers, who were set as a guard upon him, desired
them to be quiet, telling them that he was their Prisoner, and should not
suffer there, but they would suffer with him. Thence he was conveyed to the
Castle, where after two or three days abode, he enjoyed the same liberty with
other Prisoners; And a while after, he set up an Exposition Lecture in the
prison twice a day: To which, not only the Prisoners, and some of the
Soldiers, but diverse Courtiers, and many out of the town often came. Being
prohibited once or twice to go on in this Exercise, he answered, if ye are
weary of me, I am not willing to trouble you any longer; ye may turn me out of
your doors when you will; but while I have a tongue to speak, and people to
speak to, I will not hold my peace.

After some months of imprisonment, he was released by exchange. His Release.
As he was departing thence, some Courtiers and others, that had formerly
showed him some favor, persuaded him to close with their party, and to stay
with them. He utterly refusing, diverse of them accompanied him out of town; and
as they were parting, one of them said; Sir, If any of us should fall into your
hands, we should desire no better entertainment then you have had amongst us.
He replied, Gentlemen, I could wish that ten thousand of you might fall into
our hands within this month, that you might see how kindly we would deal with
you. Thence he was sent for by the Lord General Essex to be Chaplain in his
Army, He is sent for by the Earl of Essex.
with whom he continued, during his command.

Then he went to Barwick, where he was received with great affection of the
people, His going to Barwick.
and saw in a short time great success of his labors in the Ministry. During
his abode there, two things were very remarkable: One, whereas there was a
Child that had been strangely visited with such a weakness, as neither
Physicians or Divines could guess at the cause, or find out the cure; Hereupon
Master Balsom moved some Christians there to seek God with him, by Fasting and
Prayer, which accordingly they did, A special Providence.
and obtained a sudden and extraordinary answer. For as the Mother of the
Child came home from the Exercise, her Child met her, and told her, she was
very well, who before had kept her bed of a long time.

The other thing remarkable was this; A Scottish Lord, by name, the Lord of
Granson, took up his habitation for a time in Barwick, and brought with him his
Family. In which, amongst others, was the Steward of his house, formerly
reputed a godly man, who was very much afflicted in mind: Master Balsom came to
visit him, and administered some comfort to him for that time. But two or three
days after he being sorely afflicted again, Master Balsom was sent for, who
finding him very much weakened and worn out by the violence of temptation, began
to speak comfortably to him. But perceiving that no words of comfort would
fasten on him, he whispered to him in his ear to this purpose, I doubt there is
something within, that you should do well to discover. Whereupon immediately
the man's tongue swelled out of his mouth, insomuch that he was not able to
speak. Master Balsom continued speaking to him, till at length, to the
astonishment of those in the room, being many, and some of them persons of
quality, a shrill voice was heard, as from out of his throat (having not any
use of his tongue) to this purpose: Possession. Satan.
What do thou talking to him of Promises, and free grace? He is mine. Master
Balsom apprehending it to be the voice of the Devil, replied:

Balsom.
No Satan, thou do not know any man to be thine while there is life in him.

Satan.
But this is a notorious wicked wretch, and therefore is mine.

Balsom.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin.

If God would let me loose upon you, I should find enough in the best of you,
Satan.
to make you all mine.

Balsom.
But thou art bound Satan. And so turning himself to the people, with a smiling
countenance, he said, What a gracious God have we, that suffers not Satan to
have his will upon us?

Satan.
Then the Devil began to curse and swear, and blaspheme the Trinity in a most
fearful and horrible manner.

Balsom.
The Lord rebuke thee.

But this man is mine, for he has given himself to me; Satan.
and sealed it with his blood.

I do not believe that the father of lies speaks truth, Balsom.
and I do believe, how confident soever thou art, that thou will lose thy hold
before to morrow morning.

The Devil continued to curse and swear further, saying, Satan.
How can thou endure to hear thy God blasphemed? I will never give over
blaspheming so long as thou stayest in the room.

I will pray for him. Balsom.


Will thou pray for a man that is damned? Satan.


I will go home and pray for him, Balsom.
and get all the force I can in the town to join with me. After this, there
being no more voice heard, Mr. Balsom went home about eleven a clock at night,
where he found in his house diverse Christians, which he intended to have sent
for, waiting for him; and upon the sight of them, he spoke to them to this
purpose: Friends, A special Providence.
I wonder at the providence of God, in bringing you hither at this time, for
otherwise I must have sent for you. And so declaring to them what had happened to
the afflicted man, he desired them to spend some part of the night with him, in
seeking God for him, which accordingly they did. The next morning Master Balsom
going to visit him again, found him in a comfortable condition; and asking of
him, how he did? He answered, Through the goodness of God, I have overcome,
and am now as full of comfort, as I was before of trouble. And so continued all
that day cheerful, but in great weakness, and the next morning died, no
disease appearing upon him.

After some time of Master Balsom's abode there, he was earnestly entreated to
return into his own Country, to which, for some important reasons he was
inclined, but was as earnestly importuned by many of the inhabitants of
Barwick, either to abide with them, or to return again to them. And after many
other Arguments, as he was just parting with them, as their last Argument to
persuade him to stay with him, they presented him with a list of about
threescore that had been (as they were verily persuaded) savingly wrought on by
his Ministry, The great success of his Ministry.
during the time of his continuance there. He left them, but with a mind of
returning to them again, if providence crossed it not, but his return was
prevented by his death, which happened about two year after, His death.
as he was endeavoring to get himself free from the place, where he then was,
to return to them. In which space of time he did much good, as in converting
many, so in reducing many that were drawn away by Sectaries.

The Life of Master Herbert Palmer, B. D. late Master of Queens-Colledge in
Cambridge, who died Anno Christi 1647.
His Parentage.
HErbert Palmer was descended of an ancient Family of that name, allied to
diverse other Families of note, of the Nobility and Gentry. His Father was Sir
Thomas Palmer of Wingham in East-Kent, about six miles distant from Canterbury.
His Mother was the eldest Daughter of Herbert Pelham of Crawley in Sussex
Esquire. He was born at Wingham, and was there baptized, March 29. 1601.

His birth and education.
He had the happiness of a prudent and pious Education. His Father, beside his
Piety, being a very wise man, and of a more then ordinary understanding, as
well in State Affairs, as those of a more private concernment. His Mother,
beside her Prudence and other accomplishments more then ordinary in her sex,
was also eminently religious, and both of them exceeding careful of his
education. Himself also, being even from his infancy, much addicted to the
serious study both of Religion and Learning, in both of which he had made more
then ordinary Proficiency in a short time, and continued the exercise and
improvement of them afterward.

The Symptoms of Grace and Piety began betimes to put themselves forth to the
view and observation of others, as soon almost as the exercise and use of
reason; so that we may not without good ground, esteem him sanctified even from
the Womb. He was sanctified from the Womb.
When he was about the age of four or five years, he would cry to go to his
Lady-mother, That he might hear somewhat of God; So soon had these her
Religious discourses, made pleasing impressions on his apprehension. Neither
did these, and such like expressions of affection to good things soon vanish
away, (as childish apprehensions use to do,) but continued and increased,
according as his years and the use of reason increased.

Hence was it, that even from a child, being asked at any time what course of
life he best liked to follow, His early desires of the Ministry.
whether to be a Lawyer, a Courtier, a Country Gentleman, etc. he would still
answer, that he would be a Minister of Jesus Christ. From which, while some of
Mr. HERBERT PALMER.
his Friends (for trial sake) would seem to dissuade him, as being too mean an
employment for a Gentleman, telling him that Ministers are hated, despised, and
accounted as the offscouring of the world, etc. he would reply, It was no
matter for that; for if the world hated him, yet God would love him.

He was early acquainted with the Book of God, His frequent reading of the
Scriptures.
which he much delighted in, and read with great affection, (insomuch that
while he was but a child, little more then five years old, he wept in reading
the story of Joseph) and took much pleasure in learning of Chapters by heart.
And here was laid the first foundation of that great exactness in the
knowledge of the Scriptures, to which he did afterward attain.

He had excellent natural parts, both intellectual and moral: His natural
endowments.
which as they were soon capable of being employed, so they were soon set on
work; his Parents vigilance being such, that they suffered no time to be
neglected.

He learned the French tongue almost as soon as he could speak English; even so
soon, as that he has often affirmed, His skill in the French.
he did not remember his learning of it. And he did afterward attain so great
exactness of speaking and preaching in that language, together with a perfect
knowledge of the state and affairs of that Kingdom, especially of the
Protestant Churches amongst them, that he was often, by strangers, thought to
be a native Frenchman; and did not doubt but to entertain discourse with any
person of that Nation, for some hours together in their own language,
concerning the affairs of that Kingdom, who should not be able by his discourse
to distinguish him from a native Frenchman, but judge him to be born and bred
in France; so well was he furnished with an exact knowledge, both of the
Propriety and due Pronunciation of that language, and of the persons, places,
and affairs of that Kingdom, and the Churches therein. A thing not often seen
in one who had never been out of England.

When he learned the Latin tongue, His industry.
with such other parts of learning, as younger years are usually employed in at
School, his diligence and proficiency therein was such, as produced both
commendation and admiration. And while others at vacant hours, were following
their sports and recreations, he was constantly observed to be reading
studiously by himself; taking as much pleasure in good employments, as others
in sports; and counting that the best Passe-time, wherein the time was best
passed.

His carriage toward his Parents, was dutiful and obsequious; His observance
of his Parents.
not only during his Minority, but even afterward; which was very evident in
that honor and reverend respect, which he continued to express to his godly
aged Mother to the day of her death, which happened not long before his own:
being also a special helper to her in the ways of holiness. And what he thus
practiced himself, he did frequently commend to others, being always (though
himself unmarried) a great asserter of Parental authority; as well from that
great emphasis which God puts upon it through the whole current of Scripture,
as from those remarkable judgments, which in Scripture, and in his own
experience he had observed to be inflicted on disobedient and undutifull
children, (whom, as he was wont to say, he had scarce ever known to escape some
visible judgment for it in this life, though possibly otherwise godly persons,)
as also from those unavoidable mischiefs, which do frequently ensue in Civil
Societies, Despisers of Parents usually punished by God.
where the authority of Superiors is vilified or contemned, and which (if well
considered) will be often found to take their first rise and original from the
contempt of Paternal authority.

His admission into the University.
He was about the year 1615. admitted Fellow-Commoner in Saint John's College in
Cambridge, where he continued his former diligence, as well in the exercise of
Religion, as the improvement of his learning, both in his private Study, and in
the performance of Exercises in the University and College, notwithstanding
the exemption which Fellow-Commoners in Colleges are ready to plead from the
performance of them.

He is made Fellow of Queens College.
After that he had there taken the degree of Master of Arts, about the year
1622. he was in the year 1623. constituted Fellow of Queens College in that
University; where, although he were a Gentleman, that beside his Fellowship,
had an estate of his own, and so had the less need in point of maintenance, to
take that trouble of Pupils upon him; His care over his Pupils.
yet (not satisfying himself, to take a place upon him, without performing the
Office thereunto belonging) he took many Pupils, of whom he was more then
ordinarily careful, being very diligent both in praying with them in his
Chamber, and instructing them in the grounds of Religion; as also keeping them
to their studies, and the performance of disputations, and other exercises of
learning, privately in his Chamber; beside the more public exercises required
of them by the College, to the great benefit of those that were his Pupils.

He is ordained Minister.
While he was Fellow of Queens College, about the year 1624. he was solemnly
ordained to the work of the Ministry, whereunto from a Child he had addicted
himself; And about the year 1626, was called to the public exercise thereof,
as a Lecturer in the City of Canterbury; His call to Canterbury.
where, for diverse years, (notwithstanding the great oppositions he there met
with, from such as were enemies to the power of godliness,) he did with much
diligence and very great success discharge that great work, to the spiritual
edification and comfort of many yet alive, to whom his memory to this day is
precious.

The occasion of his coming thither was this; Coming from Cambridge, The
occasion of it.
to give a visit to his Brother Sir Thomas Palmer at Wingham, he did at the
entreaty of some Friends, preach a Sermon at the Cathedral Church in
Canterbury, and that with so much true Zeal, and real savor of Piety* as did
much affect the godly hearers. The report hereof coming to the knowledge of
Master Delme (a godly, faithful, prudent and laborious Minister of the French
Church in Canterbury) he made a journey to Wingham on purpose to gain a further
knowledge of him, and acquaintance with him, (with whom he was already not a
little in love from that good report he had heard of him, though as yet by face
unknown to him;) and hereby not only obtained the knowledge of the man, but was
also, by his gracious and savoury discourse and carriage, very much confirmed
in that good opinion which he had before conceived of him. And this was the
first foundation of that entire and Christian friendship, which with much
spiritual advantage to them both, Friendship.
was contracted between these two holy men, which continued and increased daily
to their mutual comfort and contentment while they were both living, and the
memory thereof is still precious to him that does yet survive.

After this, before his return to Cambridge, having (at the request of Master
Delme,) preached a second Sermon at Saint Georges Church in Canterbury, on a
week day Lecture; the most godly and best affected in the City were more and
more taken with him, and expressed great desires of enjoying his Ministry
amongst them, if it might be obtained.

Hereupon Master Delme, with diverse others, of the most considerable Gentlemen
and Citizens, having earnestly sought direction from God in a matter of such
concernment, did seriously advise about it; and being first assured of the
concurrent desires of many others, did by letters and messages to Cambridge,
signify to him the desire of the godly in that City, that he would undertake
to preach a Lecture amongst them.

This invitation after mature deliberation, His self-denial.
he thought good to accept of, preferring the opportunity and probability of
doing good in that populous place, before the hopes of preferment, either in
the University or elsewhere, which, by reason of his many Friends and
acquaintance great at Court, and otherwise, he might likely have attained unto;
holding steady to that resolution (which long before that time he had taken
up,) so to employ himself as might probably most promte the Work of God,
whatever became of his own advantages. Whereupon a License being obtained for
him from George Abbot, then Archbishop of Canterbury, authorizing him to
preach a weekly Lecture on the Lords day in the afternoon at Alphage Church in
that City; He left his Fellowship in the University, and undertook this work.

During his abode in this employment, he did much edify the people there, both
by sound doctrine, and exemplary conversation. He was a burning and shining
light.
His Sermons were altogether spiritual and heavenly, full of solid explications
and practical applications of the Word of God; whereby the City was well
seasoned as with savoury salt, and much preserved from those innovations and
corruptions, both in doctrine and Worship, which in those days were creeping
on apace; by reason whereof that leven of formality, which many of the
Cathedralists were promoting, (who preferred pompous Ceremonies before the
power of Godliness) was stopped from spreading and corrupting so much, His
opposition to innovations.
as otherwise it might have done. For although he was not then persuaded of the
unlawfulness of the then Government, and some Ceremonies then in use, yet he
could no way approve of the corrupt innovations coming on in those days, but
did with all wisdom and zeal reprove them, countenancing goodness and good
men.

And by this means, he was a great stay and comfort to the godly Ministers and
People, both in the City and Country thereabouts; whom, not only by his
public preaching, but by many other Christian and Ministerial helps
administered in his more private Converses, he did very much encourage in true
Piety. Of this very many Families in that City had great experience, (even
those of the meanest rank, His humility.
) whom he was wont often to visit as he had opportunity, that he might the
better understand their spiritual condition; admitting also persons of all
ranks freely to apply themselves unto him as they had occasion, and to partake
the benefit of private Conferences, Prayers, and other religious exercises; as
likewise affording his Christian advice and direction in cases of difficulty,
especially to distressed Consciences; in which cases, by most of his prudent
and judicious resolutions, he was frequently consulted with as a kind of
Oracle. And that not only during his abode at Canterbury, but wherever else the
Providence of God did cast him. And herein he had an excellent ability and
dexterity, and took much delight in it.

He does good abroad.
And his assistance he afforded not only to those of that City, but also to many
of the most Religious Families of the Nobility and Gentry thereabouts; to whom,
both by his personal Converses, and his Christian letters (of which there are
great numbers yet to be seen) he afforded frequent directions and
encouragements in the ways of God; And particularly the Noble Family of Thomas
late Earl of Winchelsey, then Vicount Maidstone (whose abode at that time was
at the Mote, a place near Canterbury:) the exemplary Piety of whose Family, and
the several Noble Branches thereof, was by him in a special manner promoted.

The like assistance he afforded also to those of the French Congregation in
Canterbury, whom, by reason of his exact knowledge in the French language, he
was able to edify very much. And (at the request of their Eldership) he did
twice preach to them in that language upon most solemn days, to the great
ashonishment and edification of the whole Congregation. It is memorable, that
an ancient French Gentlewoman, when she saw him the first time coming into the
Pulpit, being startled at the smallness of his personal appearance, and the
weakness of his look, cried out (in the hearing of those that sat by her)
Hola! que nous dira cest enfant joy? Alas, what should this Child say to us?
But having heard him pray and preach with so much spiritual strength and
vigor, she lift her hands to heaven with admiration and joy, blessing God for
what she had heard.

Yet this his faithful discharge of the Ministry was not without some
opposition. He is opposed by Sectaries and Cathedralists.


On the one hand those of the Separation, and such as were inclineable
thereunto, were somewhat troublesome to him; but could get no advantage upon
him, nor did prevail any thing (while he remained there) upon his hearers.

On the other side, the Cathedralists and their favorers did oppose him,
fearing (it is like) lest his godly courses and exact walking might be a blemish
to their loose and carnal ways. And therefore, though the greatness of his
birth, and friends hindered them somewhat from prosecuting of him, as probably
they would otherwise have done; yet once some of the chiefest of them
adventured to exhibit Articles against him: But his cause and answers proved
such, as that they were not able to hurt him.

After three years, or thereabouts, his Lecture there was put down by the Dean
and Arch-Dean, His Lecture put down.
(upon certain instructions then on foot concerning Afternoon Sermons) to the
great grief of his godly hearers. But not long after, upon the petition of
great numbers of the Gentry and Citizens, to the then Archbishop, by whose
License and authority he had been before established, (accompanied with the
laudable testimony of diverse Ministers, concerning his Orthodox doctrine, and
unblamable conversation, together with the concurrent testimony of ten Knights,
He is again restored.
and diverse others of the Gentry and chief Citizens) he was again restored.

During his continuance here, he was twice (by the procurement of his Friends
at Court) likely to be made one of the Prebendaries of Canterbury. Tentations
prevented.
But he often admired and praised that Providence of God, that his Friends
endeavors therein succeeded not; seeing himself by this means delivered from
many temptations and dangers, which had been incident, if he had been one of
that company; they being afterward, by the succeeding Archbishop, mainly set
on work, for the setting up and promoting superstitious innovations.

After some years he was removed from Canterbury, His remove to Ashwel.
to the Vicaridge of Ashwel in Hartfordshire, whereunto he was presented by
William Laud the late Archbishop of Canterbury, (which in his defense before
the House of Peers in Parliament, was by the Archbishop insisted upon as one
of his good deeds:) to which he received institution, Febr. 7. 1632. where he
continued the same zeal, diligence and care, which he had before discovered, in
seeking the good of those souls that were committed to his charge.

Beside his constant preaching there twice every Lords day, His great pains
he did also very frequently preach to them occasionally, as any opportunity
was offered; not willing to let pass any advantage offered of doing them good.
Wherein, notwithstanding the excellency of his learning, His humility and
sincerity.
whereby, if he had sought it, he might have attained great applause and
admiration (even from knowing men) in the ostentation thereof: yet he chose
always to condescend to the capacities of his hearers, with so much
plainness, as that (if possible) he might be understood by all, His prudence.
even those of the meanest capacities, as being most studious, both for the
matter and manner of his preaching, how he might be able most of all to profit
those that heard him. And on this ground upon any emergent occasions he
endeavored as much as might be, to suit his matter thereunto, that so the Word
of God, and the Providence of God, might one add edge unto the other, and both
jointly become the more effectual. And for the same reason he did the more
approve of Funeral Sermons, for that at such times the minds of men, especially
those more immediately concerned, are thereby rendered the more pensive and
serious, and so the more fit to take impression by the Word. On the same ground
also was he careful to observe the advantages of sickness, or any other
considerable afflictions, because his Admonitions and Christian Aavice, were
like to be at such a time the more effectual, when God had as it were softened
their heart, and opened their ear to hear.

His diligent catechizing.
He was also careful by Catechizing, both in public, and at his own house, to
instruct in the Principles of Religion, not only the Children and youth, but
even those that were more aged, in case he discerned them ignorant, and such as
stood in need thereof; and yet not so as might expose them to scorn and
reproach, but so as might most conduce to their edfication in the knowledge and
fear of the Lord. To which end he had prevailed with those of his Parish, at
lest the far greater number of them, and those the most considerable persons
to concur with him in it; by sending their Children and Servants constantly
to be catechized on the Lords day before the Afternoon-Sermon (some of whom he
catechized publicly in the Congregation, and others more privately in his own
house, either by himself or his assistant,) that so that the public
Catechizing might neither be too tedious, nor entrench upon the time allotted
for other exercises, as Praying, Reading, Expounding, Preaching, etc. nor yet
the examination of others for want of time, be wholly omitted; as also by their
own endeavors at home to help on this work: and likewise to contribute their
assistance in persuading others to the same willingness. As for those who were
more eminent, but yet needed instruction, he labored both by his own
persuasion, and the persuasion of others, to work in them a willingness to
repair to him in private at convenient times, that by conferences with them,
and friendly discourse in a familiar and gentle manner, he might bring them to
such a sufficiency of knowledge, as was necessary for their own salvation.

And the better to persuade people to a willingness* thus to receive
instruction, he used by way of encouragement, His prudent charity.
(especially to those of the meaner sort) to give Bibles to such as could read,
and five shillings in money to such as could not, when they attained such a
measure of knowledge, as that they were judged fit to partake of the Lords
Supper. And such like rewards and encouragements he used to bestow on others,
as he saw occasion; furnishing them with Books and writings, and otherwise
encouraging them according as they should manifest their diligence in gaining
and improving their knowledge. All which the generation to come, and the
children yet unborn, may have cause to bless God for, when they shall receive
the benefits thereof, communicated from their Parents to them, while others do
as much as in them lies, intail ignorance and atheism upon their posterity.

And because he found it difficult to bring those of shallow memories and weak
capacities to understand and remember the Principles of Religion; discerning,
that many who could not distinctly repeat the words, did yet understand the
matter, and therefore were not to be despised or discouraged; and others of
firmer memories, who were able to learn the words, did understand little or
nothing of the meaning of them. He did therefore study how he might best remedy
both those evils; and to that end, framed several forms of Catechisms in diverse
kinds. At length he pitched on that form, as the most convenient that he could
think of, which he published in print, entitled, An endeavor of making the
principles of Christian Religion plain and easy, His Cathechism.
of which so many thousands have been printed of late years, and entertained
with great approbation.

His method therein is this; The answers which make up the main body of the
Catechism, are so many distinct Aphorisms, or entire Propositions in
themselves, without dependence on the questions to make the sense entire,
containing in themselves a brief module of Divinity: And to that purpose so
much of the question is still repeated in the answer, as is necessary to make
the sense perfect. Hereby the Learner is freed from a double inconvenience: The
one is, that where the sense of an answer is imperfect, he is forced to charge
his memory with learning the question also, or else to make use either of this
Book or another help to ask the question, that so that answer which he has
learned may be perfect sense. The other is, that aptness in the Learner to
misapply the answer to a wrong question, when he learns only the predicate of
the Proposition without the subject. Both which inconveniences are in this way
in a great measure prevented.

Another thing mainly considerable in his method, is, That beside the main
questions and the answers thereunto, there are also annexed diverse explicatory
questions, which require no other answer but Yes, or No; which without any
further charging of the Learners memory, do direct him to the distinct
observing of what is contained in the principal answer, and so to the
understanding thereof; whereas otherwise heedlesse Learners are apt
(Parot-like) only to learn the words without at all regarding the meaning of
them. The same also will help to direst a weak memory the better to recite the
larger answer, if he be first required to give a particular answer to those
expository questions; for he will then have nothing to express in the full
answer, beside what in the Preparatory questions had been suggested to him. As
for example; Quest. In what condition was man created by God at the first? Was
he made miserable? ( No) or very happy? ( Yes) In the Image of God? (Yes) In
what condition then was man created by God at first? Answ. Man was created at
the first in a very happy condition, in the Image of God.

And in the same method he intended to digest the lesser Catechism, composed by
the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, (and authorized for public use) if
God had afforded him life to have seen that Catechism perfected, to the
compiling whereof he had contributed no small assistance; which therefore since
his death has been performed, by one that was intimate with him, and fully
acquainted with his resolutions in that particular.

His manner of reforming disorders.
As he was careful thus to instruct his flock, so was he also vigilant to
prevent disorders and misdemeanors amongst them in point of practice, wherein
he was not contented to use his own personal endeavors, but did also engage
his Parishioners to contribute their best assistance thereunto; whereunto they
did oblige themselves in diverse excellent Resolutions and Agreements, concluded
by common consent amongst them, and subscribed by their hands, viz. for the
preventing and punishing of Drunkenness and Tippling, of profaning the Lords
day, and of other profane, or disorderly demeanours during the exercise of
Divine Worship, by sleeping, talking, playing, etc. as likewise of stealing,
and pilfering, of profane swearing and cursing, of railing, slandering,
whoredom, fighting and quarrelling, disobedience to Parents and Governors,
and of other misdemeanors in whom soever.

His Family-Government.
In the religious ordering of his own Family, he was extraordinary vigilant and
painful, that it might be, so much as in him lay, a Garden without weeds; and
that those which were under his roof, might either not perish, or at least not
through his default. Indeed his house was a School of Religion, such as there
are very few to be found; insomuch that it was counted a great happiness to
live under his roof, under the constant enjoyment of so much means for the
souls good.

It was his great care to entertain none in his Family, but such as were either
truly godly, or at least willing to be instructed and educated in the ways of
God, and who would be ready and willing to attend the exercises of Gods
worship, both publicly and privately, and to avoid all scandalous
conversation.

It was his constant practice twice every day to pray with his Family, not
allowing any to be absent; at which times he read to them some portion both of
the Old and New Testament.

He was careful also to catechize his Family twice every week, and likewise on
Friday and Saturday to require an account from them of the Sermons preached the
Lords day before, which he then repeated to them.

Having also while he was at Ashwel, the Sons of diverse considerable persons
of the Nobility and Gentry, sojourning in his house, for their better education
in Religion and Learning, (he maintaining in his house an Assistant as a
Schoolmaster to teach them) he required of them the like account in Catechizing
and Repetitions as of his own Servants.

He had also daily after dinner and Supper, a Chapter read by one of those
Gentlemen in course, and he whose turn was to read, was required also, after he
had read, to repeat the substance out of his memory, which (by constant custom)
they had attained an ability to perform very exactly; after which, himself used
to go over the same briefly, by way of exposition, of what appeared difficult,
and noting such observations as were most obvious from the most remarkable
passages therein.

Beside this, he required his Servants, after every meal, to have some portion
of Scripture read amongst them, or some other religious Treatise concerning the
fundamentals of Religion, if not both.

But especially he was careful that all his Family should sanctify the
Sabbath Day. His care for sanctifying the Sabbath.
And therefore would not suffer them to be employed late the night before about
their ordinary employments, but caused them to conclude sooner then on other
days, that they might not be indisposed for the duties of the day following.
And on the Sabbath Day it self, he was careful that they should not spend any
part of it idly or vainly, no not in any unnecessary preparations of diet or
the like, but only of such and so much as was necessary for their comfortable
refreshment that day; but would have them spend the whole day, as much as might
be, in the exercises of some of Gods Ordinances public or private, insomuch
that if he had known of any dish that had kept any of his Servants from
attending on any of Gods Ordinances, he would not at all eat of it.

And for better sanctifying of that day, he was careful not only to perform
private duties in his Family, as Prayer, Reading, Singing of Psalms, etc. but
also when he went to the public Ordinances, he would call all his Family
together to go along with him, that so they might be present at the whole
service of God. And in the evening of the day, he required of all his Servants,
and the young Gentlemen that sojourned with him, an account of such portions of
Scripture as had been read in public; and as they recited particular passages
thereof, he gave brief expositions of them, and observations from them:
pressing them to meditate in private of what they read in public.

Beside this great care of his Family jointly, he was also frequent in giving
them personal counsel and direction in the ways of God, exhorting them also
to a daily constancy in the performance of secret duties between God and their
own soul; so that scarce any Family enjoyed the like measure of helps and
encouragements in the ways of holiness.

His secret duties.
His exact walking in his own secret devotion, was also exceedingly remarkable.
He was a man much in Communion with God. Twice every day he was in secret a
Suitor at the Throne of grace, and oftener, as any particular occasion was
offered. He would very seldom enter upon any business, either by himself, or
with others, His Fasting, and Prayer.
without first seeking of God. He did often set days apart to humble himself
in secret by Fasting and Prayer, according as either public or particular
occasions did seem to call for it; as also in solemn Thanksgivings, for mercies
received, whether public or private.

His frequency in reading the Scriptures.
He was a great admirer of the holy Scriptures, and much conversant in them.
Beside what he had read and heard read in his Family, he did every day by
himself read some part both of the Old and New Testament, and constantly write
short meditations and observations of what he so read, whereof he has left
behind him many hundred sheets written in Characters. He was so thoroughly
acquainted with it, that it was not easy to name a Chapter or Verse, but he
would presently tell the Contents of it; nor to name any sentence of Scripture,
but he could presently tell in what Chapter or Verse it was to be found; yea
scarce any particular case could fall out in practice, but that he would be
able to show what particular directions the Word of God afforded for it.

He was also a great observer of Providence, and took special notice how the
Providence of God, and the Word of God did constantly agree together. And from
hence was able to give very near conjectures, if not evident Predictions in
many cases, what God was about to do, and what good or evil events were likely
to come to pass; by comparing present actions with such Precedents as he had
before observed, in the Providence and Word of God in like cases.

His holy and exact walking
And as he was very careful to order all his actions according to his constant
rule, of being subservient to the glory of God, and the good of souls, so that
even his journeys, visits, discourses, and familiar converses with any, were
not undertaken without a special eye hereunto; so did he also keep an exact
account of what had passed; every night before his going to rest, setting down
in writing (in his usual Character,) the passages of that day, what actions or
discourses he had been employed in, what successes or disappointments, what
mercies or crosses he met withal, and what failings he observed in himself:
all which he surveyed again at the end of every week, writing down the chief
passages of that week, and so from month to month, and year to year. By means
whereof he was thoroughly acquainted with his own spiritual condition, and did
maintain a constant exactness, and even walking with God; which being so
uniform, might perhaps by some be the less observed. Like as the Suns
constant brightness, produces less admiration, then some blazing Star that
appears but for a while; men usually more admiring things rare then excellent.

In the year 1632. he was by the University of Cambridge made one of the
University-Preachers (having proceeded Bachelor of Divinity about two years
before;) A matter of honor and repute, He is made University-Preacher.
rather then of profit or employment. Yet also a matter of some advantage in
some cases, (as times then went) being in the nature of a general License,
whereby he was authorized to preach, as he should have occasion, in any part of
England.

At the beginning of the Parliament, he with Doctor Tuckny were chosen Clarks
of the Convocation for the Diocese of Lincoln; wherein he might have been of
good use, in case it had been thought fit to have kept up that kind of
Assembly, to have acted in concurrence with the Parliament as in former times.

In the year 1643. he was by authority of Parliament called to be a Member of
the Assembly of Divines at Westminster. He is made a Member of the Assembly.
And after some time he was chosen one of the Assessors, appointed to assist
the Prolocutor in case of absence or in infirmity. He was in that Assembly an
eminent and very useful Member, exceeding diligent and industrious, being very
rarely absent, His conscientiousnesse therein.
and that not but upon urget unavoidable occasions. For, as he accounted it an
honor to be employed by God in so public a service for the good of his
Church: so he did conscientiously attend upon that service, prefering it before
all other more particular employments, which though in themselves excellent,
yet ought, in his judgment, to give way to this.

And he was exceeding well fitted for this employment, His fitness for it.
having a clear and ready apprehension, and firm and vast memory, a solid and
steady judgment, and a good ability freely to express himself. In matters of
deliberation, he manifested much Integrity and Christian wisdom. In matters of
debate, whether about Doctrine or Discipline, he discovered a great sagacity in
searching out the true sense of Scripture, a clear judgment and strength of
reason, as well in the accurate stating of questions for debate, as in
confirming the truth, and dissolving objections against it; in all, a great
measure of Zeal, Piety, and Prudence. All which procured him much reverence and
esteem from the rest of his Brethren, who judged his presence and assistance a
very great help and advantage in that difficult work, and bewailed his death as
an unspeakable loss.

His judgment was known to be for the Presbyterian Government; the principles
whereof he did thoroughly understand, and was well able to defend, and was a
very great Instrument for the promoting of it. Yet in two things he was at
first much unsatisfied, but by the debates of the Assembly, did profess
himself to receive satisfaction in both.

One was concerning the Divine-Right of Ruling Elders, wherein he afterward
professed himself to be fully convinced, principally by the Authority of those
two places, 1 Cor. 12.28. (where Government is attributed to a distinct rank of
Officers inferior to Teachers,) and 1 Timothy 5.17. which implies, that there
are other Elders which rule well, beside those that labor in the Word and
Doctrine.

The other was, whether there ought not to be continued in the Church, an
Office superior to that of Presbyters. For although he did not approve of the
Hierarchical Government, as it was of late established and practiced amongst
us: yet since it is confessed that Timothy and Titus as Evangelists did
exercise an authority, superior to that of ordinary Presbyters, the object of
which authority seemed to be of perpetual continuance in the Church, it seemed
probable to him, that the Office also of an Evangelist was no extraordinary
Office, but ought to be continued in the Church. But hereunto he received
satisfaction, principally from hence, that in case the Holy Ghost had intended
the continuance of that Office, he would withal have described the work and
qualification of persons fit for it, and taken some course for continuing the
succession thereof, as is done in that of Elders and Deacons. But this being
wholly omitted, there being no more extant in that kind, then concerning the
Apostolical Office, the power of working miracles, etc. We are rather to esteem
that Office as well as these to be extraordinary, and but of a temporary
continuance, expiring with the persons.

Being thus called to attend the Assembly at Westminster, he was forced to
intermit his ordinary residence at Ashwel; His care for Ashwel in his absence.
being able only to exercise such a care of them as might be performed at a
distance, and by making occasional journeys thither, as he could obtain
opportunities so to do. But the ordinary exercise of the ministerial work
there, together with the profits of the place, he put over to a godly and able
Divine to be performed in his absence; reserving notwithstanding his title to
the place, not knowing how soon God might afford him opportunity of returning
to them again.

But, unwilling to intermit the exercise of his ministerial function, he did at
first preach occasionally (as he was requested,) in diverse Churches in and
about London, resolving notwithstanding within himself, to accept of the first
invitation for the constant exercise thereof.

And accordingly being soon after requested by the Inhabitants of Dukes-place
in London, His choice to Dukes-place.
(who were then destitute of a Minister) to preach amongst them, he did
(notwithstanding their inability to raise any considerable maintenance, His
self-denial.
which might invite him) willingly accept of that employment.

This work he performed amongst them with much faithfulness and diligence, as
well by public reading, His great pains.
praying and preaching amongst them twice every Lords day, and at other times
as there was occasion; as also by administering the Sacraments, public
catechizing, and exposition of such portions of Scripture as were read amongst
them. And likewise (as his custom had been elsewhere) by more private
acquaintance and converse with them in their Families, whereby he might be the
better able to afford personal directions, and other Ministerial helps to
them, as their several conditions might require. All which was performed with
so much Meekness, Wisdom and Piety, and accompanied with such a blessing from
God, as that it made a very great impression on them for their good, and was
entertained by them with much approbation and affection, they being ambitious
who should enjoy most of his heavenly Communion and Converse with him. The
success of his Ministry.
Hereby in a short time he did much good, informing such as were weak in
knowledge, settling and confirming such as were wavering in judgment, and
stirring up in all, both by his heavenly conversation and Christian counsel, a
greater zeal and affection to the power of Godliness. By reason of all which,
during the time of his abode amongst them, they were much preserved both from
errors and divisions, whereunto the great unsetlednesse of the times did much
expose them.

Afterward, His call to the new Church.
when the new Church at Westminster was perfected and made fit for use, the
Inhabitants there, and others concerned therein, did solicit him to undergo
the charge of that great people; with profer of far larger maintenance then he
received or could expect from those of Dukes-place, where the inhabitants were
neither many, nor of great estates.

But this consideration did not at all prevail with him, who regarded the work
more then the wages. For although he doubted not but that both Religion and
Reason did require a comfortable and honorable Maintenance, for those that
labored in the work of the Ministry, yet for his own part he was willing to
deny himself in that particular, if so doing might ought advance the service of
God. His temperance.
And so much the rather, because being a Batchelour, and intending so to
continue, nor at all addicted to pompous vanities or excess, either in diet or
apparel (in both of which he was exceedingly moderate) he had the less need
of being sollicitous in getting riches; being indeed much more sollicitous, how
(like a faithful Steward,) to dispose and order what he had, as might be most
for Gods honor and service, then how to increase it.

Yet his removal being much pressed upon grounds of another nature, he did at
length, with the approbation of those concerned on both parts, refer the whole
business to be considered and concluded by diverse of the most eminent of his
Reverend and godly Brethren of the Assemby, whom he did frequently desire that
they would wholly lay aside the consideration of maintenance, and deliver their
judgments, what in other considerations they judged to be most agreeable to
Gods will and his duty.

Hereupon, they to whom the matter was referred, meeting several times about
it, and hearing at large what could on either side be alleged either for his
stay or removal; after mature deliberation had, and seeking of Gods direction,
agreed in this opinion; That setting aside the consideration of maintenance,
The reasons of his removal.
yet in regard of the eminency of the place, the greatness of the Auditory,
the many persons of quality residing there, and the great need of Instruction
to those of an inferior rank, many of whom were extremely ignorant, (by reason
that amongst such a great multitude of people, there had in former times been
so great a scarcity of preaching) together with diverse other reasons of the
like nature, which did more then countervail what could be alleged on the
other hand, his obligations also to those of Dukes-place not being absolute;
they judged it most fit that he should leave Dukes-place, and undertake that
charge at Westminster.

To this their resolution he consented, yet with his Proviso, that those of
Dukes-place should be first provided of an able faithful Pastor to succeed
him, being utterly unwilling to leave them destitute. And accordingly, having
prevailed with Master Thomas Young, (since Doctor in Divinity, and Master of
Jesus College in Cambridge) to succeed him there, (who was also an eminent
Member of the Assembly of Divines, a man of great Learning, of much Prudence
and Piety, and of great ability and fidelity in the work of the Ministry) he
took his leave of them: commending them to the grace of God, and the pious care
of his Successor, taking on him the charge of those belonging to the new Church
in Westminster, and was the first Pastor of that Church.

He was here also eminently faithful and laborious in the work of the
Ministry, in public praying, reading, expounding, preaching, administering the
Sacraments, and Catechizing, with brief and clear expositions and confirmations
of the Principles of Religion, as had been his usual custom in other places.
Beside which he was also one of the seven, that by appointment of Parliament
did carry on that daily morning Lecture at the Abby-Church; His great pains
insomuch that it seems almost a Miracle, that so weak a body as his should
possibly be able to do so much as constantly he performed, continuing oft-times
to speak in public for the space of six or eight hours on a Sabbath day,
beside much time spent in more private exercises of Prayer, Repetitions, etc.
in the Family; yet when his Friends have persuaded him to favor himself,
judging so much pains to be more then his body could endure; his answer has
been, that his strength would spend of it self, though he did nothing; and it
could not be better spent then in Gods service. Yea so far was he from
favoring himself in this kind, that it was a rule with him which he constantly
observed, never to favor himself by declining any ministerial exercise which
he was requested to perform, whether in public or private, if he were
possibly able to perform it.

Neither did he here neglect, what had been his constant practice elsewhere, to
afford private assistance to those of his flock and others, as he had
opportunity. But what time he could gain from the more public affairs of the
Assembly, he spent for the most part in such duties, not willing to lose an
hour which could be employed in doing good. And to this end, beside that free
access that persons of all ranks might have unto him, as they had occasion, he
spent much time in visiting them at their own Families, A faithful Pastor.
to communicate some spiritual good to them, as Directions, Consolations, and
Encouragements in the ways of Godliness, which made his company both very
profitable and much desired. Hereby, besides others, very many considerable
Families of the Nobility and Gentry, (whose practice commonly has a great
influence on others) were much quickened and encouraged in the visible practice
of Godliness, and the power of Religion, which thereby was much improved; And
very many of them are ready upon all occasions, to profess that it was their
great happiness to be acquainted with him, and bewail the want of it as a
great loss.

And he was hereunto the more fitted, His amiable and affable disposition.
for that he was naturally of a loving and friendly disposition, of a courteous
and affable carriage, even toward inferiors, and those of mean rank,
especially if he discovered in them signs of grace, which he did honor and
encourage wherever he met with it. Hereby he gained much love and and affection
from those with whom he had to do, by reason whereof his counsel and advice
became so much the more effectual. To which we may add also his birth and
education, and his frequent conversing with persons of quality to whom he was
related and allied, by reason whereof he was well qualified with such
accomplishments as might render his company acceptable, as knowing well how to
give due respect to all, according as their places and conditions did require,
and yet to preserve the honor and reverence of his Ministerial authority,
which by the gravity, sobriety, and holiness of his conversation was much
secured.

In that great Ordinance of the Lords Supper, His care about the Lords Supper.
which in these broken and distracted times has been in many places wholly
laid aside, and in many more too much neglected; he took much care and pains
how to manage that great business, so as might be neither displeasing to God,
^o justly offensive to good men.

The difficulty herein has been, not concerning the manner of administration,
which has afforded less matter of contest, but concerning the persons that
might be judged fit to be admitted thereunto; which to many men has been
attended with so much perplexity, that they have apprehended a necessity of a
total intermission, and almost an impossibility of administering it in any
tolerable manner; while on the one hand they durst not promiscuously admit all,
(by reason of the great ignorance of many, and the profaneness or looseness
of others;) and yet on the other hand saw not how they might be able, (for want
of authority) to debar any: waiting still for the settling of a Government in
the Church, whereby this great difficulty might in some measure be removed:
Till at length, through the long intermission of this Ordinance, those that are
profane and carnal begin to slight and scorn it, and those of better
principles do too much abate in their affections to it. And that remedy, which
though late, began at length to be applied, in beginning to establish the
Presbyterian Government, has been yet so much defective in want of power, and
so much exposed to scorn and reproach, which men of profane or turbulent
spirits cast upon it, either from principles of profaneness, or of
separation, or from some other bitter root which renders men unwilling to have
their lusts, errors, unlawful liberties, or licentious courses in any kind
whatsoever to be checked or contradicted; that the matter is now almost grown
desperate, unless God will be pleased in special favor, to afford some
unexpected remedy.

Herein this holy man did manifest a great measure of singular Prudence and
Piety, wisely avoiding both rocks; Neither totally omitting the Celebration of
the Sacrament, nor yet promiscuously admitting all unto it, but those only of
whose sufficient knowledge he was assured, and whose lives, so far as he could
discern, were unblamable and free from scandal. And this he did, not only of
late years, but even formerly, from his first undertaking a Pastoral charge; at
what time it may well be supposed, to have been a thing both of greater
difficulty and danger, then of late years, to keep off unworthy receivers from
prophaneing that holy Ordinance.

In order hereunto, his first work was to abate, as much as might be, the
number of ignorant people, by persuading them to be willing to receive
instruction, which with much care and diligence he was ready to afford unto
them, in such ways as is before expressed: Which though a difficult work, was
yet carried on with so great success, through Gods blessing on his endeavors,
that in his Parish of Ashwel, where was no small number of people, he had in a
short time brought them to so great a measure of knowledge, that there was
either none or very few, either old or young, who were not able to give a good
account of the principles of Religion.

When he had once prevailed with them to be so far sensible of their own
ignorance, as to be willing and desirous to learn, it wa^ then no hard matter
to persuade such of their own accord to forbear a while, till they had attained
so much knowledge as that they might come with comfort; which would be so much
the sooner, according as they were more diligent in laboring to attain
knowledge.

When they had attained a competent measure of knowledge, if their lives were
answerable, and not obnoxious to just exception; or at least, they willing to
redress what was amiss, and ready to follow such good advice and directions,
as were given them for the ordering their conversations aright toward God and
man; there was then no reason why they should be longer debarred, but rather
such good beginnings cherished and encouraged, yet with cautions frequently
inculcated to beware of hypocrisy and formality, and not to rest in these
beginnings, but to press forward to perfection.

But in case they did either obstinately refuse Instruction, or notwithstanding
their knowledge, were scandalous and incorrigible, or such as in point of
conversation he could not judge fit to be admitted to that Ordinance: Then
probably they would either be found such as were obnoxious to such scandals as
might endanger a more public prosecution, and so cursed not be refractory; or
else by the conviction of their own consciences, when the danger of unworthy
receiving should be laid open to them; or by friendly persuasions from himself
or others: or by the reverence and awe of his holy and grave carriage, and
ministerial authority, backed with the concurrence of others amongst them,
eminent for worth and Piety; or for fear of being shamed in case they should be
openly reproved or refused in the face of the Congregation, or upon some other
the like consideration, would be persuaded to forbear in case he judged them as
yet unfit to be admitted to that Ordinance. So that scarce any whom he judged
utterly unfit, have ever peremptorily pressed upon him to partake of it. And by
these means, even in times of greatest danger, was he able to avoid the mixture
of profane and unworthy persons at the Lords Table.

Hereunto his naturally courteous and affable disposition did much conduce,
whereby he could with the more ease, gain access, both to the persons and
affections of all sorts of people: together with an excellent mixture of
meekness and courage, which being managed with singular Prudence, and
indefatigable industry, enabled him happily to carry on that difficult work,
which might otherwise seem almost insuperable.

And by the same courteous and prudent carriage, he obtained a like interest in
the affections of his people both at Dukes-place and Westminster: Insomuch as
those who were fit to be admitted to that Sacrament, were either otherwise
sufficiently known to him, by his conversing with them, or else would willingly
upon that occasion approve themselves to him, both in point of knowledge and
conversation; And others who were unfit, nor cared to attain a fitness for it,
would rather of their own accord forbear, then venture the hazard of being
refused; By means whereof, himself and some hundrds of godly persons who did
communicate with him, could with great comfort join in that holy Communion and
Fellowship.

On the 11 of April, He is made Master of Queens College,
in the year 1644. he was constituted Master of Queens College in Cambridge by
the Earl of Manchester, then employed by Ordinance of Parliament, for the
reforming of that University.

He had a great influence upon the general Reformation of that University, and
by his advice and counsel did very much help forward that work, exciting also,
and encouraging others therein, notwithstanding the difficulties in the way
that were represented as almost invincible* and did improve all that interest
which he had, both in that Noble and Religious Earl of Manchester, and in the
Assembly of Divines (who were to give their approbation to all such as should
be put into the places of such as were ejected in that University, whether
Masters or Fellows,) that all possible care and circumspection might be used,
that such only as were both learned and religious, might be commended to, or
approved for those places, lest, in stead of those that were cast out, others
as bad as they should succeed them, as well in their vices as their places.

His Government of the College.
But more especially in reference to that place, to the Government whereof he
was designed (whereof also he had formerly been a Fellow) it cannot easily be
believed how exceeding circumspect he was, how cautious and wary in the choice
of those who (as Fellows) were to join with him in the Government, that they
might be learned, pious, and unanimous. The happy effect of which care, in so
quiet and peaceable establishment of that society, as could not easily be
expected in so troublesome a time, was, to the great astonishment and amazement
of all, even of those that hated them; and has had a very great influence upon
that happy and flourishing condition thereof ever since. What his aim was in
that place, did continually appear by his constant expressions and Prayers,
which sounded of nothing more then the advancement of Religion and Learning:
And he was as true to those expressions in his continued endeavors and actings.

His first and main care was, the advancement of Religion and practical Piety;
knowing that where this took place, a conscionable improvement of time, in
other things could not well be wanting. This made him extraordinary sollicitous
for the constant presence of the whole society at the public Worship of God;
which he did carefully look to, when he was present amongst them, and was
usually one of the last things he gave in charge to all the Students, His care
to promote Religion there.
when his more public employments at the Assembly called him away, and
whereof he was very inquisitive in his absence. He took care also for the
constant instruction, not only of the young Scholars, but likewise of all the
Colledge-Servants in the principles of Religion. The exercises of Common-places
or Sermons in the Chapel, which had formerly been in use, only in Term-time,
he caused to be continued weekly all the year. Besides which, when he was
present in the College, he did frequently himself, either preach or expound
Scripture to them. He also took special notice of the several conversations of
the particular persons in the College, as well by his own inspection and
observation while he was present, as by faithful informations in his absence;
and was frequent in giving them personal counsel and direction in private.
Consonant hereunto was also the care of the particular Fellows, who beside the
instruction of their Pupils in Learning, caused them to come to their chambers
to Prayers every night, and to repetition of Sermons on the Lords day. By all
which the practice of Religion was much promoted.

His next care was for the advancement of Learning, His care to advance learning
which he endeavored to promote by his frequent exhortations and encouraging
all to diligence in their studies, and conscionable improving their time and
opportunities; as also by requiring the constant performance of public
exercises by persons of all ranks; and exciting the Fellows to a diligent
inspection, as well jointly over the College in general, as severally over
their own Pupils in particular for the same ends.

On the same ground also he took care to have the Colledge-Library furnished
with good Authors* giving considerable sums of money for that end, and
persuading others also to do the like; And some dues payable to the College,
which formerly used to be employed in feasting, were by his means converted to
a better use, in buying of such Books, which might feed the minds, both of the
present society, and those that shall succeed.

He bestowed also a considerable part of his profits there, His charity.
upon the yearly maintenance of poor Scholars, and at his death he gave a
considerable sum of money for the same purpose, to be disposed of by the
present Society to such as stood in need.

Indeed his resolution was, that so long as he was hindered from residing
constantly amongst them, by reason of his attending on the Assembly at
Westminster, he would not be a gainer by the place; but whatsoever profits he
received more then would defray the charges of journeys and other expenses
occasioned by it, he would bestow some way or other for the good of the
College.

In elections to places of preferment in the College, he was exceedingly
careful that they might be bestowed on those that were most deserving: and to
that end, he did, His prudence.
with the unanimous consent of the Fellows, make a Decree, that in all future
Elections, none should be admitted to a Scholarship or Fellowship in the
College, till they did first approve themselves for Learning by a public
trial or examination, for two or three days successively in the audience of
the whole College, which has already produced very good effects for the
improvement of Learning in that College, and more are like to ensue. In case
any solicited him for preferment of their Friends, his constant answer was,
that if they were found to deserve it better then others, they should have it;
but if otherwise, they must expect to go without it; and his actings were so
exactly consonant hereunto; as indeed in all things his resolutions, words and
actions were so exactly consonant, and kept so perfect harmony as is seldom
seen: whereas in many, their words are more then their intentions, and their
actions less then their words.

In his converse with the Fellows, it was his great care to preserve unanimity,
that as well Elections as all other affairs of the College, should be carried
on by a universal consent; so that if in the proposal of any thing, there were
any dissent, his usual manner was to defer the determination of it, till every
one should see reason sufficient to concur with the rest; and was himself as
ready to hearken to any argument produced, though contrary to his present
sense, which he would either fully answer or yield to it: so that scarce any
thing was overruled merely by plurality of suffrages, but all with universal
consent; and nothing more ordinary, then for all differences to be quite
reasoned down.

In his absence from them, his mind was still present with them; being more
thoroughly acquainted with all the affairs of the College, and more careful of
them, then most Heads of houses are when they are present. For by reason of
that sweet harmony and agreement betwixt himself and the Fellows, he had
constantly faithful intelligence of all affairs, and did communicate his
counsel and advice therein; making the good of the College, (as he was wont to
call it) his Magna cura, by reason whereof that College has flourished in a
very eminent manner: And I may safely say, without prejudice to any; that
scarce any Society in either University, since the late Reformation, both for
the general improvement of Religion and Learning, and the unanimous harmony
amongst themselves, have been comparable hereunto; yea so great was that
unanimity and reciprocal affection, between him and the Society, that scarce
ever any Head of a Society was taken from them with more general sorrow.

Beside what has been already said, much more might be added, concerning the
worth of this eminent Servant of God; much of which has been already penned by
himself in that small Tractate, Of making Religion ones business, together
with the Appendix, applied to the calling of a Minister, (which with other
small Tracts are printed together with this title, Memorials of Godliness and
Christianity.) wherein you may read a true Character of his thoughts, as well
as his actions, of which I shall only add this; That his constant practice was
so exactly consonant to the strict principles, A true Nathaniel.
that are there expressed, as can hardly be believed by those that have not
seen it.

He was a man indeed of a very public spirit, and wholly laid himself out for
God: His zeal.
And therefore, though he were ready to deny himself and condescend freely,
where his own interest was only concerned; yet was he zealous and tenacious in
things that concerned Gods glory, reserving his heat to encounter sin.

Hence was it, that notwithstanding his natural meekness, he acted in the
things of God with much courage and resolution; As in those free and resolute
expressions of himself (yet with humilty, meekness, and sobriety) in preaching
at the Cathedral Church at Canterbury, in presence of the Dean and Prebends,
wherein he spared not to set before them such things as were notoriously
amiss, (yet for the most part expressing in Latin what did chiefly concern
them, that they might take notice of it, not the people;) which, though it
procured him some trouble and opposition, yet he did not for that abate of his
courage and resolution. In like manner, when he was to preach at the Bishop of
Lincolns Visitation at Hitchin, he went thither with a resolution to speak
fully and freely against the corrupt innovations then in practice, His courage
and faithfulness.
whatever might be the issue; and did accordingly perform it, though he were
sensible of the great danger of so doing. The like resolution he manifested in
the question about the Sabbath, when opposition was made against the Perpetuity
thereof, and the Morality of the fourth Commandment, a matter wherewith his
heart was deeply affected, as being an high affront to the Majesty and
Authority of God; the thoughts whereof seemed to be continually in his mind, as
was evident by his prayers, discourses, counsels and endeavors; and
particularly by that elaborate discourse, which he, in conjunction with that
Judicious, Learned, and Pious Divine Master Daniel Cawdrey, published to the
world, entitled Vindiciae Sabbathi; (the latter parts whereof were long ago
fitted for the Press, His vindication of the Sabbath.
and want but invitations of publishing, which might encourage the Stationer to
undertake the charge.) And therefore when reading the Book for Sports on the
Lords day, bowing to the Altar, reading the Service Book there, etc. were
urged, he was most resolute against them, resolving rather to lose all, and
suffer any thing then to comply therein, and with that resolution went to the
Archbishops visitation at Welling held by Sir John Lamb, A special Providence.
where yet he found, beyond expectation, rather a connivance at him, then an
enforcement thereof. And the like he did concerning the Convocation-Oath in the
new Book of Canons, in the year 1640. which he vigorously opposed, and took a
great deal of pains in evincing the unlawfullnesse thereof.

It is well known also what freedom and faithfulness he has used in
reference to the public affairs, His faithfulness.
as well in his ordinary Sermons at the New Church, the Abbey, and Margarets in
Westminster, (to which places the greatest number of Parliament men did usually
resort,) as in those by special order preached to one or both houses of
Parliament, (some of which are to be seen in print) where he spared not to
declare fully and plainly what God expected from them, and freely to reprove
what was amiss. For (as he was wont to say) he did not in that place preach
BEFORE them, (ut coram Judice) but TO them ( authoritative) as by Commission
from God, and how much soever they might be superior to him in other regards,
yet he was in that place superior to them, as acting in Gods Name; and
therefore would not be afraid to speak whatever was the Will of God that he
should tell them, notwithstanding any displeasure or danger which might by this
means befall him for so doing.

And upon this consideration, we may look upon it as a wise Providence of God,
so seasonably to take him away a little before those great transactions about
the change of Government; which were so directly contrary to his deliberate and
settled judgment, that he would certainly have thought it his duty to Speak much
more then others would endure to Hear. For although his judgment was clear for
the lawfullnesse of Defensive Arms (which was the Parliaments case, as it was
first stated) as does fully appear in that Treatise, entitled, Scripture and
Reason pleaded for Defensive Arms (wherein himself of all others had the
greatest hand: His judgment about the King.
) yet was as peremptory against Offensive Arms, or attempting the Kings life,
whose person he judged sacred and inviolable, and has often expressed himself to
that purpose, that in case this should ever come to be the question (which he
hoped he should never see) he thought himself bound in conscience by speaking,
preaching, and otherwise, to oppose it to the utmost of his power, whatever
danger he might incur by so doing; which zeal of his, though at that time he
were like to have prevailed very little with men otherwise resolved, yet it
might have proved an occasion of much hurt to himself, and therefore God in
wisdom and mercy thought good to excuse him that piece of service.

He was in his conversation a man of much temperance and sobriety; In his diet
he abstained from strong drink altogether; His temperance, and sobriety.
Wine he drank very sparingly, so far forth only as the necessities of nature
did require, and did usually content himself to eat but of one dish at a meal,
and that none of the daintiest, even when he had more before him. In his
apparel he did neither affect to be gay nor costly, but decent, nor to spend
time in needless curiosity in dressing. As for Recreations, he scarce used
any, but in stead thereof refreshed himself with the Christian converse of
Friends; accounting time so precious, that he would redeem it not only from
sports, but from sleep also so far as the necessities of nature would permit.

His liberality and charity.
He was neither wastfull nor covetous, but very liberal; doing many acts of
charity (beside what has been mentioned before) to such as stood in need;
bestowing plenteous relief, according as he was able, both by his own hands and
the hands of others, so that those who received it knew not oft-times whence it
came. And when that eminent work of charity was on foot in Cambridge, while he
was Fellow of Queens College, whereby diverse young Scholars, who were forced
by reason of the wars to fly out of Germany, especially of the Palatinate, were
sent for hither and educated partly in the University, and partly under able
and godly Divines in the Country, whereby they might be fitted to do God and
their Country service (when God should give them opportunity to return) having
here been educated in the knowledge of our language, and the way of practical
Preaching, which has been no where more eminent then in England, (which work
succeeded beyond expectation) he was one of the great actors therein, and did
contribute liberally thereunto. The like assistance also he afforded to diverse
Hungarians, Transilvanians and other strangers, who came over into England for
the same reason.

The time of his sickness was not long; His last sickness.
for having spent much of his natural strength in his constant labors in the
service of God, there was the less work for sickness to do; His deportment
therein was holy and heavenly; His humility, faith, patience, and submission to
Gods Will, eminently appearing from time to time, and his discourse full of
heavenly expressions till the time of his death.

Not long before his death, when one had read to him the 38 Chapter of Isaiah,
(having then some little hopes of his recovery) and ready to go to prayer, he
desired him to stay a while that he might pray first, which he did briefly, (as
his weakness would permit) but very fully, both for himself, the Kingdom, the
Church of God, and all to whom he stood in any relation; The heads whereof were
soon after written as near as might be in his own words, so far as the memory
of those that were then present could call them to mind. His Prayer before
death.


First blessing God for his goodness the night past.

Blessed be God that has been so good to us this night. Then praying in behalf
of himself.

Great God, heal the sinfulness of my nature.

Pardon all my transgressions.

Take from me a heart of unbelief, that I may not depart from thee the living
God.

Deliver me from tentation.

Accept of Jesus Christ for me.

Teach me to improve all Providence.

To live upon the Promises.

Let Christ be my life.

O Lord, let me never shrink from thee.

For the good of the public.

Lord turn the heart of this Nation, and all our hearts.

Turn the heart of the King.

Sanctify the Parliament and make them faithful.

Bless the Assembly, and make them faithful and upright with thee.

Let not the Army do unworthily, but what thou would have them to do.

Bless all the Ministers.

For other Nations.

Lord do good to Scotland, and the Churches in France.

Bless New England and foreign plantations.

For the places to which he was related.

Lord provide a faithful man for Queens-Colledge.

A faithful man for this place (New-Church in Westminster.)

A faithful Pastor for those in the Country.

For Friends and those about him.

Lord, remember all those that have showed kindness to me, and have taken
pains with me, and recompense them. Thou have promised that he which gives a
Cup of water in the name of a Disciple, and he that receives a Prophet in the
name of a Prophet, shall have a Prophets reward Afterward (having forgotten to
crave a blessing upon somewhat given him to take, he prayed, Lord, pardon my
neglect and forgetfulness of thee; and deliver from tentation, and the evil of
tentation. Thou art holy if thou should forsake us; Our Fathers trusted in
thee and were delivered. Lord glorify thy name in my poor spirit, and let none
of thy people ever see me shrink from thee for Jesus Christ his sake.

Being spoken to, to cast the burden of his sickness and pain upon God, he
answered, I should do very unworthily, if when I have preached to others, that
they should cast their burdens upon God, I should not do so my self.

His death.
In these and many other the like Christian expressions, he did manifest the
same savor of holiness even to the time of his death, which had been
constantly discovered in the time of his life. He departed this life, Anno
Christi 1647. and of his age 46. having served God faithfully and painfully in
his generation, being a very great Instrument of much good, and an excellent
pattern for imitation. His body lies interred in the New-Church at
Westminster, and his memory yet lives in the minds of those that knew him.

The Life of Gaspar Colinius Great Admiral of France.
GAsppar Colinius or Coligni, His Parentage.
was descended of a very Ancient and Honorable Family; his Predecessors had
Kingly Privileges in their own Country; as the Power of Life and Death, of
Coining Money, Imposing Taxes and Tributes, etc. His Father was Gaspar de
Colonia or Colinius, who lived under King Francis the first; and had to Wife
Ludovica Monmorancy, the Sister of Annas Monmorancy, Great Constable of France.

When in the year 1522. the Admiral Bonivet had taken Fontaraby in the
Confines of Spain, as soon as he was returned into France, the Spaniards came
and besieged it with a great Army: The siege lasted twelve months, whereby the
Inhabitants suffered much extremity by reason of Famine.

King Francis hearing of it, commanded this Gaspar to raise an Army, and
relieve Fontaraby, which Army he presently Levied; but in his march he fell
sick, and died at Ax, August 4. Anno Christi 1522, His Fathers death.
leaving three Sons behind him, Odet, Gaspar and Francis.

Ludovica his Widow, was made one of the Ladies of Honor to the Queen of
France, and was very careful of the education of her Sons, and lived a most
chaste and virtuous life all the remainder of her days, dying in Paris, Anno
Christi 1547. His Mothers death.


Pope Clement the seventh, seeking to increase his Authority in France, Popes
Policy.
made the elder Brother [ Odet] a Cardinal, knowing that by reason of the
eminency of his Family, he might be very useful to him. By which means the
Inheritance fell to this our Gaspar, the second Brother, His Birth.
who was born Feb. 16. Anno Christi 1517. whose ingenuity and towardliness
appearing in his childhood, His education.
his Mother was very careful of his education; and for his Instruction in
Learning, she made choice of Nicholas Beraldus to be his Schoolmaster, a man
famous in those days in France. She also provided him Tutors to instruct him
in Military Arts; of such as were most skillful therein.

This Gaspar being thus furnished both for Peace and War, when he came to the
age of twenty four, the Dolphin of France, the Kings eldest Son besieging Baion
at that time, Gaspar went to serve under him, and to put in practice what he
had before gotten in the Theory: In which Service he showed much alacrity and
courage; His valor. He is wounded.
and in advancing near to the enemies Trenches, he was wounded with a Bullet in
his throat. The same year also the King having intelligence that his, and the
enemies Army were ready to join battle in Insubria, Gaspar obtaining leave,
hastened thither, and in that battle gave great proof of his Valor and
Prudence; so that shortly after K. Francis dying, and his Son Henry succeeding
to the Crown, he advanced him to great honor; and whereas his Uncle Annas
Monmorancy was General of the Horse, His advancement.
he made this Gaspar Colonel of a Regiment of Foot: In which Office he carried
himself so well, that in a little space he gat much repute for his Justice,
Valor and Prudence, and thereby became very grateful to the common people:
For whereas the Soldiers formerly by their rapines and plunderings used much
to oppress them, this new Colonel kept them in awe by military Discipline, His
military discipline.
especially he severely punished them for incontinency, swearing and blasphemy;
and his Orders were so generally approved of, that shortly after the King put
them amongst his Military Laws.

The same King also advanced him to greater honor, taking a great liking to
him, making him one of his own Horsemen, which vulgarly are called of the Kings
Order. And whereas contention arose about that time between the King of France,
and King Henry the eighth of England about the Town of Bulloine, which a little
before upon conditions of peace had been pawned to the English; the King of
France distrusting the English, His military service.
made this Gaspar Governor of all that Country; who presently going into
Picardy, whither King Henry of France had sent an Army to besiege Bulloine: He
with admirable art and diligence built a Castle near to it, which was such a
shelter to the French, and did so hinder the Sallies of the English, that in a
short time they were forced to treat about surrendering of the City. For the
finishing of which Treaty, the whole business was referred by the King of
France to our Gaspar, and his Uncle Rupipontius; which being ended, and the
Town surrendered, He is made Admiral.
Gaspar returned to the King, and was shortly after made the Great Admiral of
France, which amongst the French, is counted the greatest honor in the
Kingdom, having the command of the Sea, and the Kings Navy. He was also made
Governor of Picardy, and of the Isle of France, and Captain of a Troop of men
at Arms, and one of the Kings Council.

Anno Christi 1554. Charles the fifth Emperor of Germany, and Queen Mary of
England, raised great Armies against the King of France, and to resist such
potent Adversaries, none was thought so fit by the suffrage of all, He is made
General.
as our Gaspar; and therefore he was chosen by the King to that place, who
presently raising Forces hasted to the Confines of France, toward the Belgic
Provinces to secure them against the approach of their enemies. At this time
France was in great fear, considering the conjunction of such potent
adversaries, and the King of France his want both of Money and Arms to resist
them, so that many thought that the ruin of France was approaching. Whereupon
our Admiral persuaded the King to treat of Peace; which counsel was so
grateful both to the King and his Nobles, that the charge of it was presently
committed to the Admiral, He makes Peace with the Emperor.
which within few days he effected, to the incredible joy and rejoicing of all
the Orders of France; and he was looked upon as an Instrument of saving his
Country, especially considering upon what honest, honorable and profitable
conditions he had concluded the Peace.

About this time it fell out that the Guises, who were Lorrainers by
extraction, and pretended a Title to Sicily and Naples, which they said the
King of Spain had injuriously taken from their Ancestors; perswaed King Henry
of France, that for diverse years they had held correspondency with a great part
of the Neapolitane Nobility, so that if the King would but assist them with
some competent Forces, they doubted not to make an easy conquest of that
Kingdom. By this their counsel they violated the Peace which was made a little
before with Spain, and solemnly sworn to on both sides, His distaste of perjury.
which was a great grief to our Admiral, who sticked not to say that such
perjury proved always, as dishonorable, so fatal to Kingdoms; and that God
in all ages had been a severe revenger of it: Yet the King would not hearken to
him, but commanded him to raise Forces in his Province. The cause of the feud
betwixt, him and the Guises.
This was the first cause of that deadly feud which arose between the Guises
and him: There were some other smaller causes which further kindled that fire,
which for brevity sake I omit.

The Emperor hearing of these preparations in France, thought to be before
hand with them, and therefore raises an Army in the Low Countries to invade
France, which the King being informed of, and knowing that the first storm
would fall upon Picardy, he presently dispatched away the Admiral for the
securing of it, and before he he had marched two days journey, he was informed
by his Scouts that the Spaniards intended to besiege San-Quintan in Picardy: He
also received Letters from one Captain Brullius, that as soon as the Citizens
of San-Quintan heard of the Spaniards intention, they were seized with such a
Pannick fear, that many of them left their houses, and fled into the woods with
their Wives and Children. Our Admiral hearing these things, dissembled the
matter before his Soldiers, as well as he could, and showing much alacrity, by
great journeys hastened to San-Quintans. Whereupon two of his Captains [
Gernacus and Lusarcius] endeavored by all means to dissuade him from it;
telling him that the City was not fortified, neither provided with food and
other necessaries to sustain a siege, and that the enemies would beleaguer it
before he could furnish it with such things, and therefore they told him that
it was better, and more for his honor, to disturb the enemy in the open
fields, then by shutting himself up within the Walls to expose himself to such
danger. But he considering of what consequence that place was, and what
advantage the getting of it would be to the Spaniards, adhered to his first
resolutions; and having by the way adjoined to himself about two hundred and
forty Soldiers, he hastily flies to the City, His courage.
and sets all hands on work for the fortifying of it. The Spaniards being
informed hereof, presently begirt the City with a siege, St Quintan besieged.
and began to draw their Trenches about it, and possessed themselves of the
Suburbs, whereby by rolling Trenches they approached the Walls. This our
Admiral taking notice of, Sallied out upon them, and firing the Suburbs, drove
the enemies further off; yet when he had thoroughly viewed the City, and found
the weakness of it, he began to suspect that he could not long hold out
against so potent an adversary. His fidelity to his Country.
Yet considering that Gods Providence had cast him upon these straits, he
resolved rather valiantly to die, then to give the enemy so great an advantage
against France, by surrendering that Town to them. His industry.
And therefore he laid out all his care, labor and industry, for the defending
of it; and for the greater encouragement of the Citizens and Soldiers, he laid
his own hands to every work that was to be done.

Whilst he was thus busily employed, a Messenger brought him word that his
Brother Andelot was gotten safe into the City with about five hundred
Soldiers; the remains of a greater Army which the King had sent under the
Constable for the victualling and relieving the City, which Army was encountered
by a great party of German Horse and Foot, The French Army routed.
who in the encounter had routed the French, slain many, and dispersed the
rest; only in the time of the medly Andelot with his five hundred men had
slipped into the City.

As soon as this defeat of the French was known to the Soldiers and Citizens,
they were possessed with so great a fear that the encouragements of the
Admiral were little regarded. Hereupon he calls them all together, makes a
Speech to them, and showed them that the safety of their Country should be
preserved before their lives; and thereupon caused them all to take an Oath,
that if any one spoke about the surrender of the City, he should lose his head
for it; himself also took the same Oath.

The City battered.
In the mean time the Spaniards being elated with their former victory, press
upon the City harder then before; and for twenty days together continue their
battery against the Walls, whereby they beat down a great part of them.

The Admiral seeing this, and perceiving that they were approaching to give a
general storm, he encouraged his Soldiers stoutly to make resistance; telling
them that if they did but withstand the first stroke, the enemy would not be
forward to attempt a second. Where the greatest breach and danger was, there
himself stood armed to resist in the very face of danger: Other places he
commended to his Brother, St Quintan taken.
and his other Captains. But whilst he was valiantly fighting in the breach,
word was brought him that the enemy was entered in two other places of the City:
Whereupon taking some of his trustiest Friends with him, he ran thitherward to
oppose them, but before he came he found that that part of the City was filled
with his armed enemies, against whom whilst he opposed himself, he was
environed by his adversaries and taken Prisoner, The Admiral taken.
who presently carried him away to Antwerp.

Whilst he was Prisoner there, he fell dangerously sick, His sickness a means
of health to his soul.
and lay forty days tormented with a Fever; and as soon as he began to
recover, he called for a Bible, by reading whereof he much eased and refreshed
his mind and body; and by the diligent study thereof he began to embrace the
reformed Religion, and to have a taste of true Piety, and the right manner of
calling upon God.

Not long after he paid his Ransom, which was fifty thousand Crowns, and so
returned home; and being weary of the Factions and Affairs at Court, and
seriously thinking of his change of Religion, he gat leave of the King to turn
over his Regiment of Foot to his Brother Andelot, He devests himself of his
Offices.
and his Government of the Isle of France to his Brother-in law, Marshall
Monmorancy; and shortly after he sent one of his intimate Friends to the King,
humbly to signify to him that he intended also to lay down his Government of
Picardy, and therefore desired him to think of one to succeed him therein: The
King answered that he wondered at his resolution, and scarce thought him wise to
divest himself so suddenly of so many places of honor and profit: and from
that time he began generally to be suspected of his change in Religion, His
temperance.
showing a mind so free from ambition and desire of rule.

Monsieur Andelot also discovering his resolution in Religion, Andelot
questioned for Religion.
the Cardinal of Lorraine (who hated the Family of Coligni with a deadly
hatred, as the greatest enemies to the greatness of his Family) watched his
opportunity, and suggested to the King, that all men took notice, that many
great men of France were infected with the poison of Calvinisme, which they
scattered amongst the inferior sort of people, and in particular that Monsieur
Andelot had blabbed out many things to the dishonor of the solemn sacrifice of
the Mass, etc. The King being incensed hereby, commanded the Cardinal of
Chattillion his Brother, and Monmorancy his Cosen, to send for Andelot, and to
admonish him to answer modestly to the questions which should be proposed to
him.

When he came before the King, he professed his great good will toward him,
and spoke many things of his great merits, and then told him that he was sorry
to hear that which was reported, viz. that he thought ill of Religion, and
therefore he required him to tell him what he thought of the Mass, which the
Calvinists spoke so much against? His stout Answer.
Andelot being a man of great courage, answered confidently according to the
truth; which the King being offended at, exhorted him to look to himself, and
to prevent the danger before it were too late. Whereunto Andelot with greater
courage answered, that he had hitherto showed himself obedient in all things to
his Majesty, whom he had found always bountiful to himself and his Family,
but in the cause of Religion, he could neither daub nor dissemble with God;
That his Body, Wealth and Dignity were in the Kings power, of which he might
dispose as he pleased: but his Soul was subject to God only that gave it; to
whom therefore in this cause he must needs be obedient, as to his greater Lord.

At this the King was so enraged, that snatching up a dish, he therewith hurt
his Son the Dolphin, that sat next him; and then he commanded one of his
privy-chamber to carry Andelot to the City of Meaux, His imprisonment.
where he remained a Prisoner in the Bishops house, till he was removed to the
Castle of Melodune.

Not long after King Henry the second dying, his Son Francis succeeded him, who
was married to Mary Queen of Scotland, the Daughter of the Duke of Guises
Sister, by which means the Guises ruled all at Court, and they also boasted
often of the Kingdom of England, to which this Mary was Heir apparent, as they
said.

The cause why he left his Offices.
The Admiral knowing their cruel, barbarous and bloody dispositions, who would
never be free from turbulent Counsels, and especially from pesecuting those of
the Religion; he was now, without further delay, resolved to lay down his
Government of Picardy: and for that end acquainted Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of
Conde, concerning his intention, wishing him to beg that place of the King,
which accordingly he obtained.

Our Admiral being thus eased of these public Burdens, and the troubles of
them which withdrew his mind from Religion, he kept at home in his own Castle,
and the rather because of his Wife Carola Lavollia, His godly wife encourages
him.
born of an Illustrious and Ancient Family, which was wonderfully given to the
study of Religion, exhorting her Husband also, that casting off the remainders
of Idolatry and Superstition, he should wholly betake himself to the true
service of Christ. The Admiral having often heard her press this upon him,
dealt seriously with her, telling her, that he never knew any either in France
or Germany which embraced in truth this reformed Religion, Persecution attends
the Gospel.
but that they were overwhelmed with manifold afflictions, under which they
almost perished. He told her also, that by the Laws of France, which were
confirmed by all the Parliaments, Whosoever made profession of this Religion,
was to be burnt alive, and all his estate to be forfeited to the King. Yet,
says he, if you be so prepared with Faith and courage, that you can be content
to undergo the same lot with others, you shall see that I will not be wanting
to do my duty. To this she answered, That the condition of the Church at this
day, was no other then what it had been in former ages, even from the
beginning, and she persuaded her self, that it would be the same to the end of
the world. And thus each of them encouraging other, He instructs and reforms
the Family.
the Admiral began to instruct his Family in the true knowledge and worship of
God, and gave them Bibles and other good Books to read for their furthtr
edification. Withal he stoutly forbad them those oaths and blasphemies which
were common in France, especially in the Court. He provided also godly
Governors and Schoolmasters for his Children, so that in a short time there
was a wonderful change in his Family; yea, by his example his two Brethren,
Odet the Cardinal, and Andelot, were exceedingly stirred up to the study of
Religion.

The Admiral from his childhood had been bred in the Court, which did in those
days exceedingly abound with luxury and other vices, from which he was not
altogether free; The power of Religion.
but so soon as he embraced the true Religion, there was such a strange
alteration in his life and deportment, that the powerful work of Gods Spirit
did wonderfully appear therein. Before he durst come to the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, he conferred with diverse Godly Ministers, His prudent humility.
both about Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation, for the settling of his
judgment in the truth: and once being present in the Town of Vatevill at a
private meeting of the godly, where there was a Sermon, and the Sacrament to be
administered; after Sermon he requested those that were present that they would
not be offended at his weakness, but that they would pray to the Lord for him,
and then requested the Minister that he would a little more explain himself
about the Sacrament, which he willingly did; and having by sundry texts of
Scripture showed that Christ is received only Spiritually and Sacramentally
therein, he concluded with that of St. Augustine, How Christ is received in the
Sacrament.
Manducare cibum qui non perit sed permanent ad vitam, est credere in Christum.
Et Quid paras dentem, and ventrem? creed, and manducasti. Item, Nolite parare
fauces, sed cor. Christ is to be fed upon not with our mouths, but with our
faith, etc.

Our Admiral being much satisfied with this discourse, He partakes of the
Sacrament to the great joy of the Churches.
gave thanks first to God, then to that Minister and Congregation, and shortly
after was himself partaker of that holy Sacrament, the same whereof when it was
once spread abroad in France, it cannot be believed what joy and consolation it
brought to the Churches of Christ; for though till that time the true
worshippers of God had many Laws made against them by the Kings and
Parliaments, though they were daily dragged to prisons, torments and death, so
that they were forced to hold all their meetings in secret, yet was true
Religion after a wonderful manner dispersed through all the Provinces of
France, Persecution the bellows of the Gospel.
and the Popish party found by experience that the more they sought to
suppress and extinguish the light of Gods Word, and the Professors of it, the
more it daily increased.

Not long after fell out the tumult at Amboise, and the conspiracy of the
Nobility against the Guises, whose pride and insolency the Princes of France
could no longer bear with. Of this number was the Prince of Conde, and the King
of Navarre his Brother. Whereupon the Guises procured an Edict from the King, A
meeting of the Nobility.
whereby a meeting of the Nobility was appointed at Fontainbleau, especially to
treat about matters of Religion; and when the day came, which was Aug. 24.
1560. the King requested those that were present to deliver their opinions:
Whereupon the Admiral rising out of his seat, His zeal and courage.
humbly presented the King with two Supplications under this title, The humble
Supplications of those who in several parts of your Majesty's Kingdom, do
truly and purely serve God. These Supplications were delivered to Albespine the
Kings Secretary, who publicly read them. This bold fact of the Admiral was
much wondered at, considering the Kings bitter enmity against that Religion,
and the great power of the Guises. The sum of those Petitions was this:

The Protestants Petition.
They which purely and sincerely serve God, taking this fit opportunity, do
humbly beseech your Majesty, that of your clemency you will be pleased to pity
a great number of our Subjects, who unto this day are miserably afflicted,
tormented and wasted for the cause of Religion in all your Provinces: We humbly
beg of you that you will not be grieved to take cognizance of our cause, and to
appoint that the Scripture may be the judge in these great controversies;
whereby it will easily appear how much we do abhor heresy, which hitherto has
been laid to our charge: as also how falsely we have been charged with sedition,
when we never used force or arms to defend our selves, but ever thought it our
duty in our greatest extremities only to have recourse to your Majesty's
clemency. Our humble request therefore to your Majesty is, that you would be
pleased to restrain our persecutors, by whose means there is no part of your
Majesty's Kingdom, which in these late years has not been defiled with the
blood of your innocent Subjects. Our case has been miserable when we have been
forced to plead our cause before the Popes Clients and Pensioners, rather then
before equal and indifferent Judges. Our humble request therefore is, that you
would be pleased favorably to look upon so many Families who have always
acknowledged you for our gracious Lord and King; and according to Gods command
have honored and obeyed you, and shall be ready, if occasion be offered, to
spend our lives for your dignity and service; and therefore we think it but
equal that our lives and welfare should be protected against the rage of our
cruel and bloody adversaries. We further pray, that some public places may be
allowed us where our Ministers may Preach the Word of God sincerely, and
Administer the Sacraments truly; that our Religion being no longer concealed,
we may be freed from those false calumnies which our adversaries have hitherto
cast upon us; And we shall ever pray, etc.

After these Supplications were read, there were great debates, but little
about Religion, great complaints being made of the Kings debts, and
consideration had how the same might be discharged. Hereupon our Admiral spoke
freely and boldly against the Forces raised by the Guises, His boldness.
under the pretense of a guard for the King, as if he needed such a guard in
the heart of his own Kingdom; whereas the Authority of the Kings name in France
is so sacred and powerful, that thereby the meanest Constable is able to
suppress any tumult whatsoever. This free speech of his extremely vexed the
Guises, who hated him so much the more for it.

A Parliament desired.
Some others propounded that there might be a public Convention of the States
called, as the only means to cure the distempers of France; which though some
had labored to discredit, and so had caused an intermission of it for eighty
seven years, yet it had always been exceeding advantageous to the Kingdom, as
the Parliaments in England, consisting of three States, had always been there,
whereby the English Kings had been enabled to make such powerful Invasions of
France.

Shortly after King Francis the second dying, his younger Brother Charles the
ninth succeeded, and thereupon the former request was renewed for calling a
Convention of all the States.

At this time Catherine of Medice was the Queen Mother, a Florentine by birth,
to whom the education of the young King, and the care of his person was
committed, according to the ancient custom of France; but she was not suffered
to have any thing to do with the Government of the Kingdom: and hereupon the
Guises, who for a long time had been powerful at Court, intruded themselves
into that Office. And at that time many of the Nobility proceeded cruelly to
torment and afflict those of the Religion; The Protestants persecuted.
whereupon there was great fear lest some new Commotions should be raised in
the Kingdom: But the Queen Mother pretended favor toward them, The Admirals
oversight.
for which cause our Admiral endeavored, and at last effected that she should
be joined in Commission with Anthony King of Navarr, who was made Protector
during the Kings Minority. This many wise men disliked and opposed, saying,
that in the stories of former times it did appear that the Government was never
committed to the Queen Mother, especially if she were a stranger, but it
redounded to the great hurt of France, and was the cause of many Civil broils.

When the day of the public Convention of the States came, he which made the
Speech in the behalf of the Nobility, A general convention of the States.

A petition for the Protestants


about the end of his Oration presented the King with a Supplication, that they
of the Reformed Religion might have public places allowed them for the
exercise of the service of God in.

To this one Quintin a Doctor of the Civil Law, The malice of the Clergy.
and Professor of Paris, opposed himself, and made a long Oration in the name
of the Clergy, which he rather read then pronounced by heart, wherein he took
the boldness to affirm, That all they that moved for public places for those
of the Religion, were guilty of Treason against the King and Kingdom, the
authors of sedition, and bringers in of a new Religion, and therefore ought
severely to be punished. Of which when the Admiral in the Kings Council
afterward complained, Quintin to excuse himself, professed that he had spoken
nothing of his own head, but only had pronounced that Oration which was penned
and put into his hand by the Clergy, and that he was ready again in the
Convention of States before the King and all the company to avow that in all
that he had said, he had no thoughts of hurt to the Admiral.

In conclusion there was an Edict sent forth in the Kings Name, commanding and
requiring all the Judges and Magistrates through France, to release all those
of the Religion that were in prison, The Protestants freed from persecution.
and it was forbidden them upon great penalties hereafter to meddle with, or to
trouble any for their Religion sake. As for the business of allowing them
public places for worship, that was put off to the next General meeting of
the States, which was appointed but held not, to be at Ponthoise in Piccardy.

January following, there was a meeting of all the Princes and Nobles of
France, appointed to be held at St. Germans, whither also repaired the Deputies
from all the Parliaments, Churches allowed them.
and there it was decreed that Churches should be allowed to the Protestants in
the Suburbs belonging to each City: Upon the publishing of which Edict, the
Peace of the Kingdom seemed to be settled, and in the Suburbs of all the greater
Cities, yea of Paris it self, those of the Religion met publicly, and had
Sermons preached without the least disturbance. A massacre by the Duke of Guise.
But presently after was news brought that the D. of Guise in Campania had
basely murdered about two hundred persons who were met together at Vassiac to
hear a Sermon, according to the power given them by the Kings Edict, in a barn;
and it was conceived that the D. of Guise took this boldness, relying upon the
friendship of the K. of Navarr, whose weak mind he had bowed and bound to
himself by promising him the Kingdom of Sardinia, The King seized on by the D.
of Guise.
and other favors; and upon this confidence, adjoining his other Brethren to
him, with a great Army he went to the Court, and there seized upon King and
Queen Mother, who seemed with many tears to bewail the violence proffered to to
them, and carried them away to Paris.

Hereupon the Queen Mother sent diverse messengers to the Admiral, and writ
with her own hand to the Prince of Conde, requesting them to help her, and to
deliver the King out of this captivity: This caused the Prince of Conde with
many of the Nobility, Why the Protestants first took arms.
upon deliberation, to resolve to raise an Army for the rescue of the King, and
to curb the insolency of the Guises, often saying, that he ought not to be
deterred with reports, as if he intended to propagate his Religion by arms, or
to offer violence to the Person of the young King. For, said he, After such a
public Decree made by the King and all the States in favor of those of the
Religion; What had the D. of Guise, who is a Lorrainer by extraction, to do in
France? Or by what confidence does he exercise such cruelty against the Kings
faithful Subjects? And therefore he saw that there was no way left but to
repel force with force; and that he was not the author of the War, but by War
defended those that were unjustly oppressed by War.

There was also a public report that the D. of Nemours had endeavored by
flatteries to persuade the young Prince Henry, the Kings Brother (who was
afterward chosen King of Poland) to go with him out of the bounds of France,
which the young youth had declared to his Mother. There was much speech also of
the Massacre at Vassiac, and of their leading the King and Queen Mother as
their captives to Paris, where they had a powerful faction. They had also sent
to the German Princes, desiring to be admitted into the league of the
Protestants. The Cardinal of Lorraine had also sent to Christopher Duke of
Wirtzberge a prudent and valiant Prince, pretending that both he and his
Brethren would embrace the Protestant Religion, and desired to be enrolled in
the number of the Protestant Princes.

These things being publicly divulged, the resolution of the Prince of Conde
to take Arms was generally approved of, and in a few days many Cities sided
with and assisted him, as Orleans, Biturg, Roan, Lions, Vienna, Valentia,
Mont-alban, etc. And whereas by the common consent of all the Protestants in
France the Prince of Conde was chosen General, he prevailed so far with them,
Prince of Conde made General.

The Admiral made Lieutenant General.


that the managing of the War was conferred upon our Admiral, to whom he also
delegated his own power and interest, for the opinion which he had of his
excellent justice, gravity and prudence. This being generally taken notice of,
the Queen Mother interposeth as a Mediatrix for peace, and sends for the Prince
of Conde to come to their tents, entreating him, that for the convenient
situation of it, he would deliver up into their hands for a few days, as the
fittest place for the Treaty, the City of Boience, where there is a bridge that
passes over the River Loir, which bridge she affirmed to be the fittest of all
other places for the Parlee. The Prince of Conde upon the persuasions of his
Brother, P. of Condees facility.
the King of Navarr, and of the Queen Mother, and upon their faithful promise
that the Town should be delivered back to him again, and that his person should
be in safety during the Treaty, without taking any further pledges, delivers up
Boience to them, only desiring that whilst the Treaty lasted, the Constable,
Guise, and Saint Andrew (who were called the Triumvirate for the ruin of
France) might be commanded to withdraw from the Camp.

When these things were done, The Q Mothers perfidiousnesse. P. of Conde
prisoner. The Admiral releases him.
the Queen Mother and the Guises put a garrison into the Town of Bogener,
fortify it strongly, and keep the Prince of Conde prisoner.

The Admiral being justly incensed by this perfidiousnesse, and resolving not
to be wanting in his aid to the Prince of Conde, he presently with all his
Cavalry sets upon the enemies Camp, which brought such a terror amongst them,
that thereupon the Queen Mother commanded the Prince of Conde to be set at
liberty. And a few days after the Admiral assaulted Boience, and at last took
the Town, though with some loss of his men.

About this very time the Admirals eldest Son, called Gaspar, being a youth of
nine years old, but of admirable towardness, fell sick, His eldest Son dies.
and died at Orleance, which was an exceeding great grief to his Father.

In the mean time the Guises perceiving that they were forsaken by the greatest
part of France, which now adheared to, The Guises call in foreign help,
and assisted Conde, they resolved to call in foreign helps; and thereupon
sending much Money into Swisserland and Germany, they hired from the former
Foot, and from the latter Horse, to come in to their aid, which the Admiral
used often to say, was a plain demonstration of their treacherous and hostile
minds against France: and therefore that he might not be wanting to himself and
Friends, who had committed so great a trust to him, he resolved to oppose
Foreign by Foreign forces: And so do the Protestants.
And for this end he sent his Brother Andelot to the Protestant Princes in
Germany, of whose good will to the French Churches he had good assurance,
requesting aid from them, who accordingly within three months space sent him
three thousand Horse, and six thousand Foot into France.

Whilst these things were transacting, intelligence was given to the Admiral
that some Cannons, The Admiral takes their ammunition.
and a great quantity of Gunpowder was carrying to the Duke of Guise, who now
besieged Biturg, guarded with six Troops of Horse and some Foot. Hereupon the
Admiral taking some Horse with him, by long journeys hastened to meet the
Convoy, and coming up to them, they scarce stood the first shock, but throwing
away their Arms fled, and left the Booty to the Admiral, who wanting Horses to
draw them away, by over-charging the Guns brake them, and blew up the
Gunpowder, and so returned to his Camp.

Andelot returning out of Germany, brought with him three thousand Horse and
six thousand Foot; so that the Prince of Conde having a good Army of French and
Germans, hasted to Paris; which the Guises hearing of, intended to meet him,
having gotten a Regiment of Swissers, in whom they put most confidence, and so
the two Armies meeting, A Battle.
a Battle was fought, but with a doubtful event: for on the one side the
Constable was taken prisoner by one Will. Steward a valiant Scots man; and on
the other side the Prince of Conde was taken prisoner, Conde taken prisoner.
The Admirals valor.
which made many of his Foot to throw away their Arms, and fly: But the
Admiral rallying the Horse, and encouraging them to prefer their Religion,
Country and honor before their lives, he valiantly charged the Guisians, in
which medly he slew Marshall St. Andrew, a potent man at Court, and Prossaeus
Colonel to the Duke of Guise, and diverse other Noble men: The fight being
ended, the Admiral carried the Constable to Orleance, where he made his abode
for a while: But shortly after came the Duke of Guise to besiege the City,
whereupon the Admiral leaving his Brother Andelot for the defense of it, flies
into Normandy, and there besieged the Castle of Cadonius, where the Marquess
of Elboeve, one of the D. of Lorrains Brothers was, and within a few days had
it, with all the Arms and Ammunition surrendered to him.

About this time there was one John Poltrot, a young man of a Noble Family,
John Poltrot slew the Duke of Guise.
in the Army of the Duke of Guise, who having embraced the Reformed Religion,
and served for some months under the Prince of Conde, took up privately with
himself a resolution to kill the D. of Guise, as a public enemy to his
Country, and a cause of all the present calamities: And, said he, If I had
been bound to him by any oaths, I must not have been perfidious; but being
free, why should I not venture as Scaevola did, for my Countries safety? With
this resolution he went to the Duke of Guises Camp, and watching his
opportunity, shot him into the shoulder, of which wound he died within a few
days after.

A wicked brag
The very same day in the morning the Duke of Guise being ready to give an
assault to Orleance, wrote to the Queen Mother, that within twenty four hours
he would send her word of the taking of that City, and that he would make the
day very memorable by sparing neither sex nor age; and that after he had kept
his Shrovetide there, he would extinguish the memory of the Town, by utter
subverting of it. But man knows not his destiny, nor what shall happen to him,
for that the same evening he was slain, as you heard before.

Presently after which, a Peace was concluded, A peace concluded.
and the Edict renewed for the free exercise of the Reformed Religion through
all France, as formerly.

Not many months after, The Admiral accused.
the Admiral being sent for to Court by the Queen Mother, the Widow of the
Duke of Guise comes in, and falls down at the Kings feet, crying out with many
tears for revenge for her Husbands death, charging the Admiral as the
contriver and author of it. The Admiral apprehending that this was but the
device of others, which set her on to seek his destruction by fraud, He clears
himself.
which they could not effect by War; before the King and all the Council he
clears himself, showing that Poltrot had at his death professed that he was set
on by none but God; neither did he doubt but that he had done God good service
in it, and freed his Country from a Tyrant that raged and thirsted after
Christian blood, and therefore he was not sorry for what he had done, etc.

He also desired, that if they questioned the death of the Duke of Guise, he
might have leave also to put in a Charge against him, for that he doubted not
but that he could easily prove the Duke of Guise, guilty of murdering wickedly
the Kings Subjects, and of violating all the sacred Laws and Decrees of the
King; of taking up arms of his own head without Authority, and thereby making
himself guilty of Treason, and of kindling those flames in France, which had
continued about thirteen months.

Notwithstanding this resolute speech of the Admiral, his enemies ceased not
for some years still to call upon the King for justice against him; whereupon
the King at last appointed a Convention of all the Peers of the Kingdom, at the
City of Molincum, The controversy determined by the King.
whither also he called his chiefest Senators and Counselors; commanding the
Cardinal of Lorraine, and the Widow of the Duke of Guise, to produce what
proofs they could, and the Admiral to defend himself against them. When both
parties had pleaded their Cause, the King told them that he had referred the
judgment to his Counselors, and therefore asked them if they had any
exceptions against any of them: they answered, No. Then he asked them if they
would refer the determination of their Cause to him, and would stand to his
judgment: They answered that they would willingly so do.

Whereupon Jan. 29. Anno Christ 1566. the King passed this sentence, That
having heard both parties, The Admiral cleared.
and consulted with his Nobles and Counselors, who were all unanimously
agreed in the same sentence, he pronounced the Admiral clear and innocent from
the murder of the Duke of Guise, and therefore absolved him from that crime,
commanding his Proctor and all others, that they should never dare hereafter
accuse him for the same. He commanded also, that neither his present accusers,
nor any other of his Subjects, should dare hereafter to make any mention of it.
Nor that any of his Judges or Parliaments should ever admit any plea against
him for it. He declared also, that seeing both parties had freely referred
themselves to him, his will was, that they should live lovingly and peaceably
together, never contriving any thing against each other; and that if any of
them, their Friends, Kindred of Partakers, should violate this Decree, that
they should be held contemners of the Kings Majesty, as guilty of Treason, as
disturbers of the public peace; and lastly, that this his definitive sentence
should be recorded in all the Parliaments of his Kingdom.

Treachery against the Admiral.
But to return to something that happened before this, the Admiral had in his
Family one Hambervilleries, born of a Noble house, whom he made use of in his
most weighty and honest affairs; and it pleased God that some Letters of his
being intercepted, came to the Admirals hands, wherein he wrote to some great
Courtiers, that he was ready to obey their commands in giving the Admiral a
Soporiferous Potion. Our Admiral having read these Letters, called the man to
him, commanding him to write some verses in a paper that lay by, which when he
had done, comparing both the writings together, he asked him whether he would
acknowledge his hand in those Letters; which he looking upon, being stricken
with guilt for his wickedness, he presently fell upon the ground, and begged
his Masters pardon. The Admiral told him that he was willing to pardon him,
but upon condition that he should presently depart out of his house, He
forgives the Traitor.
nor should ever come into his sight again.

Not long after the aforementioned Edict of Peace was published, the Queen
Mother took counsel to go to Baion to meet her Son-in-law the King of Spain,
The Q. Mothers mischievous counsels.
and to take her Children with her: This afterward proved the cause of many
tragical events, though for the present things were kept very secret: and
first she ordered her journey to Lions, which hitherto had been in possession
of those of the Religion, because of the great number of them there; and as
soon as she came thither, Her subtilty.
she presently set her Italian Artificers to work, to build a Citadell upon a
neighboring hill, which commanded all the City.

A little before this the plague began to be very hot, and now it had seized
upon the Court it self, God follows her with the plague.
yet could not the Queen Mother be persuaded to remove her self and children
from the danger, till she had seen the foundations of the Castle laid. At last
making Lossius Governor of that City, a cruel and barbarous man, and and an
implacable enemy to those of the Religion, and adjoining to him some insolent
Soldiers that might daily vex the godly inhabitants, she departed. But this is
very remarkable, that whithersoever she removed the Court, in Cities, Towns,
Castles, etc. the plague still followed her, so that for three months together
the King was in continual danger, and was still forced to remove from place to
place by reason of the infection. At last they came to Baion, where the Queen
Mother met her Daughter the Q. of Spain, and Ambassadors from the King, with
whom she communicated her counsels.

In the mean time the Marshall Monmorancy, whom the King had made Governor of
Paris in his absence, The Guises attempts against the Protestants
had certain intelligence brought him that the Guises had employed their Agents
to the common people of Paris, to stir them up against those of the Religion in
that City; he heard also that the Cardinal of Lorraine intended suddenly to
be there with a great number of armed attendants, though the King by several
Edicts had commanded that none in their journeys should carry Harquebushes or
Pistols about them. Therefore so soon as Monsieur Monmorancy heard that the
Cardinal was entered Paris with his followers thus armed, he presently taking
his guard went to them, commanding them to deliver up their Arms: This the
Cardinal and his Nephew the young Duke of Guise, took as an intolerable
affront to them, and were often heard to say, that that fact should cost
Monmorancy his life. The Cardinal was very potent in this City, and could
easily have raised sixty thousand armed men to have slain the Governor;
frustrated by the Admiral.
whereupon he resolved to call in some of his Friends to his aid, and in the
first place he wrote to the Admiral to hasten to him, who accompanied with
three hundred Horse, entered Paris, Jan. 22. which did so terrify the
multitude, especially the Priests, Monks and Canons of the great Church, that
they began to think of flying thence.

The day after Monsieur Monmorancy sent for the Presidents of the Parliament,
and the chief Magistrates of the City to come to his house, to whom he
complained before the Admiral, of the audaciousnesse and factious counsels of
the Cardinal of Lorrain, Lies raised of him.
as also of the seditious speeches cast abroad in the City, as if the Admiral,
taking advantage of the Kings absence at so great a distance, consulted about
plundering that rich City; and therefore he thought fit to call the Admiral
before them, that so he might clear himself from that aspersion. Then said the
Admiral, I have long since found out what my malicious and implacable
adversaries have aspersed me withal, His speech to the Parisians.
as if I intended to seize upon this City, which is the Bullwark and Eye of
France. But such counsels as these are fit for those that claim an interest (I
know not how it comes in) in the succession of the Kingdom, and contend to have
certain Dukedomes and Countries restored to them. For my own part, I neither
challenge any right to the Kingdom, nor to any part of it, which yet if I
should do, I think there has not been a Noble man in France these five hundred
years, which had the like opportunity to disturb the public Peace as I. Ye
remember after the Duke of Guise was slain, that I had the Constable Prisoner
in Orleans, and what a great occasion I had thereby of doing greater things if
I would have embraced it: But on the contrary, I was never more earnest with
the King and Queen Mother for peace, then at that time when our affairs
prospered best. Who can be ignorant how sollicitous and importunate I was for
peace at that very time when many potent and flourishing Cities had delivered
up themselves into my hands? and diverse other great Cities, both of Normandy
and Brittany, sought my favor and protection? Who knows not that after Peace
was concluded, instead of begging Honors and Offices ambitiously of the King,
which happily I might have obtained, I retired my self to my own house, and
there even to this time have lived a quiet and private life? But omitting these
things, and speaking to the present occasion; Being sent for by Monmorancy, I
am come hither, not to disturb the peace of the City, or to innovate any thing,
but rather to preserve peace against the audaciousnesse of some that would
disturb it. It is not unknown unto you how much confidence those of the
Religion do put in me. These being stirred up with new rumors, and terrified
with the counsels and factions of the Guises, do daily flock to me; bring me
intercepted Letters of the meetings of certain Captains, who command their old
Soldiers to be ready in arms, that when they have occasion to use them they
may be at hand. What needs more words? Letters are intercepted written into
Normandy, the original whereof is sent to the Queen Mother, and I will show
you a copy of them, wherein amongst others there is this passage: There is no
readier means of restoring the Crown of France to those to whom it does belong
of old, then by rooting out the house of Valois, and by massacring all the
Hugonots which are the chief upholders of it; for this end their woods are to
be sold, that with the price thereof we may arm our selves and get money; and
if the Hugonots sue for them, the business being once adjudged against them,
they will never move for their charges of the suit.

Now also what should I speak of the daily plunderings and murders? It Is
sufficiently known, that after the peace was published, more then five hundred
of those of the Religion were basely murdered in several places, and yet not
one of the murderers were ever punished by the Magistrates; and they which
have complained of these things to the King or Queen Mother, have carried away
either only words, or some empty paper or parchment instead of satisfaction.
Who knows not that in the City of Turon lately and openly, many of the Religion
were cruelly massacred, even under the Ensign, and by the Soldiers of him who
was sent thither by the Duke of Monpensier to settle the peace? These things
being so, yet I hear that there are many of your Priests who are so terrified
by my coming hither, that they consult about leaving the City, and yet there is
no place in all France, no City, Town or Castle where the Priests live, and
attend their services with more freedom and safety, then in my Town of Castelon.

The Admiral having ended his speech, the company was dismissed; and two days
after there came to Monmorancy about thirty Delegates from the Parisian
Merchants, and with them the Bishop and diverse Priests, to all whom the
Admiral spoke very Friendly, bidding them be of good cheer, and fear nothing:
and within few days after, going to the Court of Parliament, he made a speech
to them, His speech to the Parliament
and told them, That nothing was more desirable to him then the Peace and
welfare of the City, neither did he come to them with any other mind then to
advance it; and therefore he exhorted them that they also would do their
endeavors that the Citizens might behave themselves peaceably and quietly: and
so shortly after he returned home.

At his return he was informed that there was one Maius, New treachery against
him.
who lived not far from him, a famous thief that was hired by the Duke of
Aumale the Brother of Guise, to lie in wait for him when he should ride forth
on hunting, for which end he had given him an hundred pieces of gold, and an
excellent Horse: many also complained to the Admiral against him for his
thefts and robberies; whereupon having gotten sufficient witnesses, he
complained of him to the Parliament at Paris, and a few days after having
apprehended him, he caused him to be carried to Paris; but when he came before
the Parliament this villain accused the Admiral as if he had dealt with him
about killing the Queen Mother, and had promised him a great reward for the
same: The Parliament after examination finding this to be but a Calumny, and
proving him guilty of many thefts, The Traitor executed.
condemned him to be broken upon the wheel, which accordingly was effected.

Shortly after the Prince of Conde had a Son born, The young Prince of Conde
born.
to whom the King would be Godfather, but because he could not himself be
present by reason of his Religion, he substituted the Admiral to supply his
room, which business was celebrated with very great pomp; for at the Feast a
Table was prepared as if it had been for the King himself, at which the
Admiral sat alone, and was attended like a Viceroy, The Admiral honored.
which every one interpreted as a pledge of the Kings singular love and favor
to him.

Not many days after, news was brought that the Duke de Alva had by the
command of the King of Spain brought a great Army into the Low Countries to
suppress and root out the Protestants, and this Army being to pass by the
borders of France, the Admiral moved in the Kings Council that Burgundy might
be looked to; and lest any tumults might arise about the difference in
Religion, he advised that a guard might rather be appointed of the Swissers
then of the French men; and it was commonly reported that six thousand Swissers
should be ready to oppose the Duke de Alva, in case he attempted any thing
against Burgundy. New designs against the Protestants.
But a few days after the Prince of Rupisurias Roch-sur-yon.
, of the royoll blood, wrote to the Admiral to send him some trusty Person to
whom he might communicate a secret which would much conduce to his safety: he
also being a Friend to the Prince of Conde, by reason of their propinquity in
blood, told him that there was secret counsel taken at Baion, for the utter
extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and all the Professors of it, and for
that end those six thousand Swissers were hired and brought into France, under
pretense of opposing the Duke de Alva: the Admiral also was informed of the
same by many Letters and Messengers from several of his Friends.

The Prince of Conde and Admiral complain to the King.
These things coming forth, first the Prince of Conde, and presently after him
the Admiral went to the Court, and told the King, the Queen Mother and all the
Council, that they saw no sufficient reason why so many Swissers should be
brought into France, except it were to oppress them, and many other honest
Families which embraced the Reformed Religion: But they should find more that
had devoted themselves to that Religion then commonly was thought of, an
experience whereof they had in the late Wars. They told them also, that if
their adversaries attempted any innovations, they would not be wanting to
themselves, nor like sheep would suffer their throats to be cut by murderers.
They therefore earnestly entreat and beseech the Kings Majesty, that he would
be moved to pity so many honest Families, and the afflicted condition of his
Country, and of the common people who suffer most in such Wars. But they
could get nothing at Court but scoffs and scorns, They are answered with scorns.
whereby they perceived their lives to be in great danger, which caused them to
withdraw, and to consult about the preservation of themselves and the Reformed
Churches: and hereunto they were earnestly solicited by many of the Nobility,
and by multitudes of honest Citizens, who complained that they could no longer
bear the manifold injuries wherewith they were daily oppressed by the
Magistrates in every place. The second Civil War.


These things being so, the Prince of Conde and the Admiral knowing of how
great Authority the Kings Name was through all France, which caused the Guises
in the former Wars to get him into their power; communicating their counsels
but with a few, they resolved to go privately to the Court to see if by any
means they could get the King away from the Guises and Queen Mother, that so by
removing him from his evil Counselors, they might the better establish peace;
but being betrayed by one of their Society, this design was wholly frustrated,
whereby they were forced openly to prepare for War.

The Prince with five hundred Horse went to St. Denis, where some others
arriving, Paris blocked up by the Prince.
in few days made up the number of two thousand Horse, and four thousand Shot;
and the Prince considering that the Parisians were not accustomed to fast,
hoped that if he could take their victuals from them, he should either force
them to fight, or draw his enemies to a more assured peace: Whereupon he sent
Andelot with five hundred Horse to Poissy and Pontois, to seize upon the
passages of the Seine beneath Paris, and other Troops to seize upon such
passages as were above the Town. Some others he sent to join with the Forces
that were coming out of Guinne, himself and the Admiral with about eight
hundred Horse, and a thousand two hundred Harquebushiers, kept St. Denis, to
curb Paris on that side. But the Constable, who was the Kings Lieutenant
General, hearing that the Prince had thus divided his Forces, issued out of
Paris with about a thousand six hundred Foot, and two thousand Lances, and well
furnished with Artillery, and having chosen a commodious place for the Battle,
A Battle.
the next day he gives the Prince Battle, wherein the Constable was wounded,
of which he died within a few days after.

In this Battle the Admiral had wonderful experience of Gods goodness in
his preservation, The Admiral wonderfully preserved.
for riding upon a very fierce and headstrong Horse, the curb of his Bridle
being broken, his Horse ran away with him, and carried him twice through his
enemies Army, yet did not the Admiral receive any one wound, though many
Pistols were discharged at him; and whenas his Horse had one Bullot shot into
him, he suffered himself to be easily reduced into his own Troop.

In this Battle many fell on both sides, especially on the Prince of Conde's,
yet was the Kings Army routed and driven into Paris, The Royalists routed.
whereupon the Prince and Admiral thought best to retreat into Lorraine to
meet those Horse which were sent for their assistance from diverse of the
Germane Princes: for they again thought fit to oppose Foreigners against
Foreigners.

In their march thitherwards they were eagerly pursued by their adversaries,
especially by Henry Duke of Anjou the Kings Brother, afterward King, first of
Poland, then of France; who taking all advantages to press upon their rear,
put them to many inconveniences.

When they came into Lorraine and met the Germans, They join with the Germans.
who were commanded by D. Cassimire the Son of the Elector Palatine, they met
with new troubles, for the Germans began to mutiny for their arrears, and to
cry Gelt, gelt, according to their usual custom; but how to satisfy them, or
to raise the least part of that Money, the Prince and Admiral knew not: Yet in
this strait our Admiral found out this remedy: The Admirals prudence.
He advised that a certain Tax should be imposed upon every man in their own
Army, according to the rank and place which he held, and for example himself
disbursed five hundred Crowns; and the Treasurers going through all the
Regiments collected the Tribute: Besides whatsoever Moneys the Prince,
Admiral, Andelot, or others had, was all put into the Treasurers hands, so
that in all they collected eighty thousand pounds, which was given to the
Lanceknets, by which prudent advice of our Admiral they were extricated out of
that great strait.

These Forces being thus united, their adversaries hastily retired, and by long
journeys returned to Paris, which the D. of Anjou looked upon as a great
dishonor to him.

But the Prince of Conde's Army being much encouraged hereby, went presently
and besieged Caen. Caen besieged by the Prince.
and having battered the Walls, and made a sufficient breach, just as Monsieur
Andelot was ready with his Brigade to have given the assault, the Kings
Trumpeters came upon the spur and proclaimed that Peace was concluded, Peace
concluded.
for the effecting whereof, Commissioners had been sent from both parties a few
days before to Paris, whereupon the siege was raised, and the Prince of Conde
dismissed his Army.

The Admirals Wife dies.
But some days before this, word was brought to the Admiral that his Wife, who
together with her Children in the beginning of the War had betaken themselves
to Orleance, was taken with a violent disease; whereupon he presently posted to
Orleance, and sending for the best Physicians he could get, he performed the
Office of a dear and loving husband to her, yet it pleased God that she died.
This was a very great affliction to him, and when many of his Friends came to
comfort him, being overwhelmed with sighs and tears, he said, Oh my God,
wherein have I sinned and offended thee, that thou correctest me so bitterly,
and loadest me with so many calamities! O that I could live more holily, and be
more exemplary in my life then I have been! Most holy Father, look upon me with
the eyes of tender mercy, and ease me of these pressures.

His counsel to his Children.
Then being comforted by his Friends, he commanded his Children to be called to
him, and told them that by this loss of their dear Mother, they might see the
instability of all earthly comforts, and that there was nothing here below
which they could confide in; and that Houses and Castles, though never so
strong, were not given them for habitations, but as Inns; and that therefore
they ought not to trust in any of these frail and fading things, but only in
the mercy, and goodness of God, and then they need not doubt but that they
should find him always ready at hand for their comfort; and so two days
after, calling Monsieur Grelleus his Sons Tutor, he told him, that he must
needs return back to the Camp, His charge to Grelleus.
where he knew not what might befall him, and therefore he required him to have
a special care of his Sons, and as he had often requested him, to be careful
to bring them up in true Religion and the fear of God, as well as to instruct
them in other Arts and Learning. His Wife had been always very studious of the
Reformed Religion, His Wives character.
of an admirable courage and constancy in bearing the manifold afflictions
which befell both her self and Husband; and amongst her other excellent
qualities and virtues, she was always very pitiful toward poor people and
sick persons, to whom she was very liberal in relieving and assisting of them:
and whereas many sick and wounded Soldiers were daily sent from the Camp to
Orleance, she frequently visited them, so that the Physicians judged her
disease to proceed from the stench of them.

Peace being proclaimed (as is before specified) in many places by the Kings
Trumpeters, Popish treachery.
the Admiral had scarce been three days at his own house, before Letters and
Messengers came to him from many of his Friends, signifying, that instead of
peace, his enemies made great preparations for a more dangerous War; for they
observed that in every place such provision of War was made, that if the Prince
of Conde himself, and the other associates did not timely prevent it, they
would be circumvented by their cruel enemies before they were aware; and this
they gathered from the Garrisons put into Orleance, Altissiodore, Blesa, and
other Cities surrendered to them, as also by the Adversaries possessing
themselves of all the Bridges and Passes over the Rivers, keeping the Horse
together in the heart of France, and continuing two Regiments near Paris, under
a pretense of a guard for the King.

Our Admiral finding these things to be true, thought it most for his safety
to retire into Tanlian to his Brother Andelot, and from thence he shortly after
removed to Nuceria, a strong City under the Prince of Conde's Government,
whither formerly upon the like occasion he had carried his Wife and Family.

In his passage thither there fell out this memorable accident: Near to the
Town of Molinius there is a great Lake in the passage to Altissiodore; when our
Admiral came near it, A remarkable Providence.
there was in his company an old man called Gripperius, that had been a great
traveller by sea, and one that loved the Admiral very dearly; this man
observing a black cloud coming toward them carried with a violent wind, he
called to the Admiral, desiring him to gallop to the next Town so fast as he
could, lest he should be oppressed with the violence of the storm approaching;
the Admiral hearkening to his counsel, spurred on his Horse, but before he
had passed the narrow passages of the Lake, there suddenly came such a violent
tempest, accompanied with a Whirlwind, that many Horses and men were quite
overthrown, many were wounded with the great hailstones, and almost quite
slain: The wind took off the Admirals hat, which afterward could never be
found, and one of his followers lent him his hat: but herein the great mercy of
God did appear, that the Admiral escaped unhurt by the hail, only one hailstone
hit and hurt him about the ankle; and had this storm taken him and his company
a little sooner, whilst they were upon the Lakes bank, in all probability it
had made an utter end of them.

The tempest being over, our Admiral comforted his attendants, and lifting up
his eyes to Heaven, he said, O Almighty God, A Prediction.
I thank thee, from whom I know this storm proceeds, to warn us of the tempest
of danger that is approaching, by which we shall be sorely pressed, but not
oppressed.

When they were met together at Nuceria, They send to the King.
they sent diverse Messengers with Letters to the King, signifying that they had
daily intelligence of the snares that were laid for their lives, and therefore
they beseeched his Majesty to pity his Kingdom wasted already with two Civil
Wars; and that he would not ruin his Kingdom, but rather by his clemency and
wisdom quench that fire that is kindled by the Guises.

Our Admiral also wrote to Margaret, Daughter of King Francis, and new
Duchess of Savoy, whom he believed to have great power with the Queen Mother,
entreating her to improve all her Authority and interest for the diverting of
the storm that was approaching to the ruin of her Native Country. But when he
perceived that no arguments nor entreaty could prevail for peace, and
understood that Tavannius, who was a little after made Marshall of the Kingdom,
was secretly drawing his Forces toward Nuceria, The third Civil War.
there to compass them in, he advised the Prince of Conde that they should
presently depart from thence, and make all the have that possibly they could to
Rochel, which by reason of their ancient privileges, had never hitherto
admitted of any Garrison. By the way they were to pass over the River Liger,
and in the train there was the Prince of Conde's Wife, and six little Children,
whereof one was but a year old; and two days after followed the Admiral and
Monsieur Andelots Children, whom the Admiral had sent for to come to them: A
special providence.
At which time this strange Providence fell out; When the Prince of Conde
thought to transport his company in two or three little Ships privately over
the River near unto Sancerra, it pleased God that a Foard was found, whereby
fifty Horsemen that were of the Princes train rode over, and in the mean time
the Ladies, Women and Children were ferried over in Boats, and no sooner were
they gotten all over, but, though the day was fair, the River suddenly rose so
high, that the Inhabitants of Sancerra took notice of the wonderful Providence
of God, praying heartily for the safety and welfare of those little ones who
had escaped such a danger.

The King hearing of this their going to Rochel, by the advice of his
Courtiers, presently commanded all his Horse, especially those that were in the
Countries of Xantone and Poicters, to hasten to Rochel. He sent also his
Brother Henry the Duke of Anjou, to raise all the Forces he could, and
presently to march thitherwards. In the mean time those of the Religion, The
Protestants basely murdered.
who relying upon the Kings promise and Proclamation of peace, stayed in their
own Cities, were every where basely murdered.

About this time Joane Queen of Navarr, who in the former troubles had kept
here own house, The Queen of Navarr assists them.
abhorring such abominable treachery and perfidiousnesse after peace so often
renewed, getting what Forces she could together, advanced with them to Rochel,
carrying with her her Son Henry, who after her death was King of Navarr, and
her only Daughter.

Niort taken. Engolisme besieged.
These things being thus settled, the Admiral drew some great Guns out of
Rochel, intending to besiege Niort, and within a few days had it surrendered to
him. Then he led his Forces to Engolisme, which stands upon an high and steep
hill, having only one passage to it, and therefore the enemies had a little
before strongly fortified it, but the Admiral planting his Ordinance on that
side where it was saultable, within a few days space had it surrendered to him.

Presently after the Van of each Army met at Jasenullius, A Battle.
and fought together, the Admiral commanded that of the Protestants: who
charged the enemy so gallantly, that they were presently broken, The Royalists
beaten.
and scattered, flying to Lusinian for safety, leaving all their bag and
baggage behind them, so that the booty which the Admiral gat, was estimated to
be more worth then fifty thousand Crowns. Two days after they intercepted
Letters from Fizius the Kings Secretary, to the Queen Mother, much bewailing
that loss.

Presently after the Admiral going to the Town of Jarnac, A special providence.
fell into great danger, and without a special providence had become a prey to
his enemies. For the enemy understanding that he purposed to transport his
Forces over the River in that place by a bridge of boats, they secretly laid an
ambush on the other side, and observing the Admiral where he was, they let fly
all their Harquebushes at him, and others endeavored to break the bridge; of
the Admirals side there was one Harquibushier that had often shot at the
enemies, and at last was by a bullet slain; whereupon twelve more ran to his
aid, so that a tumult arising, the Admiral ran with his naked Sword, The
Admirals danger.
not having time to put on his arms, and endeavored to cut in sunder the cords
wherewith the boats were fastened; all which time the enemies ceased not
continually to shoot at him, yet God wonderfully preserved him; and from that
time forwards he resolved never to be without a Lifeguard for his assistance in
such sudden accidents.

Two days after the enemies having passed over the River Charenton, the Prince
of Conde feared lest they would compass him about, having lately joined to
them three thousand German horse, and six thousand Swissers, yet being of a
very resolute and courageous mind, he resolved to stop their course, yet
withal if possible to avoid a set Battle. In the mean time word was brought
to the Admiral that some of his Forces which were quartered in a neighbor
village, were circumvented by their enemies, and yet valiantly defended
themselves; our Admiral hastened therefore upon the spur to their succor with
some horse, whom as soon as the enemies espied, His valor.
they compassed round about, which being told to the Prince of Conde, being
more valiant then advised, he brake into the midst of them, where being
oppressed with the multitude, and his horse killed under him, which also fell
upon him, he lifting up his beavour, rendered himself to some of the Kings
Captains, who gave him their faith for his safety; but presently after came
Montisquius Captain of the Duke of Guise his guard, not without the secret
command of his Master (as it was believed) and setting upon Conde behind his
back, Prince of Conde basely slain.
as he was talking with the Captains, dispatched him with a dagg shot into his
neck. He was a Prince inferior to none that lived in that age for courage and
courtesy; he was eloquent in speech, liberal, affable to all, His character.
and a most excellent Commander in War. After his death his body was basely
abused, and at last in scorn laid upon a Shee-Asse, and carried to Jarnac.

The Admiral being exceedingly grieved with this great loss, and suspecting
the issue, made a retreat, together with his Brother Andelot, into the Town of
St. Jan de Angeli; and whereas he might have revenged the indignities done to
the body of the Prince, by showing the like to the bodies of many of his great
adversaries whom he had slain, yet he would not do it, but afforded them decent
burial, which thing he also did during all the time of the Wars.

The Queen of Navarr being at Rochell, and hearing of this great loss,
hastened to the Camp, comforted the Captains, and exhorted all the Soldiers
not to be disheartened, The Prince of Navarr in his room.
nor to forget their former valor, telling them that she had brought her only
Son Henry, that was to succeed her in the Kingdom, to be their General,
professing that she preferred the safety of the Army before the life of her
Son. To him was also Henry Prince of Conde, Brother to Lewis that was lately
slain, adjoined in this honor; but the whole care for managing the War, by
the joint consent of all the Commanders and Officers was wholly divolved upon
the Admiral, none having the like credit or authority amongst those of the
Religion as he: For it was well known that besides his singular skill in
military affairs, his justice and temperance, there was none amongst all the
Peers of France that had so openly embraced and professed the Religion as he.
He was the first that reformed his Family according to the Rule of Gods Word:
The Admirals piety.
He was the man that presumed to prefer their Petition to King Francis the
second, that was nearly allied to the Guises by affinity. He gave the first
example to the Nobility of France of Piety, who were grown extreme loose by
reason of the dissoluteness of the Court: and after he had once embraced the
Reformed Religion, he never gave the least occasion of scandal to the
Churches. And whereas many Delegates repaired often to him from the Churches,
he always gave them wholesome and prudent counsel. He first took up arms, not
to fight against the King, His Authority to take up Arms.
as some misreported, but at the request and Prayers of the Queen Mother:
Neither yet did he it, either by his own private counsel, or of the Queen
Mother, but by the Authority of the Parliament of Orleance, the King being not
yet twelve years old: As also after the Kings Edict for Peace, established and
promulgated by the advice and consent of all the States of France, because it
was so notoriously violated by the Guises, to the utter undoing of many honest
Families, and almost the ruin of many flourishing Cities, and to the loss of
the lives of many famous Captains, to the great prejudice of the whole Kingdom,
and to the oppression of many flourishing Churches* dispersed almost in every
Town of France. By all which that poor Kingdom was laid open to be a prey to
any foreign Prince that should invade it.

Andelot's death.
After these things a grievous affliction befell the Admiral by the death of
his Brother Andelot, who in the City of Xantone died of a violent disease
suddenly, not without suspicion of poison; and the rather because it was a
usual saying of Biraguus, shortly after made Chancellor, That the War was not
to be finished with so much hazard by armed men, but rather by Cooks and
Kitchen boys.

Upon this occasion the Admiral wrote a Letter to his own and his Brother
Andelot's sons, who were with their Tutor at Rochel, for comforting of them,
the tenor whereof was this:

Although I believe that the death of my Brother Andelot is very grievous unto
you, The Admirals Letter to his Sons and Nephews.
yet I thought fit to admonish you that you have great cause to rejoice that
you had so good a Father and Uncle, of whom I dare affirm that he was truly
Religious and eminent for his valor and skill in military affairs, the
remembrance of which virtues ought to be dear unto you, that as much as may be,
you may be imitators of them; yea I believe I may boldly affirm this of him,
that there is none in all France more skillful in warlike affairs then was he;
and I doubt not but even foreign Nations will subscribe to the truth hereof,
especially those which have had experience of his virtues; and this credit he
got to himself, not by idleness and sluggishness, but by undergoing the
greatest labors for his Countries sake. Truly I knew no man that was more
devout to Godward, nor more just to men then he. Neither am I ignorant that it
were unfit for me thus to boast of him to strangers; but I mention them more
freely to you, because I would have you to be imitators of his virtues, for I
even propose him for my own imitation; and I pray God from my heart, that when
I come to dye, I may with the like piety and assurance resign up my spirit to
God, as I saw him to do; And that my grief for him may be the more extenuated,
I earnestly desire that I may see his graces and virtues to live in you: Which
that it may be so, I exhort you with all your hearts to embrace Piety and true
Religion, and wholly to apply your selves to your Books, that thereby you may
(through Gods grace) be led in the way of virtue: and though I willingly allow
you to recreate your selves in those hours which your Master allots you, yet I
charge you, take heed that in your play you neither speak nor do any thing
whereby you may offend God: Be very careful to reverence your Master, and obey
him no otherwise then you would obey me, for I am persuaded that he will give
you no other counsel then what may be for your honor and profit. In short, see
that you love me, or rather that you love your selves, so that I may hear
nothing of you but what I may rejoice in, and as you grow in years and body, so
you may grow in Piety and Virtue. The Lord bless you all, and the holy Spirit
preserve you for ever. From Xantone, May 18. 1569 Castellonius.

The courage and magnanimity of our Admiral did exceedingly appear in this,
for that though he had lost such a Brother as was second to none in piety,
justice, virtue, and the glory of his military actions, so that the Admiral
called him his right arm, yet he told his Friends often that he wholly relied
upon the divine providence, and knew assuredly that the Church of God was not
administered by humane counsels, His Faith.
nor this Christian Army, led by the providence and valor of its Commanders,
but by God: And speaking concerning his Brother to his Friends, he brake out
into this expression, O blessed Andelot, who have finished the course of thy
life so holily and happily!

The Germans aid the Protestants.
About this time news was brought him that Wolfgang, Duke of Bipont, had brought
a strong Army out of Germany into France, for the aid of the Protestants, and
that he had already passed the Loir, and had taken Charity, where was a Bridge
over that River; and when he understood that they were advanced as far as
Chalons, he intended to join his Forces with them, and that very day on which
he came to them, D. Wolfgang died of a violent disease; whereupon the German
Army unanimously chose Wolradus Count Mansfield, to be their General. This
conjunction of theirs exceedingly troubled their adversaries, and every one
deemed that the Kings Army would not be able to stand before them, but that the
Courtiers would hereby be brought to stoop to them. Yea all good Patriots that
studied the public Peace, did abominate the perfidious Authors of these Wars,
publicly saying, that God never suffered such perjury to escape long
unpunished; and it was verily believed that if the Admiral had led this
gallant Army strait to Paris, many great Cities would willingly have yielded
and put themselves into the Admirals protection: which opinion was much
confirmed hereby, for that the Duke of Anjou pitching his tents near to them,
The Royalists beaten.
and adventuring a Battle, he was easily overthrown, most of his foot being
either slain or taken, together with their Commander in chief, Strossius, cosen
German to the Queen Mother.

The Admiral having so brave an Army, hoping that now at last the Kings heart
would be inclined to Peace, The Admiral sends to the King for Peace.
he sent an humble supplication to him (the Duke of Anjou not suffering him to
send Ambassadors) in his own and the Armies name, entreating and beseeching
him no longer to harden his heart, but to pity the afflicted condition of the
common people, and also to consider, that if the War should be protracted, it
would turn to the great prejudice of all the States of France; there being
twenty thousand Auxiliary Soldiers of both parts; and that things were brought
to this pass, that by these Civil Wars men's minds were so far from union
and love to their Country, that every one sought the blood, ruin and
destruction each of other. They therefore humbly entreated that he would spare
his poor Subjects that had so long groaned under these heavy pressures, and
that he would no longer be led away by the Cardinals and Italians, who had too
much power over him, and could not have the like fellow-feeling of the miseries
of France as the French men themselves. They suggested also that this was the
fittest time for a Treaty, when both parties were so confident of their own
strength; and that the conditions which he and his Army would propose were very
easy, viz. That they might enjoy that Peace and Liberty for the exercise of
their Religion, which was often confirmed to them by the Decrees of all the
States, and by the Kings own Proclamations; That it was extreme madness in
those Italians and strangers, to think that those of the Religion, whereof
there were at least two hundred thousand men, could so easily be rooted out,
the truth whereof the experience of the former Wars might easily demonstrate.

The Duke of Anjou having received that disgrace which we spoke of before, by
the advice of his Council dismissed a great part of his Army, especially of his
Horse, for a month or two, bidding them go home and refresh their bodies.

Things standing thus, the Admiral called a Council, wherein it was
determined, That seeing Rochel and diverse other Maritine Cities and places were
wholly in the power of the Protestants, That therefore they should take care
for the fortifying of them, and then should attempt the taking in of the City
of Poictiers, which would be as a Bulwark to all that Country; but to this
there seemed a main impediment, which was the taking in of the Castle of
Lusiniac, Lusiniac surrendered.
the strongest piece in all France: yet after they had besieged it a few days,
it was surrendered to them; and so also was Castelheraut about the same time.
Then they proceeded to besiege and batter Poictiers, Poictiers besieged.

The Admirals sickness.


but within a few days the Admiral, being quite tired with watchings and
labors, fell sick of a Flux, which held him so violently for thirty days
together, that he could neither assist them with his Counsels nor presence; so
that by this means the City was relieved with much provision and three hundred
fresh Soldiers, which encouraged them to make diverse sallies: The King also
wrote to them to hold out, promising speedy aid, which animated them valiently
to defend themselves. But it was evident that if the Lord had not laid that
affliction upon the Admiral, the City had been theirs.

About this time there was one of the Admirals Servants called Dominicus Albio,
who having been taken prisoner by the Kings party, Treachery against the
Admiral.
and stayed some months with them, returned to his Master, where after a while
he was suspected by reason of some words that fell from him, and therefore
being strictly examined, he brought forth a box of poison which one Riverius, a
chief man about the Duke of Anjou had given him; together with one of his
Secretaries, both of them promising him two thousand Crowns if he would poison
his Master. Upon this his confession he was condemned to death; and though some
would have had him tormented, The Traitor executed.
yet the Admiral caused him only to be hanged, for the terror of orhers.

The Admiral being not yet fully recovered of his Disease, news was brought him
that Castelheraut, being about seven miles off, was besieged by the enemies;
whereupon in his Horselitter, he presently advanced thitherward, The Royalists
beaten.
and having relieved the place with fresh men he easily raised the siege, and
drove away his enemies, killed many, especially of the Italians, neither gave
he over the pursuit till they had passed the River, which for the depth of it
is called Creusa. In the mean time the young Duke of Guise, who was Governor
of Poictiers, in the night time removed out of the City with a great company,
putting a fresh Garrison into it; and the Duke of Anjou having recruted his
Army with many French, Germans and Swissers, came to Chinon; whereas the
Admirals Army was tired out with the long siege of Poictiers, and much wasted
with want of provision, and with great tempests; and of those which remained
there were very many sick, especially of the Germans; and most of those of
Xantone were gone home to refresh themselves. Many also were gone to La
Charity, and Sancerre, which were in the Protestants hands: For which causes
the Admiral judging it best to protract time, restrained the eager minds of
his Soldiers from fighting; yet both Captains and common Soldiers would not
be satisfied, threatening to go home and provide for their own safety. They also
judged it far more fit to fight there in their own Country, where they might
be supplied with necessaries, then in their enemies; especially considering
that they had diverse strong Towns in Aquitane, the Delphinate and Liege, into
which they might retreat, and from whence they might make excursions for the
depopulating of their enemies Countries. The Germans also cried out, that
having wanted their pay for diverse months, it were better for them to fight,
then to be so long from their own Country and relations. The Admiral forced
to fight.
Thus it being resolved that they should come to a Battle* both Armies
advanced to Monconture, striving which should possess the place; and the Van
being led by the Admiral, was suddenly set upon by the enemy; the Admiral
seeking for his Armor-bearer could not find him, yet unarmed as he was, he
rushed into the midst of his enemies; Count Mansfelt seconded him, so that they
forced them to give ground: Hard by there was a rivolet which the enemies
contended earnestly to pass over; His policy.
whereupon the Admiral taking some Harquebushiers with him, hastened to the
Rivers bank to oppose them, where he continued all that evening; ^n the mean
time the enemy continually shot at him both with great and small shot, A
special providence.
who if they could have gotten the passage, might have brought great detriment
to the Army; for the enemies exceeded the Protestant Army by a third part,
besides they were fresh and in good plight, the other were weary and harrassed
out; but this holp them only for two days space, for on the third day six
hundred Germans set upon the Admiral, who had only two hundred French horse
with him, and in the fight, the Admiral being often shot at, He is wounded.
at last received a wound on his face by the right side of his nose, the bullet
piercing into his mouth, which wound bled so fast that he could not spit out
the blood: his sword also by many blows fell out of his hand, and the buckles
of his Breastplate were so broken that it hung by very little: but in this
extremity by the assistance and faithful help of one ^lorinerius a young
Norman, whom he had brought up from a Child in his Family, His Army overthrown.
he was rescued and conveyed out of the crowd, and his Forces being overthrown,
he was by his Friends conveyed to Parthenaeus. Here we might wonder at his
constancy and magnanimity: for whereas in this great calamity most men gave way
to despondency, he labored to comfort and confirm each of them; he also caused
his Secretaries presently to write into all the parts of France to the
Protestants that were in arms, His courage.
not to be discouraged, or to think that he had received so great a blow which
might not be repaired within a few days.

The very next day he removed to Niort, where, having settled his affairs, he
went into Xantone, and there stayed seven days for the cure of his wound,
which could not be perfectly healed in less then twenty five days space.
Being thus tos^ed up and down with various afflictions, word was brought him
that the Parliament of Paris, He is condemned by the Parliament of Paris.
Sept. 13. 1569. had made a Decree wherein they had declared him guilty of
treason, and had proposed a reward of fifty thousand Crowns to any one that
would bring him alive to the King. At the same time he had intelligence that
one Martinengus an Italian, banished his own Country for treason, being made
by the King Commander of some Troops of horse, had been at Castellion, and
surprised his Castle, and plundered it of all his rich Furniture which for
diverse ages had remained there, His house plundered.
the value whereof was not less worth then one hundred thousand Crowns,
besides he had so burned the whole Town adjoining to the Castle, that there was
scarce any footsteps remaining of it; which sad tidings were so far from
causing any dejectedness in him, or disfitting him for his employments, that
he did not so much as show the least change in his countenance: And whenas his
Friends and kindred flocked to him to comfort him, he told them, That through
Gods grace, he had this frame of spirit given him, that for those things which
are usually called Goods, he possessed them, and not they him; and that his
Fortunes were subjected to him, His contentation.
not he to them. And whereas in those Civil Wars, Princes, Peers, Nobles,
Knights, Horsemen and Footmen had large allowances from the King, whereby they
maintained themselves, he on the contrary was always careful to discharge his
quarters, both for himself and Family, His justice.
whereby he contracted great debts, taking up money upon use to enable him to
it; yea he pawned his very Wives Jewels, Bracelets, Rings, and other rich
furniture, thereby to furnish himself with money; by which means he did so
weaken his estate, that in the end of this third Civil War he was forced in a
Council of the Princes, to move for some allowance wherewith to sustain his
Family.

About this time he wrote another Letter to his Sons, and the Sons of his
Brother Andelot, who were still at Rochel, under the same Tutor, the tenor
whereof was this:

Truly it would be very grateful unto me if I had opportunity to see you, His
Letter to his Sons and Nephews.
and to speak face to face: but seeing I am deprived of that happiness, I
thought fit by this Epistle to admonish you always to set Piety and the fear
of God before your faces, especially at this time, when you find by experience
that there is no trusting to those things which are called Goods. Our hope must
be placed elsewhere then in this world, and other things must be sought after
then those which we see with our eyes, and handle with our hands: but because
to do that is not in our own powers, we must earnestly pray unto God that he
would lead us in that way which is most sure and safe; neither yet must you
expect that that way will prove pleasant and delicate, and abounding with
worldly felicity: For Christ himself who has gone before us, and is our
Captain and Ensign bearer, must be imitated by us. Men indeed have dispoiled us
of those things which are fading and transitory, but if we be willing and
careful to submit to the will of God, we shall be happy, and it shall be well
with us at the last; for those men have wronged you, not for any injury you
ever did them, but out of a hatred against me, which also proceeds from hence,
because the Lord is pleased to honor me by being an Instrument of assisting
has afflicted Church; and therefore if for this cause we suffer loss and
inconveniences, we have no reason to grieve for it, but rather to assure our
selves that he will give us such a reward as men shall not be able to take from
us. I have many other things to write to you of if I had leisure; but for the
present I have enough, if I may admonish and request you for Gods sake, that
you go on valiantly in the study of virtue, and that in all your words and
actions you show an aborrency of all vices; be obedient to your Master, and
your other Governors, that though I seldom see you, yet I may hear that you
increase in Piety and good Manners: To conclude, I pray, if it be the will of
God, that whatsoever further befalls us, either in our estates or persons, we
may have it sanctified to us for our spiritual good; and I heartily pray to God
that he will be a refuge and help unto you, and a defense in this your
minority; Fare you well. From Xantone, October. 16. 1568. Castellonius.

The Admiral and all the Commanders of his Army having often consulted about
their future proceedings, resolved to strengthen all their garrisons, and so
with their light Horse to go into Toulouse, where they of the Religion held
Montalban, a place very strong both by Nature and Art, who also had gotten
together a good sum of money for paying the German Auxiliaries: besides they
hoped by passing over the two Rivers of Garone and Lotters, to join to
themselves those forces which were under the command of Mongomry, a man of
great authority by reason of his skill and experience in military affairs, who
also had lately by the assistance of his forces quieted Berne, that belonged to
the Prince of Navarr.

This journey, by reason of the roughness of the way proved very difficult and
painful, especially considering that the enemies had Garrisoned all the
Cities, and broken down all the Bridges where they were to pass; yet at length
with much difficulty they came to Montalban, from whence the Admiral sent to
the King and Queen Mother in in his own, They send to the King for Peace.
and in the names of all that were with him, humbly entreating them that they
would not suffer so many valiant and gallant men as were in both Armies
mutually to shed the blood each of other; but that rather out of their clemency
they would put an end to those mischiefs; that the contrary was the counsel of
some Cardinals and Bishops that never came into the field to try the miseries
of War; or else of certain Italians that rejoiced in the ruins of France;
and that it was extreme madness to suppose that two huedred thousand
Protestants to whom so many of the Nobility had joined themselves, could so
easily be suppressed and destroyed. Besides also it could not be but in those
Wars many Papists must be great sufferers as well as the Protestants; some in
their persons, and others in their estates and Families. That the speeches of
the Courtiers were unworthy the Kings Majesty, who used commonly to say, That
the King would not spare his Popish Subjects, so he might destroy his
adversaries: For it was the voice of a Tyrant, not of a King, to say, Pereant
amici, A Tyrannical speech.
dum una in mici intercidant, Let my friends perish whilst mine enemies fall
together with them. That the conditions of Peace were easy, viz. That the
Decrees made by the States of Orleance, and the Edicts of Paris might be
renewed and established, whereby the Protestants were allowed certain places
for public Worship.

These Messengers being dispatched away, they presently resolved to pass the
River Oaronna, which was between theirs and Mongomries forces, but the passage
seemed very difficult by reason of the breadth, depth and swiftness of the
River; whereupon the Admiral resolved to take in the Town of Marian, which
stands upon the Rivers bank, which he also did, and Mongomry coming to the
other bank, the Admiral intended to make a Bridge, which also with admirable
art and industry he effected, and so in two days space passed the German horse
over it: but the night after a Ship coming swiftly along the stream, brake down
the Bridge, so that they were forced to make a new one of Boats, whereby
Mongomries Army came over safe to them; and the German horse also which brought
up his rear, and so having stayed there two days for the refreshing of his
men, he led his Army to Toulouse, and took in all the neighboring Towns,
either by storm or surrender, though he had only two great Guns in his Train,
which he brought with him from Montalban. And the Protestant Army was the more
incensed against them of Toulouse, because (say they) they have been violent to
burn them of our Religion: They beheaded Captain Rapin who carried them the
Edict of Peace from the King; they have also committed many other insolences
which now cry for vengeance, and God has put an opportunity into our hands,
which we must not neglect, etc.

Having dispatched these things he resolved to march to Vivaret, and to the
bank of Rhodanus, and understanding that some were up in Arms for him in the
Delphinate, who also had taken some Towns, he sent part of his forces to them,
to assist them in taking in some Cities of greater consequence, committing the
government of them to Count Lodwick of Nassaw, who arriving in the Delphinate,
struck such a terror into the Inhabitants as caused them to fly into the
Cities; but he having no Guns for battery, only wasted the enemies Country,
and so with honor returned within few days to the Admiral.

Shortly after the Admiral worn out with cares, watchings, The Admiral falls
sick.
and incessant labors, fell sick; and though he was greatly afflicted with his
disease, yet conceiving that it was of great concernment for him to get to the
River Liger, he made no stay, but in his Horselitter marched with his Army
thitherward; for he was informed that about La Charity and Sancerra, there were
about two hundred risen in Arms for him, whom he thought to be of great
concernment to adjoyn to his Army, the rather because Cossaeus Marshall of the
Kingdom, after the Battle in Xantone, by the King made General of the Army in
the room of the Duke of Anjou, as he understood, advanced with his Army that
way, and began to approach near him: And whereas there came a Trumpet from him
to the Admiral about exchange of Prisoners, the Admiral sent him word by his
Trumpet that he should not need to be at so much pains to seek him, for that he
himself was hasting toward him, so fast as he could.

Ambassadors from the King
When he was advanced so far as the Forest, behold new Ambassadors met him from
the King about a Peace; for when the Courtiers heard that the Admiral, whom
they thought to be utterly broken by his former overthrow, had in so short a
time gotten so gallant an Army together again, they were extremely terrified,
lest he should march directly toward Paris, and there should plunder and
destroy the brave Country Houses of the Courtiers, Senators, and rich Citizens
of Paris, the like whereunto they had heard that the Senators and Citizens of
Toulouse had already felt.

The Admiral by his march (though in his Horselitter) had his disease much
increased upon him, and the Physicians gave their judgment, that if he
continued still to be pressed with so great cares and multiplicity of
businesses, he could not hold out long; whereupon the Treaty with the Kings
Ambassadors brake off for a time: but some Nobles that were aweary of the
Wars complained that there was no reason that the Treaty should cease,
because the Admiral could not be present at it, affirming, that though he
should die, yet there were men enough of honor and interest that could carry
on the Treaty, to the establishing of Peace. The Ambassadors tnswered them, We
wonder thrt you do not consider of how great authority the Admiral is amongst
you, The great esteem of the Admiral.
who if he should die to day, we would not offer to any of you tomorrow, so
much as a cup of cold water. What? do you not yet know that the only name of
the Admiral can prevail more for you then a great Army without him?

The Treaty goes on.
Within a few days the Admiral being refreshed, and in a good measure
recovered, the Treaty began again, and at last it was concluded, That certain
Commissioners should go along with the Kings Ambassadors, to signify to his
Majesty in the name of them all, That they of the Religion desired nothing more
then Peace, neither was any thing more grievous to them then War; yet was
there none of them but would undergo greater miseries, yea and death it self,
rather then to deny the truth which they had embraced: That if the King pleased
to grant them Peace and the exercise of their Religion upon the former
conditions, and to put some cautionary Towns into their power for their
security, they would willingly, and for ever lay down their Arms.

These Messengers being dispatched, the Admiral advanced forward, and in his
way took in the Town of Reneducium, to which some of the Vantcurriers of
Cossaeus were come, and from that day forwards there was no day passed without
some skirmishes between the two Armies; and one day the minds of the Soldiers
on both parts were so far inflamed that it had near come to a general Battle,
there being only a little Brook between the two Armies, Monsieur Mongomry
having already broken the first Battle of the adversaries, wherein were
Valetius and Vasco, men of great authority amongst the Royalists. But presently
came new Messengers from the King desiring a cessation from arms till the
Treaty was finished; Peace concluded.
and after great debate an Edict was sent from the King, by which certain
places were allotted to the Protestants for the exercise of their Religion in,
for the performance whereof they had for two years four cautionary Towns put
into their hands, viz. Rochel, Montalban, Cognac, and Charity: and the Kings
Proclamations hereof were sent all over the Kingdom; and so an en end was put
to the third Civil Wars.

The Admiral bringing the German Forces to the borders of their Country,
dismissed them courteously, and so taking the two young Princes of Navarr and
Conde, he went with them to Rochel, where the Queen of Navarr was, purposing to
stay there till the Peace was fully settled in every place: and after a few
Months, trusting to the Kings promises, and to the oaths of the Kings
Brethren, and Parliaments, having been tired out with so many and great
labors, he betook himself to rest; and at the entreaties and persuasions of
his Friends, inclined to dispose of himself again in Marriage, the rather
because he was earnestly solicited thereto by the kindred of Jacoba Monbella,
the widow of the L. Anthony Monbell, who was Daughter of Count Intermontanus,
of whose modesty, piety, and wholly life he had heard much formerly. The
Admirals second marriage.

He marries his Daughter to Teligni.


She therefore being brought honorably to him to Rochel, he solemnly married
her; and not long after he disposed his own Daughter Ludovica in Marriage to
Monsieur Teligni, a young man of great Nobility and virtue. Of all the Nobility
of France none seemed more acceptable and dearer to the King then this Teligni,
by reason of his admiral ingenuity; and therefore being much about the King,
it was he that did afterward persuade the Admiral of the great esteem and
hearty good will of the King toward him.

But God quickly mixed sorrow with the joy of these Marriages, Odet Coligni's
death in England.
news being brought about that time, of the death of Odet Coligni Cardinal of
Chattillion, who had been some time in the Court of England, as the Procurator
for the cause of the Protestants with Queen Elizabeth, who much favored him
for the amplitude of his Family, and the opinion of his virtue and integrity.
But the Protestants affairs being composed in France, his Brother Gaspar sent
for him: Whereupon coming to Queen Elizabeth, he obtained leave for his
departure; but being taken with a sudden disease, he died Feb. 14. 1571. not
without the suspicion of poison, and was buried at Canterbury, being about
fifty years old. He was a man of rare courage, His character.
candor and faithfulness, of a sharp judgment, so that few were to be compared
with him in managing great affairs. Guillin his Chamberlain poisoned him with
an Apple, at the instigation of the Queen Mother, as he confessed at the time
of his death, when afterward he was taken as a Spy at Rochel, for which he was
hanged.

But all this while the Duke of Anjou was a great enemy to the Protestants, and
boasted every where of his Victories against them, yet the King did what he
could to persuade the Queen of Navarr and the Admiral of his great good will
toward them, that they might be induced the more to confide in him. Popish
cruelties.
Notwithstanding which the Papists in some places made slaughters of the
Protestants. As in Orange, whither all the Inhabitants returned, who had been
driven away in the time of the late Wars, the Popish Soldiers made an
assault upon them, and slew them without regard of age or sex. Also in Roan,
and other places they were slain in great number by the Popish rabble.
Whereupon the Queen of Navarr, the Princes and other Protestant Nobles sent to
the King to complain of the violation of the Edict, and to require satisfaction
for the same. The King entertained them kindly, The Kings dissimulation.
protested that these things were done to his great grief, and that he would so
punish the Authors of these mischiefs, as should be for the terror of others.

Not long after, viz. Anno Christi 1571. the King wrote very flattering Letters
to the Admiral, The Kings dissimulation with the Admiral.
giving him very honorable terms, inviting him to his Court at Blesa,
entreating him that he would be an instrument of concluding a Marriage between
Henry Prince of Navarr, and his Sister Margaret, and to prevail the more with
him, he sent him word by his Messengers, that no surer way could be found out
for establishing the public Peace of the Kingdom, and for uniting all sorts
of persons, then by this Marriage.

And the better to delude him, the Guises seemed to be every day less welcome
to him then other, and Monmorency (the Admirals Sisters Son) was used very
familiarly by the King, who often protested to him his good will toward the
Admiral; communicated to him the counsels of his greatest affairs, for the
managing whereof he told him, that he had need of the Admiral for to be his
Captain and Minister. The Queen Mother also, according to her manner, protested
that she liked nothing better then that a certain Peace should be confirmed
upon equal conditions, Royal dissimulation.
the memory of former matters being blotted out.

The Admirals entertainment at Court.
By these means the Admiral was drawn to the Court, where he was entertained
extraordinary lovingly, even beyond expectation; so that when he fell down on
his knees to do reverence, the King took him up, calling him his Father, saying
often and openly, that a more desired day never shone unto him then that,
wherein he saw an end put to the War, and a firm Peace settled in the whole
Kingdom by his presence; adding, with a smiling countenance, Now we have you
with us, you shall never depart from our side hereafter. He was entertained
with the same serenity of countenance by the Queen Mother, the Duke of Anjou,
but especially by the Duke of Alanson, who much favored him. The King also
seconded his words with deeds, causing one hundred thousand Crowns to be paid
him out of his Treasury for his private losses in the last Wars; he gave him
also the Revenues of the Cardinal his Brother, which were very great, for one
year, and also the furniture and household stuff of the said Cardinal.

A few days after the Admirals return from the Court, the young Duke of Guise,
The malice of the Duke of Guise.
by the instigation of the Cardinal of Lorraine his Uncle, would have put in a
new complaint against the Admiral for the death of his Father; but the King
interposing his Authority, drew up a form of agreement, which he made both of
them to set their Seals to, and to take their oaths for the keeping of it;
notwithstanding which the Duke of Guise shortly after entered Paris,
accompanied with many armed men, which the Admiral hearing of, being then at
his House at Castellion, he moved the King by his Son-in-law Monsieur Teligni,
that he might have leave to keep a small Guard for his own safety: Whereupon
the King wrote to him with his own hand, and sent his Letter by Bricmald, a man
of great esteem for his virtue; the tenor where of was this:

That it was most acceptable to him that the Admiral should be exceeding
cautious and careful of his own safety, The Kings dissembling Letter.
and therefore he gave him power to fortify his Castle, and to raise as great
a Guard as he pleased, desiring him to be confident without doubting of his
good will toward him; and that he would be as careful of his safety, as a
Father of his Childs. These Letters with many such like expressions of love
being written with the Kings own hand, many read with great delight, and were
now thoroughly persuaded that they ought no longer to doubt of the Kings good
will and sincere affections to the Admiral.

Hereupon Count Lodwick of Nassaw (whom we mentioned before) thinking this a
fit time (and being secretly invited to the Court) moved the King in the name
of his Brother the Prince of Orange, for assistance; telling him that there
were many Cities in the Low Countries, that being oppressed and tired out with
the lust, covetousness, and cruelty of the Spaniards, would willingly
surrender themselves into his hands; And after a few days spent in debate
about this business, The King dissembles with C. Lodwick.
the King faithfully promised Count Lodwick that very shortly he would send a
great Army under the command of the Admiral thither; and it was further agreed
upon betwixt them, that if they succeeded in that War, the King of France
should have all the Country from Antwerp to Picardy, and that the Prince of
Orange should have Holland, Zeland, and Frisland.

About this very time Letters were intercepted and sent to the Admiral,
Intercepted Letters which showed the dissimulations.
written from the Cardinal Peleus to the Cardinal of Lorrain to this purpose:
That the King was never better affected then now; and therefore because of his
good affections, together with the Queen-Mothers, and the Duke of Anjou's, he
hoped there would be good issue of those affairs which were resolved on in the
common Council: That the King at the Admirals coming to Court, had carried
himself more politickly then they could have expected; whereupon the King
believed that he had taken away all suspicion from the Admiral, and had left
him no occasion of doubting of his love and good will toward him, which
Lorrain knew to be the basis, by their joint consent, upon which their future
proceedings did depend. That some speech was indeed raised about warring upon
the King of Spain, which the King made such use of, that the Admiral thence
collected arguments of his greater good will toward him. That they must use
such artifices whilst they expected an opportunity to effect what was resolved
on. That the King of Spain was thoroughly acquainted with all these proceedings,
that so he might suspect nothing by reason of those great preparations which
were made for War, for he was assured that this was done upon good grounds,
as subservient to the principal end. That therefore he desired the Cardinal
that whatsoever he had heard, or should hear hereafter, yet he should assure
himself that the King would never depart from his first purpose, and that
whatsoever he did, did but conduce to hasten the end of their Counsels, and
that both the King, Queen Mother, and the Duke of Anjou, were all very
solicitous for this thing, and that as soon as ever the business should be
effected, they would instantly send away Messengers to acquaint Lorraine with
it. And as for the business of the Prince of Navarrs marriage, they hoped that
it would quickly be effected, for this was to begin all their future designs,
etc.

The Admirals security.
He that sent these Letters to the Admiral, hoped that he would have been
warned by them to look to himself and his affairs, but he had such a strong
confidence of the Kings love and good will toward him, which also was daily
nourished in him by his Son-in-law Teligni, that he which was most provident
and sharp-sighted in all others businesses, was fatally blind in this.

In the beginning of May 1571. the King desired the Queen of Navarr to go to
Paris, to provide all things necessary for the marriage, where she arrived the
fifteenth day of the same month; and the fourth day of June she fell sick of a
feavour, whereof she died five days after, to the extreme grief and sorrow of
all her Servants and Friends. The Queen of Navarr's death.
Two days before her death, being in perfect memory, she made a most Christian
Testament and last Will, finishing her course with singular piety and joy in
God.

She was a Princess of great experience by reason of her manifold adversities,
Her character.
in all which she showed an invincible constancy, and heroical greatness of
courage, most affectionate to her Religion, very careful of the education of
her children, training them up in the fear of God. In her words most grave and
full of motherly affections to them. She had a ready and well advised wit, was
pitiful and easy to be entreated; constantly maintained that which she judged
to be good, and agreeable to the will and good pleasure of God. She had a great
vivacity of spirit, whereby she was able to comprehend all her affairs, and had
a lively grace in representing them, either by word or writing. She died June
9. 1572. and of her age 44.

It was believed that she was poisoned by the smell of certain perfumes; the
Doctors and Chyrurgions which opened her, were commanded not to open her brain
where the mischief lay, and therefore could not determine about the cause of
her death.

The Admirrll in this time was at his house aa Castallion, The King sends for
the Admiral.
where he received many Letters and Messages from the King to come to him; and
because he stirred not, the King sent Cavagnes and Briquemaud to fetch him,
that they might come to a conclusion about the Wars in Flanders; and special
commandment was given to the Provost of Merchants, and other chief men, that at
the Admirals coming to Paris, there should be no affronts done him.

About the same time the Admiral had many advertisements from his Friends,
both within and without the Realm; His friends advertisements.
that though he could not conceive any sinister opinion of the King, his
Mother, or Brother, that yet at least he would consider into what place he was
about to thrust himself, amongst so many implacable enemies. But he resting
upon the testimony of a good conscience, His security.
and the providence of God, rejected all those counsels, as proceeding from
men's covetousness, or desire of new troubles, which he abhorred worse then
death; and therefore taking a small train with him, He went to Paris.
he went to Paris, and was very honorably entertained by the King,
Queen Mother, the Kings Brethren and others, to the great astonishment of the
whole City.

At the Admirals coming to Paris, amongst other Letters that were brought to
him, there was one that gave him these warnings. Warnings to the Admiral.
Remember the Popish Maxim, confirmed by the Authority of Councils, That faith
is not to be kept with Heretics, in which number the Protestants are
accounted. Remember the implacable spirits of the Papists at this time,
irritated by the last Wars. There is no doubt but it is the fixed purpose of
the Queen Mother to destroy the Protestants by any means whatsoever. Consider
that she is an Italian, of a most crafty wit, born of the Progeny of Popes, who
contrives all extreme things against her enemies. Remember in what School the
King has been brought up from his childhood: how he has been taught to swear
and forswear: To pollute himself with whoredoms and adulteries: To compose his
countenance: To counterfeit Faith and Religion: How he has been accustomed to
cruelty and bloodshed: How he has been taught not to suffer above one Religion
in his Kingdom: How it has been whispered into his ears, That the Protestants
seek to dispoil him of his life and Kingdom: That he is not bound to keep
Covenants made with armed Subjects: That he is taught the Mysteries of State
Policy. Remember that Commodus caused Julianus to be slain, whom he pretended
to honor and embrace as a Father. That Antoninus Caracalla, under the pretense
of a Muster, caused all the chief youths of the City to be slain. That Lysander
under the pretense of friendship commanded the throats of four hundred
Milesians to be cut. That lately Atonius Spinola invited all the chief men of
Corsica to a Banquet, where they were all slain. That Christian, King of
Denmark, used the same art to commit that horrid massacre at Stockholme, etc.
That the Kings speech to his Mother at Blois was no secret, when swearing
fearfully, he asked her whether he had not carried himself well at the coming
of the Queen of Navarr? To whom she answered, That he had begun well, but that
would profit little unless he went on: But I (quoth he) swearing often, will
bring them all into the net. Wherefore if you be wise, haste both out of the
Court and City with all speed, as out of a most impure sink.

His confident answer.
The Admiral having read this Letter, though he were offended, yet lest he
should seem to neglect the prayers and warnings of his Friends, he returned
this answer; That there was no place left any longer for these suspicions: That
he was verily persuaded that so great perfidiousnesse could not enter into the
heart of so good a King: That indeed the Duke of Anjou was more estranged from
the Protestants; but that hatred would by degrees cease by reverence of the
affinity contracted with the King of Navarr: That the King had entered into a
league with the Queen of England, and endeavored to do the same with the
Protestant Princes in Germany, which sufficiently shows how he stands affected
to the Protestants. Moreover that Faith was given to the Prince of Orange, and
to the E. of Nassaw his Brother to aid them against the Spaniards. That the
Kings Ambassadors did daily search into the Counsels of the Duke de Alva, and
acquainted the King therewith, as the King daily informed him: That the Navy
under Strossius at Broag is rigged for no other end but to disturb the Spansh
Fleet, and to assist the Prince of Orange. That for himself they need not fear,
the King having made Friendship betwixt the Guises and him, faith being
mutually given that neither should injure other. To conclude, That the King
does all he can to have Peace at home, and War abroad; and to translate it
into the Low Countries against the Spaniards; wherefore he prays his Friends
not to trouble his mind any more with suspicions, which is now busied with
weightier matters, and to join with him in prayer to God, that he would bring
those things to a good issue, which are well begun for his glory, and the good
both of Church and Kingdom.

A little before Count Lodwick with some others had Commissions from the King
to surprise some Frontier Town in Flanders. Royal treachery.
On the other side the Duke de Alva had intelligence of every step that Count
Lodwick took, yet such was his diligence that he surpised Monts in Henault,
wherewith the Duke de Alva was so netled, that he said, The Queen Mother had
sent him the flowers of Florence, but he would for them return her Spanish
thistles; but upon further intelligence he was soon pacified.

Many Lords and Gentlemen of the Religion accompanied the King of Navarr and
Prince of Conde to Paris, The Protestants flock to Paris.
and the King drew many more of them thither, who otherwise would have kept
their houses, under pretense of his Wars in Flanders.

Count Lodwick was presently besieged in Monts by de Alva, whereupon the King
gave Commission to Monsieur Jenlis to raise Horse and Foot for his succor:
Deep dissimulation.
but de Alva being acquainted with all his proceedings, surprised him, which
the King seemed to be much grieved at, and presently wrote to his Ambassadors
in the Low Countries to procure the deliverance of the prisoners. He also
encouraged the Admiral to send all the help he could to the Rutters, whom the
Prince of Orange had levied for the relief of his Brother, causing moneys to be
delivered to him for their pay.

The Ambassadors of Spain also seemed to be very malcontent, because the
King began War in Flanders: and the Kings Mother played her part in this
Tragedy, pretending that she knew nothing of the Kings proceedings, and now she
did know them she would leave the Court. These juglings were carried so
handsomely, that the Admiral, Teligni his Son-in-law, and other Lords were
confidently persuaded that the King was wholly guided by the Admirals advice.

July the last, The Rochelers wrote to the Admiral that the Kings Army
approached near them; Rochel blocked up.
that from Xantone and Gascoine it daily wasted the Country about them, using
terrible threatenings against their Town, and menacing to plunder it; whereupon
they entreated his advice, especially about receiving eight hundred men, which
they sought to put as a Garrison into the Town. The Admiral made them an
honorable answer, Aug. 7. assuring them of the care he had over them, adding
that he found the King so well disposed for Peace, that all men had cause to
commend him. Yet the Rochelers neglected not to look to themselves and to
fortify their Town. In other Towns many were the threats of the Papists
against the Protestants, The Admiral deluded.
which much terrified some: others relied upon the Admirals presence and favor
at Court; and to such as suggested doubts to him, he said, that the King had
reconciled the differences betwixt the Guises and him, causing both Parties to
swear friendship: That the King gave his Sister in marriage, not so much to the
King of Navarr as to the whole Church of the Protestants, to join with them
thereby in an inviolable union, and therefore he besought all them, that either
by writing or words advised him of the hatred of the King, Queen Mother, the
Duke of Anjou, or the house of Guise, no more to trouble him with those things,
but rather to commend all in their daily prayers to God, and to give him thanks
who of his infinite mercy had brought things to so good an end.

August 17. Henry King of Navarr, The King of Navarr married.
and the Lady Margaret of France, Sister to the King, in the evening were
conducted to the Louure, and the next day were married by the Cardinal of
Bourbon in the sight of all the people upon a great Scaffold made before the
gate of the great Church in Paris, which day was passed over in Banquets,
Dances and Masks; and that very day the Admiral wrote a Letter to his Wife
great with child in this tenor: Most dear and desired Wife, This day was
celebrated the Marriage between the King of Navarr and the Kings Sister, The
Admirals Letter to his Wife.
and these three or four ensuing days will be spent in Feastings, Maskings and
Dancings. The King has promised me, that after a few days he will set time
apart to hear the complaints which are brought from several parts of the
Kingdom for violating the Edict of Peace; for the prosecution whereof it is very
necessary that I should improve all my interest with the King: For though I
have an earnest desire to see thee, yet it would be grievous to me, and I
suppose to thee also, if I should be any ways deficient in a business of so
great concernment; neither will my stay here about it be such, but that I hope
to come to thee this next week. If I should only respect my own content, it
would be much more pleasing to me to be with thee, then to stay any longer at
Court, for sundry reasons which I may hereafter impart to thee; but I must have
more respect to the public good, then either to my own pleasure or profit. I
have some other things to impart to thee so soon as God shall bring us
together, which I much long for both day and night. All that I have for the
present to write to thee is only thus much; at four a clock this afternoon was
celebrated the Mass for the Marriage, during which time the King of Navarr
walked without the Church with some other Noblemen of our Religion. Some other
matters of smaller concernment I shall reserve till we have an opportunity to
speak together; in the mean time (most dear and loving Wife) I pray for thee
that God will protect and keep thee, Farewell. Paris, Aug. 18. 1572.

Three days since I was much tormented with the Stone and Cholick, but through
Gods mercy they held me not above eight or ten hours, and now by the same mercy
I am wholly freed from them. I promise thee that in these great Feasts and
Pastimes I will trouble none. Once again Farewell.

Thy most loving Husband, Chattillion.




The Kings dissimulation.
About the same time, their Counsels for the Massacre being not yet ripened, the
King with the greatest demonstrations of good will that might be, thus accosts
the Admiral, My Father, Remember what you have undertaken to me, that you will
be injurious to none of the Guises whilst you are in the Court, they also have
interchangeably given their faith, that they will carry themselves honorably
and modestly toward you. And truly I put as great trust as may be in your
words, but I have not the same confidence in their promises. For besides that I
know that the Guises seek occasion of revenge, I know their disposition to be
bold and haughty, and with what great favor and affection the people of Paris
do follow them; It would be a great grief to me if they who have brought into
the City many men of War notably furnished with arms, under color of coming
to the marriage solemnity, should go about any thing for your destruction,
which would extremely reflect upon me; and therefore I think it fit, if you be
of the same mind, to bring a Regiment of Praetorian Soldiers into the City,
under the command of such men (meaning some that were least suspected) who may
not only be ready for the public securiry, but upon all emergencies, if
turbulent spirits should attempt any thing against you. This friendly speech so
prevailed with the Admiral that he gave his consent, and so a Regiment was
brought in without the suspicion of the Protestants, which afterward helped to
cut their throats.

Five days after, as the Admiral came from the Court, The Admiral wounded.
where he had been all that morning, accompanied with twelve or fifteen
Gentlemen, being on foot about a hundred paces from the Louure, walking softly,
and reading a Petition, just over against the house of one Villemure a Canon,
and Tutor to the young Duke of Guise, one shot with an Harquebush at him
through a lattice window, the Gun was laden with three brass bullets, one
whereof brake his forefinger of his right hand, the other two pierced his left
arm: He that shot it had a horse ready at the back door, whereon being mounted
he escaped through St. Anthonies gate, where finding a Spanish Jennet held
ready for him, he posted away to the place appointed for his retreat. The door
of the house being burst open, the Harquebush was found with a Lacquey, and
another servant who belonged to Challey, Steward of the Kings house, and a
great dealer in the Duke of Guises affairs, who also the day before had brought
this Harquibushier to that house, desiring that he might be well entertained:
the Lacquey also was sent that morning by this Harquebushier whose name was
Maurevel, to the Duke of Guises Groom of his Stable, requiring that the Horse
should be ready that was promised him.

The Admiral being brought to his lodging, showed singular piety and patience;
Chyrurgions were sent for, and amongst the rest Ambrose Pareus, the Kings
Chyrurgion, who began first with his finger, which he cut off, but his pincers
not being keen, His admirable patience,
he opened and pressed them three times before he could cut it off. Then he
lanced both those places in his arm which the bullets had pierced; all which
the Admiral bore not only with a courageous heart, but with a constant
countenance, insomuch as seeing his Friends to weep which held his arm whilst
the incisions were made, he said unto them, My Friends, why do you weep? and
Christian courage.
I judge my self happy that bear these wounds for the cause of my God. And
withal looking upon Monsieur Merlin his Minister, he said, These wounds, my
Friends, are Gods blessings, the smart indeed of them is troublesome, but I
acknowledge the will of my Lord God therein, and I bless his Majesty who has
been pleased thus to honor me, and to lay any pain upon me for his holy name
sake; let us beg of him that he will enable me to presevere unto the end. And
seeing Monsieur Merlin to weep and lament, he said to him, My Merlin, you
should rather comfort me: To whom he answered, Indeed there can be no greater
comfort then to think upon the honor which God has done you, in judging you
worthy for his Name and Religions sake to suffer these pains. My Merlin,
answered the Admiral, if God should have dealt with me a^cording to my
deserts, or have used his power over me, he must have de^^ far more severely
with me; but blessed be his Name, who has dealt so mildly and lovingly with me
his unworthy Servant.

Then said another that stood by, Go on with this your piety, for God ought to
be praised by you who has left the greatest part sa^ and untouched, for which
cause you have greater reason to admire h^^ mercy in these wounds, then to
complain of his justice, especial^^ considering that neither your head nor your
mind are wounded. Th^^ said Merlin, You do very well Sir that you turn your
thoughts from these murderers to God, for truly it was his hand that inflicted
their wounds, neither ought you at all to think upon the bl^ody-mindednesse of
your adversaries. Truly, said the Admiral, I freely and from my heart forgive
both him that shot at me, His charity.
and those also that set him on: for I know assuredly that it is not in their
power to hurt me, no though they should kill me, for my death is a most certain
passage to eternal life. The same words he shortly after spoke to Marshall
Danvill when he came to visit him.

And whereas Monsieur Merlin told him, that the afflictions and calamities
which happen to Gods Children use to quicken the^ more in Prayer: The Admiral
thereupon with an audible voice and fervent soul poured out this Prayer unto
God, O Lord God, and my heavenly Father, have mercy upon me for thy tender
mercies sake; His Prayer.
Remember not against me my former iniquities, neither charge me with the sins
of my youth. If thou Lord should strictly mark what is done amiss, or
should impute to us our breach of Covenant, what flesh could stand before
thee, or endure thine anger? As for me, disclaiming all false gods and worship,
I only call upon thee the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and worship
thee alone: for Christ his sake, I beseech thee to bestow thy holy Spirit upon
me, and give me the grace of patience. I only trust in thy mercies, all my hope
and confidence is placed on that alone, whether thou please to inflict
present death upon me, or to spare my life to do thee further service. Behold
Lord, I am prepared to submit to thy will in either, nothing doubting, but if
thou please to inflict death upon me, thou will presently admit me into thine
everlasting Kingdom. But if Lord thou suffer me to live longer here, grant,
O most heavenly Father, that I may spend all the remainder of my days in
advancing thy glory, and in observing and sticking close to thy true Religion.
Amen.

His Prayer being ended, Monsieur Merlin asked him if he pleased that they also
should go to Prayer with him: Yea, said he, with all my heart; and whilst
Merlin was praying, the Admiral with his eyes fixed upon heaven joined with
very great devotion. And after Prayer, when Merlin minded him of the examples
of the ancient Martyrs, telling him that there was never any man from the
beginning of the world, that laid out all his labor and interest for God, and
his true Religion, but that he met with manifold afflictions; the Admiral
interrupted him, His comfort.
saying, I am refreshed and confirmed with this speech, and the examples of the
holy Fathers and Martyrs do much comfort me, and mitigate my pain.

Presently after the two Marshals of the Kingdom, Monsieur de Cosse and Danvill
came to visit him, telling him that they were extremely grieved for his mishap,
and that nothing could have happened more bitter to them; yet withal, say
they, we judge it equal and agreeable to your former valor, to recollect and
show your self a man, for your virtue has given you far more then this ill
chance can take from you. Then the Admiral turning to de Cosse, said, Do you
not remember, Sir, what I told you of late? Truly so much attends you also.
But, said Danvill, My Admiral, I purpose neither to comfort you, nor to exhort
you to courage and constancy, for your self is the man from whom such
Consolations and Exhortations use to proceed, only I request you to consider
wherein I may be serviceable unto you: I wonder from whence this mischief did
proceed! Then said the Admiral, Truly I can suspect none but the Duke of
Guise, yet dare I not affirm that it was he: However, through Gods mercy, His
Faith.
I have learned neither to fear mine enemies, nor death it self, which I am
sure can do me no hurt, but may forward my eternal peace and happiness: For I
know that my God in whom I have put all my confidence can neither deceive nor
lie unto me. Only herein I am sorrowful, for that by this accident I am
disabled to show the King how much I would have done for his service (meaning
in the War of Flanders:) Would to God I had an opportunity to speak with his
Majesty, for I have some things to impart to him, which much concern his
interest, and I believe there is none that dare tell it him but my self.

In the mean time the King of Navarr, and the Prince of Conde complained
grievously of this vile and treacherous fact to the King; To whom the King
cursing and swearing grievously, called God to witness that he would so
severely punish this wickedness toward the Admiral, The Kings profane
dissimulation.
that he would leave the example to all future ages to take heed of such
villainy; and thereupon the Lacquy and Woman that were found in the house, were
apprehended and cast into prison.

At two a clock in the afternoon, the King hearing of the Admirals desire to
speak with him, went to him, The King visits the Admiral.
accompanied with the Queen Mother, his two Brethren, the Duke of Monpensier,
the Cardinal of Bourbon, Marshall Danvill, Tavenes, de Cosse, etc. When the
King came first into the Admirals chamber he caused all his servants to go
forth, except Monsieur Teligni, his Wife, and Merlin; then going to the beds
side, the Admiral said to him, I humbly thank you Sir, that you have been
pleased to put your self to so much trouble for my sake. Then did the King with
flattering words congratulate his valiant mind, and bid him be of good courage,
and hope well of the issue. To whom the Admiral replied;

Sir, His speech to the King.
There are three things wherewith I was desirous to acquaint your Majesty;
First, To profess my fidelity and observance to your Majesty; and I pray God
so to be merciful unto me, before whose Throne I may be brought shortly to
appear by these my wounds, as I was always studious and careful of your
honor and dignity. Neither yet am I ignorant how often mine adversaries have
calumniated me to your Majesty, and accused me for a disturber of the public
Peace; but through Gods mercy, though I should hold my peace, yet my actions
will sufficiently clear me from this charge. Indeed this has been the fountain
of all these calamities, because I resisted their fury, and impudency: and
because I asserted the authority of your Edicts against their turbulent and
violent proceedings; neither could I endure to suffer them so often to violate
the faith confirmed by your oaths to your Subjects. God is witness of the
sincerity of my mind herein, who also fully knows the difference between me and
my adversaries, and will righteously judge the same. Furthermore also
considering the great Honors and Offices conferred upon me by your Father, and
Grandfather, and confirmed by your self; I should be ungrateful and
unfaithful if I should not humbly request your Majesty to provide a remedy
against all those maladies and perturbations which already disturb the peace of
your Kingdom. And now to proceed to the business of Flanders, Never any of
your Predecessors had the like opportunity of getting Honor as your self. You
know that many Cities in the Low Countries desire your favor, and to throw
themselves into your protection. This occasion I perceive is in your Court
laugh't and scoff't at, and through the default of some few men, the
opportunity is like to be overslipt. Those Forces which were lately led by
Genlisse thitherward, were circumvented, and destroyed by de Alva; you know
what a great number of Catholics were in that Army; Of what Religion then I
pray you are those who make a jest at the slaughter of so many of their
Contrymen, and of their own Religion? There is scarce any secret word spoken
in your Privy-Councell, but presently the Duke de Alva knows of it. I pray you
Sir, What good can we expect when those that sit in your Privy-Councell, and
should assist your Majesty and your Brethren, do betray your most secret
counsels to your public and professed enemies? I beseech you Sir, that you
take care of a business of such concernment as this is, yea again and again I
entreat it of you. And lastly, I beg with the like earnestness, that you will
not suffer your Edict of Pacification to be so ordinarily broken: You know how
often you have sworn to keep it: You know that foreign Nations, and all your
neighbor Princes have taken notice of it. What an unworthy thing is it Sir,
that an Oath so solemnly sworn, should be so much slighted and neglected? Do
you think that foreign Princes will hereafter make any account of your Oath?
But the other day in Champaigne, as the Nurse carried a child home from
Baptism, and from a Sermon which was held in a place allowed by your authority,
certain seditious persons lying in wait by the way, basely murdered the Nurse,
Infant, and some other of the company with it. Consider I pray you, how great
the wickedness was, and how Honorable, yea how Glorious it will be to your
name not to suffer such cruelty to escape with impunity.

Unto this Speech of the Admiral the King returned this answer, The Kings
answer.
That he had never called his loyalty into question; That he reputed him a good
Commonwealths man, and a valiant and excellent Captain, before whom he
preferred no man in his Kingdom. And (said he) if I had had any other opinion
of you, I had never done as I have heretofore. About the Flemish business he
answered never a word. But for the third thing he answered, that he liked
nothing better then that his Edicts for Pacification should be holily and
inviolably observed, for which end he had sent his Deputies into all the
Provinces of his Kingdom; for the confirmation whereof he called the
Queen Mother to witness, who turning to the Admiral, said, My Admiral, there
is nothing more true, Deep dissimulation.
Commissaries and Deputies are sent into all parts. Yea forsooth (said the
Admiral) of those men who have imposed Fifty thousand Crowns as the price of
my Head.

Then said the King, My Admiral, there is danger lest your earnestness may
hinder your health, it is better that you take your rest; the harm has
befallen you, but the dishonor reflects upon me; but I swear by Gods death
that I will so severely punish this wicked deed, that the memory thereof shall
continue to all posterities: The Woman and Lacquy that were found in the house
we have committed to safe custody, Whom further do you require to be examined,
or whom would you have to exercise judgment? To this the Admiral answered, I
leave this business to your Wisdom and Fidelity, yet because you ask my
judgment, I humbly desire that Cavanneus and Masparrot may be employed therein,
for I think that the author of this deed is not far off. The King and
Queen Mother coming nearer to the Admirals pillow, spoke a while softly, and at
last the Queen Mother said, Although I am but a woman, yet I perceive we must
provide betimes.

The King at his departure advised the Admiral to be transported into the
Kings Castle, and the Earl Rhetius pressed the same diverse times, saying that
he feared lest such a commotion should be raised amongst the common people of
Paris, as the King with all his authority should not be able to quell. To this
it was answered, That the Physicians and Chyrurgeous would not allow of his
removal, lest the stirring of his body should inflame his wounds: That if the
King pleased to manifest his love and favor to the Admiral, there was no more
fear of the people of Paris, then of a company of women: That the authority of
the Kings name was so great in France, especially in Paris, that were the
common people never so mad and furious, yet the mention of that alone would
easily suppress them. The Bullet viwed.


Then did the King call for the brazen bullet wherewith the Admiral was
wounded, and asked him if he felt not very great pain when his finger and arm
were cut? To which receiving an answer, he replied, that there could not be a
more constant and valiant man found this day in the world; and so restoring the
Bullet, the Queen Mother looking on it said, I am glad that the Bullet is got
out, for I remember that when the Duke of Guise was shot in his Camp, the
Physicians often told me, that though it were poisoned, yet there was no danger
when the Bullet was out: But, said a by-stander, Madam, we rested not upon
that, but we gave the Admiral Physic to prevent the danger if there were any
poison.

After the Kings departure came in John Ferrers, Vidam of Chartres, who
comforted the Admiral with many words, concluding that the enemies had
betrayed their great cowardlinesse in that they durst not encounter the
Admiral but through a grated window; but that the Admiral was an happy man,
who had lengthened out the praise of his virtue to so great an age. Yea, said
the Admiral, in this I account my self happy, that the Lord has been pleased
to show me mercy, for they are truly blessed whose sins are forgiven, Psalm.
32.1.
and whose transgressions are covered.

A Council held by the Protestants.
The King of Navarr, Prince of Conde, and some other Christians of the
Protestants being present, they resolved to go down into a lower Chamber, to
consult what course to take for their present security. At this debate Ferrers
was very earnest that they should with all speed depart out of Paris, assuring
them that this was but the first act of a more dangerous Tragedy that would
suddenly ensue. Others on the contrary argued, That it was enough for the
present to require justice of the King, desiring that judgment might be
speedily executed: In this opinion Teligni stood stiff, affirming that he knew
the Kings mind thoroughly, and that they ought not to suspect his faith and good
will. Yet it was alleged again that many seditious reports were scattered
about: That many Papists on the Wedding Day, when the Protestants came out of
the Church, that they might not be present at Mass, spoke publicly, That
within a few days they should hear Mass. Presages of the Massacre.
Also some of the chief Citizens said, that there should be more blood then
wine shed at that Marriage. Also the President of the Senate advised a
Nobleman of the Protestants to go into the Country with his Family for a few
days. Also John Monluc Bishop of Valentia, Monluc's advice.
when he was going Ambassador into Poland, advised the Earl of Rochfaucand,
not to suffer himself to be blinded with the smoke of the Court and its unsuall
favors, which are deservedly suspected by wise and wary men; Therefore, said
he, be not too secure, cast not your self into dangers, but withdraw your self
and other Noblemen betimes out of the Court. But these things could not be
heard by reason of Monsieur Teligni's confidence.

In the mean time the Woman and Lacquy who were found in the house of Villemur,
were examined by the Presidents of the Parliament. The Woman confessed that a
few days before, Villerius Challius, a retainer to the Guises, brought a
Soldier to that house, commending him to her as if he had been the Master of
the house, but his name was concealed. The Boy confessed that he had served
this man a few days, who called himself one while Bolland, and another while
Bondol, and that he was sent that morning to Challius to entreat him that the
Horse might be ready as he had promised. Hereupon Challius was sent for, the
more to delude the Protestants.

The King also wrote to the Governors of the Provinces, The Kings
dissimulation.
wherein he detested the wrong done to the Admiral, and required them to do
their endeavor that all might understand how greatly it grieved him, and that
he would most severely punish it to the terror of all others.

The day after some of the Admirals friends being certified that many things
were done tumultuously in the City, and that weapons were brought together in
many places; they thought fit that counsel should be taken betimes, for that
no good could be expected from those proceedings: Hereupon one was sent to the
King to certify him of the commontion of the people, and of their carrying of
Arms, and therefore to request him to charge certain of his guard to stand
before the Admirals door for his better security: The King seeming to be moved
with this news, Deep dissimulation.
began to demand of the Messenger who had told it him? and whether the Admiral
knew of it? and withal he sent for the Queen Mother, who was scarce entered,
when the King with a disquiet mind (as he seemed) said, What a mischief? What
is the matter? He tells me that the common people are in a tumult, and take
Arms. She answered, They are not in any tumult, neither do they take Arms; but
you know that early in the morning you commanded that all should contain
themselves in their own quarters, lest any tumult might arise. That is true,
said the King, but I forbad them to take Arms.

Then the Messenger again requested that he would send some of his Guard to the
Admirals lodging. The Duke of Anjou being by, said, Take Cossen to you with
fifty Harquibushiers: The other answered, We desire only six of the Kings
Guard, for their Authority will more prevail with the people then many armed
men. Yea (quoth the King and the Duke of Anjou) take Cossens to you, An ill
omen.
for you cannot have a fitter man: which words were pronounced very
imperiously. The Messenger knowing Cossen to be a great enemy to the Admiral,
yet held his peace; and not far from the Kings Chamber he met with Monsieur
Thoree, Brother to Marshall Monmorency, who whispering in his ear, said, No
greater enemy could be given us for our Keeper; to whom the other answered, Did
you not observe how Imperiously the King decreed it? but pray you remember what
I answered to the King when he first commanded it.

A few hours after came Cossen with his fifty Harquibushiers to the Admirals
house, and chose two shops by, to place his Guard in. A little after Rambulet,
the Kings Camp-master followed, who by the advice of the Duke of Anjou,
commanded all the Popish Nobility that lodged in that street to remove their
quarters elsewhere, that he might dispose of their lodgings to the friends and
familiars of the Admiral; then which no more crafty counsel could be devised
for those matters which afterward fell out. Popish subtilty


Toward evening this happened, which gave to many no small occasion of
suspicion: A Boy by the command of Teligni brought two hunting poles to the
Admirals house; but Cossen put him back, and would not suffer them to be
carried in: This being told to the King of Navarr, who was now with the
Admiral, he went down, and asked Cossen upon what confidence he did it? Cossen
answered, that he had done it at the command of the King; but, said he, since
you will have it so, let them be brought in. That day the King sent to all the
Admirals familiar friends, admonishing them to go near to the Admirals house,
and take up all those quarters.

Counsel that the Protestants should leave Paris.
But upon the former occurrences another Council was called under the Admirals
lodging, wherein the Vidam of Chartres again urged his former opinion, that the
Admiral should presently be carried out of Paris, and that his friends should
go along with him: That every hour they observed many things that justly
increased their suspicion; But most were of the contrary opinion, viz. That
they were only to require justice of the King, and to desire that the Guises
and their Faction might be commanded out of the City, as being too powerful
with the people of Paris; and of this opinion was the King of Navarr, the
Prince of Conde, and many others; and the rather because Teligni urged that it
would be a great injury to the King, if any should call his faith and sincerity
into question, and that it would be sufficient if justice were meekly required
of him. At this debate there was one Bucavannius a Picard, A Judas.
who never spoke word; he was a professor indeed of the true Religion, but very
gracious with the Queen Mother, and very frequent with her familiars, which
probably betrayed all to her.

About three a clock in the night there fell out another thing which increased
the suspicion, for one carrying to the Admirals house the Coats of Male of
Teligni and Guercius, Cossen turned him back again, which man complaining to
Guercius (who was a stout and gallant man) he went to Cossen, and sharply taxed
him for it, so that they had well near fallen to blows, but Teligni, who was of
a meek and quiet spirit, with gentle words pacified them, himself being so
deluded with the fair and flattering words of the King, that he never thought
that he spoke enough in his commendation.

The Massacre projected.
In the mean time a Council was held at Court, where were present the King,
Queen Mother, Duke of Anjou, Duke of Nevers, the Bastard of Angolisme, Birage,
Tavannius, and Radesianus; and it was concluded, That seeing by the death of
one the mischief diffused amongst so many could not be extinguished, therefore
all should be destroyed: And that the wrath which God would not have fulfilled
with the blood of Coligni alone, should be poured out against all the
Sectaries; therefore, say they, the bridle is to be let loose to the common
people, who are stirred up enough of themselves; and when the business is
accomplished, reasons will not be wanting whereby the deed may be excused, the
blame being laid upon the Guises, who will willingly undergo the same. So they
all concluded that all the Protestants were to be destroyed, even every Mothers
child of them. Concerning the King of Navarr, and the Prince of Conde, it was
debated, Whether they were to be exempted from the number of the rest: and it
was alleged that the King of Navarr was to be spared, because of his royal
Dignity, and his affinity newly contracted; for it would be without all excuse,
if so great a Prince, next to the King in blood, conjoined in fresh affinity,
should be slain in the Kings Castle, between the arms, as it were, of the King
his Brother-in-law, and his Wives embraces. Concerning the Prince of Conde the
contention was greater; he was much envied for his Fathers sake, yet the
dignity of his person, and the authority of the Duke of Nevers, who became
surety for him, prevailed that he should be spared.

After this the King calling the King of Navarr, told him that by reason of the
violence and boldness of the Guises, The Kings dissimulation with the King of
Navarr.
and the common people inclining to them, he would advise him to command those
of his household whom he knew most faithful to him, to come to him to the
Louure, to be at hand upon all occasions: This the King of Navarr took in very
good part, sending for those that were stout of hand to lodge about him.

Now it was observed that armed men rambled up and down in the City every
where, and about the Louure also: that the common people grumbled and gave
forth threatening speeches. The Admiral being informed of these things, sent
one to the King to tell him of it. The King answered, that there was no cause
why Coligni should be afraid, for that these things were done by his command
to repress the motions of the people, who were stirred up by the Guises, and
therefore bad him to rest assured. It was also told Teligni that Porters were
seen carrying Arms into the Louure; but he slighted it, saying, that these were
unnecessary suspicions, the Arms being carried in for the winning of a Castle
in the Louure, that was built for sport.

Presently the Duke of Guise, to whom the charge was chiefly committed to see
the business executed, The Duke of Guise excites to the Massacre.
calling together the Captains of the Popish Swissers, and the Tribunes of the
French bands, late in the night he discovered to them what the will of the King
was, that the hour was come wherein by the Kings commandment punishments
should be inflicted on the head, and by consequence upon the whole faction of
the Rebels; that the beast was caught and entangled in the net, and therefore
they must do their endeavoer that he might not escape: Be not therefore (said
he) wanting to so fit an occasion of carrying home a most glorious triumph over
the enemies of the Kingdom; the victory is easy, the spoils will be rich and
great, which you may obtain as the rewards of your good service, without
shedding your own blood.

Then were the Swissers placed about the Louure, unto whom certain bands of
French men were added, and charge was given them that they should suffer none
of the King of Navarrs, nor of the Prince of Conde's men to come forth. Cossen
also was charged with his Harquibushiers to suffer none to come out of the
Admirals house.

Fatal security
That evening Guercius with some others, had proffered Teligni to keep guard in
the Admirals house, suspecting danger; but he told them that there was no need
for them so to trouble themselves, and so with gracious words dismissed them;
by which means it came to pass that none lodged in the Admirals house but
Cornaton, Labonnius, Yolett the Master of his Horse, Merlin his Chaplain,
Paraeus the Kings Chyrurgeon, and some four or five Servants: Teligni was gone
to the next house, where he lay with his Wife. In the Admirals Court were the
five Swissers whom the King of Navarr had sent him.

Then did the Duke of Guise send for John Caronius lately made Provost of
Merchants, whom he commanded to signify to the Aldermen, that they should bid
those in their several Wards to appear in Arms at the Townhouse about
midnight to understand the Kings pleasure: He commanded also Macellus, who was
very gracious with the people, to signify to them that liberty was given them
from the King to take arms to destroy Coligni, and all the other Rebels, that
therefore they should see diligently that they spared none, nor suffered them
any where to be concealed: That order should be taken to do the like in all
other Cities of the Kingdom, who would follow the example of Paris: That the
sign for the beginning the assualt should be the ringing of the little Bell in
the Palace: That the sign whereby they should know one another, should be a
white handkerchief about their left arm, or a white cross in their hats: That
therefore they should come armed in good numbers, and with good courages,
taking care to have candles lighted in their windows, that no tumult might
arise before the sign was given. And thus the Duke of Guise, and the bastard of
Engolisme did all they could that things might be effected according to the
agreement.

At midnight the Queen Mother fearing the Kings wavering, who was somewhat
startled at the horridness of the fact, The Queen-Mothers mischievous mind
reproved him for it, saying, that by his delays he would overslip so fair an
occasion offered by God for the utter vanquishing of his enemies. The King
being netled with this which seemed to charge him with cowardlinesse, commanded
the matter to be put in execution; which word the Queen Mother speedily taking
hold of, caused the little Bell to be rung in St. Germans Church about an hour
before day, The sign of the Massacre.
Aug. 24. being St. Bartholmews day, and on a Sabbath.

Presently the Duke of Guise with Engolisme, and d' Aumal went to the Admirals
house, where Cossen watched; The Admirals house assaulted.
and a noise being raised the Admiral was awakned with it, and heard of a
sedition, yet rested secure relying upon the Kings word and favor: But the
tumult growing greater, when he perceived a Gun to be discharged in his Court,
he then conjectured, though too late, that which was the truth, and so rising
out of his bed and putting on his nightgown, he stood and prayed against the
wall. Then came a servant to Labonnius, and told him that there was one at the
door who by the command of the King desired to be brought to the Admiral;
Labonnius therefore taking the keys, ran down and opened the door; then did
Cossen catch at him, and stabbed him with his dagger, and so with his
Harquebushiers he set upon the rest, killing some and chasing away others: Thus
all things were filled with noise, and another door at the stair foot was
easily broken open, and one of the five Swissers (sent by the King of Navarr)
was slain; yet were the stairs so barricado'd with chests that he could not
presently enter. In the mean time Monsieur Merlin went to prayer with the
Admiral and the rest; and at the end thereof a servant coming in said to the
Admiral, Master, It is God who calls us to himself, they have broken into
the house, neither is there any ability to resist. Then said the Admiral, The
Admirals speech.
I have prepared my self for death a good while ago; shift you for yourselves
if possibly you can, for your endeavor to help me would be in vain: I commend
my soul into Gods hand. It was observed that the Admirals countenance was no
more troubled then if no danger were at hand.

Thuanus relates his words thus; I perceive what is in doing, I was never
afraid of death, and I am ready to undergo it patiently, for which I have long
since prepared my self; I bless God that I shall die in the Lord, through whose
grace I am elected to an hope of everlasting life. I now need no longer any
help of man. You therefore my Friends, get ye hence so soon as ye can, lest ye
be involved in my calamity, and your Wives hereafter say, that I was the cause
of your destruction. The presence of God, to whose goodness I commend my soul
which will presently fly out of my body, is abundantly sufficient for me. Then
all his company gat up into an upper room, and crept out at a window upon the
tiles, and by the benefit of night some escaped.

By this time Cossen with some Swissers of the Duke of Anjou's guard had
removed the chests, and were come up the stairs: One Beheme [a German] was the
first that entered the chamber, who seeing the Admiral sitting there, said, Are
not you the Admiral? I am (quoth he) but you young man should have regard to
my hoary head and old age. But Beheme exchanging no more words, struck him with
his Sword, and first embrued himself in the Admirals blood; then Cossen, The
Admiral slain.
Atinius and the rest followed, and slew him with many wounds. This Atinius
reported afterward that he never saw a man in so present a danger, to have
born out death with so great a constancy.

Then did the Duke of Guise from below ask if the business were done? answer
was made that it was: But, said he, the Duke of Engolisme will not believe it,
except he see him himself, therefore cast down his body out at the window; with
that they hurled it down headlong into the Court all defiled with gore blood;
whereupon the bastard of Engolisme, wiping the blood from his face with his
handkerchief, and thereby knowing him, His body basely abused.
kicked him in a scornful manner: Some say it was the Duke of Guise that did
it. Then one of the Duke of Nevers servants cut off his head, and carried it to
the King and Queen Mother, who caused it to be embalmed, and sent it as a
present to the Pope and the Cardinal of Lorrain, His Head sent to Rome.
to assure them of the death of their capital enemy.

The people fell upon his Corpse as mad men, one cuts off his hands, another his
feet, another his privy members, and for three days space drag his poor
carcass about the streets with all indignity. Then some boys would have
thrown it into the River Seine, but others dragged it to the gallows at
Mountfaucon, where they hung it up by the thighs, and the shoulders downward;
but within few days Francis Monmorency, Yet buried.
who had seasonably withdrawn himself from the danger, caused some trusty
persons to take it down by night, and bury it in the Chapel at Contilia.

This was the end of this brave man, who was the very first Noble man in all
France that durst profess himself a Protestant, His character.
and a helper of them.

He was mavelous zealous in performance of the exercises of Religion: His
piety and zeal.
He used to rise very early, and then putting on his nightgown: and calling his
Servants about him, he went to prayer with them: Then he set time apart to hear
the Deputies of the Churches which were sent to him, or for such like public
businesses. Each other day in the forenoon he had a Sermon preached before him,
after which he returned to his business till dinner, which being ready, his
Servants came in, and there the Admiral standing by the Table, and his Wife by
his side, one of David's Psalms were sung, and a blessing craved upon the meat;
which course he did not only observe at his own house, but every day in his
Camp without intermission. When the cloth was taken away, he presently arose,
and standing, with his Wife by him, either himself or his Chaplain returned
thanks. At supper-time the same was done, both with Prayers and Psalms: And
because he found it difficult to get all his Servants together at bedtime in
regard of their various employments, he caused them all to come in presently
after supper, where after a Psalm he went to prayer with them.

Examples prevalent.
By this his excellent example very many of the French Nobility were enduced and
encouraged to use the same discipline in their Families; the Admiral often
admonishing them, that if they would embrace godliness in the life and power
of it, it was not enough for the Master of the Family to hear Sermons, and to
order his life in an holy and religious manner, unless by his authority and
example he brought all his household to join with him in the same.

When the time for receiving the Lords Supper approached, His manner of
preparing for the Lords Supper.
he used to call his Friends and all his Family to him, and showed them that he
must render an account to God for them as well as for himself: If any discord
was between them, he reconciled it; If any were ignorant, he took care that
they should be better instructed; If any were obstinate, he plainly gave them
notice, that it was better for them to remain at their own homes, then for him
to maintain such ungodly persons in his retinue.

He always esteemed the careful education of Children in good Schools a
singular benefit of God, His care for education of children.
and he called it the Seminary of the Church, saying, that ignorance of good
letters was the cause of error both in Church and State; and that Popery crept
in, and kept in by that means. Hereupon he erected a fair School at Chattilion
under his Castle, in a pleasant and wholesome place, and bestowed great cost on
it, where he maintained Learned Interpreters of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin
tongues; he maintained also many poor boys and young men in that School.

He was modest and moderate in his desires after the world, His contempt of the
world.
for though he had great Honors and Offices conferred upon him, whereby he
might much have enriched himself; yet he added not so much as one Lordship or
plough-land to the Inheritance left him by his Fathers. He husbanded his estate
and household affairs frugally; yet having very many Noblemen and Gentlemen that
resorted to him upon public business, he gave them free and hearty
entertainment, whereby he spent all that he saved at other times by his
frugality. Yea his extraordinary expenses were so great, that he left his Heir
in debt no less then forty thousand Crowns, paying to his creditors yearly
use-money no less then six thousand Crowns.

There was such incredible love and concord betwixt him and his two Brethren,
that all three seemed but to have one mind betwixt them. Brotherly love
He lived fifty three years six months, and eight days, His age.
and was slain Aug. 24. 1572.

He was of a middle stature, of a ruddy color, his members equal and well
compacted; of a mild and cheerful countenance, of a small and pleasant voice,
yet somewhat slow and gentle, of a healthy constitution, of a comely gate and
gesture; abstemious in the use of Wine; of a moderate diet and sleep, for he
never used to sleep above seven hours at the most. His abstinence
After the Edict for Pacification he suffered no day to pass, but before he
went to bed he set down the things in his journall which fell out in the Civil
Wars, and were of any moment; which being found after his death, was carried
to the King, and admired by his very adversaries, who thereby saw his quiet,
constant and composed mind in the midst of his greatest businesses.

When the War was finished, and he was retired to Rochel, no day passed over
his head, His daily exercise.
wherein he did not morning and evening read over one of Calvin's Sermons upon
Job, which History he used to call his Pancrestum or Physic for all diseases,
which greatly comforted his heart in all his afflictions.

Teligni murdered, and his young Son.
By his first Wife he had five Children: He left alive Lewis his eldest
Daughter, married to Monsieur Teligni, who was murdered the same night with
his Father-in-law; then Francis, Odet, and Charles, the two elder survived that
furious Massacre; the third being not eight years old, in whom he took much
delight for his prettiness, was taken by his enemies, and taught to bear the
Cross of Christ in his tender years.

He left his second Wife great with child, who was brought to bed four months
after of a girl; and returning to her native Country in the borders of Savoy,
was not long after committed to prison by the command of P. Philibert D. of
Savoy, for marrying against his consent.

The Life of Joane Queen of Navarr, who was poisoned at Paris a few days
before the bloody Massacre, Anno Christi 1572.
IOane of Albert was daughter to Henry the second, King of Navarr, and to
Margueret of Orleance, Her Parentage
Sister to Francis the first of that name, King of France; and by her Parents
was carefully trained up in the Protestant Religion from her childhood, which
she constantly adhered to all the days of her life. She was married to Anthony
of Bourbon, Son to Charles Duke of Vendosme, Her marriage.
by whom she had Henry the fourth of that name King of France by his Fathers
right, and the second of that name King of Navarr by his Mothers.

This Anthony King of Navarr, in the minority of Charles the ninth, being the
first Prince of the blood, was to be his Protector; but the Queen Mother and
the Guises seeking to draw all the power and management of affairs into their
own hands, labored by all means to withdraw the King of Navarr from the
Protestants; that so by weakening them thereby, they might rule the roast as
they listed: For which end they employed the Ambassador of Spain, Popish
policy.
the Cardinal of Tournon, Escars, and some other household flatterers to him,
who persuaded him, that carrying himself a Neuter, and causing the Prince his
Son to go once to the Mass, the King of Spain would give him the Realm of
Sardinia in recompense for that of Navarr which he had lately taken from him.
The Pope likewise confirms him in this hope, which indeed was but to take from
him all means of recovering his Kingdom of Navarr when he should attempt it.
Yet he being drawn by those Spanish and Lorrain practices, King of Navarr turns
Papist.
estrangeth himself by little and little from the Protestants, solicited the
Queen his Wife to return into the bosom of the Romish Church, and to draw her
children thereunto: But she being better grounded in the truth then so easily
to forsake it, refuses; The Queens constancy.
whereupon a breach grew betwixt them, and the King her Husband falls in love
with one of the Queen-Mothers Maids.

The forenamed Guisian instruments seeing this, persuade him that Heresy is a
sufficient cause of dissolving marriage, Popish policy.
and that therefore he might be divorced from Joane Albert his Wife, as being
infected with the poison of Heresy. They tell him also that notwithstanding
his divorce, he should retain to himself the possession of, and interest in all
the Dominions and Kingdoms belonging to her, of which she should be deprived as
unworthy of them by reason of her Heresy: And instead of her he should marry
Mary Queen of Scots, whose Dowry (say they) is the Kingdom of England, and as
soon as the marriage is contracted, the Pope would strip Elizabeth of it, as
unworthy thereof for the same cause, and settle it upon them, etc.

But the King of Navarr abhorring to be divorced from his Wife, it remained
that he should accept the conditions about the Kingdom of Sardinia; for the
effecting whereof they left no means unassaied; and at last prevailed so far,
that they gulled the King of Navarr, and set him at odds with his Brother the
Prince of Conde, Coligni the Admiral, and the other Protestants. The Queen his
Wife distasting his change of Religion, and adhering to the Popish party,
retired into Podium in the Country of Bearne, where she kept her Court.

The King of Navarr slain.
But it pleased God that shortly after in the siege of Orleance the King of
Navarr was shot into the shoulder, whereof he died about three weeks after.

Treason against the Queen.
The next design was to seize upon the Queen, together with her Son Henry and
her Daughter Katherine, and to bring them before the judgment seat of the
Inquisition of Spain, and the Conspirators doubted not but that Philip King of
Spain would more willingly hearken to this counsel, for that this exploit
would make for the advantage of his Religion, the rescuer whereof he proudly
boasted himself to be: As also the business about the Kingdom of Navarr, which
he unjustly detained, would be hereby dispatched, by the taking away of the
unlawful heirs thereof. They conceived also that the business might easily be
effected by the means of the King of Spain's Soldiers that lay at Bacinona,
ready to be transported into Africa; who, by the ways of the mountains might
come upon, and surprise the Queen of Navarr and her Children at Podium before
they were aware. One Dominik a Captain born in the territories of Bearne, was
singled out to go to the Court of Spain to communicate these counsels with the
King, and to receive further instructions from him. But it pleased God that
this Dominik falling sick by the way, Annas Hespius an honest man that tended
on him, Gods providence over her.
smelt out the occasion of his journey, and by giving timely notice, prevented
the effecting of it; by which deliverance God showed his watchful providence
over his handmaid, this Religious Queen of Navarr.

Her going to Rochel.
Not long after in the time of the third Civil War for Religion, this Queen
having raised great Troops, led them to Rochel, together with her Son Henry,
and her Daughter Katherine, from whence she wrote Letters to the King, the
Queen Mother, the Duke of Anjou, and the Cardinal of Bourbon. Her Letters to
the King, etc.
To the King she wrote, That in the common Cause of Religion, in regard of the
duty which she owed to the King, and the necessity of blood whereby she was
joined to the Prince of Conde, she could not be wanting to him upon such an
occasion, having always rejected the bloody counsels of the Guisian faction,
and especially the Ambition of the Cardinal of Lorrain, from whose friendship
she earnestly dehorted the Duke of Anjou, beseeching him that he would not
yield up himself a minister of his wicked will, in cutting up the Royal stock
by the roots. In her Letter to the Cardinal of Bourbon, she sharply chideth
him for not being warned by his former danger: For how long (says she) will
you be the Suffragan of the Cardinal of Lorrain? Have you forgotten the
treacherous plots that were laid by him for your Head? and are you so credulous
as to believe his oaths, when he swears that he minded no treachery? etc. But
these Letters prevailing nothing, the War went on, and in the Battle of
Bassac the Protestants were worsted, and the Prince of Conde slain; which news
being carried to Rochel, Prince of Conde slain.
the Queen of Navarr posted to the Protestant Army, where before a great
Assembly of Nobles and Soldiers, She encourages the Army
she made an Oration to confirm their minds, praising the virtue and constancy
of the Prince of Conde, who had employed his faithful endeavors even unto
death, in defense of so just a Cause; and thereupon she exhorted the rest to
imitate his example, and to persevere in maintaining the truth of Christ, and
the Liberty of their Country: For (says she) the good Cause is not dead with
the Prince of Conde, neither ought godly men to give way to despondency in such
cases, God having so provided for his Cause, that he gave Conde companions
whilst he lived that may succeed him now he is dead. I have brought with me
mine only Son Henry, and Conde's own Son; who, as he is Heir of his name, so is
he of his virtues: These with other Nobles besides I trust will never be
wanting to so good a Cause. And having thus spoken to the Nobles and Army, and
many things privately to her Son, whetting his youthful spirit, she returned
again to Rochel to provide new succors.

In the mean time a Commission was granted to Terride, Governor of Quercie, to
summon the Queen of Navarr, and the Prince her Son, to leave the party of the
Protestants, and in case of refusal, to invade the Countries of Bearne, Foix
and Navarr, in which he so prevailed, that he reduced all to the Kings
obedience, Her Country surprised,
but only Navaren, which he besieged, as the only strong place that remained to
the Queen.

Hereupon the Queen and the Princes sent the Earl of Montgomery to encounter
him, who with a small Army of five hundred Horse, and four thousand Foot,
forced Terride to raise his siege, and retire himself to Ortheze. His men were
dispersed, and to prevent his gathering them together again, the Earl besieged
him, forced the Town, and to beat Terride with his own weapons, he turned his
Cannons which ht found in the Town against the Castle, whereupon it was
surrendered to him; And regained.
after which all other places were suddenly reduced to the obedience of the
Queen, and the Earl having garrisoned the Towns of his new conquest, speedily
returned to the Princes.

Not long after Peace being concluded betwixt the King and the Protestants, the
King published an Edict, wherein amongst other things he has this passage:

The Kings Edict.
Let it be lawful for the Queen of Navarr the Kings Aunt, besides the benefit
which is common to all those which have the highest jurisdiction, to enjoy the
free exercise of her Religion in the Dukedom of Albert, in the Earldoms of
Armigniac, Foix and Bigorre, in one place of all those Dominions which she
holds in her own possession, or which may be consigned to her by the King; so
that all that will come to that place (though she her self be absent) may enjoy
it without danger. Moreover lest any doubt should arise concerning the right
meaning of the Queen of Navarr the Kings Aunt, as also of the Princes of Conde,
both Father and Son; the King does declare, That he acknowledges them all for
his faithful Cosens and Subjects; and that they and all that have managed the
Wars under them shall be free, and not bound to render an account for moneys
received or taken, etc.

Popish subtilty
The Peace being concluded, the malice of the Popish party was no whit abated;
whereupon they sought by Policy to effect that which they could not by power;
and for this end Biron was sent to Rochel in the Kings name to treat with the
Queen of Navarr about the marriage between her Son Henry, The match propounded.
and the Kings Sister, the Lady Margaret; for which end he invited them to come
to the Court, where businesses might be fully debated and concluded: He added
also that hereby a fair occasion was offered from God to settle their affairs
in peace, etc.

The Queen of Navarr having returned thanks in a set Oration, answered that the
matter was of that importance that she would take time to her self in
deliberating of it; and albeit she did profess and acknowledge that that
affinity would be a great ornament and profit to her, yet she was for the
present doubtful what to do in regard of the near kindred betwixt her Son and
the Lady, and the difference in their Religions: Her pious care about it.
Wherefore (says she) I will consult with my Divines, and what I shall find to
make for Gods glory, and the good of the Kingdom, and that may stand with a
good conscience, that I will readily and willingly embrace, being desirous in
all that I may to satisfy the pleasure of the King and Queen, to whom I owe
all due observance.

Yet there remained two scruples which troubled the King and the Queen of
Navarr, in respect of the place and manner of celebrating the marriage: For the
Queen would not have it done at Paris, which City being extremely addicted to
the Popish Religion, she feared was long since an enemy to the Family of
Navarr, and therefore she judged it not safe to have it celebrated there. The
King on the contrary said, That it would make for a certain sign of sure Peace
to have the celebrity of the marriage seen in the Metropolis of the Kingdom, as
it were on a public Theater. The other doubt was about the manner of the
celebration. For the Queen of Navarr being most addicted to the reformed
Religion, would never endure that it should be contracted after the Popish
manner, nor the Queen Mother after the fashion of the Protestants. But the King
prayed the Queen of Navarr to pardon him in that matter, for that it would tend
to his great dishonor if he should suffer the marriage of his Sister to be
solemnized in any other form then according to that ancient Religion which he
had received from his forefathers; therefore to resolve this doubt, there was
time taken on both sides.

In the mean time the Queen of Navarr consulted with the Ministers of the
Reformed Religion what might be done in this matter. Some of them insisting
upon the simplicity of Gods Word, said, Ministers dissent about it.
that it was utterly unlawful for such marriages to be contracted, especially
by illustrious Personages, in whom it is more dangerous because of more
public concernment. Others judging that this marriage would be a sure, and as
it were an everlasting foundation of a most happy Peace, assented to it.

The Queen of Navarr and the Protestant Nobles striving to find out remedies,
both for the Kingdom which was grievously afflicted, and for their own bruised
estates, liked these men's judgments best; and so the business proceeded, and
the conditions of marriage were agreed upon between the parties. The King was
to give his Sister for her Dowry three hundred thousand Crowns, each Crown
being valued at four and fifty Shillings.

About this time the Queen of Navarr being zealously careful to propagate the
Protestant Religion in Cantabria (a Province of the Jurisdiction of Navarr) she
sent Pastors who had learned the Country language, which is understood by
almost none of the neighbors, Her zeal to propogate the Gospel.
and was before believed that it could not be written. She took care also that
the New Testament, the Catechism, and the Prayers used in the Church of Geneva,
should be translated into the Gascoine or Cantabrian tongue; which she caused
to be printed at Rochel in a most fine letter, and sent to them. And so upon
the earnest solicitation of the King, she went the March following, She goes to
the Court.
Anno Christi 1572. from Rochel to the Court, which was then at Blois, with
great attendance, where it is incredible to think what welcome she had on all
sides; especially from the King and his Brethren; who yet when all was done,
could boastingly say to his Mother, Now Madam, have not I quit my self well?
The Kings dissimulation.
Let me alone, and I will bring them all into the net.

In April following were the Articles concluded concerning the marriage of the
Prince of Navarr with the Kings Sister. And in the beginning of May the King
woed the Queen of Navarr again to come to Paris, for preparing things fitting
for the Marriage, which she at last consented to; She goes to Paris.
and so May the 6. she took her journey from Blois and came to Paris, May the
15. After which she went from place to place in the City into sundry houses and
shops, to find out such things as might tend to the adorning of the day of so
great a solemnity.

The Queen Mother in the mean time, who could not endure this good Queen, and
yet not finding with what color she could dispatch her with the rest; though
she feared the greatness of her spirit in case she should survive them, and
judged it impossible to work upon the flexibility of the young Prince her Son
whilst she lived. She therefore consulted with one Rene an Italian, whose
practice was to impoyson things; by whose devilish help she brought her
accursed purpose to pass. This Rene sold the Queen of Navarr certain Perfumes,
whereby he found out the way to poison her therewith; She is poisoned.
and afterward he was heard to make his brags of it, saying also that he had
the like in store for two or three more, who suspected no such matter.

Her sickness, and religious carriage therein.
By this means June the 4. this good Queen fell sick of a continued Feavor, and
(though others slighted it, yet) she perceiving by the strength of her disease
that she should not long continue, prepared her self to receive from the hand
of God her merciful Father, that which he had appointed concerning her: And
calling her Son Henry, she commanded him above all things carefully to serve
God, Her charge to her Son.
according to the confession of Faith wherein he had been educated, and not to
suffer himself to be plucked or diverted from the same by the smoaky pleasures
and delights of the world, and other incentives unto vices; and that he should
take care that the Constitutions concerning the same which she had published in
the Principality of Berne, and the lower Navarr be inviolably kept: That he
should thoroughly purge his Family, and cause all bad Counselors to be gone
from thence, which thought ill concerning God: As also, all flatterers, the
abusers of Princes, and all other vicious Persons: That he should retain with
him all good men, as Bellovarius, Francutius, and Betulus, who were men of an
unblameable life: That he should have a special care of his Sister Katherine,
using her gently and lovingly without bitterness, causing her to be brought up
in the Town of Berne, in the same School of godliness which himself had been
trained up in; and when she should grow marriagable, that he should marry her
to a Prince of equal dignity, professing the same Religion: That he should
love Henry Bourbon his Cosen German, as his Brother; and also Francis Marquess
of Contium, taking care that as great concord as may be, be cherished betwixt
them and the Admiral Coligni, for the advancement and propagation of Gods
glory. Lastly, she makes her Son her Heir; entreating the King, the
Queen Mother, the Duke of Anjou, and the Duke of Alenson, the Kings Brethren,
to undertake the Protection of the Prince her Son, and of Katherine his Sister,
and to permit them the free exercise of their Religion.

Then she requested that she might have such nigh about her as might comfort
her in her sickness out of the Word of God; as also to pray with her and for
her, according to that of Saint James, Is any sick amongst you? let him call
for the Elders of the Church, James 5.14.
and let them pray over him, knowing that the Prayers of a righteous man
prevail much with God.

According to her desire, a Minister resorted to her, showing out of the
Scriptures, Her conference with the Minister.
that Christians ought in all things to submit to the will of God, as to the
Father of spirits, that they may live; and albeit by reason of the severity of
his chastisements, sometimes it may seem to our flesh, as if they were sent for
no other end but for our destruction; yet ought we to consider that the just
God can do nothing but justly, and being withal a merciful Father, he cannot
but therein seek the welfare of his afflicted Children.

To this she replied, I take all this as sent from the hand of God my most
merciful Father. Nor have I, during this extremity, feared to die, much less
murmured against God for inflicting this chastisement upon me, knowing that
whatsoever he does, he does so order the same, as that in the end it shall turn
to my everlasting good.

Then said the Minister, The causes of sicknesses and diseases must be sought
beyond the course of Physic, which always looks to the corruption of the
humors, or of the distemper to the more noble parts of the body. And though it
be not amiss to have respect to these things as to secondary causes, yet ought
we to ascend higher, namely to the first, even to God himself, who disposes of
all his creatures, even as best pleases him. He it is that makes the wound,
and heals; that kills, and makes alive, Deuteronomy. 32.39. and therefore to him we
ought to direct our Prayers for our comfort in all our griefs and sufferings,
and in the end to expect full deliverance, seeing it is easy with him to
restore our health, if it stand with his his good pleasure.

To this she answered, That she depended wholly upon Gods Providence, knowing
that all things are wisely disposed by him; and therefore she besought him to
furnish her with all such graces as he saw to be necessary for her salvation.
As for this life (said she) I am in a good measure weaned from it, in regard of
the afflictions which have followed me from my youth hitherto; but especially
because I cannot live without offending my good God, with whom I desire to be
with all my heart.

Then said the Minister, Yet long life how full of troubles soever it be, is to
be esteemed amongst the blessings of God, Long life a blessing.
seeing his promise implies so much; and not only so, but because our lives may
many ways serve to his glory; and long life is not only an honor, but a
pledge of his favor: Even as it is to him whom a Prince long implies in his
service, having had experience of his fidelity many years together. Hereupon he
earnestly requested her to pray, that if it was the will of God he would employ
her yet longer in his service, for the further enlargement of his Gospel, and
that he would grant unto her such recovery of health, and such a good
disposition of body, that with renewed strength she might be enabled to finish
her course much more nobly then ever heretofore.

To this she replied, That in regard of her own particular, her life was not
dear unto her, seeing so long as she lived in this frail flesh, she was still
prone and apt to sin against God; only she said her care was somewhat for her
Children which God had given her, in respect that they should be deprived of
her in their young years; yet (says she) I doubt not, but though he should
please to take me from them, himself will become a Father to them, and a
Protector over them, as he has ever been to me in my greatest afflictions, and
therefore I commit them wholly to his government and fatherly care.

Then the Minister blessed God for working in her Majesty this assurance of
Faith, and ability to cast her care upon the Providence of God, entreating her
still to persevere therein, which would sufficiently seal unto her the truth of
her Faith. And thus (says he) did the Patriarchs in times past, commit the
care of their posterity into the hands of God, as may appear by the several
blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: But yet he told her that it was very
requisite that she should make choice of such, who for their sincerity both in
life and Doctrine, might continue to water in these young Princely Plants, the
seeds of Piety that had been sown in them by her so great pains and industry;
seeing it was to be hoped that the example of her Faith and constancy in the
service of God, wherein she had gone before them, would serve as a perpetual
inducement to them to follow her noble virtues. And whereas she had declared
that death was not terrible to her, because it was the way by which she was to
pass to her eternal rest, he told her that Christians had little cause to fear
death, in regard that they should not die at all, according to that of our
Savior, He that lives and believes in me shall never die, Joh. 8.51. For,
says he, to speak properly, death is no death to them, but a sweet sleep,
being often so called in the Scriptures: and therefore Christ for their sakes
has overcome and triumphed over it in his own person; so as now we may cry out
with St. Paul, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? 1
Cor. 15.55.


After this he admonished her to make confession of her sins before God,
showing that bodily diseases tend to the dissolution of nature, and that death
was the wages of sin: further declaring, that by this her chastisement she
might discern what she had deserved if God should enter into judgment with her,
not only in regard of the fall of our first Parents, in which guilt she was
enwrapped as well as others; but also by her own personal sins, seeing the
best in the world are in themselves but poor, miserable and wretched sinners;
yea if the Lord should punish us according to our demerits, we could expect
nothing at his hands but eternal death and damnation.

At these words she began with her eyes and hands lifted up to Heaven, to
acknowledge that the sins which she had committed against the Lord were
innumerable, and therefore more then she was able to reckon up; but yet she
hoped that God for Christ's sake, in whom she put her whole trust, would be
merciful to her.

From hence the Minister took occasion to declare at large upon what ground she
was to expect the fruit of this mercy of God in Christ: Adding, The whole have
no need of a Physician, but the sick. And Christ says, He came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. And, that he is ready to fill the hungry
with good things, whereas in the mean while, he sends the rich empty away. Of
these things (says he) you ought so much the rather to be persuaded in your
counscience, by how much the more the holy Spirit of God witnesses to your
spirit that you are the Child of God, and enables you to cry Abba, Father: For
what is Faith else but a firm trust and assurance of the good will of God
manifested toward us in his blessed Son?

But the Minister fearing lest by his long discourse he might be troublesome,
or cause her too much to spend her spirits, would have given over; which she
taking notice of, earnestly requested him not to forbear speaking to her about
these matters of life and eternal salvation; adding that now she felt the want
of it, in regard that since her coming to Paris she had been somewhat remiss
in hearing such exhortations out of the Word of God: And therefore I am the
more glad (said she) to receive comfort out of it in this my great extremity.

Then did the Minister endeavor to set before her the happiness of heaven,
and what those joys were that the faithful possess in the presence of God,
which the Scriptures intending to discover, tell us, that Eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what
those things are, which God has prepared for them that love him. For, says
he, it is as if a King minding greatly to honor some Noble personage, should
bring him to his Court, and there show him his state and attendance, his
Treasures, with all his most precious Jewels: Eved so will the Lord one day
reveal to all his Elect and faithful people, his magnificence and glory, with
all the Treasures of his Kingdom, after he has gathered them home to himself;
decking and adorning them with light, incorruption and immortality. Therefore
(says he) since this happiness is so great, your Highness ought to be the
less solicitous about leaving this transitory life, and know that you are to
change this earthly Kingdom for an heavenly Inheritance; These temporal good
things which vanish and come to nothing in the using, to enjoy for ever those
things which are eternal and everlasting. For your faith being now firmly set
upon our Lord Jesus Christ, you may be assured to obtain eternal salvation by
him. Then did he proceed to propose to her this question; Madam, Do you verily
believe that Jesus Christ came into the world to save you? and do you expect
the full forgiveness of all your sins by the shedding of his blood for you?

Yea (said she) I do, believing that he is my only Savior and Mediator, and I
look for salvation from none other, knowing that he has abundantly satisfied
for the sins of all his people, and therefore I am assured that God for his
sake, according to his gracious promise in him, will have mercy upon me.

During all the time of her sickness, she ceased not to continue in such
fruitful and comfortable communications, sometimes intermixing them with most
affectionate sighs to God, as a testimony of that hope and desire she had of
enjoying his presence, often uttering these words: Her Prayer.
O my God, in thy good time, deliver me from this body of death, and from the
miseries of this present life, that I may no more offend thee, and that I may
attain to the felicity which thou in thy Word have promised to bestow upon me.
Neither did she manifest her pious affection by words only, but by her constant
and cheerful countenance, so far forth as the vehemence of her disease would
suffer; thereby giving a clear testimony to all that beheld her, that the fear
of death could not drive her from the steadfastness of her Faith. The Minister
also went often to prayer with her, the usual tenor whereof was this which
follows;

A Prayer.
O Lord our God, We confess here before thy Divine Majesty, that we are
altogether unworthy of thine infinite mercies, by reason of our manifold
iniquities, and that we are so far from deserving to be heard of thee in our
requests, that we are rather worthy that thou should reject both our persons,
and our prayers; But seeing it has pleased thee to make us a gracious promise
of hearing and granting our requests, we humbly beseech thee freely to forgive
all our offenses, and to cover them under the obedience and righteousness of
thy dear Son, that through him our selves and our services may be well pleasing
unto thee. For Lord we acknowledge that all our afflictions are measured out to
us by thine hand, who art a most just Judge, in regard that we have every way
provoked thee to wrath by our infinite sinnings against thee, yea by our
rebellions which now testify against us. For alas Lord, our life has been no
way answerable to that perfect obedience which thou by thy holy Law do justly
require at our hands, which we from day to day do transgress, and therefore do
here cast down our selves at this time before thy glorious presence,
unfeignedly acknowledging our misery and wretchedness from the very bottom of
our hearts. Yet Lord mercy is with thee, and because thou art our Father,
therefore thou desire not the death of sinners, but rather that they should
convert and live. For this cause we now fall down before the throne of thy
grace, with confidence of obtaining thy wonted mercy which thou have promised
to such as call upon thee in truth; beseeching thee who art the Father of
mercies, to have compassion on all such as thou have humbled under thy mighty
hand, but more especially on this thy Servant the Queen, who lies here before
thee sick of a dangerous disease; that as thou have righteously afflicted her
for her sins (which she also does with us acknowledge) so it would please
thee in pardoning them all to her for thy beloved Sons sake, to grant that she
may profit by this thy correcting hand for the time to come: Above all O Lord,
give her a sweet sense, yea full assurance of thy eternal joys, that so she may
with the greater patience take down this bitter potion ministered unto her from
thy hand, and that the sole desire of enjoying thy presence may cause her to
forget all worldly greatness and magnificence, knowing that they are nothing in
respect of the glory which is now set before her. Endue her also with meekness
of mind to bear the tediousness of her affliction, for though the spirit be
willing, yet the flesh is weak, yea full of resisting and unbelief; that so
receiving all things from thee as from a Father, she may the more willingly
submit her will to thine. And because, O good God, thou have made her hitherto
an happy Instrument for the advancement of thy glory, and defense of thy poor
afflicted people, we pray thee, if it may stand with thy good pleasure, restore
her to health again, that so the excellent work that thou have by her means
begun, may not be left unperfected; but by virtue of this her deliverance, she
may with renewed strength undertake the same in better sort then ever
heretofore, especially for the well educating and training up the Children that
thou have given her. But, Lord, if thou have a purpose now to call her home to
thy self, who are we that we should contradict thy holy will? Only we pray thee
that thou would confirm her more and more in the knowledge of thy blessed
Gospel, and thereby also in the certainty of her salvation, which thou have
given her by Faith in thy Son Jesus Christ, that thus she may not cease to
sanctify and call upon thy holy Name to her last breath. And as touching our
selves, who are here by thy good providence gathered together about her, being
in bodily health, give us to know the uncertainty and brevity of our life, that
so according to our duty, we may behold the same in this mirror that thou have
set before us, as knowing that even the greatest in the world are subject to
the same calamities as well as the small, that so our chief care may be to
employ the remainder of our time to thine honor and service. All which we
crave of thee in the Name of Jesus Christ thy Son, our only Mediator and
Advocate, Amen.

During the time of prayer, she ceased not with hands and eyes lift up to
Heaven, to fetch many deep sighs, especially when mention was made of the mercy
of God in Christ, which he extends to poor sinners; so that all present might
evidently see that her heart and affections were joined to the Prayer that was
made by, and for her. And whilst she thus lay, she still continued in her holy
desires to depart hence that she might be with Christ, taking great delight in
the holy and Christian exhortations which were made to her by many godly and
learned men, who came to visit her, to whom also she manifested no small
testimonies of that faith and hope which she had in God, touching the salvation
of her soul, by her holy and savory speeches, which for brevity sake are
omitted.

Yea although the Lord exercised her much with the sense of her inward disease,
Her patience.
yet could you not at any time discern any speech favoring of coffeehouse
or impatience to proceed out of her mouth, nay scarcely so much as a groan.

But if at any time she found any refreshings from the violence of her disease
(there being no malady so vehement which has not some intermissions and
breathing times) she declared her willingness to obtain the recovery of her
former health, and for that end she refused no good means prescribed for her by
her learned Physicians. Again, when she perceived her sickness to increase
upon her, and that she grew worse and worse, she was no whit appaled thereat,
but showed her self to be armed with an invincible constancy to undergo the
utmost that death could do against her, preparing her self willingly for that
last conflict.

And when she saw her Ladies and Gentlewomen weeping about her bed, she blamed
them for it, saying, Weep not for me I pray you, for as much as God does by
this sickness, call me hence to enjoy a better life, and now I may enter into
the desired Haven, toward which this frail vessel of mine has been a long
time steering: Yet she showed her self grieved that she wanted opportunity to
reward them, and many more of her Family and Train which had done her faithful
service, as she could have wished, excusing her self to them, and professing
that it was not want of good will, but her being prevented by this her sudden
sickness: But (said she) I will not fail to give order about the same to the
utmost of my ability.

In the end, perceiving her strength to decay more and more, she gave order to
have her last Will and Testament made, and thereby settled her outward estate.
And the 8 of June, which was the day before she died, she called for a
Minister, and finding that she was drawing nigh unto her end, she desired him
to speak somewhat largely of the temptations which Satan is wont to assail Gods
Elect withal in their last conflict.

To this the Minister answered, Indeed that is the hour wherein the sworn enemy
of all the faithful does most busily bestirre himself, if possible to deprive
them of the comfort of their salvation, not sparing especially at that time, to
set upon them with might and slight, but yet even then the Lord is not, nor
will be wanting to his, filling their hearts with such joy and comfort of the
Holy Ghost, as shall make them in the end more then conquerours. His first
Engine wherewith he would drive them to despair, is by presenting before their
eyes the innumerable heaps of their sins and pollutions, wherewith they have
been any way defiled in their whole life: and then he presents to them Gods
justice, before which no flesh can be able to subsist, unless it were pure and
spotless; whence he infers, that such miserable sinners can expect and look
for nothing but utter death and condemnation. But against these assaults we
must as David, Psalm. 52. set the infinite multitudes of Gods compassions, which
do infinitely surpass the multitudes of our sins. And as for the justice of
God, we confess that no creature that is defiled by sin can abide to be
strictly examined by it, if God should call us to a severe account: but we know
that God will never enter into judgment with those that believe in his Son, but
imputes unto them that righteousness and obedience which was accomplished by
him, which is sufficient to oppose against the justice of God; therefore in it
alone we must expect to stand before his face, and not by our own dignity and
worthiness. Indeed, if we were to appear before the seat of Justice to receive
there what we have deserved, we had good reason to be overwhelmed in utter
despair, but turning our eyes upon him, who being the eternal Son of God, has
clothed himself with our humane nature, to bear on him the same punishment that
was due to our sins, and thereby has acquitted us, then Gods justice does no
whit affright us, but rather yields us assured comfort, because God being just,
cannot require the same debt twice. Having therefore received full and perfect
satisfaction from Christ, whom he has ordained to be our surety, and who has
paid our debts for us, thence we gather assurance that he will no more require
it at our hands. To which purpose these sentences are to be well observed. It
is Christ who has born our grief, and carried our sorrows. The chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. That we all like
sheep have gone astray, and have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord
has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Christ is our peace, and the
propitiation for our sins. The Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world. Upon these considerations Gods justice need not terrify such as believe
in Christ, of whose righteousness and redemption they are made partakers;
seeing that Jesus Christ, who knew no sin, was made sin (that is an oblation
for sin) for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

I grant (said he) that these things belong not to all indifferently, but only
unto such as believing in the Son of God, do wholly cast themselves upon the
merit of his death and passion, which as St. Peter says, is sufficient for
their salvation, Act. 4.12.

Then did he ask her, whether she placed her whole trust and confidence on
Christ crucified, who died for her sins, and rose again for her justification.
To this the godly Queen answered, that she neither expected salvation,
righteousness, nor life from any else, but only from her Savior Jesus Christ,
being assured that his merit alone did abundantly suffice for the full
satisfaction for all her sins, albeit they were innumerable.

This being your faith Madam (quoth the Minister) you cannot come into
condemnation, but are passed from death to life, neither need you fear Gods
Seat of Justice, since it is turned into a Throne of mercy and grace unto you,
and therefore the hour of death will be exceeding welcome to you, being but a
sweet passage into a far better life; as also the time in which all tears shall
be wiped from your eyes, therefore I beseech you Madam think often of that
sweet Text, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, for they rest from
their labors and their works follow them. Now the time approaches wherein you
shall enjoy the beatificiall vision, the society of your Husband Christ, the
fellowship of the blessed Angels and celestial Spirits with the holy Patriachs,
Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs of Christ, partaking with them in the same
felicity and glory. He also further said, Madam, If it should please God by
this your sickness to put an end to this weary Pilgrimage of yours, and to
call you home to himself, as by some evident signs it appears that he will, Are
you willing to go unto him? To this she answered with much Christian courage,
Yea with all my heart.

Then said he, Good Madam, Open the eyes of your Faith, and behold Jesus your
great Redeemer sitting at the right hand of his Father, reaching out his hand
to receive you to himself. Are you, Madam, willing to go unto him? Yes I assure
(says she) most willing, and much more willing then to linger here below in
this world, where I see nothing but vanity. Then he asked her if they should go
to prayer with her: which she desiring, they performed it by her, whilst this
pious Lady manifested her ardent affection in calling upon God.

The Minister Absolves her.
Prayer being ended, the Minister discerning in her the undoubted testimonies of
unfeigned Repentance, and of the sorrow that she conceived for the offenses
which she had committed against God, together with the assured confidence which
she had in his mercies, as a Minister of the Gospel, and Ambassador of the Son
of God, by the authority given to him, having the word of reconciliation
committed to him; he assured her in the Name of Christ, that all her sins
were forgiven by God, and that they should never come in account against her at
his judgment seat; yea, that she should no more doubt thereof, then if the Son
of God from Heaven should say unto her, Daughter be of good comfort, thy sins
are forgiven thee. And to the end that troubled consciences might the better be
quieted, Christ has used these words speaking to his Ministers, saying, Whose
sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. And the reason is, because the Word
which they pronounce is not the word of a mortal man, but of the immortal
God, being of no less weight then if himself uttered the same. Then he asked
her Majesty if she accepted of so gracious a message which assured her of the
free pardon of all her sins: Yes (says she) with all my heart, and make no
doubt thereof.

The Admiral came to her.
Not long after came in the Admiral Coligni, and with him another Minister, to
whom she gave ear a good space together, his speech tending to prepare her for
death; and when he had finished his speech, he also prayed with her, which she
attended to with great affection. Then she requested that those two Ministers
might stay all night with her in her chamber, and that they would in no wise
leave her.

The greatest part of this night was spent in holy admonitions; which these
Ministers gave to this gracious Lady one after another; besides which she
required them to read to her some Chapters of the holy Scriptures which were
pertinent to her condition, and so they read out of St. John's Gospel, from the
fourteenth, to the end of the seventeenth Chapter. After which they went to
prayer with her, which being ended, the Queen desired to take some rest; but it
was not long ere she commanded them to read again: Whereupon one of them made
choice of certain of David's Psalms, full of ardent and affectionate prayers,
suting to this Princess present condition by reason of her affliction; and for
a conclusion read Psalm. 31. wherein the Prophet, amongst other things, does
commend his spirit into the hands of God, Because, says he, thou have redeemed
me, O Lord God of truth.

Then the Queen willed them to pray with her again; and thus was the most part
of that night spent in such holy exercises; during all which time the Ministers
never discerned in her the least sign of impatience, notwithstanding the
violence of her affliction. Yea whereas immediately before her sickness she had
showed how affectionately she was bent to provide things most magnificent for
the day of her Sons Marriage, according as the State of so great an alliance
required; yet it was admirable to observe, that after this sickness had seized
on her, God wrought in her such a neglect and forgetfulness of all such
matters, that she never showed to have so much as a thought thereof.

This night being thus spent, and past by this Noble Queen, she persevering in
the expressions of such like affections, and ardency of faith, Her death.
the next morning between eight and nine of the clock, she departed this life
to take possession of a far better, sweetly yielding up her spirit into the
hands of God, June 9. Anno Christi 1572. being the sixth day after she fell
sick, and of her age 44.

She had her perfect speech and memory, even to the hour of her death, showing
not only that staidness and soundness of judgment (which ever in times past
she had) in the care about the salvation of her soul, but also in the well
settlement of her worldly affairs.

The King made as if he had conceived great grief for her death, putting on
mourning attire, wherein also the whole Court followed his example, lest by
this sudden accident their Counsels and futurh desperate designs might be
prevented.

Also to avoid all jealousies and suspicions of her being poisoned by reason of
her sudden sickness and death, her body was opened by sundry expert and
learned Doctors of Physic and Chyrurgery, who found her Heart and Liver very
sound, only some scirrousnesse on one side of her Lungs; but her Head they
might not open, where the malady lay, by which means the discovery of it was
prevented. Anonymus.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.
A TABLE OF The Principal things contained in this Part OF THE LIVES.
A.
AFflictions profitable to Gods children. p. 202 Antinomians practice. 52
Apostasy plagued by God. 25 Assurance to be sought. 211 Astrologers are liars.
99
B.
BIble is translated into English. 4 Bishops enemies to godly Ministers, and to
the power of Godliness. 1, 2, 20, 21, 28, 29, 30, 41, 46, 48, 53, 58, 61, 63,
89, 106, 109, 146, 148, 149, 162, 163, 185, 189, 191, 201, 223 A Bishop
enjoined to ask a Minister forgiveness in his own Congregation. 163
C.
CHarity eminent. 88, 151, 155, 168, 174, 191, 202, 225 Charity of good
Ministers. 2, 13, 14, 24, 76, 186, 237, 240 Comfort at death. 142 Comforting
afflicted consciences. 16, 173, 202, 204 Constancy. 151, 171, 297 Contentation.
55, 177, 171 Conversion. 27, 86, 99, 144, 184, 199 Conversion of a Jailer. 9
Courage 245, 270, 283 Courage of Gods Ministers. 9, 43, 109, 163, 186, 214,
222, 239
D.
DEath desired 203 Death not feared 208 Devil dispossessed by Prayer 91, 216
E.
ENvy. 46 Examples prevalent. 294
F.
FAith. 86, 180, 205, 207, 267, 285 Family cared for, and well instructed. 5,
72, 164, 169, 190, 226, 248, 262, 267, 295 Fasting and Prayer. 171, 174, 200,
203, 228 Fidelity. 27, 246 Flight refused in time of persecution. 9, 10 Flight
embraced. 12 Friendship sincere. 391, 221 Frugality. 174
G.
GRatitude. 27, 39, 176
H.
DAnger of unprofitable Hearers. 81 Heretic burned. 147 Hospitality. 200, 202
Humility. 249 Humility of Gods Ministers. 25, 39, 55, 151, 174, 179, 180, 182,
187, 191, 206, 209, 210, 222, 224
I.
INgratitude. 56 Joy unspeakable. 25, 202
L.
Life exemplary. 81 Long life, why a blessing. 303
M.
WHat makes a complete Man 81 What makes a complete Minister 82 Meekness of
Gods Ministers. 25, 174 207 Ministers cared for by God. 5, 6, 10, 11, Ministers
dearly loved. 195 Ministers falsely accused. 52 Ministry of the Word
successful. 21, 25, 30, 67, 79, 87, 89, 147, 158, 164, 167, 186, 201, 213,
217, 231
P.
PArents honored. 219 Painfulnesse in Preaching. 1, 5, 14, 22, 41, 46, 56,
157, 164, 173, 183, 185, 187, 191, 200, 210, 219, 222, 223, 231, 232 Papists
enemies to faithful Ministers. 5, 8, 9, 29 Patience. 89, 207, 283, 307
Peacemakers blessed. 15, 210 Persecutors plagued by God. 186 Persecution. 251
Poverty of Gods Ministers 29, 55 Prayer frequent and powerful. 25, 86, 91,
191, 196 The Benefits of it. 205 Predictions and Prophesies. 7, 12, 90, 263
Providence special. 5, 10, 11, 12, 33, 36, 37, 42, 54, 59, 62, 89, 91, 144,
145, 150, 161, 164, 184, 187, 206, 213, 215, 216, 217, 239, 261, 263, 265, 270,
298 Prudence. 40, 60, 72, 110, 158, 167, 177, 224, 237, 264
S.
Sabbath Breakers plagued by God. 160, 165 Sabbath sanctified. 227 Self-denial.
40, 89, 185, 186, 221, 230 Sin the greatest of evils. 205 Slanders cast upon
Christ's Ministers. 48, 147 Sleep moderated. 19 Studiousnesse of Ministers. 9,
24, 34, 79, 153, 172, 191 Swearing how prevented. 203 Sympathy with the
Churches sufferings. 25, 177
T.
Thankfulness in Afflictions. 211 Thanksgiving excellent. 17
W.
WOrd of God highly prized. 19, 26, 153, 189, 203, 219 World contemned. 22, 24,
204
Z.
Zeal. 103, 238, 301 Zeal for the Sabbath. 72 Zeal against Sectaries and
Separatists. 72, 151, 176, 178, 191, 197
FINIS.
Errata in this Part of the Lives.
PAge 35. line 14. dele long. l. 27. read demeanor. p. 45. l. 4. dele
therefore. l. 32. r. he for they. p. 47. l. 6. r. a for as. p. 62. l. 35. r.
bought for brought. p. 70. l. 35. dele be. p. 71. l. 13. put in of. p. 83. l.
43. r. decease for disease. p. 85. l. 12. r. skillful for skill. p. 94. l. 22.
r. he took for then an took. p. 105. l. 1. r. had. l. 2. r. flower. p. 134. l.
41. dele and. p. 151. l. 45. r. heal for zeal. p. 168. l. 17. r. 1635 for 1631.
p. 179. l. 18. r. yet for yea p. 189. l. 2. r. three penny for third. p. 217.
l. 31. r. them for him. p. 246. l. 26. r. preferred for preserved. p. 250. l.
5. r. your for our. p. 262. l. 2. r. now for new. p. 288. l. 20. r. Chieftains
for Christians. p. 293. l. 29. r. erected for elected. p. 298. l. 27. r.
lawful for unlawful. Some other literal faults there are, which are easily
amended.


