Wilhelmus Conquestor Rex Anglia Dux Norman: etc.


THE Life and Death OF WILLIAM, Surnamed The Conqueror: King of ENGLAND, and
Duke of NORMANDY. Who dyed Anno Christi, 1087.

By Samuel Clarke, late Minister of Bennet-Finck London.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller at the sign of the Star, at the West end of
St Paul's, 1671.

THE Life and Death of WILLIAM Surnamed the CONQUEROR KING of ENGLAND, and
Duke of NORMANDY: Who dyed Anno Christi, 1087.
THE Normans issued out of Denmark, His Pedigree.
and Norway, the Inhabitants of which Countries in those times were so fruitful
in the Procreation of Children, that they were forced oft-times to send
multitudes abroad to seek new habitations. Amongst whom there was one or Rolls.
Roll, a great Commander, attended with many lusty lads, who in the days of
King Alfrid, first landed in England; where finding no room empty, nor any
employment, was content (upon some relief received) to seek employment
elsewhere; which he did against Rambalt Duke of Frize, and Reiver Duke of
Chaumont, and Henalt, with whom he often encountered, and made great spoils in
their Countries. Then passing along the Coast of France, he entered the mouth of
the River Seine, and sacked all the Country up to Roan: where the People having
been a little before miserably spoiled by an other Invader, were so terrified
by the coming of these new Forces, that the Archbishop of Roan, by the peoples
consent, offered him the obedience of that City and Country upon condition that
he would protect them, and govern them according to the Laws of Christ, and the
customs of their Country. For Charles the Simple, the present King of France,
being otherwise embroiled about the right of his Crown, neglected to defend
them: So that Roll shortly after attempted the Conquest of Paris itself, and
therein gave some notable overthrowes to some of the French Commanders: So that
King Charles was forced to buy his Peace by entering into alliance with, and
giving over to Roll, his right to Normandy, (formerly called Nuestria). And
hereupon Roll turned Christian, and was baptized by the name of Robert.

Thus he came to his Estate, which he governed with such Judgment and equity,
that he left his Name honorable, and his successors a firm foundation to
build upon. From him in a direct line descended six Dukes of Normandy that
inherited that Dukedom, the last of which, was also called Robert, who (out of
blind devotion) resolving to visit Christ's Sepulcher, acquainted his Nobles
therewith: They dissuaded him all they could, because he had no issue, and
Allaire Earl of Britain, and the Earl of Burgundy were already contending
which of them should succeed him, whereby their Country was like to become a
Prey to the Soldiers, from which he in conscience was bound to secure it.

The Duke told them, that he had a little Bastard, His Birth and Parentage.
of whom he had great hopes, whom he would invest with that Duchy as his Heir,
and therefore he prayed them thenceforth to take him for their Lord. And (said
he) To show my trust in him, I will make the Earl of Britain his Governor,
and Seneschal of Normandy; and the King of France shall be his Guardian, and so
I will leave him to God and your Loyalty.

Shortly after the Bishops and Barons did their homage to this base Son, named
William, whom He is made Duke of Normandy
his Father begat on one Arlet, a mean woman of Falaise. And Duke Robert
delivered the Child with his own hand to Henry first King of France, whom he
had greatly assisted in keeping his Crown against an other Competitor: and
therefore he might the more presume (if good-turns done to Princes could weigh
down self-respects) to have and committed to the French King.
found a faithful discharge of his trust. He caused also young William to do
his homage for the Duchy of Normandy to the King, and so committed him to his
Royal Faith: and going his joruney, he dyed in Asia, William being then but
nine years old.

Soon after the news of his Father's death, the Nobles of Normandy, by much
entreaty gat him out He comes into Normandy.
of the French King's hand, knowing that they having him amongst them, would
countenance his Counselors, and such as were in Office. But they soon found
that his Person without power did but increase His troubles by Competitors.
their discord, and factions. For presently after his right was questioned by
Competitors And first Robert de Tresny, an experienced Soldier, bringing a
fair line from Roll, entertained, and feasted the chiefest men amongst them,
urging to them what a wrong it was to him, that a Bastard, and a Child should
be preferred before him in the Duchy, which his Ancestors had gotten by their
Valor, and what a shame it was for the Normans to be governed by such an one.
And when words prevailed not, he brought it to the trial of the Sword in a
great Battle, in which (by the valor of Roger de Beaumont) he was defeated and
himself and his two Brethren slain.

Not long after, the King of France, (violating the trust that was reposed in
him) assisted in Person The King of France against* him.
William Earl of Arques, another pretender to the Duchy, descended also from
Roll, and brought to his aid a mighty Army, yet Count Guifford, Duke William's
General, by a stratagem training the French into an Ambush, overthrew them, and
caused the King to return to Paris with great loss and dishonor, and forced
Arques to seek relief from the Earl of Bologne, where yet he found little
favor, few regarding men that are overthrown, and low.

This storm past, a worse succeeds. There lived New troubles.
with Duke William, a young Lord of the like years, called Guy, descended also
from Roll, who, coming to be sensible of his Interest, was advised by some
stirring spirits to put in for the Duchy, which (they said) was his right, and
but usurped by the Bastard. And to promote his affairs there fell out a deadly
feud between two of the greatest Lords, Vicount Neel, and the Earl of Bessin,
whose quarrel Duke William either did not, or could not pacify, whereupon this
Guy, who was lately made Earl of Briorn and Vernon, interposed to end this
discord; and by the advice of Grimolt de Plessis, brought it to pass that both
these great men turned the point of their malice against Duke William, for not
ending the difference, and therefore conspired with Guy to murder him at
unawares; which also they had effected, had not a Fool, whom they suspected
not, noting their preparations, got away in the night to Valogne, knocking, and
crying at the Gates, till he was admitted to the Dukes presence (who was now
about seventeen Treason against* him.
years old) whom he willed presently to flee or he would be murdered.

The Duke seeing the Fool so affrighted, contemns not the information, but
presently takes Horse, and all alone posts toward Falaise, his strongest
place. By the way his Horse was tired, and at break a day coming to a Village
called Rye, A special* Providence.
it fell out that a Gentlemen was standing at his door, ready to ride abroad:
of him the Duke enquired the next way to Falaise; the Gentleman knowing him
humbly craved the cause of his so strange and untimely riding alone? The Duke
told it him, and this Gentleman, called Robert de Rye, lent him a fresh Horse,
and sent his two sons with him to conduct him the next way to Falaise.

No sooner were they got out of sight, but the Conspirators came posting after,
and enqured of the same Gentleman whether he saw the Duke: He answered, that he
was gone a little before such away (showing them another path) and offering his
service to Count Bessin, rode on with them, but led them so about, that the
Duke had gotten into Falaise, whereupon, being disappointed, they returned to
their homes; so strengthening themselves that the Duke thought fit to retreat
into Roan, He retires to the French King.
and from thence to the King of France to crave his aid, putting him in mind
what faithful service his Father had done for him: That he was his Homager;
under his Protection; and that he had no other sanctuary to flee unto for
succor against his mutinous and unruly Nobility. And he was so importunate
that the King aided him in Person with a Royal Army against his Competitors,
whom they met in the Vale of Dunes, as ready to resist them, with as great a
power and resolution, as the other were to assault them.

The Battle was very fierce and bloody, wherein His Valor and Victory.
the King of France, and Duke William bestirred themselves lustily; yet had not
Ralfe de Tesson been false to his fellows, to recover the favor of the Duke,
they had hardly carried the victory. After this, diverse of the Conspirators
(who had too great hearts to submit) passed over the Alps into Italy, where
they grew very famous for their Valor. But here ended not the Dukes troubles.
For Guy de Burgagne escaping by flight, fortified the Castles of Briorne and
Verneil; yet in the end was forced to submit both them, and himself to the
Dukes mercy, and now became his Pensioner, who His meekness.
before was his Competitor. This gentle act of the Dukes brought in many others
to yield up themselves, and had their Signiories redelivered to them, but their
Castles were demolished.

Shortly after, our Duke was called into action His new troubles.
again, by Geffry Martel Earl of Anjou, who usurped Alanson, Damfront and
Passais, members of the Duchy of Normandy, to recover which, the Duke raised
an Army, and first got Alanson, where, because he was opprobriously scorned by
them, and called the son of an Harlot, he used extreme cruelty. Then laid he
siege to Damfront, to relieve which, Count Martel came with a great Army; and
our Duke to discover his strength, sent Roger de Montgomery, and two other
Knights to deliver this message to the Earl, That if he came to victual He
recovers his Towns.
Damfront, he should there find him the Porter to keep him out. Whereunto the
Earl answered: Tell your Duke that to morrow at break a day he shall have me
there on a white Horse ready to give him the Combat, and I will enter
Damfront, if I can: And that he may know me I will wear a shield d'Or, without
any devise.

Roger replied, Sir, You shall not need to take that pains: for to morrow
morning you shall have the Duke in this place, mounted on a bay Horse: and that
you may know him he shall wear upon the point of his Lance a Streamer of
Taffaty to wipe your face. So returning, each side prepared for the morning.
But the Earl, busied in ordering his Battles, was informed by two Horsemen, that
came crossing the field, that Damfront was for certain surrendered to the Duke,
whereupon in a great rage, he presently departed with his Army: part whereof,
as they passed a straight, were cut off by Vicount Neel, who by that service
redeemed his former offense, and was restored to the Dukes favor, whom ever
after he served faithfully.

From Damfront the Duke with his Engines His Valor.
removed to Hambrieres, a Frontier Town of Count Martels: But by the way (had
he not discovered it himself) he had been entrapped in an Ambush and
overthrown: yet before he could clear himself he lost many brave men; wherewith
he was so enraged, that pressing into the midst of his Enemies, he made at
Count Martel, struck him down with his Sword, clave his helmet, and cut off an
ear, yet he escaped out of the press, though diverse of his men were taken,
and the rest routed.

But whilst he was thus contending with outward Enemies, two of his own
conspired against him, A new Conspiracy.
William Guelan, Earl of Mortagne, and William Earl of Eu, both pretenders to
the Duchy of Normandy: But the first, upon suspicion, the second upon proof of
intention, were both banished. And the Earldomes of Mortagne he gave to Robert,
and that of Eu to Odo, both his Brethren by the Mothers side. And all these
difficulties he encountered withal before he was full twenty two years old.

Now the more to confirm and strengthen his Estate against future practices, he
assembled a Parliament He calls a Parliament
of his Bishops, Barons, and Gentlemen, causing them to take their Oath of
Allegiance, and to raze their Castles. After which he married Matilda, the
Daughter of Baldwin the fifth, Earl of Flanders, but not without some
opposition. For his Uncle Mauger, Archbishop of Roan, excommunicated him for
marrying her who was his Cosen German. To His Marriage*
expiate which offense (though the Pope dispensed with it) he was enjoined to
build some Hospitals for blind People: and two Abbyes, one for men, and the
other for women; which were built at Ca^n.

These his successes made him the object of envy He is envied by the French
King,
to the French Court, who incensed the King against him, to abate his power,
and to find a quarrel* (which borderers easily may do) to set upon him. The
King who was forward enough of himself, to make his cause the fairer, pretends
to correct the insolences of the Normans committed in his Territories, and to
relieve Count Martel, oppressed by the Duke. He alleged also, that it
concerned him in honor and justice, to have that Province which held of his
Crown, to be Governed by a Prince of lawful blood; wherefore he resolved
utterly to extirpate Duke William, and to settle a legitimate Prince in that
Duchy. For which end, he raised two Armies through all his Dominions, whereof
one he sent along the River who invades his Country.
Seine, the other into the Country of Bessin, meaning to encompass him.

The Duke hereupon divided his Forces also into two parts; and sent the one
under his Brother Odo, Earl of Eu, Walter Guiffard Earl of Longevil, and
others, into the Country of Caux, Himself with the other advanced toward
Eureux, to oppose the King who was at Mentz. He also withdrew all the Cattle
and Provisions out of the Country, into Cities and Fortresses. The Kings Army
marching to Mortimer, and finding the Country to abound with all plenty, fell
to making good cheer; thinking that Duke William with his men, was yet at
Eureux; which the Army of Odo understanding, marched all night, and at break of
day gave them so hot an Alarm, that he The French beaten.
put them all into a rout, leaving their Horses and Armor to the Normans, who
in the pursuit of forty thousand left not a fourth part of them alive.

The King of France thus defeated, returned home with disgrace; and our Duke
with the price of the Prisoners, recovered his Peace, and the Castle of
Thuilliers, which had been taken from him in his minority. Cout Martel though
much discouraged with the Kings overthrow, yet made some attempts for the
recovery of his Towns, but without success. Wherefore the next spring he went
again to solicit the French King to aid him against the Duke, who (said he) is
now grown insolent upon the victory he stole last year, so that there is no
living by him. Besides, he suggested that the Normans extremely derided the
French, and had a base esteem of them, making their last overthrow the subject
of their sport, and Rhimes, as if the King of France, upon such an
inconsiderable loss, durst not break a dishonorable Peace.

The King being stung with this reproach, raised a mighty Army, far greater
than the former, wherein The King of France invades his Country again,
were three Dukes, and twelve Earls, and notwithstanding the solemn peace
made, and so lately sworn with the Duke, he entered Normandy in the Harvest
time, spoiling all before him along the Country of Bessin. From thence he
passed to Bayeux, and Caen, purposing to pass the River Dine at Verruil, and to
destroy all as far as to Roan: Coming thither he found the Causeway long, and
Bridge narrow, wherefore he caused his Van to pass over first, and to secure
his Rere, lead by the Duke of Berry, himself staid behind in Caen, till his men
and Carriages were passed. Duke William all this while was storing his
Fortresses with men and victuals: strengthening himself and Falaise, as much as
he could: yet had no Army in the Field, but only a running Camp, ready to take
all advantages; and so lets the fury of this storm spend itself, till being
informed of their passage over the and is again beaten.
Bridge, and then marching all night with ten thousand men, in the morning
early he set upon the Rereward, with so dreadful a cry, and fury, that such as
were upon the Causeway being affrighted, thrust forward such as were before
them, hasting to get over the Bridge, which, by reason of the great press,
brake, so that many were drowned; and such as were got over could not return to
aid the rest. Nor the King (by reason of the marshes on both sides) could not
yield any succor to his people; but stood a spectator of their slaughter; there
were very many slain, and six of the Kings Earls taken Prisoners.

This shameful overthrow was so laid to heart by The King of France dies.
the King of France, that he died shortly after, and the Duke of Normandy
enjoyed peace, which he employed nobly in ordering and beautifying his State;
building and endowing Churches, and Monastries: He erected also a Tomb for
himself and his wife at Caen; Feasting and rewarding his Nobles, and other men
of worth; whereby he so engaged their hearts to him, that they were wholly his
to do what he pleased.

In the time of this calm he sailed over into England, He goes into England.
pretending a visit to King Edward, his kinsman, who, because he had been
protected, and bred in Normandy by Duke Richard the second (Grandfather to them
both) gave him most Royal entertainment* Probably he came to see, and to be
seen, to make way for his future designs. And not long after Herald, whether on
purpose, or by some casualty of weather was driven into France, is uncertain;
but he was gallantly entertained in Normandy by Duke William, and at Roan
something was concluded betwixt them; whether to divide the Kingdom of England
between them; or that Herald, being a coast-dweller, should let in Duke William
after the decease of King Edward the Confessor, and do his best to help him to
his Kingdom, is uncertain; but whatever it was, it was solemnly sworn to upon
the holy Evangelists, and all the Relics in Roan. And for more assurance
Herald was betrothed to Adeliza, the Dukes Daughter, and his Brother Wolnot was
lest as a pledge for the performance. Sure it is, that so much was done, either
by our King Edward, who by Will left the Crown to him, or by Herald, or both,
as gave him ground to challenge the Crown of England and to pursue the getting
of it. Though indeed it was not in either of their powers to prejudice our
State, or to alter the conse of a right succession.

As soon as Duke William heard of the death of King Edward, and of the Election
and Coronation of Herald, he assembled the States of Normandy, and acquainted
them with the right he had to England, entreating their utmost assistance for
the recovery of it, and to avenge him on the perjured. Usurper Herald; showing
them what a strong party he had in England, and the distractions of the people,
which made his attempt very probable. He told them what Glory, Wealth, and
greatness the obtaining of such a Kingdom would add to them. Yet
notwithstanding all he could say, there were but few that liked of this
attempt, and they which did, were such as had long followed him in the wars,
and thereby had exhausted their estates, and were content to run any adventure
that might promise hope of advantage. Of the rest, some thought it best to hold
and defend their own Country, without adventuring to conquer an other* and
this was the richer sort: Others were His preparations.
willing to contribute, but did it so sparingly that it little advanced the
design; and the rest were so tired with former Wars, and so willing to enjoy
the blessing of Peace, that they were unwilling to forgo a certain, for an
uncertain good.

The Duke meeting with these discouragements, His Policy
was much perplexed, which made him to deal more particularly with his best
Friends, whom he knew to affect Honor, and that they would adventure their
whole estates with him. These were William Fitz-Auber, Earl of Brettevil;
Gualter Guifford, Earl of Longevil; Roger, Lord de Beaumont, etc. especially
his own brothers* Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, and Robert Earl of Mortagne. These he
procured in a full Assembly to make their offers, which they did so liberally (
Fitz* Auber promising to furnish forty ships with men and Ammunition, the
Bishop of Bayeux forty, the Bishop of Mentz thirty, etc.) that the rest of the
assembly doubting, that if without their help the Duke should carry on his
design, he would not forget their backwardness, they came off more liberally.

The Duke finding them yielding, yet not so forward as was requisite for such
an undertaking, dealt with the Bishops and great men apart, getting that of
them severally, which of all together he could not attain, and causing every
man's contribution to be recorded, kindled such an emulation amongst them, that
they which before would do nothing now strove who should do most. By his fair
persuasions also he drew in most of the Princes and Nobles of France, to
adventure their Persons, and much of their estates with him. As Robert Fitz
Harvay, Duke of Orleance, the Earls of Britain, Ponthieu, Bulloigne., Poyctou,
Maine, Nevers, Hiesms, ^umarl, Signior de Tours, yea and Martel his enemy, Earl
of Anjou. Indeed it was strange that these great men of France, should
adventure their lives and Fortunes to add England to Normandy, and so great a
Crown to a Duke who was too great for them already. But where God has
determined alterations in Kingdoms and States all things shall concur to
promote the same.

The King of France who should have most opposed was now a Child, and under the
Tutorship of Baldwin Earl of Flanders Duke William's Father in Law, and
therefore from thence he was sure of furtherance, rather than hinderance. And
to delude the young King he promised faithfully, if he conquered England, to
hold it of the Crown of France, as he did his Duchy of Normandy. And to His
subtilty.
make the Pope his friend, he promised him to hold it of the Apostolic See:
Whereupon the Pope sent him a consecrated Banner, an Agnus Dei, and one of
Saint Peter's hairs. The Emperor also sent him some Forces under the command
of one of the Princes of the Empire. And being thus encouraged and furnished,
within eight months he was ready with a powerful Army, at Saint Valery in
Normandy, to transport himself into England in 896 Ships.

But now let us see how affairs stood in England: The affairs in England.
King Edward the Confessor, being himself without issue, had in his lifetime
sent into Hungary for his Nephew Edward, called the Outlaw, the Son of Edmund
Ironside, intending to make him his Successor to the Crown; but he dying soon
after his arrival in England, King Edward then gave his Son Edgar the name of
Etheling, or Prince Edgar, meaning to design him for his successor; but was
prevented by death before he had fully established him; and Edgar Etheling,
though he had right, yet being young, and a stranger here, and so wanting power
to make good his right, Herald, the Son of Herald made King, An. 1066.
Earl Godwin, stepped into the Throne, and though hereby (violating of holy
Rights) he offended the Clergy, yet not any, either of the Clergy, or Laity
durst oppose him; as being the most Martial man in the Kingdom, and such an
one as the state of the Realm then stood in need of. And besides his own worth
he had the assistance of Edwin, and Marchar, the two great Earls of Yorkshire,
and Chester.

Indeed King Edward had appointed the Crown sometimes to William Duke of
Normandy, sometimes to Edgar Etheling, and sometimes to this Herald, who was
now Crowned by Aldred, Archbishop of York: And being possessed of the Throne,
he was able to make good his Title: yet to make Prince Edgar some part of
amends he created him Earl of His prudence and policy.
Oxford. And Herald being thus settled, carried himself with great valor, and
Justice for the time he enjoyed it, which was but nine months. He made all
provisions for defense that a politic and active Prince could do.

The first man that begun to disturb his new Government was his younger Brother
Toustaine, who in King Edward's Reign being made Governor of Northumberland,
for his pride and barbarous cruelty, was banished the Kingdom; His opposition
and success.
and now by reason of his former hatred against his Brother, was easily set on
by the Duke of Normandy, and Baldwin Earl of Flanders, (who had married his two
Daughters to Duke William, and Toustaine,) to assail Herald. He first assailed
the Isle of Wight, and then set upon the coast of Kent, from whence he was
chased by Herald, and forced to withdraw into the North, where seeking to land,
he was thence repulsed by the Earls Marchar, and Edwin, (whose Sister Herald
had married.) Then he craved aid of the Scots; and afterward of Harald
Harfager, King of Norwey, who was excercising Piracy about the Orchades; with
him he prevailed, and so uniting their Forces, they landed about Tinmouth, and
from thence marched into the heart of the kingdom. But near Stamford King
Herald of England met them with a strong His victory.
Army, and after a long and cruel fight, ended the day with victory, and the
death both of Toustaine, and the King of Norway.

No sooner was this Battle over, but with his wearied and broken Forces he was
called to a Duke William comes into England.
more fatal business in the South. For now Duke William of Normandy pretending
a right to the English Crown, by the Testament of the late King Edward his
kinsman, upon the advantage of King Herald's being so far off with his Army,
landed at Pemsey, near to Hastings in Sussex; and Herald being informed of it,
gathering together his broken Forces, increasing them as much as he could by
the way, with all possible speed he hasted to give the Duke Battle.

Duke William as soon as he had landed his men, His policy.
sent his ships away, that so they might think of nothing but either Victory or
Death. Then going himself on land his foot slipped, and he fell down, which some
of his company took for an ill sign; No (said he) I have by this taken
possession of this Land. Many attempts were made to compound the difference
between Herald, and William, but Herald would hearken to none, presuming of
success, and judging it a disgrace to capitulate for that which was his own.
And when one of his Brothers called Gyrth entreated him to consider what a
fearful thing it was to break an Oath, which he had so solemnly sworn. Herald
judged, that nothing which he had done being a private man could be of force to
him, being now a Prince.

Anno Christi, 1066. October the fourteenth (being also Herald's Birthday) and
his Soldiers (thinking The Battle between him and Herald.
to honor him thereby) having spent the night in revelling and drinking
(whereas the Dukes men spent it in quietness and devotion) they joined Battle,
the Kentish men being placed in the Front (as by ancient custom was their due)
and King Herald with his Londoners, leading the main Battle: where though the
number of their Armies was not much unequal (each of them having above sixty
thousand men) yet was there great odds in the expertness of the Soldiers, and
more in their weapons. For the Duke had with him all the flower of France, and
Flanders, whereas King Herald had lost his best men in the late fight, and for
weapons, the Normans had long Bows, which then were not in use among the
English, it is no marvel then though the Normans got the Victory. And though
Herald lost his life, yet he lost not his Their mutual valor.
credit: and the English showed no less valor though they were Conquered, than
the other did in Conquering. For King Herald (like an expert General) had
ordered his men in so firm a Body, that no power of the Normans could disorder
their ranks, till Duke William used this Stratagem: He made his men to retire,
and to counterfeit flight, by which means he drew the English on upon an
hollow ground covered over with earth, wherein many of them fell and perished,
as also into an Ambush of his Horsemen, which unexpectedly fell upon them and
cut them in pieces,

Indeed Duke William fought that day so valiantly that he had three Horses
slain under him: But King Herald showed no less valor in killing many of the
Normans with his own hands. Insomuch as the fight continued doubtful for a
long time, till at last King Herald being struck into the brains with an
Arrow, fell down dead, upon Herald slain.
whose fall a base Norman, cut off one of his thighs, for which Duke William
was so offended, that he disarmed the Soldier, and cashiered him. Thyra King
Herald's Mother, proffered a great some of money for his Body, which the Duke
nobly refused and gave it her freely, who buried it in Walltham Abbey. And no
marvel if the English had such ill success. For the People being secure from
their former enemies the Danes (which peace had continued now about the space
of fifty years) had discontinued the use of Arms, and were generally Englands
sins.
debauched with Luxury and idleness. The Clergy was grown licentious, and well
content with little Learning. The Nobility given to Gluttony, Venery, and
oppression: the common sort to drunkenness and all disorder.

Duke William, as his Valor won him the Victory, Duke Williams victory.
so his Victory won him a Crown; and suddenly of an old Duke he became a young
King. Wherefore having returned public thanks to God for his good success in
the place, which he called Battle field, near Hastings in Surrey, he led his
Army toward London, yet not the direct way for fear of an other encounter, but
through Kent, Sussex, Surry, Hampshire, and Bark shire, and so His Progress.
coming to Wallingford, he there crossed the Thames, and passed through the
Counties of Oxford, Bucks, and Hertford: And whilst he staid at Barkamsted,
Aldred Archbishop of York, Woolstan Bishop of Worcester, Walter Bishop of
Hereford, with the Earls The English submit to him.
Edwin, and Morchar, the greatest men in the Kingdom, yea and Edgar Etheling
himself, came and yielded their Allegiance to him, the Pope having cursed all
such as would not accept of him.

From hence as William passed toward London, he found his way stopped up with
multitudes of great Trees, which by Frederick Abbot of Saint Albans, a man of
Noble blood, were caused to be felled to secure his Monastery from being
spoiled by the Normans; whereat William both wondering and A stout Abbot.
fret ting, sent for the Abbot under assurance of his safe return, and asked
him why he did it? Frederick stoutly replied: I have done the Duty both of my
Birth and Profession, and if others of my rank had done the like (as they
might, and ought to have done) it had not been in thy power to have pierced the
Land so far.

From hence William marched to London, where the Gates were set open, and the
Bishops, Lords, and People entertained him with great signs of joy, though
with small gladness; and though he had not He comes to London; Is received with
Joy. His Coronation.
their hearts, yet he had their knees; for in most humble manner they accepted
of him for their Sovereign, and upon Christ-mass day after, he was Crowned at
Westminster by Aldred, Archbishop of York: For that Stigand, Archbishop of
Canterbury, was not held Canonically invested in his See.

Here, according to the accustomed form, the Bishops and Nobles took their
oaths to be his true and faithful subjects: and he (being required by the
Archbishop of York) takes his Oath before the Altar of Saint Peter, to defend
the Right of the Church, to establish good Laws, and to see Justice uprightly
and impartially administered as became a No Conqueror.
good King. Nor did he ever claim any power by Conquest, but as a Regular
Prince, submitted himself to the orders and customs of the Kingdom, desiring
rather to hold the Scepter by his Testamentary Title than to claim it by the
sword. So that though the name of Conqueror, by the flattery of the times, was
given to him; yet he showed by all the course of his Government that he assumed
it not.

Being thus settled, he chose for his Counsel such His Prudence.
men as he knew to be of greatest Wisdom, and experience; then he applied his
thoughts to secure his new-gotten Empire. For which end he fortified such
places as lay open to danger; placed strong Garrisons upon the Coasts; and
provided Ships to ride in those Harbors which lay most open to Invasions. he
marched also toward Dover, (the Lock and Key of the Kingdom) to secure that
place, and to overaw that Kentish, a most strong and populous Province.

But when Stigand, the Archbishop of Canterbury, The Kentish men's Policy.
and Eglesigne, the Abbot of Saint Austins (who were the chiefest Lords and
Governors of Kent) heard of it, they assembled the Commons at Canterbury,
laying before them the dangers of their Province, the miseries of their
Neighbors, the Pride of the Normans, and the wrongs of the Church. All which
(say they) are too apparent. The English till now were ever free, and the name
of Bondmen not heard among them. But now servitude attends us, if we yield to
the pride of this insulting enemy; to withstand which, we are ready to
adventure our lives with you. This resolution drew the people willingly to join
with them, who appointed to meet at a Bay at Swanscomb, within two miles of
Graves end.

Accordingly there they met at the day, and kept themselves secret in the
woods, waiting the coming of the Conqueror, agreeing to carry before them
great branches of Trees, whereby they might conceal themselves, and if need
were, impede the march of the Normans. Which device daunted King William at his
approach, who judging himself secure, was thus before he was aware, suddenly
beset on every side with enemies. For now the Kentish men, having environed his
Army round, threw down their Boughs, and with bent Bows prepared for Battle:
So that he which even now thought himself secure of the Kingdom, began to
despair of his Life, in which amazement, Stigand, and Eglesine pesented
themselves before him, and said,

Most Noble Duke, behold here the Commons of Kent are come forth to meet and
receive you as their Sovereigne, requiring your Peace, and their own Freedom,
and the enjoyment of their ancient Laws. If these be denied they are resolved
to submit their trial to a Battle, fully purposing rather to dye than lose
their Laws, and Liberties, and so to live servilely in Bondage, which Name, and
Nature is, and ever shall be strange unto us, and not to be endured.

William being brought into this strait, and loath to hazard all upon so nice a
point, more warily than willingly granted their desires, and Pledges being
given on both sides for performance, Kent yielded to him her Earldom, and Dover
her Castle.

When King William had established all things for Englands security, he
committed the Government of it to Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, his brother by the
Mothers side, and to his Cousin or Fitz-Osburne.
Fitz-Auber, whom he made Earl of Hereford, and in the Lent following King
William goes into Normandy.
sailed into Normandy, taking with him all the chief men of England, who were
likeliest to make a party against him in his absence. As Edgar Etheling,
Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, the two great Earls Edwin, and Morchar,
Frederick Abbot of Saint Albanes, Agelnothus Abbot of Glastenbury, Walteof Earl
of Northumberland; Roger Earl of Hertford, Rainulph Earl of Cambridge,
Gospatrick Earl of Cumberland, etc. And in his absence, which was all the
Summer, nothing was here attempted against him, save that Edrick, surnamed the
Forester in the County of Hereford, calling in the Welsh to his assistance,
forraged the remoter borders of that County. The rest of the Kingdom was quiet,
expecting what would become of this new World, wherein as yet they found no
great alteration, their Laws and Liberties remaining the same they were, and
they might hope that by this accession of a new Province, England would have
her Dominion enlarged abroad, and her profit not impaired at home.

King William having disposed his affairs in Normandy, Returns into England.
toward Winter returned into England, where he had three sorts of men to
satisfy, 1. Such as had adventured their Lives and estates with him, 2. Those
of his own Country, whose merits, and propinquity looked for recompense,
whereof the number was very great, 3. The people of England, by whom he must
now subsist, wherein he had more to do than in his Battle at Hastings, seeing
that all rewards with money must be raised out of the stock of the Kingdom,
which must needs be distasteful to the State in general; and if he preferred
any of his to dignities by displacing others, it must needs bring very feeling
grievances to the persons displaced. But he thrust no great men out of their
room, but such as put themselves out by revolting after they had given their
Fealty to him. So that it seems he contented himself, and his for the present,
only with what he found ready, filling up their places who were slain in the
Battle, or fled away, as many were with Herald's Sons, out of the Kingdom.

Such of desert as he could not presently prefer, he sent abroad into the
Abbeys, there to live till places fell void for them, whereof twenty four he
sent to the Abbey of Ely, by which policy he not only lessened his Suitors at
Court, and eased the His Prudence. and Policy.
eye sore of the English, but had a watch over the Clergy, who were then of the
greatest power in the Kingdom, and might prevail much with the people.

But the English Nobility thinking that their splendour was darkened by the
interposition of so many strangers, and fearing that yet it would be The
English rebel.
further eclypsed, Conspired together, and fled, some into Scotland, and others
into Denmark, to try if by foreign aid they could recover themselves. Amongst
whom, Edgar Etheling, with his Mother and two Sisters, intending for Hungary,
where he was born, was driven into Scotland, where he was kindly entertained by
or Malcol^^.
Malcolin the third, whose former sufferings in exile had taught him to pity
others in the like distress: and whom also it concerned to look to his own, now
his neighbors House was on fire. This induced him also to make a League with
Edgar, and to tie it the stronger, he took to wife Margret, the sister of Edgar
(a very virtuous Lady) by whom the blood of our ancient Kings was preserved and
conjoined with the Normans in King Henry, the second, and so became English
again.

Edgar being thus in Scotland, there repared to him the Earls Edwin, and
Morchar, Hereward, Gospatrice, Siward and others, and shortly after Stigand and
Aldrid the two Archbishops: with diverse of the Clergy, who in that third year
of King William's Reign, raised great commotions in the North, and sought most
eagerly to recover their lost Country. But it now proved too late, the King
having settled the Government of the Kingdom, so that instead of prevailing they
gave advantage to the Conqueror to make himself more than he was. For all
oppositions made by Subjects against their Sovereigns, do, if they succeed not,
tend much to their advancement; and nothing gave deeper rooting to the Normans
here, then the petty revolts made by scattered Troops in several places, begun
without Order, and followed without resolution.

King William, foreseeing new stirs from Scotland, sent to Malcolme to deliver
up to him his enemy Etheling, which if he refused he threatened him with Wars.
Malcolme returned answer: That it was unjust and wicked, especially in a
Prince, to betray to his enemy, one that came to his Court for protection,
especially being now so nearly allied to him. William, thus disappointed,
feared a dangerous Rebellion in his Kingdom, to prevent which he built four
strong Castles. One at Hastings: A He built 4 Castles.
second at Lincoln: A third at Nottingham: And a fourth at York, in all which
he placed strong Garrisons. And disarming the English, he commanded every
Householder to put out both fire and candle at eight a clock at night, at which
hour he appointed that in every Town a Bell should be rung; called by the
French Coverfew, or Cover fire, to prevent nightly tumults which otherwise
might arise. Then did he give the Earldom, and all the Lands that Edwin held in
Yorkshire, to Allain Earl of Britain. The Archbishopric of Conterbury, he
conferred on Lankfranc Abbot of Caen. That of Tork upon Thomas his Chaplain,
and all the rest of the English, which were out in Rebellion, had their places
supplied by the Normans.

Shortly after, Goodwin, and Edmund the sons of the Troubles out of Ireland.
late King Herald, coming with some Forces out of Ireland, landed in
Summersetshire, and fought with Adnothus, one of King William's Captains, whom
they slew with many others, and taking great booties in Cornwall and
Devonshire, returned back into Ireland.

Exeter also thought to shake off the Norman In the West and North.
yoke. And Northumberland, to recover their former liberties took Arms,
against whom the King sent Robert Cumin, and himself went against Exeter and
besieged it, and at last the Citizens opened their Gates and submitted to his
mercy, the Ringleaders escaping into Flanders. But in the North, Cumin lying
secure in Durham, was suddenly in the night surprised by Edgar Etheling, and
his followers, who slew Cumin, and all his Normans being about seven hundred,
one only escaping to carry the ill news to King William.

During these stirs in England the English fugitives in Denmark so far
prevailed with King Swain, that he sent a strong Navy of three hundred ships,
well fraught with Soldiers, under his two England invaded by the Danes and
Scots.
Sons Harold, and Canute, who arriving in Humber, marched to York, to whom also
Edgar, and his associats out of Scotland, joined themselves. At whose approach
the Citizens were so terrified that York burnt.
they set fire on the suburbs, and the flame by an high wind, was driven over
the wall, whereby a great part of the City was consumed, together with the
Cathedral Church and a famous Library of great worth, and the Garrison of
Normans consisting of 3000. were all slain.

This so incensed King William, that speedily King William goes against them.
raising an Army, he entered Northumberland, pitifully wasted by the Danes,
and made spoil of all, and with a good sum of money purchased the departure
of the Danes* These devastations in sundry Counties made such a Dearth, that
the People were forced to eat Horses, Dogs, Cats, Rats, etc. and between York
and Durham, for the space of Woeful devastations.
sixty miles, for nine years together, there was such an utter desolation, that
neither House was left standing, nor field tilled.

After this great defeat most of the Lords came in The King Conquers.
upon the public Faith, and were conducted to Barkhansted, by the Abbot
Frederick, where upon their submission, and Oath of Allegiance retaken, they
were restored to his favor, and to give them satisfaction, King William,
before the Archbishop Lankfranc, and the Lords, again swear to observe the
ancient Laws of the Realm, established by his Noble Predecessors, especialy
those of Saint Edward. Yet not long after these. Lords upon new discontents
brake out again. But Earl Edwin, making toward New discontents.
Scotland, was murdered by the way by his own men. The Lords Morchar and
Hereward, betook themselves to the Isle of Ely, intending to secure themselves
there for that Winter; to whom also repaired Earl Syward and the Bishop of
Durham out of Scotland. But the King who was no time giver, Ely taken.
presently besieged them with flat Boats on the East, and made a Bridge two
miles long on the West, and so brought his men upon them, who seeing themselves
surprised, yielded to the Kings mercy: Only Hereward desperately marched with
his People through the Fens, and fled into Scotland, the rest were sent to
diverse Prisons where they dyed, or remained during the Kings life.

Those Lords that continued Loyal upon the late submission, were employed and
preferred by the King William's clemency.
King. As Edric, the Forrester. And Gospatrice was made Earl of Northumberland,
and sent against King Malcolme, who wasted the Countries of Tisdale,
Cleaveland, and Cumberland. Waltheoff, the Son of Earl Syward, he married to
his Niece Judith, a very valiant man: showing a Noble nature to love virtue,
even in his enemies. And now King William, finding Scotland, to be a place of
retreat for all his discontented Subjects, and where his Competitor Edgar
lived, he entered the Kingdom with a great Army, which encountering more with
wants than Forces, and both Kings considering the Peace with Scotland.
uncertain events of War, upon fair overtures concluded a Peace, agreeing upon
the bounds of each Kingdom; and Delinquents with their partakers were generally
pardoned. And shortly after Edgar Etheling, came in volutarily, and was
restored to the Kings favor, who allowed him a liberal maintenance, which held
him ever after quiet.

King William being now gone into Normandy, there was amost dangerous
Conspiracy begun against him by Ralph de Waher Earl of Suffolk and Norfolk; A
new Conspiracy.
Roger Fitz Aubre, (or Osburne) Earl of Hereford: Waltheoff, Earl of
Northumberland, with Eustace, Earl of Bulloine (suborned, as it was thought, by
the King of France, there unto). These Lords conspired to keep William in
Normandy, and to dispossess him of his Kingdom; for which end they agreed to
join theirs with the Danish Forces, whom they intended to call in. This was a
dangerous Combination, the King being in Normandy besieging the Castle of Dole,
in Britain, belonging unto Ralph Waher, and defended against him by the King
of France, and at such a time when all his Neighbor Princes were jealous of
him, and ill affected to him. The King of Scotland, and the Princes of Wales,
ready to join with them at home. Swain King of Denmark, with a Navy of two
hundred sail ready to invade England; to which Drone, King of Ireland, joined
sixty five ships. And this did more distract and incense him, because most of
these great Lords were either his kinsmen or nearly allied to him.

This grand Conspiracy was discovered by Waltheoff Discovered.
to Archbishop Lankfranc, who persuaded the Earl to go to the King and to
inform him of the greatness of his danger. Yet notwithstanding this discovery,
Roger, and Ralph, proceed in their intentions, and raise Forces. But by the
diligence of Odo, Bishop of Baiaux, the Kings Brother, Prevented.
the Bishop of Worcester, and the Abbot of Evesham, they were so prevented that
they could never unite their Forces: Whereupon Ralph fled into France; Roger
was taken and imprisoned; Waltheoff was beheaded; and so this flame was extinct.

The greatest and last insurrection was in Normandy, His son Robert rebels.
by King William's own Son Robert, who by the instigation, and assistance of
Philip King of France, (envying Williams greatness) entered Normandy, and
claimed it as his own right. His Father indeed had promised him it long before,
but Robert impatient of delays, endeavored by a strong hand to wrest it from
his Father. King William hearing hereof passed with a strong Army over into
Normandy, where in a Battle meeting with his Son, hand to hand, he was by him
unhorsed, and hurt in the arm. But his Son perceiving by his voice that it was
his Father, suddenly leaped off his Is reconciled to his Father.
Horse, took him up in his arms, fell down at his feet, and humbly entreated
his pardon, which his Father easily granted, embraced his Son, and ever after
they lived in mutual love.

After this King William sent this his Son Robert, with an Army against Malcolm
King of Scots, who had invaded Northumberland, who at the coming of Duke
Robert, retired. At which time Duke Robert began to found a Castle upon the
River of Tine, whereof the Town of Newcastle did take its beginning, and Name,
which formerly was New Castle built.
called Moncaster. These frequent Wars put the State to an infinite charge, the
King entertaining all this while, besides Normans, very many French. Finding
the English (in respect of many great Families that were allied to the Danes)
rather to incline to that Nation than to the Normans.

In the fifteenth year of his Reign he subdued Wales, and brought the King
thereof to do him Homage. And presently after quarrels arose between King
William, and the King of France. Quarrels with France.
The King of France invades Normandy, and takes the City of Vernon. The King of
England invades France, and subdued the Country of Xantoigne, and Poicton, and
so returned to Roan. Then did the King of France summon our King to do him
Homage for England, which he refused, saying he held it of none but God, and
his sword: But for the Duchy of Normandy, he offered him Homage, which yet
would not satisfy the King of France. Whereupon he made a new invasion but
with more loss than profit. In the end they concluded a crazy Peace, which held
only till King William had recovered a sickness, whereinto (through his travel,
age, and corpulency) he was fallen; which occasioned the young and lusty King of
France jeeringly to say, that he lay in of his great The French King jeers him.
belly in Roan. This so irritated King William that so soon as he was
recovered, he gathered a very strong Army with which he entered France in the
chiefest time of their Fruits, spoiling all before him till he came to Paris,
where the King of France then His reveng.
was, to whom he sent to show him of his upsiting. From thence he marched to
Mentz, which he wholly sacked, where he caught the occasion of His sickness.
his Death, by the strain of his Horse amongst the breaches: from whence he was
conveyed sick to Roan.

Anno Christi, 1078. King William, before his going into Normandy, the more to
assure himself, and his successors of the English Crown, on the East side of
London, built a strongly fenced Castle The Tower built.
or Magazine for his Warlike Ammunition, which he entrenched with a long and
deep Ditch, (...) now called the Tower of London: the Surveyor of which work,
was Gundulphus, Bishop of Rochester the mortar of it being tempered with the
blood of Beasts. Then to fill his Coffers he imposed great Subsidies upon the
Land, causing an exact survey to be taken of the whole kingdom; yea, and of
every particular part and commodity thereof, so England surveied.
that there was not a Hide of Land, Lake, Water or Wast, but he knew the value,
the Owners, and Possessors, together with the Rents, and profits thereof. As
also of all Cities, Towns, Villages, Monasteries, and Religious Houses. Causing
all the People in England to be numbered, their Names to be taken, with notice
what every one might dispend by the year, their substance, money, and Bondmen
were recorded. How many yoke of Oxen and plough-lands were in the Realm: and
what services they owed that held of him in Fee: All which was certified by
Oaths of the Commissioners.

This done, he caused six shillings to be paid him for every Hide of Land. The
Book that contained this Survey, was called the Roll of Winchester, as being
kept there at first. But ever since it has been called Doomsday Book, because
of the General and inevitable censure thereof; and since it has Doomsday Book.
been kept in the Kings Exchequer at Westminster, This grievous exaction made
the English miserably groan under their present State, whereby the King and his
Normans were daily more hated: and he on the contrary loved them so little that
he fought by all means to bring the English Name, and Nation to ruin. He gave
also further offense both to God and Man, by depopulating the fruitful Country,
lying South from Salisbury to the Sea: pulling down Towns, and Villages, with
thirty six Parish Churches, and so laid open all the Country for New forest
made.
thirty miles space, for wild beasts for his own Game in Hunting: which place
has ever since been called the New Forest. He also imposed such severe
punishments upon such as offended in hunting his Game that he was called the
Father of wild Beasts. But God's severe Judgment pursued him for his
wickedness; for in this Forest, Richard his second Son, was gored by a Deer,
whereof he dyed. Rufus, an other of his Sons, being taken for a Deer, was shot
through with an Arrow Remarkable Judgments.
and slain. Henry, his Grandson by Robert Curtoise his Eldest Son, eagerly
pursuing a Deer was by a bough struck into the jaws, and left hanging till he
died.

Although King William at his Coronation had taken an oath to observe the Laws
of King Edward, then in use: which oath he renewed at Barkhamsted, yet did he
abbrogate many of them, and brought in the Norman Laws, written in French,
commanding that all Causes should be pleaded, and all matters The Laws in French
of Form dispatched in French; either on purpose to entrap men through
ignorance of the Language, or else to make the Normans Language predominant in
this Kingdom, which yet he could never effect, there being not so much as any
footsteps of that Language remaining in the English Tongue. Forms of Judgment
by Fire, and Water, called Ordeal, formerly much used, were now antiquated and
shortly after quite abolished by the Pope, as savouring too much of Paganism.
That of Combat continued longer, but was of no ordinary use. Actions both
Criminal, and Real, began now wholly to be judged by the verdict of twelve men,
called by the name of Enquest. And whereas the Bishops formerly dealt in
Secular Causes, and shared with the King in many Mulcts imposed on Delinquents,
now the King confined all the Clergy within the Bishops Power abated.
compass of their own Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to meddle only in matters
concerning men's Souls. He set up Sheriffs in every Shire, and Justices of Peace
to punish Malefactors. And lastly, he ordainned his Council of State his
Chancery, his Exchequer, and his Courts of Justice, which always removed with
his Court. These places he furnished with Officers, and assigned four Terms in
the year for determining controversies amongst the People, commonly held at
Westminster.

As for his Provisionary Revenues, his Tenants who held Lands of the Crown,
paid him no money His household Provision.
but only Corn, and Victuals; and a just note of the quality, and quantity of
everyman's ratement was taken through all the Shires of the Kingdom, and
leavied constantly for the maintenance of the Kings House. One Law he made
which was extremely distasteful to the Gentry. That whereas they might at their
pleasure, hunt and take Deer which they found abroad in the woods, now it was
ordained that upon penalty of putting out their eyes, none should presume to
take or kill any of them, the King preserving them for his own Game.

In the first year of his Reign he granted to the The Charter of London renewed.
City of London, their first Charter and Liberties in as Large a manner as they
enjoyed them under King Edward the Confessor; which he did at the request of
William a Norman, Bishop of London; in grateful remembrance whereof, the Lord
Major and Aldermen upon their solemn days of their resort to Paul's, do still
walk to the Gravestone where this Bishop lies interred. Also this King was the
first that brought the Jews into England. He also enacted a Law that whosoever
forced a woman should lose his Genitals. In his time the use of long Bows came
first into England, which, as they were the weapons wherewith under this King
France Conquered England, so they were the weapons with which England under
succeeding Kings conquered France. This King also appointed a Constable at
Dover Castle, and a Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. In short, He ordained such
good Laws, and had them so well executed, that a Girl might carry a bag of
money all the Country over without danger of being robbed. And in his time the
setting of Seals to Bonds and writings was first used.

In King William's time Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, was removed from his
See and kept Prisoner during his Life in the Castle of Winchester; Bishops Sees
Changed.
and Lanfranc, an Italian* succeeded him; who in a Synod at London, removed the
Bishops Sees from small Towns to Cities: as from Silliway to Chichester; from
Kyrton to Exeter; from Wells to Bath; From Sherborn to Salisbury; from
Dorcester to Lincoln; and from Lichfield to Chester; and from thence again to
Coventry.

He founded the Abbey of Battle in Sussex, where his works of Piety.
he overcame Herald. The Abbey of Selby in Yorkshire; And a third near London,
called Saint Saviors. He founded also the Priory of Saint Nicholas at Exeter,
and gave great Privileges to Saint Martins Le Grand in London. In Normandy he
founded an Abbey at Caen: and he gave to the Church of Saint Stephens there, two
Manors in Dorsetshire; one in Devonshire; an other in Essex; much Land in
Bark*shire, some in Norfolk; an house in Woodstreet London, with many Avowsions
of Churches.

In his time Saint Paul's Church being burnt down, Paul's Church burnt. and
reedified.
Maurice Bishop of London, began this which is now standing; A work so
admirable and stupendous that many thought it would never have been finished.
Toward the building of the East end of it, the King gave the choice Stones of
his Castle in the West end of the City; in which place afterward was founded a
Monastery of Black Friars. And after the death of Maurice, Richard, his next
successor, gave all the Rents of his Bishopric toward the building of this
Church; yet the finishing of it was left to his successors. About the same time
William, Bishop of Durham; founded University College in Oxford:

In the twentieth year of his Reign, their happened so great a fire in London,
that from the West Gate to the East Gate it consumed all the Houses and
Churches, at which time (as was said before) Paul's Church was burnt down.
Burning Fevers also consumed the People. Murrains devoured an Great Judgments.
infinite number of Cattle; great Rains and Floods destroyed the Fruits of the
Earth, whence ensued a great Famine; and by them the Hills were so softened, and
undermined, that some of them fell, and overwhelmed the Neighboring Villages.
Tame Fowls, as Hens, Geese, Peacocks, etc. fled into the Woods, and Forests,
and turned wild.

Odo, the Kings Brother, Bishop of Bayeux, hoping to obtain the Popedom had
heaped up vast Treasures for the purchasing of it. But as he was about to begin
his journey, he was seized upon by the King, and imprisoned, and his House
being searched, there were found such heaps of Gold as caused admiration in all
that saw it, and many of his Bags were drawn out of Rivers, where they were
laid, full of Gold beaten to Powder.

King William wanting money seized upon the Plate, He despoiles the Monasseries.
Jewels, and Treasure within all the Monastries in England. Pretending, that
the Rebels had conveyed their Riches into these Religous Houses (as into
Sanctuaries, and privileged places) to defraud him thereof* He made also all
Bishoprics and Abbyes that held Baronies (always free before) to contribute
to his Wars and other occasions.

We left King William sick at Roan, occasioned partly His last Will.
by heat and partly by the leap of his Horse which brake the inward Rim of his
Belly; And perceiving his approaching Death, he made his Will, wherein he
commanded that all his Treasure should be distributed to Churches, Ministers,
and the Poor; appointing to each their several portions. His Dukedom of
Normandy* he left to his eldest Son Robert, to whom he had formerly given it.
His Kingdom of England he left to his second Son William. And Henry his
youngest Son, surnamed Beauclark, hearing himself neglected by his Father, with
tears said, And what Father do you give me? the King answered, Five thousand
pounds of Silver out of my Treasury. But (replied he) what shall I do with the
Treasure if I want an Habitation? His Father answered, Be patient my son, and
comfort thyself in God, suffer quietly thy Elder Brothers to go before thee.
Robert shall have Normandy, and William England, but thou in time shall have
entirely all the honor that I have gotten, and shall excel thy Brethren in
Riches and Power.

His Son William he sent away into England, and by him Letters to Archbishop
Lanfranc. His Prisoners he commanded to be set at liberty; and then dyed
September the ninth in the fifty sixth year of his Duchy, the twenty first of
his Kingdom, and the sixty fourth of his age, Anno Christi. 1087.

No sooner had this late Glorious* Princes Soul left his Body, but his Dead
Corpse was presently abandoned by his chiefest Followers, who posted His Death.
away every one to defend his own; whilst his menial Servants despoiled him of
his Armor, Vessels, Apparel, and all princely furniture, leaving his Dead Body
naked upon the floor, where it lay stinking till one Harluins, a poor Country
Knight, at his own cost undertook to carry it to Caen, unto Saint Stevens Church
formerly founded by this King.

At his entrance into Caen, the Monks came forth to meet him; But at the very
instant, a sudden fire Vanity of* Vanties.
happening, presently invaded a great part of the City, whereupon his Hearse
was forsaken by all, every one applying himself to help to quench the fire.
After which being carried to Church and the Stone Coffin set ready, which was
to receive the Body, one Ascelinus Fitz-Arthur, stood up and forbad the burial,
saying, This very place was the floor of my Fathers House, which this dead Duke
violently took from him: and here upon part of my Inheritance founded this
Church; This ground therefore I challenge, and in Gods behalf, forbid that the
Body of my Despoiler he covered in my Earth, neither shall it be interred
within the precincts of my right. Whereupon they were forced to compound with
him for a present sum of money, and for one hundred pound weight of Silver
afterward to be paid, and so the Exequies went forward. But when the Corpse
came to be laid into the Tomb, it proved too little, and the belly being
pressed* and not bowelled, brake, and with an intolerable stink, so offended
the bystanders, that with great amazement, they all hasted away, and the poor
Monks were left to shuffle up the Burial, who also were glad when they gat to
their Cells.

He was of an indifferent stature, of a comely person, His Charecter.
of a good presence, till his corpulency increasing with age, made him
unweildy; of so strong a constitution that he was never sick, till a little
before his Death. His strength such that few men could draw his Bow; Of wit
ready, and very Politic; In Speech Eloquent; Resolute in attempts; In hazards
valiant; A great Soldier, and very successful; His Charters of an other
tenor, and very brief; as may appear by one that run thus.

1 William, the third year of my Reign, Give to thee Norman Hunter, to me that
art both leese and Deer,

The Hop and the Hopton, and all the Bounds up and down,

Under Earth to Hell, above the Earth to Heaven;

From me and mine, to thee and thine,

As good, and as fair, as ever they mine wear.

To witness that this is sooth, I bite the whitewax with my Tooth.

Before Jugg, Maud, and Marjery, and my youngest Son Henry.

For a Bow, and a broad Arrow, when I come to hunt upon Yarrow.

His only wife was Mathilda, or Maud, Daughter His Wife.
to Baldwin the fifth, surnamed the Gentle, Earl of Flanders, by whom he had,

Robert surnamed Curtois, or Short Thighs, who succeeded his Father in the
Duchy of Normandy His Sons.
whereof he was dispossessed by his Brother Henry, King of England, at the
Battle of Ednarchbray, Anno. 1106. where being taken Prisoner, his eyes were
put out, and he was sent to the Castle of Cardiff in Wales; and after twenty
years imprisonment, died there.

William the elder, surnamed Miser, who in the right of Queen Maud, was Earl of
Flanders, who died six years before his Father.

Richard was born in Normandy, and as he was hunting in the new Forest, whilst
he was young, was slain by a Stag.

William surnamed Rufus, who succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of England.

Henry surnamed Beau-clerk, or the Fine Scholar, who after his Brothers Death
came to be King of England, and Duke of Normandy.

Cicily his eldest Daughter was by her Father made a Nun, and afterward was
chosen Abbess His Daugters.
in the Monastery built by her father in Caen.

Constance his second Daughter, was first married to Allain Earl of Little
Britain, who was afterward by King William made Earl of Richmond.

Alice, his third Daughter was married to Steven Earl of Bloys.

Gundred his fourth Daughter was married to William Warren, who was the first
Earl of Surry, in England.

Ella his fifth Daughter: some say, she dyed young.

Margeret, his youngest Daughter, who was contracted to Alphonso King of
Galicia in Spain; but dyed before the marriage was consummated.

There was one Randolph Peverel, to whom Edward the Confessor was very
bountiful, because he had married his kinswoman, the Daughter of Ingelrick, a
man of great Nobility among the English Saxons. A Lady of that admirable
beauty, that with her looks she conquered the Conqueror William, who desired
nothing more than to be her Prisoner in Arms, which to effect, he begins to
express a kind of love to the remembrance of her deceased Father Ingelrick,
enriching the College of Martins Le Grand, in London, first founded by him,
and her Uncle Edward. Then he honors and advances her two Brethren, William
Peverel, Castellane, or keeper of Dover Castle, and Pain Peverel, Baron of
Bourn, in Cambridgshire, the Founder of Barnwell Abbey, and Standardbearer to
Robert, Duke of Normandy, in the Holy War against the Infidels.

He prefers her kindred and Friends: He sollicites her by the Messengers of the
Devils Bedchamber, his fly Enchanting Bawdes, and comes sometimes himself (like
Jupiter) in a Golden shower. Thus by these forcible demonstrations of his love,
and unavoidable allurements (especially from a King) she was brought at length
to his unlawful Bed, unto whom she bare a Son named William, who was Lord of
Nottingham, and Founder of Lenton Abbey. The Lady his Mother (touched with
remorse of Conscience for her sin) to expiate her guilt (for such was the
Doctrine taught in those days) founded a College in Hatfield Peverel, in
Essex, wherein, setting apart all worldly employments, she spent the remainder
of her days.

King William, having once settled himself in the Kingdom, divided a great part
of it among his followers: To Allen, surnamed the Red, Earl of Britain, who
came into England with him and was his Son in Law, he gave the Honor, and
County of Edwin, within the Province of York by his Charter in these words.

I William (surnamed the Bastard, King of England) give and grant to thee my
Nephew Allen, Earl of Britain, and to thy Heirs for ever, all those Villages,
Towns, and Lands, which were late in the possession of Earl Edwin in Yorkshire,
with Knights Fees, Churches, and other liberties and customs as freely and as
honorably as the said Edwin held them.

Given at the siege before York*

FINIS.

