CHRISTIAN Good-Fellowship: OR, Love, and Good Works, Held forth in a Sermon
preached at Michael's Cornhill London, before the Gentlemen, Natives of
WARWICKSHIRE, At their Feast, November the 30. 1654.

By Samuel Clarke Pastor of the Church in Bennet Fink London.

Manus Pauperum Gazophylacium Christi. Who so stops his ears at the cry of
the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard.

Prove. 21. 13. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill at the Anchor in Paul's
Churchyard. 1655.

To the Right Worshipful Sir John Burgoin, Sir Richard Temple, etc. and to the
rest of his dearly beloved Countrymen, Citizens of London, but borne in
WARWICKSHIRE.
SIRS,
WHen your Stewards made choice of me to this service, I labored to find out,
and pitch upon such a subject, as might through Gods blessing, bring most glory
to him, edification to your souls, and advantage to our Native Country and
whereby you might be minded of the Principal ends of your meeting: And as the
Lord was pleased to direct me to this ensuing subject, so did he of his
infinite mercy appear so far in his own Ordinance, that there generally
appeared in you a readiness to concur in advancing those good works which were
proposed to your Christian considerations: It was intended that after dinner a
general subscription should have been promoted amongst you: but by reason of
the shortness of time, and multiplicity of other businesses wherewith your
Stewards were taken up, it was not carried on amongst a fifth part then
present: Yet was there more done by those few, then has been done by any one
County of England in their late meetings: and amongst the rest of you, Mr. John
Howkins (whose name I cannot but mention with honor, though he is unknown by
face to me) subscribed four score pounds, toward the placing of poor boys
born in Rugbie, Apprentices in London.

It Is pity so good a foundation should want its superstructure, and therefore
at the request of your Stewards (though I never thought any sermon of mine
worthy the Press) I have adventured to publish this, hoping that the same
goood word of God that so warmed your hearts in hearing, may by the same
blessing, revive, and quicken your affections in reading, so as to perfect what
was then so well begun amongst you.

The names of the Stewards (who are to have the oversight in disposing of your
moneys) I thought fit to, set down at the end of this Epistle: Men, I hope
without exceptions, whose Prudence, and Fidelity you need not to suspect in the
ordering of it. Amongst them Col. Thomas Clark at the Kings head within Algate,
is chosen Treasurer, to whom if you please to send in what it shall please God
to move your hearts to contribute to so good a work, I doubt not but as many
shall have the benefit, so your own souls will find the comfort of it
hereafter.

Let not any one say that this Sermon might have been preached in Rome, or
Spain where good works are in such request whilst they hope to merit Heaven by
them. No, it will rather vindicate our Doctrine from their fowl, and false
aspertions whilst they call us Solifidians, and charge us as if we preached
only Faith, without good works: whereas on the contrary we still call upon our
hearers to show their Faith by their fruits, and tell them that Faith without
works is dead, and can minister no true comfort, and therefore exhort them to
grow up to fruitfulness which will sweetly seal up their calling to glory, and
virtue, as the budding of Aarons Rod Ephesians. 2. 10.
did his calling to the Priesthood, yea, we tell them, that if they be new
creatures, they are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
before ordained that they should walk in them; and that if Christ be their
Redeemer, he has redeemed them from all iniquity, and purifieth them to
himself a peculiar people, Zealous of Good Tit. 2. 14.
works: But I fear to exceed my limits, and therefore my prayer for you all is,
that the God of hope will fill you with all joy, and peace in believing: Romans 15.
13,
and make all Grace abound toward you, that ye always having all sufficiency
in all things, may abound to every good work.

Amen.
From my study in Thridneedle street. Dec. 19. 1654. I rest Sirs Yours in the
service of your faith, and to further your comfort and joy, SAMUEL CLARK.
Old Stwards.
Col. Tho. Clark Treasurer Mr. Nicholas Enos. Mr. William Hickocks. Mr. Tho.
Barnhurst. Mr. Tho. Ashby. Mr. John Norris. Mr. Edw. Johnson: M. Tho. Underhil.
New Stewards.
Col. James Drax. Mr. Tho. Hopkins. Mr. Laurence Warkman. L. Col. Tho. Randall.
Mr. Rich. Chandler: Mayor Raph Tasker. Mr. Rich. Smith. Mr. William Bridges.


Heb. 10. 34. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good
works.
THese meetings of Countrymen are no new thing, though of late years they have
been interrupted by reason of the sad calamities, and distracted times, which
our sins had plunged us into. They have formerly, and may again be improved to
a twofold benefit, and advantage.

First, that by acquaintance, and society of Countrymen, love might be bred,
nourished, and increased amongst them.

Secondly, That upon consideration of Gods goodness, bounty, and mercy to our
selves here in this City, we may take occasion to remember the place of our
Nativity, and provoke one another to think upon, and do some good works which
may conduce, and tend to the publik benefit of the same. Now these being the
principal ends of our present meeting, give me leave (Dear Countrymen) to
bespeake you, as our Apostle does his Countrymen here in my Text.

Let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good works. But that
we may better understand the occasion of these words, we must look back to what
went before: And we shall find that the principal scope of the Apostle in the
former part of this Epistle is to prove that Christ by his Priestly office, and
offering up himself a sacrifice to his Father, has fulfilled, and also
abolished all the Legal Sacrifices; and purchased eternal Redemption for his
people: In the former part of this Chapter he sums up this Doctrine in few
words, and then tells us what sweet use may be made of the same. As first, that
therefore we should be constant in the faith of Christ. ver. 23. Let us (says
he) hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering. 2ly. That we should
be sincere in mutual love in our private conversing together. ver. 24. Let us
consider one another to provoke unto love. 3. At unity in public
Church Assemblies. ver. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves
together, as the manner of some is. 4. Patient under the Cross of Christ, from
ver. 32. to the end of the Chapter.

Verse 22. he had exhorted them to draw near unto God with a true heart in full
assurance of Faith, and ver. 23. To adhere unto, and avow the Doctrine of
Christ, and that in times of trial, and persecution upon this ground, because
he is faithful that has promised, and thereupon in this Verse of my Text he
shows how they may be furthered therein. viz. If they would consider one
another to provoke unto love, and to good works. Wherein we have.

1. The duty pointed out: Let us consider one another. 2. The end of the duty.
To provoke unto love, and to good works.
Let us consider one another: the words in the Original are, (...),
Observemus: Let us observe one another; It does not barely signify to look
into, or consider, Sed magno studio mentem in rem intendere. But to bend the
mind with the greatest study, and diligence that can be to find out a matter.

To provoke: (...): which word is taken two ways in Scripture. 1. In a bad
sense, for a sharp contention: as Act. 15. 39. where speaking of the difference
which arose between Paul, and Barnabas about taking John Mark along with them,
the Text says, The contention was so sharp between them, that they departed
asunder one from the other. Or such a provoking as makes all the body to
tremble, or that sets the teeth on edge: of (...) and (...). Acetum, vinegar;
but here secondly: It Is used in a good sense for stirring up, or quickening one
another to a necessary duty.

From the context, as this Verse looks back to the two and twentieth, we may
gather this proposition.

That there is no true Faith which is not accompanied with love, Doct.
and good works. The Apostle James: Chap. 2. Tells us of a twofold Faith: A
dead Faith, and a living Faith: A dead Faith is that which consists in words
and profession only without good works. ver. 14. What (says he) does it
profit, my brethren, though a man says he has Faith; and has not works? Can
Faith save him? He means, such a livelesse, saplesse Faith: For (says he)
ver. 17. Faith if it has not works, is dead being alone: For (according to the
usual Maxim) as Faith justifies our persons, so works justify our Faith: And
Paul writing to Titus, charge him to teach this Doctrine to his hearers,:
This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, That they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain
good works.

This therefore cashieres from the number of true believers all those Use.
rough, and rugged Esau's, who, Salamander-like, love to live in the fire of
contention, and are never well but when they are embroiled in quarrels. Or
that instead of provoking to love, do all that they can to make National, and
Church divisions by distinctive names, and titles seeking to divide, and
subdivide us till they have crumbled us all to pieces. A most Diabolical sin,
who is the Author of Division, and among the vulgar is known by his cloven
foot: whereas God is the God of Peace: Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace: the
Gospel, the Gospel of Peace: Christ's Ministers the Ambassadors of peace: and
therefore all his people should cry with David: I am for peace. Psalm. 120. 7.

Secondly, all such Solifidians, as boast much of their Faith, but are not
careful to maintain good works. These are barren Figtrees that bear fair
leaves of profession without any fruit at all: but when Christ shall come with
his basket and turn up their fair leaves, and find no fruit, he will set down
his basket, and take up his Axe: as Mat. 3. 10. Now also is the axe laid unto
the root of the Trees therefore every tree which brings not forth good fruit,
is hewn: down, and cast into the fire. Or else he will curse them for their
barrenness, as he did that tree. Mar. 11. 14. No man eat fruit of thee
hereafter for ever.

Let us consider one another: Hence observe.

That Christians should with much seriousness, and diligence consider, Doct.
and acquaint themselves each with other.

Quest. But what is it that they are to observe each in other?

Answ. 1. Their gifts, graces, experiences, and virtues to draw them forth for
their mutual benefit. 2. Their wants, and weakness to pity, cover, and heal
them. 3. Their dispositions, and temper, that we may know the better how to
deal with them: According to that of Jud. verse 22. 23. Of some have
compassion, making a difference: and others save with fear, pulling them out of
the fire.


Therefore when we meet together we should not squander away Use.
our precious time in frothy, and idle discourses, or in vain, and fruitless
impertinences: but according to the Apostles counsel here: we should consider
one another to provoke unto love and to good works. And this brings me to the
principal point, for which I made choice of this Text. viz.

That it is the duty of all Christians to provoke one another to love, Doct.
and to good works; which Point you see consists of two branches: First, that
we should provoke one another to love; So did Abraham speaking to Lot. Genesis 13.
8. Let there be no strife I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my
Herdsmen, and thy Herdsmen, for we be brethren. And Joseph speaking to his
brethren. Genesis 45. 24. See that ye fall not out by the way. And Peter speaking
to all Christians, says, Love the brotherhood. 1 Pet. 2. 17.

Quest. What is this love that we must provoke one another to?

Answ. It Is a Christian virtue, or Grace infused into us by the Holy Ghost,
whereby we sincerely love God for himself, and our brethren for Gods sake. I
call it a Christian virtue, or Grace to distinguish it from the Est ignis ab
igne spiritus accensus Pros.
natural affection of love which we bring into the World with us. And from
that moral virtue which may be acquired by our own diligence, and industry:
whereas this is the work of Gods spirit in us, and an evidence of our future
salvation. 1 Ioh. 3. 14. For we know that we have passed from death to life,
because we love the brethren, and he that loves not his brother (with this
holy love) abides in death. This love you see has a two fold Objection. God,
and man: The latter I conceive is principally meant in this Text, and therefore
I shall speak to that, and it is an uniting, and cementing Grace, that soders
men's hearts one to another, as Jonathans to David. 1 Samuel 18. 1. The soul of
Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and he loved him as his own soul. And
this is that which the Apostle exhorts us to. Ephesians. 4. 2. 4. -- Forbearing one
another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace. And Col. 2. 2. That their hearts might be comforted being knit together
in love. And this is that for which the Primitive Christians were so famous.
Act. 4. 32. The multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one
soul, etc.

Quest. What arguments may we use to provoke one another to love?

Answ. 1. Propter praeceptum: Because of the command of God, and were there no
other reason for it, this should be instar omnium, instead of all: Because God
will have it so: Indeed I may say of this as David does of Goliaths sword.
There is none to that: We see how peremptorily our Apostle requires it here.
Provoke unto love, and our Savior Christ is not less urgent. Joh. 13. 34. A
new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another: and this precept
he backs with the best president: As I have loved you that ye also love one
another. And that beloved Disciple that seems to be wholly composed of love,
does often inculcate it. 1 Ioh. 3. 16. He would have our love so ardent, as to
lay down our lives for the brethren, and ver. 18. Let us not love in word,
neither in tongue (only) but in deed and in truth* and ver. 23. This is his
commandment -- that we love one another* and Chap. 4. 7. Let us love one
another: for love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God, and knows
God, and verse 11. If God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. and
ver. 12. If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfected
in us: and in diverse other places of his Epistles. But to this, diverse other
arguments may be added. As

2. Propter unitatem: Because of that unity, and Oneness that is amongst us:
we are all men; therefore of the same kind: and the Apostle tells us. Act. 17.
26. that God has made of one blood all Nations of men, for to dwell on all the
face of the earth. Yea more: We are all Christians, and therefore should love
one another. Yet more: We are all English men, and therefore should love one
another. Once again: We are all the same County, Warwickshire men, and
therefore should love one another: To all which unities may be added one more,
if we are the same in truth, as we are in profession, we are all members of the
same mystical body whereof Christ is the head. Romans 12. 5. We being many, are
one body in Christ, and every one members one of another.

3. Propter bonitatem, and pulchritudinem: Because of the goodness, and
comeliness of it. Love is an amiable Grace, as afterward I shall show. It Is
lovely in the eyes both of God and man: Yea, they which want it themselves, yet
admire, and love it in others. Psa. 133. 1. David set's an Ecce before it. Ecce
quam bonum, etc. Behold how good, and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity.

4. Propter firmitatem. Because it strengthens us against adversaries: the old
Maxim is, Divide, and impera: They are easy to be ridden by every Usurper, who
are first divided amongst themselves: Hence it was that Micypsa lying on his
death-bead called all his sons together, and caused them to write this sentence
in Golden letters. Concordia parvae res crescunt; Discordia magnae dilabuntur:
By concord small things are increased, and strengthened: But by discord the
greatest are overthrown.

And you know the story of Scillurus, who likewise calling for his eighty sons
upon his deathbed, told them that whilst they continued knit together in
brotherly love, like a bundle of darts, or sheaf of Arrows, they would be
altogether invincible, but if once disjoined, or severed by* hatred, they would
quickly become a prey to their adversaries.

5. Propter similitudinem: Because of that likeness that is amongst us: And,
similitudo gignit amorem: Likeness breeds love. We see it in all tame, and
profitable creatures, who loving each other in regard of likeness, feed and
flock together: similis gaudet simili, Like loves his like. And truly we are
more brutish then they, if this moves us not to love one another. Indeed it is
the property of wild beasts, as of Lions, Bears, Tygres, etc. to love solitude
in howling Wildernesses, and to walk abroad alone, and if they meet to
intertear one another: But though the great Tyrants of the world join house to
house, and Isa. 5. 8.
field to field that they may dwell alone. Yet seeing God has made us sociable
creatures, and Religion has made us Christians: Let us provoke one another to
love.

6. Propter propinquitatem. Because of that near alliance, and kindred that is
amongst us: If we be real as well as Nominall Christians? we have all one
Father: God: One Mother: the Church: One Redeemer: Jesus Christ: One
Sanctifier: The Holy Ghost. Are nourished at the same breasts: The sincere milk
of Gods word: Are heirs to the same Kingdom. The Kingdom of Heaven, and are
often told by Gods word, that we are all brethren. Hence the Apostle Peter
inferrs that we should love as brethren. 1 Pet. 3. 8.

7. Because it is the best Ornament that we can put upon us: Better then a
chain to the neck, or a Ring to the finger. Yea, we should cloth our selves
with love as with a Garment. Col. 3. 14. Above all put on charity, which is the
bond of perfectness. But alas! It Is now almost out of fashion: Many talk
indeed of love, but show no fruits of it: as some boast of costly Garments in
their Wardrobes, or Chests, but wear them not, whereas God has given us this
Garment of love to wear; neither need we fear wearing of it out, as we may
other Garments: For it is the better for using, as Gold is for rubbing that
shines the brighter: yet, as we are not born with cloths on our back, nor with
chains about our neck: So neither are we borne with this Grace of love in our
hearts, but are by nature hateful, and hating one another. Tit. 3. 3.

8. The sacred Scriptures heap up many motives to stir us up to love: as 1. It
will prove us to be true Disciples of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, not
spurious, nor bastards. Ioh. 13. 35. By this shall all men know that you are my
Disciples, if ye have love one to another. 2. It will be a great ornament to
our profession, and will beautify the Gospel of Jesus Christ: Tertullian
tells us, that in his time the mutual love amongst Christians was so eminent,
and remarkable, that the Heathens taking notice of it, could say, Ecce quam
invicem se diligunt Christiani: Behold how loving the Christians are one to
another. 3. It will declare, and demonstrate the truth of our Faith. Gal. 5. 6
For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by love. 4. It shows that we are
translated from death to life. 1 Ioh. 3. 14. and hereby we may know that we are
so. Yea, fifthly, Love is the life of God, Angels, and Heaven: Of God, for God
is love. 1 John 4. 8. Of the blessed Angels: for there is nothing but love, and
concord amongst them. Of Heaven: for that will perfect* our love, and put an end
to all the differences which are too rife even amongst Gods own people in this
world: when holy Grynaeus lay upon his death-bead, he told a friend that came
to visit him, that he was going to that place, ubi Luthero cum Zuinglio optime
*convenit, where Luther, and Zuinglius agreed well, though they could never
agree upon earth. 5. In regard of the eternity of this grace it is that the
Apostle 1 Cor. 13. 8. tells us, that charity never fails; and in this regard
prefers it before Faith, and Hope. verse 13. Now abides Faith, Hope, and
Charity, but the greatest of these is Charirity. 6. It Is a sign we walk by
the light of Gods Word, and spirit. 1 Ioh. 2. 10. He that loves his brother
abides in the light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him. 7. This
Grace is of God, and shows that we are born of God. 1 Ioh. 4. 7. Let us love
one another, for love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God. 8.
Without this Grace of love no duty is accepted though never so difficult, or
specious in the eyes of the World* 1 Cor. 13. 3. Though I bestow all my goods
to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not Charity,
it profits me nothing. 9. Love will draw love from others: Cos Amoris amor
Love is the whetstone, or Load stone rather of Love; ut ameris Ama: If you
would be beloved of others, you must love others. Love is a coin that must be
returned in its own kind: the excellent properties of it are further set forth
by the Apostle Paul. 1 Cor. 13. 4. 5. etc. Charity suffers long, and is kind,
etc. But we must remember (as was said before) that love comes from God, and
therefore must be begged of God* 1 Ioh. 4. 7. All these things considered, will
furnish you with arguments enough wherewith to provoke both your selves and one
another to love. Especially if on the contrary we do but remember what evils
are attributed by the spirit of God to the contrary vice of hatred. 1 Ioh. 2.
11. He that hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness. 1. John
3. 15. Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer, and we know that no
murderer has eternal life abiding in him. 1 John 4. 4. 20. If any man say, I
love God and hates his brother, he is a liar: For he that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? And thus
I have opened, and proved the first part of my Doctrine, I am come now to the
second.

That it is the duty of all Christians to provoke one another to good works. Now
in the prosecution of this Thesis, or Position, we shall dispatch three things.
First, to speak something by way of explication. Secondly, by way of
confirmation. Thirdly, by way of Application. First, for Explication, we shall
answer several Queries. As

Quest. What work may be called good?

Answ. There are three ingredients required to make up good works.

1. They must be good materialiter, or in the matter of them: They must be such
things as are either commanded, or at least approved of by God. Else he will
say unto us, Who has required these Aa. 2. 12.
things at your hands? There are indeed many actions which glister much in the
eyes of the World, and yet are an abomination in the eyes of God. As the Popish
Fastings, Pilgrimages, Bead-prayers, giving their Prayers to God by number, not
by weight; of which I may say as the Apostle. Col. 2. 23. Which things indeed
have a show of wisdom in Will Worship, and humility, and neglecting of the
body, and yet the Lord abhors them.

2. They must be good quoad fontem, they must proceed from a right principle: A
good heart, a pure conscience, and faith unfeigned. 1 Timothy 1. 5. Now the end of
the Commandment (says the Apostle) is Charity out of a pure heart, etc.
Charity we know is a work commended by God: and yet it is not accepted except it
come from a good Fountain, a good heart, and a pure conscience. For the same
Apostle tells us. Tit. 1. 15. Unto the pure all things are pure: but unto them
that are defiled, and unbelieving is nothing pure: because their mind, and
conscience is defiled. He tells us also, Heb. 11. 6. that without faith it is
impossible to please God; and therefore all works, though materially good, if
done by unbelievers, they are but splendida peccata, as the Father said: But
specious and glittering sins.

3. They must be good, quoad finem: They must tend to a right end. viz. the
glory of God in our own, and the salvation of others. Christus opera nostra non
tam actibus, quam finibus pensat: says Zanchy: God does not so much judhe of,
and weigh our works by the actions as by the ends: The want of a right end made
Cain's sacrifice, and (...) zeal, and the Pharisees Fastings, and Prayers, and
Alms abomination to the Lord, who searches the heart, and tries Mat. 6. 2.
etc.
the reins, and knows all our thoughts a far of. We must therefore look well
to our end in all our works, and see, that as the Sun puts out the light of the
fire, so the glory of God puts out all other selfish ends whatsoever.

Quest. But what good works should we provoke one another to upon this
occasion.

Answ.The most seasonable is at this our feast to remember the place of our
Nativity, the Country where we were born, and to do some good for that. I
shall humbly propose these good works to your Christian considerations. First,
laying down this Position: That the chiefest work of mercy is that which tends
to the benefiting and enriching of other men's souls: The Gospel indeed has
(through Gods mercy) been preached, and professed in Warwickshire ever since
the first reformation in King Edward the sixth his days of glorious memory,
and many blessed Martyrs suffered there for the truth under that Marian
Persecution which followed: As sincere Sanders, gracious Glover, and many
others. I could also name unto you many famous lights set up in the Candlestick
of Warwickshire in the reign of our three late Sovereigns: besides such as are
now there living; So that that Country has been a Goshen, when many other
parts of the Nation have been in a Cymerian, and Egyptian darkness; Yea, give
me leave to tell you that which it may be you have not formerly taken notice
of, that in Warwickshire about the year of our Lord 1519. the little Park by
Coventry was perfumed with the odours of six of the Saints bodies burned in it
upon one day for their profession, See my English Martyrologie. page 64.
and perseverance in the truth: Besides diverse others which suffered not long
after: So that it appears, that before the name of Luther was heard of in the
Christian world, Religion was propagated in our Native Country. Yet

1. Are there not some blind, and barren places in the same overspread with
Popery, and profanesse, where the people perish for lack of Knowledge, and that
for want of a godly, able, and faithful Ministry: And that for want of means
to maintain such amongst them? And may we not some way or other be
isntrumental this day to help them to the bread of life, where we first drew
in our breath of life?

2. Is there not a great want of Schools in some parts of the County, whereby
the poorer sort of Inhabitants, who cannot maintain their children abroad at
public schools, are disabled to breed them up in Knowledge, and learning as
otherwise they might, and would do?

3. Are there not many Widows, and Orphans of godly Ministers, and
Christians, whose husbands, and Parents have been ruined, and undone in the
late plundering times, ( Warwickshire having born as great a share therein as
most Counties in England) and whose present, and pressing necessities cry aloud
unto us for relief, and pity?

4. Are there not many hopeful youths whose Parents are unable to send, and
place them in this City, who might be far more serviceable to God, and their
Country, (as your own experience manifests) And may there not be some stock
of moneys raised for the taking of, and placing forth such, and when they come
out of their time to lend unto them gratis upon good security for a certain
time, which might enable them to live comfortably all their life after?
Christian friends, I take not upon me to prescribe which* or how many of these
shall be taken into your consideration: but surely to further such good works
will be very acceptable to God, and worthy our present meeting: Let us
therefore according to the words of my Text, Provoke one another to love, and
to good works.

Quest. But who are they that must do such good works?

Answ. 1. It Is a duty that most especially is incumbent upon rich men, the
Scripture every where calling upon them to be rich in good works, as 1 Timothy 6.
17, 18. Charge them that are rich in this world that they be not high minded,
nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy: That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate: For God gives them not riches to hoard up,
and to lie by them, but to do good with them: and for this cause there are poor
always with us, that rich men might never want objects of their charity, and
liberality, whereas the earth being the Lords, and the fullness thereof, he
could make all rich, but he will not do it: as Mar. 14. 7. Our Savior Christ
tells us. The poor ye have always with you, and whenever you will, you may
do them good. Yea, we must do good unto them, and if we have any love to God,
we cannot but express it by showing our love this way to his poor members.
For 1 John 3. 17. Who so has this worlds good, and sees his brother has
need, and shuteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love
of God in him? By which interrogation is employed a more vehement negation: viz.
that certainly the love of God dwells not in such a man. Yea, the Apostle
James thundereth against such merciless, and hardhearted rich men, as are
nothing affected with the miseries, and wants of their poor brethren. Jam. 2.
13. He shall have judgment without mercy that shows no mercy. As we see in
the example of the rich man in Hell that was denied a drop of water, because he
had denied to relieve poor Lazarus: Non habuit guttam, quia non dedit micam,
says Saint Augustine: He had not a drop of water, because he had denied a
crumb of bread. What good then will all your riches do you, whilst gaining the
world you lose your own souls* Yea, I desire covetous rich men often to read
that flaming Text. Iam. 5. 1, 2, 3. Go to now ye rich men, weep, and howl for
the miseries which shall come upon you: Your riches are corrupted, and your
garments motheaten: Your gold, and silver is cankred, and the rust of them will
be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire, ye have
heaped up treasure together for the last days.

2. Yet the poorer sort also must give something out of their poverty: For
there are none of us here present that are so poor but there are others poorer,
and in such a case we must remember the widow. Mar. 12. 42. Who cast in two
mites, which make a farthing: and see how grateful this was unto Christ, who
did not only take notice of it, and commend it to his Disciples; but has left
it upon record to her everlasting credit, that she of her want did cast in all
she had, even (...) All her life, or livelihood. How also does the holy Apostle
Paul commend the poor Macedonians for their Bounty to their poor brethren in
Judeah. 2 Cor 7. 2, 3. That in a great trial of affliction, the abundance of
their joy, and their deep poverty, abounded unto the riches of their
liberallity. For to their power (I bear record) and beyond their power they
were willing of themselves: where we see their poverty was no hindrance to
their liberallity toward those that were poorer then themselves: And though
such persons have little to give, yet let them give a little of that little,
and they shall not lose their reward. Mat. 10. 42. Whosoever shall give to
drink, to one of these little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a
Disciple, verily I say unto you (says Christ) he shall in no wise lose his
reward. Ye know how the Lord blessed the poor widow of Sarepta for relieving
the Prophet Elijah in his wants 1 King. 17. 16.

3. But suppose thou have nothing to give (though it can hardly be supposed)
yet look upon the wants of thy native Country, and contribute prayers for those
that are in misery there. This will cost thee nothing out of thy purse: Yea
bleed over their necessities, Isa. 58. 10.
and let the bowels of thy compassion erne over them. Et si nihil al^ud habes,
da Lachrymulam: magnum enlm solatium afflicto est in sericordia: says Gregory
Nazianzen. If thou have nothing else, give a tribute of tears: For it is a great
comfort for those that are in misery to be commiserated, and pitied: Look upon
the blind places of the Country which are overgrown with Popery and profanesse,
and do as thy Master Christ commands: Mat. 9. 37. 38. The harvest truly is
plenteous, but the laborers are few: Pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest
that he will send forth laborers into his Harvest. Look also upon their bodily
wants, and if thou have not wherewithal to supply them, be active in
persuading others to liberality. It was the great commendations See his life in
my first part of Lives. p. 97. Eodem p. 100.
of Ephrem Syrus, that when he had nothing himself to give to the poor, by his
sweet, and attractive sermons, he stirred up the hearts of others to relieve
them. The like we read of Saint Basil, that in the time of a Famine he sold his
Lands, and all his other goods to relieve the poor, and stirred up other rich
Merchants by Scripture and sweet speeches to contribute to their necessities.

Thus having answered such objections as might lie in the way to obstruct, and
hinder your bounty, and liberality at this your meeting: I am come in the next
place to give you some motives, and arguments why you should take this present
opportunity of provoking one another to good works for the public benefit of
our Country.

1. Consider how much it may tend to the advancement of Gods glory, when
thanksgivings are returned by many unto God in your behalf. The Italians boast
that Italy is the Garden of the World, and Tuscany the Garden of Italy: How
much trulier may I say that England is the Garden of the World? For if Italy
abounds with superfluities? I am sure that England much more abounds with all
manner of necessaries for the life of man: It being a land (as Palestine)
flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all Lands: and wherein God
feeds us with the fat of the kidneies of Wheat: Or if Italy abounds, or exceeds
us in temporalls! I am sure England far exceeds in spiritualls, being a Goshen,
whist the other is an Egypt: A Land wherein (through Gods infinite mercy) we
enjoy the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, whilst Italy sits in
darkness, and in the region, and shadow of death: And as they call Tuscany the
Garden of Italy, I may call Warwickshire the Garden of England, or England
Epitomized in the Woodland, and Fielden parts of it: the one abounding with
flourishing, and fruitful Pastures, for Dairies: the other with rich, and
fertile Arable Land for corn. Yet this Garden in some places of it wants
weeding, and some tender Plants want nourishment, and if God shall please to
make you this day isntrumental for the promoting of either, or both these
works, I may say with the Apostle Paul. 2 Cor. 9. 12. The administration of
this service will not only supply the wants of the Saints; but will be
abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God in your behalf: Give me leave
therefore to bespeak you in the words of Cyprian, Ne dormiat in Thesauris tuis,
quod Pauperi prodesse potest: let not that sleep, and rust in thy Treasury,
which may be profitable to the poor. And again, Quod aliquando de necessitate
amittendum est, sponte pro Divina remuneratione distribuendum est. That which a
man must sometime necessarily part with: Its wisdom for him to distribute it
so, that God may everlastingly reward him.

2. Consider how exceeding advantageous your liberality in this kind will be to
your selves, seeing hereby you make God your debtor. Pro. 19. 17. He that gives
to the poor, lends to the Lord. Yea, Faeneratur Domino, he lends upon Usury,
and the Lord binds himself to repay it: and in that text gives him security
under his own hand for it. That which he has given will he repay him again.
The Hebrew word implies that he will do it fully, and abundantly: Mostly in
this world, but infallably in the world to come.

Quest. But how does the Lord use to repay such mercy, and good works?

Answ. 1. With spiritual blessings: Those that for conscience sake, and 2 Cor.
^. 7.
in obedience unto God do such good works, he will make them to abound in every
grace. Observe (I beseech you) what God by Solomon has promised. Pro. 11. 25.
The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall be watered
also himself. And what the Prophet Esaias C. 58. 10, 11. If thou draw out thy
soul to the hungry, and satisfiest the afflicted soul: then shall thy light
arise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noon day: And the Lord shall
guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy
bones: And thou shall be like a watered Garden, like a spring of water whose
waters fail not. And what by the Prophet David. Psalm. 112. 9. He has
dispersed, he has given to the poor, his righteousness endures for ever: his
horn shall be exalted with honor.

2. With variety of Temporal blessings: For God usually blesses such.

1. In their outward estate, increasing that. Pro. 11. 24. There is that
scatters, and yet increases: and there is that withholdeth more then is
meet, but it tends to poverty. Bounty (says one) is the most compendious way
to plenty; neither is getting, but giving the best way to thrift. For in works
of mercy, and charity, our scattering is increasing, no spending, but a
lending, no laying out but a laying up. Pro. 11. 24. The Emperor Tiberius the
second, See my Mirror in Charity.
being a valiant, godly, and liberal Prince, the more bountiful that he was
to the poor, the more his riches increased; so that he had such quantities of
Gold, Silver, and precious things as none of his Predecessors ever attained the
like. I suppose you are not strangers to that story, of a certain godly, and
charitable Bishop of Millain, who journeying with his servant, was met by some
poor people that begged an Alms of him: The Bishop commanded his man to give
them all that little money that he had, which was three Crowns: But his servant
thinking to be a better husband for his Master, gave them but two Crowns,
reserving the third for their expenses at night. Soon after certain Noble men
meeting the Bishop, and knowing him to be a good man, and liberal to the poor,
commanded two hundred Crowns to be delivered to the Bishops servant for his
Masters use: The man having received the money, ran with great joy, and told his
Master of it: Ah, said the Bishop, what wrong have thou done both to me, and
thy self? Si enim tres dedisses, trecent as accepisses: If thou had given
those three Crowns as I appointed thee, thou should have received three
hundred: As Melancthon relates the story. And indeed such open-handed, and
openhearted Christians have more then once Gods word of promise for such an
ample retribution. Deuteronomy. 15. 7. If there be among you a poor man of any of thy
brethren, thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor
brother: ver. 8. but shall open thine hand wide unto him. ver. 10. Thou shall
surely give him, and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him:
because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy
works; and in all that thou put thine hand unto. And Psalm. 41. 2. The Lord
promises such a merciful man that he shall be blssed upon the earth: He shall
not only have the upper (as before) but the nether springs: He shall be
blessed with the dew of Heaven, and with the fatness of the Earth. And Psalm.
112. 3. Wealth, and riches shall be in his house. And Pro. 3, 9, 10. Honor the
Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase. So
shall thy barnes be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new
wine,

2. The Lord has promised them safety, and protection in perilous, and
dangerous times. Ps. 41. 1, 2. Blessed is he that considers the poor: The
Lord will deliver him in time of trouble: The Lord will preserve, and keep him
alive, and thou will not deliver him unto the will of his enemies. Again, Isa.
58. 8. The glory of the Lord shall be his rereward, For his safety, and defense
against dangers. Paulinus Bishop of Nola having consumed all his estate, Paulus
Diaconus.
in redeeming poor Christian Captives: at length having nothing left, pawned
himself for a certain widows Son: but the Barbarians (moved with his
goodness, and charity) returned him home, and many Captives with him freely

3. The Lord will support, and comfort such with Divine consolations upon their
bed of sickness, when all worldly, and creature comforts fail them; and when
such soul-ravishing comforts are more worth then all the world. Psa. 41. 3. The
Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, thou will make all his
bed in his sickness. Ps. 112. 4. unto such there arises light in darkness: v.
7. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed trusting in the
Lord. Yea, see that sweet promise. Isa. 58. 9. Then shall thou call and the
Lord shall answer; Thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I am.

4. You may hereby make God your debtor at death to send his blessed Angels to
guard, and transport your souls through the territories, and regions of the
Prince of the aier into Abraham's bosom. According to the counsel of our
Savior Christ. Luke 16. 9. Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when you fail they may receive you into everlasting
habitations. Hereby indeed we shall do as the blessed Apostle Paul advises us.
1 Timothy 6. 19. Lay up in store for our selves a good foundation against the time
to come that ye may lay hold on eternal life. And for our further
encouragement, let us remember what wise Solomon tells us. Eccles. 11. 1. Cast
thy bread up on the waters: for thou shall find it after many days.

5. Yea, such liberall-hearted persons after death leave a blessed memorial
behind them: and Solomon tells us. Eccles. 7. 1. that Ps. 112. 6. 9.
a good name is better then precious ointment: yet that will leave a sweet sent
in the room when it is removed: How much more shall the name of such merciful
men be continued? See it in the example of good Obadiah, who took the Lords
Prophets, and hid them 1 King. 18. 13.
by fifty in a Cave, and fed them with bread and water. How sweet is the
memorial of that merciful Proselit Cornelius? whose prayers, Act. 10. 2
and Alms as they were had in remembrance before God, So are they recorded in
the sacred Scriptures to his everlasting commendations. Act. 9. 36.
The like may be said of Dorcas, and many others. Our own Histories likewise
furnish us with plentiful examples of this kind: As of Master Bradford, Georg
Wiseheart, Giles of Bruxels, Doctor See my Mirror p. 117. etc
Tailor, Master Fox, Master Hooper; and of later time, the young Lord
Harrington, Mr. Wheatley of Banhury, etc.

6. Lastly, God is made a debtor to such to bless their posterities after
them: To such says the Lord. Is. 58. 12. They that shall be of thee shall
build the old wast places: thou shall raise up the foundations of many
generations: and thou shall be called the repairer of the breach: And Psa. 112.
2. His seed shall be mighty upon Earth: the generation of the upright shall be
blessed: Neither do we want examples of Gods faithful performance of this
promise: How well did Mephibosheth fare for the mercy which his Father Jonathan
showed to David? And what said David to old Barzillai, who had mercifully fed
him, and his wearied men when he fled from Absolon? 2 Samuel 19. 38. The King
answered, Chimham (thy son) shall go over with me, and I will do to him that
which shall seem good unto thee: and whatsoever thou shall require of me, that
will I do. I shall only add one famous example of our own: Queen Ann Bullen,
wife to King Henry the eighth, was a very charitable woman, she used to carry a
little purse about her for the poor, thinking no day well spent, wherein some
had not fared the better at her hand: She also kept her maids, and such as were
about her in working, and sowing garments for the poor; and see how the Lord
dealt with her, in her only child our renowned Qu. Eliz. whom the Lord
wonderfully delivered from See her life in my 2d. part of Lives.
death in the Reign of her Sister Qu. Mary, and after advanced her to the
Throne, preserved her from the rage of Rome, Spain, and the Devil, giving her
a long life, and glorious Reign to the comfort of her friends, and terror of
her enemies.

And thus I have showed you how by your charity, and liberality you make God
your debtor, though, non ex merito, yet ex promisso, not out of merit (as the
Papists teach) yet by virtue of his promise, which (we use to say) is due debt:
Now I proceed to give you some further Motives and arguments to quicken you to
this duty.

3. We should therefore take the present opportunity of doing some public
good for our Country, because we know not how little a while we may enjoy our
estates: We have of late seen Civil War, and plundering times wherein many of
plentiful means have been suddenly brought to poverty: and sure I am, that the
same sins which brought down those judgments are still common. Yea, I fear, I
may truly say, that instead of amendment we wax worse, and worse, and our
provocations are greater then formerly: Why may we not then expect some
sweeping, and desolating judgment to be impendent over our heads? and should
we by a general, or some particular hand of God be emptied of that fullness
which we now enjoy, we shall then be disabled to do such good works though we
would: But me thinks I hear some objecting, and saying, Object.
that because we know not how little a while we shall enjoy what we have, its
therefore good to make much of it whilst we have it, and to lay up against a
rainy day?

To which I answer, that the spirit of God which is much wiser then we, has
made the contrary inference. Eccl. 11. 2. Give Answ.
a portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou know not what evil shall
be upon the Earth: And the Apostle Paul. Gal. 6. 10. Bids us whilst we have
opportunity to do good to all men: but especially to the household offaith.

4. It Is the readiest, and surest way to obtain mercy from God in our need, if
we carefully, and conscienciously relieve others in their needs: we have
Christ's own testimony for this. Mat. 5. 7. Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy: And the same is largely held forth by the Prophet Isa. 58.
from 7. to 13. as before.

5. It will afford much inward peace, and comfort: For as light and influence
accompanies the Sun: and as heat goes along with the fire: and as every flower
has its peculiar sweetness: So every good work carries meat in the mouth,
comfort in the performance. Pro. 21. 15. It Is joy to the just to do judgment.
The like may be said of works of mercy: It will afford joy to them that do
them: whereas cruelty, and unmercifullnesse shall be a sting in the
consciences, and a dagger at the heart of those that are guilty thereof.

6. God expects that like the Tree of Life mentioned. Rev. 22. 21. we should
bring forth fruit every month. That we should be like the Lemon tree that
ever and anon sends forth young Lemons, so soon as the other fall off through
ripeness. Or like the Egyptian Figtree, which Solinus speaks of, which bears
fruit seven times in the year. Or, more perennis aquae: Like Fountains which
continually send forth fresh streams of water. But alas! most Christians on
the contrary are like unto the Cypress tree that is fair, and tall, but
altogether fruitless: Or like that Figtree mentioned in the Parable, Luke 13.
6, 7. A certain man (said Christ) had a Figtree planted in his Vineyard, and he
came, and sought fruit thereon but found none. Then said he to the dresser of
his Vineyard, (mark the doom of such) Behold these three years came I seeking
fruit on this Figtree, and find none; Cut it down: Why cumbreth it the ground?

7. Lastly, God will make honorable mention of such merciful, and liberal
persons at the day of judgment where your labor of love showed to the poor
members of Jesus Christ shall not be forgotten. Mat. 25. 34, 35. Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world: For I was an hungered and ye gave me meat: I was therstie and ye
gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked and ye clothed me: I
was sick, and ye visited me: I was in Prison, and ye came unto me: -- verse 40.
In as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye
have done it unto me.

Therefore it exhorts us all here present to improve this our Use.
meeting, as the Apostle advises us here, To provoke one another unto love,
and to good works. But many think that it will be time enough for them to think
of doing good works when they come to make their Wills before their death.
Truly I will not discourage men from this duty at any time: But give me leave
to tell you in the words of a Reverend Divine: Good works (says he) done at a
man's death are like a dark-lanthome that gives light only to those that come
after it: but good works done in a man's life, are like a torch that equally
gives light both to those that go before, and to those that follow after it.
Yea, defer it not till another year, as some would persuade, for you know not
whether ye may live till an other year. Yea, what says the Apostle, I am. 4.
14. Ye know not what shall be on the morrow: For what is your life? It is even
a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

Take therefore the present opportunity: as Paul exhorts you. Gal. 6. 10. Non
semper estas erit: Summer will not last always: Post est occasio calva: A
precious opportunity once lost, may never be recovered again. Bis dat qui cito
dat. He that gives speedily, gives twice. Remember Solomon's advice. Pro. 3. 28.
Say not to thy neighbor, go, and come again, and to morrow I will give, when
thou have it by thee. Remember how grateful a Sacrifice it is to God. Heb. 13.
16. To do good and to distribute forget not; for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased. Hence Cyprian, Qui Pauperi Eleemosynam dat, Deo suavitatis odorem
sacrificat, He that give an Alms to the poor, offers a sweet smelling
sacrifice unto God, and the same Father tells us, that Dives sine Eleemosyna,
arich man without alms is one of the great absurdities in the life of man: And
says Gregory Nyssen: There is no excuse for hardheartednesse: For where can a
rich man cast his eyes, but he may behold objects for his charity. As the
husbandman casts some of his corn into a fruitful soil, whereby in due time he
reaps with advantage. So do you with your worldly blessings, sow them in the
bowels, and on the backs of your poor Countrymen, members of Christ, and in
the day of Harvest you shall find a great increase. Only by way of caution let
me give you this advice: Sow not sparingly. For 2 Cor. 9. 6. He which sows
sparingly shall reap sparingly; And he that sows bountifully; shall reap
bountifully. And Pro. 22. 9. He that has a bountiful eye shall be blessed: for
he gives of his bread to the poor. Hence Eccl. 11. 2. Give a portion to seven,
and also to eight, and verse 6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening
withhold not thy hand. But especially remember the words of our Savior Christ.
Luke 6. 38. Give and it shall be given unto you, good measure, pressed down,
shaken together, and running over shall men give into your bosom* For with the
same measure you mete withal, it shall be measured to you again. Again Give
not grudgingly: Every man (says the Apostle. 2 Cor. 9. 1 Timothy 6. 18
7.) according as he purposes in his heart, so let him giveu ^ot grudgingly,
or ofnecessity: For God loves a cheerful giver. Romans 12. 8. He that shows
mercy must do it with cheerfulness. They must be ready to distribute, willing
to communicate: And for your further encouragement herein, I am requested to
give you notice, that what God shall stir up your hearts to contribute at this
time, shall be faithfully employed to good uses by your Stewards, who will be
accountable to you for the same at the next Feast. Consider what has been
spoken, and the Lord stir up your hearts to provoke one another unto love,
and to good works.

Amen.
Errata
Page 4. l. 34. r. Goliah's for Goliaths. p. 5. l. 14. r. we are all of the
same County. p. 8. l. 36. r. judge, for judhe.

FINIS.

