THE LIFE and DEATH OF Julius Caesar, The first Founder of the ROMAN EMPIRE AS
ALSO The LIFE and DEATH OF Augustus Caesar In whose Reign our Blessed LORD, and
SAVIOR JESUS CHRIT was borne.

By Sa. Clarke sometime Pastor in St. Bennet Finck London.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door. 1665.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF Julius Caesar The first Founder of the ROMAN EMPIRE.
JUlius Caesar by the Fathers side was of a very Caesar's Parentage.
Noble and ancient Family, and by the Mothers side he descended from the Kings
of Rome, who were extracted from the Trojan Aeneas. When he was a young man,
Sylla having gotten the Lordship of Rome, would have had him put away his Wife
Cornelia, who was the Daughter of Cinna, the Dictator, but he could not
prevail with him, either by promises or threats to do it, whereupon he took
away her joynter from him.

Sylla being very busy in putting to Death many of his His danger by Sylla.
enemies, yet passed by Caesar whom he contemned for his youth. And Caesar was
not contented to retire himself in safety inthose stormy times, but came and
made suite to the People for the Priesthood which was then void, when he had
scant any hair on his face: but by Syllas means he suffered a repulse, who was
so irritated hereby, that he determined to have killed him; and when some of
Syllas Friends told him, that it was to no purpose to put so young a man to
Death, he answered, That they did not consider that there were many Marius's in
that one Boy.

Caesar being informed of his danger, secretly fled from Rome, and hid himself
a long time amongst the Sabines, His flight*
wandering from one place to another, yet at length he fell into the hands of a
party of Syllas Soldiers who soughtfor him, but he bribed their Captain with
two Talents, and so escaped. Then went he unto the Sea side, and taking Ship,
he passed into Bythinia unto King Nicomedes. And after a while, he took Sea
again, He is taken by Pirates.
and fell into the hands of some Pirates, who at that time kept all the
Seacoast, with a great Fleet. They asking him twenty Talents for his Ransom,
Caesar laughed them to scorn, as not knowing what a man they had taken, and of
himself promised them fifty Talents, and sent some of his men to get him this
money, so that he was almost left alone amongst these Thieves, which were the
cruellest Butchers in the world, having only one of his Friends and two Slaves
with him.

Thus he continued thirty eight days amongst them, not as a Prisoner, but
rather waited upon as a Prince by them: For he boldly exercised himself amongst
them His boldness.
in their sports: He would make Orations and call them to gether to hear them,
and if they seemed not to understand or regard them, he would call them
Blockheads and Beasts, and laughing, would threaten to hang them, and they took
all in good part, thinking that it proceeded from his Boyish simplicity.

When his Ransom was come, he paid it them and so was dismssied; and presently
arming and manning He is delivered.
some Ships out of the Haven of Miletum, he followed these Thieves, and finding
them yet at Anchor, he took most of them, and got a great Booty, and carried
there persons to the City of Pergamus, and there imprisoned them, whilst
himself went to Jumus, the Governor of Asia, to whom the execution of these
Pirates did belong. But he desiring to get the money, because there was good
store of it, said, that he would consider of these Prisoners at better leisure.
Caesar hereupon returned back to Pergamus, and there hung up all He crucifies
the Pirates.
these Thieves openly upon the Cross, as he often had threatened that he would
do, when they thought that he was but in jest.

When Sylla's power began to decay, Caesar's Friends wrote to him to return to
Rome: But he first went to Rhodes to study there for a time, under the Tuition
of Apollonius, an honest man and excellent Rethorician, His studies.
whose Scholar also Cicero had been. Caesar had an excellent gift to speak
well naturally, which was much helped by his Studies, so that he was very
eloquent, and might have been second to none, but that he applied himself
rather to follow the Wars, and to manage great matters than to pleading of
causes.

When he was returned again to Rome, he immediately His return to Rome.
wan the good willof the People by his Eloquence, and courteous speaking to
every man, being more ceremonious in his deportment than could be expected from
one of his years. Besides, he ever kept a good Table, and He grows popular.
fared well, and was very liberal, which much increased his estimation with
the people. And his enemies, presuming that when he could not hold out that
charge and And is feared.
expense, the favor of the People would quickly decay, they suffered him to go
on, till by degrees he was grown very great, and powerful. So that though some
of them foresaw that his power would at last turn to the destruction of the
Commonwealth of Rome, yet now they knew not how to provent it. Indeed Cicero
was the first man, who mistrusting his dealings, found out his subtilty and
malice, which he cuningly cloaked under a show of courtesy, and familiarity:
Yet (said he) When I consider how finely he combeth his fair bush of hair, and
how smooth it lies, and that I see him scratch his Head with one finger, my
mind gives me then, that such a man should not be so wicked as to design the
ruin of the commonwealth.

The first time that he made proof of the good will of the People was, when he
stood in competition with Pompey to be chosen a Colonel of a thousand Foot
Soldiers, and carried it against him; but a more manifest proof of it was at
the Deathof his Aunt Julia, the Wifeof Marius the elder. For then he solemnly
made an Oration in her commendations in the Market place, and at her Burial,
did boldly show forth the Images of Marius, which was the first time that they
were seen after Syllas Victory over him, at which time Marius and all his
partakershad been proclaimed Traitors and enemies to the Commonwealth. And
whereas some cried out upon Caesar for doing it, the Poeple on the other side
applaudded and thanked him him for it. And whereas there was an ancient custom
that the Romans used to make Funeral Orations in commendation of old Ladys,
but not of young Women, Caesar was the first that praised his own Wife in an
Oration at her funeral, which much engaged the People to him, seeing him of so
kind, and loving a nature.

Shortly after he was made Treasure under Antistius His preferment.
Vetus, the Praetor, for which he ever after honored him, so that when he
himself came to be Praetor, he made his Son Treasurer under him, and when he
came out of that Office, he married his third Wife, whom was Pompeia, and
married his Daughter Cornelia which he had by his first Wife, to Pompey the
Great. He further ingratiated, himself with the People by disbursing a great
sum of his own money in mending the Appian way, when he was made Overseer
thereof: as also for that, when he was chosen an Aedile, he showed the People
the pastime of three hundred and twenty couple of Sword Players, and exceeded
all others in the sumptuousness of his Feasts and sports which he made for the
delight of the People, which made them daily to give him new Offices by way of
requital.

Not long after the High Priest Metellus dyed, and Isauricus and Catulus, two
of the chiefest men, and of the greatest authority in Rome, contended for the
place: Caesar also presented himself to the People and sued for it, and Catulus
fearing the event, sent a great sum of money to Caesar, to procure him to
leave off his suite: Caesar sent him word, that he would disburse a greater
sum than that to maintain the suit against him: and when the Day of Election
came, his Mother bringing him to the Door, Caesar weeping kissed her and said,
His ambition. He is made High Priest.
Mother, This day thou shall see thy Son chief Bishop of Rome, or bannished
from Rome; and accordingly he carred it by the suffrages of the People,
insomuch as the Senate and Noble men were all afraid of him, judging that from
henceforth he would make the People do what he pleased.

Afterward Caesar going into the Senate to clear himself of some accusations
that were brought against him, the Senate keeping him somewhat longer than
ordinary, the People come to the door and called for him, bidding them let him
out. Whereupon Cato fearing an insurraction of the Poor and needy persons, who
put all their hopes in Caesar, moved, that a frank distribution of Corn for a
month should be made amongst them, which indeed put the Commonwealth to the
charge of fifty five hundred Myriades, but it quenched the present danger, and
did happly scatter the best part of Caesar's strength, and that at such time
when he was made Praetor, and had thereby opportunity of doing much mischief.
Yet all the time of that Office, he never attempted to make any alteration in
the Commonwealth. His Moderation.


About this time Clodius was suspected of too much familiarity whith Pompeia
wherefore Caesar put her away. He puts away his wife.
The Government of Spain being fallen unto Caesar as he was Praetor, his
Creditors came with great importunity calling for their debts: But he being
unable to satisfy them, went to Crassus, the richest man in Rome; who stood in
need of Caesar's boldness and courage to withstand Pompeys greatness, who became
his surety to his greediest Creditors, for eight hundred and thirty Talents,
whereupon he was suffered to depart to his Province.

As he passed over the Alps he came to a little poor Village, where his friends
that did accompany him, asked him merrily if there were any contending for
Offices in that Town, and whether there were any strife amongst the Noblemen
for honor? Caesar answered, I cannot tell: but for my part, I had rather be
the chiefest man His ambition.
here, than the second person in Rome. Another time in Spain reading the
History of Alexander he was sorrowful a good while after, and at last burst
out into weeping. His Friends marvelling at it, asked him what was the cause of
his sorrow? He answered, Do you not think that I have good cause to be sorry,
when Alexander ( being no older than myself) had conquered so many Nations and
Countries, whereas hitherto I have done nothing worthy of my self.

When he first came into Spain he followed his business close, and in a short
time had joined ten new Ensigns His victories in Spain.
of Foot Soldiers, unto the other twenty which he had before. Then marching
against the Gallicians, and Lusitanians, he conquered all before him as far as
to the Atlantic Ocean, subduing those People which before knew not the Romans
for their Lords; and then did as wisely take order for the establishing of
Peace. For he reconciled the Cities together, made them Friends: But especially
he pacified all suits of Law betwixt Debtors and Creditors which arose by
usury: Ordaining His Prudence.
that the Creditors should take yearly two parts of the revenew of their
Debtors, till such time as they had paid themselves, and that the Debtors
should have the other third part to live upon. By this he won great estimation
to himself, and returned from his Government very wealthy, his Soldiers also
were full of rich spoils.

The Romans had a custom, that such as desired the honor of Triumph, should
stay without the City, whereas they that sued for the Consulship must of
necessity be there in Person. Caesar coming home just at that time when Consuls
were to be chosen, he sent to request the Senate that he might be permitted to
sue for the Consulship by his friends: Against this Cato at first did
vehemently invey, alleging that it was contrary to an express Law. But when
he perceived that many of the Senators (being Caesar's friends) favored his
request, he cunningly sought all he could to prevent them: whereupon Caesar
resolved rather to give over his suit, for the Triumph, than to lose the
Consulship: So he came into the City, and outwitted all but Cato. His device
was this, Pompey and Crassus were the two greatest His subtilty.
Persons in Rome, and at jarr between themselves: Caesar affecting to make
himself greater than either of them, sought to make them friends, and thereby
to get the power of them both: For indeed, they both affected his Friendship,
that by his help they might supplant one another. And in the end, by his
endeavors, a peace was concluded betwixt them: yet being still jealous one of
another, and fearing to lose Caesar, they both sought to gratify him, and by
this means he made himself equal to either of them: and that power which they
two had formerly usurped, was now divided between three, and in the end Caesar
hereby got the sole command.

This League being made betwixt them, Caesar demanded the Consulship, being
brought into the Assembly for the Election betwixt these two Noble Persons and
was there chosen Consul* together with Calphurnius He is chosen Consul.
Bibulus, without the contradiction of any: And when he was entered into his
Office, he began to put forth Laws meeter for a sedicious Tribune than for a
Consul, because by them he preferred the division of Lands, and distrubuting
Corn to every Citizen Gratis, and all to please the People; And when the
Senators opposed it, he took the advantage, Protesting that the Senate by their
austerity drove him against his will to cleave to the People, and thereupon he
asked Crassus and Pompey in the open Assembly, if they gave their consents to
his Laws? They answered, yea. Then he prayed them to stand by him against those
that threatened to oppose him with the Sword: Crassus said he would, and Pompey
did the like, adding, that he would come with his Sword and Target both against
such; which gave great offense to the Senate, but the common People much
rejoiced.

Caesar to oblige Pompey more to him, gave him his Daughter Julia in marriage,
who was made sure before He marries his Daughter to Pompey
to Servilius Caepio, promising him in her stead Pompeys Daughter, who also was
made sure unto Faustus, the Son of Sylla. And shortly after Caesar himself
married Calphurnia, the Daughter of Piso, whom he caused to succeed him in the
Consulship. Cato then cried out, and called the Gods to witness, that it was a
shameful thing that they should make such havoc in the Commonwealth by such
horrible Bawdy matches, hereby dividing amongst themselves the Government of
Provinces, and great Armies. And Bibulus perceiving that he did but contend in
vain, Caesar being too potent for him, and that his Life was in danger for
opposing these Laws, he kept his House all the rest of his Consulship.

Pompey having married Julia, he filled the Marketplace with Soldiers, and by
open force authorized the Laws which Caesar had made in favor of the People:
He procured also that Caesar had both the Gauls, and all Illyria, with four
Legions, granted him for five years: and when Cato stood up to speak against
it, Caesar He is sent into Gaul.
bad his Officers to lay hold on him, and carry him to Prison, thinking that he
would have appealed to the Tribunes, but Cato said no more, but went his way.
And Caesar seeing that not only the Nobility, but the Commons also were
offended at it, out of respect to Cato's virtues, he secretly prayed one of the
Tribunes that he would take Cato from his Officers, which was done accordingly.
Many of the Senators refused to be present in the Senate under him, but left
the City, because they could not endure his doings; whereupon one Considius, an
old man told him, that the Senators durst not meet because of his Soldiers.
Why then (said Caesar) do not thou also keep home out of the same fear?
Because (said he) My age takes away my fear from me, for having so short a time
to live, I care not to prolong it further.

Caesar preferred Clodius, a base fellow, to be Tribune, who sought the Office
for no other end but to destroy He bettays Cicero.
Cicero, who had discovered his Villainies, and Caesar would not go to his
Province till he had set them two together by the ears, and driven Cicero out
of Italy. Yet did he deserve the name of as brave a General as any that went
before him, if we consider the hard Countries where he made Wars: His gaining
of so many Countries which he adjoined to the Empire of Rome: The multitude and
power of the enemies whom he overcame: The rudeness and Valor of the men with
whom he had to do, whose manners yet he mollified, and civilized: His
courtesy, and clemency to those whom he overcame: His great bounty and
liberallity to those that served under him: As also if we consider the number
of Battles that he fought, and the multitude of enemies that were slain by
him. For in less then ten years, he took by assault above eight hundred His
Valor and great successes.
Towns: He conquered three hundred Nations: and having at several times above
thirty hundred thousand Soldiers against him, he slew a Million of them, and
took as many more Prisoners. He was so entirely beloved of his Soldiers, that
to do him service, and His Soldiers Valor.
to advance his honor, they were invincible: As appears by the example of
Acilius, who in a Sea Fight before the City of Marseiles, boarding one of the
enemies Ships, had his right hand cut off, and yet he ran upon his enemies,
thrusting them in their faces with his Target on his left hand, and so
prevailed that he took their Ship.

One Cassius Scava also in a fight before the City of Dyrrachium, having an eye
put out with an Arrow, his shoulder stricken through with a Dart, and his thigh
with another, having received thirty Arrows upon his Shield, called to his
enemies as if he would yield to them: but when two of them came running to him,
he cut off one of their arms by the shoulder, and wounded the other in the
face, and made them give back till he was fetched off by some of his fellows.
In Brittan also when some of his Captains were driven into a bog full of mire
and dirt, the enemies fiercely assaulting them there, Caesar viewing the
Battle, he saw a private Soldier thrust in amongst the Captains, where he
fought so valiantly that at length he forced the Barbarous People to fly, and
thereby saved the Captains, who otherwise had perished there: And then this
Soldier being the hindmost of all the Captains, marched through the bog,
sometimes swiming, and sometimes on foot, till he gat to the farther side,
only he lost his Target. Caesar wondering at his valor, ran and embraced him:
But the poor Soldier, hanging down his head, with tears in his eyes, fell at
Caesar's feet, begging pardon for leaving his Target behind him. In Africa also,
Scipio having taken one of Caesar's Ships, slew all that were in it, save
Petronius, a Treasurer, to whom he proffered life: But Petronius answered him,
that Caesar's Soldiers used to give others their lives, and not to have their
lives given them, and thereupon slew himself with his own Sword.

Now Caesar bred this courage in them by rewarding them bountifully, and
honoring them. He also gave them a good example by adventuring himself upon
manifest dangers, and putting his Body to extreme pains when there was
occasion, which filled them with admiration. As for his costitution he was
lean, white, and soft skinned, and often troubled with the Headache, and
sometimes with the falling sickness, yet yielded he not to his sickness, but
rather took pains as a Medicine His Temperance.
to cure it, traveling continually, living soberly and commonly lying abroad
in the Fields. Most nights he slept in his Coach, and in the days traveled up
and down to see Cities, Castles, and strong holds. He had always a Secretary
with him in his Coach, who writ as they went by the way, and a Soldier behind
him that carried his Sword. He made such speed when he had gotten his Office at
Rome, that in eight days he came to the River of Rhone. He was an excellent
Rider from his youth: for holding his hands behind him, he would His activity.
run his Horse upon the spur.

In his Wars in Gaul, or France, he used to exercise himself in inditing
Letters by the way, wherein he was so nimble that he employed two Secretaries,
or more at one time. He made very little account of his Diet, Supping one night
in Millane with his Friend Valerius Leo, there was served at Table some Sperage
with perfumed oil instead of Sallet oil, he eat it, and found no fault,
blaming his Friends who were offended at the mistake, saying, that if they
liked it not they should have let it alone, and that it was not good manners
hereby to shame their Friend. At another time in his journey he was forced by
soul weather to shelter himself in a poor Cottage that had but one Cabin, and
that so narrow that one could scant lie in it, whereupon he said to his
Friends, the greatest rooms, are fittest for the greatest men, and Beds for
sick persons, and so caused Oppius that was sick to lie there, and himself with
the rest of his Friends, lay without doors.

The first War that Caesar made in Gaul, was against He overcomes the Swissers.
the Helvetians, or Swissers, and the Tygurines, who having set fire of their
own Cities and Houses, came to invade that part of Gaul which was subject to
the Romans. These were a very Warlike and Valiant People, and in all they were
three hundred thousand souls, whereof there were one hundred and ninety
thousand fighting men: yet were they overthrown by Labienus, Caesar's
Lieutenant at the River Arax. And when the Helvetians afterward came suddenly
to set upon Caesar, he made have to get into some place of strength, and there
ordered his Battle against them, and when one brought him his charging Horse,
he said, when I have overcome mine enemies, then I will get upon him, to pursue
them, and so marching against them on foot, he fiercely charged them: The
Battle continued long before he could make them fly: yet had he more ado to
take their Camp, and to break the strength that they had made with their Carts.
For not only those that were fled into it, made head again, but their Wives
and Children also fought stoutly for their lives, till they were all slain, and
the Battle was scarce ended by midnght.

Presently after, above one hundred thousand of those that had escaped from
this Battle, were forced by Caesar to return into their own Country again, and
to the Towns which they had burnt; and this he did lest the Germans should
come over the Rhine, and settle themselves in that Country being void.

The next War that Caesar made was in defense of the And the Germans.
Gauls against the Germans, though himself had before admitted Ariovistus their
King to be received as a consederate of the Romans: Notwithstanding which, they
were grown very unquiet Neighbors, watching but an opportunity to possess
themselves of the rest of Gaul. Caesar perceiving that some of his Captains
much feared them, especially the young Gentlemen of Noble Famelies, who went
along with him as to some Pastimes, he commanded all that were afraid to return
home, and not endanger themselves against their wills. But for himself he said,
he would set upon those Barbarous People, though he had left him but the tenth
Legion only. Upon this the tenth Legion sent their Officers to thank him for
the good opinion he had of them: and all the other Legions blamed their
Captains for their backwardness, and followed him cheerfully till they came
within two hundred Furlongs of the enemies Camp.

Ariovistus his courage was well cooled when he saw And the Gauls.
Caesar so near, whereas they thought that the Romans were afraid of them: His
Army also was in a great amaze. But that which discouraged them most, was the
Prophesies of some foolish women, who observing the terrible noise which the
water in the River made, advised the Germans by no means to fight, and they
being possessed with a supestitious fear, sought to avoid the fight: Yet Caesar
skirmished with them every day and sometimes followed them to their Forts, and
little Hills where they lay, whereby he so provoked them that at last they came
down with great fury to fight. In this Battle he overcame them, and pursued
them very eagerly, making a great slaughter of them even to the River of Rhine,
filling all the fields with dead Bodies, and spoils. Ariovistus himself flying
speedily got over the River, and escaped with some few of his men: At this
Battle there were slain about eighty thousand Germans.

After this Battle Caesar left his Army to winter amongst the Sequanes, and
himself thinking of the affairs His policy.
of Rome, returned over the Alps to a place about the River Po: whilst he lay
there he labored to make Friends at Rome: and when many came to visit him
there, he granted all their suits, and sent them back, some with liberal
rewards, and others with large promises, whereby he engaged them to him.

During all the time of Caesar's great conquests in Gaul, Pompey did not
consider how Caesar conquered the Gauls with the Roman weapons, and wan the
Romans with the Riches of the Gauls. At this time Caesar being informed that
the Belgae who were the most warlike Nation He overcomes the Belgae.
of all the Gauls, were all up in Arms and had raised a very great Power, he
presently made toward them with all possible, speed; and found them
overrunning and plundering the neighbor Countries and confederates of the
Romans, wherefore he gave them Battle, and overthrew their chiefest Army, and
slew so many of them that the Lakes and Rivers were died with their blood, and
filled with their dead Bodies, that the Romans passed over on foot upon them:
After this overthrow, such of them as dwelt near the Sea yielded themselves:
and from thence he conducted his Army against the Nervians, the stoutest
Soldiers of all the Belgae. These dwelling in a Woody Country, had conveyed
their Wives, Children and Goods into a very great Forest, remote from their
enemies, and being above eighty thousand fighting men, they, watching their
opportunity, set upon Caesar when his Army was out of order, and little
expecting them. At the first charge they brake the Roman Horsemen, and
encompassing the seventh and twelfth Legions, they slew all the Captains, and
had not Caesar himself with his Shield on his Arm, run amongst them, making a
lane as he went, and the tenth Legion, seeing him in that danger, followed him
with all speed, there had not a Roman escaped alive that day. But looking upon
Caesar's valor, his men fought desperately, even beyond their abilities, and
yet could they not make the Nervi fly but they fought it out bravely till most
of them were A Battle.
slain in the Field, five hundred only of them ascapeing. Yet was it a bloody
Battle to the Romans, for that of four hundred Gentlemen, and Counselors of
Rome, there were but three saved.

The Senate of Rome made great, signs of joy for these Victories, by
sacrifizing to the Gods, Plays, etc. and as Caesar's fame was increased hereby,
so he wan upon the Peoples love: And always, when his affairs would permit,
he used to Winter by the River Po, to give direction about his affairs at
Rome. And truly not only such as sued for Offices at Rome, obtained them by
Caesar's money, and therefore employed all their power to promote his interest,
but the chiefest also of the Nobility, went to Luke unto him, insomuch as at
one time His Policy.
there have been seen before his Gates, one hundred and twenty Sergeants
carrying Rods and Axes before the Magistrates that have waited upon him, and
two hundred Senators besides. Here they held a Council, wherein it was agreed,
that Pompey and Crassus should again be chosen Consuls for the year following:
and that Caesar should have more money delivered him to pay his Army, and that
his Government should be prorogued for five years longer.

Then Caesar returning into Gaul to his Army, found there a great War begun:
For two Potent Nations of the Germans, having passed over the River of Rhine to
conquer new lands, Caesar fought with them, which himself thus discribeth:
These Barbarous People (says he) after they had sent Ambassadors to me to
desire peace, contrary to the Law of Arms, came and set upon me as I traveled
by the way, insomuch as eight hundred of their men overthrew five thousand of
my Horsemen, who nothing at all expected their coming, And going on to
describe their farther proceedings. he says, that they again sent Ambassadors
to him to mock him, whom he kept Prisoners, and then setting upon the enemies,
who were about four hundred thousand Persons, he slew most of them, saving a
few that He overcomes the Germans.
flying gat back over the River of Rhine and so escaped. Caesar, taking this
occasion, and being ambitious to have the honor of being the first Roman that
ever passed this River with an Army, he built a Bridge over it, though the River
were very broad, and ran with a violent stream, and especially there where he
built the Bridge: and the Barbarians casting great Trees into the River, they
were carried down with such violence that by their great blows they did sore
shake the Posts of the Bridge, to prevent which, and to abate the sury of the
stream, Caesar caused a Pile to be made a good way above the Bridge, which was
forcibly rammed into the bottom of the River, so that in ten days space he had
finished his Bridge of goodly Carpenters work: A very rare invention as could
be possibly devised.

Then passing his Army over this Bridge, he found none that durst fight with
him: For the Suevians who were He passes over the Rhine.
the most Warlike People of the Germans, had retired themselves and goods into
great Valleys, Bogs, Woods, and Forests. Caesar therefore having burnt up the
enemies Country, and confirmed the League with the consederates of the Romans,
he returned back into Gaul. About this time also he made a journey into
England, being the first that sailed the Western Ocean with an Army, and that
passed through the Atlantic Sea to And went into England.
make War in this great and famous Island, and was the first that enlarged the
Roman Empire beyond the habitable Earth. For he twice passed the Seas out of
France into England, where he fought many Battles with the Brittans, in which
he did more hurt to the enemies, than enrich his own men: therefore this War
had not such success as he expected, which made him only to take pledges of
the King and to impose a yearly Tribute upon him, and so returned back into
Gaul.

He was no sooner landed there, but he met with Letters which advertised from
Rome of the death of his Julias death.
Daughter, the Wife of Pompey, for which they both of them were very
sorrowful: and by this means the league betwixt Pompey and Caesar was broken,
to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth. Caesar's Army being very great, he
sent it into several Garrisons for their Winter Quarters, and returned into
Italy, as he used to do. During which time all Gaul rebelled again, and had
raised great Armies, who were led by one Ambiorix. These did first set upon the
Garrisons of Caetta, and Titurius, whom they slew together with all their men.
Then they went with sixty thousand men, and besieged the Garrison which Quintus
Cicero had in charge, and had almost taken it by storm, Ciceroes Soldiers
being all wounded, yet they showed such valor that they did more than men in
their own defense. This news coming to Caesar, who was far off, he returned
with all possible speed, and levying seven thousand Soldiers, he hasted to
relieve Cicero that was in great distress. The Gauls that besieged him,
hearing of Caesar's coming, arose, and went to meet him, making little account
of his small number: Caesar to entrap them, still drew back, making as though
he fled from them, but still lodging in plaees of safety, and commanded his men
that they should not stir out to skirmish with them, but rather to raise the
ramparts of his Camp, and to fortify the Gates, as men afraid, that their
enemies might the less esteem them: But at length, he took the opportunity
when the enemies came in a disordered manner to assault his Camp, and He beats
the French.
then sallying out, he routed, and slew a great number of them.

This Act suppressed all the rebellions of the Gauls in those parts: Himself
also went in the midst of Winter in those places where they did Rebel* for now
he had a new supply out of Italy of three whole Legions to fill up the rooms of
those that were slain, of which Pompey lent him two, and the other Legion was
raised about the River Po. Shortly after there brake out the greatest and most
dangerous War that ever he had in Gaul, which had been long designed by the
chiefest and most Warlike People in all that Country, who had a very great
Army, leavying multitudes of men, and much Treasure to fortify their strong
holds: The Country where thy were was very hard to come into, especially then
in the Winter when the Rivers were high, and the Woods and Forests covered
with Snow, the meddowes drowned with floods, and the Snow so deep that no ways
could be discerned, all which might have discouraged Caesar from setting upon
them: the rather, because many Nations joined in this conspiracy, of whom the
chief were the Vernians, and the Carnutes, who had chosed Vercing entorix for
their Captain. He divided his Army into diverse places, under diverse Captains,
and drawn into his assistance all the Nations as far as to the Adriatiek Sea:
So that if he had tarried a little longer till Caesar had been engaged in his
Wars with Pompey, he had put all Italy into great fear and danger.

But Caesar, who knew his advantages, and how to take the best opportunities,
as soon as he heard of this Rebellion, he hasted toward them, intending to let
The French rebel.
them know, that they had to do with an Army that was invincible, and which
they could not possibly withstand, seeing they had marched with such speed in
so hard a Winter. This made them wonder when they saw him burning and
destroying their Country, when they thought him far off. Such Towns and strong
Forts as yielded to him, he received to mercy. But the Hedui, who used to be
styled the Brethren of the Romans, taking Arms against him, much discouraged
his men: wherefore Caesar went through the Country of the Lingones to enter
into Burgundy, who were confederates with the Romans. Thither the enemies
followed him, endeavoring to compass him in on every side. Caesar tarried
their coming, and then fighting with them a long time, he at last overcame
them. Of Caesar overcomes them.
those which fled, most of them together with their King got into the City of
Alexia, which Caesar presently besieged, though it seemed inexpugnable, both in
regard of the hight of the Walls, and the many hands to defend them. During
this siege Caesar fell into a very great danger: For three hundred thousand of
the best Soldiers amongst the Gauls came against him, besides those within the
City, who were seventy thousand fighting men, so that finding himself to be
shut in between two such mighty Armies, he was faign to fortify himself with
two Walls: One against those within Alexia, and the other against those
without. And truly the Battle which he wan at this place, gat him more honor
than any other that ever he fought before. For in this extreme danger he showed
more Valor and Wisdom, and courage than in any other. And this was wondefull,
that they within the City neheard of their Friends that came to assist them,
till Caesar had overcome them: Yea, Caesar's own men that guarded the Wall
against the City, knew nothing of the Battle till they heard the cries and
lamentations of those in the City, when they saw the Romans bring into their
Camp such a number of Shields glistering with Gold and Silver, such store of
bloody Corslets, and Armor, such a deal of Plate, and movables, and such a
number of Tents, and Pavilions of the Gauls which the Romans had gotten of
their spoils. Thus the greatest part of this huge Army were slain: and as for
those within the City, when they had done and received much hurt, they at last,
yielded, and Vercing entorix, went out of the City richly Armed, and his Horse
furnished with brave, and glittering Caparisons, and rode about, Caesar who sat
in his Chair of State. Then allighting, he took off the Caparisons, and stripped
himself of his Armor, and prostrated himself on the Ground, and then went and
sat down at Caesar's feet, speaking never a word. Caesar after a while committed
him to Prison to be led in his Triumph at Rome.

Now Caesar had long since projected the destruction of Non vult Caesarve
priorem, Pompeiusve pareni.
Pompey, as Pompey had done the like for him. Nothing kept Caesar from being
the Greatest Person but Pompey the Great, and nothing kept Pompey from being
supreme but Caesar. Hitherto Pompey had set light by Caesar, thinking that he
could crush him when he pleased: But Caesar went more cunningly to work: for to
attain his end, he procured to be sent into Gaul, where he exercised and
hardened his Army, and by his valiant deeds purchased fame and honor: so that
now he lacked nothing but an occasion to put his design in practice, which
Pompey partly gave him, and the iniquity of the times much surthered it. For
such as sued for honors and Offices, bought the voices of the People
shamefully, who therefore came to the Marketplace, not to give their voices,
but with Bows, and Slings, and Swords: and the Assembly seldom brake up, but
the Pulpit for Orations was besprinkled with the blood of the slain, so that
many Wise men believed, that there was no Disorders at Rome.
other cure of these evils but by putting the supreme authority into one man's
hand; and many wished that Pompey were the man: But he seemed to decline it,
though cunningly under hand he labored to be chosen Dictator.

Cato smelling his drift, persuaded the Senate rather to make him sole Consul,
thereby to satisfy his ambition: Pompey sole Consul.
This was done accordingly, and the time also for the Gevernment of his
Provinces was prorogued: they allowed him also a thousand Talents yearly out of
the public Treasury wherewith to pay his Soldiers. Hereupon Caesar took
occasion to send his men to Rome, to sue in his name for the Consulship, and
for the prolonging of his Government. This was too indiscreetly opposed by
Marcellus and Lentulu, and many things were spoken in his disgrace. They took
away also the freedom from the Collonies which Caesar had lately granted them.
And when Marcellus was Consul, he caused one of those Senators to be whipped,
saying, that he gave him those marks, that he might be known to be no Citizen
of Rome; and bad him go and tell Caesar of it.

Shortly after Caesar opened his Treasures which he had got in Gaul, and gave
it freely among the Magistrates of Rome. He set Curio the Tribune, clear out of
debt: He gave to the Consul Paul fifteen hundred Talents, wherewith he built a
stately Theater. Pompey now beginning to fear, labored to have a successor
sent to Caesar, and withal sent for his two Legions, which Caesar returned to
him, bountifully rewarding every Soldier: and they which brought these Legions
back, disgraced Caesar all they could, and told Pompey that if Caesar's
Soldiers did but once see him, they would all forsake Caesar and cleave to
him. This made Pompey Pompey deluded.
more secure, that he neglected to prepare for War. One of Caesar's Captains
coming to Rome, and moving the Senate to have his government prorogued, they
delaying their answer, he laid his hand upon his Sword, and said, Since you will
not grant it him, this shall give it him. Caesar seemed to be very reasonable
in what he requested, For he said, that whilst they required him to lay down
Arms for fear of a Tyranny, and yet permitted Pompey to keep his, they went
about to establish a Tyranny.

Curio in the name of Caesar moved before all the People, that both should be
commanded to lay down Arms, which motion was entertained with great joy and
claping of hands by the People, who threw nose-gayes, and flowers upon him for
it. Then Anthony one of the Tribunes, Factions in Rome.
brought a letter from Caesar, and read it before the People in spite of the
Consuls, wherein hae desired that they would grant him Gaul on this side the
Alps, and Illyria with two Legions only, and then he would desire no more: But
Scipio the Father in Law of Pompey, moved in the Senate, that if Caesar did not
dismiss his Army by a day appointed, that then he should be proclaimed an enemy
to Rome, Marccilus also added, that they must use force of Arms and not
Arguments against a Thief; whereupon the Senate rose without determining any
thing, and every one put on his mourning apparel as in the time of a common
calamity. Cirero being newly come from his Government in Cilicia, took much
pains to reconcile them together, and persuaded Pompey all he could, who told
him that he would yield to whatsoever he desired, so he would let him alone
with his Army: But Lentulus the Consul shamefully drove Curio and Anthony out
of the Senate, who were in such danger that they were faigne to fly out of Rome
to Caesar, disguised in a Carriers coat. This gave Caesar great advantage, and
much incensed his men, when they saw and heard how his Friends were abused.

Caesar at this time had about him but five thousand Caesar goes against Pompey.
Foot, and three thousand Horse, having left the rest of his Army on the other
side of the Alps, to be brought after him by his Lieutenants: Judging it better
suddenly to steal upon them at Rome, then to assail them with his whole Army,
which would require time, and give his enemies opportunity to strengthen
themselves against him. He therefore commanded his Captains to go before, and
to take in the City of Ariminum (a great City on this side the Alps) with as
little bloodshed as might be. Then committing the rest of those Soldiers which
he had with him, to Hortensius, he spent a whole day in seeing the sword
players exercise before him. At night he went unto his lodging, where having
bathed himself a little, he came into the Hall, and made merry with those whom
he had bidden to supper. Then rising from the Table, he prayed his Guests to be
merry, and he would come again to them presently: howbeit he had secretly
before directed his most trusty Friends to follow him: not all together, but
some one way, and some another. Himself in the mean time took a Coach that he
had hired, and pretending at first to go another way, he suddenly turned
toward Ariminum.

But when he came to the River of Rubicorn, which divides the hither Gaul from
Italy, he suddenly made a stop (for if he once passed that, there could be no
hope of peace) considering with himself of what importance this passage was,
and what miseries would ensue upon it. Some say that he spoke thus to his
Friends: Doubtless if I forbear to pass over this River, it will be the
beginning of my ruin; if I pass it, the ruin will be general: Then turning
toward the River, he said, It is yet in our power to turn back, but if we
pass the River we must make our way with our Weapons. Some say, that Coesar
standing thus doubtful, he was encouraged by the apparition of a man of a very
great stature, piping upon a reed, whereupon many of the Soldiers and some
Trumpetters went near to hear him, and that he catching one of their Trumpets,
leaped into the River, sounding to the Battle with a mighty blast, and so
passed on to the farther side of the River: Whereupon Caesar, with a furious
resolution, cried out, Let us go (whether the Gods,) and the injurious dealing
of our enemies, do call us. The Dice are cast. I have set up my Rest, Come what
will of it: After He passes Rubicon.
which he set spurs to his Horse, and passed the River his Army following him.

Caesar having passed the River and drawn his Army together, he made an Oration
to them, shedding some tears, and tearing his Garment down the Breast, laying
before them the equity of his cause, and craying their assistance. To whom,
having with a general applause and consent made answer; that they were ready
to obey his will, he presently marched on and came the next day to Ariminum,
upon which he seized. The like he did to all the Towns and Castles as he passed
on, till he came to Corfinium which was held by Domitius, who in a factious
tumult had been nominated for his successor in the Government of Gaul. This
being taken, he pardoned the Soldiers, and Inhabitants, and used Domitius
kindly, giving him leave to depart (who went straight to Pompey) by which
clemency he purchased to himself much honor. These thirty Cohorts he kept with
him.

Caesar's resolution being known at Rome, it troubled Pompey, amazed the Senate,
and terrified the common People. Pompey now found himself deceived, who before
could not believe that Caesar would thrust himself into so great danger, or
that he could be able to raise sufficient forces to resist him: but the success
proved otherwise. For though Pompey had authority from the Consuls and Senate
to leavy Soldiers, to call home his Legions, and to send Captains for the
defense of those Cities in Italy by which Caesar should pass, yet all this was
not sufficient to resist his fury, and the power that he brought with him. The
fame of Caesar's coming increasing daily, Pompey, with the whole Senate Pompey
flies and the Senate.
left Rome, going to Capua, and from thence to Brundusium, a Sea Town seated at
the mouth of the Gulf of Vinic^, where he ordered the Consuls to pass to
Dyrrachium, (now Durazzo) a Sea Town of Macedonia, there to unite all their
forces, being out of hope to resist Caesar in Italy, who had already taken
Corfinium, where, having drawn Domitius's thirty Cohorts to serve him, he
marched on, and hearing that Pompey and the Consuls were at Brundusium, he
hasted toward them with his Legions with all possible speed. But Pompey,
though Caesar pursues him.
he had fortified the Town sufficiently for his defense, yet when Caesar began
to invest the Town, he embarked himself and his men in the night time, and so
passed over to Dyrrachium, to the Consuls. Thus Caesar enjoyed Italy without
opposition, yet was he doubtful what to resolve on: He would gladly have
followed Pompey but wanted Shipping, and it being Winter, he knew that Ships
could not be procured so soon as was requisite: and considering with all, that
it was not safe to leave an enemy behind him, which might cause an alteration
in France, or Italy; he resolved first to go into Spain, which held for Pompey,
and where he had his best Legions under the command of Petreius and Afranius,
saying to his Friends, Let us go against an Army which wants a Captain, and
afterward we will go against a Captain that wants an Army. For Pompeys
Soldiers in Spain were very valiant, and had been long exercised in Arms, but
their Commanders were neither Politic, nor expert in War. But on the contrary,
Pompey was a most Wise and Valiant Captain, but his Soldiers were newly
levied, and of small experience. He is Lord of all Italy. And went to Rome.


Caesar returning from Brundusium, in sixty days space became Lord of all
Italy, and when he came to Rome, the People were in great fear, remembering the
Miseries they had suffered under Sylla: But Caesar using his accustomed
clemency, hurt no man, high nor low: He called the Senators together which
remained there, comforting them with mild and good words; and laying the whole
fault upon Pompey, he fought to justify his own cause, declaring how much he
desired Peace, with all, requsting that Abassadours might be sent to Pompey to
procure the same: And causing himself presently to be chosen Consul, he opened
the Treasury, though Metellus, one of the Tribunes of the people, opposed him,
and the Treasure which he took from thence, which was very great, he
distributed amongst his Soldiers.

Then was he desirous to go into Spain, first taking order for the Civil
Government: and making choice of the Legions which should go with him, he left
the rest in Brundusium, and Otranto, and other strong places upon the Sea
Coast, to keep Pompey from landing if he should attempt to return into Italy.
He also made Hortensius, and Dolabella his Captains to provide Shipping to be
brought into the Port of Brundusium, there to be in a readiness against his
return from Spain: Quintus Valerius he sent with a Legion into Sardinia against
Marcus Cotta which held the same for Pompey. To Sicily he sent Curious, and
Marcus Cate, with direction that having taken the same, he should pass over
into Africa. Lepidus he sent to Rome, as Prefect thereof, and Mark Anthony he
made Governor of all Italy: And resolving to leave Licinius Crassus in France,
with his acustomed celerity he went on his journey, finding no resistance,
neither in Italy nor France, till he came to He went into Spain
Marcelleis, which held for Pompey. This City he besieged, and to avoid loss
of time, left Decius Brutus, and Caius Trebonius with sufficient Forces, who
endured much in the siege: himself hasted into Spain, where, being expected,
Afranius and Petreius attended him with four Roman Legions, and the aid of
their Friends, between whom, and Caesar the War continued for some while,
chiefly about the City of Lerida.

At first Caesar was in great danger and much distressed chiefly for wans of
Victuals, as also for that the Winter was come on, which troubled him with the
swelling of Rivers, before and after which, there passed many And conquered
Pompeys men.
great skirmishes between the two Armies. And Caesar, watching his
opportunities, at last brought his adversaries to such distress that they
perished with hunger, and were forced to come to a composition, which was, that
the Legions should have liberty to go whither they pleased: and so part of them
took pay of Caesar, the rest departed, and Petreius, and Afcanius went to
Pompey.

This War being ended, and the Spring come, Caesar, that he might leave no
enemy behind him, marched into the Province of Betica (now Andaluzia) with part
of his forces, commanding the rest to march And other places.
whither he had appointed, and there to stay for him, because Marcus Varro held
that Province for Pompey against Caesar with one good Legion: But he, not
daring to oppose Caesar, delivered up the Legion to him, together with that
Country, and all was pacified there. From thence Caesar went to Cordova, where
he called a Parliament of all the States of that Province, in which he highly
commended them, and those of Sivil for taking his part, and so marching
forward, he came to the Isle of Cadez, where having gotten Ships in readiness,
he left Quintus Cassius with four Legians in that Province, and so embarking,
he went to Taragona, commanding his Legions to march by Land thither, where
having settled his affairs, he advanced with his Army toward Narbona, and from
thence to Marcelleis, which now He takes Marcelleis.
yielded to him, having endured many calamities during the Seige: Caesar
respecting the antiquity and same of this City, would not destroy it, nor the
Inhabitants, but leaving a strong Garrison in it, he ordered his Legions to
march for Italy; and himself, with a sufficient guard, and some of his Friends
took passage by Sea to Rome.

Though all things succeeded thus well with Caesar, yet some of his Captains
had ill sucesse. For Caius Antonius, His Captains had ill success.
whom he left with Dolabella for to command his Navy, was overthrown and taken
Prisoner in the Gulf of Venice by Octavius, Lieutenant to Pompey. In which
overthrow this was very remarkable: Anthony was faign to put his men into long
Boats for want of Ships, which were taken by a Strategem as in a toil, by the
Pompeians, with Ropes under the Water. One of them which had in it a Thousand
valiant young men, being thus ensnared, was assaulted by the enemies whole
Army, against which they defended themselves bravely from morning till night,
and in the end being oppressed with the multitude, by the persuasion of
Valteius, their Colonel, they all slew one another, rather than they would
fall into the enemies hand. Dolabella was likewise overthrown near to the
Island of Coreyra (now Corfu:) and Curious, who went with his two Legions into
Africa, though at first he had good success, yet afterward he was overthrown,
and most of his men slain by Jaba, King of Mauritania, Pompeys Friend.

Caesar being come to Rome and made Dictator, new Consuls were chosen, whereof
he being one laid aside his Dictatorship, and provided Praetors for the
Provinces as himself pleased. He sent Mracus Lepidus into Spain: Aulus Albinus
into Sicily: Sextus Peduceius into Sardinia; and Decius Brutus into France; and
taking such further order as he thought good, he departed from Rome in December
toward Brundusium, whither he commanded all his Forces to march, there to take
passage for Macedonia, where he knew that Pompey staid with his Army: who all
that whole year that Caesar spent Pompey prepares for War.
in his journey to Spain, busied himself to provide a Navy wherein to return
into Italy, and in gathering Treasure, and levying Soldiers, having made an
exceeding great provision of all things. For there came unto him, Ships, money,
and men from sundry Kingdoms and Provinces both of Asia, and Greece: as from
Syria, Pontus, Bithynia, Cilicia, Phoeniciae, Caeppadocia, Pomphilia, Armenia
Minor, Egypt, Greece, Thessaly, Boeotia, Achaia, Epirus, Athens, Lacedemonia,
the Isles of Creet, and Rhodes, and from many other Countries. There came also
to his aid King Deiotarus, and Aribarzanes, of all which, together with those
which he brought with him from Italy, he compounded a very great Army by Land,
and a very great Fleet of Ships and Gallyes by Sea.

It being now the depth of Winter, Pompey presuming it improbable, if not
impossible for Caesar to pass the Seas to him; having also intelligence that
Caesar was in Rome, he disposed of his Army to their Winter Quarters in
Macedonia and Thessaly; and himself retired farther from the Sea, commanding
his Sea-Captaines (of whom Marcus Bibulus was chief) to guard the Sea coast.
But Caesar knowing that in the speedy execution consisted his greatest hopes of
Victory, and that occasion once lost could hardly be recovered, he departed
from Rome, and came to Brundusium, though all his Legions were not as yet come
to him. There he embarked seven of his best Legions in such ships as were
ready, sending a Command to the rest which were coming, to hasten to
Brundusium, whither he would send for them with all possible speed. And so
departing, he crossed the Seas with a prosperous gale of Wind, and the Caesar
goes against him. Now Brindez.
third day after arrived upon the coast of Macedonia, before Pompey had any
intelligence of his embarking. There he safely landing his men in dispite of
Pompeys Captains, and commanded his Ships and Galleys presently to return to
Brundusium to fetch, the rest of his Army. Presently after his first landing,
he seized upon the Cities of Appallonia, and Erico, driving from thence Lucius
Torquatus, and Lucius Straberius, who held them for Pompey.

Pompey hearing of Caesar's arrival, sent for his Troops which were nearest
hand with all speed possible, with whom he marched toward Dirrachium, where
his Victuals, ammunition, and other provisions for the War lay, lest Caesar
should go and surprise them, which indeed he attempted but in vain, the
situation of the place making it inexpugnable.

Pompey being come, their Camps were lodged within Sksrmishes betwixt them.
a few furlongs each of other, where he passed many adventurous skirmishes, and
also some Treaties of Peace, offered by Caesar, but rejected by Pompey, so
confident he was of his own power. In the interim Caesar daily expected the
coming of the other Legions, who staying longer than he expected, he resolved
in person, with three Confident servants, secretly to embarke himself in a
Brigandine, and to pass that straight of the Sea and to fetch them, hoping to
perform the same without the knowledge of any. And accordingly, passing down
the River to the Sea, he found it so troublesome and tempestious that the
Master of his Brigandine (not knowing whom he carried) durst not adventure
forth, but would have returned. Then Caesar discovering his face, said, Perge
audacter: Caesarem enim fers, and fortunam Caesar's rashness.
Caesaris: Bear up bravely, and boldly against the Winds and Waves: for thou
carriest Caesar, and all his Fortunes. The Master herewith encouraged, strove
all that possibly he could to proceed in his voyage: but the force of the
Tempest was so great, and the Wind so contrary, that do what possibly they
could, they were driven back again.

When Caesar's Army heard of these passages, they much wondered, grieved and were
troubled at it: Commending him more for his Valor, than for his Wifedome: But
within few days after M. Anthony arrived with four of those Legions which were
left behind in Italy, presently returning the Ships back for the rest. Anthony
after some adventures, joined with Caesar's Army near to Dirrachium where we
lately left him. Frequent skirmishes still continued between the two Armies,
and many were slain on both sides, and one day the skirmish was so hot,
supplies being sent from both sides, that it almost came to a just Battle,
wherein Caesar's men were Caesar is beaten.
so beaten, that they fled before the enemies, and could not be made to stand
by any entreaties, or menaces, till they were come into their Camp, which they
had strongly fortified: yet many durst not trust to that, but fled out of it:
But Pompey either because he imagined their flight to be feigned to draw him
into an Ambush, or because he thought there needed no more to be done, and that
Caesar could no more resist him, he neglected to prosecute his Victory, causing
a retrate to be sounded without assaulting Caesar's Camp, which, probably, he
might have taken, and made an end of the War that day. Whereupon Caesar said to
his Friends: Truly this day had ended the War, if our enemies had had a Captain
that had known how to overcome.

At this time Caesar lost a great number of his men, amongst whom were four
hundred Roman Knights, ten Tribunes (or Colonels) and thirty two Centurions
(or Captains) and his enemies took for from him thirty two Ensigns. Upon this
Victory Pompey sent news thereof to diverse parts of the World, holding
himself for an absolute Conqueror. Caesar much blamed some of his Captains
and Ensign bearers for their cowardice, and his Army were so grieved and
ashamed, that they much importuned him to lead them forth again to Battle: But
he thought it not fit so soon to lead them forth against a Victorious Army. He
therefore sent his fick and wounded men to the City of Apolonia, and Caesar's
policy.
departed by night with as great silence as could be from the place where he
was* and marched toward Thessaly, intending there to refresh and encourage his
Army, and to draw his enemies farther from the Sea coast, where their chief
strength lay, and where their Camp was well fortified, and victualled, or at
least he intended to attempt the overthrow of Scipio, who (as he heard) was
coming to join with Pompey.

Pompey finding Caesar was departed, followed him for some few days; and then
taking Council what to do, he resolved to leave a sufficient Navy to guard the
Seas, Pompeys good resolution.
and with the rest to return into Italy, and to seize upon it, together with
France and Spain, and afterward to go against Caesar: But the Roman Lords
that were with him, and the importunity of his unskilful Captains and
Soldiers, forced him to alter his determination, and presently to pursue
Caesar, who made an Alt in the fields of Pharsalia, which are in Thessaly,
making his retreat with so much prudence, and in so good order, that upon all
occasions that were offered he ever had the better; till at length seeing his
men full of resolution and courage, he resolved no longer to defer the Fight.
Concerning which Battle: the ordering, and event of it: the flight of Pompey
Pompey beaten and slain.
into Egypt, and how basely, and barbarously he was murdered there, see it
before in the Life of Pompey the Great.

Julius Caesar having obtained this great and glorious victory, used therein
his accustomed Clemency, not Caesar's clemency.
suffering any Roman either to be slain or hurt after the Battle was ended,
but pardoned all those that were either taken in the Fight, or found in the
Camp, amongst whom was Marcus Tullius Cicero. After which, being He pursues
Pompey.
informed which way Pompey was fled, he pursued him with the lightest, and
swiftest of his Army, and in the way subduing all the Cities, he at last came
to the Sea side, where he gathered together all the Ships and Galleys that
possibly he could, together with those whom Cassius had brought, he therein
shipped as many of his men as they could contain, and passed into the lesser
Asia, where, being advertised that Pompey had been in Cyprus, he presumed that
he was gone into Egypt; wherefore he steered the same course, taking with him
two Legions of old Soldiers only. When he arrived at He comes into Egypt.
Alexandria, he understood that Pompey presuming upon the many benefits, and
good entertainment which the Father of this King Ptolomy had received in his
House, had sent to this Ptolomy to harbor and assist him: which accordingly
the King promised, and Pompey coming upon his safe conduct, in a small Boat,
was by the false Kings commandment basely murdered, thinking thereby to win
the favor of Caesar. He understood likewise that Cornelia the Wife of Pompey,
and his Son Sextus Pompeyus were fled from thence in the same ship wherein they
came.

Caesar being landed, and received into the City, they brought him for a
present the Head of the Great Pompey; but he turned away and would not see it,
and when they brought him Pompeys Ring with his Seal of Arms, he wept,
considering the end and success of the great adventures and properties of
Pompey, who with such honor Vanity of vanities.
and fame had Triumphed three times, and been so many times Consul in Rome: and
had obtained so many Victories abroad.

When Caesar was landed in Egypt, he found the Country imbroyled in Civil
Wars: there being great discord between young King Ptolomy, and his Sister
Cleopatra, about the division and Inheritance of that Kingdom, wherein Julius
Caesar (as being a Roman Consul) took upon him to be an Arbitrator. For which
cause, or because their guilty consciences accused them for the treacherous
murder of Pompey, Fotinus the Enuuch, who had contrived the said murder, and
Achillas, who had been the actor of it, fearing that Caesar inclined to favor
Cleopatra, sent for the Kings Army that lay near the City, consisting of
twenty thousand good Soldiers, purposing to do by Caesar as they had done by
Pompey, so that within a few days, there began between Caesar and his small
Army, both in the City, and in the Harbor where the Ships and Galleys lay, the
most cruel, and dangerous encounters that ever Caesar met with: For he was
often forced to fight in his own Person, both within the City (whereof the
enemies His Wars in Egypt.
held the Greater part) and also in the Harbor with his ships, and was
sometimes in so great peril and danger, that he was forced to leap out of the
Boat into the Water, and by swimming to get to one of the Galleys, at which
time he held his Commentaries in one hand above Water, and carry his Robe in
his teeth, and to His danger.
swim with the other hand. But when his other Forces were come to him from
Asia, and other parts, he at the end of nine months (for so long these Wars
lasted) became Victorious, as in all other his enterprises he had been, and the
young King Ptolomy was slain in fight. His Victory.
In this War Caesar did such exploits, and behaved himself so gallantly, that
for the same only he well deserved the fame and name of a brave Captain.

The Pride of the Egyptians being thus tamed, Caesar put to death the
murderers of Pompey, and established the fair Cleopatra, the Queen and
Governesse of Egypt, whom, during his stay there, he entertained for his
Friend, and had a Son by her called Caesarion. And when he had quitted and
settled all things in Egypt, he departed thence into Asia, and traveled
through Syria He passes into Asia.
(now Soria) being informed, that during his troubles in Egypt, King
Pharnaces, the Son of that mighty King Methridates, thought it a fit time,
whilst the Romans were embroiled in Civil Wars, to recover what his Father had
lost: For which end having overthrown Domitius, whom Caesar had sent to govern
those parts, and having taken by force of Arms the Provinces of Bithynia, and
Cappadocia, expelling thence King Ariobarzanes (a Friend and Subject of Rome)
and beginning to do the like in Armenia the less, which King Deiotarus had
subjected to the Romans: Caesar (I say) being informed hereof, went with his
Army sooner than Pharnaces imagined, though he expected him, and had
intelligence of his approach, so that in few days they came to a Battle, in
which the King was soon overthrown, Overcomes Pharnaces.
and put to flight, with great slaughter of his People, yet himself escaped.

Caesar was very joyful for this Victory, because his of earnest desire to
return to Rome; where he knew that many scandals were raised, and many
insolences were committed for want of his presence: He knew also that Pompeys
eldest Son had seized upon a great part of Spain, and had raised great forces
of those which Marcus Varro had left there, and of his Fathers Troops. He also
understood, that in Africa many principal Romans, who had escaped from the
Battle of Pharsalia, were gethered together, where of M. Cato (surnamed
Uticensis) was the chief, and Scipio, Pompeys Father in Law, and that these
went thither with the greatest part of the Ships and Galleys which belonged to
Pompey, and with the greatest power that they were able to leavy; and that
joining with Juba King of Mauritania, they had subdued all that Country, and
had a great Army in a readiness to oppose him, having chosen Scipio for their
General, because that Cato would not take that office upon him, and for that
the Name of Scipio had been so fortunate in Africa.

Caesar having intelligence of all these things, within the space of a few
days, with great celerity and diligence recovered all that Pharnaces had
usurped, and chasing him out of Portus he regained all those Countries: and so
leaving Celius Minucius for General, with two Legions to gaurd that Province,
pacifying the controversies and contentions in the rest, and rewarding the
Kings, and Tetrarchs which continued firm in their Leagues and amity with the
Romans, without any longer abode, he departed out of Asia, and in a short space
arrived in Italy, and so passed to Rome, within little more than a year after
he went thence, which He comes to Rome.
was a very short time for the performance of so great matters, and so long a
journey.

Presently after his coming to Rome, he caused himself to be chosen Consul the
third time, and reforming (so much as the time and his leisure would permit)
all disorders in Rome, being troubled and not able to endure that his enemies
should possess Africa, with great expedition he prepared all things necessary,
and from Rome took his way toward Africa, commanding his Army to follow him.
First he went into Italy, from from whence taking Ship, he passed over into
Africa, He passes into Africa.
and though neither his Navy, nor his Army arrived with him, trusting to the
valor of those that he had with him, and his own good Fortune, he landed with
small Forces, near to the City of Adrumentum, and from thence marched to an
other City called Leptis, into which he was received, and after some conflicts
that passed, his Legions being come to him, and certain other Troops of Horse,
and Companies of Foot, he began the War which continued four months. He first
began with Petreius and Lubienus; and then with Scipio and King Juba, who
brought to those Wars eight thousand men, the one half whereof were Horse.

In this War were many encounters and Battles, in which Caesar was in great
danger: but at last (his good Fortune, still attending him) he overcame them in
a great Battle, wherein there were slain of the enemies ten thousand, and
Caesar remained Master of the He overcomes Scipio.
Field, and in a short time after, subjected all the Country to him. Scipio,
and all the chiese Captains, with him died sundry Deaths, and Juba escaping by
flight from the Battle, finding no place of security, Asranius and he resolved
to dye fighting one against the other, in which combat, King Juba being the
stronger man, slew Afranius, and then commanded one of his slaves to kill him,
and so he died desperately.

Marcus Cato, who was in the City of Utica, hearing Cato kills himself.
that Caesar was marching thitherward, though he knew that he would not put him
to death, but rather had a desire to pardon him and to do him honor; yet,
resolving neither to receive life nor honor from his enemy, he slew himself:
In whose death there passed many remarkable accidents recorded by Historians.
Ftorus says thus of it. Cato (says he) hearing of the death of his Partners,
he dallyed not at all, but joyfully hastened his end: For after he had embraced
his Son, and his Friends and bad them good night, and then rested a while upon
his bed, having first perused Plato's Book of the immortality of the Soul: then
about the relieving of the first watch he got up, drew his sword, and therewith
thrust himself through: after which the Phisicians applied plasters to his
wounds which he endured whilst they were in the room, but then he pulled them
away, and the blood following abundantly, he left his dying hand even in the
wound. Scipio, who had been General in this War, escaped also from the Battle
by flight, entered into some Galleys, which being met with by Caesar's Navy,
that he might not fall into his enemies hand, after he had given himself some
wounds, he threw himself into the Sea, and so was drowned.

Caesar having obtained so great and absolute a Victory, spent some few days
in settling and ordering the Provinces of Africa, making the Kingdom of Juba a
Province, and then marched to Utica, where he embarked June the third, and came
to the Isle of Sardinia, and after some short stay there, he arrived at Rome
the He returns to Rome.
twenty fifth day of July. At his coming thither there were granted unto him
four Triumphs: First for his conquests and Victories in France, in which were
His Triumphs.
carried the Protractures of the Rivers of Rodanus, and the Rhine wraught in
Gold. The second Triumph was for the Conquest of Egypt, and of King Ptolomy,
where were set the River of Nilus, and the Pharus burning. The third was for
the Conquest of Pontus, and of King Pharnaces, wherein, in regard of his speedy
Victory, was placed a writing with these words, Veni, Vidi, Vici: I came, I
saw, I overcame. The fourth Triumph was for the Province of Africa, wherein
King Jubas Son was led Captive: and in this Triumph were given Jewels, and
Arms to Octavius, Caesar's Nephew, who succeeded him in the Empire. As for the
Battle wherein he Conquered Pompey, he would not Triumph, because it was
against a Citizen of Rome.

These Triumphs being ended, he gave great rewards to his Soldiers, and
entertained the People with Feasts, and bountiful gifts, and then caused
himself to be chosen the fourth time, Consul. And so, to the end that there
should be left no place wherein he would not be obeyed, he resolved to go for
Spain, hearing that Gneius Pompeius, the Son of Pompey, was retired with the
rest of the Army which had escaped out of Africa, to go to his Brother Sextus
Pompeius, who was in possession of a great part of Spain, as we heard before,
together with the famous Cities of Sivil, and Cordova, and many others of those
parts: many Spaniards also coming to their aid.

Caesar in this journey carried with him his most valiant, and most experienced
Soldiers, and made so good He goes nto Spain.
speed, that in few days space he arrived in Spain, in which journey his
Nephew Octavius followed him. Entering into Spain he came to the Province of
Betica (now Andaluzia) where were Sextus Pompeius, with his Brother Gneius, and
such Legions and Soldiers as they had gotten together; and there began betwixt
Caesar and them a most cruel and bloody War, the end whereof was, that near
to the City of Munda, Caesar, and Gneius Pompeius (for Sextus was then A cruel
Battle.
at Cordova) joined Battle, which was one of the most obstinate, and most
cruel fights that ever was in the world. For Caesar being a most excellent
Captain, and the Soldiers which he brought with him most brave and valiant
men, and fleshed with so many Victories, held it out with great resolution; and
on the other side, the bravery and courage of young Pompey and his men was
such, and they fought in such manner, as Caesar's Squadrons began to give
ground, and were ready to forsake the Field, and at the very point to have been
wholly overthrown: and the matter came to this issue, that Caesar was about to
have slain himself because he would not see himself overcome. Yet taking a
Target from one of his Soldiers, he rushed into the midst of his enemies,
saying with a loud voice, If ye be not ashamed, leave me and deliver me into
the hands of these Boys; For this shall be the last day of my Life and of your
Honor: with which words, and his example, his Soldiers took heart in such
manner, that recovering the ground which they had lost, the Battle became
equal, which lasted almost a whole day without any sign of Victory to either
party, sometimes seeming to incline to the one, sometimes to the other side;
until at the length Caesar and his men did so great exploits, as that the
evening being come, his enemies began to faint, and fly, and the Victory His
Victory.
was apparently Caesar's. There died of the enemies above thirty thousand in
this Battle, and Caesar lost above a thousand men of account besides common
Soldiers.

Caesar esteemed so much of this Victory, and so gloried in the danger which he
had ascaped, that ever after he used to say, That in all other Battles he had
fought for honor and Victory, and only that day he fought for his life. Young
Pompey, after he had performed all the offices of a Prudent General and
Valiant, Soldier, was forced to fly, and wandering through many places, was at
last taken and slain by some of Caesar's Friends, who carried his head to
Caesar. His other Brother Sextus Pompeius, fled from Cordova, and afterward
forsook Spain: Caesar recovered Sivil, and Cordova, and all the rest of the
Country* after which, ordering his affairs in Spain after his pleasure, he
returned to Rome, and He returns ^o Rome.
Triumphed for these Victories, which was his fifth and last Triumph.

Caesar now came to be the most mighty, the most redoubted, and the most highly
esteemed man in the World, having conquered and subdued the greatest His power.
part thereof, in as little time, as it might seem that another man might be
able* to travel through those Countries by reasonable journeys. He then made
himself perpetual Dictator, and so without opposition, he finished the making
of himself the Sovereign Lord, and Monarch of the Empire of Rome, within less
than five years after he first attempted the same. And this was the Original
and beginning of the Roman Emperors. For Julius Caesar would not be called
King (that Name being odious to the Romans above all things, ever since Kings
were first driven from Rome) but contented himself to be called Perpetual
Dictator, and Emperor, which Title was usually given to the Roman Generals
upon their obtaining any signal Victory. But after Julius Caesar, all his
successors took that title, glorying to be called Emperor, which has evere
since been held for the highest Title, and Dignity in the World.

Caesar having now attained to that absolute power which he had so ambitiously
saught after, he showed in all his Deportment much clemency, and Magnanimity,
His clemency, and Magnaminity.
honoring and rewarding his Friends, and easily forgiving, and very cheerfully
pardoning all those that had been his Adversaries: Thus he pardoned Brutus,
Cassius, Cicero, Marcellus, and many others: Yea, some of them he admitted to
his company, and private familiarity, and to Offices and Dignities; and amongst
the many virtues wherewith he was endued, his clemency and liberality were most
glorious. But all this prevailed not with the Romans to quench their desires
after the recoverie of their lost liberty, neither to assuage the hatred and
malice conceived against him by his adversaries, as afterward appeared.

And notwithstanding many were discontented, yet some for love, others for
fear, and out of dissimulation, Disconten's arise.
both Senate and People, yea all in general gave him Names, preheminences and
Titles of Honor, such as never had been given to any other man before him,
neither ought to have been accepted by him; and many were the more offended,
because they knew that he affected and desired them. They gave him the name of
Emperor, Father, Restorer, and Preserver of his Country. They made him
perpetual Dictator, and Consul for ten years: and perpetual Censor of their
manners. His Statue was erected and set up amongst the Kings of Rome: and a
Chair, and Throne of Ivory was set up for him in the Temple, and in the Senate
House, and an high Throne in the Theater, and in the place where Base flattery.
the Senators did use to sit. His Pictures and Statues were set up in the
Temples, and in all public places. Some Titles they gave him, and he accepted
of, which were pecular to the Gods. The month formerly callad Quintile, they
called Julius after his name. They also built, and consecreated Temples to him,
as they did to Jupiter and the other Gods, and gave him certain Honors which
they held proper for their Gods, and did him many other honors exceeding all
measure.

Julius Caesar enjoying such honor and power, so that he had no equal, no
second in the World with whom he might contend, it seemed that he would contend
with himself, and attempt something wherein he might excel himself: For he was
not contented with all the Victories which he had obtained, neither to have
fought fifty several Battles, in all which he was Victorious, save in that one
at Dirrachium against Pompey: neither to have slain in the Wars and Battles
which he fought a Million, ninety, and odd thousands of men, besides those
which were slain in the Civil Wars. But being of a His great projects.
most haughty mind, he sought to do greater matters, if greater could be.

For first he resolved to pass into the East, there to conquer and subdue the
fierce Nations of the Parthians, and to revenge the death of Marcus Crassus;
and from thence to pass through Hyrcania, and other Countries till he should
come to the Caspian Sea, and so through all the parts of Scythia, Asiatica; and
passing the River Tanais, to return through Scythia into Europe, and in his
retreat to come into Germany, and other Countries bordering thereupon,
conquering and subjecting all to the Roman Empire. For which end, he presently
caused to be levied in several places ten thausand Horsemen, and sixteen
Legious of chosen Footmen, and appointing the time wherein he intended to begin
his journey, he commanded them to repair to their Rendevouz. He sought also
not only to subdue all Nations, but to correct and reform even nature it
self: For he purposed to have made an Island of Peloponesus (now called Morea)
by cutting the neck of land between the Egaean, and the Jonian Seas. He
purposed also to have altered the courses of the River Tiber, and Anian, and to
have made there new channels, capable of bearing great Ships. He ordered the
digging down and levelling many high Hills and Mountains, in Italy, and to dry
up, and dreine great Lakes and Marshes therein. He corrected the computation
of the year, reforming it according to the course of the Sun, and brought it
into that order wherein it now is. He did the like about the course of the
Moon, and her conjunctions and oppositions to the Sun: and this was attributed
to him for Tyranny by those that hated him.

Many others things Caesar did, which were very remarkable, in reforming the
Laws, customs, and Offices. He reedified the ruined City of Carthage, in
Africa, and sent thither Colonies, and Roman Citizens to Inhabit it: the like
he did by Corinth. But all these works with his high conceits and undertakings,
were prevented, by his unexpected, and immature Death, which within a few Days
after ensued. A few men, and those unarmed bereft him of his Life, whom no
former forces could resist. For five months only he lived as Sovereign Lord in
Peace; when those in whom he reposed greatest trust conspired his Death.

Some say that Caesar's was counseled to have a Guard about him always; to
which he answered, that he would have none: for that he had rather die once,
then live continually in fear. They which conspired his death, were stirred up
thereto, either out of hatred to his Person, or desire of Liberty, accounting
him for a Tyrant: or out of suspicion that he would have made himself a King, a
thing in the highest degree hateful to the Romans: and lastly because he begun
to contemn others: For he used to say, that the Commonwealth was His Pride.
but a voice and name without a Body, or Substance, and that Sylla was a Fool
for resigning his perpetual Dictatorship. All the whole Senate coming one Day
to the Temple of Venus where he was, he sat still, and rose not up as formerly
he used to do. His Friends also and Favorites began to report, that in the
Books of the Sybils (which in Rome were had in great Veneration) it was
written, that the Parthians could never be overcome but by a man that should
have the Title of a King, and therefore he labored that Caesar should take
upon him that Title before his Parthian War; and though he seemed to be
displeased at it, yet they suspected the contrary, and their suspicion was
increased, for that, whereas the Tribunes of the People had caused a man to be
imprisoned who had set a Crown upon the Head of one of Caesar's Statues, he was
so encensed against the Tribunes that did it, that he deposed them from their
Office: And not long after, when Mark Anthony (who was his great fovourite* and
that year his fellow Consul) being at some public Games, came to Caesar, and
put a Crown His dissimulation.
upon his Head, though he threw it down, yet they all imagined that Mark
Anthony would not have presumed to have done it without his good liking, and
that he did it but to prove the People how they would like it; these and such
like passages gave them occasion to desire and design his Death.

They were also further encouraged hereunto, for that in sundry public places,
certain writings were set up which did entice and animate them to conspire
against him: as upon the Statue of Brutus, who in ancient times did chase the
Kings out of Rome, were written these words, Would to God thou were now living,
Brutus. And upon the Image of Marcus Brutus, who then was Praetor, and
descended from the former Brutus, were these words: Thou sleep long Brutus.
Truly thou art not Brutus. And again: Thou art dead Brutus: Would to God thou
were living, Thou art unworthy of the succession from the Brute. Surely thou
art not descended from the good Brutus: and such like other writings were set
upon these Statues.

So as for these, and such like reasons, there were seventy of the most eminent
men in Rome that conspired to A conspiracy against him*
murder Caesar: of which the principle were Decius, Marcus Brutus, Caius
Cassius, Gaius Casca, Attilius Cimber, Servius Galba, Quintus Ligarius, Marcus
Spurius, etc. who, after diverse consultations, concluded to kill him upon the
Ides of March, which was the fifteenth day of that month, in the Temple where
the Senators were to sit that day: Yet Brutus was held to be Caesar's Son, and
had received great honors, and many favors His death foretold.
from him. This conspiracy was kept so secret notwithstanding the great number
of them, that there was not any one found that discovered the same. But there
were so many signs, and Prodigies, and to himself there happened so many
forewarnings, that (without knowing any cause) all men were of opinion that
Caesar's Death was near at hand. Spurina also, who was his Southsayer,
forewarned him to look to himself till the Ides of March were past: for that
his Life was in great danger. And Caesar's own Wife entreated him upon her
knees, that he would not that day go to the Senate: For she had dreamed that
he lay dead in her lap. These and such like warnings prevailed so far with him,
that he was about to send to Mark Anthony to make his excuse, and to put off
the Senate to another day. But what God has determined must come to pass; and
therefore Brutus being present, advised him by no means to discover any such
fear, and so he resolved to go.

Caesar made small account of Death, and said, That as for himself he had won
power and fame, and glory enough, and that at no time he could die with greater
honor. And some discoursing the night before he was slain, what Death was
best: Even that (qouth he) which is sudden, and least prepensed. The fifteenth
of March being come, he went from his House in a Litter toward the Senate, and
as he passed along the street, there was a Petition delivered to him, wherein
was set down in writing all that was concluded in this conspiracy, and he which
gave it, prayed him to read it presently, which he began to do: but there came
so many to speak to him that he could make no farther progress, and this
Paper was found in his hand when he was dead. As he passed on, he met with
Spurina, the Southsayer, and pleasantly jesting, he said to him, Do thou not
know Spurina, that the Ides of March are come? Yea (answered Spurina) and I
know that they are not yet past.

When he came to the Temple where the Senators met, he alighted from his Litter
and went in, and having first done Sacrifice (according to the custom) which
all that saw persaged to be fatal, and unfortunate, he sat him down in his
Chair, and Brutus Albinus entertaining Mark Anthony at the door with discourse,
one of the Conspirators, whose name was Celer, came to Caesar, under a pretense
to entreat him to release a Brother of his from Banishment, and presently all
the rest of the conspirators drew near to his Chair; which when Caesar saw,
thinking that they had all come for the same purpose, he said unto them, what
force is this? and at that instant, one of them whose name was Casca,
beginning, they all drew their poyniards, and Swords which they had privately
under their Gowns* and began to wound him. The first blow he received Casca
gave him in the throat: At which Caesar said aloude, What do thou Traitor
Casca? and wresting the Poyniard out of his hand, he arose and stabbed Casca
through the Arm, and being about to strike him again, he was prevented by the
many wounds which the others gave him, wilest with great force and courage he
leaped from one side to the other to defend himself: But when he saw Marcus
Brutus with his drawn Sword in his hand, wherewith he had already wounded him
in the Thigh, he was much amazed, and said in the Greek Tongue, Why how now Son
Brutus? And thou also? And having so said, seeing so many weapons He is slain.
bent against him, and that no body came to his rescue, he remembered to keep
the honor of his person, with his right hand he covered his Head with part of
his Robe, and with his left hand, girt himself and settled his clothes about
him, and being so covered he fell down to the ground, having received three and
twenty wounds; and it happened that his fall was at the foot of the seat on
which Pompeys Statue stood. So in His character.
this manner died one of the most Mighty, Worthy, Valient, Wise, and most
successful Princes, and Captains that ever was in the World. For, his
excellencies, abilities, invincible mind, incomparable courage, the Battles
which he fought, and Victories which he obtained: The Provinces, Kings and
Nations which he subdued; His Counsels, Policies, and Stratagems, and bold
attempts: his Magnanimity, clemency, and bounty both to the conquered and
Conquerors: the great designs which he had proposed to himself a little before
he was slain, being all well weighed and considered, it will plainly appear,
that in none of those things aforesaid, nor in any other that may be said of
him, there has been any Heathen King, or Captain that ever excelled him. And
setting apart his ambition, and desire of rule, he was only noted, and blamed
for being too much given to women.

Caesar was thus slain in the fifty sixth year of his age, a little more than
four years after the Death of Pompey, in the seven hundred and tenth year after
the building of Rome, and about forty and two years before the Incarnation of
our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Caesar left behind him neither Son nor Daughter legitimate at the time of his
Death: For though he had been four several times married, yet he had but one
only Daughter, named Julia, that was married to Pompey, and dyed before him.
Wherefore by his last Will, he adopted for his Son, and made his Heir in the
His will.
Dodrant, that is, in nine parts of twelve of his goods, his Nephew Octavius
Caesar, after wards called Octavianus Augustus, who was the Son of Acia, his
niece, and of Octavius Praetor of Macedonia, which Octavius at this time, was,
by the commandment of his Uncle, in the City of Apollonia, in the Province of
Epirus, where he applied himself to his studies, staying for him there, thence
to go with him to the Parthian War, being now about seventeen years of age.

Caesar being thus slain, the news of it ran presently all over the City, and
the tumult therein was so great, that no man knew what to do or say. All
Offices ceased, the Temples were all shut up, and every man was amazed. Caesar's
Friends were afraid of those that slew him, and they as much feared his
Friends, Brutas, Cassius, and the other Conspirators, and others that joined
with them, seeing the great tumult, durst not go to their Houses, nor prosecute
their other designs, for fear of Mark Anthony and Lepidus, whereof the one was
Consul, and the other General of the Horsemen, but presently from thence they
went to seize upon the Capitol, crying by the way as they went, Liberty,
Liberty, and imploring the favor, and assistance of the People. The rest of
that day, and all the next night, Mark Anthony, and Lepidus (who took Caesar's
part) were in Arms, and there passed sundry massages, and treaties between
them and the Conspirators: At last it was agreed that the Senate should sit,
whither Brutus, and Cassius came, M. Anthonies Sons (by the persuasion of
Cicero, a great lover of Liberty) remaining as Hostages for them.

In the Senate they Treated of Peace and concord, and Peace concluded.
that all that was past should be buried in perpetual oblivion; whereunto,
Anthony who was Consul, and the whole Senate agreed: and the Provinces being
divided, there was algreat liklihood of Peace. For the Senate approved, and
commended the murder, and the People dissembled their thoughts: For on the one
side the authority of Brutus, and Cassius, and the name of Liberty, seemed to
give them some content: and on the other side, the heinousness of the fact,
and the love they bare to Caesar, did move, and excite them to hate the
murderers, and so all was quiet for the present. But Mark Anthony (who
affected the Tyranny) took every opportunity to incense the People against them:
and Caesar's Testament being opened, wherein (besides the adopting of his Nehpew
Octavius, and making him his Heir) besides other bequests, he bequeathed to
the People of Rome, certain Gardens, and Lands near to the River of Tiber,
and to every Citizen of Rome a certain sum of money to be divided amongst
them, which being known, much increased their love to Caesar, and made his
death more grievous to them.

Caesar's Funeral being agreed upon, his Body was burnt with great solemnity in
the Field of Mars, and Mark Anthony made the Funeral Oration in his Praise,
and took the Robe wherein Caesar was slain, being all bloody, and showed it to
the People, using such speeches as provoaked them both to wrath, and
commiseration, so as before the Funeral solemnity was fully finished, they all
departed in great fury, taking Brands in their A tumult.
hands from the fire wherein Caesar was burned, and went to burnethe Houses of
Brutus, and Cassius, and if they could have found them, and the rest of the
Conspirators, they would certainly have slain them; and in their fury they
unadvisedly slew Elius Cinna, by mistaking him for Cornelius Cinna, who was one
of the Conspirators.

This tumult put Brutus, and Cassius, and their confederates, into such feate,
that they all fled from Rome into several parts: and though the Senate (having
appeased the tumult) inflicted punishment upon some of the seditions, and had
already committed some of them to Prison, yet Brutus, and Cassius durst not
return to Rome, but after a while went into Greece, to Govern those Provinces
which Caesar in his Life time had allotted unto them, which were, Macedonia to
Brutus, and Syria to Cassius. And truly this was very remarkable, that within
the space of three years all the Conspirators dyed, and not one of them of a
natural death.

Caesar in his fifth and last Consulship made an Edict, that thanks should be
ruturned to Hyrcanus, the High Priest He favored the Jews.
and Prince of the Jews, and to the Nation of the Jews, for their affection
to himself and the People of Rome. And decreed also, that the said Hyrcanus,
should have the City of Jerusalem, and repair the Walls of it which Pompey had
beaten down, and should Govern it as he pleased himself. He also granted to the
Jews, that every second year there should an abatement be made out of their
rents, and that they should be free from Impositions, and Tributes.

His Name of Caesar was so honorable, that all his successors to this present
day, have assumed it into their Title, and esteem it an honor to be called
Caesar's.

FINIS.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF OCTAVIANUS AUGUSTUS In whose Reign our LORD CHRIST was
born.
_(...) Caesar, who was afterward His Parentage.
called Octavianus Augustus, was by the Fathers side descended of the Ancient
Family of the Octavij, which was of great account in Rome even from the time of
Tarquin their King: By the Mothers side he was descended from the Regal Line:
His Mother was Accia the Daughter of Accius Balbus, and Julia, the Sister of
Julius Caesar, which Accia was married to the Father of Octavius. He was born
in the year of the Consulship of Cicero, and Caius Antonius. He was but four
years old when his Father dyed: and at twelve years old he made an Oration at
the Funeral of his Grandmother Julia.

When his Uncle Julius Caesar, was Warring in Spain against the Sons of Pompey,
Octavius (though he was but His first employment.
young) followed him thither through many and great dangers: and when that War
was ended, Julius Caesar intending to take him with him to the Parthian War,
sent him before to the City of Apollonia, where he plied his Book very
diligently; and on a time having a mind to see Theogenes, a learned.
Astronomer, he calculated his Nativity, and promised him great matters, which
made Octavius conceive great hopes of himself, and in memory thereof he caused
certain Medals to be coined, and would often boast of what Theogenes had told
him.

Octavius in the sixth month after he went to Apollonia, having intelligence
from his Mother of the Death of his He comes into Italy.
Uncle Julius Caesar, he hasted out of Epirus to Brundusium, where he was
received by the Army that went to meet him as the adopted Son of Caesar, and
without any further delay he assumed the name of Caesar, and took upon him to
be his Heir, and that so much the rather, because he had brought with him good
store of money, and great forces that were sent him by his Uncle: and so at
Brundusium, adopting himself into the Julian Family, he called himself Caius
Julius Caesar Octavius.

To this very Name, as though he had been his true Son, there came great store
of partly of his Friends, partly of freed*men, slaves* and Soldiers, by whom
being Many resort to him.
more strengthened and imboldned by the multitude of them that flocked to him,
and by the authority of the Caesarian name, which with the common People was in
great reputation, he took his journey toward Rome with a great train, which
daily increased like a Flood.

On the fourteenth Kalends of May he entered into Naples, where he gave Cicero
a visit. From thence as he was going to Rome there met him a vast company He
comes to Rome.
of his Friends, and as he entered the City, the Globe of the Sun seemed to
compass his Head round like unto a Bow, as it were, putting a Crown upon his
Head, who afterward was to be so great a man: and at night, calling together
his Friends, he commanded them to be ready the next morning, with good store of
followers, to meet him in the Marketplace, which was done accordingly; and he
going to Caius, the City Praetor, and Brother to Anthony, he told him that he
did accept of the Adoption. For it was the Roman custom in Adoptions to
interpose the authority of the Praetor: which acceptance being Regisired by the
Scribes, from thence he presently went to Mark Anthony the Consul, who behaved
himself M. Anthony's pride.
proudly toward him, and scarcely admitting him into Pompeys Gardens, gave him
time to speak with him.

Octavitanus had a great mind to revenge the Death of Julius Caesar; but by his
Mother, and Philip his Father in Law he was advised to conceal his Purpose for
a time, both because the Senate had approved his Death, and because Mark
Anthony, who was principally to assist him therein, did not show himself very
friendly to him. Octavianus understanding that Mark Anthony had in his custody
all the Treasure that was left by Julius Caesar, he desired him to command it
to be delivered to him, therewith to pay his debts, and to distrubte it as
Caesar had appointed in his Will: But Anthony with greater Pride than
Octavianus could well bear, not only refused what he demanded, but reproved him
for desiring it; whereupon discords presently arose betwixt them: and
Octavianus strengthened himself with the Counsel of Cicero, a great enemy to
Anthony, and one whose authority at that time, by reason of his Wisdom and
Eloquence, was very great.

Anthony being Overseer of those things which Caesar had commanded to be done,
what by corrupting the Notes, And falsehood.
and changing them at his pleasure, did what himself listed, as if it had been
the appointment of Caesan; by this means, gratifying Cities and Governors,
and heaping vast sums of money to himself, selling not only Fields and
Tributes, but freedoms and immunities even of the City of Rome, and that not
only to particular Persons, but to whole Provinces, and of these things there
were Tables hung up all over the Capitol.

Octavianus being nineteen years old, at his own charges gathered an Army, and
sought the favor of the People, Caesar raises*an Army.
and prepared forces against Anthony for his own and the Commonwealths safety.
He also stirred up the old Soldiers, who by Julius Caesar had been planted in
Colonies: so that Anthony being afraid of him, by the mediation of Friends* had
a conference with him in the Capitol, and they were for the present reconciled:
but within a few days, through the whisperings of some, their enmity brake our
again, and Anthony, not thinking himself strong enough, and knowing that the
Legions of Macedonia were the best Soldiers, and six in number, with whom also
were many Archers, light harnessed men, and Horsemen, these he sought to draw
to himself, who, because of their neernesse, might presently be brought into
Italy: and thereupon he caused a rumor to be spread, that the Getae wasted
Macedonia by their inrodes; and upon that occasion he demanded an Army of the
Senate, saying, that the Macedonian Army was raised by Caesar against the
Getae, before he intended the Parthian War, whereupon he was chosen General of
those Forces, and he abtained a Law for the change of Provinces, whereby his
Brother Cains Anthony challenged Macedonia, which before by lot fell to Marcus
Brutus. Anthony leaves Rome.


On the seventh of the Ides of October Anthony went to Brundusium, there to
meet four of the Macedonian Legions, whom he thought to draw to himself by
money. Thither also Octavianus sent his Friends with money to hire these
Soldiers for himself, and himself posted into Campania, to engage those
Soldiers which were in Colonies to take his part; and first he drew to him the
old Soldiers of Galatia, then those of Casilinum on both sides of Capua,
giving to each man five hundred pence, by which means he gat together about
ten thousand men, who marched with him under one Ensign as a guard.

In the mean while the four Legions of Macedonia, accusing Anthony for his
delays in revenging Caesurs Death, without any acclamations conducted him to
the Tribunal, as it were, to hear an account of this matter, and there
continued silent. Anthony taking this ill, upbraded them with their
Ingratitude, and complained that they had not brought to him some disturbers of
the Peace, who were sent from that malapert young man (for so he called
Octavian) and to ingratiate himself with them, he promised an hundred pence to
each of them, which niggardly promise was entertained with laughter, His
Parsimony.
which he took so ill, that being returned to his Quarters, in the presence of
his most converous, and most cruel Wife Fulvia, he put to death some Centurions
out of the Martian Legion.

When those of Caesar's party, that were sent to corrupt the Soldiers, saw that
they were more exasperated by Caesar's Policy.
this deed, they scattered Libels about the Army, wherein they disgraced
Anthony, and extolled the liberality of Caesar. And when some sided with
Octavian, and others with Anthony, the Army, as if it had been set to sale at
an outery, addicted themselves to him that would give most. And because that
Decius Brutus, who commanded Gallia Cisalpirea (now Lombardy) opposed Anthony,
he went to besiege him in the City of Mutina (now Modena) which being known in
Rome, Cicero his authority and credit in the Senate was such, that Mark Anthony
declared an enemy.
Anthony was declared an enemy to the State, and the new Consuls, Hircius and
Pansa were sem against him, and with them was Octavian sent with Ensigns of a
Consul, and Title of a Pro-praetor, having been first admitted into the Senate
though so young, which was done by the procurement of Cicero, though he
afterward requited him ill for it.

Octavian with the Consuls, drew near to Mark Anthony, Cicero remaining to
command in chief in all matters at Rome: and between the two Armies there
passed many skirmishes and encounters, and at last they came to a Battle,
wherein the Consuls and Caesar had the Victory, but Hircius was slain in the
Battle, and Caesar overcomes him.
Pansa was so wounded, that he died within a few days after, and both the
Armies of the slain Consuls obeyed Caesar. By this means D. Brutus was freed
from his siege, and Anthony was forced to forsake Italy by a dishonorable
flight, leaving his baggage behind him. In this service Octavian made marvelous
proof of himself, being but twenty years old, performing the Office, not only
of a good Captain, but also of a stout Soldier: For seeing the Standart*
bearer sore wounded and ready to fall, Octavian took from him the Eagle, and
bare it a great while till he had lodged it in safety.

Mark Anthony after the Battle, gathering the remainders He fliesinto France.
of his Army, passed the Alps and went into France, soliciting the Friendship
of Lepidus, who was there with an Army ever since the Death of Julius Caesar,
whom after some treaties he made his Friend: and Octavian after the Victory
obtained, presently sent to the Senate to require a Triumph for his Victory, as
also the Counsulship for the remainder of the year in the room of the dead
Consuls, with their succession in their charge, and command of the Army. But
the answer of the Senate was not according to his desire: For the Friends and
Kinsmen of those that had murdered Caesar began to fear him, and to suspect
his power, wherefore they prevailed to delay that which he required, and in the
end they resolved to assign the Army to Decius Brutus, and temporizing with
Octavian, they granted him a Triumph, but denied him the Consulship, whereat he
was much discontented, and therefore secretly treated of friendship with Mark
Anthony, and having drawn to himself the affections of the Army, he therewith
Caesar makes himself Consul.
marched toward Rome, and approaching near to the City, in dispite of the
Senate, he caused himself to be chosen Consul being not fully twenty years old.
Then did he cause accusations to be exhibited against Brutus, and Cassius, and
the rest of the Conspirators; and in their absence, having none that durst
defend their cause, they were condemned. After this was done he left the City,
and with his Army marched toward Anthony, and Lepidus, who were already entered
into Italy.

Decius Brutus hearing of the Treaties and League that was made between
Octavian, Lepidus and Mark Anthony, not daring to stay in that Country,
departed with his Army, which soon forsook him, some going to Caesar, others to
Mark Anthony, whereupon he fled, but being at last taken, he was brought to
Mark Anthony, who caused his Head to be cut off. The Armies of these Captains
drawing near together, to whom Assinius Pollio, and Plancus, with their
Legions were joined, these three Octavian Caesar, Mark Anthony, and Lepidus,
meeting, after three days debate, they concluded their accursed Peace; and
these firebrands of sedition entered into a Triumvirate, with A Triumvirate
erected.
several intents and designs. Lepidus was covetous, and sought riches by
troubling the State. Anthony was by nature an enemy to Peace, and to the
Commonwealth, desiring an opportunity to be revenged of those who had declared
him an enemy to the State. And Octavian sought revenge upon Brutus, and
Cassius, and those who had slain his adopted Father. And to bring these things
to pass, Octavian put away his Wife who was Daughter to Servilius, and
contracted himself to Claudia, Daughter in Law to Anthony by his Wife Fulvia,
who was now a child, and from whom he was afterward divorced by reason of the
discord that arose between Anthony and him.

In this League which they made, besides dividing the Provinces amongst
themselves, they agreed to Proscribe and kill each of them his enemies, and the
one Many proscribed.
delivered them into the others hands, having more respect to be revenged upon
an enemy then to save a Friend; and so there was made the most cruel and
inhumane Proscription, and Butchery that ever was before heard of, giving and
exchanging Friends, and Kinsmen for enemies. For Mark Anthony gave up his
Fathers Brother: and Lepidus his own Brother, Lucius Ingratitude.
Paulus: and Octavian; M. T. Cicero, whom he called Father, and who had
entreated and honored him as a Son. And besides these, they Proscribed and
condemned to die three hundred other Principal men of Rome, amongst whom were
about one hundred and forty Senators, besides two thousand Romans of the order
of Knighthood.

This agreement being made, they all three went to Rome, where they took upon
them the Government of the Commonwealth by the name of Triumvirat, the time
being limited to five years, though they never meant to leave the same. And
presently after, those who were condemned and Proscribed, were by their
commandment put to death, being sought out in all parts and places; their
Houses were ransacked, and their goods confiscated.

Cicero understanding that his name was in the Catalogue Cicero flies.
amongst the Proscripts, only because he had been a lover of Roman Liberty, he
fled to the Sea, where he embarked himself, but so hard was his hap, that by
contrary winds he was driven back to the shore, whereupon, returning to some
possessions of his near Capua, not far from the Sea, as he lay sleeping there,
he was awakened by some Crows which with their bills plucked his clothes from
his back. His servants being moved with this ill presage, put him into his
Litter, and again carried him toward the Sea: but being overtaken by the
murderers, he put his neck And is slain.
out of his Litter, and they cut off his Head, and his right hand, wherewith he
had written his Orations a against Mark Anthony called Philippicks: And thus was
he slain by one whom he had defended, and delivered from death. Anthony
joyfully received his hand, and caused it to be nailed up in the place where he
was wont to plead, to which all the People repaired to behold so woeful and
miserable a spectacle, of whom there was not any one but was heartily sorry for
the Death of so great a Personage, and so fervent a lover of his Country.
Salvius Otho, a Tribune of the People, invited his Friends to his last Supper,
and as they were Horid cruelty.
sitting, in came a Centurion, and in the presence of them all, struck off his
Head. Minutius the Praetor was slain, sitting in his seat of Judgment. L.
Villius Annalis, who had been Consul, flying from the murderers, hid himself
in the Suburbs in a little House of one of his clients, Sons unnatural.
but his own Son betrayed him to the murderers, who slew him there; but
shortly after this Parricide being drunken, quarrelling with the same
Soldiers, was slain by them. C. Toranius also being betrayed by his own Son,
was slain, who in a few days having consumed his Patrimony, was condemned for
Theft, and banished into a place where he died miserably.

Quintus Cicero was hid by his Son, whom they could Sons dutiful and good.
never make to confess by any torments where his Father was; but the old man,
not being able any longer to endure that they should torment so virtuous a Son,
came and presented himself to the Murderers: whereupon the Son entreated them
to kill him first, but they killed them both together. The Egnaces; the Father
and Son, embracing one the other were both run through at once and slain. C.
Hosidius Geta, was put into a grave by his Son as dead, who sustained and kept
him till the danger was over. Aruntius, after he had comfored his Son,
delivered up himself to the murderers, but his Son for grief famished
himself. Some other Children carefully hid, and preserved their Parents.

Tanusia was such an importunate suitor to Caesar for her Husband T. Junius
that she preserved his life: He Wives good.
was in the intrim hidden by Philopoemen, his bondmen enfranchised, whom Caesar
afterward Knighted for his fidelity to his Master. Q. Ligurius haivng been
concealed by his Wife, was discovered by a slave, and killed, whereupon his
Wife pined her self to death. Lucretius Vespilio, having passed many dangers
whilst he sought to hide himself here and there, at last came to his Wife
Shuria, who hid him between the Sealing and the top of the House till she had
begged his Life of the Triumvirs. Apuleius was saved by his Wife, who fled away
with him. Antius his Wife wrapped him up in Coverlets, and caused him to be
carried to the Sea side as a pack of stuff, where he embarked and sailed into
Sicily. Coponius was saved by his Wife, who lent her Body to Anthony for one
night, to save him whom she preferred before her honor.

But the Wife of Septimius, having shamefully given her Body to one of
Anthonies Familiars, caused her Wives bad.
Husband to be put into the number of the Poscripts, that she might the more
freely continue her Adulteries, and her Husband was slain by her means. Q.
Vettius Salussus was hidden in a very secret place, but acquainting his Wife
with it, she betrayed him to the murderers. Fulvius was discovered by one of
his slaves and his Concubine, though he had made her free, and given her goods
wherewithal to maintain her self.

P. Naso was betrayed by his slave enfranchised, with Servants bad.
whom he had been too familiar, but he revenged himself upon his slave, whom he
killed, and then held forth his neck to the cut throats. L. Lucceius had put
into the hands of two of his Freedmen as much as would have relieved him in his
Banishment, but they ran away with all, whereupon he delivered himself to the
murderers. Haterius, who had hid himself in a very secret place, was sold and
betrayed by his slave, and killed. Cassius Varus who was betrayed by a slave
made free, had his Head struck off. Caius Plotius was hiden by his slaves, but
being given to Perfumes, the sent thereof discovered him; yet when the
Soldiers could not find him, they cruelly tormented his Servants good.
Servants to make them confess where he was, which yet they would not do: But
the Master pitting his faithful servants, came out of his secret place, and
delivered himself to the murderers.

Appius Claudius changed his Gown with his slave, who in that habit presented
himself to the murderers, and was slain by them instead of his Master. Another
slave of Menius did the like: for he went into his Masters Litter, and offered
his neck to the murderers, who cut off his Head, and so his Master escaped
into Sicily. The slave of Urbinus Panopio, hearing that the murderers were
coming to his Masters House, took off his Gown and his Ring, and gave him his
own apparel, and put him out at a back door: then he went up and lay upon his
Masters Bed, where he boldly attended them that killed him for Panopio. The
slave of Antius Restio, though his Master had soundly beaten him a few days
before for some knavish tricks, yet to save his Master, meeting an old man by
the way, he struck off his Head, and showing that, with his whippings to the
murderers, he made them believe that thus he had revenged himself of his
Master, with whom he shortly after fled into Sicily. The slaves of Martius
Censorinus kept their Master secretly, till he had opportunity to escape into
Sicily to Sextus Pompeius.

Q. Oppius, an honorable old man, being very near A good Son.
taking, was rescued by his Son, who conveying him out of Rome, carried him
upon his shoulders, and sent him into Sicily, where all the poor distressed
Romans were courteously entertained by S. Pompeius, who sent forth Ships, and
Galleys to lie upon the coast of Italy, ready to receive all them that fled to
him; doubly rewarding those that saved any that was Proscribed: He gave also
honorable Offices to all that had been Consuls, and comforting the rest with
singular courtesy. Many others fled into Macedonia to Brutus and Cassius:
others into Africa to Cornificius. Statius Samnis, an honorable Senator being
about eighty years old, that those Thieves might have no part of his Goods, he
gave them for a prey to whomsoever would take them; then setting his House on
fire he burnt himself in it. Aponius having been long concealed by his slave,
grew weary of that confinement, came out into the Marketplace, and yielded his
neck to the murderers. Cestius being in the like condition, caused his slaves,
to make a great fire, threw himself into it and died: Sulpitus Rufus, who had
been Consul, was murthred because he would not sell an Isle of his to Fulvia:
also Ampius Balbus was slain, because he A Jezabel.
would not give her a pleasant place of his.

M. Anthony put into the number of Proscripts a Senator called Nonius Struma,
only to get from him an Base coveteousnesse.
Emerod esteemed worth fifty Thousand Crowns: but Nonius found a means to
escape with his Emerod, to the great grief of Anthony. Some valiantly defended
themselves, as Atteius Capito, who killed many Soldiers Valor.
who came rudely running upon him, but being at last oppressed with multitudes,
he was slain. Vetulinus, assisted by his Son, valiantly repulsed the
murderers, but at last was slain. Sicilias Coranas hoping to escape, put
himself amongst the Mourners that followed a dead Corpse, but being discovered
was slain.

The Triumviri caused the goods of the Proscripts to be sold by the Drum, at
such prizes as the Soldiers pleased, yet most part of them was spoiled and
given away. They promised also to Widows their Joyntures, and to Sons the
tenth part of their Fathers Patrimony, and to Daughters the twentieth part, but
few or none had any benefit by this promise; yea, on the contrary, they sacked
many of them that demanded Oppression.
these rights. They exacted great sums of money in Rome, and all over Italy;
and to encourage the Soldiers, they gave them unmeasurable gifts, and granted
them daily new pillage. The Legions they Wintered in the richest Cities upon
free Quarter. To be short, men by fear and custom were so inured to slavery,
that they became more slaves than the Tyrants would have had them.

These three men having done what they would in Rome, and knowing that Brutus
and Cassius had a very great Army in Greece, who called themselves the
Deliverers of their Country, saying that they would go and and set Rome at
liberty from oppression: Cassius having overthrown and slain Dolabella in
Syria: and being informed, that by the assistance of their Friends, they had
gotten together eighteen Legions, hereupon Mark Anthony, and Octavian resolved
to go against them with the greatest Army that they could possibly make of old
Soldiers, and that Lepidus should stay to guard Rome: and accordingly they
departed, They go against Brutus and Cassius.
and arrived in Greece, and marching on, they drew near to the place where
Brutus and Cassius were encamped, which was in Macedonia in the Philippick
Fields.

Before they came to join Battle there were sundry Prodigeis.
Prodigies: for fowls of prey hovered about the Camp of Brutus as if it had
been their own already: and as they marched out to Battle, a Blackmoore met
them, which they accounted an ill Omen. Brutus being alone in his Tent at
night, a man sad and ghastly appeared to him, and being asked what he was, he
answered, I A Spectarum.
am they evil Genius, and so vanished: But on the contrary. Birds, and Beasts
promised good success to Caesar. These Armies lying so near together had
frequent skirmishes, and at last came to a Battle, where the Victory was
strangely divided: For Brutus on the Brutus beats Caesar. M. Anthony beats
Cassius.
one side of the Field, did beat Octavian, and put his Battalion to rout,
pursuing them into the Camp, where many of them were slain; and while Brutus
was following his Victory, his partner Cassius was overthrown by Mark Anthony,
though he did all that was possible to encourage his men, and by reason of the
clouds of dust, knew nothing of Brutus his Victory, whereupon retiring to an
high ground, he there pitched his Tent: and so standing and looking about, he
saw Brutus his Troops coming to his aid, and to relieve him; but he imagining
that they came flying before their enemies, commanded a slave of his whom he
had made free to kill him, who did it accordingly.

Octavians men that escaped by flight, retired to Mark Anthonies Camp, and had
not Brutus his men busied themselves in ransacking Octavians Camp, they had
that day, obtained an entire Victory: for they might in due time have rescued,
and relieved Cassius, and both of them being joined together might easily have
overthrown Mark Anthony: but God had otherwise determined. The Victory being
thus divided, the Generals of either party gathered their forces together, and
of Brutus side, were slain eight thousand men, and of the enemies side a far
greater number. Brutus did his best to encourage and comfort his Soldiers, and
the Gentlemen which followed Cassius: and the next day, though both Armies were
put in Battle array, yet they fought not; but a few days after, Brutus, by
his Soldiers, was forced to come to an other Battle, who was of himself
willing rather to delay and prolong the War, knowing that his enemies wanted
Victuals, and many other necessaries, and because he reposed no great trust in
the forces of Cassius: for he found that they were fearful, Brutus beaten.
and hard to be commanded because of their late overthrow. When they came to
the second encounter, Brutus did all the Offices of an able General, and of a
Valiant Knight, yet in the end his men were broken, and overthown by the enemy.
Burtus having gathered his scattered Troops together, found himself unable to
make any further resistance, and being advised by some of his Friends to fly,
he told them, That so be would, yet not with his feet but with his hands, and
thereupon, taking a Sword from a servant of his called Stratus, he slew
himself. Thus Octavian, and Mark Anthony Kills himself.
remained Victors, and Masters of the Field, and all things succeeded according
to Caesar's desire, for whom, God in his secret Counsel, had reserved the
Monarchy of the whole World, which for the present was divided between three.

These Wars being ended, and the Legions of Brutus, and Cassius, reduced to the
obedience of the Conquerors, Octavian, and Mark Anthony agreed, and resolved,
that Anthony should remain to Govern Greece, and Asia, that Lepidus should go
into Africa, and that Octavian should return to Rome: and accordingly Mark
Anthony went into Asia, where he gave himself up to sensuality Anthony With
Cleopatra.
and delights with the fair, but wanton Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, and
Octavian, though with some hindrances, by reason of his health, at last came to
Rome.

Not long after there arose new Wars and troubles for though Octavian was at
peace with Lepidus who was now in Africa, Octavian having under his command
Troubles in Rome.
Spain, France, part of Germany, Italy, and Illyricum, yet Lucius Antonius, who
at this time was Consul, being provoked thereto by his Sister in Law Fulvia,
Wife to Mark Anthony, began to oppose himself against Lepidus and Octavian,
seeking to overthrow the Triumvirat, which contention brake out about the
division of Fields which Caesar had made to the Soldiers which had served him
in his Wars. Some say that Fulvia made this stir, that she might procure the
return of Mark Anthony to her, of whom she was jealous, hearing of his
familiarity with Cleopatra. The discord in Rome grew to that height that they
came to Arms; and Lucius Antonius went from the City, and levied an Army
against Octavian, who also marched toward him with his Forces. But Lucius not
daring to join Battle, shut himself up in Perugia, where Caesar immediately
besieged him, and divorced himself from Claudia, the Daughter of Fulvia, and
was married to his third Wife, Scribonia by whom he had one only Daughter.
Octavian being about twenty three years old, so strictly besieged Perugia that
Lucius and his men were brought to such Caesar's Victory.
straits for want of Victuals, that he was forced to yield up himself to
Octavian, who pardoned him, and used him kindly, and thus this War was ended
without bloodshed. And so Octavian returned to Rome, of which he was now sole
Lord: and from hence some reckon the beginning of his Empire which was about
four years after the Death of Julius Caesar, and about thirty eight years
before the Incarnation of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Caesar being now in quiet, Fulvia by letters, and false informations sought to
stirre-up her Husband Mark Anthony against Octavian, with which resolution she
left Italy, and went toward him; and at the same time Mark Anthony departed
from Alexandria in Egypt, and came to the Isle of Rhodes, where he was
informed of all that had happened to his Brother Lucius. From thence he went
into Greece, and at Athens he found his Wife Fulvia sick, yet vehemently
inveying against Octavian: Authony comes into Italy.
wherefore leaving her there, he went with two hundred Galleys into Italy, and
landed at Brundusium, where the Wars began between him and the Forces of
Octavian, who was yet at Rome. But news coming of Fulvias death, some Friends
interposed to reconcile them, and at last it was agreed, that Arbitrators
should be chosen to compose their differences. Octavian chose Mecaenas, and for
Mark Anthony was Asinius Pollia, and these brought it to this issue, that Mark
Anthony should have all the East from Italy, beginning from the Jonian Sea,
which is the entry into the Venetian Gulf, unto the River of Euphrates,
wherein were included all the Provinces of Graecia and Asia, with all the Peace
made bewixt them.
Islands within these limits. To Octavian was allotted from the said Jonian Sea
to the Western or Spanish Sea, wherein were contained Spain, France, Italy,
Germany, and Britan. To Lepidus was confirmed Africa, where he then was, with
all the Provinces thereof. And for the strengthening of this League, Mark
Anthony, now a Widdower, was to marry with Octavia, the Sister of Octavian by
the Fathers side, formerly married to Mareus Marcellus, by whom she had one Son
called also Marcellus, whom Octavian adopted. And this marriage was dispensed
with by the Senate, because in Rome, Widows were not permitted to marry till
they had lived ten months in Widdowhood, which she had not done.

This being concluded, Octavian, and Mark Anthony Anthony marries Octavia.
went to Rome, where the wedding was solemnized, and they were seemingly good
Friends; but their Peace was disquieted by the Neighborhood of Sextus
Pompeius, who commanded the Seas from Sicily where he lived, and with his
Ships, and Pirates, he disquited Caesar's Friends, who thereupon resolved to
ruin him: But at the request of the Senate, and of Mark Anthony, he harkned to
Peace, and by the mediation of Friends, They are reconciled with Sextus Pompey.
it was agreed that all matters past should be forgotten, and that they should
live like good Neighbors and Friends, and that Sextus Pompey should enjoy
Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica which he had in possession, and that he should
clear the Seas from Pirates that Merchants and passengers might pass safely,
and that he should furnish Rome yearly with a certain quantity of Corn. This
being concluded, they agreed upon a meeting of all three upon the Sea side in
the straight of Messina, in a Fortress built for that purpose which reached
into the Water, whither Sextus Pompey might come with his Galleys and be in
safety: which accordingly was performed with great joy and solemnity; and
Sextus Pompey feasted them in his Galleys, and they likewise him by Land.

From hence Sextus Pompey returned into Sicily, and Octavian and Mark Anthony
to Rome, where for a while they remained in great familiarity: and then Mark
Anthony preparing for his journey into the East, sent Ventidius before him with
a great Army against the Parthians, wherein he had so good success, that he
overcame and defeated Pacorus, the Parthian Kings The Parthian bea*ten.
Son, and slew twenty thousand of his men, and thereby sufficiently revenged
the Death of Marcus Crassus, for which he afterward Triumphed at Rome.

Mark Anthony departed from Rome with his new Wife, and wintered with her in
Athens* Octavian in the mean time in Rome growing mighty, and in high esteem,
was yet very pensive, being troubled at the Neighborhood of Sextus Pompey in
Sicily, attending an occasion to War against him: for which purpose he prepared
a great Fleet, pretending that* Sextus with his Ships, Caesar envies Sextus
Pompey.
and Gallyes hindered the coming of Corn into Italy. These Sicilian Wars
continued for some years: in the beginning whereof Octavian had ill success,
yet more from storms and tempests than from the force of his enemies* and if
Sextus Pompey had been as Prudent and able to offend his enemy as he was to
defend himself: and as he was Valiant, if he had been as Wise and Politic, he
might have greatly distressed Octavian in all matters concerning Italy: yet the
matter was so handled, that at Octavians request Mark Anthony came twice out of
the East into Italy to assist him in these Wars. The first time he came to
Brundusium, where, not finding Octavian according to appointment, he returned
without seeing him, upon some jealousies which grew betwixt them. But Octavian
having lost most of his Fleet in a storm, he sent his entire Friend Mecenas to
Mark Anthony, at whose entreaty he returned into Italy with three hundred Ships
and Galleys, giving it out that he came to Caesar's aid. And though there were
some differences between them, yet Octavia so labored between her Husband and
Brother, that she reconciled them, and so they met in the mouth of the River
near Tarentum, where Mark Anthony gave to Octavian one hundred and twenty of
his Galleys for his Wars, and Octavian gave to him some of the Italian
Soldiers, and they renewed their Triumvirat for other five years. Which done,
Mark Anthony returned to the East to prosecute his Wars against the Parthians,
his Wife Octavia and her Children remaining in Rome.

Anthony being gone, Octavian resolving to prosecute Wars against him.
the Wars against Sextus Pompey with all his Forces, armed two Navies, whereof
Agrippa was the Admiral of the one, and himself of the other: He sent also to
Lepidus intreaing his aid, who accordingly came and brought with him a Thousand
Ships, little and great, and eighty Galleys, wherein he transported five
thousand Horse, and twelve Legions of Foot Soldiers. Sextus Pompey hearing
what great preparations were made against him, did strongly fortify all the
Seacoasts of Sicily, and on the frontiers of Africa; near to Lilibaeum, he
placed Plinius, a good Captain with good companies of Soldiers, and his whole
Fleet by Sea he drew into the Port of Messina, purposing to manage his Wars by
Sea, having neither experience, nor power to do it by Land, and so he attended
the coming of his enemies.

Lepidus loosing with his whole Fleet from Africa, was encountered with a
tempest, wherein with the loss of a great part of his Navy, he, with the rest
landed at Lilybaeum, and took in certain places there about, but having small
judgment, and experience in the Wars, he made a greater noise then did hurt to
Pompey. Octavius also being at Sea in a tempest, lost thirty of his Galleys,
besides small Ships, and with much difficulty returned to Italy: and Taurus,
who commanded the Galleys which Anthony left, landed at Tarentum, though with
great loss and danger. Octavian was so grieved at these losses, that he had
thoughts of giving over the War for that year: but changing his mind, he
repaired his Fleets, and ordered Agrippa, with one of them to pass into
Sicily, and there to make War both by Sea and Land: and himself following with
the other Fleet did the like.

About this time Octavian divorced himself from Scribonia, though he had a
Daughter by her called Livia, and then he married Livia Drusilla, Wife to
Tiberius Caesar marries Livia.
Nero, by whom she had a Son called also Tiberius; hereupon Tiberius was forced
to leave her to please Octavian, though at this time she was with child of a
Son. This Livia he loved deerly, and continned with her till his Death.

Agrippa assaulted, and took in some places in Sicily, which Pompey hearing of,
departed from Messina with one hundred and seventy five Galleys, to relive
them, and Agrippa being advertised of his coming, prepared to meet him, his
Galleys being almost equal in number, and so they joined Battle, which for a
time seemed to be equal, but at last Agrippa prevailed, and Pompey rerreated
in time, his Galleys and Foists withdrawing Pompey beaten.
themselves into some Rivers near at hand, whither Agrippa with his bigger
Vessels could not follow them. In this fight Pompey lost thirty of his Galleys.
Agrippa the next day went to a City called Tindaria, thinking to surprise it by
reason of intelligence which he had with the Citizens: and Pompey in the night
gave secret order to his whole Fleet to retire to Messina.

Octavian in the mean time embarked a great part of his Army, which he landed
in Sicily, and set them on shore under the command of Cornificius, little
thinking that Pompey had been so near, who if he had taken this opportunity,
might have defeated Octavian. But loosing it, Octavian imbarking again,
intended to determine the quarrel by a Battle at Sea, leaving Cornificius
with his men fortified on the Land. Then did Pompey sail out of Messina with
his whole Fleet, and neither Parties refusing it, they came to a Battle, in
which Octavian was overcome, and all his great Fleet scattered Caesar beaten.
and lost, and himself driven to fly into Italy in a Brigandine, where through
many dangers, he at last came to the Army, whereof Mesalla was General, and
being nothing discouraged with this loss, he presently took order for all that
was needful. To Rome he sent his entire Friend Mecenas, to take order that
this news should breed no alteration there, and then presently sent to
Agrippa, the Admiral of his other Fleet, that he should with all speed succor
Cornificius and his Army in Sicily, and to Lepidus he sent to desire him to
make his present repair to the Isle of Lippari, which is between Sicily, and
Calabria.

His diligence and good order about these affairs was such, that in a short
time, by the help of Lepidus, and Agrippa, in dispite of Pompey, he landed all
his Forces in Sicily, and joining with Lepidus, he encamped near to Messina,
where began a most cruel War both by Sea, and Land, wherein the power and
sufficiency of Pompey did wonderfully appear, in that he was able to grapple
with so potent adversaries. Yet seeing himself oppressed, he sent a challenge
to Octavian, that to avoid the further effusion of blood, he would try it out
with him in a Navall fight, so many Ships and Galleys against so many. Ostavian
delayed him at the first, but afterward they agreed that with three hundred
Ships and Galleys on either side, they would meet in such a place, and there
fight it out, and accordingly they prepared for the Battle.

Octavian leaving Lepidus with his Land Army, embarked himself in his Fleet,
and Pompey did the like, and so they joined Battle, which was one of the
cruelest that ever was, considering the Commanders and the strength on either
side, where Pompey, after he had performed all the Offices of a good and
Valiant Captain, and after the slaughter of multitudes on both sides, was
overcome by Octavian, and all his Fleet was burnt and Pompey beaten.
sunk, or taken, saving sixteen sail which escaped by flight, and he in one of
them, and these entered into the Haven of Messina. And though the City was
sufficiently fortified, and Pompey knew that Plinius, his And flies.
General was coming to his rescue, yet in a dark night he embarked, and with
those sixteen Ships which had escaped, he fled into the East to Mark Anthony,
hoping to find relief from him: but after much toil, and many And is slain.
accidents which happened to him, he was slain by one Titius at the commond of
Mark Anthony, and in him failed the House and memory of his Father Pompey the
Great.

In this War Octavian escaped many dangers. For having transported part of his
Army into Sicily, and Caesar's dangers.
sailing back to fetch the rest, he was suddenly supprised by Demochares, and
Apolaphanes, two of Pompeys Captains, from whom he escaped with much
difficulty with one only Ship. Then traveling by Land to Rhegiuns, he saw some
of Pompeys Galleys near to the shore, and supposing them to be his own, he went
down to the Sea side, where he had like to have been taken by them; and then
seeking to escape by unknown passages, he met with a slave of Aemilius Paulus,
who remembering that he had proscribed his Master Paulus, Father to this
Aemilius, he attempted to kill him.

Octavian having obtained this great Victory aforesaid, though with very great
loss, he went to Land with the remainder of his Ships and Army, comanding
Agrippa to join with Lepidus, and to go to Messina, whither Pliny, Pompeys
General had retired himself. But not thinking good to stand upon his defense,
now that his Master was fled, he yielded himself to Lepidus with all his
Legions: This made Lepidus so proud, that affecting to have Sicily to himself,
he contended with Octavian about He falls out with Lepidus.
it: and entering into the City of Messina, he placed a Garrison in it, to hold
it for his own use: The like he did in many other places of the Island: and
when Octavian came, he desired to speak with him, greatly complaining of his
proceedings.

But in Rule, and Dominion equallity is intolerable, whilst either of them
coveted this Isle for himself they fell at variance, and Octavian made his Navy
to draw near to the shore: So that both Armies began to stand upon their
guard, the one against the other, and many messages passed between them, yet
could they not agree. But Octavian was far better beloved and esteemd by the
men of War, for his many virtues, and Nobility, and for his Namesake [ Julius
Caesar,] then the other, and the Soldiers began to lay all the fault upon
Lepidus.

Octavian understanding this, labored secretly to corrupt Caesar's Policy.
Lepidus his Soldiers, to draw them to himself: and one day, with a great
Troop of Horse, he rode near to Lepidus his Camp, and parlying with his
Soldiers, justified himself and laid all the fault upon Lepidus, insomuch that
many of them began to come over to his side. Lepidus, being informed hereof,
caused an Alarm Lepidus overcome.
to be given, and commanded his men to sally out against Octavian, but when
they came forth, most of them joined with him: so that Lepidus seeing himself
in danger of beig forsaken of his whole Army, yielded himself unto Caesar, and
putting off his Generals Robe, he went to his Tent, and submitted to him.
Octavian received him as if he had never offended, very courteously, and
honorably, but restored him neither to his State nor power, and sent him with
a good company to Rome, without any Office but the High Priesthood, which he
had held ever since the Death of Julius Caesar: and so this difference was
ended without bloodshed.

Octavian now retaining Sicily to himself, and having divested Lepidus of the
Triumvirat, he appropriated to himself the Province of Africa, and remained
General of the three Armies, to wit, of Lepidus, of Pompey, and of his own;
wherein were forty five Legions of Footmen, and twenty five thousand Horse,
all well armed, besides many other Numidians. He had also upon the Sea, six
hundred Galleys and many Ships, and Brigandines. And now waited only for an
opportunity to fall out with Mark Anthony that he might make himself Lord of
all. Yet for the present he paid his Soldiers as well as he could, and gave
Coronets, Honors, and Arms to those who had deserved well in these Wars. He
then dispered his Armies, sending them to their own homes, laden with many
fair promises. He also left, and sent Praetors and Governors into Sicily and
Africa, and so hasted Caesar retern to Rome.
toward Rome, where he was received with Ovation (which was little less than
a Triumph) with incredible joy and honor: and was so exceedingly beloved, that
in many places they erected Temples and Altars to him, as to their Gods: and he
reformed such things as by reason of the Wars were grown out of order.

At this time Mark Anthony, who was in the East, though he had no great
success in his Parthian War, yet was he still of great power, very Rich, and
well obeyed in the Provinces of Greece, Asia, and Egypt, and in Anthony
besotted with Cleopatra.
the rest of his Governments. But he was so besotted with the love, and company
of Cleopatra, the Queen of Egypt, that he thought of nothing but how to
satisfy her humor, in the mean time neglecting, and forgetting his Wife
Octavia, the Sister of Octavian, who in beauty and Wisdom was nothing inferior
to Cleopatra, and in virtue and goodness did far excel her.

The Monarchy of the World being thus divided between these two, the one in the
East, the other in the West, yet, as though each of them had not enough, they
studied each of them to supplant, and destroy the other. Chiefly Octavian, who
seeing that Anthony neglected Caesar seeks a quarrill with him.
his Sister, and did not send for her, he continually advised, and urged her to
go to her Husband, that he might have a fair occasion to fall out with him if
she were not well entertained: But she, not well understanding his design,
that she might prevent all controversies between her Brother and her Husband,
departed from Rome, carrying with her many Jewels, and Presents which she had
gotten together therewith to present Mark Anthony. But he, having fixed his*
heart upon Cleopatra, wrote to her by the way that she should go into Greece,
and stay at Athens, till he returned from the Parthian War, yet did he never go
against them, Cleopatra hindering him. Notwithstanding Octavia sent all those
things which she had brought, to her Husband, and all this not prevailing to
procure her acceptence, she went full of grief, to Rome.

Then did Octavian begin openly to complain of Mark Anthony, and to declared
himself his enemy, and Mark Anthony entered into a League with the King of the
Medes, the better to strengthen himself, causing Cleopatra (besides the Title
of Egypt) to be called Queen of Syria, Lybia, and Cyprus, and jointly with
her, a Son of hers called Caesarion, of whom Julius Caesar left her with child
when he was in Egypt: and to two Sons which himself had by her, called
Ptolomy, and Alexander, he gave the Title of Kings: to Alexander, of Armenia,
and Parthia: and to Ptolomy, of Cilicia, and Phoenicia,; hereupon the enmity
between Octavian and him greatly increased: yet was the War deferred because of
other Wars which Octavian had in Illyricum, and Dalmatia. The People of these
Countries, seeing Caesar's new troubles.
the Romans engaged in Civil Wars, rebelled, together with those of Austria,
Hungary, and Bavaria, who joined with them. This War Octavian undertook in his
own person, which was very cruel and dangerous: wherein he was twice wounded,
and gave great proof both of his Wisdom and Valor: yet in the end, he not
only subdued and tamed Illyricum, but both the Pannonia's, and all the
neighboring Nations which had joined with them.

Then did Octavian return Victorious to Rome, and though a Triumph was granted
him, yet would he not Triumph as then, so great was his desire to make War
against Mark Anthony, who was no better affected toward him. For he levied
Soldiers, procured Friends, and Armies against him, and promised Cleopatra to
bring her Tryumphing into Rome. Yea, she requested of him, the Rule and Empire
of Rome, and he promised it her.

Matters standing upon these terms, Mark Anthony sent his Wife Octavia a Bill
of Divorce, according to the custom of those times, commanding her to go out
of his House wherein she dwelt in Rome. This, and other Qurrals betwixt them.
indignities Octavian imparted to the Senate, complaining against Anthony, and
in his Orations to the People, he accused him for that (the second five years
of his Triumvirat and League being expired) yet came he not to Rome, neither
respecting the authority of the Senate, nor of the People, but held his place,
and kept possession of the East and of Greece: and by such suggestions he
incensed the People against him.

Mark Anthony, on the other side, by Letters and Messengers, complained that
Octavian had often broken the Peace, and had cast Sextus Pompey out of Sicily,
retaining that, and other places which he held, to himself: and that therein he
had no respect of him, nor had given him any part thereof: and that he detained
the Galleys which he had lent him for that War. As also that he had deprived
Lepidus of his Government, and kept all those Provinces, and all the Legions
which were his, without imparting any share thereof to him: and that he had
divided all the Lands in Italy to his own Soldiers, not assigning any part
thereof to his. Thus the one accused the other, either pretending that they
were forced to undertake the War; whereas the truth is, it was their Ambition,
and insatiable desire to Rule that pricked them forward to it. Hereupon they
called diverse Nations to their aid, so as the whole World in a manner, either
of one side or other, was in Arms. Those in the West for Octavian, and those
in Preparation for War.
the East for Anthony: at least, the beast and choicest men of them all.

Anthony was first in the Field, and came with a great Army to the famous City
of Ephesus in Jonia, a Province of Asia the less, whither he had sent for his
Navy to transport him into Europe. And he had in readiness eight hundred
Galleys and Ships of burden: two hundred whereof Cleopatra gave him, together
with all the Ammunition, and Victuals necessary for the Fleet: He also took her
along with him, contrary to the advice of all those which were of his Council.
Then sailed he to the Isle of Samos, to which he had appointed all the Kings,
Tetrachs, and People which served him in this War, to come by a day perfixed.
The Kings that met him there, were Tarcondemus, King of the upper Cilicia:
Archalaus, of Cappadocia: Philodelphus, of Paphlagonia; Methridates, of
Comagena, and others: Besides those which sent their Forces, as Herod, King of
Judaea: Amyntas, of Lyeaonia: and the Kings of Arabia: Of the Medes: and
Palemon, King of Pontus with some others. So that he had one hundred thousand
well trained Footmen, and twenty two thousand Horse, besides his Navy by Sea,
which consisted of five hundred Gallyes, besides Ships of burden which carried
his ammunition, and Victuals.

If Anthony, thus furnished, had presently passed into Italy, he had put
Octavian into great hazard: For Anthonys imprudence.
then he had not sufficient Forces to have withstood him, nor other necessary
Provision for the Wars. But Mark Anthony, delaying the time at Athens, let slip
the opertunity, and gave Octavian leisure to provide all things necessary from
Italy, France, Spain, and all other his Provinces, from whence he levied eighty
thousand choice Soldiers, and above twenty thousand good Horse: and seeing
that Anthony stayed so long, he sent him word, that seeing he had Ships, and
other fit provision, he should Caesar's message.
come for Italy, where he staid in the Field to give him Battle, promising to
afford him good Ports and Havens, where he might safely land without
interruption. To this Anthony answered, that it would be more honorable
Antonys answer.
if he would determine this quarrel in Person against him, body to body, which
he would willingly accept, though he was now old and crazed, and the other
young and lusty: and if he liked not of this challenge, he would stay for him
with his Army in the Fields of Pharsalia, in the same place where Julius Caesar
fought with Cneius Pompey.

These Messages passing between them without effect, Anthony drew his Army by
Land, and his Navy by Sea toward Italy, and Octavian, embarked his Legions at
Brundusium, They meet.
and crossed the Sea to a place called Torma, in the Province of Epire (now
called Romania) and after some notable exploits performed, the two Armies drew
near together, as also did the Navies. Octavians Navy consisted of two hundred
and fifty Galleys, but better armed, and swifter then were Mark Anthonies,
though his were more in number. And Mark Anthony, being persuaded by Cleopatra
(who in this also was the cause of his ruin, thereby to have the better means
to fly if the Battle should be lost) would needs try his Fortune in a Sea
fight, though his Army by Land had a great advantage over the other.

Anthony chose twenty two thousand out of his Army They prepare to fight.
and put them aboard his Fleet, and Octavian, who refused not the Sea Fight,
made his provision also, and so shipping himself in his Galleys, he committed
the charge of his Land Army to Taurus, and Anthony left his Land Forces with
Canidius: and in the sight of both the Armies, these two brave Captains, which
the best Navies in the World, took the Seas, where they fought for no less
then the Empire of the World. Yet was the Fight deferred for three days in
dispite of both parties, the Seas rising so high that they could not Govern
their Vessels. The fourth Day they came to an encounter at a Cape called
Accius, in Epire, not far from the place where their Land Armies stood.

The Battle was one of the most cruelest that ever was heard of, and lasted
ten hours before Octavian obtained A Battle.
the Victory, though Mark Anthony staid not so long in the fight. For Cleopatra
in the greatest fury of the Battle, fled away in her Galley, whom seventy of
her other Galleys followed: and unfortunate Mark Anthony, who all his life time
hitherto had been a valiant and brave Captain, seeing Cleopatra fly, on whom he
had fixed his Antony flies.
eyes and heart, shifting out of his own Galley into a lighter, followed her,
without regard of his Armies either by Sea, or Land, and overtaking her, went
abord her Galley, wherein he sailed three days with out either seeing or
speaking with her, being confounded with shame for showing so much weakness,
and at last they arrived in the Port of Alexandria in Egypt.

His Navy which he left fighting, though now Headless and without a Captain,
yet continued to make gallant His men's fidelity.
resistance till five thousand of them were slain: and at last they were
overcome, rather for want of a Commander then through any force of an enemy,
though Octavians light and swift Galleys were a great help to him: and so he
remained Conqueror, and granted life, and pardon to the Conquered, getting
into his hands three hundred of their Galleys. In Anthonies Army by Land there
wanted neither courage nor constancy to their General, though he had so
unworthily deserted them: and therefore they continued seven days in their
Camp, ready to give Battle, without accepting any composition from the enemy,
and they would have staid longer, had not Canidius their Captain abused his
trust, flying secretly from the Camp to seek Anthony, whereupon, the Army being
destitute of a General, yielded to the enemy; who admitted them His Army
yields to Caesar.
into his own Army, being nineteen Legions of Foot, and twelve thousand Horse.
The Senators, Knights, and Noble men, that had served Anthony, many of them he
fined in great sums of Money, many he put to death, and some he pardoned.

Then did Caesar sail to Athens, and being pacified with the Greeks, he
distributed the Corn that was left in the War, to the Cities that were
afflicted with Famine, and that were despoiled of their Money, Servants, and
Horses, And Anthony being arrived in Egypt, chose out one good Ship of good
burden, and fraught with store of Treasure, and rich Plate of Gold and Silver,
and gave it to his Friends, entreating them to divide it amongst them and to
shift for themselves, and he wrote to Theophilus, the Governor of Corinth,
that he would provide them an hiding place till they might make their Peace
with Caesar. And Caesar, of the spoils of the enemy dedicated ten Ships' to
Apollo Actius.

Anthony being come into Africa went into a desert Anthony lives privately.
place, wandering up and down, only accompanied with two Friends; and after a
while he sent to the General of the Army which he had formerly raised for the
defense of Egypt, but he slew his messengers, and said that he would not obey
Anthony, whereupon he had thought to have killed himself, but being hindered by
his Friends, he went to Alexandria, and after a while he built him an House in
the Sea by the Isle of Pharos, and there lived from the Company of all men,
saying, That he would live the life of Timon the Man-hater, because he was
abused by his Friends, and had experience of their ingratitude, and he called
this house Timonion. Yet at length he left this place, and went to the Palace,
where he spent his time in Feasting and jollity. And Cleopatra got together
diverse sorts of deadly poisons of poisonsome Creatures, whereof she made
trial upon many condemned persons, and amongst all, she liked the biting of
the Aspe best: for it brought a sleepiness without any contraction of the
members, or groaning, only causing a gentle sweating of the face, and a
languishing stupidity of the senses.

At Rome many things were decreed in honor of Caesar Caesar highly honored.
for this Victory at Sea: First a Triumph was granted him for Cleopatra: and a
Triumphal Arch was erected at Brundusium, and another at Rome. The base of the
Julian Temple was adorned with the Beakes of the Shipshe had taken: There were
Plays decreed to be kept every fifth year in honor of him: Processions were
always to be made on his Birth day, and on the day wherein the news of his
Victory was first brought. That the vestall Virgins, the Senate, with their
Wives and Children should go and meet him at his return: that all the
Ornaments of Anthony should be demolished and cast down: that his birth day
should be accounted unlucky: and that none of his Famely should ever have the
forename of Marcus.

About this time Anthony and Cleopatra sent Ambassadors to Caesar into Asia.
Cleopatra demanded the Kingdom of Egypt for her Children, and without
Anthonies knowledge, sent him a Scepter, Crown, and Chair, all of Gold, as it
were, delivering her Kingdom over to him: and Anthony demanded that he might
live a private life at Athens if he might not continue in Egypt. Caesar
accepted of Cleopatra's gifts, accounting them as good Omens: but he would
afford no answer to Anthony; and privately he promised impunity and her Kingdom
to Cleopatra if she would kill Anthony. They sent also a second Embassage to
Caesar, and Cleopatra promised him a huge mass of money; and Anthony minded
him of the former friendship and alliance that was between them, and what acts
they had done together: he delivered also to him Terullius, a Senator, and one
of Caesar's murderers, whom he put to death* he proffered also to kill himself
to obtain security for Cleopatra, yet Caesar would give him no answer.

Anthony and Cleopatra hereupon prepare for War, and Caesar at last marched
against them, and sent Cornelius Anthony prepars for War.
Gallus before with four Legions, who suddenly seized up Paraetonium, the prime
City of Egypt, toward Lybia. Anthony being informed hereof, marched toward
Paraetonium, hoping to draw Gallus his Soldiers to own him, but when on the
contrary he had received great loss both by Sea and Land, he returned to
Alexandria. Presently after Caesar took Pelusium, by the Treachery of
Cleopatra, who caused Selucus the Governor to deliver it up to him, hoping to
draw his love to her, yet did she disown it to Anthony.

Cleopatra had storehouses, and Monuments, admirable both for sumptuousness
and higth, which she had built by the Temple of Isis, and thither she had
brought the most precious things of all her Royal Treasure, as Gold, Silver,
Emeralds, Pearls, Ebony, Ivory, and Cinnamon, as also store of Lamps, and
Flax; whereupon Caesar fearing that she would set fire of them, whereby he
should loose such Treasures, he, to preven despair, gave her hopes of favor,
whilst he marched to wards the City, and she privately forbad the Citizens of
Alexandria to sally out against him; whereas openly she seemed to encourage
them to oppose him.

Caesar being come before the City, Anthony fallied out, Casar pursuss him into
Egypt.
and fought valiantly with him, and routed his Horse, and drove them to the
very Camp, of which at his return, he boasted to Cleopatra, and she to reward
him gave him an Headpeice, and Armor, all of Gold. The next Day Anthony
dispersed tickets amongst Caesar's Soldiers, promising them fifteen hundred
Drachmaes a piece if thy would come over to him: These Caesar read to his
Soldiers, rendering Anthony more hateful to them thereby, and they being
exceeding angry that their fidelity was tempted, fought so valiantly at the
next encounter, that Anthony was driven back out of the Field. After this
Anthony challenged Caesar to a single Duel, who answered, That Anthony had many
ways to die. He therefore considering that he could not die any way more
honorably than in Battle, resolved to set upon Caesar both by Sea and Land.

Many Prodigies fore-ran the bondage of Egypt. In Prodigies.
some places it rained blood. Armies appeared in the Aier. A huge Draggon was
seen amongst the Egyptians which hissed horribly. A Comet appeared, and the
Images of the Dead. The Statues seemed to mourn: and Apis lowing heavily, shed
some tears.

On the Kalends of August, Anthony early in the morning Cleopatras treachery.
went down to the Haven to order his Fleet. But Cleopatra caused them to revolt
from him, and to join with Caesar's Fleet: Whilst Anthony beheld this, he was
also forsaken by all his Horsemen, who revolted to Caesar, and his Foot were
heaten back into the City: whereupon he cried out that he was betrayed by
Cleopatra. She fearing his anger, fled to her Monument with one Eunuch, and two
Maids, and sent Anthony word that she was dead: This he believing, desired his
faithful servant Erotes, according to his former promise, to kill him: Erotes
drew out his Sword as if he would do it, but Anthonies back being toward him,
he slew himself, who falling at his feet, Anthony said, Noble Erotes, thou have
taught me what to do, but could not endure to do it thy self; So taking the
Sword, he thrust it into his Belly: yet after a while, the blood stopping,
Anthony kills himself.
he desired those about him to dispatch him, but they all fled, which caused a
great tumult.

Cleopatra from the top of the Monument perceiving it (for the Gate was so made
that being shut it could not be again opened) she sent her Secretary to bring
him into the Monument to her: Anthony was carried to the foot of the Monument,
and being tied in a Pulley, was with great pains drawn up by Cleopatra and her
two Maids. It was a sad sight to see him thus drawn up, besmeared with blood,
and ready to give up the Ghost. When he came to the top, he stretched forth his
hands to Cleopatra, who receiving him in* laid him on a bed, tareing her head
tire, breast and face with her own hands, so that she was all gore blood: He
labored to comfort her, and advised her to look to her affairs, and to save
her life if she could do it without dishonor, and that amongst all Caesar's
Friends she should most trust Proculeius, and so gave up the Ghost.

In the mean time Dercetaeus, one of Anthonies Guard, stole his bloody Sword,
and ran away with it to Caesar, telling him what had happened: Caesar then
going into the inmost room of his Tent, much bewailed Anthony, Casar bewailes
his Death.
his Kinsman and Colleague, and who had been his companion in many Battles, and
in the Government of the Empire. Then sending for Proculeius, he commanded him
by all means, if it were possible, to save Cleopatra alive, fearing to loose
her Treasures, and that she might adorn his Triumph. Procuieius, and one
Epaphroditus coming to the Monument, labored to persuade Cleopotra to come
forth: and at last, by a wile, Proculeius seized upon her, yet granted her some
days to embalme Anthonies Body, after which they brought her into the Palace,
diminishing nothing either of her wonted train, or honor, that so she might
do no mischief to her self.

Caesar having Conquered Alexandria; ascended into a Tribunal, and calling the
Citizens before him, who for fear fell upon their knees, he told them that he
freely Caesar pardons the Egytians.
pardoned them for their great God Serapis his sake. He also pardoned the rest
of the Egyptians, being unwilling to put so many men to death, which formerly
had done so good service for the Romans. Of those that favored Anthony, some
he put to death, and others he pardoned either of his own good will, or at the
intercession of Friends. And whereas Anthony had with him many Children of
Kings, some as Hostages, others upon false accusations, some of them Caesar
sent home, others he joined together in marriage, and some he kept by him.
Coming to view the Tomb of Alexander the Great (which as Strabo reports was
of Glass) Caesar put a Crown upon it, and strewed flowers over it, and
worshipped it: and being asked whether he would see the Bodies of the
Ptolomies? he answered, That he would see a King, not the dead. Neither would
he go to see their God Apis, saying, that he used to worship Gods, not Oxen.

Many great Kings, and Captains desired to bury the Body of Anthony, but Caesar
would not take it from Cleopatra, who buried it splendidly and Magnificently,
and Caesar suffered her to take what Treasures she would for his Funerals.
Cleopatra, through her much sorrow, fell into a Fever, and her Breast was
troubled with inflammations, and ulcers, through the blows which she had given
herself, yet by the care of Caesar, and the skill of her Phisician she was
recovered: after which she delivered to Caesar an Inventory of all her
Treasures: and when Seleucus, one of her Treasures, accused her for concealing
some things, she leaped up, and taking him by the hair, she buffetted him
soundly; at which Caesar smiling, reproved her, to whom she answered, Is it not
a great matter, O Caesar, seeing thou please to come Cleopatras Passion.
and visit me in this condition that I am in, that I should be accused by my
own Servant? If I have reserved some Jewels, not for my self poor wretch, but
that I might Present Octavia, and thy Lyria* that by their intercessions I
might find the more favor with thee, I hope its no fault. Caesar was glad at
this, hoping that now she had a mind to live, but she deceived him.

Shortly after she wrote a Letter, and sealing it up, she sent it by
Epaphroditus to Caesar, wherein she desired to be buried with Anthony* then
adorning herself in her She kills herself.
best apparel, she set an Aspe to her left Arm, by the biting of which, she
presently died as in a slumber. As soon as Caesar had read her Letter, he sent
some in all have to her to see what was done, who when they came, found
Cleopatra dead upon a bed of Gold, in all her royal robes, and her two waiting
maids dead at her feet. Casar being informed hereof, admired, and pitied her,
and grieved that he was deprived of the chief honor of his Triumph; and
buried her in the same Sepulcher with Anthony, finishing the Tomb which she had
begun: and her waiting Women by his command were buried honorably: she lived
thirty nine years and reigned twenty two.

Caesar having settled his affairs in Egypt, passed through Syria into Asia,
and from thence into Greece, and so to Rome where he Triumphed three days,
first Caesar's Triumphs
for his Dalmatian, secondly for his A^cian, and thirdly for his Egyptian
Victory, which was the most sumptuous, and set forth with the greatest
preparations, wherein was carried in a bed the Image of Cleopatra, and an Aspe
biting her Arm. After which Caesar enriched the Temple of his Father Julius
with the Egyptian spoils: He also consecrated many things to Jupiter
Capitolinus, Juno, and Minerva: He brought into the Cell of Jupiter Capitolinus
sixteen thousand pound weight of Gold, beside Pearls, and precious stones
vallued at fifty Millions of Sesterces, and Rome was so enriched with the
Riches of Alexandria that the prizes of every thing were doubled, and Interest
fell from ten to four per Cent.

Thus Caesar, in the space of about sixteen years, erected the Monarchy, which
his Uncle Julius Caesar had begun, and though the means whereby he obtained
it, are not justifiable, yet afterward he Governed it justly, and wisely, and
was one of the best Princes in the World: Gentle, Just, Merciful, Liberal,
Valiant, and endued with many other Virtues; happy and succesfull Caesare
commendations.
in his affairs, and much beloved of all: and the People, and Senate of Rome
gave him a new Name, which before that time was never heard of, calling him
Caesar Augustus, a Name which they held for holy, venerable, and of Great
Majesty, and which appertained to the Gods and their Temples, concerning which
Ovid thus writes,

Sed tamen humanis celebrantur honoribus omnes,
Hic socium summo cum Jove nomen habet, etc. Fastorum.
All common Persons have their common Fame,
But he with Jove enjoyes an equal Name,
Of old most sacred things, Augusta were:
Temples that Name, and hollowed things do bear:
Yea Auguri depends upon this word,
And whatsoever more Jove does afford:
Let it enlarge his rule and life, let all
Our coast be guarded by a fenced wall.
The Senate also by Oath approved all his acts, freed him from all tie of Laws,
and that he should have as Flattery.
absolute power as the Laws, and that he might do all things, or not do them,
according to his pleasure. And now because the Books of the Sybils, through age
were worn out, Augustus gave charge to the Priests, with their own hands to
write them out, and that no other should read them.

Caesar Augustus (for so now we must call him) seeing himself in quiet and
without War, caused the Temple of Janus to be shut, whereas they Religiously
observed, Janus Temple shut up.
that during the time of War it should stand open: It had never before been
shut since the foundation of Rome but twice: Once in the time of Numa Pompilius
the second King thereof: and the other after the second Punick War, when Titus
Manlius was Conful* Augustus shut this Temple three times, whereof this was the
first: And now living in Peace and prosperity, he omitted no part of his care
in the Government of the Roman Commonwealth, and the Provinces there^^: Sending
thither Praetors, Pro-consuls, and other Governors which were excellent men,
and fit for those dignities: and himself gave direction, and was very diligent
in all things touching Justice, Customs, Religion, and public buildings, so
as in all things his Rign was happy, peaceable, and quiet dureing all his life.

Yet in this so happy a time, some People and Nations still affecting Liberty,
labored to shake off the Roman New troubles.
yoke, and thereby molested, and disquieted the Empire, as the Spaniards, the
Inhabitants of Illyricum, and the Pannonians. In Spain the Cantabrians, the
Asturians, and part of Gallicia, passing their bounds, began a War against the
Empire. Augustus being informed hereof, judging it to be a doubtful War, and
of importance, commanded the Temple of Janus to be opened, and determined to go
against them in person, and to send other Captains to follow his other Wars.
And accordingly Augustus went into Spain, and with three Armies made War
against the People aforementioned, which proved very doubtful, and desperate,
and lasted five years: and though he suppressed the Cantabrians, and Asturians,
and drove them to their Rocks and Mountains, yet before he could wholly subdue
them, he was faign to bring a great Navy upon the coast of France to invade the
Sea coasts of Cantabria, and Galizia, by which means he drove them to such
extremities by Land, that they were at last forced to submit to his obedience.

Augustus his great favorite Agrippa served him faithfully in this War, whom
therefore he married to his Daughter Julia, who was the Widow of his Nephew
Marcellus, the Son of his Sister Octavia. And thus he brought all Spain into
subjection to him above twohundred Spain subdued.
years after the Romans began to make their first Wars there. So as no Province
cost Rome more Treasure, more blood, nor more time than Spain

This long and doubtful War being so happily finished, Augustus was so pleased
with it that he gave commandment that the Temple of Janus should again be shut,
and came to Rome in great Triumph. But this Temple continued not long shut, for
some Nations of the Germans rebelled, so that it was again opened. These were
the Inhabitants of Noricum, (now Bavaria) and the Pannonia's (now Austria and
Hungary) and the two Missia's (now Bulgary, and Servia)* as also Illyricum (now
Sclavonia) and the Province of Dacia (now Transylvania, and Walachia) and some
others, though at several times.

Against these Augustus sent his Generals, and Armies, amongst which were his
Sons in Law, the Sons of Livia, Tiberius Nero, who succeeded him in the Empire,
and his Brother Drusus Nero, of whom Livia was with child when Octavian married
her: and these two Brothers (though the War lasted somewhat long) vanquished
those Nations, and obtained great Victories in Germany, and the confines
thereof: especially Tiberius, who in three years space subdued the Pannonia's,
Illyricum, and Dalmatia; for which Victories he afterward entered into Rome in
an Ovation Triumph with great Pomp and honor. Marcus Crassus also overcame and
put to flight the Missians, a People who had never seen the Romans before. And
when they were ready to give Battle, they said, Tell us who you are that seek
to molest, and disquiet us? We are (said they) Romans, the Lords of Nations,
whereupon they replied, It shall be so if you overcome us; which fell out
accordingly.

But Augustus obtained not these Victories without Augustus his crosses.
some crosses. For in these Wars dyed his Son in Law Drusus, who was highly
esteemed for his Noble acts, and grear Victories, for the loss of whom both
Augustus and Livia were much afflicted: But yet his grief was greater for the
mishap which befell Quintilius Varro, who was General of three Legions in
Germany, and being careless, was surprised by the Almans, and himself, his
Legions, and all his Auxiliaries were slain, and two Standards with the
Imperial Eagles taken, for which he was so immoderately grieved, that he
knocked his Head against the Wall, and cried out unadvisedly, Quintilius Varro,
Give me my Legions again: For certain months also he suffered the hair of
his Head and Beard to grow carlesly. And the very day of this unhappy accident,
he did every year observe mournfully with sorrow and lamentation.

Of his Son in Law Drusus there remained two Sons, Germanicus and Claudius,
which he had by Antonia, Augustus his Niece, and Daughter of his Sister Octavia
and Mark Anthony; of which Claudius was Emperor: And Germanicus married
Agrippina, the Daughter of Julia, Augustus his Daughter, by whom he had Caius
Caligula, who also was afterward Emperor. Augustus, after many notable
Victories, compelled his enemies at length to sue for Peace, whereupon again he
commanded the Temple of Janus to be shut up, and from thenceforth all things
succeeded prosperonsly with him.

The Subjects of the Empire were now very obedient to him, and all other sent
their Ambassadors seeking his Many Ambassadors come to him.
favor, and Friendship. The Indians in the remotest parts of the East; and the
Scythians that inhabited the North: and the Parthians an untamed People, sent
their Ambassadors to him, giving security to keep the Peace, and restoring to
him the Standards and Eagles which were taken when Marcus Crassus was slain.
There came also Kings who were Friends and Subjects to the Roman Empire to do
him Homage, laying aside their Ensigns, and Royal Robes: and many of them
built Cities to his Name, and for his honor, calling them Caesaria. So did
Herod the Great in Palestine: King Juba in Mauritania, and others.

The World being thus at Peace and quietness, forty and two years being
expired since that Augustus, after the Death of Julius Caesar, came to Rome, in
the time of this general Peace, was the Prince of Peace, our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ borne in Bethlem, of Our Savior Christ borne.
the Virgin Mary, Herod being King of Judaea, placed there by the Romans, of
whose blessed Life and bitter Death, as also of the order of his Ministry, and
Miracles see his Life published by me Anno Christi 1664. At which time their
came forth a command from Caesar Augustus that all the Roman World should be
taxed, which taxing was first made when Cyrenius was Governor of Syria. Luck.
2. 1. Out of which a little Book was made by Augustus, in which all the public
Riches were contained: as also how many Citizens, and Allies in Arms: what
Navies: How many Kingdoms and Provinces: what Tribute, and Customs there were:
what necessary charges, and Pensions went out. Shortly after Augustus was
called Lord by the People, but he did not only refuse that Title, but forbad it
by a public Edict.

Augustus enjoying so great prosperity, was yet nothing His Prudence and
Justice.
altered in his qualities and behavior, as often it happens in other Princes;
but rather became more mild, just, and affable, more courteous, liberal, and
temperate. He established very good Laws, and orders for the reformation of
abuses and evil customs. He erected both within and without Rome many
stately, and sumptuous Edifices, which made him to boast concerning Rome,
Latericiam inveni, Marmoream reliqui: I found it built with Brick, and left it
built with Marble. He bestowed great gifts and favors upon all sorts of
People. He delighted the People with Feasts, and Plays of sundry kinds, going
himself in person to honor them: He sent Colonies into sundry parts and
Provinces: He made excellent good Orders for the Governors, and Government of
the whole Empire: The like he did also for the Wars, and Martial Discipline. He
showed himself loving and sociable to his Friends and Familiars, whom he
honored and loved much. Some conspiracies against him which were discovered,
he punished without rigor, being more prone to pardon than to punish. Of
murmurings, and defamatory Libels he never desired to know the Authors; but
answered them with gravity, giving satisfaction, and purging himself from those
things which were charged upon him. He was much addicted to, and affected with
learning, and himself was very learned and eloquent, and compiled some notable
Books. He much honored and rewarded wise and learned men: yet he escaped not
the tainture of some vices, growing through human frailty, and his great
liberty: especially he was much given to Women, though in his diet, apparel,
His vices.
and ornaments he was very sparing and modest. He gave himself also excessively
to play at Dice, and other Games then in use.

Thus, though in many things he was very happy, yet, besides his troubles and
dangers, he was very unhappy in his Children and Successors: For by his His
crosses.
four Wives to whom he was married, he had only one Daughter called Julia, by
his third Wife Scribonia, and she proved exceeding Wanton, and unchaste, yea she
left nothing undone in luxury, and lust, which was possible for a woman to do
or suffer, accounting every thing lawful that pleased her. Yea, she came to
that height of laciviousnesse, that she kept her feasting even in the Courts of
Justice, abusing those very places with lascivious acts in which her Father had
made Laws against Adulterers. Hereupon her Father was so enraged that he could
not contain his anger within his own House, but published these things, yea,
and communicated them to the Lords of the Senate. He kept himself also a long
time from company for very shame: He had thoughts of putting his Daughter to
death; but at last he banished her into Pandataria, an Island of Campania, her
Mother Scribonia, of her own accord, accompanying her in banishment, Julia
being at this time thirty eight years old.

For want of Sons to succed him, Augustus first adopted his Nephew Marcellus
the Son of his Sister Octavia, to whom he first married his Daughter Julia: and
Marcellus dying without issue, he then married her to his Favorite Agrippa:
who also left her a Widow, but yet he had by her three Sons, and two
Daughters: Two of these Sons having been adopted by Augustus, died before him:
whereupon he adopted the third, who bore his Fathers Name, Agrippa, the which
adoption he afterwads revoaked for some displeasure conceived against him: and
lastly he adopted his Son in Law Tiberius Nero, and made him his Heir, whom
also he married to his Daughter Julia, the Widow of Agrippa: yet this he did
more through the importunity of his mother, than for any good liking that he
had of him, being sorry that such an one should succeed him.

Not long after, the first Letter of his Name that was upon the Inscription of
his Statue that was set up in the Capitol, fell down, being struck with a flash
of lightening; whereupon the Southsayers foretold that he should A prodigy.
live only one hundred days after, which was denoted by the letter C. and that
he should be Cannonized for a God, because Aesar, which remained of his Name,
in the Hetruscan. Tongue signified a God. Hereupon he wrote a Catalogue of his
doings, which he appointed to be engraven in Tables of Brass, and to be set
over his Tomb.

Things being thus done, Caesar Augustus being now seventy six years old, and
odd days, having reigned above fifty six, and being the best beloved, and the
best obeyed Prince in the World, Death overtook him, which was occasioned by a
flux which held him for some days: and so Augustus died at Nolla in Campania,
in the same House and Chamber wherein his Father Octavius died, His Death.
being the nineteenth day of August, upon which day he was first made Consul:
and in the fifteenth year after the birth of our Savior Jesus Christ.

He was generally lamented, and there was a universal sorrow, and heaviness
over the whole Empire for him. For he did wisely and uprightly Govern that
Monarchy which he had gotten by force, and fraud. He was His Character.
of a mean stature, of a very good shape, and proportion of Body, of an
exceeding fair face mixed with modesty, and gravity: His eyes were very clear
and bright: He was very advised in his speeches, and loved to speak quick, and
briefly. His last Will and Testament was written a year and four months before
he died, and left in the custody of the Vestall Virgins.

In his life time he was very desirous to reform abuses in Rome, and in the
first place he corrected some disorders in the Senate, whom he reduced to the
number of six hundred. He reformed what was amiss in their plays and Games, in
the Knights, and in their manner of suing for public Offices. He set fines
upon their Heads that would not marry, and bestowed much upon those that had
Wives and Children. He gave unto Hortensius He was a friend to marriag.
twenty five thousand Crowns to procure him to marry, that he might raise up
issue to that Noble Family of the Hortenses. He ordained that maids should be
at least twelve years old before they married: and suffered them to kill
Adulterers that were taken in the fact, and condemned the Sodomites without
pardon. He gave order that none should be put in nomination for Offices but
such as were virtuous and of good repute. He tied not himself to any certain
hours for his meals, but used to eat when he was hungry, and that which he fed
upon was neither dainty nor delicate, and he drank His temperance.
little Wine: Instead of a Looking-glass, he used to read or write whilst his
Barber was trimming him. He never spoke to the Senate or people, or to his
Soldiers but what he had first written and premeditated, though he had words
at command.

He delighted to read good Authors, but gathered nothing more then sentences
teaching good manners, and His Prudence.
having written them out word for word, he gave Coppies thereof to his familiar
Friends, and sent them about to the Governors of Provinces and to the
Magistrates of Rome. He was too much adicted to Divinations, and was
marvellously afraid of Thunder and Lightning: Our Savior Christ being borne,
all the Devils Oracles ceased, and the Oracle of Delphes was faigne to confess
it, and ever after remained dumb: whereupon Augustus The Devils Oracles dumb
being astonished, caused a great Altar to be set up in the Capitol, with an
Inscription, signifying that it was the Altar of the God first born. To prevent
the great abuse of Usury which undid many Families, he put into the Exchequer
twenty five hundred thousand Crowns, and suffered private men to take of it for
three years without His Charity.
Interest, putting in good security for the paying back of the principal: and
condemned such usurers as had taken more than the Law allowed to pay four times
as much to those who had been oppressed by them.

FINIS.

