A Geographicall Description Of all the COUNTRIES In the known WORLD. AS ALSO
Of the greatest and famousest Cities and Fabrics which have been, or are now
remaining: Together with The greatest Rivers, the strangest Fountains, the
various Minerals, Stones, Trees, Herbs, Plants, Fruits, Gums, etc. which are
to be found in every Country. Unto which is added, a Description of The rarest
Beasts, Fowls, Birds, Fishes, and Serpents which are least known amongst us.
Collected out of the most approved Authors, and from such as were eyewitnesses
of most of the things contained herein.

By SA: CLARKE, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Bennet Finck, London.

PSALM 104.24, 25. O Lord, how manifold are thy Works! In wisdom have thou
made them all: The earth is full of thy riches: So is the great and wide Sea,
wherein are things creeping innumerable: both small and great Beasts, etc.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Thomas Newberry, at the three Lions in Cornhill,
over against the Conduit. MDCLVII.

A GEOGRAPHICALL DESCRIPTION OF ALL THE COUNTRIES IN THE KNOWN WORLD as also
of the Chiefest Cittyes, Famousest Structures, Greatest Rivers* Strangest
Fountains etc. Together with The rarest Beasts* Birds Fishes etc, which are
Least known^ amongst us. BY SA: CLARKE: R Gaywood fecit



A Geographicall Description Of all the COUNTRIES In the known WORLD.
The Division of the World.
THE Earth is commonly divided into four parts, Asia, Africa, Europe, and
America.

Asia Described.
Asia is divided into two parts: Asia the less, next to Europe, called also
Anatolia, or Natolia, thus bounded: Toward the West and North, is Greece: Full
West is the Archipelagus: On the East is the River Euphrates: On the North is
the Euxine Sea: And on the South the Mediterranean. This Country was once of
admirable fertility, affording all sorts of Commodities, both for necessity and
delight: But for the sins of her Inhabitants its turned into barrenness,
having been so often wasted by the great Monarchs of the earth. First, by the
Babylonians, then by the Meads and Persians, then by the Grecians, then by the
Romans, and lastly by the Turks, who have made such woeful havoc, that in it
are to be seen the ruins of above four thousand Cities, and Towns: the
residue have lost both the names, and memory of their Predecessors, and the
people are fallen from the Knowledge, Religion, and Industry of their
forefathers: and for the most part are Mahumetans.

In this Asia the Less are contained these Provinces: Caria, Jonia, Dori^,
Lydia, Aeolis, Phrygia minor, and major, Cilicia, Pamphilia* Lycia, Bythinia,
Pontus, Paphlagonia, Galacia, Cappadocia, Lycaonia Pysidia, and Armenia minor.

In Jonia stood Miletum where Paul Preached to the Elders, Acts 20.17. and
Ephesus.

In Lydia were seated Laodicea, Thyatira, Philadelphia, Sardis and Pergamus.

In Phrygia minor was Adramitium mentioned Act. 27.2.

In Phrygia major was Colosse, to whom Paul wrote his Epistle.

In Cilicia was Tarsus where Paul was born. In this Country feed those Goats
whose hair makes our curious Chamlets, and Grogerams, falsely called Camels
hair.

In Pamphilia are seated Perga, Pisidia, and Attalia, Sea Towns, Act. 13.1^, 14.

In Lycia the chief City was Patara.

In Lycaonia were Iconium and Listra.

In Pisidia was the famous City of Antiochia.

In Asia the Greater are contained these Countries, Syria, Palestine, Armenia
major, Ara^^a the Happy, Stony, Desert, Media, Assyria, Mesop^tamia, Persia,
Chald^n, Part^ia, Hircania, T^rtaria, ^hi^a, and India.

In Syria are Phaenicia, Cael^syria and Syroph^nicia.

In Phaenicia are Tire and Sidon, Sarepta and Ptolaemais.

In Caelosyria are Hieropolis, Damascus, Aleppo, Tripolis etc.

Palestine is in length two hundred miles: in breadth but fifty: containing
Samaria; Idumaea, Judaea, Galile the higher, called Galile of the Gentiles:
Galile the lower, wherein were Nazareth: and Mount Tabor, where Christ was
transfigured.

Armenia major, now Turkomania, wherein was Colchus whence Jason fetched the
golden Fleece.

Arabia divided into three parts, Arabia Deserta, where the Children of Israel
were fed with Manna forty years. Arabia Petrosa, where Mount Sinai was, and the
Law given. Arabia Faelix, abounding with Spices and Drugges, where Medina is,
the place of Mahomets Sepulcher.

Media where the fruits of the Country are said to be always green, and
flourishing.

Assyria where Nineveh stood to which Jonah was sent.

Mesopotamia where was Babylon.

Persia a great Empire where the Regal City is Persepolis.

Chaldaea often mentioned in Scripture.

Parthia the Inhabitants whereof were famous for their Archery, and opposition
against the Romans.

Hircania which has many Cities of note, and abounds with Wine, and Honey.

Tartaria formerly called Scythia, whose Queen Tomyris, overcame Cyrus, and cut
off his head: They have neither Cities nor houses but live in hoards; their
Prince is the great Cham.

China is a very great, populous, and fruitful Country, and the Inhabitants are
very ingenuous, but it is lately overrun by the Tartars, as you shall hear
afterward.

India, through the midst whereof runs the River ^anges, dividing it into India
intra Gangem, which lies toward the West, and India extra Gangem, which lies
toward the East. The chief place whereof is Goa, where the Viceroy of
Portugal resides.

The Islands of Asia the less are Rhodes, over against Caria; and Cyprus,
formerly consecrated to Venus.

In the Indian Ocean the Islands are very many, principally Ormus, Zeilan,
Sumatra, Avirae insulae, Bocuro, Java major, and minor, Japan, the Molucco's,
and the Philippine Islands, which abound with Spices of all sorts, Pearls, and
Gold, whereof I will now give a more particular account.

Asia minor, more largely described. Cappadocia described.
Cappadocia, called also Leucosyria, and now Amasia, stretches four hundred
and fifty miles along the Euxine Sea; bounded on the West, with Paphlagonia,
Galatia, and part of Pamphilia, on the South with Cilicia, on the East with the
Hills Antitaurus, and Moschius, and part of Euphrates; Here runs Halis, the
end of Craesus Empire, both in the site and fate thereof, he being deceived
with that ambiguous Oracle, Craesus Halin penetrans, magnam pervertet op^m vim,
that passing Halis, he should overturn a great State, which he interpreting
actively of his attempts against Cyrus, verified it passively in himself. In
Cappadocia was the City of Comana, famoused by the Temple of Bellona, and a
great multitude of such as were there inspired by Devilish illusions. Not far
thence also was Castabala, where was the Temple of Diana Persica.

Galatia, or Gallo-graecia, has on the South, Pamphilia, and on the North its
washed with the E^xine Sea, by the space of two hundred and fifty miles. Sinope
was the chief City: Deiotar^s a famous King: but Galacia is made more famous by
St. Paul's Epistle written to the Church thereof.

Pontus, and Bithinia, now called Bursia, has on the West the mouth of Pontus,
the Thracian Bosphorus, and part of Propontis; Galacia on the East: part of the
Euxine Sea on the North: and Asia, properly so called, on the South: The most
famous Cities in it were Nice, wherein was celebrated the first General Council
gathered against the Arians: Nicomedia, sometimes the seat of the Emperors;
Apamia, or Bursa, nigh to Mount Olympus, where the first Ottamans had their
Seat-Royal, and all of that race (except the Great Turks themselves) are still
there buried: Chalcedon, builded seventeen years before Bi^amium and the
builders thereof are said to be blind, which neglected that better seat. Here
was held a famous Council of six hundred and thirty Bishops against the Heresy
of Eutiches.

Paphlagonia* has on the North Pontus, on the East the River Halis, on the
South Phrygia and Galacia, and on the West Bithynia: Vetruvius tells us of a
^ountain here that seems to be mixed with wine, that makes drunken such as
drink freely thereof.

Asia, properly so called, now Sarcum, is bounded on the West with part of
Propontis, and Hellespont, the Aegean, Icarian and Myrtoan Seas; On the South
with the Rhodian Sea, Lycia and Pamphilia; On the East with Galacia: and on the
North with Pontus, Bythinia, and part of Propontis. In which space are
contained Phrygia, Caria, and both Mysia's, Aeolis, Jonia, Doris, and Lydia.

Phrygia is divided into the greater, and the less, called also Hellespontiaca,
and Troas. The greater lies Eastward, and is so called from the River Phryx,
which parts it from Caria. Here stood Midaium the Royal Seat of Mydas, and
Apamia the Phrygian Metropolis. Here also upon the River Sangarius stood
Gordie, where was the Gordian knot, which when Alexander could not untie, he
cut it in sunder with his sword.

In the lesser Phrygia stood the eye of Asia, and Star of the East, called
Ilium, or Troy, destroyed by the Grecians after ten years siege, the ruins
whereof appear at this day, the walls, and decayed buildings entertaining the
beholder with a kind of majesty; the walls were of a large circuit, of great,
spongy, black, and hard stones, cut foursquare; the ruins of the Turrets on
the walls are yet to be seen, also great marble Tombs of ancient workmanship
made Chest-fashion, and their covers whole are yet to be seen without the
walls. Many great Cisterns made to receive rain water are yet whole; The soil
about it is dry, and barren: The Rivers Xanthus, and Simois so much famoused,
are small Rivers, which in Summer are quite dry.

Nunc seges est ubi Troja fuit. Cyzicus was a City of Mysia, wherein was a
famous Temple, whose Pillars were four cubits thick, and fifty cubits high,
each of one stone, the whole building was made of polished stone, and each
stone was joined to other with a line of gold: The Image of Jupiter within was
made of Ivory, crowned with a marble Apollo, which City and Temple were
swallowed up in an Earthquake, and probably for their abominable Idolatry. The
like befell Philadelphia (one of the seven Churches to which St. John wrote)
another City of Mysia, and the like to Magnesia in the same Region.

A little hence stands Abydus, and over against it on Europe side was Sestus;
one of the Guards of the Turkish Empire, he having built Castles there which
are well furnished, and the Straits not being above seven Furlongs over. Here
Xerxes joined Asia to Europe by a Bridge, for the transportation of his huge
Army into Greece.

In Mysia also was that famous Pine Tree that was four and twenty foot in
compass, and growing entire for seventy foot from the root, was then divided
into three Arms, equidistant, which afterward gathered themselves close into
one top two hundred foot high.

Jonia is situated on the Icarian Seas over against the Isle of Chios, wherein
were ten principal Cities, Miletus, Myus, Priene, Ephesus, Colophon, Lebedus,
Teos, Clazomenae, Phocaea, and Erythraea.

The Temple of Diana Described.
The Temple of Diana at Ephesus was one of the Worlds Wonders; two hundred and
twenty years were spent in the building of it: It was built upon a Marish to
prevent hurt by Earthquakes, which were very common in those parts; the first
foundation was laid upon Coals, the second upon Wool; It was four hundred
twenty and five foot long, and two hundred and twenty broad, there were in it
one hundred twenty and seven Pillars of Marble, sixty foot in height, and
thirty six of them curiously wrought and engraven, the works of so many Kings.
The doors of the Temple were of Cypress, which after four hundred years, were
as fresh as if they had been new made; the roof was of Cedar: The Image, which
superstition supposed to have come down from Jupiter, was made by one Canesia:
some say of Ebonie, others of the Vine which had many holes made, and filled
with Spikenard, the moisture whereof closed up the rifts. It was enriched and
adorned with gifts beyond value. It was contrived by Ctesiphon, and was seven
times fired, the last whereof was by Erostratus, who did it to get himself a
name: Herodo.

Doris was almost surrounded with the Sea, wherein was Gnidus, a City famous
for the Marble Image of Venus and Halycarnassus, famous for Herodotus, and
Dionysius the Historians; and for Mausolus, whose Sepulcher erected by
Artimesia his wife, and sister, was accounted one of the seven Wonders of the
World.

Lycia is washed by the Sea for the space of two hundred miles: In it Mount
Taurus arises, hence stretching it self Eastward under diverse appellations, to
the Indian Sea.

Pamphilia bears Eastward from Lycia, and now together with Cilicia is by the
Turks called Caramania.

Armenia minor, which is divided from the greater, now Turcomania, by the River
Euphrates on the East.

A more full description of the Countries in Asia major. The Land of Canaan
Described.
It was first called Canaan after that the posterity of Canaan the son of Cham
had possessed it, when Moses and Joshua had conquered it, it was called the
Land of Israel. After the Babylonish Captivity it was called the Land of
Judaea: From the Philistines, which inhabited the Seacoasts, it was called the
Land of Palestine: and by Christians since, the Holy Land. Adricomius, which
has best described it, makes it to bound Eastward on Syria, and Arabia:
Southward on the Desert of Paran and Egypt: Northward on Mount Libanus: and
Westward on the Sea. From Dan to Bersheba its about a hundred and sixty Italian
miles in length, and sixty in breadth. No Country in the world had so many
Cities in so little a compass as this once had. The Royal Cities in each Tribe
were these: In Aser, Acsaph, besides Sidon, and Tyrus: In Benjamin, Bethel,
Gaaba, Jerusalem, and Jerico. In Dan, ^achish; besides Eckron and Gath: In
Ephraim, Gazer, Samaria, Saron, and Tapua: In Gad, Rabba: In Isachar, Aphec: In
Juda, Arad, Be^eck, Eglon, Hebron, Libna, Mackeda, Odolla, Taphua: In Manasse,
Dor, Gilgal, Jezreel, Megiddo, Taanac, and Thirza: In the other part of
Manasse, Astaroth, Edri, Geshur, Machathi, Soba, Teman, and Damascus. In
Nepthali, Aser, Kedes and Hemath: In Ruben, Heshbon, Madian and Petra: In
Simeon, Debir, and Gerar: In Zebulon, Jeconan and Shimron.

Jordan is the chiefest River, which at last loses it self in the Lake
Asphaltites, but before that, it makes many fruitful Valleys, and spreads it
self into a Lake called Genazereth, sixteen miles long, and six broad,
environed with many pleasant Towns, as Julias and Hippo on the East: Tarichea
on the South, and Tiberias on the West, made wholesome with her hot-waters. But
before it makes the Lake of Genazereth, it makes another called Samachonitis,
it especially is filled with the snow of Libanus usually melted in the first
month, which causes Jordan then to swell, and overflow his banks (which made
Josua's passing thorough it at that time the more miraculous:) In Scripture its
called the waters of Merom. The variety of fruits, and other temporal
blessings, wherewith this Country was enriched, are so fully set down in
Scripture that I need make no particular mention of them. What multitudes of
people it fed, may be taken notice of in those two Instances; First, When David
numbered them, there were found Eleven hundred thousand in Israel, and four
hundred and seventy thousand in Judah, valiant men that drew the sword, 2 Samuel
24.9. and yet Benjamin and Levi were not reckoned: And in the days of
Jeroboam, 2 Chr. 13. Abijah King of Judah brought into the field four hundred
thousand, and Jeroboam eight hundred thousand, and on this part were slain five
hundred thousand, all choice men, which no history can match in any age, or
place of the world: What then was the total number, if women, children,
impotent, and aged men had been reckoned?

After the return from the Babylonish Captivity, one third part of this Country
was called Judaea, to distinguish it from the other two, Samaria and Galilee.

Galilee was the most Northerly, confining on Libanus and Anti-Libanus toward
the North: on Phaenicia Westerly: having Caelosyria on the East: and Samaria
with Arabia on the South: Jordan parted it ^n the midst It was divided into
the higher and lower Galilee, the higher was called Galilee of the Gentiles,
containing the Springs of Jordan, and those Cities which Solomon gave to King
Hyram: The lower was called Galilee of Tiberias, that City giving name both to
the Lake and Region, in which Nazareth, and the Hill Tabor were famous.

Samaria is seated betwixt Galilee, and Judaea, being much less than either of
them. Judaea is the most Southerly, between the Mediterranean, and Dead Seas,
Samaria, and Idumaen. Pliny adds to these the Region of Decapolis, so called
from her ten Cities, which were, Caesarea Philippi, Aser, Kedes, Nepthalim,
Sephet, Corazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum, Jotopata, Tiberias, and Bethsan, called
also Scythopolis.

A Description of Jerusalem, and the Temple, as they were when they were
destroyed by the Romans.
Jerusalem was compassed with a treble wall on every side, save only on that
part where it was enclosed with inaccessible Valleys; for on that side it
needed only one wall: It was built upon two hills, the one opposite to the
other, separated by a Valley, which was wonderously replenished with houses.
One of these Hills, whereon stood the upper part of the City, was far higher
and steeper than the other; whereupon King David compassing it about with a
Wall, called it the City of David. The other hill called Acra, was the place
whereon the lower part of the City stood: And opposite to this Acra, was
another hill lower than it, which at first was divided from it by a large
Valley; but when the Asmonians reigned, they filled up this Valley, and cut
down the top of Acra, that it might not hide the Temple: within one of the
valleys was Siloam, a Fountain sending forth abundance of clear and sweet
water: The outmost wall, by reason of the valley about it, and the Rock whereon
it stood was impregnable, the rather, because besides the situation, it was
built very strongly by David, Solomon, and other Kings. A fourth wall was begun
by Agrippa: In humane reason, had this wall been finished, the City could never
have been taken: For he began to build it with stones twenty cubits long, and
ten cubits broad, so that it could neither be easily undermined, nor battered
with Engines: But he built this wall but ten cubits high, and then fearing
lest Claudius Caesar should think that he had a purpose to Rebel, he gave it
over: Yet afterward the Jews raised this wall twenty cubits high: made a
Battlement two cubits high, and the Tower three cubits, in all four and twenty
cubits high: Besides, upon the wall were three Towers twenty cubits broad, and
twenty cubits high, built four square, very strongly; within these Towers were
rooms for men to dwell in, and Cisterns to receive rainwater. The third wall
had ninty of these Towers, and between every Tower were two hundred cubits
space: The second wall had fourteen Towers; and the old wall had threescore,
and the compass of the whole City was three and thirty furlongs.

Between the North, and the West-part of the City, upon the outmost wall, stood
the Tower Psephina, which was raised threescore and ten cubits high; so that in
a clear day a man might from thence discover Arabia, and the utmost confines of
the Jews, even to the Sea. Just opposite to this was the Towe^ Hippicos, built
by Herod upon the old wall, which for bigness, beauty, and strength, surpassed
all others in the world: It had four corners, each of which was five and twenty
cubits broad, as many long, and thirty cubits high, and in no place hollow: On
the top was a Well to receive Rainwater, twenty cubits deep. On the top of all
were Houses five and twenty cubits high, divided into many rooms: Above them
were battlements two cubits high, and Turrets three cubits high, so that in all
it was fourscore and five cubits high.

He built also a second Tower, in breadth and length forty cubits, and as many
high, in figure of a square pillar, all solid, and not hollow within: And above
this, a Porch ten cubits high, adorned with Turrets and Pinacles: Over the
midst of this Porch he built another Tower, distinguished into goodly rooms,
and sumptuous Baths; and on the top it was beautifyed with Turrets and
Pinacles; so that the whole height was almost fourscore and ten cubits.

Lastly, He built a third Tower, which he called after his Queens name,
Mariamne, twenty cubits high, and twenty broad, all of solid stone, and not
hollow, having more stately and magnificent lodgings in it than either of the
former: It was in all fifty five cubits high.

These Towers, though they were very high, yet by reason of their situation
they seemed far higher: For the old Wall whereon they were built stood upon a
Rock that was thirty cubits high, whereby their height was much increased: They
were not built also of ordinary stone, but all of white Marble, whereof each
stone was twenty cubits long, and ten cubits broad, and five cubits thick; and
so curiously joined together that every Tower seemed but one stone; within the
City was the Kings Palace, surpassing all that can be spoken of it, and for
greatness, and curious workmanship, may be compared with any other in the
world: It was environed with a wall thirty cubits high, adorned with goodly
Towers round about, Beautified with Houses for an hundred of the Nobility: The
variety of the Marble wherewith it was built, was admirable, all sorts being
therein used, though never so rare to be found. In every room also were many
vessels of gold, and silver, and many Porches round about, adorned with most
curious Pillars: There were in it very many pleasant walks, adorned with all
sorts of Trees, and Gardens, beset with Fountains that spouted up water on
high, and Cisterns beauti^yed with many Brazen Statues, from which ran out
water continually.

The Temple Described.
The Temple was built upon a Rocky Mountain; the plain on the top whereof was
at first scarce big enough for the Temple and Court, the hill being very steep:
But the people every day bringing earth thither, at last made it plain, and
large enough, and enclosed the hill with a treble wall, which was a work
passing all expectation; to the effecting whereof many Ages were spent, and all
the holy treasure offered to God from all parts of the world: The foundations
of the Temple were laid three hundred cubits deep, and in many places more. The
stones of it were forty cubits, The Porches were double, and every one was
supported by many stately pillars, five and twenty cubits high, all of one
piece of white Marble; the tops of them were of Cedar so exactly wrought, as
astonished the beholders: These Porches were thirty Cubits broad, and the
compass of all was six Furlongs. The Courts were curiously wrought, and paved
with all sorts of stones.

Thirdly, The way to the inward Temple was all enclosed with stones, wrought
like Lattice-work, which were three Cubits high, of curious workmanship: to
this second there was an ascent by fourteen stairs; and aloft it was four
square, and enclosed with a wall by it self, whose outside being forty Cubits
high, was all covered with stairs to ascend up to it, and within, it was twenty
five Cubits high: At the top of the fourteen stairs within the wall was a
level, compassed with a wall of three hundred Cubits, which had eight Gates in
it; and between the Gates were Porches opposite each to other, reaching from
the wall to the Treasury, supported with great and stately Pillars. All the
gates were covered with Plates of gold, and silver, only one was covered with
Corinthian brass, which for beauty far excelled the other, dazzling the eyes of
the beholders: In every gate were two doors, each of them thirty Cubits high,
and fifteen broad; and on each side they had seats thirty Cubits long, and
forty Cubits high, each one supported with two Pillars, twelve Cubits thick:
Only the gate which was covered with Corinthian brass, was fifty Cubits high,
the gates were forty Cubits, and it was more richly adorned than the rest.

Fourthly, the Holy of Holies was situated in the midst of all, and had twelve
stairs to go up to it. The forepart of it was an hundred Cubits high, and as
many broad: Backward it was forty Cubits; on each side it had as it were two
shoulders rising up in height twenty Cubits: The first gate was seventy Cubits
high, and five and twenty wide, and had no doors, to show that Heaven was
always open, etc. All the foreparts were gilded, and all wi^^in was covered
with fine gold. The inward part was divided into two rooms, whereof the first
only might be seen, which was in height fourscore, and ten Cubits, in length
forty, and in breadth twenty: round about the wall was a golden Vine,
vvhereon hung many grapes in clusters all of gold, every cluster being about
six foot long: It had golden gates fifty five Cubits high, and sixteen Cubits
broad. It had curious hangings of the same length, admirably wrought with
Purple, Violet, and Scarlet Silk, all the fabric was so exquisitely and
richly wrought, that none could possibly imagine any workmanship that it
vvanted: For it was all covered with a massy plate of pure gold which
dazzled the eyes of the beholders: The top was all set with rods of gold,
sharp like pikes at the ends, lest birds should sit thereon, and defile it. The
stones wherewith it was built were forty five Cubits large, five in length, six
broad, and as many long. Joseph. l. 6. c. 7.

The City of Ninive described.
Ninive was first founded by Assure the son of Sem, Genesis 11.10. Enlarged by
Ninus, the third Babylonish King: The compass of it was four hundred and
eighty Furlongs, or sixty four Italian miles* the Walls were one hundred foot
high, and so broad, that three Chariots might pass abreast upon them; upon the
Walls were fifteen hundred Towers, each of them two hundred foot high: It Is
called a great City, Jonah 3.3. It was eight years in building, and there were
never fewer than ten thousand workmen about it.

The City of Babylon described.
Babylon was founded by Nimrod, Genesis 10.10. but enlarged by Semiramis, who for
the carrying on of that work, drew together thirty hundred thousand workmen;
who in one year finished the Walls, which contained in circuit four hundred and
eighty furlongs, or sixty four Italian miles: They were two hundred foot high,
and fifty foot thick; so that six Chariots might drive abreast on them. The
River Euphrates ran through the midst of it: over which she built a strong,
and stately Bridge of a mile long, binding each stone to other, with clips of
Iron fastened with molten lead. These Walls were one of the seven Wonders of
the World. It was built four square, each side sixteen miles long; situated in
a large plain. Aristotle calls it a Country, rather than a City: and it must
needs be very great, when some part of it was taken three days before the
other heard of it.

It had a hundred brazen Gates, and two hundred and fifty Towers upon the
Walls, for beauty, and strength. Semiramis built in it two Palaces both for
ornament, and defense: One in the West, which was sixty Furlongs in compass,
with high brick Walls, and within that a less, and within that a third,
wherein also was an impregnable Tower. These were wrought sumptuously with
Images of Beasts: It had three stately gates, and within the walls were game of
Beasts of sundry sorts. The other Palace was in the East, on the other side of
the River, containing thirty Furlongs in circuit.

Semiramis her Obelisk described.
Semiramis Queen of Babylon caused an huge Obelisk, square, and of the fashion
of a Pyramid, to be cut out of the Armenian Mountains one hundred and fifty
foot long, and four and twenty foot thick, which with much difficulty was
brought to the River Euphrates, and from them thence to Babylon, where she
erected it, to be matter of admiration to future ages. Diod.

The Rarities in old Babylon described.
Within the heart of this huge and stately City of Babylon she built a Tower,
reckoned amongst the Worlds Wonders; It had an hundred brazen gates, and two
hundred and fifty Towers. Semiramis also built in the same City a stately
Temple which she dedicated to Cush, or Jupiter Belus, four square; each side
containing two Furlongs or a thousand paces, with thick Towering walls, entered
by four gates of polished brass. In the midst was a solid Tower of the height
and thickness of a Furlong: upon this another, and so each higher than
another, being eight in number, reaching far above the middle Region of the
Air: In the highest Tower was a Chapel, and therein a fair bed covered, and a
Table of gold, in the top of this Chapel she placed three golden Statues: One
of Jupiter, forty foot long weighing a thousand Talents (each Talent containing
sixty three pounds, and almost ten ounces): Another of Ops, weighing as much,
sitting in a golden Throne, at her feet two Lions, and hard by, huge Serpents
of silver, each of thirty Talents. The third Image was of Juno standing, in
weight eight hundred Talents: To all which was a common Table of gold forty
foot long, and twelve broad, weighing fifty Talents. There were also two
standing Cups of thirty Talents, and two Vessels for perfume, of the like
weight: besides three other Vessels of gold weighing twelve hundred Talents:
all which the Persian Kings after their conquest of it took away. Herod.

Nebuchadnezzar's Babylon with its Rarities described.
Nebuchadnezzar, after he came to it, having conquered all the neighboring
Nations, enriched this Temple of Belus with their spoils, and added a new City
to the old without the same, which he compassed about with three walls, and
made in them stately gates: and near his Fathers Palace he built another more
stately, wherein he raised stone works like unto Mountains, which he planted
with all manner of trees: He made also Pensile Gardens (one of the Worlds
Wonders) born upon arches four square, each square containing four hundred
foot, filled above with earth, wherein grevv all sorts of trees and plants:
the arches were built one upon another in convenient height, still increasing
as they ascended: the highest which bate the vvalls were fifty Cubits high:
He made also Aquaeducts for the watering of this Garden. He erected also an
Image of gold in the plain of Dura sixty Cubits high, and six broad: These
stately buildings made him so to boast; When Alexander took it, he h^d in i^
two hundred thousand Talents of Gold.
Is not this great Babel that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Herod.

The Tower of Babylon Described.
About one hundred and thirty years after Noah's coming out of the Ark, his
posterity being affrighted with the late Flood, under Nimrod they intended to
raise up such a pile, as should secure them from a second deluge, and admirable
it is to consider, what multitudes of men there were in the world in so short a
space, there being but eight persons that came out of the Ark, and now this
building was carried on by five hundred thousand men; the Basis of it was nine
miles in compass, and in a few years they raised it above five thousand paces
into the sky, and had proceeded farther, but that God by confounding their
Languages, despersed them over the whole face of the Earth. Herb. Trav.

The Country about Babylon has been the fruitfullest in the World, yiedling
ordinarily two hundred, and in some places three hundred increase: the blades
of the Wheat and Barley are about four fingers broad; They cut their Corn
twice in the year, and depasture it a third time, or else it would be nothing
but blade: Pur. Pilgri. p. 59.

The City of Bagdat Described.
Bagdat is raised out of the ruins of old Babylon: its in circuit above three
miles, containing fifteen thousand families: its watered by Tygris, somewhat
broader than the Thames; it has a bridge over it made upon thirty long boats,
chained together, made to open, and shut at pleasure: The Mosque stands at the
West end, large, round, and pleasantly raised of white freestone: The Palace
joins to the market, its large but low. The Coha-house is a house of good
fellowship, where every evening they assemble to drink a certain Stygian
Liquor, a black, thick, bitter potion, brewed out of Bunum berries, of great
repute, because it provokes lust, and purges melancholy. The Buzzar is square,
and comely, the gardens are sweet and lovely.

Syria Described.
Syria bounds Northward upon Cilicia, and part of Cappadocia by Mount Amanus:
on the South upon Judea, and part of Arabia-Petraea: On the East upon Arabia
Deserta, and Euphrates: and on the West upon the Syrian Sea. This Country is
thought to have been the habitation of our first parents before the Flood, and
of Noah, and the better part of his Family, after. Hierapolis was the chief
City, where was a Temple built in the midst of the City, compassed with a
double wall: The Porch looking Northward was almost a hundred fathoms high: the
Temple it self, was three hundred fathoms, at the top whereof stood Images of
Priapus; which was their God, whom they served with filthy and godless vices.
The Temple within shined with gold, and the Roof was wholly of the same
metal. It yielded so fragrant a smell, that the garments of those that came
into it retained the sent long after: within it was a Quire, where stood the
Images of Jupiter, supported with Bulls, and of Juno sitting upon a Lion, with
a Scepter in one hand, and a distaffe in the other, adorned with many Jewels;
and amongst the rest on her head, one called the Lamp, yiedling light in the
night season.

Not far from the City was a lake two hundred fathoms deep, wherein was
preserved sacred Fishes, and in the midst thereof an Altar of stone, crowned
always with garlands, and burning with Odours.

Antioch, another City in Syria, was built by Seleucus, and was sometimes the
Seat Royal of the Syrian Kings, and afterward it was the third City in the
Roman Empire: the third seat of the Christian Patriarks: and the first place
where the Disciples were called Christians: but now its a Sepulcher to it self,
being left but a small village.

Damascus, another Regal City, was fair, and great, every side containing
fifteen miles, by it ran the River Pharphar, that watered their gardens: but
Abana entered into the City, and by Conduits was carried into their private
houses, both of them adding both pleasure and Profit to the inhabitants; which
made Naaman prefer them before all the Waters of Israel. In it was a Synagogue
of the Ismalites, a stately building, wherein was a wall of glass
distinguished by three hundred sixty and five holes, in each of which was a
Dial with twelve Degrees, answering to the hours of the day, within it were
bathes and costly buildings, so rich of gold and silver as seemed incredible:
it had forty great Porches in the circuit of it, wherein nine thousand Lamps,
all of gold, and silver hanged from the roof of them. It was ca1led the Palace
of Benhadad.

Aleppo is now the chiefest City in Syria, wherein this is very remarkable,
that though the Plague rage never so much (as many times it does) yet upon that
very day wherein Sol enters into Leo, which is usually the twelfth or
thirteenth day of July, it immediately cease, and all that are then sick
amend, and such as are then come abroad, need fear no further danger. The Turks
call Aleppo, Halep, which signifies milk, because it yields great store of
milk. Its usual here with many Christians to take a woman of the Country
(provided she be not a Turk, for its death for a Christian to meddle with
them) and when they have bought them, to enroll them in the Cadi's book, and so
to use them as wives at bed, and board, while they sojourn there, and then at
their departure to leave them to shift for themselves, and children.

Tripolis is a City on the main land of Syria, near unto Mount Libanus, which
is a Mountain of three days journey in length, reaching from Trypolis to
Damascus: The Christians which dwell upon this Mountain are called Maronites,
they are a very simple and ignorant People, yet civil, kind, and courteous to
strangers. There are now few Cedars growing here, only in one place, there are
four and twenty growing together, they are tall, and as big as the greatest
Oaks, with diverse rows of branches, one over another, stretching strait out,
as though they were kept by Art. There is no place in all the World, wherein
they speak the Syriack tongue naturally at this day, but only in four villages
on this mountain, which are Eden, Hatcheeth, Shany, and Boloza. Near unto
Tripolis, there is a gallant plain of about a mile in length full of Olive, and
Fig Trees.

Scandaroon, by Christians called Alexandretta, is in the very bottom of the
Straights: The Air is very unwholesome, and infects those that stay any time
there, occasioned by two high mountains, which keep away the Sun from it for
a great part of the day: the water also near the Town is very unwholesome. Here
our Merchants land their goods, and send them by Caravan upon Camels to Aleppo,
distant about three days journey. Here are many Jackalls, which in the night
make a great crying, and coming to a grave where a Corse has been buried the
day before, if the grave be not well filled with many great stones upon it,
they will scrape up the Earth, and devour the corpse. Mr. Bidulphs Travels.

The Empire of Persia Described.
Persia at this day has many famous Provinces subjected to her Command; as
Persia, Parthia, Media, Hyrcania, Bactria, Sogdiana, Evergeta, Ar^a, Drangiana,
Margiana, Paropamisa, Caramania, Gedrosia, Susiana, Arabia, Chaldea,
Mesopotamia, Armenia, Iberia, and Mengrellia, twenty Noble Kingdoms of old:
The whole Empire is bounded East, West, North, and South, with India, Arabia,
the Caspian and Persian Seas. In length from East to West is one thousand three
hundred and twenty miles; and in breadth from North to South; its One thousand
four hundred fourscore and eight miles; So that the whole Circuit is about Four
thousand miles: the Revenues of the Persian King, amount yearly to the sum of
one million and one hundred and ninty thousand pounds sterling.

The Persians are usually big-boned, strong, straight, and proper: Of an Olive
color, the women paint, the men love Arms, and all love Poetry. No part of
their body is allowed hair, the upper lip excepted, where it grows long, and
thick: they turn it downwards: the meaner sort reserve a lock in the midst of
their head, by which they believe Mahomet will pluck them up into Paradise.
Their eyes are black, their foreheads high, and their Noses hooked; upon their
heads they wear Shashes of great rowls of Calico, silk, and gold, the higher,
the more beautiful: They wear no bands, their outside garment is usually of
Calico, stitched with silk, quilted with Cotton; the better sort have them
far richer, of silk, silver and gold; their sleeves are straight and long,
their garment reaches to the Calf of the leg, their wastes are girt with Towels
of silk, and gold very long: next their skin they wear smocks of Cotton very
short; their breeches and stockings are sowed together; from the ankle to the
shoes they are naked; their shoes have no latchets, sharp at the toes, and
turn upward.

Circumcision is so necessary, that without it none can call himself a
Mussulman: Both men and women use it; the women at any time from nine to
fifteen: the men at twelve, which was Ishmaels age, when Abraham circumcised
him, whom they make their progenitor. Their ordinary household furniture is a
Pan, a Platter, and a Carpet* their diet is soon dressed, and as soon eaten;
their Table is the ground, covered with a Carpet, over which they spread a
Pintado cloth: before each man they lay four or six thin Cakes of Wheat: for
every one a wooden spoon, their handles almost a yard long, and huge big
mouths: Their only meat is Pelo, dressed after diverse manners. It consists of
Rice, Mutton, and Hens boiled together, to which they add various sauces, etc.
Their drink is Sherbet, made of fair water, sugar, Rosewater, and juice of
Lemmons mixed together.

The chief Cities in Persia described. The City of Lar described
Lar is the chief City in the Province of Larestan. Its not walled about: In
that Art is needless, the lofty Rock, so naturally defending her: she has a
brave Castle on the North Quarter, mounted upon an imperious Hill, not only
threatening an enemy, but awing the Town with her frownin^ posture: the ascent
is narrow and steep: the Castle of good stone: the walls are furnished with
good battlements, whereon are mounted twelve brass Cannons, and two Basilisks
(the spoils of Ormus) within the walls are one hundred houses stored with
soldiers, who have there a gallant Armory, able to furnish with Lance, Bow,
and Gun, three thousand men. The Buzzar or Marketplace, is a gallant Fabric;
the materials, a good Chalkie-stone, long, strong and beautiful: Its covered a
top, arched, and containing in it a Burse, or Exchange, wherein the shops are
stored with variety of wares: the walk from North to South is a hundred and
seventy paces: from East to West one hundred and sixty: the Oval in the Center
is about one hundred and ninety. The Mosques or Churches are not many: One
especially is round, figuring eternity: in some places engraven with Arabic
letters, and painted with knots, and in other places with Mosaic fancies. Its
low, and without glass windows, wooden trellizes (excellently cut after their
manner) supplying that want: Here are the fairest Dates, Orenges, Lemmons, and
Pomecitrons in all Persia: at easy rates you may have Hens, Goats, Rice, Rache,
and Aquavitae. The Inhabitants are for the most part naked, being a mixture of
Jews, and Mahumetans; their habit is only a wreath of Calico tied about their
heads, a cloth about their loins, and sandals on their feet; the rest naked.
Herb. Trav.

Shyraz described.
Shyraz is at this day the second City for magnificence in the Persian
Monarchy: It Is watered by the River Bindamyr, that springs out of the Tapirian
Mountains: It Is each way about three miles in length; the compass nine miles.
Its pleasantly seated in the North West end of a spacious plain, twenty miles
long, and six broad; environed with stupendous Hills, under one of which the
City is placed: Its defended by Nature, enriched by Trade, by Art made lovely:
The Vine-yards, Gardens, Cypresses, Sudatories, and Temples ravish the eye, and
smell, in every part sweet, and delightful. The houses are of Sunburned Bricks,
hard, and durable; flat and tarrassed about: the Belconies, and windows are
curiously and largely trellized: the floores spread with rich Carpets: None are
without their Gardens, or Forests, rather of high Chenaers, and Cypresses: In
it are fifteen brave Mosques, pargetted with Azure-stones, resembling
Turquoises, without; lined within with pure, black polished Marble: the tops
beautified with many double-guilt-spires, which reflect the Sun beams with a
rich and delightful splendour: two excel all the rest: One of them is fifty foot
high in the body, leaded, covered with gold, and blew; the walls, varnished and
wrought with knots and poesies: Above, aspiring with two colums of wood round,
cut and garnished with great bravery, very nigh as high as Paul's in London. The
other is Quadrangular: the superficies of Arabic invention, imbost with gold,
paved with Porphiry, painted with Azure, garnished with Mazes, and at their
festivals made resplen^ent with one thousand Lamps and Torches. Idem.

When our English Ambassador passed through this City, he was entertained in
the Dukes Palace, where all the great men of the Court and City were present,
and many young Ganimedes arrayed in cloth of gold, went up and down with
flagons of pure gold, to fill out Wine to such as nodded for it: they were
served with a curious banquet, at the end whereof came in the Duke: He was
ushered in by thirty gallant young Gentlemen vested in crimson Satin: Their
Tulipants were of Silk and Silver, wreathed about with chains of Gold, of
Pearl, of Rubies, Turquoises, and Emeralds: they were all girded with rich
swords, and imbroidered scabbards, they had Hawks on their fists, each hood
worth one hundred pound. To these succeeded their Lord, the Arch Duke of
Shyraz, his Coat was of blew Satin, richly imbroidered with silver, upon which
he wore a Robe of a great length, so glorious to the eye, so thick powdered
with Oriental Gems, as made the ground of it invisible, the price invaluable.
His Turbant was of pure fine silk and gold, bestudded with Pearl and
Carbuncles: his Scabbard was beset all over with Rubies, Pearls, and Emeralds:
His Sandals res^mbled the bespangling Firmament, etc. Idem.

The ancient Persepolis described.
Persepolis was a City so glorious, that Quintus Curtius, and Diodorus Siculus
entitle it the richest, and most lovely City under the Sun. It was a very large
City, and the Metropolis of all Persia, two of the gates standing twelve miles
asunder, which shows what the circuit of it was, when in her beauty and
bravery. On the South side was a stately and magnificent Palace, built by King
Cyrus: On the North side stood a mighty strong Castle, which was girt about
with three walls: The first wall was four and twenty foot high, adorned and
beautified with many turrets and spires: The second was like the first, but
twice as high: And the third was foursquare, being ninety foot high; all built
of polished Marble: On each side of the City were twelve brazen gates, with
brazen Pales set before them very curiously wrought. On the East arose amiably
an Hill of four Acres, in which, in stately Mausoleum's, were entombed the
Monarchs of the World. Many rare and admirable buildings it had, amongst which
the glorious Temple of Diana was the most exquisite for Art, and materials in
the World: The stones were of the richest Marble and Porphery, the roof of
refined gold. The Palace Royal was cut out of the Marble Rock, above two miles
in compass: the roof and windows were of Gold, Silver, Amber, and Ivory: The
Seat within was of Gold, and Oriental glittering Gems: In one room was an
artificial Vine, the stalk of pure Gold, the clusters of Grapes of Pearls and
Carbuncles: His bolster was valued at five thousand Talents of Gold; the
footstool worth three thousand Talents: so that when the greedy Greeks had
pillaged three days, yet Alexander had for his share seventy two millions of
Crowns of Gold: besides he loaded away three thousand Mules, with two and
thirty millions, and seven hundred and fifty thousand pounds in Coin. The
ruins of this stately City are seen at this day with astonishment. Herb. Trav.
p. 144.

The City of Spahawn described.
Spahawn, The Metropolis of the Persian Monarchy, is seated in the Parthian
territory, as the navel to that spacious body: It Is nine English miles in
compass, containing seventy thousand houses, and of souls about two hundred
thousand, composed (besides natives) of English, Dutch, Portuguize, Poles,
Moscovites, Indians, Arabians, Armenians, Georgians, Turks, Jews, etc. drawn
thither by the magnetic power of gain and novelty. The principal things
observeable in it are, The Bridge well built of stone, supported by five and
thirty Arches, through which the Syndery from the Acroceraunian Mountains
gently flows. The Midan, or great Marketplace* which is the most spacious,
pleasant and Aromatic Market in the World: a thousand paces from North to
South, the other way above two hundred, resembling our Exchange: the building
is of Brick, well made, and framed in a most delightful manner; the inside is
full of shops, each shop full of ware, arched above, a top framed Tarrase-wise:
and cemented with excellent plaster, its placed in the heart of this
triumphant City. The Kings Palace joins to the West side of it, possessing a
large quantity of ground backward, though to the street side it has no
magnifick front; her best bravery being in the trim pargetting and painting
with Azure and Gold, in Mosaic and Antic sort, interlaced with Poesies of
Arabic: But within, the rooms are arched, enlightened with curious trellizes:
the roof embossed with red, white, blew, and gold, the sides with sports, and
painted Images: the ground spread with rich and curious Carpets of Silk and
Gold. Tarrased above, garnished with a very high Tower, excellent for view; and
breathing. The Wilderness behind is filled with all sorts of birds,
privileged from hurt, or affrights, who return their thanks in a sweet
melodious consort. The North Isle of the Midan, contains eight or nine arched
rooms, hung with Lamps and Candlesticks, which being lighted, gives a curious
splendour.

Opposite to this Palace is a fair Mosque, in form round, and within
distinguished into Isles; the walls are lined fifteen foot high from the ground
with white, and well polisht Marble, without pews or seats: In the midst is a
stately Tank, or Pond, and at the Portal another eightsquare, filled with
Crystal streams of water, wherein all Musslemen wash their hands, arms, eyes,
etc. as an operative work to purge sin, and confer devotion.

In the Midan the shops be uniform, the Trades are no where severed; all the
Mercers together, the Lapidaries together, etc. but most of them are of gums,
drugs, and spices so sweet and delicate as can be imagined.

The Hummums or Sudatories are many, and very beautiful, some square, but most
round, made of white stone polished, and durable; the windows are large
without, and narrower within, the glass is thick, and dark: the top round,
tyled with a counterfeit Turquoise, perfectly blew, fresh and lasting; they are
divided into many rooms, some for delight, and others for sweating: the paving
all pure black Marble: Men use them in the morning, women toward night. It Is
their Catholicon against all diseases, colds, catarrhes, phlegm, aches, etc.

The City is Oval, each house made pleasant by large Cypress Gardens. The
Seraglio for his women, is full of precious treasures, and more precious
beauties, but not to be seen. The Castle is very large, well walled, and
deeply moated. The City has so many pleasant Gardens, that at a distance you
would take it for a Forest, so sweet, you would call it a Paradise: I shall
only describe one of them excelling all others.

Going from the Midan, you pass through an even delicate street two miles
long, most part of the way walled on both sides, bedecked with Summer-houses,
but more remarkable in that abundance of green, broad spreading Chenore Trees,
yielding shade, and incomparable order and beauty. The Garden is circled with a
stately wall, three miles in compass, entered by three gallant and curious
gates. From North to South it is one thousand paces; from East to West seven
hundred: from one end to the other easily seen by reason of a fair large Alley,
running all along in parallel, distinguished into nine ascents, each
surmounting other a foot, each distance smooth and even. In the Center is a
spacious Tank, made into twelve equal sides, each side being five foot, set
round with pipes of lead, which spout out water in variety of conceits and
postures, which sort of pastime continues thence to the North gate, where is
raised a house of pleasure, antickly garnished without, within divided into
four or six Chambers: the lower is set out with Tanks of rich white Marble, and
fumes out a cool Breese: the higher rooms are garnished with variety of
Landskips, representing their sports of hunting, hawking, fishing, riding,
shooting, wrestling, and other fancies: the seeling is enriched with beaten
gold, imbost with Azure. From her Tarrasses is a dainty prospect of most part
of the City. This Garden is replenished with trees of all sorts, for fruit,
shade, and medicine: All so green, so sweet, so pleasant, as may well be
termed a Compendium of Sense-ravishing delights.

Within the City is a Column or Pillar, at the base twenty foot round, and
sixty foot high, made of the heads of men and beasts: the occasion of this was
Anno Christi 1500. when Tamas Shaw ruled Persia, being much troubled with Turks
and Tartars, these Citizens refused not only to contribute to his Wars, but
denied him entrance, whereupon he vowed revenge, entered the City by force,
and without regarding age, or sex, slew three hundred thousand of them; and of
their heads made this Pillar, as a Trophee of his victory, and their baseness.

-- En quo discordia Cives perduxit miseros. -- When our English Ambassador
came to the Emperor of Persia, he found him at Asharaff in Hircania, two miles
from the Caspian Sea: when he came to the Court with his retinue, they
allighted, and were ushered into a little Court du Guard, that stood in the
center of a spacious Court, the ground spread with Persian Carpets, about a
pretty white Marble Tank, where they were feasted with Pelo, and Wine, the
flagons, cups, dishes, plates, and covers being of pure beaten gold: Thence
they were led through a spacious and fragrant Garden, curious to the eye, and
delicate to the smell, to another Summer House, rich in gold imbossements, and
paintings; but far more excellent for the admirable prospect* for from thence
they viewed the Caspian Sea on one side, and the Mountain Taurus on the other.
The ground Chambers were large, apiece, archt, and richly gilded above,
and on the sides, below, bespread with curious Carpets of Silk and Gold.

In the Center were Tanks of Christalline water (an Element of no mean account
in those Torrid habitations) Round about the Tanks were placed Goblets,
Flagons, Cisterns, and Standards of pure Massy-gold: some of them were filled
with perfumes, others with Rosewater: with wine some, and others with choicest
Flowers. From thence they were led into another large square upper Room, where
the roof was formed into an Artificial Element, many golden Planets attracting
the wandering eye to help their Motion: The ground was covered with far richer
Carpets than the other: the Tank was larger: the matter, Jasper; and Porphiry:
the silver purling-stream was forced up into another Region, yet seemed here to
bubble wantonly as in her proper Center: about it was so much gold in vessels
for use, and oftentation, that some Merchants with them, judged it worth twenty
millions of pounds sterling: Another Tank there was incircled with a wall of
Gold, and richest Gems: No other Flagons, Cups, nor other vessels were there
but what were thick, and covered over with Diamonds, Rubies, Pearls, Emeralds,
Turquises, Jacinths, etc. The seeling of this Chamber was garnished with
Poetic fancies in gold, and choicest colors. The ground in this room was
covered with such Carpets as befitted the Monarch of Persia: Above sixty of the
greatest Nobles sat round about it, cross-legged with their bums to the ground,
and their backs to the wall, like so many statues, their eyes fixed on a
constant object; not daring to speak, sneese, Cough, spit, etc. in the Emperors
presence. The Ganimed Boys in vests of Gold, and richly bespangled Turbanes,
etc. with Flagons of most glorious metal, profering wine to such as would taste
it: The Emperor Abbas himself sat at the upper end; so much higher than the
rest, as two or three silken shags could elevate him: his apparel was plain,
etc.

The City of Casbine Described.
Casbine is at this day for multitude of Buildings, and inhabitants, the
chiefest City in Media, and next to Spahawn, the greatest City in the Persian
Monarchy. Its compassed with a wall seven miles in compass: seated in a fair
even plain, having no hill of note within thirty miles compass: the Champain
yields grain, and grapes, but no wood. It has a small stream to water it,
which gives drink to the thirsty; and makes fruitful the gardens, whereby they
yield abundance of fruits, and roots in variety; as Grapes, Orenges, Limes,
Lemons, Pomecitrons, Musk melons, and Water-melons, Apples, Pistachoes,
Filberts, Almonds, Walnuts, Plums, Cherries, Peaches, Apricocks, Figs, Pears,
Goosberries, Dates, and excellent Pomgranats; etc. The Families in it are
twenty thousand, and the Inhabitants about two hundred thousand: The Buzzars,
or market places are large, and pleasant: The Midan is uniform, and beautiful:
The Kings Palace nigh the market, low built, painted with blew, red, and yellow
colors, commixt with Arabic letters and knots in gold, and azure: The windows
are spacious, trellized, and neatly carved: Near the Kings gate is a great
Tank: The Hummums, or sweating places are many, resplendent in the azure
pargetting, and tileing: The gardens are pleasant for view and smell.

The City of Tauris Described.
Tauris was the late Metropolis of Media, taking its name from the prodigious
Mountain Taurus, under which it is built; the ancient name was Ecbatane, when
she was far greater than now she is: Strabo says, that it was fifteen
miles in compass, the walls were strong and stately, seventy cubits high, and
fifty broad, beautified with many lofty Turrets, and battlements, within were
many great and excellent Palaces, especially that which was built by Daniel
(the Mausoleum of the Median Kings) was most magnificent, which remained
undemolished till the time of Josephus. That built by Darius was no less
memorable, most whereof was built of Cedar, the roof studded, and plaited with
burnished gold. At this day its about five miles compass, well peopled, traded
to from far and near; The houses are flat on the top, made of brick; the
Buzzar large, and the gardens lovely.

The City of Derbent Described.
Derbent is a strong and famous Port Town upon the Caspian Sea, viewing from
her lofty Turrets, the Armenian, and Hyrcanian Territories, as also Ararat, and
the sea. Its circled with a strong, high, and defensible stone-wall, above
three miles in compass: The houses, Hummums, and Churches, are but meanly
beautiful: the strong Castle Kastow is most observeable in it, pleasantly, and
very advantagiously seated.

Hyspaan Described.
The City of Hyspaan in Persia, was formerly called Hecatompolis, by reason of
its hundred gates; It Is compassed with a strong wall, and is in circuit as much
as a man may well ride on horseback in a day; its a very strong City, and is
excellently watered with deep channels of running springs, conveyed into it
from the Coronian Mountains, which are as a wall inaccessible about it. On the
North side is a very strong Castle, which is compassed about with a wall of a
thousand and seven hundred yards in compass. On the West side of the City are
two Seraglio's, one for the King, the other for his women: Palaces of great
state, and Magnificence, the Walls whereof glister with pollished Marble, and
pargetting of diverse colors; and all the Palaces are paved with curious
checkered work, and covered with curious Carpets wrought with Silk, and Gold;
the windows are made of Marble, Porphery, and Alabaster; the Posts and doors of
Massy Ivory, checkered with glistering black Ebonie, so curiously wrought in
winding knots, as may easilier stay than satisfy the wondering eye of the
spectator. Near the Palace is a stately Garden, spacious, and large,
beautifully adorned with a thousand sundry kinds of Fruit Trees, plants, and
flowers of all sorts to delight the beholders. There are in it a thousand
Fountains, and a thousand Brooks, and as the Father of them all, a pretty River
which with a mild stream, and delightful murmr, divides the Garden from the
Kings Palace.

Casan described.
Casan is the chiefest City in Parthia; It is seated in a goodly plain, having
no Mountains within a days journey of it: It wants neither Fountains,
Springs, nor curious pleasant Gardens: It abounds with all necessaries for
the life of man; It Is greatly frequented with all sorts of Merchandise,
especially out of India. The Citizens are very industrious, and curious in all
manner of Sciences, especially in weaving girdles, and shashes; in making
Velvets, Satins, Damasks, excellent Persian Carpets of a wonderful finenesse:
Here you may buy all manner of Drugs, and Spices; as also Turkesses, Diamonds,
Rubies, and Pearls; as also all sorts of Silk, raw and wrought: For there is
more Silk brought into Casan in one year, than there comes broad cloth into
London. This City is much to be commended for Civil Government: For an idle
person is not suffered to live amongst them; the child that is but six years
old is set to labor: no ill rule, disorder or riot is suffered there. They
have a Law amongst them, whereby every person is compelled to give his name to
the Magistrate, withal declaring by what course he lives; and if any tell
untruly, he is either well beaten on the feet, or employed in public slavery.

Casan contains above four thousand families; the houses are fairly built; the
streets be large and comely: the Mosques and Hummums are curiously painted,
and covered with blew Tiles, like Turquoises: The Buzzar is spacious, and
uniform. The Gardens abound with fruit, and the fields with Corn: The
Carravans-Raw is an admirable Fabric, able to receive all the retinue of the
greatest Potentate in Asia. It was built by Saw-Abbas for the entertainment of
Travelers on free cost: The whole building is founded on Marble, six foot
high, the rest of Brick; varnished and colored with knots, and Phansies of
Arabic characters in Azure, red, and white, laid in Oil: Its a perfect
quadrangle, each side two hundred paces long: In the midst of this spacious
Court is a large fouresquare Tank, or Pond, with Christaline water: This Royal
Inn is seated in the midst of fragrant and spacious Gardens.

Armenia the greater described
Armenia Major lies on the farther side of Euphrates: is a very mountainous
Country; has part of Cappadocia, and Euphrates, on the West. Mesopotamia on
the South: Colchis, Iberia, and Albania on the North. And the Caspian Sea, and
Media on the East: One part of it is called Turcomania, the other Georgia. On
the Mountain of Ararat, in this Country the Ark rested, and from hence the
World was repeopled. The chiefest Rivers are Phasis and Lycus, which run into
the Pontick Sea: Cyrus, and Araxes into the Caspian; Euphrates, and Tygris
which run into the Red, or Persian Sea.

Tygris, so called from its swiftness, passes through the Lake Arethusa, yet
neither mingling water, nor fishes, says Solinus; afterward it diveth under
Taurus, and rises on the other side bringing much filth with it, and is again
hidden, and again rises, and at last carries Euphrates into the Sea.

Mr. Cartwright in his Preachers Travels, says, that these present Armenians
are a very industrious people in all kind of Labor: that their women are very
skilful, and active in shooting, and managing any sort of weapon, like the
Ancient Amazons; That their Families are great, the Father and all his
posterity dwelling together under one roof, having their substance in common,
and when the father dies, the eldest son governs, all submitting themselves
under his regiment, after his death, not his son, but his brother succeeds, and
when all the brethren are dead, then the eldest Son. In diet, and clothing they
are all alike.

Media Described.
Media has on the North the Caspian Sea: on the South Persia: on the West
Armenia: and on the East Parthia. Ecbatane was once the Metropolis of it,
twenty miles distant from the Caspian Straits: which are a narrow way made by
hand through the Hills, scarce wide enough for a Cart to pass, eight miles in
length, the rocks with their obscure frowns, hanging over them, and in the
summer time multitudes of Serpents guarding them. The walls of Ecbatane were
built of hewn stone, seventy cubits high, and fifty cubits broad, and sixteen
miles in compass. Herodotus says, that after the Assyrians had reigned in
Asia, five hundred and twenty years, the Medes rebelled, chose Deioces for
their King, at whose command they builded him this royal City, and in it a
Palace of Cedar wood; joined with plates of silver, and gold, being a stately
thing, the whole compass of it was seven furlongs. Diodorus Siculus reports,
that at one time, multitudes of Sparrows that devoured their seed, forced the
inhabitants to leave this Country, and to seek their living in other places:
as Mice caused them in some part of Italy: and Frogs that rained out of the
Clouds, made the Attariotae: and Fleas chased away the Inhabitants of Myus: How
great is that God, who of the smallest of his Creatures, can muster Armies to
conquer them that swell in the conceit of their own greatness? as against
Pharaoh, etc. And how many Nations in Africa have the Grasshoppers exiled from
their native habitations? amongst the Medes none might be King except he was
in stature and strength more eminent than others: They used to nourish Dogs
with great care, to whom they cast men ready to dye, whilst yet breathing, to
be devoured of them. In this Country is the Lake of Van, three hundred miles
long, and a hundred and fifty broad, of salt water the greatest next to Meotis.
Gyllicus affirms that eight great Rivers run into it, without any apparent
issue to the Sea.

Parthia described.
Parthia is seated at the roots of the mountains, having the Arians on the
East; the Medes on the West: Caramania on the South: and Hyrcania on the North,
surrounded with Deserts: they used not gold, or silver, but only to adorn their
armor: they had many wives, of whom they were so jealous that they forbad them
the sight of any other man: They performed all businesses, both public and
private on horseback; this being the distinction of free men from servants;
they buried their dead in the bellies of birds, or dogs: they were exceeding
superstitious in the service of their Gods: they were a stout, unquiet, and
unfaithful people: their fight was more dangerous in their flight, than in
their onset; whence Seneca says Terga, conversi metuenda Parthi.

The Parthians flight does most affright. Its now called Arach.

Hyrcania described.
Hyrcania (now Strava) has on the West Media: on the East Margiana: on the
South Parthia: and on the North the Caspian Sea: Its famous for store of woods,
and Tigers: Strava the chief City abounds with trafick for Silk: Their Religion
agrees with that of the Persians.

Arabia described.
Arabia is a very large Country lying between the Persian Gulf on the East,
and the Arabian Gulf on the West: On the South is the Ocean; and on the North
is Syria and Euphrates. Its usually divided into Petraea, Deserta, and Foelix:
The name Faelix, or Happy is given to the Southern part, from the fertility of
it. Petraea to a second part, of Petra the Seat Royal: Deserta, or the Desert
from the nature of it, being a very barren soil.

Arabia the Desert is bounded on the East with Babylonia, and part of the
Persian Gulf: on the North with Mesopotamia, near to Euphrates: On the West
with Syria, and Arabia Petraea: and on the South with the Mountains of Arabia
Faelix, near unto which, and Euphrates, it has some Towns which are frequented
by Merchants: In other parts it is unpeopled, only by some roving Arabians
wandering in it, seeking pasture for their Cattle.

Arabia Petraea has Syria on the West and North: Arabia the Desert on the
East; and Arabia Foelix on the South: some call it Nabathaea: that part of it
which is next to Syria is fruitful; the other barren, wanting both wood, and
water, and frequented by wandering theevish Arabians: In this Country it was,
that the Israelites wandered forty years up and down in their passage to Canaan.
Here is Mount Sinai, a mile and an half from Horeb, and far higher: Sinai is
ascended by steps cut out of the Rock, and from the top of it may be seen both
shores of the Red Sea.

Arabia Foelix bounds upon the former, and has the Sea on all other parts,
against which it does abut for the space of three thousand five hundred and
four miles. Its now called Ayaman, or Giamen. Its probable to be the Country
where Saba stood, whose Queen came to visit Solomon, though the Abassines
challenge her to themselves: It has store of Rivers, Lakes, Towns, Cities,
Cattle, and fruits of many sorts. The chief Cities are Medina, Mecca, Ziden,
Zebit, Aden, etc. Here is store of gold, silver, and variety of precious
stones: As also wild beasts of diverse kinds. The Inhabitants use circumcision
at thirteen years old after the ^xample of Ismael. Frankincense grows only in
this Country, and not in every part, but in one part only, guarded, and almost
unpassable by Rocks; the place is one hundred miles long, and about fifty in
breadth; there are three hundred families appointed to attend this Wood, who
are called Holy, and when they cut the trees, whence Incense sweats, which is
in the Spring and Autum, they must abstain from Women, funerals, etc. when its
gathered, they carry it on Camels by Sabota, where they pay the Tithe to a God
called Sabis. They have in Arabia sheep with great tails, some of which weigh
forty pounds, some much more: they kill all the Mice they can, as supposing
them enemies to their Gods: the women cover their faces, being contented rather
to see but with one eye, than to prostitute their whole faces. They have also
Balsom trees. The Arabic language is now the most common in all the Eastern
Countries, especially amongst those that embrace the Mohammedan Religion.

Tartary described.
The Tartars inhabit a vast space of ground in Asia, and are divided into many
Tribes different both in name and government one from another: The greatest and
mightiest of them is the Crim Tartar, called by some the great Cham, that lies
South, and South East from Russia. Their Arms are Bows, Arrows, and Swords;
they are all Horsemen, and use to shoot as readily backward, as forward: the
common soldiers have no armor more than their ordinary apparel, which is a
black sheep skin with the wool side outward in the day time, and inward in the
night, with a cap of the same: the Nobles imitate the Turks, both in apparel
and armor. In their wars they chiefly seek to get store of Captives,
especially of Boys and Girls, whom they sell to the Turks, or other neighbor
Nations; they are most of them Mahometans. They have certain Idol puppets made
of Silk or other stuff in the likeness of a man, which they fasten to the door
of their walking houses to keep them in safety; besides they have the Image of
their great Cham, of an huge bigness, which they erect at every stage when
they march, and every one as he passes by, must bow down to it, they are much
given to witchcraft, and sorcery. They are divided into Hoords, over each of
which is a Duke, who are bound when the Emperor sends for them, to attend him
with such a number of Soldiers, every one having two horses, one to ride on,
and the other to kill, when his turn comes to have his horse eaten: for their
chief food is horseflesh, which they eat without any bread: They keep also
great herds of Kine, and black sheep, rather for their skins and milk (which
they carry with them in great bottles,) then for their flesh, which (they say)
is not so strengthening as horseflesh, they drink milk and blood mingled
together: Sometimes as they travel, they let their horses blood; and drink it
warm. They have no Towns but walking houses, built upon wheels, like
Shepherds Cottages: these they draw with them, and drive their cattle before
them, and when they stay, they plant their Cart-houses very orderly in rank, so
making the form of streets, and of a large Town: the Emperor himself has no
other City but such as these: In the spring they move with their Cattle
Northward grazing up all before them, and then return Southward again, where
they remain all the winter: Toward the Caspian sea, and on the frontiers of
Russia, they have a goodly Country, but marred for want of Tillage.

They use no money, and prefer brass and Steel before all other metals. They
have broad and flat visages, much tanned, have fierce and cruel looks, thin
hair on their upper lips, they are light and nimble, they have short legs, as
if they were made for horsemen: their speech is sudden, and loud, speaking out
of a deep hollow throat: their singing is very untunable. The Circasses that
border upon Lituania, are more civil than the rest, applying themselves to the
fashions of the Polonians: The Nagay Tartars lie Eastward, and are far more
savage, and cruel: The most rude, and barbarous, are the Morduit-Tartars, that
worship for god, the first living thing they meet in the morning, and swear by
it all the day after: when his friend dies he kills his best horse, and
carries his hide upon a long pole, before the Corpse to the place of burial:
that so his friend may have a good horse to carry him to heaven; they are void
of learning, and without written Laws, only some rules they hold by tradition,
as to obey their Emperor and Governors: none to possess any land, but the
whole Country to be common: not to use daintiness in diet, etc.

This great Country is bounded on the East with the Eastern Ocean: On the West
with Russia, and Moldovia: On the North with the Sythick, or frozen Sea: and on
the South with Mare Caspium, the Hill Taurus, and the wall of China: Its in
length from East to West, five thousand four hundred miles, and in breadth from
North to South, three thousand and six hundred miles. It was formerly called
Scythia. It has been so fruitful of people, that it was called, Vagina
gentium, et officina generis humani; the mother of all inundations.

From hence indeed Huns, Herules, Franks, Bulgarians.
Circassians, Sueves, Burgundians, Turks, Tartarians,
Dutch, Cimbers, Normans, Almaines, Ostrogothes,
Tigurines, Lombards, Vandals, Visigothes,
Have swarmed like Locusts, round about this Ball.
And spoiled the fairest Provinces of all.
The Island of Cyprus Described.
In the Mediterranean Sea: there are only two Islands belonging to Asia,
Cyprus, and Rhodes.

The Island of Cyprus Described.
Cyprus is seated in the Sea of Syria, and is in compass five hundred and
fifty miles: Its in length from East to West, two hundred miles: In breadth but
sixty five miles. Its about sixty miles distant from Cilicia, and one hundred
from the main land of Syria. In summer its very hot: the greatest supply of
water is from the Clouds: So that in Constantines time, there being a great,
and long drought, the Island was almost unpeopled for thirty six years
together. Ordinarily its very fruitful, and so stored with Commodities, that
without the help of other Countries, its able to build a ship from the keel to
the top-sail, and to furnish it to Sea, with all things necessary, either for a
voyage or Sea Fight. It yields plenty of wine, Oil, Corn, Sugar, Honey, Wool,
Cotton, Turpentine, Alum, and Verdegreece: As also all sorts of Metals, Salt,
Grograms, and other Commodities; whence it was called Macaria; or the blessed
Island. There are abundance of Cyprus Trees growing in it. The Inhabitants are
warlike, strong, and nimble, civil, Hospitable, and friendly to strangers. The
Jews in Trajans time slew in this Island, two hundred and forty thousand living
souls, whereupon ever since they suffer no Jew to come amongst them.

The Island is divided into eleven Provinces: the chief Rivers are Pedeus and
Tenus: The chief Cities are Paphos, once famous for the Temple of Venus.
Famagusta on the South Sea. Nicosia almost in the center of the Country.
Amathus, Ceraunia, now called Cerines: And Arsione, now Lescare. Its now under
the Turks, who took it from the Venetians, Anno Christi, One thousand five
hundred threescore and ten.

The Island of Rhodes Described.
Rhodes is situated in the Carpathian Sea, over against Caria in the lesser
Asia: Its in circuit one hundred and twenty miles: The chief City is of the
same name, where stood that huge Colossus of Brass, in the Image of a man
fourscore cubits high, whose little finger was as big as an ordinary man: it
was the work of twelve years, made by Chares of Lindum.

The Inhabitants of this I Will were always good Seamen. Anno Christi 1308. the
Knights of St. John in Jerusalem, being driven out of Asia by the Saracens,
seized upon this Island, and were always troublesome neighbors to the Turks,
till the year 1522. at which time Solomon the Magnificent, wrested it from
them. The forenamed City of Rhodes, stands on the East part of the Island at
the bottom of a hill, and on the shore of the Sea; having a safe and fair
Haven: it has also two walls for defense, thirteen high towers, five bulwarks,
besides sconces and outworks: Its inhabited only by Turks and Jews: for though
the Christians are suffered to trade freely all day; yet at night, upon pain of
death they must leave it.

The Rhodian Colossus more fully Described.
In the Isle of Rhodes stood one of the worlds seven wonders, which was a huge
Colossus made of Brass in the form of a man, standing with his two legs
striding over an haven, under which, ships with their Masts and Sails might
pass: It was fourscore cubits high, with all the parts proportionable, and all
gilt over. When Muani the fifth Caliph of Babylon, overcame Constance the
Emperor in a Sea Fight, and had taken the Isle of Rhodes, this image being
formerly thrown down by an Earthquake, was sold by him to a Jew, who loaded
nine hundred Camels with the brass of it. Theoph. Pez. Mel. Hist.

The Islands and Countries in the East Indies Described. Malabar Described.
Malabar is near to Cape Comeryn: Its four hundred miles in length, but not
above a hundred in breadth: yet so populous that one of the Samorines, or
Kings, has brought into the field two hundred thousand men: The Country is
green and full of all delights, Cattle, Corn, Fruit, Cotton, silkworms, and
other Merchandise: it has store of strong Towns, and safe Harbors. Its
divided into many Toparchies, but all obeying the Samorine, a naked Negro, yet
as proud as Lucifer: The Nayroes are his Lords, a sort of Mammeluks, that live
by the sweat of other men's brows, lust wholly Mastering them: they always go
armed with sword and Buckler: The people generally are big-limmed, strong,
cole-black, wear their hair, (which is like wool) long, and curled: about their
heads they have a wreath of a curious sort of linen wrought with gold, and
silk: about their wast a piece of Calico, all the rest naked: the vulgar sort
pink their skins in many places: some are Mahometans, others Gentiles: the
Mohammedan women use vails like other Indians: such as are Gentiles affect
nakedness: their greatest pride is in their noses, and ears; and they judge
them most brave which are bigest, and widest: their ears they make big by
weighty bables which they hang in them: they wring their snouts with silver,
brass, or Ivory: their arms and legs are chained richly. Their Braminies, or
Priests, have the maiden heads of all that are married: they are courageous and
politic.

The City of Callecut in Malabar Described.
Callecut a City is not large, nor of any beauty* the houses are low, thick,
and dark: The Samorine, or Emperor usually abides here: many deformed Pagathoes
are here worshipped: The chapel where their grand Idol sits is covered, and
about three yards high: the wooden entrance is engraven with infernal shapes:
within their beloved Priapus is imperiously enthronized upon a brazen Mount:
his head has a resplendent Diadem, from whence issue four great Rams horns:
his eyes squint: his mouth is wide, from whence branch four Monstrous Tusks:
his nose is flat: his beard like the Sun beams, of an affrighting aspect; his
hands are like the claws of a Vulture; his thighs and legs big, and hairy; his
feet, and tail resemble a Munkies; Other Temples* have other Pagods, ugly all,
yet all differ in invention. They commonly exchange their wives; As men have
many wives, so one woman may have many husbands.

The Isle of Zeiloon Described.
Zeiloon, or Ceilon, is two hundred and fifty miles in length, one hundred and
forty in breadth. It abounds with sundry sorts of aromatic spices: but
especially with Cinnamon: It has plenty of Orenges; Dates, Cocoes, Ananas,
Plantans, and Mastick; It has Elephants, Bufolos, Cowes, Sheep, Hogs, etc.
Smaragds, Rubies, Ambergreece, etc. The King hereof to show his bravery to the
Portugals, invited them to see him walk upon a Tarras, arraied in an
imbroidered Coat, powdered with Gold, Smaragds, Diamonds, and Pearl; altogether
darting out rays wonderful, delightful and pleasant: Hereupon Selveira, the
Portugese Governor, builds a stately and strong Castle amongst them, under
pretense of defending them from the Mallabars; but it was rather to be his
Jewel keeper: for in a short time he ravished the King of all his riches; In
this Island there is scarce any village, or Mount, without its Pagod: amongst
which, that Apes tooth god was the principal, resorted to by millions of
Indians: and when Columbo, the Viceroy of Goa took it away, they pro^ered to
redeem it with three hundred thousand Ducats; Their Idols are horribly
deformed, and ugly: yea the more ugly the more venerable.

The Manner of fishing for Pearls in the Isle of Zeilan.
They begin their fishing every year in March or April, and it lasts fifty
days, and when this time draws near, they send very good Diverse to discover
where there is the greatest plenty of Oisters under water, and right against
that place they pitch their Tents on the shore, making as it were a little
Village; and so when the time is come, they go out in their Boats, and Anchor
in fifteen or eighteen fathom of water, and then they cast a rope into the Sea
with a great stone fastened at the end of it: Then a man that has his nose and
ears well stopped, and anointed with Oil, with a basket under his left arm,
goes down by the rope to the bottom of the Sea, and as fast as he can fills
the basket with Oisters, and then shaking the rope, his fellows in the boat
pull him up with his basket, and thus they go on till they have filled their
Boats with Oisters, and so at evening when they come to their Tents, each lay
their heap of Oisters by themselves, and none of them are opened, till their
fishing be ended: At which time they open every man his own, which is easily
done, because then they are dry, and brittle: There are but few of these
Oisters in comparison, that have Pearls in them. There are also certain that
are expert in Pearls, present, that set the price upon them, according to
their carracts, beauty, and goodness: the round ones are best.

Choromandel described.
Choromandel stretches from Cape Comoryn to the famous Gulf of Bengala, and
has in it these famous Towns of Trade: Negapatan, Meliapore, Polycat, Armagun,
Narsinga, Mesulipatan, and Bipilipatan.

Negapatan is hot, and unwholesome, the wind and raines being for the greatest
part of the year high, and unseasonable. The Town has good water, and fruits
well relished, cooling and nutritive, yet the people are much vexed with
fevers, fluxes, etc. they are blackish, blockish, unapt for study or exercise,
by reason of the heat: A small thin shuddery or lawn is drawn before their
secret parts: their head has a small wreath, the rest is all naked: they have
gold, and precious stones, which they esteem as we do trifles. The Bannians
Wives have here more freedom to burn themselves when their Husbands dye, than
in other places; so that in this place the custom is usual. If any refuse to
burn, they must shave, and are accounted as Monsters.

The City of Goa described.
Goa is the bravest, and best defenced City in all the Orient, where the
Viceroy of Portugal keeps his residence, and seats of Justice. Its built three
hours journey within land, in an Island thirty miles compass, surrounded by a
River that flows from the mighty mountain Bellaguate. Its compassed with a
strong and beautiful wall, proud in her aspiring Turrets, dreadful in many
tormenting Cannons. The Marketplace or Buzzar is in the Center of the City,
richly built, pleasant, and capacious: the other streets (after the Indian
mode) are narrow, and nasty: the buildings in general are spacious and comely:
It Is watered with a delicious stream: the Gardens are filled with sweet, and
eye-pleasing flowers: the whole Isle abounds with Grass, Corn, Groves, Cattle,
fruits, and many other sense-ravishing delights, wherein there are above twenty
Villages: The field pieces here are above three hundred; the Palaces are
strong, of good stone, furnished within with rich Arras, and painting, and the
Churches beautiful, and comely. Herb. Travels.

The City of Amadavar described.
Amadavar is the Metropolis of Cambaya, or Guzurat, watered by a sweet River,
and circled by a beautiful strong stone wall of six miles compass, well and
orderly adorned with many pretty Towers, and twelve Posterns. The streets are
many, indifferently large, and comely: most shops abound with Aromatic Gums,
perfumes, and spices: as also with Silks, Cottons, Calicoes, and choice of
Indian, and China rarities, owned, and sold by the fair spoken, but crafty
Bannians. The Marketplace is rich, and uniform, the Castle strong, large, and
moated about. The houses in general are built of Sun-dryed Bricks, low, large,
and tarrassed.

The Island of Socotora described.
Socotora is an Island in the mouth of the Red Sea: a little Island, but
pleasant, and abounding with good things, one part rising into wholesome Hills,
other parts falling into fruitful dales; all places garnished with spreading
trees, sweet Grass, fragrant flowers, and rich Corn: has store of Olives,
Aloes, Sempervive, Sanguis Draconum, Cocoes, Dates, Pistachoes, Orenges,
Pomegranats, Pomecitrons, Lemons, Melons, Suger-Canes, etc. It abounds with
fish, foul, and flesh: Here are Civet-Cats. The inhabitans are black; they are
Christians by profession; their Churches are built in the form of a Cross, kept
sweet, and neat, without seats and images: they have a Patriarch whom they
reverence, and duly pay their Tithes to the Clergy: their feasts and fasts
like ours. Age is much regarded, humility commanded, and commended: second
marriages are not allowed, except they had no Children by the first: have their
Sacraments; wrap the dead in clean linen, and so bury them without lamentation.

Ormus described.
Ormus is situated in the Persian Gulf, a miserable, and forlorn City, and
Isle at this day; though not many years since, it was the bravest place in all
the Orient.

If all the world were made into a Ring,
Ormus the Gem, and grace thereto should bring.
The whole Island is a Sulphurious Earth, which together with the heat of the
Sun, from May to September, makes it almost intolerable; so that their custom
is to sleep in beds of water all day, naked; the City had a fair Buzzar, many
Churches, Monasteries, brave Magazeens, stately houses, and as gallant a Castle
as any was in the East. The whole Isle exceeds not fifteen miles in compass,
and is the most barren place in the World, neither affording Tree, nor spring
of good water: yet from the advantageous standing, the industrious Portugal
made it the staple, and glory of the world, till in the year 1622. the English
joining with the Persians, made it a ruinous heap, as it continues till this
day.

Narsinga Described.
Narsinga is famous all over Asia: its confined by Mallabar, Gulcunda, Bengala,
and the Ocean: the King is very rich, and powerful in men, arms, and
ammunition: His Country full of all things requisite for use, and pleasure:
Has many fair Towns, strong Forts, pleasant fields, and choicest Minerals,
abounding in Rivers, hills, dales, Cattle, Corn, Fruits, etc. The Temples have
in them many rich, and Massy Idols, of ugly shape, as best pleases the Devil
for his service, and devotion.

Bisnagar is the second City in Narsinga for grandeure, and bravery; being
circled with a wall of four miles compass, and as well fortified: well built,
and wealthy; It is much frequented by our European ships, and Junks from all
parts of India. Few strangers come thither but they are invited by the King,
who delights to show them his fine clothes, being set thick with stones, and
Gems of infinite value: he has for his guard a thousand Pensioners: He
affects Polygamy, and therefore styles himself, The Husband of a thousand
women, who at his death makes his flaming grave their consuming Sepulcher.

Mesulipatan is seated near the Bengalan Ocean; The Town has little beauty,
not many years since a raging mortality, and Famine having well nigh
depopulated it; The fields, and gardens, are parched by the Sun from March to
July; the four next months are disturbed with wind, and incessant rains; only
from November to March, they have kindly weather. The English have here a
residence where they trafick for Calicoes, Rice, etc.

Malacca described.
Malacca is a Peninsula, whence abundance of gold is carried into Pegu, Siam,
Borneo, and Sumatra; Its judged to be part of the Ophir whence Solomon fetched
his gold.

Malacca, the Royal City obeyes now the Siam Monarchy; being conquered by the
King thereof, Anno Christi 1508. by the help of the Portugals, at which time
they gat an incredible Mass of Treasure, three thousand pieces of great
Ordinance, and so much minted coin that the King of Portugals part came to two
hundred and fifty thousand Ryals of eight. The City is above three miles long,
but narrow; built upon the banks of a pleasant River as broad as our Thames. A
rivolet of sweeter water runs through the Town, over which is raised a strong
stone bridge, the buildings are generally low, and but meanly furnished, though
they want no gold to purchase better. The streets and fields show many
delightful Arbours, and choice fruits, with Corn, Sugar, and Durapen trees,
preferred before gold, and silver.

Patania Described.
Patania stands between those two famous Ports of Malacca, and Siam: the Town
is strong, and defended by twelve great brass guns, whereof one is a Basilisco
of twenty six foot long. The People are black, and go almost naked: they
delight much in eating Bettle, and Opium: they usually eat in plates of Gold,
they are very hospitable to strangers, and the better sort of them blush not to
proffer their daughters, and neeces to be their bed-fellows during their stay
there. Adultery they punish sharply, Fornication lightly, they delight much in
wine, Rack, Rice, Fruits, etc.

Siam Described.
Siam is a powerful and wealthy Kingdom: The King has under him many Countries
watered by Ganges: he usually goes to war with a thousand Elephants; and two
hundred thousand men: The Inhabitants are black, and almost naked: As a badge
of devotion, they gird their middles with a piece of Leather, and carry an
umbrella in their hands to lenefy the flaming Sun; they are great Idolaters,
worshipping gods in the shape of Prtapus, or Pan: They have Groves and Altars,
whereon they offer flesh, fruit, and flowers; their Tallapois, or Priests, are
great Conjurers, and much esteemed by the People. Here are abundance of
Diamonds, Chrysolites, Onix-stones, Magnets, Bezars, with Lignum aloes,
Benjamin, Cotton, and mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, etc. Victuals, and
other Commodities are very cheap: But its most memorable in the Cabriz, or
boodstone here generated.

The Riches of the King of Pegu.
The King of Pegu in the East Indies for people, dominions, gold, silver, and
precious stones, far exceeds the power of the great Turk. This King has
diverse Treasuries full of Riches: He is Lord also of the Mines of Rubies,
Saphires, and Spinels. Near unto his Royal Palace there is an inestimable
Treasure, whereof he makes no account, for it stands in such a place as every
one may see it. It is a great Court, walled about with stone, with two gates
which stand always open; and within this Court are four gilded houses covered
with lead, and in each of them are Idols of a very great value. In the first
there is the Image of a man of gold, very great, and on his head a Crown of
gold, set with most rare Rubies, and Saphires, and round about him are four
little Children of gold. In the second there is the statue of a man of silver,
sitting on heaps of money, whose stature in height as he sits is higher than
the roof of an house: I measured one of his feet (says mine Author) and it was
as long as all my body, with a Crown on his head like the first. In the third
there is a statue of Brass of the same bigness, with the like Crown on his
head. In the fourth there is a statue as big as the other of Gansa, which is
the metal they make their money of, which is copper and lead mingled together:
this also has a Crown on his head like the first. They have many Idol-houses,
which they call Pagods, all the tops whereof are covered with leaf gold, and
some of them are covered with gold from the top to the bottom, and once in ten
years they guild them a new. This King styles himself King of the white
Elephants, and when he rides abroad, four white Elephants are led before him
vested with gold, having their teeth enclosed in sheathes wrought with Jewels.
He keeps above four hundred tame Elephants, and has many wild ones in the
Woods, which they can catch at their pleasure*

The City of Pegu described.
Pegu is a very great, strong, and fair City, and very populous: Its made
square, with very fair walls, and a great Trench round about it, full of water,
wherein are many Crocodiles: It has twenty fair Gates made of stone, on every
side five Gates; there are upon the walls many Turrets, gilded with gold very
fair; the streets are as straight as a line, from one Gate to another, and so
broad, that twelve men may ride abreast in them: On both sides, at every man's
door there grows a Palmer tree, which yields a pleasing shadow, so that a man
may walk in the shade all day long: their houses are covered with Tiles. The
Kings house is in the midst of the City, walled, and trenched about, the
buildings within are very curious, and sumptuously gilded, having costly
workmanship on the front, which is also fairly guilt. The house wherein his
Idol stands is covered with tiles of silver, and all the walls are guilt with
gold.

Not far from this City there is an Idol-house of a wonderful bigness, and all
guilt from the top to the bottom; unto which adjoyneth an house for their
Tallipoies, or Priests to preach in. It is five and fifty paces long, and has
three walks in it, and between them four great Pillars gilded: The house it
self is gilded with gold within, and without, and round about it are very fair
houses for Pilgrims to lodge in: and many goodly houses for their Priests which
are full of Images of men, and women, all covered with gold. Sir Walter Raughly
in his History of the World, proves by many probable arguments that this was
the Ophir from whence Solomon fetched his gold, and Ivory. Pur. Pil.

This Kingdom of Pegu is bounded by Siam, Ganges, and the Ocean, and is
Commandresse of many Islands, as Monim, Barongo, Nogomallo, Cocos, etc. It is a
Kingdom full of all earthly delights, and blessings of nature, as gold,
silver, lead, and Iron: Also Smaragds, Topaz, Rubies, Saphires, Garnats,
Emeralds, Espinels, and Cats eyes. As also of Rice, long Pepper, Sugar, Benoin,
Musk, Gum-Lack, Cotton, Calicoes, and what else a reasonable man can desire.
Their habit is thin and fine; they wear no beards: they dye their teeth black,
because Dogs teeth are white, they cut and pink their flesh as a mark of
bravery.

The King of Pegu on festival days rides abroad in his triumphant Chariot all
gilded, which is drawn by sixteen goodly horses: His Chariot is high, with a
rich Canopy over it. About, and behind it go twenty of his Nobles, each of
them having a rope in his hand that is fastened to the Chariot, to hold it
upright from falling. The King sits in the midst of the Chariot, and about
him stand four of his Nobles that are in greatest favor, etc. He has one
Principal wife, and at least three hundred Concubines. Every day* he sits to
hear the suits of his Subjects in this manner: He sits on an high seat in his
great Hall, and under him sit his Nobles; and they which desire audience come
and set them down before him at forty paces distance, holding up their
supplications in one hand, and in the other a present, according to the
weightiness of the matter; then come the Secretaries, take their petitions, and
read them before the King, and if he grants their requests, he sends one to
take their present, otherwise not: but never speaks to them himself.

The Noble and simple are all apparelled alike for the fashion, only differing
in the finenesse of the cloth, which is of Bombast: First they have a shirt of
white Bombast; then another painted cloth which they bind up betwixt their
legs, and on their heads they wrap an other cloth in fashion of a Miter: they
go all barefooted: all sorts of women wear a smock that reaches to their
middle, and from thence downward they wear a cloth open before, so that they
cannot go but they discover natures secrets, which they say was invented to
keep men from sin against nature; they go also barefooted, having their arms
adorned with hoopes of gold, and Jewels, and their fingers full of precious
rings.

Sumatra described.
Sumatra is that famous Isle formerly called Trapabone: Its six hundred miles
long, and two hundred and forty broad. Its rich in gold, fruits, and precious
stones, but miserably overspread with ignorance, and superstition; the
Inhabitants worshipping Cats, Rats, Dogs, yea and the Devil himself: both sexes
go for the most part naked: The soil is good where the Rivers water it, but
barren where the veins of gold are found. There are many good inland Towns, but
the Ports are best known, as Aken, Aru, Daru, etc. but especially Passaman,
where is most store of gold; the Rivers abound in Fish, and Crocodiles, which
Creature is a wonder in nature, coming from a little Egg, and growing till it
be eight or ten yards long: their tails are as long as their bodies; their
mouths and throats so wide, that they are able to swallow a horse, and man at
one bit; their teeth are engrailed; they have no tongue, and contrary to all
other Creatures move only the upper jaw; their bellies are penetrable, their
backs hard to be peirced. In the winter quarter they fast from food; all the
rest of the year devour their prey with much greediness; sixty days pass
before the female lays her eggs, which are commonly sixty in number, and she
is sixty days in hatching them, and usually they live sixty years: some call
them Aligartos. The Jchneumon steals into his belly, and gnaws in sunder his
guts whilst he lies gaping that the little Trochil may pick his teeth, which
gives it feeding.

Java Major described.
Java the greater is an Island near the Bengalan Sea, in length four hundred
and fifty miles, in breadth two hundred and seventy: the midland is for the
most part Mountainous, and ill peopled; the Sea coasts low, and populous, yet
unhealthful. The Seacoasts by reason of trade for Pepper, has well built
Towns, especially Bantam, Palamban, Jackatra, Japarra, Tuban, Jortan, etc.

Bantam is the biggest City in the Island, nigh two miles long: It yields Rice,
Pepper, and Cotton-wool; though most of the Pepper be brought thither by the
Chinese from Janeby, Borneo, and Malacca. Four Vice-Royes are under the
Mattarans, or great Kings command; who is able to bring into the field two
hundred thousand desperate slaves, black, but valiant: the Climate is so hot,
that for the most part they go naked; their weapons are lances, darts, arrows,
but especially creezes, two foot long, broad, waved, sharp, and small pointed,
and basely poisoned: the hilt of wood, horn, the better sort of gold, silver,
or Ivory, cut in the figure of a deformed Pagod: They are given to murders,
theft, Adultery, deceit, etc. also Magic, and Astrology delight them, in which
Satan instructs them, the better to oblige them to his worship. They are
excellent swimmers; they delight in hunting Tigers, Ouzces, etc. They are
friendly to the English, especially ever since the Dutch took Jackatra from
them. Their Orankayes, or great men are idle, sociable, but not to be trusted.

The Isle of Celibes Described.
Celibes is by some called Makasser, from her best City in the Island: Its
oval, and above two hundred miles long: well peopled, but with bad people: Its
fruitful, though under the hotest part of the burning zone; They are black,
naked, only having a few plantane leaves tied about their middles; the better
sort wear Tulipants, and white shirts upon their coal-black skins. The women
are very immodest. The men use long Canes, out of which they can blow a little
pricking quill, which if it draw blood in any part of the body, it kills
immediately, so strong is the poison.

The Molucco Isles described.
The Molucco Isles are five in number: Molucco, Gillolo, Tirnate; Tidore, and
Machan: The English were the first Traders hither, and the natives acknowledged
our King their Sovereign, though since the Dutch thrust us out, as if all India
was theirs by title from the Creation. Gillolo is the greatest, but in Cloves,
Mace, Nutmegs, Ginger, Pepper, Oil, Aloes, and Honey, all of them alike
plentiful.

The Bandaneza Islands Described.
Near unto the former, are the Islands of Amboyna, Banda, Puloway, Pulerone,
Lantore, Batan, Labatacka, Nero, Ticobassa, Cumber, Salamo, etc. All of them,
especially Pulerone, and Puloway, seeming continued wildernesses of Nutmeg, and
Clove trees, Pepper, Vines, and Olives. These two last, first traded with our
Merchants, and acknowledged fealty to our King James, till the uncivil Dutch
dispossessed us, cruelly abusing our men, and entitling themselves Lords of the
Banda-Islands.

The Isle of Borneo described.
Borneo resembles an Oval shield, and for the most part groans under the
Spanish servitude: It has many villages and people, which are great Idolaters:
It yields Mines of gold, and Diamonds, Bezar, Musk, Lignum Aloes, Amber,
Sanguis Draconum, Wax, Rice, and Rattoons. Her chief haven Towns are
Socodania, and Bemermassin.

The Isle of Japan described.
Japan is in length six hundred miles: in breadth One hundred four score and
ten: The best towns and Ports in it are Meacco, Ozacca, Tenze, Firando,
Fuccate, etc. Macco is an inland City as big as Florence, but not so
beautiful; Has a sweet and large River: low but comely houses: abundance of
stately Fotiquees, or Temples full of gilded Idols, called by them Mannada's.
The Government is Monarchical, above sixty petty Kings do homage to the
Emperor: whose frowns are worse than an ordinary death. The Country is for the
most part mountainous, full of Rivers, Trees, Corn, Grass, and Mines: It has
plenty of villages swarming with Heathen Idolaters. The people in the North,
and East parts of it are more savage, treacherous, idle, Lascivious, and awed
by no Law: malefactors they crucify. The Civil Japonians are valiant,
courteous, and great affectors of Novelties. The best port in it is Ozacca,
strong, and beautiful, famous for its royal Castle, varnished, tiled, and
burnished over with pure Gold: rich, and Majesticall, of excellent stone, and
well built; the walls are every where twenty foot thick, well polished, and
curiously cemented; circled with deep trenches full of water, having above
twelve Iron Gates, with draw-bridges.

Fuccate is a pretty sweet Town, well watered, having a strong, and defensive
Castle, Its environed for three miles compass with spreading Sycamore Trees,
wherein are many small, but richly-tiled Fotiquees, or Temples, in which they
worship Pan, or Priapus, yea the Devil in his ugliest shapes.

In Meacco are seventy Temples, wherein they number three thousand three
hundred thirty and three little gilded Devils: but more memorable is that in
Meacco, huge, and wonderful, of guilt Copper: Its posture is sitting in a
chair seventy foot high, and fourscore broad: fifteen men may conveniently
stand upon his head, his thumb is forty inches about, and his other limbs
proportionable. At Dabis is another of these Idols, made of Copper; hollow,
vast, thick, and double guilt: his height is twenty four foot, though formed
kneeling, his buttocks resting on his legs, his arms are stretched out, and
sometimes making a fire in him, they sacrifice a child, which in his embraces
is fried to death with horrible torture.

The women of Japan, if they want means to bring up their children, most
unnaturally deprive them of that life, which not long before they had given
them. Their houses are most of wood; because of their frequent Earthquakes:
With them black is a feastival color, and white a Funeral. They dye their
teeth black. Reproaches, Thefts, Pe^^^ry, and Dice-play, is very hateful to
them. Herb. and Purch.

The Kingdom of China described.
China has on the East, the sea of Japan: On the West the Deserts of Judustan:
On the North the Tartars: On the South the Philippine Islands: And on the South
West, Cochinchina, Pegu, with part of Siam. In form its square, each way One
thousand five hundred miles over: The circuit above four thousand miles: The
Country is generally plain, and fruitful, full of sweet and Navigable Rivers,
which are no less inhabited than the Cities, and villages; There are in it six
hundred Cities: two thousand walled Towns, and four thousand unwalled; one
thousand Castles, and Villages numberless: it feeds above sixty millions of
men, and boys, besides women which be not enrolled: The whole Empire is
divided into fifteen Provinces; each of which has a Metropolis, full of
people, fairly built, and very spacious. One of their Kings to keep out the
Tartars, built a wall of one thousand and two hundred miles in length, six
fathom high, twelve yards thick: it was twenty and seven years in building,
though constantly wrought upon by seven hundred and fifty thousand men.

Pequin the now Regal City of China described.
Pequin is in compass thirty Leagues, or fourscore and ten English miles,
environed with two walls, upon which are innumerable Towers and Bulwarks. It
has three hundred and sixty gates, each having over it a Castellet with two
Towers, and a drawbridge. There are in it three thousand eight hundred
Temples, wherein are continually sacrificed birds, and wild beasts, and amongst
these, four very admirable, for their curiosity, and costlinesse. The streets
are long, and large; the houses fair, encompassed with Iron, and Latten grates:
at each street end is a Triumphal Arch, shut up at nights, in the chief whereof
are Watch-bells. There are one hundred and twenty large Channels of water, and
over them eighteen hundred rich, and fair bridges:

There are in this City one hundred and twenty Shambles, one hundred and twenty
marketplaces; besides in every street five or six shops, wherein they sell
flesh, poultry, and Bacon. There are without the City sixteen hundred
Garden-houses belonging to persons of Principal note: And twenty four thousand
Sepulchers of Mandarines, [Justices of Peace] with their little gilded
Chapels, encompassed with Grates of Iron, and Latten, with rich Arches at
their entries. The gardens, groves, Tanks, and Fountains, have their walls
lined within with fine Porcelane which makes a gallant show. There are also
store of other houses with great walls, in which are Gardens, and groves with
game for hunting, which belong to several companies.

The City of Nanquin described.
The City of Nanquin is thirty and six miles in compass, circled with three
strong walls and ditches: the Kings Palace in it is vast, and glorious: the
other buildings many: the inhabitants are reckoned to be twenty thousand: the
Temples are above a thousand: the streets fair and the people industrious.

The Country of Quinsay described.
Quinsay borders upon Cochin-china:

The whole Country is well watered, and the Rivers abound with fish; which
they use to take with Cormorants. The People are of an Olive color, wear their
hair very long: their eyes are commonly black: their noses little: their eyes
small: their beards deformedly thin; their nails oft-times as long as their
fingers, serving as a mark to distinguish the gentry by: The better sort are
clothed in silk, and Satin: the meaner in black cloth made of Cotton* their
coats long, and quilted, made to tie under the left arm, after the As^^tick
mode: their sleeves are long and strait at hand: their shoes often of the same
stuff with their coats: some have them richly imbroidered* some knit their hair
in cawls of silk, in horse-hair some, and some in fillets of gold, or silver:
Others wear high Caps, or Felts, made of fine twigs, round, and mixed with silk
of diverse colors, etc. The women are modest, a light vail of fine linen
wholly covering them. They are generally proud, crafty, jealous, voluptuous,
and given to Music* Poetry, Painting, and stage plays; They eat in
porcellane, and have their diet in many small dishes, minced, which they take
up with two sticks of bone, or Ivory: for to touch their meat, or their mouths
with their fingers is held absurd, and impious; they all sit on stools, and eat
on Tables.

No Beggars are suffered amongst them, for if they be young, the whip rewards
them, but if they be old, and lame, the Hospital relieves them: murder they
punish with death: adultery, and theft, with the Strappado. They exceedingly
honor, and reverence their Parents: they obey them at all times, in all places:
marry not without their assent: they honor them be they never so mean: relieve
them be they never so poor: at their death show loyalty and duty, and seldom
mourn less than two or three years. They arrogate all sorts of excellencys in
Art, or Science as peculiar to their Nation, they think their speech, (which
mostly consists of Monosyllables) the most sweet, and Rhethorical of any in the
world: They say they are the antientest of all other People, and that they
borrow nothing from any other, but all other from them: They say they were the
first inventers of Letters, Guns, Painting, Tillage, and Navigation: For all
which they say That they only see with two eyes, and all others but with one.
They are great Gamesters, and when they have lost all, stake their wives, and
children, whom they part with, till they can redeem them; they so firmly
believe the Resurrection, that sometimes they lend money to be repayed in the
world to come: Though their houses outwardly are but mean, yet oft-times the
insides are lined with excellent good Marble, Porphyry, and Serpentine. When
the Husband dies, the wife mourns exceedingly, puts sackcloath next her skin:
for three years is scarce seen to laugh, and abstains from public Feasts, and
pastimes.

There has often been great wars between the Tartars who lived beyond the
vast wall before mentioned; and the Chinese; as Anno Christi 1206, which
lasted for seventy and seven years, at which time the Tartars wholly conquered
that potent Empire, extinguished the imperially family of the Sunga's: erected
a new family of their own, which they called Ivena, of which Tartarian race
nine Emperors governed successively the Kingdom of China, for the space of
seventy years in peace: but at the end thereof a contemptible person of the
Chinese, called Hugh, presumed to rise up against them, acting first the part
of an highway man, and wanting neither courage, nor companions, in a short
time made up the vast body of an army, fought with; and after many signal
victories in the year 1368. finally drove them out of the Kingdom of China,
receiving for his pains the whole Empire, and was the first erector of the
Imperial family of the Taiminges, who enjoyed the Kingdom in peace for two
hundred and fifty years: The last of them was called Vanley, who from the year
1573 to 1620: governed the Kingdom of China, with much prudence, and equity:
But about that time the Tartars being multiplied; and receiving many injuries
from the Chinese, they again take arms, invade China, and with mighty
success began, and continued the wars till the year 1653; at which time they
had made a full conquest of it, no considerable party opposing them in their
peaceable possession; as you may read more fully in a book called Bellum
Tartaricum.

The City of Quinsay described.
Quinsay was formerly the Regal City of China, situated abuut the heart of the
Country, and yet not far from the Sea: In it were to be found so many
delights, that it seemed an earthly Paradise: It was one hundred miles in
compass, for the streets, and channels thereof were very wide, and the
Marketplaces very large. It had on the one side, a clear lake of fresh water,
and on the other, a great River, which entering into many places of the City
carried away all the filth, and occasioned a good air. There were store both of
Carts, and Barks to carry necessaries. It had in it twelve thousand Bridges,
great and small; those on the chiefest Channels being so high, that ships might
pass under them. On the other side of the City was a great Trench forty miles
long, large, and full of water from the River, which served both to receive the
overflowings of the River, and as a fence to that side of the City, the earth,
that was taken out, being laid as a bank, or hill on the inside. There are ten
chief Marketplaces (besides infinite others along the streets) all of them
square, the square being half a mile on each side, and from the fore part of
them runs a principal street forty paces wide, reaching from one end of the
City to the other, with many Bridges traversing of it; and at the end of every
four miles is such a Marketplace. There is also a large channel running over
against the street behind the Marketplaces, on the banks whereof are erected
storehouses of stone, where Merchants out of all Countries laid up their
Commodities, being commodious to the Markets. In each of the Marketplaces
three days in a week was a concourse of forty, or fifty thousand persons which
brought in whatsoever was requisite for the life of man, besides beasts, and
fowls of game. Then followed the Butchers rows of Beef, Veal, Kid, and Lamb:
Besides there were all sorts of Herbs; and fruits, and amongst them huge Pears
weighing ten pound a piece, and very fragrant: Peaches yellow, and white, very
delicate. Every day from the Ocean, which is but five and twenty miles off, is
brought up abundance of fish, besides what the Lake and River yield. All the
Marketplaces are encompassed with high and fair houses, and underneath are
shops of Artificers, and all sorts of Merchandises, Spices, Jewels, Pearls,
Rice-wine, etc. Many streets answer one another in those Marketplaces, wherein
are many Bathes, both of cold, and hot waters, and people wash every day before
they eat any thing. At the end of each Marketplace is a Palace where
Magistrates determine all controversies which happen amongst Merchants and
others.

There are twelve Principal trades, each of which have one thousand shops, and
ye shall see in every shop ten, twenty, thirty, or forty men at work under one
Master. The Masters themselves work not, but stand richly apparreled, and their
wives with Jewels inestimable: their houses are well ordered, and richly
adorned with Pictures, and other stupendous costs.

About the Lake are many fair buildings, and great Palaces of the Nobles, and
chief men; and Temples of their Idols, and Monasteries of many Monks. In the
midst of the Lake are two Islands, upon each of which is a Palace with
incredible numbers of rooms, whither they resort upon occasions of marriages,
or other feasts, where are provisions of Vessels, Nappery, and other things,
kept in common for such purposes. In the Lake also are Boats and Barges, for
pleasure, adorned with fair seats, and Tables, and other provision for
banquets, covered over head: within they are neatly painted, and have windows
to open, and shut at pleasure. Nor can any thing in the World seem more
pleasant, than from the Lake to have such a prospect, the City so fully
presenting it self to the eye, with so many Temples, Monasterys, Palaces,
Gardens with high trees, Barges, People, etc. For their manner is to work one
part of the day, and the other part to spend in solace with their friends, or
with women on the Lake, or in riding in Chariots up and down the City. All the
streets are paved with stone, as are all the high ways in China: The principal
street of Quinsay is paved ten paces on each side, and in the midst it is well
gravelled with passages for the water, which keeps it always clean: There are
also multitudes of Chariots, accommodated with clothes, and cushions of Silk,
for six persons in each of them; and in them the inhabitants solace themselves
in the streets, or go to Gardens provided on purpose for their pleasure. This
City contains about sixteen hundred thousand households, and together with the
Country adjoining, yielded to the King sixteen millions, and eight hundred
thousand Ducats of gold yearly, besides six millions, and four hundred thousand
Ducats for the customs of salt. Pur. Pil. v. 3. p. 98.

The Great Mogols Empire described.
The Great Mogols Country is called Indus^an, which for spaciousness, abundance
of brave Towns, numberless inhabitants, infinite treasure, mines, food, and all
sort of Merchandise exceeds all Kings and Potentates in the Mahomitan World.
This vast Monarchy extends from East to West two thousand six hundred miles:
From North to South one thousand four hundred miles: Its in circuit five
thousand. It is bounded with the Bengalan Gulf, and Indian Ocean: On the South
with Decan and Mallaber: North and North West with Tartary, and Persia* It
contains thirty seven large Provinces: thirty great Cities: three thousand
walled Towns: His revenues are very great: He has in continual pay three
hundred thousand Horse, and keeps two thousand Elephants at a vast charge; his
Treasurer yearly issuing out above forty millions of Crowns. The names of the
Provinces are

1. Candahor, The chief City is of the same name: It lies Northward, and
confines upon Persia.

2. Cabul, The chief City is of the same name: It lies in the North West part,
and confines upon Tartary.

3. Multan, The chief City is of the same name: On the West it joins with
Persia.

4. Hajacan, It has no great City: Its bounded Eastward with the famous River
of Indus, and Westward with Persia.

5. Buckor, The chief City is Buckor-succor: Indus runs through it, and much
inriches it.

6. Tatta, The chief City is of the same name: The River Indus makes many
fruitful, and pleasant Islands in it: the chief arm of it falls into the Sea at
Synde, a place famous for curious handy crafts.

7. Sorat, The chief City is Janagar. Its a little Province but rich, bounded
with the Ocean on the South.

8. Jeselmeere, The chief City is of the same name.

9. Attack, The chief City is of the same name: It lies on the Eastside of
Indus.

10. Peniab, It Is seated (...) five Rivers, which all fall into Indus: Its a
great, and very fruitful Province. Lahor is the chief City, afterward
described; which is the chiefest City of Trade in all India.

11. Chishmeere, The chief City is called Siranakar: the River Phat passes
through it that falls into Indus.

12. Bankish, The chief City is called Bishur: Its divided from Chishmeere by
the River Indus.

13. Jengapor, The chief City is of the same name: It lies upon the River Kaul.

14. Jenba, The chief City is of the same name: It lies East of Peniab.

15. Delli, The chief City is of the same name; which is a great City, where
most of the Great Mogols lie interred.

16. Bando, The chief City is of the same name. It has Agrae on the West.

17. Malway, A very fruitful Province: The chief City is Rantipore.

18. Chitor, A great Province, where the chief City is of the same name.

19. Guzarat, A goodly Kingdom, and exceeding rich, enclosing the bay of
Cambaia: The chief City is Surat, a place of great trading.

20. Chandis, Where the chief City is Brampoch, large, and populous, and the
South bounds of this Empire.

21. Berar, The chief City is Shapore, the South part of it also bounds this
Empire.

22. Narvar, Where the chief City is Gehud, watered by a fair River that
empties it self into Ganges.

23. Gualiar, The chief City is so called, where the Mogol has a great
Treasure. In this City also is a strong Castle, where he uses to keep his
Prisoners.

24. Agra, Where the chief City is of the same name, and afterward described.

25. Sanbal, The chief City is of the same name: Its watered by the River
Jemini, which falls into Ganges.

26. Bakar, where the chief City is Bikaneer: It lies on the West side of the
River Ganges.

27. Nagracut, The chief City is of the same name, where is a Chapel richly
seeled, and paved with plates of pure gold. The Idol is called Matta, visited
by many thousands yearly, which out of devotion cut off a part of their tongues
to sacrifice to it.

28. Syba, Where the chief City is Hardwair: Here the famous River Ganges
springs out of a Rock, whither the superstitious Gentiles go daily in troops to
wash their bodies.

29. Kakares, Where the principal Cities are Dankalee, and Purhola: Its very
large, and exceeding mountainous, and is parted from Tartarie by the Mountain
Caucasus, being the Mogols most Northerly bound.

30. Gor, The chief City is of the same name: The River Persilis begins here,
which runs into Ganges.

31. Pitan, the chief City is of the same name: Its watered by the River Kanda,
which falls into Ganges.

32. Kandua, Where the chief City (...) Karhakatenka: the River Sersili parts
it from Pitan, and lies Northward.

33. Patna, The chief City is of the same name: A fertile Province, bounded by
Ganges on the West.

34. Jesual, Where the chief City is Raiapore: It lies East of Patna.

35. Mevat, Where the chief City is Narnol: Its a very mountainous Country.

36. Udessa, Where the chief City is Jokanat. Its the Eastermost part of this
vast Empire.

37. Bengala, Its a very spacious and fruitful Kingdom, bounded by the Gulf
of Bengala, into which the River Ganges emptieth it self at four mouths.

This Empire has plenty of excellent Wheat, Rye, and Barley, whereof they make
pure white bread. As also of Kine, Sheep, and Goats, with whose Milk they make
much Butter, and Cheese* they have store of Bufelo's that give good milk: Its a
very large Beast, having a smooth thick skin without hair. They have store of
red Deer, fallow Deer, Elks, and Antilops, which are good Venison; and every
man's Game, not being enclosed in Parks. They have Geese, Ducks, Pigeons,
Partridges, Quails, Peacocks, and many other singular good fowl: a sheep is
usually sold for twelve pence, four couple of Hens for twelve pence: A Hare for
a penny, three Partridges for a penny, etc. They have store of Salt and Sugar.
They have abundance of Musk-melons, Water-melons, Pomegranats, Pomecitrons,
Lemmons, Orenges, Dates, Figs, Plantans, Mangoes, in shape like our Apricocks,
but more luscious: Ananas, a delicate fruit: store of Potatoes, Carrats, and
other good roots: as also Pears, and Apples in the Northerly parts: many good
Garden Herbs, and Ginger: also Taddy, an excellent Drink that issues out of a
Tree. For three months they have abundance of rain, with much thunder, and
lightening: the other nine months so clear, that a cloud is scarce to be seen.

The Country is beautified with many woods, and great variety of fair goodly
trees, some having leaves as big as bucklers, others parted small as Fern, as
the Tamarine trees that bear a sower fruit; somewhat like our Beans, very good
to cool, and cleanse the blood: all their trees are green all the year about.
There are rare flowers of admirable colors, but few of them sweet, save their
Roses, and two or three more sorts.

The Country is watered with many goodly Rivers, especially Indus, and Ganges;
besides which, they have store of springs, upon many of which they bestow great
cost of stonework, making Tanks, or Ponds, some of them a mile in compass,
others more, surrounded with stone walls, and within them fair stone steps
round about. Some of them are filled with rain water. They have a strong drink
called Rack, distilled from Sugar, and the spicie rind of a tree called Jagra:
they have also Cohha made with a black seed boiled in water, that helps
digestion, quickens the spirits, cleanses the blood, and provokes lust. Many of
their houses are flat on the top, on which in the cool seasons of the day, they
take the cool air: they have no chimnies, using no fire, but only to dress
their meat. The upper rooms have many lights to let in air, but they use no
glass: Amongst their houses are many fair trees, which are a great defense
against the Sun. Most of their houses in the Cities are of Brick, or stone,
well squared. Their staple commodities are Indico, and Cotton-wool, of which
they make diverse sorts of cloth, some finer, and purer than our best Lawns:
some of it they stain in variety of curious figures. They have also store of
Silk, which they weave curiously, sometimes with gold, and silver, whereof they
make Velvets. Sattens, and Taffaties, but not so good as in Italy. They have
store of Drugs, and Gums, especially Gum-Lac, of which we make hard wax. The
Earth has store of minerals of Lead, Iron, Brass, Copper, and Silver, which
yet they need not open, having so much brought out of all other Countries. They
have curious Gardens, planted with fruitful trees, and dainty flowers, which
never fade: in which they have fountains to Bathe in, and other water works for
delight. There are Lions, Tigers, Wolves, Jackals: Over grown Snakes, and in
their Rivers Crocodiles. There are many Scorpions, and Flies that are very
troublesome, and Muskitees.

The Wind, called the Monson blows six months Southerly, and six months
Northerly, seldom varying: April, May, and the beginning of June, till the
Rains fall, are exceeding hot: Thus has the wise disposer of all things
tempered bitter things with sweet, to teach us that there is no true, and
perfect content in any Kingdom, but that of heaven.

They have store of good Horses, and Camels, Dromedaries, Mules; Asses,
Rhynocerots; which are as long as the fairest Ox in England, their skines lie
plaited in wrinkles on their backs. They have many Elephants, their King having
usually fourteen thousand, and many of the Nobles a hunded a piece: There are
some of them fifteen foot high, all of them black, their skin thick, and
smooth, without hair: they take much delight in the water, and will swim
excellent well, they are exceeding docible, so that they will do almost any
thing the keeper bids them: If he would have them affright a man; he will make
toward him as if he would tread him in pieces, and yet when he comes to him,
not touch him. If he bid him abuse a man, he will take dirt, or kennel water
in his trunk, and dash it in his face; etc. They are most sure of foot, never
stumbling: they are governed with a hook of steel, with which their keeper
sitting on their Necks, pull them back, or prick them forward at their
pleasure. Every Male has allowed to him four females.

The Inhabitants of Indostan Described.
The Inhabitants before they were conquered by Tamerlane, were all Gentiles,
but now they are mixed with Mahometans: they are of stature, like us, very
straight, seldom or never is there a crooked person amongst them: They are of
an Olive color, have black hair, but not curled; they love not any that are
white, saying that they are like Lepers, their chins are bare, but have long
hair on their upper lips, shave their heads; only reserve a lock on the Crown
for Mahomet to pull them to heaven by. The habits of men and women differ
little, mostly made of white Cotton cloth, made close to the middle, then
hanging loose down below the knee: under them they have long breeches reaching
to the ancle, and close to their bodies: their feet are bare in their shoes,
which they commonly wear like Slippers, which they put off when they come into
their houses, whose floores are covered with excellent Carpets, upon which they
sit when they talk or eat, like Tailors on their shop boards: on the men's heads
are shashes, which is a long thin wreath of cloth, white or colored. The
Mohammedan women cover their heads with vails, their hair hangs down behind
twisted with silk: often bedecked with jewels, about their necks and wrists:
their ears have pendants: their nostrils pierced to put in rings at their
pleasure: Their ease in child bearing is admirable: for it is a common thing
there, for women great with child, one day to ride carrying their Infants in
their bodies, and the next day to ride carrying them in their arms.

The great Mogol, every year at the entering of the Sun into Aries, makes a
feast to his Nobles which lasts nine days, at which time they present him with
gifts, and he again repays them with Princely rewards: I was astonished (says
mine Author, who was an eye witness of it) when I beheld at that time the
incredible riches of gold, pearls, Precious stones, jewels, and many other
glittering vanities which were amongst them.

The walls in the Kings house are painted, or beautified with pure white Lime:
the floores are covered with rich, and costly Carpets: there lodge none with
him in his house but his Eunuchs, and women, and some little boys, that he
keeps for detestable uses: he always eats in private amongst his women, upon
great variety of excellent dishes, which being prepared, and proved by the
Taster, are served up in vessels of Gold covered, and sealed up, and so by the
Eunuchs brought to him.

In this Empire there are no Inns to entertain strangers, only in great Towns
are fair houses built for their receipt, which they call Sarrays, not inhabited,
where Travelers have room freely, but they must bring with them beds, food,
and other necessaries which they usually carry upon Camells, or in Carts drawn
with Oxen, wherein they have tents to pitch when they meet with no Sarray's.

The inferior sort of people ride upon Oxen, Horses, Mules, Camels, or
Dromedaries, and the women like unto the men, or else in slight Coaches drawn
with Oxen, many whereof are white and large, and they are guided with cords,
which go through the parting of their Nostrils, and so betwixt their horns,
into the Coach-mans hands: they are nimble, and will go twenty miles a day. The
better sort ride upon Elephants, or are carried on men's shoulders in Sedans,
which they call Palankeenes.

In all their great Cities they have Markets twice a day, early in the morning,
and in the evening; wherein they sell almost every thing by weight. They are
generally so superstitious, that they will rather dye than eat, or drink any
thing that their Law forbids.

The chief Cities in the great Mogols Countries Described.
Lahore in the great Mogols Country, is a vast and famous City, not much
inferior to Agra, the Metropolis; yea, for circuit and bravery, it much
excells it: The air for eight months is pure, and restorative: the streets are
paved and graceful, which are cleansed, and watered by the River Ravee, which
flows most pleasantly into this City, from the Casmyrian Mountains, and after a
stately course of three thousand English miles, deep enough for Junks of sixty
Tun, it falls into Indus at Tutia. This City is beautified with stately
palaces, Mosques, Hummums, or Sudatories, Tanks or Ponds, Gardens, etc. The
Castle is large, strong, uniform, pleasant, and bravely seated, being built of
hard, white, and polished stone: armed with twelve Posternes: within which is a
Palace, sweet, and comely, entered by two Gates, and Courts: on the walls, are
pictured sundry stories, and pastimes.

From this City to Agra is five hundred miles, the Country in all that distance
being even without Mountains, and hills, and the high way planted on both
sides, with shady Ash-trees, whose spreading green tops lenefies the scorching
heat of the Sun: At the end of each eight miles is a fair, and convenient lodge
built for travelers to repose themselves in: Herb. Trav. p. 69. Pur. Pil. v.
2. p. 1468.

Brampore in the same Country, is a City seated low, and in an unhealthful
plain, very large, and spacious, and inhabited most by the Bannians: the
streets are many and narrow; the houses not high, and but meanly beautiful. In
the North-East end it has a Castle standing by the Rivers side, large and
defensive: In the River is an Artificial Elephant, so skilfully shaped, that by
the Bannians it is adored, and by others admired. Idem.

Fettipore, if the water were good, it had triumphed over all the Cities in
India; It is walled about, and to the North, North West, has a lake, or fish
pond five miles over: The North East has a fair Buzzar, or market place five
hundred paces long, well paved, and built on all sides with pleasant houses: At
one end is the Mogols house, and a Mohol most excellently framed; the other
side is glorious by a curious Mosque, or Church ascended by thirty steps,
adorned with a brave gate: the top is full of Pyramids, the Court within is six
times bigger than the Royal Exchange in London, excellently paved with free
stone, the Isles are large and well paved, the Pillars all of one stone, and
beautiful: and affronting this Gate is a most sumptuous Monument, covered with
painting, and Pearl-shell: proud in the many Princes there buried. Idem.

Candahor is seated in a reasonable fruitful Country, redundant in all good
things, yet by reason of so many Caravans passing, and repassing from Lahore to
Persia, all sorts of provision is very dear, and the passage much pestered with
thieves: the City is not very spacious but strong, made defensive by many helps
of Nature, and Art: In the South, and East; its surrounded with an advantageous
wall: In the West, and North, with high and precipitious Mountains: the Suburbs
are large, adding to the City both beauty and Wealth. Idem.

Mandow is a City both ancient, and famous, seated on the side of a lofty and
steep hill, and beautified with a strong and stately Castle, encompassed with a
defensive wall of five miles compass; the City is very beautiful, adorned with
Temples (in one of which are buried four Kings) Palaces, Fortresses, especially
with a Tower ascended by one hundred and seventy steps, supported by Massy
Pillars, and adorned with gates and Windows very observable. Idem.

Surat is at this day a City, great, famous, rich, and populous; yet neither
air, nor soil agrees with strangers; the one being extreme hot, the other
sandy, and sulphurious. From June to September the clouds shower down
continually unhealthful rains, the wind and thunder so commixing, that no place
in the world seems more unhealthful: Its counted the third best Town in the
Guiarat Kingdom: Amadavar, and Cambaya excelling her: Its watered with a sweet
River called Tappee, which arising out of the Decan mountains, glides through
Brampore, and so to Surat. Its circled with a mud-wall, a strong stone Castle
is built at the South-West side, the River washing it: the West opens into the
Buzzar through a fair gate of stone: The Medan is of no great beauty, nor do
the shops give any splendour. The houses are indifferently beautiful, some of
carved wood, others of Brick: the English, and Dutch houses at the North end,
excelling the other for bigness, and furniture: adjoining to one gate is a
Tank of water, made of good freestone, circling in above one hundred sides, or
angles, in compass near one thousand paces.

Agra is the navel of the Mogols territories, and Empress of India: Its
watered by the River Jeminey, which from Delly glides hither, and commixing
with Ganges, flows into the Bengalan Sea: Its in shape like an half Moon; the
streets long, and narrow, and nasty, of seven miles continuance: part of it is
walled about, the rest ditcht. Here the Great Mogol has a Palace, wherein are
two large towers, at least ten foot square, which are covered with Plates of
the purest gold.

Asmeer is seated upon an high impregnable mount, the greater part of the City
being below, fairly built, walled with good stone, and moated about: the
Country about it is Champaigne and very fruitful.

The Kingdom of Bengala Described.
Bengala is a very large Kingdom, lying along the Seacoast one hundred and
twenty leagues, and as much into the land: Its watered by the River Cabaris,
called by some Guenga. It abounds with Rice, Wheat, Sugar, Ginger, long
Pepper, Cotton, and Silk, and enjoys a very wholesome air. Gouro is the Regal
City, spacious, and beautiful; and so is Bengala, which has given name to that
part of the Sea called the Gulf of Bengala: Chatigan is also another of their
Cities. The inhabitants are a most subtle, and wicked people: Men, and Women
given much to uncleanness; they never dress or sees meat twice in one pot,
but every time have a new one. Adultery is punished with the loss of their
noses. In this Country are many Rhinocroces. It is now subject to the Great
Mogol.

Cambaia described.
Cambaia is called also G^sarat, containing in length from the River Bate to
Circam, which is a Country belonging to Persia, five hundred miles upon the
Seacoasts: On all other parts its environed with the Kingdoms of Dulcinda,
and Sanga on the North: Mandao on the East; and with the Gredosians on the
West; the Sea* and the confines of Decan being the Southerly bounds. It has
in it sixty thousand Cities, and villages. Its watered with many Rivers,
whereof Indus is the chief, which divides it in the middle, arising from
Caucasus, and after a course of nine hundred miles, at two mouths disembogues
it self into the Ocean. Its a fertile Country, not inferior to any other in
India: the earth and trees bring forth plenty, and variety of fruits: It has
store of Elephants, precious stones, Silk, Cotton, etc. The people are of an
Olive color, and go naked, except about their privities: They eat no flesh,
but Rice, Barley, milk, and other liveless Creatures; their chief Sea-Towns are
Daman, Bandora, Curate, Ravellum, and Bazuinum; and within land, Cambaia,
Madabar, Campanel, Tanaa, etc. Cambaia being the chiefest, situate three miles
from Indus: Its called the Indian Cairo, having much trafick to it by Indians,
Portugals, Persians, Arabians, Armenians, etc. The Women dye their teeth
black, thinking it a great part of their beauty, and therefore always go with
open lips to show it. When men die they burn their bodies, and their wives
dressed as for a wedding, burn with them.

Six leagues from Decan is a Hill out of which Diamonds are taken; it is walled
about, and kept with a Garrison: Their Religion is partly Moorish, partly
Heathenish. They have Hospitals for sick, or lame Birds, Beasts, etc. yea they
redeem Beasts, and Birds lives, and if maimed, or hurt, carry them to their
Hospitals. In the high ways, and woods they set pots with water, and scatter
meat to feed them. If they catch a Flea, or a Louse, they will not kill it, but
let it go: and you can do them no greater injury, than to kill either in their
presence; and if by entreaty they cannot persuade you to forbear, they will
redeem its life with money. They drink no Wine, eat no Vinegar, use water only;
they will eat no Eggs, as supposing blood to be in them; they are very careful
before they sit down, that no living Creature be under them. Pur. Pilgrimage.

The Philippine Islands described.
The Philippine Islands were discovered by the Spaniards out of new Spain, Anno
Christi 1542. who in honor of their King Philip the second, gave them that
name: They are many in number, lying far into the Sea before Cauchin-China, and
Chambaia: some of them are great, and very rich in Rice, Honey, Fruits, Birds,
Beasts, Fishes, Gold, etc. and enriched more by trade from China: seventy of
these Islands are subjects, or friends to the Spaniards, their intestine
divisions making an easy way to the Spanish Conquest. They worshipped the Sun,
and Moon. Now they have amongst them many Monasteries of Friars, and Jesuits:
But the wicked lives of the Spaniards, makes the Inhabitants abhor their
Religion: They carve, and cut their skins in sundry fashions, and devises, all
over their body.

The Island of Mauritius described.
The Island of Mauritius lies within the torrid Zone, about one hundred Leagues
from Madegascar. It abounds with all good things, requisite for man's use: The
land is high, and mountainous; the shape somewhat round; in circuit about one
hundred miles, every where sweet, and flourishing; having an healthful air, and
the blooming fragrant trees abating the heat of the Sun: besides the gentle
Breezes moderating the weather: There are delicious Rivers which make the Earth
fruitful: Infinite store of lofty spreading trees, green all the year; their
boughs being never unapparrelled of their Summer livery: The ground is ever
spread with natures choicest Tapestry, the mirthful Sun ever re-inforcing a
continued vigor, and activity: Of the trees, some are good for timber, others
for food; all for use: Here is store of Box, and of Ebony of all sorts, black,
white, red, and yellow: the tree is high, small, and straight: and the wood of
such esteem, that many ships come yearly to it to load with Ebony; besides
which, there are Coquo trees, Pines, Ashes, Cypresses, etc. As also store of
rare fruits: birds, and fowl: Hawks of all kinds: Bats as big as Gos-hawks,
Passo-Flemingos, Herons, Geese, and many others, good in their flesh, and
excellent in their feathers: Fish there are plenty, as the Cow-fish, Dolphins,
Abicores, Cavalloes, VVhale, Porpice, Grampasse, Mullet, Bream, Trout, Tench,
Soles, Flounders, Tortoises, Eeles, Sharks, Pikes, Crabs, Lobsters, Oysters,
Cuttle-fish, Rock-fish, and other strange fishes: some like Hedg-hogs; some
like Cats, others with bristles, etc. This Isle also affords Goats, Hogs,
Beeves, and land Tortoises so big, that two men may sit on one of them, and
she will go away with them.

Africa described in General.
Africa is divided on the North from Europe, by the Mediterranean Sea: On the
South it runs on a point to the Cape of Good Hope, and is bounded with the vast
Ocean, called there the Aethiopick Sea: On the East with the Red Sea; and on
the West with the Atlantic Ocean, called Mare del Nort, so that her longitude
and latitude contains about four thousand and two hundred English miles. Its
much less than Asia, and far bigger than Europe.

In most parts its very barren, and therefore has no great plenty of
Inhabitants. Its full of sandy deserts* which lying open to the winds, and
storms, are often moved like to the waves of the Sea, by which means Cambysis
with his Army was much hazarded. Its full of venomous Serpents, which much
endanger the Inhabitants; besides other ravenous beasts, which ranging about,
possess themselves of a great part of this Country, and make it a Wilderness
of Lions, Leopards, Elephants, and in some places Crocodiles, Hyena's,
Basilisks, and Monsters without number, and name: for when, for want of water,
Creatures of all kinds, at sometimes of the year come to those few rivolets
that be, to quench their thirst; the Males promiscuously forcing the Females
of every species that comes next him, produces this variety of forms. Salust
reports that there dye more of the people by beasts, than by diseases: And in
the tracts of Barbary, the Inhabitants every tenth, fifteenth, or five and
twentieth year, are visited with a Plague, and with the French disease in such
violence, that few recover, except they remove into Numidia, or the land of
Negros, the very air whereof is an excellent Antidote against those diseases.

Their commodities are Elephants, Camels, Barbary-ho^ses, Rams with great tails
weighing above twenty pound, etc.

Africa is divided into seven parts. Barbary, or Mauritania: Numidia, Lybia,
The land of Blacks: Aethiopia superior: Aethiopia inferior: and Egypt, besides
the Islands.

Barbary has on the North the Mediterranean Sea: on the West the Atlantic:
on the South the mountain Atlas, and on the East Egypt. The Inhabitants are
crafty, covetous, ambitious, jealous of their Wives: their Country yields
Orenges, Dates, Olives, Figs, and a kind of Goat; whose hair makes a stuff as
fine as Silk. It contains in it the Kingdoms of Tunnis, Algier, Fess, and
Morocho.

Tunnis is famous for the chief City of the same name, five miles in compass;
and Carthage, two and twenty miles in circuit, that contended so long with Rome
for the Monarchy of the world; and Utica memorable for Catoes death there.

Algier contains in it a strong harbor for Turkish Pirates: before the chief
Town whereof the Emperor Charles the fifth received a mighty loss of ships,
Horses, Ordinance, and men.

Fess has in it a City with seven hundred Churches, one of which is a mile and
an half in compass.

Morocho, where the chief City of the same name has a Church larger than that
of Fess, and thereon a Tower so high, that from thence may be discerned the
to^ of the Mountains Azaci which are at one hundred and thirty miles distance.

Here is also a Castle famous for Globes of pure gold that stand on the top of
it, weighing one hundred and thirty thousand Barbary Ducke^^.

Numidia, the second part of Africa has on the East Egypt: on the West the
Atlantic Ocean: on the North the Mountain Atlas, and on the South the deserts
of Lybia: Its called also the Region of Dates from the abundance that grows
there. The Inhabitants are very wicked: stay in a place but till they have
eaten down the grass: Hence there are but few Cities, and those in some places
three hundred miles distant.

Lybia on the East is bounded with Nilus, on the West with the Atlantic: on
the North with Numidia; and on the South with the Country of the Blacks: Its so
dry, that a traveller can scarce meet with any water in seven days journey;
the Inhabitants live without any Law, almost so much as that of nature.

The Land of Blacks, or Negroes, has on the West the Atlantic; on the East
Aethiopia superior; on the North Lybia; and on the South the Kingdom of
Manicongo. The River Niger runs through it, almost as famous as Nilus for her
overflowing: It yields store of gold, silver, Ivory, and other commodities. It
has in it four Kingdoms: Tombu^o, infinitely rich. Bornaum, where the people
have no names proper; no wives peculiar; all therefore no children which they
call their own. Gonga, the King whereof has no estate but from his subjects as
he spends it. And Gualatum, a very poor Country.

Of this Land of Negroes one makes these verses.

The Land of Negroes is not far from thence,
nearer extended to the Atlantic main,
Wherein the Black Prince keeps his residence,
attended by his Jetty-coloured train;
Who in their native beauty most delight,
And in contempt do paint the Devil white.
Aethiopia superior; or the Kingdom of the Abyssines. Is bounded on the North
with Egypt; on the South with the Mountains of the Moon; on the East with the
Red Sea, and on the West with the Country of the Blacks. The King hereof is
called Prete Janny, or Presbyter John: they are mungril Christians: The King
has under him seventy petty Kings, which have their several laws, and
customs: The Country yields Orenges, Lemmons, Citrons, Barley, Sugar, Honey,
etc.

Aethiopia inferior is on every side begirt with the Sea, except on the North,
which is bounded with the Mountains of the Moon. It consists of five Kingdoms;
1 Aiana which abounds with Gold, Ivory, Honey, Wax, Corn, large sheep, etc. 2
Zanguabar in which is Mosambique. 3 Monomopata, wherein are plenty of Gold
Mines. The King is served with great pomp, and has a guard of two hundred
Mastiffs. 4 Cafraria, in which is the cape of Good hope: always stormy to the
Spaniards; whence one was very angry with God, for suffering the English
Heretics to pass by it so easily, and not giving his good Catholics the like
speed. 5 Manicongo, where in many parts the Inhabitants are men-eaters, selling
such flesh in their Shambles.

Egypt has on the East the Red Sea, on the West Barbary: on the North the
Mediterranean and Aethiopia superior on the South. It was called the Granary of
the World: for though it has rain but seldom, yet Nilus overflowing makes it
very fruitful: the chief Cities; are Grand Cairo, and Alexandria: see afterward
a more full description of it.

The Islands belonging to Africa Described.
The Atlantic Islands are 1. that of Saint Thomas, lying directly under the
Aequinoctiall line, inhabited by the Portugalls, and yiedling plenty of Sugar.
2. Prince Island, lying between the Equator and Tropic of Capricorn: a
fertile place. 3. The Gorgades being nine in number, lying near to Cape Virde:
they abound in Goats, and the chief of them is called St. James. 4. The
Canaries, for their fruitfulness called, The fortunate Islands: they are seven
in number, the chief is called the Grand Canary, they yield excellent wines. 5.
The Hesperides, not far from the Gorgades, where the soil is very fruitful; the
weather continually fair, and the air very temperate.

The Aethiopick Islands are

1. The Island of Saint Laurence, or Madagascar; which is four thousand miles
in compass, and longer than Italy, rich in all commodities for man's use: The
people are very barbarous, and most of them black, yet there is some white
amongst them, supposed to be transplanted out of China.

2. Socatrina, or Socotera, which lies at the mouth of the Red Sea, and is
sixty miles in length, and twenty five in breadth: Its very dry and barren, yet
has diverse good drugs in it. From thence comes our Aloes Socotrina.

The Principal Countries in Africa more largely Described.
Africa is usually divided into 1 Egypt. 2 Barbary. 3 Numidia. 4 Lybia. 5 The
land of Negro's. 6 Aethiopia interior. 7 Aethiopia exterior. 8 And the Islands,
as was aforesaid.

A more full Description of Egypt.
This Country of Egypt contains in length from Siene to the Mediterranean
Sea, five hundred sixty and two miles, and in breadth from Rosetta to Damietta
above one hundred and forty miles: yet in some places its not above thirty
seven miles broad: The Inhabitants are tawny, and brown. From its fruitfulness
it was called Horreum Populi Romani: The Roman Granary, where Lucan says.

The Earth content with its own wealth, does crave
No foreign Marts: nor Jove himself: they have
There hopes alone in Nilus fruitful wave.
Dr. Heilen. This Nilus is divided toward the Sea, into seven Channels. It
swells above its banks by the space of forty days, beginning upon the 15th
day of June, and is forty days more decreasing, and returning into its banks.
During this inundation, the Cattle live on hills, and in the Towns, unto which
they are aforehand driven, and foddered till the return of the water into its
Channel. The Towns, and Villages stand all upon tops of hills, and in the time
of the flood appear like so many Islands: and the people by boats have free
intercourse all the while. In the mud left upon the fields, are many creatures
engendered by the heat of the Sun: Whence Ovid, And when the seven mouthed Nile
the fields forsakes,
And to his ancient Channel him betakes:
The tillers of the ground live creatures find
Of sundry shapes, inth' mud that is left behind.
Dr. Heilen.

This River is almost three thousand miles long, and being the only River of
Egypt, affords the only drink to the Egyptians, and indeed its very good water.
The Paper made of Sedges, called Papiri growing by this River, afforded Ptolemy
Philadelphus materials for Books in that brave Library of Alexandria: but
understanding that Attalus, King of Pergamus, used this Egyptian Paper, for to
exceed him in another Library, he prohibited the carrying of it out of Egypt,
whereupon Attalus invented Parchment, called from his City Pergamena: and
before these inventions, they wrote either on the inside of the bark of a tree
called Liber, whence we call our Books Libri, Or on Tables made of wood,
called Caudex, whence came our Codex. Or on Tables covered over with wax:
whence Tabellarius is a letter Carryer: and the pin which they wrote with, was
called Stylus, which was afterward used for that peculiar phrase used by any:
as Negligens Stylus: exercitatus Stylus. Sometimes they wrote in leaves, as the
Sybils did their Prophesies, called Sybillae folia: whence we call it a leaf of
paper.

Pharos is a little Island over against Alexandria, in which Ptolemaeus
Philadelphus built a watchtower for the benefit of Saylors: the chief workman
was Sostratus of Gnidos. It was all of white Marble, of a wonderful height,
ascended by degrees, and in the top were many Lanthorns with lights in the
night, to direct those that traveled by Sea; for the admirable structure, it
was counted one of the wonders of the world.

The chief Cities in Egypt described, The Grand Cairo described.
The Grand Cairo in Egypt is accounted one of the greatest Cities in the world.
It is situated upon a most beautiful plain, near unto a certain. Mountain
called Mucatun, about two miles from the River Nilus, It Is invirond with
stately walls, and fortified with Iron Gates. In it are built most stately and
admirable Palaces, and Colleges, and most sumptuous Temples. There are also
many Bath stoves, very artificially built: It abounds with all sorts of
Merchandise out of all parts of the World. There is in it a famous Burse
[Exchange] called Canen Halili, wherein the Persian Merchants dwell; It Is built
very stately in the manner of a King's Palace, of three stories high: Beneath
it are many rooms, whither Merchants resort for the exchange of their costly
wares; as all sorts of Spices, precious stones, Cloth of India, etc. There is
also a stately Hospital, the yearly revenues whereof, amount to two hundred
thousand pieces of gold called Saraffi. The Suburbs are very large, wherein
also are many stately buildings, especially a College being of a wonderful
height, and great strength: Besides many other Palaces, Colleges, and Temples.
Here they have great store of poultry: For in certain Ovens built upon sundry
lofts they put abundance of Eggs; which Ovens being kept in a moderate heat,
will in seven days hatch all those eggs into chickens. P. Pil.

There are in it eighteen thousand streets. It is so populous, that its reputed
in very good health, if there dye but a thousand a day, or thirty hundred
thousand in a year. I mean when the Plague; which comes once in seven years, is
amongst them. Heil.

In one of the streets are about threescore Cooks shops: then follow other
shops, wherein are to be sold delicate waters, and drinks made of all kinds of
fruits, which are kept charily in fine vessels: next to these are shops, where
diverse confections of honey, and Sugar, like to ours in Europe, are to be
sold: Then follow the Fruiterers shops, who have Outlandish fruits out of
Syria, as Quinces, Pomgranats, etc. Next to them are shops wherein they sell
Eggs, Cheese and Pancakes fried with Oil: Next is a street, wherein all manner
of Artificers dwell: Then there are diverse ranks of Drapers shops; In the
first rank they sell excellent fine linen, fine cloth of Cotton, and cloth
called Mosal, of a mavelous breadth and finenesse, whereof the greatest
persons make shirts, and scarfs to wear upon their Tulipants: Then are Mercers
shops, wherein they sell Silks, Damask, Cloth of Gold, and Velvet brought out
of Italy: The next are woollen Drapers, with all sorts of European cloth: next
of all are store of Chamblets to be sold. At the gate of Zuaila dwell great
store of Artificers. Next to the forenamed Burse is a street of shops, where
are all kind of Perfumes, as Civet, Musk, Ambergreece, etc. Next follows the
street of Paper Merchants, with most excellent smooth Paper: There are also to
be sold precious stones, and Jewels of great value, which the Brokers carry
from shop to shop: Then come you to the Goldsmiths street, inhabited mostly by
Jews, who deal in rich commodities: Then are there Upholsters, and Brokers who
sell apparel, and rich furniture at the second hand, as Cloaks, Coats, Nappery,
etc.

It has many large Suburbs, as that of Bed Zuaila, containing about twelve
thousand Families, being a mile and an half in length. The Suburb called Gem^li
Tailon, adorned with a most admirable Palace, and sumptuous Temple: where also
dwell great store of Merchants, and Artificers. The Suburb called Bell Elloch,
containing near three thousand Families, inhabited by Merchants, and Artizans
of diverse sorts; there is also a great Palace, and a stately College: Here
are many stage players, and such as teach Camels, Asses, and Dogs to dance,
very delightful to behold. The Suburb Bulach upon the Bank of Nilus, contains
four thousand Families: here are many Artificers, and Merchants, especially
such as sell Corn, Oil, Sugar, etc. Its also full of stately Temples,
Colleges, and Hospitalls; under this Suburb you may sometimes see above a
thousand Barks upon the River, The Suburb of Caresa contains about two thousand
Families: Here are many Sepulchers built with high and stately vaults, and
Arches; adorned within with diverse Emblems, and colors, the pavement spread
with sumptuous, and rich Carpets.

The Inhabitants of Cairo in the Winter time, wear garments of cloth lined with
Cotton: In the summer they wear fine shirts, over which some have linen
garments, curiously wrought with silk: others wear Chamblet, and great Turbants
on their heads, covered with cloth of India: The women go in costly attire,
having on their foreheads frontlets, and about their necks chains of Pearl: on
their heads they wear a sharp, and slender Bonnet, about a span high very
precious, and rich, their Gowns are of woollen cloth with strait sleeves,
curiously imbroidered with needle work, over which they cast veils of excellent
fine cloth of India: their faces are covered with a black scarff: on their feet
they wear fine shoes, or Pantoffles, etc.

The City of Alexandria described.
The great City of Alexandria, was founded by Alexander the great, not without
the advice of most famous, and skilful Architects, upon a beautiful point of
land stretching into the Mediterranean Sea, being distant forty miles, Westward
from Nilus: It was most sumptuously, and strongly built, four square, with four
Gates for entrance: One on the East Side toward Nilus: Another on the South
toward the Lake of Buchaira: the third Westward toward the Desert of Barca:
and the fourth toward the Haven. Near unto the City walls, are two other
gates, which are divided asunder by a fair walk, and a most impregnable Castle
which stands upon the Wharf, in which Port the best ships out of these parts of
the World ride: Here the Christians pay a tenth of all their wares, whereas the
Mahometans, pay but a twentieth part. At this time that part of the City that
lies toward Cairo is best inhabited, and furnished with Merchandise, and so is
the other part that lies next to the Haven: under each house in the City is a
great vaulted Cistern, built upon mighty Pillars, and Arches, whereinto at the
overflowing of Nilus, the water is conveyed, under the City walls, by a most
artificial Sluice, that stands without them. The City stands in a sandy Desert,
so that its destitute of Gardens, Vines, and Corn, but what is brought from
places at forty miles distance.

The City of Rosetto Described.
Rosetto was built by a Slave to one of the Mohammedan Governors, upon the
Eastern bank of Nilus, three miles from the Mediterranean Sea, and not far from
the place where Nilus emptieth it self into the sea: In it is a stately
Bath-stove, having fountains both of cold, and hot water belonging thereunto.

The City of Thebe Described.
Thebe at this present contains but about three hundred Families ^ but the
buildings are very stately and sumptuous. It abounds with Corn, Rice, and
Sugar, with a certain fruit of a most excellent taste, called Muse: It has in
it great store of Merchants, and Artificers: The Country about it, abounds
with Date-trees, which grow so thick, that a man cannot see the City till he
comes near the Walls: Here grow also store of Grapes, Figs, and Peaches: Over
against the City the River of Nilus makes an Isle, which standing high, brings
forth all sorts of fruits but Olives.

The City of Chanca described.
The great City of Chanca is about six miles from Cairo, at the very entrance
into the Desert, through which is the way to Mount Sinai: Its replenished with
most stately houses, Temples, and Colleges: All the fields between Cairo, and
it, are full of Dates. From Chanca to Mount Sinai are one hundred and forty
miles, in all which way there is no habitation: Through this City lie the two
main roads, one leading to Syria, and the other to Arabia: They have no water,
but what remains in certain channels after the inundation of Nilus. In the
other Cities there is nothing remarkable.

The Egyptian Pyramids Described.
In Egypt are diverse stupendous structures called Pyramids, the greatest
whereof is situated on the top of a rocky hill, which rises above the plain
about an hundred feet, with a gentle, and easy ascent, the height of the
situation adding beauty to the work, and the solidity of the rock giving the
superstructure a permanent, and stable support: each side of this Pyramid is
six hundred ninety three feet according to the English Standard; so that the
whole Basis contains four hundred eighty thousand two hundred, and forty nine
square feet, or eleven English acres of ground. The height is the same with the
breadth: viz. six hundred ninety three feet.

The ascent to the top is contrived in this manner: From all the sides without,
the ascent is by degrees; the lowermost step or degree is about four foot in
height, and three in breadth, which running about the Pyramid in a level, makes
on every side of it a long, but narrow walk; the second row is like the first,
retiring inward from the first three feet, and so runs about the Pyramid. In
the same manner is the third row placed above the second, and so in order the
rest like so many stairs rising one above another to the top, which contains
about nine foot square. The degrees by which men ascend are not all of an equal
depth, for some are about four foot, others scarcely three, and the higher they
ascend, the more they diminish, both in breadth, and thickness: so that a
right line extended from any part of the Basis to the top, will equally touch
the outward angle of every degree.

These are all made of Massy, and polished stones, hewn out of the Arabian
Mountains, which bound the upper part of Egypt, being so vast, that the breadth
and depth of every step, is one single and entire stone, so that in most of
them is contained thirty feet of stone: The number of these steps is two
hundred and seven.

On the North side ascending thirty eight feet upon an artificial bank of
earth, there is a square, and narrow passage, leading into the inside of this
Pyramid, containing in length ninety two feet, and an half: The structure of it
has been the labor of an exquisite hand, as appears by the smoothness and
evennesse of the work, and by the close knitting of the joints: it is now an
habitation for great ugly batts of about a foot long.

At the end of this entrance you must climb up a massy stone, eight or nine
foot in height, where you enter into a Gallery, the pavement consisting of
smooth, and polished white Marble* the breadth is about five foot, and the
height the like: the length of this Gallery is an hundred, and ten feet: At the
end whereof begins a second Gallery, a very stately piece of work, and not
inferior either in respect of the curiousity of Art, or richness of
materials, to the most sumptuous or magnificent buildings: Its divided from the
former by a wall; at the end whereof is a Well about three feet in the
diameter, the sides whereof are lined with white Marble, its eighty six cubits
in depth, hewn through the Rock on which the Pyramid stands* Beyond the Well
about fifteen foot is a square passage, the stones whereof are exceeding
massy, and exquisitely joined, which contains one hundred and ten feet, at the
end whereof is an arched Vault, or little Chamber; the length about twenty
feet, the breadth seventeen, the height about fifteen.

The length of this second Gallery before mentioned is one hundred fifty and
four feet, of white, and polished Marble, both roof, walls, and bottom; the
joints are so well knit, that they are scarce discernable: The height of this
Gallery is twenty six feet, the breadth six feet, bounded on both sides with
two banks, like benches of polished Marble.

At the end of this Gallery you enter into a square hole which brings you into
a little room lined with rich, and speckled Thebaick Marble, out of which
through another passage, being all of Thebaick Marble; most exquisitely cut,
you land at the North end of a very sumptuous, and well proportioned room,
wherein Art seems to contend with Nature, the curious work not being inferior
to the rich materials: It stands in the heart, or center of the Pyramid,
equidistant from all the sides, and in the midst between the Basis, and the
top: The floor, sides, and roof, are all made of vast, and exquisite tables of
Thebaick Marble: from the top to the bottom are but six ranges of stone, all
of an equal height. The stones which cover this room are of a strange, and
stupendous length, like so many huge beams lying flat, and traversing the
room, and bearing up that infinite weight, and Mass of the Pyramid above. Of
these there are nine which cover the roof; the length of this room is thirty
four English feet: the breadth somewhat above seventeen feet, the height
nineteen feet and a half.

In the midst of this glorious room stands the Tomb of Cheops of one piece of
Marble, hollow within, and sounding like a bell; but empty: For (says
Diodorus) although the Egyptian Kings intended these for their Sepulchers, yet
it happened that they were not buried therein: For the people being exasperated
against them, by reason of the toilsomenesse of these works, and for their
cruelty, and oppression, threatened to tear in pieces their dead bodies, and
with ignominy to throw them out of their Sepulchers, wherefore the^ commanded
their friends when they were dead to bury them in some obscure place. The Tomb
is cut smooth, and plain, without any sculpture, and ingraving: The outsides
contain in length seven foot, three inches, and a half. In depth its three
foot, and almost four inches, and the same in breadth: The hollow part within
is something more than six foot long, the depth is somewhat above two feet;
whereby it appears that men's bodies are now as big as they were three thousand
years ago: For it is almost so long since this Tomb was made. This Pyramid was
twenty years in making, and yet there were three hundred threescore, and six
thousand men continually working about it, who only in Radishes, Garlic; and
Onions are said to have consumed eighteen hundred Talents. Collected out of Mr.
Greaves, a curious observer of it.

The Egyptian Mummi's described.
Not far from this Pyramid in Egypt are the Mummi's, which were the graves of
the ancient Egyptians, into which are discents not unlike to the narrow mouths
of Wells, some near ten fathomes deep, leading into long vaults, hewn out of
the Rock with pillars of the same. Between every Arch lie the Corpses ranked
one by another of all sizes, which are innumerable, shrouded in a number of
folds of Linen, and swathed with bands of the same, the breasts of diverse
being stained with Hierogliphical Characters: The Linen being pulled off, the
bodies appear solid, incorrupt, and perfect in all their dimensions; whereof
the musculous parts are of a brown color, hard as stone-pitch, and has in
Physic the like operation; only more sovereign.

To keep these from putrefactions, they drew the brains out at the nostrils
with an Iron instrument, replenishing the head with preservative spices: then
cutting up the belly with an Ethiopian stone, they took forth the bowels,
cleansed the inside with Wine, and so stuffing it with a composition of Myrrh,
Cassia, and other odours, they closed it up again: The like the poorer sort
effected with Bitumen, fetched from the Lake of Asphaltites in Jury, whereby
they have been preserved till this day, having lain there for about three
thousand years.

The Lake of Maeris described.
Maeris, one of the Egyptian Kings, undertook, and finished that most admirable
Lake, which for greatness, and color is like a Sea: Its about six hundred
furlongs from the City of Memphis, the circumference of it, contains M.M.M.DC.
furlongs, the depth of it is fifty fathom, or three hundred feet; many myriads
of men were employed for many years about it.

The benefit of it to the Egyptians, and the wisdom of the King cannot be
sufficiently commended: For seeing the rising of Nilus is not always alike,
and the Country is more fruitful by the moderatenesse thereof: He dug this
Lake to receive the superfluity of the water, that neither by the greatness of
the inundation, it should cause Marshes, or by the scarcity of water, the earth
should not yield her strength, he therefore cut a ditch from the River to this
Lake fourscore furlongs long, and three hundred feet in breadth, by which
sometimes receiving in, and sometimes diverting the River, he gave at his
pleasure a sufficient quantity of water to the husbandmen. After the Kings
name, its called the Lake of Maeris.

In the midst of this Lake he built a Sepulcher, and two Pyramids, each of
them of an hundred fathoms high, placing upon them two Marble statues, sitting
on a Throne, one representing himself, the other his wife; seeking hereby to
make his memory immortal. The revenews which came by the fish of this Lake, he
gave to his wife to buy her unguents, and ornaments, which was so great, that
it amounted to a Talent a day: For it was mightily replenished with fish of
twenty sorts, so that very many were continually employed in catching, and
salting of them. Diod. Sion. Herod.

Barbary described.
Barbary has on the East Cyrenaica: on the West the Atlantic Ocean; On the
North the Mediterranean Sea; and on the South the Mountain Atlas. Its now
usually divided into the Kingdoms of Tunnis, Algiers, Fess, and Morocco. It
produces Figs, Olives, Dates, Sugar, and horses excellent for shape, and
service. The men are comely of feature, of a duskish color, stately of gate,
implacable in hatred, laborious, and treacherous. The women are rich in Jewels,
beautiful in blackness, and have delicate soft skins.

The Kingdom of Tunis described.
Tunis has on the East Cyrenaica, and on the West Algier: It contains all
that which the Ancients called Numidia antiqua: The soil is fertile, especially
the Western part: The Inhabitants are healthful, seldom vexed with any
sickness; its divided commonly into five parts.

1 Ezzab in the East, having many Towns and Regions in it.

2 Tripolis, where the chief City is of the same name; and where the Great Turk
has a Bassa, or Viceroy: Its at this day a receptacle of Pirates, that rove
and rob in those Seas. Anno Christi 1551. It was won from the Knights of
Malta by Sinan Bassa.

3 Tunis, where the chief City of the same name stands, near to the ruins of
Carthage: It has in it about ten thousand households, and many Temples, and
especially one of singular beauty, and greatness. Cairoan also has been a
famous City six and thirty miles from the Sea, and one hundred from Tunis;
where is an admirable Temple built upon Pillars of Marble.

4 Constantina, having the chief City of the same name, wherein a^ eight
thousand families, and many sumptuous buildings, a great Temple, and two
Colleges.

5 Bugia, which for one hundred and fifty miles space extends it self by the
Sea side to the River Major; the Principal City is called Bugia, sometimes
adorned with Temples, Hospitals, Monasteries, and Colleges of students in the
Mohammedan Law. There is also in Bugia, Necotus a very pleasant City; and
Chollo, very rich. In this Country also is seated Bona, formerly called Hippo,
where St. Augustine was Bishop.

The Kingdom of Algier described.
Algier formerly called Mauritania Caesariensis, is bounded on the East with
Tunis, on the West with Fess, and Morocco. It has in it five Principal
Cities. 1 Hubeda. 2 Tegdenit. 3 Guagido. 4 Telesine, which sometimes contained
sixteen thousand families, and is adorned with many beautiful Temples, and has
in it five dainty Colleges, curiously wrought with Mosaic work. And 5 Algier.

The City of Algier described.
Algier is seated on the Mediterranean Sea, upon the side of an hill, whereby
one house hinders not the prospect of another: Its in fashion like a Bow: the
old Town is in compass three thousand four hundred paces: the Island wherein
it stands is walled about, except that part which is open to the Port, and
City; where lately they have erected a five cornered Tower to secure both: Its
well strengthened with Turrets, Fortresses, and Bulworks: without the Wall is a
ditch of sixteen paces broad: without the Town there are three Castles: the
Streets are generally narrow, and in the Winter Dirty: The Houses toward the
street are dark: but being inwardly built with square Cloisters, it makes them
light: the roofs being flat serve them for galleries and Prospect: In the
midst is a well, but the water brackish: they use no chimnies, but make fires
in Panns. The Kings Palace, and great men's houses have spacious Courts, with
specious Pillars about, and many by-rooms spread with Mats, and Carpets, their
Custom being to put off their shoes when they enter.

Their household furniture is generally mean: their common lodging is upon a
Mat, or Carpet upon the ground: Pelts are their Nappery, water their drink,
Rice with pulse their meat, etc. five Cisterns without the City supply them
with water, fetched in upon the shoulders of their slaves: There are seven fair
Mosques, five Colleges of Janissaries, where six hundred of them live together
in one house. One Hospital, four fair Baths, whereof two for washing with hot,
and cold water, paved with Marble: Two Royal Porches, one of thirty six foot
square, with columes for the Janissaries, and the other is before the Palace:
within the Walls are near thirteen thousand houses, many of them containing
thirty Families, and some more: There are in all above one hundred Mosques,
besides the Oratories of Hermites: Sixty two Baths, fourscore and six Schools,
wherein children learn to read, and write, and a few others for the Alcoran: In
the Suburbs are fourteen thousand six hundred ninety eight Gardens, each having
Christian Slaves to keep them: yea there is scarce a family in the City,
wherein they have not one or more Christian Slaves of both Sexes: Besides in
the Kings Prison are commonly two thousand, and two or three thousand more in
their Galleys, so that in all, there are seldom fewer than thirty thousand of
these poor slaves. See what misery these poor captives endure before in the
Chapter of Cruelty.

Fesse and Morocco described.
Fesse and Morocco, formerly called Mauritania Tingitana, have on the East
Algiers; On the West the Atlantic Ocean: and are parted one from the other by
the River Omiramble: The other principal Rivers in them are Tensilt, Sus, Suba,
and Lyssus.

Fesse is divided into seven Provinces, in the which the chief City is Fesse,
so called from the abundance of Gold that was found at the laying of the
foundation of it.

The City of Fesse Described.
The City of Fesse is both great, and strong: the soil about it, is diversified
with little Hills, and pretty valleys, which make it very pleasant: The River
near it disperseth it self into many channels, and when it enters into the
City, it divides it self into two arms, and these again are subdivided into
variety of watercourse, passing through every street, and by pipes under
ground is carried into every Temple, College, Inn, Hospital, and almost into
every private house, whereby it carries away all the silth that might annoy
either the sight or sent. The buildings are of Mosaick-work, with fine bricks,
and stones framed after a most curious manner, lovely for delight, and stately
for admiration. The roofes of the houses are adorned with Gold, Azure, and
other excellent colors: on the top they are flat for the Inhabitants use and
pleasure: within they are richly furnished, every Chamber having in it a Press
curiously painted, and varnished. The Portals, Pillars, Cisterns, and other
Ornaments of the City are very exquisitly framed: There are of Temples in it
about seven hundred, whereof fifty are very great, and fair, adorned with
Marble Pillars, and other Ornaments, the Chapiters whereof are wrought with
Mosaic and carved works: each of them has his Fountain of Marble, and other
costly stones: the floores are covered with Mats closely joined; the walls also
for a man's height are lined with the same; every Temple has its Steeple after
the Mohammedan manner, whereon their Priests call the People to prayer at the
appointed hours. The principal Temple is that of Caruven, so great, that it
contains in circuit a mile, and a half. It has thirty one Gates great and
high: the Roof is one hundred and fifty Tuscan yards long, and near fourscore
broad. Its supported with thirty eight Arches in length, and twenty in breadth:
Round about it are Porches on the East, West, and North, every one in length
forty yards, and in breadth thirty, under which are storehouses, wherein are
kept Lamps Oil, Mats, and other necessaries: every night are lighted nine
hundred Lamps, for every Arch has his Lamp, especially that row which extends
through the midst of the Quire, which alone has one hundred and fifty Lamps:
amongst which are some great lights made of Brass, every of which has sockets
for one thousand five hundred Lamps: The Steeple is exceeding high. Not far
from the City are twenty Lime-kills, and as many brick-kills, serving for the
reparation of the Temple, and houses that belong to it. The revenues of this
Temple are two hundred Ducats a day.

In the City there are two Principal, and most stately Colleges, adorned with
Mosaic, and carved works, paved with Marble, and stones of Majorca; in each of
them are many Chambers: One of them containing above one hundred Chambers, is
adorned with a goodly Fountain of Marble, and a continual running stream:
about it are three Cloisters, or Galleries of incredible beauty, supported with
eight square Pillars of diverse colors: the Arches adorned with Mosaic of
Gold, and Azure: the roof of carved work. The Gates of the College are of
Brass finely wrought, and the Chamber doors are well carved. In the great hall
where they say their Prayers, is a Pulpit, ascended by nine stairs, all of
Ivory, and Ebony.

There are many Hospitals in Fesse not inferior to the Colleges for building:
there are also a hundred Bath-stoves well built, each of them having four
Halls, and certain Galleries without; in which they put off their clothes, most
of them pertaining to the Temples, and Colleges, and yiedling them a great
rent.

Their Inns are almost two hundred, built three stories high, each of them
having one hundred and twenty Chambers in them, with Galleries before all the
doors: but yiedling neither beds, nor food for strangers. There are also a
thousand Mills, the revenues whereof belong to the Temples, and Colleges. Each
trade in Fesse has a peculiar place allotted thereto. There are six hundred
fountains walled about, which supply the Temples, and other places with water,
because the River is sometimes dry.

In the territories of Fesse is the City of Sella, where the buildings are of
Mosaic work, supported with Marble Pillars. The shops are under fair, and
large Porches: in which, there are Arches to part the several Occupations: it
has in it fair and beautiful Temples: hither the English, Genowayes, Flemings,
and Venetians use to trade.

Morocco described.
Morocco is divided into seven Provinces, in all which the chief City is
Morocco, once the Metropolis of Barbary, containing one hundred thousand
Families, but now inferior to Fess for voluptuousness, spaciousness, and
beauty: yet there is a large Church in it bigger than that of Fesse, though not
so beautiful, having a Tower on it so high, that from thence may be seen the
hills of Azasi at one hundred and thirty miles distance. There is also a large
and stately Castle, on whose Tower there stand three Globes made of pure Gold,
weighing one hundred and thirty thousand Barbary Ducats, some Kings have been
about to take them down, but have always been hindered by some disasters, which
makes the common people judge, that they are kept by spirits.

Numidia, and Lybia described.
Betwixt Barbary, and these, is the Mountain Atlas, so high that the top of it
cannot be seen: It was so called from one Atlas a King, that dwelt at the
bottom of it.

Numidia has on the East Egypt: on the West the Atlantic Ocean: on the North
Atlas: and on the South Lybia: The Inhabitants live like the Nomades, not in
houses, but in Wagons, and Carts, whence Lucan speaking of them, said, They
dwell in Waines, not houses, and do stray
Through fields, and with them lead their gods each way.
Heilin.

They spend their time in hunting, staying but three or four days in a place,
whilst the grass will sustain their Camels; so that there are few Towns in
this Country, and those far remote one from another. Teffet is their greatest
City, which yet consists not of above four hundred households, and has no other
Town within three hundred miles of it. In this Country are abundance of Dates,
whence its called Dactylorum regio. This fruit is most of their food, and with
the stones of them they feed their Goats, which makes them fat, and causes
them to give store of milk. The air has this property, that it presently cures
all that have the French disease, and come into it. The chief Cities are
Stafilet, Dausen, Dara, Lapsa, and Teffet.

Lybia has on the East Nilus; on the West the Atlantic Ocean; On the North
Numidia; and on the South the Land of Negroes. In this Country Arius, the
Heretic was born, who denied the perpetual divinity of Christ. It is now
called Sarra, i. e. a Desert, because the whole Country is full of sandy
Deserts, through which Merchants use to travel eight days together, without
the sight of either River, Lake, Bush, or Tree. The chief Cities are Huadan,
Guargata, and Toherraum. They have neither King nor Laws, but are governed by
the chief man in every Tribe: They are most Gentiles, they have some Mahometans
amongst them.

The Land of Negroes described.
The Land of Negroes has on the East Aethiopia superior: On the West the
Atlantic Ocean: On the North Lybia; and on the South the Kingdom of
Manicongo: The people are very ignorant and brutish: most of them Gentiles,
yet are there some Mahometans and Christians amongst them: They took the
Portugal ships when they first saw them, for great birds with white wings:
their guns for the work of the Devil, and bag-pipes for living Creatures. The
Nobles in the presence of the King, never look him in the face, but sit on
their buttocks with their elbows on their knees, and their hands on their
faces; they anoint their hair with fat of fishes, which makes them stink
abominably. They have abundance of gold and silver, very pure, and fine. Its
watered with the River Niger, which from the fifteenth of June overflows its
banks for the space of forty days, and is so many more before it returns into
its channel, which makes the fields very fruitful: In one place Niger hides it
self for six miles under ground: The second River is Senega, upon whose
Northern bank, the people are cole black; but on the South only tawny.

The Chief Kingdoms are

1 Gualata, where they have no Laws.

2 Guinie, where there is neither Town nor Castle, except Mina built by the
Portugals.

3 Tombutum, where the Inhabitants spend all their time in singing, and
dancing. The King hereof is the richest of all the Princes in those parts of
Africa, keeping a royal Palace, and has for his guard three thousand horsemen,
and footmen sance number.

4 Melli, which is three hundred miles long, the Inhabitants are rich, civil,
and industrious.

5 Cana, where are Plenty of Lemons, and Pomegranats.

6 Gialo^ie, where the people are so nimble, that they will leap upon a horse
when he gallops, and stand upright when he runs, turn themselves about, and
suddenly sit down; mount, and dismount in a trice.

7 Benin, where the people raze their skins with three lines drawn to the
Navel, without which they think they cannot be saved; Both men and women go
naked till they be married, and then they wear a cloth from the wast to the
knees.

8 Nubia, where there is a poison so exceeding strong, that the tenth part of a
grain will kill a man in a quarter of an hour: Its sold for one hundred Ducats
the ounce.

9 Bornum, where the people have neither wives, nor children that they call
their own, nor names, but are only distinguished by some external accident.

10 Goaga, where the King has no revenues, but what he winnes from his
enemies.

11 Ganaga, where the King has nothing, but what his Nobles please daily to
allow him.

The Country of the Mandigos described.
In Guinie upon the River Gambra live the Mandingos: The River abounds with
Crocodiles, River-horses, Torpedoes, running-fishes, etc. On the banks of it
are many Geese, Ducks, Hernes, Curlews, Storks, Plovers, etc. On the Land are
Beeves, Goats, Guinie Hens, etc. The people are perfeclty black, and live a
very idle life, except it be in their seed-time, and harvest: their usual food
is Rice, or some Grain boiled; their drink is water, or Dullo, made of Grain
like our Ale: Their houses are round covered with Reeds, many of them built
together, and compassed with a wall of Reeds six foot high, to defend them from
wild-beasts, which yet many times, much endanger them. There are Ant-hills cast
up by Pismires; some of them twenty foot high, and in compass able to contain
twelve men, which with the heat of the Sun are baked into that hardness, that
our English which trade thither for gold, use to hide themselves in the ragged
tops of them, when they take up their stands, to shoot at Deer, or other
beasts. The Town wherein the King dwells is seated on the River, compassed about
with Hurdles ten foot high, and fastened to strong poles: On the outside is a
Trench of great breadth, beyond which the Town is again circled with Posts, set
close together of about five foot high: their Arms are Azegaies, or Javelins,
made of Reeds six foot long, with an Iron Pike artificially made, and
dangerous: they have others that they cast like Darts, with barbed heads: as
also swords about two foot long. Some have Bows and Arrows made of Reeds,
headed with Iron poisoned: when any of them come to the King, they presently
kneel down, and coming nearer, they lay their hands first upon the ground,
then upon their head, then coming to him, they lay their hand with much
submission upon the Kings thigh, and so retire back: the King answers them with
nodding his head: They are generally clothed in cloth made of Cotton, whereof
there is plenty; their apparel is a shirt to their knees* and a pair of
breeches; they are mostly bare-headed, their hair bedecked with Gregory's, made
of leather, of several fashions, which whilst they wear, they think that no
evil can betide them.

The King has two wives sitting by him, laying their hands on his naked skin,
stroaking, and gently pulling the same. When the woman is with child, she
lies no more with her husband till the child be weaned. The wives live in
great servitude, beating their Grain in Morters: they never are admitted to
sit, and eat with their husbands: you shall never see kissing, or dalliance
betwixt husband and wife, nor brawling amongst the wives, though one man has
many, and they equal: each woman has her several house for the night, and when
they appear in the morning, they salute their husbands, kneeling, laying their
hands on his thigh: her apparel is loose, and party-colored: from the wast
upward she is bare, to show her painted razed body, whereof they are proud,
turning themselves to show it, and well pleased when you handle it. Few either
of men or women are without Tobacco-pipes made of earth well glazed, about two
inches long, the bowl will hold half an ounce of Tobacco: into these they put
Reeds about a yard long, and so draw the smoke.

They have store of Palmita wine: and gourds which grow like our Pumpions
carried up their walls, of unequal size, from an egg to a bushel, yielding
variety of household vessels to eat, drink, and wash clothes in: they have store
of great Locusts trees, which yield clusters of Cods, ripe in May, which they
eat. They have store of Bees, and Honey. They have a sort of trees, which on a
long stalk have a great and round fruit with a pleasing pith therein, on which
Baboons and Monkeys feed. There is a tree or shrub commonly growing on the
River bank like our great Briars, having a ragged leaf, which leaf with the
gentlest stealing touch, betwixt the finger, and thumb, will make the whole
bough to close up all his leaves, and the touch of a sprig, will cause the
whole tree to close up all his leaves: It bears a yellow flower like our
Eglantines. There are many Lions, Jackals, Ouzes, and Leopards. The Civit-Cats,
and Porcupins rob them of their Poultry. There are also abundance of Elephants,
which going in companies spoil their Corn, and Cotton grounds: they feed
amongst sedges, and upon boughs of trees: the blacks eat their flesh* There are
Deer of all sorts, Antilops, wild Bulls, and huge Bears. The Baboons go by
three or four thousand in a Heard, some of the bigest being leaders, which are
as big as Lions: the Females carry their young under their bellies, and if any
have two, she carries one on her back.

There are infinite store of Guinie-hens, Partridges, Quails as big as
Woodcocks, Pigeons, Parrats, and Parakitos: Their greatest fowl is a Stalker,
who standing upright is taller than a man: the next is a Wake, which makes a
great noise as he flies, and does much hurt in their Rice grounds: of smaller
birds there are many sorts, pleasant to the eye, and delighting the ear.

Aethiopia inferior Described.
Aethiopia inferior has on the East the Red Sea: on the West the Ethiopian
Ocean: on the North the Land of Blacks, and Aethiopia superior: and on the
South the Southern Ocean. It has in it these Kingdoms.

Atan between the mouth of the Red Sea, and the River Calimanci. It abounds
with flesh, Honey, Wax, Corn, Gold, Ivory, and abundance of Sheep, whose tails
usually weigh five and twenty pounds.

Zanzibar extending from the River Calimanci to Monomopata: Its divided into
fifteen Provinces, or Kingdoms, the chiefest whereof is Sofila, where there is
so much Gold, and Ivory, that some would have it to be Solomon's Ophir.

Cafraria, which has on the East the River de Infanto: on the West and South
the Ocean: and on the North the Mountains of the Moon: it extends Southward to
the Cape of Good hope, first discovered by the Portugals, Anno Christi. 1497.

The Africans at the Cape of Good Hope Described.
At the Cape of Good Hope: the Africans are ugly black, strong-limmed,
desperate, crafty, and injurious. Their heads are long, their hair woolly, and
crispt; of which some shave one side, leaving the other long, and curled:
Another shaves all, saving a little tuft on the top: Another (thinking his
invention better) shaves here, and there, the bald skull appearing in many
places: other some shave away all save a lock before. Such as have tufts of
hair, hang in them brass buttons, spur rowels, pieces of Pewter, etc. Their
ears are long, and made longer by heavy bables they hang in them, as links of
brass, or Iron, chains, glass-beads, blew-stones, bullets, or Oister-shels: and
such as cannot reach to such Jewels, have singles of Dear, beaks of birds, Dogs
or Cat stones, etc. Their Noses are flat, crushed so in their infancy, their
Lips great: quick, crafty eyes: and about their necks they have guts, or raw
puddings, serving both for good and Ornament: The better sort instead of them
get hoops of Iron, chains of brass, or greazy thongs of stinking Leather:
Their arms are laden with voluntary shackles of Iron, Ivory, rusty brass, or
musty Copper: the rest of their bodies are naked, saving that they are girded
with a thong of raw Leather, to which is fastened, a square piece like the back
of a Glove to cover their privities: but the women, when they receive any
thing, return their gratitude by taking up that slap, and discovering their
shame: But their great ones have better clothing: A nasty untanned hide of a
Lion, Leopard, Calf, Baboon, or Sheep (the hair inward) which they put upon
their shoulders, reaching to their wastes: for their thighs and legs are never
covered: To their feet is fastened a broad piece of Leather, tied by a little
strap, which for the most part they hold in their hands, that their feet may
have liberty to steal, which with their toes, they can do most cunningly, all
the while looking you in the face, as if they meant no harm. Most of the men
are semi-Eunuches, one stone being exsected in their infancy by their nurses.
Both sexes hideously cut, gash, and pink their brows, nose, cheeks, arms,
breast, back, belly, thighs, and legs in sundry works, and Figures. They have
no houses, they delight most in Caves, Holes, or Lions dens, unfurnished; a
whole Tribe commonly keeping together, coupling without distinction, the name
of wife, or brother, being unknown amongst these incestuous persons.

They feed, sleep, and speak altogether without order, or Law: In the night
they sleep round a fire, a Sentinel watching the Lions, their adversaries:
Vivitur ex rapto: the one eating the other, the Lion tearing some of them, and
they other times training him over covered pits, which catches him: and so they
slay, and eat him to day, who perhaps was a Sepulcher to their friends, or
parents the day before. They dawb, and rub their skins with grease, and coals,
indenting, and drying them in the Sun whereby they become Monsters to all civil
eyes. They eat men alive, or dead, which when they fail of, dead Whales, Seals,
Pengwins, grease, or raw puddings are their diet: and when the frost of old age
benums their limbs, whereby they are unapt to provide their own food, they
either eat them, or expose them upon the Mountains, either to be killed by
famine, or devoured by Lions.

With these no violent death, nor stroying rage
Of Lust, is half so dreadful as old age.
They have no spark of devotion, no knowledge of God, heaven, hell, or
immortality; no place of worship, no day of rest, no order in nature, no shame,
no truth, no ceremony in births, or burials, mere brutishness, and stupidity
over shadowing them. The women carry their children on their backs, and give
suck with their long dugs stretched over their shoulders. Anno Christi. 1600.
Sir James Lancaster had amongst them a thousand sheep, and fifty Oxen for
trifles. They train their Cattle to such obedience, as with a whistle, great
Herds will follow them like Dogs, and being sold, with a like call will run
away after them, to the buyers costly mirth and admiration: to prevent which,
the Mariners upon the delivery of each beast; either kill it quickly, or
fasten their horns with cords to stakes placed there on purpose.

The Kingdom of Sofala Described.
Sofala is situate on the cost of Eastern Ethiopia, near the Sea: here the
Portugals traffic to Manica, a Land of much Gold, within land above threescore
Leagues; the women perform the offices of Tillage, and Husbandry: In it are
many sorts of fruit, as Pomgranats which bear all the year, some green, some
ripe, and some in flowers: Fig Trees which yield black Figs all the year about:
Oranges, Limes, Vines, which bear twice a year, in January, and July; Ananas,
Sugar canes, Palm Trees which yield infinite Cocoes, and Wine; Guiny Wheat, and
Rice; There are abundance of Hens, Goats, Kine, Wild beasts, and wild Swine. In
Manica grow little trees on Rocks; which are dry most part of the year, but if
you cut off a bough and put it into water, in the space of ten hours it
springs, and flourishes with green leaves: In some parts they have store of
Orenges and Lemons. The King of this Country is called the Quitive, they are
Gentiles; He has above one hundred women whereof one or two are his Queens:
and many of them are his Aunts, Cosins, Sisters, and Daughters, all whom he
uses promiscuously; when he dies his Queens must dye with him, to do him
service in the other world.

The Kingdom of Monomopata Described.
Monomopata is above two hundred Leagues long: On the North-West lies the
Kingdom of Abutua, where is much fine Gold, yet their greatest riches they
count their Cattle: On the East it has the River Zambeze: On the South-West it
extends to the Ocean, and Southward its bounded with the River Inhanabane: The
King has many women, whereof one is principal: None may speak with him, except
he bring a present; The King and his Subjects wear a white Perewinkle in their
foreheads for a jewel, fastened in their hair, and the King has another great
one on his breast. None of them cut the hair of their heads or beards, yet they
grow not long: they live commonly to ninety, or one hundred years: when the
King dies, his Queen must drink poison to serve him in another World. It
abounds so with Elephants, that about five thousand are yearly killed for their
teeth-sake: There are said to be three thousand Mines of Gold.

The Kingdom of Congo, or Manicongo Described.
The Kingdom of Congo has on the West the Ocean: On the South the Caphars and
Mountains of the Moon: On the East those Hills from which the Rivers issue, and
run into the Fountains of Nilus: and on the North the Kingdom of Benin: The
most Southerly part is called Quimbibe: a great and mighty Kingdom, extending
from Bravagal to Bagamidri; the air is wholesome, the earth outoutwardly
furnished with store of fruits, inwardly with Mines of Crystal, and other
metals. Angola is another Province of Congo, a great Kingdom, and very
populous. Cabazza is the Royal City, one hundred and fifty miles from the
Ocean: from this Country the Portugals use to carry above twenty thousand
slaves yearly into Brasile. They are Heathens, have their Idols of wood in the
midst of their Towns, in fashion like a Negro, which they call Mokisso's: they
take as many wives as they please, there are Mines of Silver, and excellent
Copper: they have many Kine, but love Dogs-flesh better, which they feed for
the Shambles; their houses are fashioned like Bee-hives: Horse-tails are great
Jewels amongst them, for one of which they will give two slaves.

Congo properly so called, extends Westward three hundred seventy five miles;
Northward five hundred and forty; Southward six hundred, crossing over the
Mountains of the Sun, and the Mountain of Crystal: Its divided into six
Provinces, Bamba, Songo, Sundi, Pango, Batti, and Pemba. Bamba is the greatest,
and richest; there are Mines of silver, and on the Seashore, shells which they
use in stead of money: Amongst them there are some very strong men, who will
cleave a slave in the middle, or cut off a Bulls head at one blow: There are
certain creatures as big as Rams, having wings like Dragons, long tails, and
chaps with diverse rows of teeth; they live upon raw flesh; their color is
blew, and green, and they have but two feet; the Pagan Negroes worship them for
Gods. The Rivers of Congo are many, the greatest whereof is Zatre: In all of
them are River-horses, and Crocodiles, and they overflow as does Nilus. There
are whole Mountains of Porphiry, Jasper, white Marble, and other Marbles; and
one, that yields fair Jacinthes, straked with natural veins. When any of the
Inhabitants dye, they have no power to bequeath their goods to their kindred,
but the King is heir general to all men.

The Kingdom of Loango described.
Loango is the No^therly neighbor of Congo, right under the Line: the Country
stretches two hundred miles within Land: the people are called Bramanes, and
the King Mani Loango: they are circumcised after the manner of the Jews, as all
the rest of the Nations in those Countries use to be: they have abundance of
Elephants, and wear clothes of Palm: they are Heathens, and use many
superstitions; they have their Mokisso's, or Images, to which they offer
several things.

Beyond the Country of Loango are the Anzigues, the cruellest Cannibals that
are under the Sun: for in other places they eat their enemies, or their dead,
but here they eat their Countrymen, and kins-folk, and keep shambles of man's
flesh, as with us of Beef, or Mutton. They have many Mines of Copper, and great
quantity of Sanders, both red, and gray. They are excellent Archers; they are
circumcised, and worship the Sun for their greatest God, and the Moon next.

Ethiopia Superior; called also Abassia, described.
It is watered with four principal Rivers, and as many huge Lakes: The first
River is Taucea, running Northward, but drunk up by the thirsty sands, before
it can come to the Sea: It has bordering upon it, Mountains of admirable
height, and inaccessible: The second River is Oara, larger than Nilus, that
emptieth it self into the Sea of Zeila: the water is very clear, but the
superstitious Abassines refuse to drink of it, because in its passage it
waters some Mohammedan Regions. The third is Gabea, and the fourth is Nilus:
One of the Lakes is called Dambea, threescore mile long, and five and twenty
broad: It abounds with fish, and River-horses; and in it are many Islands, in
which traitors are confined.

The Abassine soil is for the most part hollow, and in the midst of the plains,
rise many Rockie-hills, which in times of war serve them for Fortresses: The
whole Country abounds with Mettal-Mines; but the inhabitants, partly through
ignorance, and partly for fear of the Turks, if the riches of their Country
should be discovered, suffer them to lie hidden in the earth, only they make
use of so much Iron as lies upon the surface of the earth. Of plants and trees
there is great variety: There are Hares, Goats, Bores, Hearts, Elephants,
Camells, Buffalls, Lions, Panthers, Tigers, Rhinocerotes, and Jaraffs.

The air in this Country is most part warm, and temperate: In some parts very
hot, and unwholesome. The Winter is from the end of May, to the beginning of
September; in which time it rains almost every day, which is often accompanied
with thunder: their Wine is made of Honey; their Churches are usually
compassed with trees for shade.

The richer sort buy garments of the Saracens, the rest both men and women
cover their bodies either with a skin, or some course Hempencloth: when they do
reverence to any, they put off their cloth from the shoulders to their navel;
their hair is long, which serves them for a Hat: the better sort curle and
anoint their hair with butter; they brand marks in their bodies, especially in
their face; on their little fingers they suffer their nails to grow as long as
they will; their hands and feet are bare, which they color reddish; they are
artlesse and lazy: they lie on Ox hides, they eat their meat out of great
bowls of wood, without any Napperie: they have no Cities, but great unwalled
Villages; their greatest Town has scarce sixteen thousand houses: These houses
are small, without elegancy or story, round, and covered with earth, and straw:
They paint Christ, the Virgin, and other Saints black, as Devils, and wicked
men white. Their Temples are round, having a double Porch: they neither walk,
nor talk, nor sit, nor spit, nor laugh in the Church, nor admit Dogs into the
Churchyards: some Churches are only for men, others for women: In small
Villages they are common to both, but with divisions that they cannot see one
another.

The chiefest Port belonging to the Abissines is Suaque^n, situated in the
Arabian Gulf: It excels most of the Cities in the Orient, in four things:
First, in the goodness and security of the Haven, which is fenced by nature
against all storms, and will contain two hundred ships, besides multitudes of
small Vessels.

Secondly, In the easiness of loading, and unloading of them: For the City
being built in an Island, they set the beak-heads of their Ships and Galleys
over the streets, and by casting a plank over, they are emptied into the
warehouses.

Thirdly, For trafick with strange Nations; for there repair thither Merchants
from all parts of India, Cambaia, Pegu, Malacca, Arabia, Ethiopia, Egypt, etc.
which trade for abundance of gold, and Ivory.

Fourthly, For the strength of the City, which is very great, by reason of
Sholds, Flats, Islands, Rocks, Banks of sand, etc. which makes the approaches
very difficult, and dangerous. This Country of Abassia is as big as Germany,
France, and Italy, and has in it plenty of Rice, Barley, Beans, Pease, Sugar,
etc.

The Hill Amara in Ethiopia described.
In Ethiopia under Prete Janny, commonly called Prester, or Presbyter John, is
an hill called Amara, situated in the navel of the Ethiopian body under the
Equinoctial line, adorned with all variety of fruits, wholesome air, pleasant
aspect, and prospect: yea Heaven, and Earth, Nature and Industry have all been
corrivals to present their riches to it.

It stands in a great plain, having no other hill near it by thirty leagues,
the form of it is round: the rock is cut so smooth without any unequal
swelling, that to him that stands beneath, its like an high wall: the top is
overhanged with rocks, jutting forth for the space of a mile: Its above twenty
leagues in the circuit, compassed with a wall on the top, well wrought, that so
neither man, nor beast in chase may fall down.

The top is a level, only toward the South is a rising hill beautifying this
plain, whence issues a pleasant Spring which passes through all that plain,
and pays its tribute to every Garden that will exact it, and so makes a Lake
at length, whence issues a River that from thence runs into Nilus.

The way up to it is cut out of the Rock, not with stairs, but by an easy
ascent, so that one may ride up with ease, at the foot whereof is a fair Gate
with a Corpse du Guard: Halfway up is a fair and spacious Hall, cut out of the
Rock with three large windows to it, and at the top is another gate with the
like Guard: The air above is wholesome, and delectable, so that they live long
there without sickness* There are upon it thirty four Palaces standing by
themselves, spacious, sumptuous, and beautiful, where the Princes of the Royal
blood have their abode with their Families. There are two Temples also, the
most beautiful in all Ethiopia.

There are many flourishing and fruitful Gardens, curiously made, and
plentifully furnished with Europian fruits, as Pears, Pippins, etc. and of
their own, as Oranges, Citrons, Lemons, etc. Its also adorned with Cedars,
Palm Trees, etc. as also with variety of herbs, and flowers to delight the
sight, taste, and sent: There are also Cubaio trees, pleasant in taste beyond
all comparison, and great store of Balm-trees. There is plenty of all sorts of
Grain, and Corn, and such charms of Birds as delight the ear with their
melodious warbling notes, and please the eye with their variety of colors, and
other creatures that adorn this Paradise.

The aforenamed Churches have their Pillars, and Roofs of stone, richly, and
cunningly wrought, the matter and workmanship contending for magnificence: That
of Jasper, Alabaster, Marble, Porphyrie; This of painting, gilding, and much
curiosity: To these are adjoining two stately Monasteries; in one whereof are
two rare pieces, whereon wonder may justly fasten both her eyes.

The Treasury, and the Library of the Emperor, are such as neither of them is
thought to be matchable in the world; neither that of Constantinople, wherein
were one hundred and twenty thousand Books; nor that of Alexandria, wherein
were seven hundred thousand Books: For the number in this Library is
numberless, their price inestimable. There are three great Halls, each above
two hundred paces large, with Books of all Sciences, written in fine Parchment,
with much curiosity of golden Letters, and other work, and cost in writing,
binding, and covers: There are all the Greek Fathers: The Writers of Syria,
Egypt, Africa, and the Latin Fathers, with others innumerable, in Greek,
Hebrew, Arabic, Abyssine, Egyptian, Syrian, and Chaldee. There are Poets,
Philosophers, Physicians, Rabbines, Talmudists, Cabalists, Hieroglyphics, etc.

The Treasury, leaves them of all other Princes behind it. Its a Sea that
every year receives new Rivers, which never run out: every Emperor yearly
laying up part of his revenue there. The Jewels here kept are incomparable,
Topazes, Amethists, Saphires, Diamonds, etc. He has one Jewel that was found
in the River Niger (that brings forth more Gemmes than any other in the world)
which is one piece diversified with a thousand variety of stones. Its about two
spans, and an half square: there are in it one hundred and sixty Diamonds, one
as large as the palm of ones hand: It has in it above three hundred Emeralds;
Rubies the greatest in the World: Above fifty Saphires, Turqueses, Balazes,
Amethists, Spinels, Topazes: Jacinths, Chrysolites, etc. Nature here playing
the Jeweller, and representing a Map of the worlds Gemmes in this one Jewel,
without, and infinitely beyond all Art of Man. Bernardo de Vecheti, a Jeweller,
being sent thither by Francis de Medicis, Duke of Florence to see it, accounted
it beyond all estimation, and value. The Emperor also has made him Tables with
thousands of stones set in them.

In this hill are kept the Princes of the Blood Royal, as in a prison, and
never return thence, except they be chosen Emperors. Anno Christi 1608. there
were six of them: These meet all together when they please to recreate
themselves by hauking, hunting, etc. and they have grave persons to instruct
them in learning, and virtue. Purchase Pilgrimage. p. 677. etc.

The chiefest Cities in Abassia, or Aethiopia superior, Described.
The chiefest Cities in this Empire are: 1. Saba, in which are four Gates made
of Alabaster, and Jasper, wrought with antique work, and the doors thereof
curiously carved. It has in it five thousand great and sumptuous houses: the
streets are spacious, and so shaded with Pent-houses, that a man may walk
without being offended by either Sun or rain. The other Cities are 2. Aruma. 3.
Cossomum. 4. Zameta, the seat of Barnagasso, or the Viceroy. 5. Suacen, before
described. 6. Tanape. 7. And Zembra: The Kings Court also is a wandering City;
For his Pavilions, and Tents belonging to him, and his retinue being pitched,
take up ten miles in compass.

In this Empire are seventy Tributary Kingdoms, the chief whereof are 1.
Barnagassum, which lies toward the Red Sea, and borders on the Turks. 2.
Tigremaon, famous for her Mines of Gold. 3. Angote, where the Inhabitants use
Salt, Pepper, and Iron instead of money, and feed on raw flesh. 4. Amara, where
is that famous Mountain before described. 5. Guagere, which is an Island in the
River Nilus, one hundred seventy and five miles long, and one hundred twenty
and five broad, etc. The Natives call this Emperor, The Negus. His revenues are
so great, that besides the expenses of his Court, and Camp, he coffers up three
millions every year.

The Islands in the Red Sea, belonging to Africa Described.
That which is now called the Red Sea, or Arabian Gulf, that parts Asia from
Africa, is in length one thousand and two hundred miles, in breadth for the
most part one hundred: Its so full of sholds, that ^xcept they keep the channel
in the midst, there is no sailing but by daylight: At the entrance into it,
stands the I Will of Babel mandel, or Babmandel, which the ancient Kings of Egypt
used to chain up to keep the passage.

Sues is near the bottom of this Sea, where the Turk has his Arsenal, and
Galleys for those Seas: The Timber is brought out of Caramania by Sea, by the
River Nilus, and by Cammels the rest of the way, at incredible charges. Some
think that Pharaoh was here drowned: Others think that the passage of the
Israelites was at Tor, where this Sea is not above nine miles over. Ezion Geber
was a Port hereabouts whence Solomon sent his Fleet to Ophir for Gold, etc.

Bernice was a Port in the Red Sea, where the Indian Drugs, and Spices were
unladen in the time of the Roman Empire, and from thence carried to Alexandria
in Egypt. Zidem is twelve leagues from Mecca, where since the ships used to
unlade their Spicery, as formerly they did at Bernice.

A little further is the I Will of Mehun: and then the I Will of Cameran, one of the
hotest places in the world: then Dalaqua, where they get pearls. Its one
hundred twenty and five Leagues long, and twelve broad. Mazzua is another
Island which makes Ercocco a good Haven. There are diverse other small Isles, in
which there is nothing memorable.

The chiefest Islands belonging to Africa Described. Madagascar Described.
Madagascar, or St. Laurence Island, is the greatest Island in the World, being
a thousand miles in length, and in some places four hundred miles in breadth:
Its full of Towns, people, Minerals, Beasts, Woods, waters, and what is
requirable in a fruitful land. Its a good place for victualling, as they pass
into the East Indies, the air quick, and healthful: Its divided into four
Kingdoms, each King with their Ebony Scepters ruling his people, being jealous
of each others greatness. The Sea Towns are infected with Mahometisme, the
midland eclipsed with black Idolatry. Nature has taught them Laws, they punish
Murder with death; adultery with public shame, and the^t with banishment.
Fishing delights them more than Tillage. The people are generally strong,
courageous, and proper. The men cover their naked bodies in war, with strong
and Massy Targets, their right hand, brandishing a long neat pike, or lance of
Ebony, barbed with Iron, kept as bright as silver, which they can throw with
excellent dexterity, and skill: Their color is black, they anoint their naked
bodies with Grease, and Tallow; proud to see their skin shine, and are not
offended with the stink: their hair is long, black, and curled: They wear a few
leaves plaited about their wastes, but are elsewhere naked; their ears are bored
and wide; they pink, and cut their flesh; and whilst the men seek their prey
abroad, the women keep constantly at home and spin. The boys marry at ten, and
the maids at twelve years old. They know no Letters: Nihil scire, nil
jucundius. The earth is rich in Minerals, Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, etc. but
hearing of the cruelty, and covetousness of the Portugals, they prohibit the
diging of them. If you will buy any thing of them, they give it in exchange for
Agats, Helitropians, Jasper; and long red Cornelian beads, which they prefer
before all the Diamonds of India, and of which they are so proud, that the
owner, be he Subject or King, is often dethroned for it, one string of them
being able to put them all into a combustion. Bracelets, Copper-chaines, beads,
bells, and Babies are much esteemed, for which you shall have in exchange,
sheep with great tails, Beeves, Bufaloes, Camels, Antilops, Red-deer, Leopards,
Goats, Milk, Hens, Eggs, Wheat, Barley, Rice, Oranges, Lemons, Lymes,
Pomcitrons, Plantanes, Sugar Canes, Ginger, Toddy; Coconuts, etc. Herb. Travels.

Their time of marriage is for men at twelve, and for women at ten. They have a
kind of Bean growing on trees, the Cod whereof is two footlong.

The Island of Mohelia described.
Mohelia, another Island beyond it, where the houses are made of Reeds, or
straw, fitted to the heat of such a torrid climate. The Inhabitants are cole
black, have great heads, big lips, flat noses, sharp chins, huge limbs, go
naked, having only a few plantane leaves about their wastes, to veil their
modest parts; they cut, and pink in several works their skins, face, arms, and
thighs, striving to exceed each other in variety. Tobacco is of great account
amongst them, which they suck out of long Canes, called hubble-bubbles: They
have store of Buffols, Goats, Turtles, Hens, huge Bats, Camelions, Rice, Pease,
Cuscus, Honey, Oisters, Breames, and much other fish: They have also Toddy,
Cocos, Plantanes, Orenges, Lemons, Lymes, Pomecitrons, Tamarind, Sugarcanes,
etc. The Isle is always green, each day a gentle breeze, and shower bedewing
the earth, and mollifying the scorching Sun; so that it is always adorned in
Floraes Livery, yea, roabed with Natures best Arras, pleasantly refreshed with
silver purling streams, and shaded with dainty trees of all sorts. Here you may
have thirty Orenges, or Lemons for a sheet of paper: for two sheets ten
Coco-Nuts: An Ox for a piece of eight, and a Goat for six pence.

The Isle of St. Hellen described.
This Island is on this side the Cape of Good Hope, and nearer to the African,
than to the American shore: the Seas about it are very deep, and the Land so
high and precipitious, that the Mariners use to say, A man may choose whether
he will break his heart going up, or his neck coming down: But when up, no
place yields a more delightful object: Its even, and plain, clothed with sweet
grass, long, and curious: The springs above are sweet; there are but two
Rivolets in the Island: there are abundance of Hogs, and Goats: there are also
Phesants, Powts, Quails, Hens, Partridges, and diverse sorts of useful herbs,
as Wood Sorrel, Trifolie, Basil, Parsley, Mint, Spinach, Fennil, Annis, Radish,
and Lemons.

The Island of St. Thomas described.
The Island of St. Thomas is of a round figure, being one hundred and fourscore
miles in compass; It lies directly under the Aequinoctial line: it so
abounds with Sugar, that forty ships are laden from thence yearly: The chief
City is Pavoasan: At the first discovery it was wholly overgrown with woods,
now it is inhabited by the Portugals, and Negroes; the latter often living till
they be an hundred years old: the Portugals not exceeding fifty. It will bear
no fruit that has a stone in it. In the midst is a woody Mountain continually
over-shadowed with a thick cloud, which so moistens the Trees, which are many,
that from thence droppeth water sufficient to water all their Sugar grounds.

Princes Island described.
Princes Island lies between the Equator, and the Tropic of Capricorn, near
unto the Isle of St. Hellen: Its called Princes Island, because, when it was
first discovered, the revenues of it were allowed to the Prince of Portugal.

The Isle of Cape Verde described.
Next to Cape Verde are seven Islands full of birds, but empty of Inhabitants:
But the Isles of Cape Verde are nine; they were first discovered, Anno Christi
1440. None of them are inhabited but St. Jago, and Del Fogo, so called, because
it burns perpetually: They were taken by Sir Anthony Sherly, Anno Christi 1596.
who had in one night such a shower of ashes, as he did lie by Del Fogo, that
in the morning you might have written with your finger upon the Deck of his
ship. St. Jago was taken by Sir Francis Drake, Anno Christi 1585. Brava, and
Bona Vista have better names, than natures, they yield no matter for History:
As neither do the Isles of St. Matthew, Sancta Cruz, St. Paul, and Conception.
The former of these are called the Gorgades, and abound with Goats. The latter
the Hesperides, distant from Africa ten thousand furlongs.

The Island of Maio described.
Maio has in it a Lake two leagues long, where the Sun congeals and turns the
water into salt. Here the Sea looks like a green field, being covered over
with an herb called Sergasso, like to our Sampher, which lies so thick that a
man cannot see the water, hindering the ships passage, except it has a strong
wind: It is yellowish of color, and bears an empty berry, like Goosberries.
Its four hundred miles distant from the coast of Africa, and the Sea is so
deep, that no ground can be found, and yet this herb is thought to come from
the bottom. These coasts are troubled with continual thunders, and
lightenings; and unwholesome raines; and if this rainwater stand but a little,
it turns into Worms, and it fills the meat that is hung up in it with Worms.
Here swims also upon the face of the waters another herb like a Cocks-comb,
which is so venomous, that it can hardly be touched without peril. In these
Seas also they meet with great and tedious calmes.

The Canary Islands described.
The Canary Islands are twenty leagues from the continent of Lybia, being six
in number. Canaria, La-Palma, Teneriffa, Lancerota, Hierro, La-Gomara; and
Forteventura. The ancient Inhabitants knew no God but Nature; were ignorant of
the use of fire; shaved with flint-stones: Nursed their Children by Goats;
tilled the Earth with Horns of Oxen; abominated the slaughter of Beasts; like
beasts used women in common; had no meum, and tuum.

The Woods their dwelling was, the Herbs their diet;
And on the leaves, and boughs, they slept in quiet.
They are now inhabited by the Spaniards, who have the Inquisition amongst
them: The Grand Canary is the residence of the Inquisitor whither all the other
Isles repair for Justice. Its one hundred and twenty miles in compass: Has
store of Goats, Bees, Asses, Hogs, Barley, Rye, Rice, variety of flowers,
Grapes, and other excellent fruits.

Teneriff may compare with the Grand Canary in multitude of Inhabitants; and
exceeds it in Grapes, yielding yearly eight and twenty thousand Buts of Sack;
of the high Pike in this Island, see afterward.

Hyerro is famous for that Tree, which (like the Rock in the Desert) affords
sweet water to all the Inhabitants: The description whereof, see afterward.

Madara stands in two and thirty degrees, and is the greatest of all the
Atlantic Isles: It was so called of the wildernesses of trees there growing,
which when they were first fired, they burned so furiously, that the people for
a time were forced to go some space into the Sea from the violent heat, and the
wood-ashes made the soil so fat, that at first it yielded threescore fold,
since but thirty: The excellent Wines that we have from thence are made of
Vines that were brought from Candy, and they bring forth more Grapes than
leaves, the clusters being two, three, and four spans long. At first here were
many Pigeons that would suffer themselves to be taken, not knowing, and
therefore not fearing a man.

Forty miles from Madara is the Isle of Porto Santo, or All Saints, because
discovered upon that day Anno Christi 1428. Here were such store of Conies,
bred of one she Cony, brought hither great with young, that the Island was
almost destroyed, and made unhabitable by them.

The Isle of Malta described.
Within the Streights there are only some few Islands belonging to Africa,
whereof the Isle of Melita, or Malta is the chiefest: In old time famous for
the Temple of Juno, spoiled by the Roman Verres. Its distant from Sicilie
threescore miles, from Africa one hundred and ninety: It was sometimes subject
to the Carthaginians. It is now held by the Knights of Malta, whose valor
appeared Anno Christi 1565. by defending it against their mighty and powerful
adversary the Turk.

The General Description of Europe.
Europe by Pliny is called Orbis domitorum genitrix, and well she may, if we
read her story in her Greek Monarchy of Alexander the great, and in her Latin
Empire of the Romans, who scarce left a corner of the World, then known,
unconquered. It is almost encompassed with the Sea, being as it were a
Peninsula, whose Isthmus, is that part which lies between the River Tanais, and
the frozen Sea, by which it is joined to Asia. Westward it is bounded with the
Atlantic Ocean, having no land till you come to Amerrica. On the East toward
Asia, it has the Aegean Sea, called Archipelagus, and Pontus Euxinus, Palus
Meotis, and the River Tanais: Southward it has the Mediterranean Sea, and
Fretum Herculeum. Northward the Pole Artick. She bears in length but three
thousand and eight hundred miles, and in breadth nigh one thousand and two
hundred miles: So that she is the least, but yet the most populous part of the
world, and blessed with the Gospel above all others.

The Kingdoms, and Countries in the Continent of Europe are, Spain, France,
Belgia, Germany, Italy, Denmark, Hungary, Poland, Sclavonia, Greece, Dacia,
Norway, Sweden, and Muscovy.

Spain, not long since consisted of three Kingdoms, Castile, Arragon, and
Portugal, but lately Portugal has rent it self from her, and chose for King,
the Duke of Braganza, under the name of John the Fourth, but we will speak of
her as she was before, and so in compass she is about one thousand eight
hundred and ninety English miles. Its begirt with the Sea on every side,
unless on the Eastern, where it is joined to France by a kind of Isthmus,
crossed by the Pyrenaean Mountains from Sea to Sea. On the West its bounded
with the Atlantic Sea: On the North with the Cantabrick: On the South with the
straits of Gibraltier: and South East with the Mediterranean Sea. It yields all
sorts of Wines, Sugar, Fruits, Oils, Metals, Lamb-skins, Wool, Cork, Rosen,
Steel, etc. The Inhabitants are not many, nor have they many great Cities, as
in other parts of Europe: the poor are proud, the best superstitious, and
hypocritical: yet good Soldiers, because patient to endure labor, hunger,
thirst, by which means they rather weary out, than overcome their enemies.

France begins at the West from the Pyrenean Mountains, and is bounded on the
East with Germany: On the North with our English Seas: Southward with the
Mediterranean: and South-East with the Alps, which divide it from Italy. The
chief Provinces are Lorraign, Burgondy, and Savoy, which have Princes of their
own: the rest are Normandy, Britany, Bury, Aquitane, Picardy, Peictoires,
Languedock, Anio^, Casconie, Provence, and Campaine, etc. The Country is very
fruitful, which causes much Traffic from neighboring Nations: their special
commodities are Wine, Salt, Linen, Paper, etc. Its well peopled, and has many
fair Cities, the Inhabitants are great Courtiers, and light of carriage.

Belgia has France on the South: Denmark on the North: Germany on the East:
and the Ocean on the West: Its called the Lowcountrys, or Netherlands. Its in
compass about one thousand miles. Its divided into seventeen Provinces:
whereof four are Dukedomes: seven Earldomes: five Baronies: and one Marqueship.
The Dukedomes are 1. Brabant, in which is An^werp. 2. Luick. 3. Lutzenburg,
where is the vast Forest of Ardenna. 4. Gilderland. The Earldoms are 1.
Flanders. 2. Artois. 3. Heinolt. 4. Holland. 5. Zeland. 6. Zutphen. 7. Hamme.
The Barronies are 1. Friezland. 2. Utrech. 3. Mecklen. 4. Overysel. 5.
Grauling. The Marquisat is that of the Holy Empire. Its a good land, and
affords store of Butter, Cheese, and very great Oxen. The people are
industrious, and excellent Mechanics. The men are big boned, excellent Seamen,
and maintain their liberty by the sword.

Germany lies Eastward from Belgia, and is bounded on the West with France,
and Belgia: On the East with Hungary and Poland, and the River Vistula. On the
North with the German Ocean, and on the South with the Alps that divide it from
Italy. Bohemia is situated in the midst, compassed with the Hyrcanian wood:
whereof the Regal City is Prague. Germany comprehends many Provinces, as
Saxony, Brandenberg, Pomeren, Bavaria, Silesia, Franconia, Austria, Helvetia,
East-Friesland, Westphalia, Cleveland, Alsatia, Brunswick, and Hassia. The
Emperor is now chosen by eight Electors, the Archbishops of Triars, Ments, and
Colen: the Count Palatine of the Rine: the Duke of Saxony, and Bavaria: and the
Marquess of Brandenberg, and the King of Bohemia with his casting voice. Its a
rich country in Corn, Wine, Fruits, and Mines, and has in it healthful Baths:
the People are warlick, and ingenious.

Italy has Germany on the North, the Mediterranean on the South, the Adriatic
Sea on the East, and on the West Mare Terrenum. Its in length one thousand and
ten miles: the greatest breadth is four hundred and twenty. Its divided into
many States; the chief are the Kingdom of Naples: the territory of Rome,
Lumbardy, Tuscany: The Signiory of Venice, Verona, etc. Its of admirable
fertility, and called the Paradise of the world. The Inhabitants are grave but
exceeding libidinous.

Denmark is joined to Germany on the South: on the West it has Mare
Germanicum, and is a Peninsula, the two principal Provinces are Irglant and
Holstein: most of the other are petty Islands, whereof Zeland is the chief, and
Loitland. It breeds goodly horses, and store of Cattle.

Hungary has on the West Germany, the River Tabiscus and Walachia on the
East, Poland on the North, and on the South, is the River Sauri: Southward is
Sclavonia. The famous River Danubius cuts her in the middle, nameing her parts
Citerior, and Ulterior. The chief Provinces are Soliense, where the earth sends
forth such a stink, that it poisons the birds that fly over it; and an Island
in Danubius that is exceeding fertile, and so generally is the whole Country.
The Inhabitants are strong, their Daughters Portions are only a new attire; and
all their sons equally inherit without respect of primogeniture. The Emperor
and Turk share it betwixt them.

Poland has Silesia on the West, the River Boristhenes on the East, the
Baltic Sea on the North, and Hungary on the South. Its in compass two
thousand six hundred miles. The chief Provinces are Livonia, Lituania. Volinia,
Samogatia, Podolia, Russia Nigra, Mazoria, Prussia Regal, Podlasia, and the
Dukedom of Opwits, and Zator, and Polonia propria. The land abounds with honey,
wax, Mines of Copper, and Iron, horses fit for service: the Kingdom is
elective.

Sclavonia has Hungary on the North, the Adriatic sea on the South, Greece on
the South-East, and Italy on the West. It contains in length four hundred and
fourscore miles, and in breadth one hundred and twenty. Its divided into
Illiricum, Dalmatia, and Croatia. The Sclavonian Language is used in many
Countries, both of Europe and Asia. Its divided betwixt the Empire of Germany,
the Turk, and the Venetians.

Greece has on the West the Adriatic sea: on the East the Aegean, Hellespont,
and Propontis, Northward the Mountain Hemus, and Southward the Mediterranean.
It was once the seat of the worlds Empire, and flourished above other Countries
with all sorts of humane learning. It was one of the first that embraced the
Gospel, and bred many Fathers of our Church. Its now miserably enslaved to the
Turks. Its commonly divided into Peleponesus, Achaia, Epirus, Albania,
Macedonia, Migdonia, and Thracia. It yields Gold, Silver, Coperas, Colors,
Wines, Velvets, Stuffs, etc.

Dacia has on the West Hungary, on the East the Euxine sea, on the South
Greece, and on the North Sarmatia, from the which its divided by the Carpathian
Mountains. It was formerly called Misia. The chief regions in it are
Transylvania, Moldovia, Walachia, Servia, Rascia, Bulgaria, and Bosnia.

Norway is in length one thousand three hundred miles, in breadth about six
hundred. Its under the Government of the King of Denmark. Theft is counted the
greatest sin amongst them. It yields Cables, Masts, Furrs, Stockfish, which the
poor eat instead of bread. The Metropolitan City is Nidrosio, besides which
there are but two of note, Bergla, and Asloia. On the North, and West, lies the
populous Province of Finmark.

Sweden is on the East of Norway, from which it is divided by the Dofrine
Mountains on the North and South its bounded by the seas, On the East it joins
to Muscovy. Its a fertile Country, and in some Provinces has great plenty of
Corn, Furrs, Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, and Lead. Its divided into Gotland,
quasi good land, Finland, quasi fine land, Bodia, Scrickfinia, Lapland, etc.
The inhabitants often live till they be one hundred and forty years old.
Thence lately have come the two great Conquerors, Gustavus Adolphus, that
conquered much of Germany, and Carolus Adolphus, that now has conquered
Poland, and most of Prussia.

Muscovy is the last country of Europe toward the East, and part of it stands
in Asia. Its bounded on the West with Livonia, and part of Sweden: On the East
with Tartary, on the North with the frozen seas: and on the South with
Lituania. The length of it is three thousand miles, the breadth of it is three
thousand threescore and five. Most of it is extreme cold, but to help that,
they have great store of Furrs, as sables, Martins, white Foxes, etc. It has
store of Corn, Fruit, and Cattle. The people are very base, contentious,
ignorant, and sottishly superstitious. They bury their dead upright, with a
staff in his hand; and a penny in his Purse, with a letter to St. Nicolas to
procure him entrance into heaven. The chief Provinces are Muscovy, where stands
the Regal City of Mosco. Pernia where they eat dried stags flesh instead of
bread. Rhesan full of Corn, and Horses, etc.

The Islands in Europe Described.
In the Western Atlantic Seas are Groenland, Groviland, Island, and Frisland.
These are extreme cold, yet yield plenty of Fish, Oil, Whale bones, and Morses
teeth.

In the British Seas, are Ireland, Great Britain with her train, the Orcades,
Hebrides, Silly, Man, Weight, Anglesey, Jersey, Garnsey, etc. Others there are
of less note in the German Seas, and those which divide Norway, and Sweden
from Germany, and Poland. Toward Spain are the Azores, nine in number, the
chief of them is Faial.

The Southern Islands of Europe lie in the Mediterranean Seas: As the Baleans
near Spain, Corsica, Sardinia near Italy, Sicily, and Malta. In the Adriatic,
and Jonian seas, Absorrus, Curicta, Scardona, Insulae Diomedeae, Issa,
Tragurium, Pharia, Corsica, and Melitum. More Southward, Ertcusa, Cephalenia,
Ithica, Echidnades, Zazinthus, the Strophades and Cythera.

In the mouth of the Aegean sea is Candy, an I Will of five hundred and twenty
miles in compass, abounding with Cypress trees, and a lascivious wine called
Malmesey. The chiefest Islands in the Aegean sea are Melos, Chias, Bria, the
Cyclades, Sporades, Delos, etc. But I will write a little more particularly of
the chiefest of these Islands; as

1 Samothracia, which is a small Island, where the air is most clear, and pure:
the chief Town is Samia, beautified with a goodly harbor, but now by reason of
the Pirates infesting it, left almost desolate.

2 Lemnos, containing in circuit almost one hundred miles: here is dug that
sovereign Mineral called Terra Lemnia, and Sigillata, because its sealed when
made into pellets, with a Turkish character: The VVestern parts are dry, and
barren, the Eastern more fruitful: It contains about seventy five Villages.

3 Lesbos is one hundred sixty eight miles in compass: the South, and West
parts are mountainous and barren, the rest level, and fruitful.

4 Chios is one hundred twenty and five miles in compass. It bears that
sweet Gum called Mastick. In it are an infinite number of Partridges that are
of a red color, they are kept tame; and fed in flocks in the streets, and
Villages, a little boy or girl driving them into the fields, and with a
whistle calling them home again. The most excellent Greekish VVines are made
here, called Vina Chia.

5. Euboea, over against Chios, now called Negropont, is in compass three
hundred sixty five miles: A very fruitful Island; between the continent and it,
is only a little Euripus that ebbs and flows seven times in one day, the
reason whereof, when Aristotle could not find out, he threw himself into it,
saying, Quia ego non capio te, tu capis me: In it are two Rivers, Cireus, and
Nileus: Strabo says, that if sheep drink of the former, their wool turns
white; if on the latter, coal black.

The Sporades are twelve in number, the chiefest is Milo: fourscore miles in
circuit; the soil is fruitful of grain, and oil: Here is excellent Marble,
curiously spotted: pitch and brimstone, and hot springs good for many diseases.

The Cyclades are in number three and fifty, the chiefest are. 1. Delos,
wherein they had a custom not to suffer men to dye, nor children to be born
in it, sending their sick men, and great bellied women to Rhena, a small Island
hard by* 2 Samos, where the Tyrant Polycrates lived, who, because he never had
any mischance, threw a Ring that he loved dearly, into the Sea; but shortly
after, he found it in the belly of a fish that was brought to his Table: yet
was he at length brought to a miserable death by Orontes, a Persian, showing
the instability of all earthly things. 3. Patmos, whither St. John was banished
by the Emperor Domitian, and where he had his Revelations.

In the Cretan Seas are. 1. Crete, in compass five hundred and ninety miles,
in length two hundred and seventy, in breadth, fifty: the soil is fruitful,
especially of Wines called Muskadels: it yields also Sugar-Candie, Gums, Honey,
Sugar, Olives, Dates, Apples, Orenges, Lemons, Raisons, Citrons, and
Pomegranats, yet it wants Corn. Its very populous. Paul describes the people
out of Epimenides: The Cretians are liars, evil beasts, slowbellies. Its famous
for three things. 1. They have no venomous Creature there. 2. If a woman bite a
man hard, he never recovers again. 3. There is an herb called Alimos, which if
one chaw in his mouth, he shall feel no hunger that day. It was once called
Hecatompolis, because it had in it a hundred Cities. It is in the Venetians
hands.

The Jonian Isles described.
Cythera is in compass threescore miles: It was formerly called Porphyris,
from the abundance of that sort of Marble called Porphyrie, which the Mountains
yield.

The Strophades are two Islands, wherein there is nothing remarkable, but a
spring of fresh water in one of them, which has his fountain in Peloponesus,
above five miles distant, which passing under the Sea, arises there.

Zacinthus: now Zant, is threescore miles in compass. Its wonderfully stored
with Wine, Oil and Currants, of which last ordinarily they make yearly one
hundred and fifty thousand Chekins for their own Coffers, besides eighteen
thousand Dolars, which they pay for custom to the State of Venice: when the
English first traded thither, the inhabitants were very poor, and when the
English bought so many Currants of them, they asked our Merchants whether they
dyed clothes, or fed their Swine with them; which uses themselves put them to,
but now they know better, and grow rich by the trade. This Island is much
troubled with earthquakes, commonly once a week, whereupon they build their
houses low. The chief City is Zant, not big, the streets rugged and uneven, and
the houses low for the cause aforesaid. Over the Town Hall door in this City is
this Distich inscribed.

Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, probos.
The Echinades Islands are five in number, being but like Rocks, and are famous
for nothing, but for the famous battle of Lepanto fought near them, betwixt the
Turks, and the Christians.

Cephalenia is in compass one hundred sixty and six miles, and contains two
hundred Towns: the chiefest commodities it yields, are Wheat, Honey, Currants,
Powder for dying Scarlet, Oil, and Wool, etc.

Corcyra, now Corfu, is near Epyrus, in length, four and fifty miles, in
breadth, four and twenty: Its seated in the midst of the Venetians Lordships by
Sea: The chief City is Corfu, where the Turks have received sundry repulses.
Its very fruitful in Honey, Wax, Wine, Oil, etc.

The Adriatic Isles have nothing of note in them, and therefore I proceed to
the Mediterranean Isles, the principal whereof is 1 Scicily, in compass seven
hundred miles. The people are ingenuous, eloquent, and pleasant, but very
unconstant, and talkative. The soil is incredibly fruitful, in Wine, Oil, Honey,
Saffron, Sugar, Salt: in Mines of Gold, Silver, Allom, having also Agates, and
Emeraulds, with such abundance of Corn, that it was called, The Granary of the
Roman Empire. In this Country is the Hill Hybla, so famous for Bees, and Honey:
and Aetna, which continually sends forth flames of fire: Here was once the
famous City of Siracuse two and twenty miles in compass: but now Palermo is
the seat of the Spanish Viceroy.

In this Island lived those two great Tyrants, Dionysius the elder, and
Dionysius the younger, who were so odious for their cruelty, that all the
people hated* and continually cursed them, only one old woman prayed for the
life of the latter; and being asked the reason, she answered, that she knew
his Grandfather to be very bad, and when at the prayers of the people, he
was taken away, his son succeeded, that proved far worse than his Father; and
after their curses had prevailed also for the removal of him, came this present
Tyrant, worse than either: for whose life she was resolved to pray, least
after his decease the Devil himself should come amongst them.

Malta is in compass about threescore miles; Its seated on a Rock, over which
the earth is not above three foot thick; yet have they abundance of
Pomegranats, Citrons, Orenges; and other excellent fruit: there is also great
store of Cotton-Wooll, which they sow as we do Corn: In the Acts this Island
is called Melita: It consists of four Cities* and threescore Villages. It was
by Charles the fifth given to the Knights of the Rhodes, newly expelled by the
Great Turk: they are a thousand in number, whereof five hundred must be
always resident in the Island: the others upon summons must make their
appearance. None are admitted into their order, unless they bring a testimony
of their Gentry for six descents. But some make this Island to belong to
Africa, where you may see more of it.

3 Corsica is just against Greece in the Ligurian Sea, and is in length one
hundred and twenty miles: in breadth threescore and ten: the whole circuit
being three hundred twenty and five. Its a fine Country, yields excellent Dogs
for game, good horses, fierce Mastiffs, and a beast called Musoli, found no
where in Europe, but here, and in Sardinia: horned like Rams, and skinned like
Stags, of incredible hardness. It produces the best VVines, Oil, Figs,
Raisons, and Honey, but bitter, and unwholesome. It abounds also with Allom,
Box-trees, Iron-Mines, etc. Its under the Government of Genoa. The people are
churlish, stubborn, poor, and illiterate.

4 Sardinia, which is seven miles distant from Corsica. It contains in length
one hundred and fourscore miles, in breadth fourscore and ten, in circuit five
hundred and threescore. It abounds in Corn, and Cattle, but wants Oil. Their
Bulls do naturally amble, and therefore the Country Peasants usually ride upon
them. Here is the Beast Musoli, of whose skins carried to Corduba, and there
dressed, is made our true Cordovan Leather. The Inhabitants are little of
stature, and prone to Rebellion, and therefore the Spaniard suffers neither
Smith, nor Cutler to live there. The chief City is Calearis, just opposite to
Africa, having a goodly haven much frequented by Merchants, and is the seat of
the Spanish Viceroy.

The Baleans Islands described.
The chief of these Islands are, 1. Majorca, about threescore miles distant
from Spain, and is three hundred miles in compass; the chief Cities are
Majorca, wherein is an university, and Palma.

2. Minorca, distant from the former nine miles; and is in circuit one hundred
and fifty miles: the inhabitants are effeminate: the soil for the most part
fruitful.

Nigh to these are two lesser Islands. 1. Ebuisa, one hundred miles in circuit;
the chief commodity in it is salt. 2. Olhiusa, threescore and ten miles about.
The men and women in both of them are excellent swimmers.

The lesser Islands scattered up and down, have nothing in them remarkable, but
only in one of them called Ischia, is a fountain so hot, that in a short time
it will boil any flesh or fish put into it.

Somewhat without the mouth of the Straits of Gibralter, is the Island of
Gades, or Cales, in length thirteen miles. Anno Christi 1596. it was suddenly
taken by the English under the conduct of Charles, Earl of Nottingham, Robert
Earl of Essex, and Sir Walter Rawleigh: at which time they burnt the Spanish
Indian fleet, consisting of forty ships, whose lading was worth eight millions
of Crowns. They overthrew also the Spanish fleet, consisting of fifty seven men
of war: they took two great Gallions with their luggage: they spoiled and
carried away abundance of warlike ammunition: they slew and took prisoners four
thousand foot, and six hundred horse: whence one made this Distich.

Alcides yields to Devereux; he did see
Thy beauties, Cales, but Devereux conquered thee.
The British Islands discribed.
England is bounded on the East with the German, on the West with the Irish, on
the South with the British Oceans, and on the North with the River Tweed, and
a line drawn from it to Solwal VVestward. Formerly the Northern limit was a
wall cross the Island from Carlisle in Cumberland to the River Tine. It was
built by Severus as a fortress against the Picts: at every miles end was a
Castle; between every Castle many Watch-Towers, and through the walls of every
Tower and Castle went a pipe of brass, which from one Garrison to another
conveyed the least noise without interruption: so that the intelligence of an
invading enemy, was quickly made known to all the borders. When the wall
failed, the strong Towns of Berwick and Carlisle were the chief bars against
invasion.

Its in length three hundred and twenty miles: concerning our commodities, they
are thus reckoned up.

England is stored with Mountains, Bridges, Wool,
With Churches, Rivers, Women beautiful.
The Bridges are in number eight hundred fifty and seven. The Rivers are three
hundred twenty and five, the chief is Thames, which ebbs and flows twice a day
more than threescore miles: The banks of it are so adorned with fair Towns, and
Princely Palaces, that a Dutch Poet made verses of them, thus Englished.

We saw so many VVoods, and Princely Bowers
Sweet Fields, brave Palaces, and stately Towers,
So many Gardens, dressed with curious care,
That Thames with royal Tiber may compare.
The second River is Severne, whose head is in Plinlimmon hill in
Mountgomry-shire, and ends seven miles short of Bristol, washing in the mean
space the walls of Shrewsbury, Worcester, and Gloucester.

The third Trent, so called from thirty kinds of fish found in it. Its
fountain is in Staffordshire, and passing through the Counties of Nottingham,
Lincoln, Lecester, and York, it meets with Humber, the most violent River in
all England.

The fourth Humber, made up of the Rivers, Dun, Are, VVarfe, Your, Darwent,
and principally Ouze, and Trent.

The fifth Medway, a Kentish River, famous for harboring the Royal Navy at
Chatham.

The sixth Tweed, the North East bound of England, on whose Northern bank
stands the strong Town of Berwick.

The seventh Tine, famous for Newcastle, and her inexhaustible Coale-pits.
These with the rest are thus set forth by Draiton the Poet.

Our Floods Queen Thames, for ships, and Swans is crowned,
And stately Severn for her shore is praised,
The Crystal Trent for foords, and fish renowned,
And Avons fame to Albions cliffs is raised.
Carlegion Chester vaunts her holy Dee,
York many wonders of her Ouse can tell:
The Peak her Dove, whose banks so fertile be,
And Kent will say her Medway does excel.
Cotswol commends her Isis to the Tame,
Our Northen borders boast of Tweeds fair flood:
Our VVestern parts extol their VVillies fame,
And the old Lea brags of the Danish blood.
Our women are the most beautiful in the world, without the help of any
adulterate Sophistications. In a complete woman, say the Italians should be
the parts of a Dutch woman from the girdle downward, the parts of a French
woman from the girdle to the shoulders, over which must be placed an English
face. And as their persons, so their privileges are greater here than in any
other Nation, they being not so servilely submiss as the French: nor so
jealously guarded as the Italians: hence England is called the Purgatory of
servants, the hell of horses, and the Paradise of women. And the Italians
commonly say, that if there were a bridge built over the narrow Seas, all the
women of Europe would run into England: For here they have the upper hand in
the streets, and at the Table, the thirds of their husbands estates: their
equal shares in lands; privileges wherewith women in other countries are not
acquainted.

The wool of England is excellent fine, especially that of Cotswold in
Gloucester shire, of Lemster in Hereford shire, and in the I Will of Wight. Of it,
are made excellent broad-cloaths, which are dispersed all over the World,
bringing in much money into the Realm, and setting on work so many poor people.
And the giving of some Cotswold sheep by King Edward the fourth, to Henry King
of Castile, Anno Christi 1465. is counted one of the greatest prejudices that
ever happened to this Nation. The wool transported has brought into us no less
than one million and five hundred thousand pound yearly, and our Lead half as
much.

We have more Parks in England than in all Europe besides. Lately we had
Chases thirty, Forests fifty five, Parks seven hundred forty and five,
replenished with abundance of Game.

Our Mines are of Tin, Lead, and Coals. Beer we have plenty, which being
transported into France, the Lowcountries, and Germany is amongst them highly
esteemed. We have so many well-tuned bells, that Foreigners have called it The
Ringing Island.

Our Air is very temperate: No seas in Europe yield more plenty of fish. Our
Oisters were famous amongst the old Romans. Our Herrings yield great profit to
the Netherlanders. Our Nobility have not such unlimited power as in other
Nations. Our commonalty live in far greater reputation than they do in other
Countries, and have more civility in them.

Our Ministry is learned and religious, and have a more practical, and powerful
manner of Preaching than in any other Nation. Their printed works are so
famous, that many young Scholars of other Nations, come over on purpose to
learn our language, that they may be able to make use of our Books; they are
also the best provided for of any Ministers in the reformed Churches.

The Diet of England is for the most part flesh: In London alone there are
slain and uttered, no fewer than sixty seven thousand and five hundred beefes,
and six hundred seventy five thousand sheep, besides Calves, Lambs, Swine, and
Poultry, in a year: I believe now far more: The Spanish Gondamor when he was
here, having often seen our Shambles, said that there was more flesh here eaten
in a month, than in all Spain in a year. A Forreigner coming to London, and
seeing such multitudes of people in the streets, wondered where there could be
meat to fill so many bellies: but when he had seen our Shambles, and markets,
he wondered where there could be bellies to eat so much meat.

Our Navy is called the walls of England, the like ships for service are not to
be found in the World, and our Mariners, and Soldiers are not to be
equalled. In King Edward the third his time two hundred of our ships near
Scluse overcame four hundred of the French: of which they sunk two hundred
sail, and slew thirty thousand Soldiers. In eighty eight a few of our Queens
ships overthrew the Spanish Invincible Armado, consisting of one hundred thirty
and four great Gallions: Sir Francis Drake with four ships, took from the
Spaniard one million, and one hundred eighty nine thousand, and two hundred
Ducats in his voyage Anno Christi. 1587. And again, with five and twenty ships
he awed the Ocean, sacked St. Jago, Domingo, and Carthagena, bringing away
with him besides much treasure, two hundred and forty pieces of Ordnance. Our
Country men Drake, and Cavendish have sailed round about the World. I omit the
voyage to Cales mentioned before. Sir Richard Creenvil in one of the Queens
ships called the Revenge, wherein were but one hundred and fourscore Soldiers,
and of them ninety so sick as not able to fight, yet maintained he a Sea Fight
for four and twenty hours against above fifty of the Spanish Gallions, and
though when his powder was spent to the last barrel, he yielded on honorable
terms, yet before, he had killed one thousand of the Spaniards, and sunk four
of their greatest vessels. And what victories we have had of late over all the
Navies of the Lowcountries, I omit to speak of, because they are fresh in every
ones memory. In land service our soldiers are able to endure, and resolute to
undertake the hardest enterprises: witness our wars, and conquests in Spain,
France, Ireland and Scotland, and the Netherlands assisted by us.

England is a most fertile, and a most potent Island, as well for situation, as
for men and ships: and the Inhabitants are good soldiers both by sea and land,
in valor and courage, not inferior to any one Nation whatsoever, and are more
apt to offend by temerity, and overmuch forwardness, than by cowardice, It
excells all other nations in Mastiffs, Cocks of the Game, and Women, who are
incomparably beautiful, and therefore have great influence upon the men: yea
the Queens have commanded here more absolutely, and have been much better
obeyed and respected, than the Kings.

The division of England is into forty shires, and nine thousand seven hundred
and twenty five Parishes, beside Chapels: In these are five hundred fourscore
and five Market Towns, besides Cities: the chief are Shrewsbury, Northampton,
South-hampton, Lecester, Warwick, etc.

Our Universities are two, Cambridge, and Oxford, which for number, and beauty
of Colleges, multitudes of Students, and largeness of revenues, are not to be
equalled in the Christian world. I will not determine which is of greater
antiquity, this question having been agitated by so many.

In several places of England there is excellent white salt made: I shall
describe the manner of the making of it at Nantwich only. There is one salt
spring, which they call the Brine-pit, standing close by the River Weever, from
whence the Brine is conveyed into the several Wich-houses, and when the Bell
rings, they begin to make fire under the Leads, wherein they boil the said
salt water, and as it seeths, the Wallers (which are commonly women) do with a
wooden Rake gather the Salt from the bottom, which they put into long wicker
baskets, and so the water voideth, and the Salt remains. In some other places
they boil it in Iron pans with coals, but they say the salt is not so white.

The Cities in England Described. The City of London Described.
No Records set down the Original of this ancient City. A City it was when
Caesar first entered Britain, and by the Testimony of Tacitus, Ptolemy, and
Antonine, was called Londinium, and by Ammianus Marcellinus, for her successive
prosperity, Augusta, the greatest title that can be given to any. In regard of
both elements it is most happy, as being situate in a most rich, and fertile
soil, abounding with plenty, and store of all things, and on the gentle ascent,
and rising of a hill hard by the Thames side, which by his safe and deep
channel is able to entertain the greatest ships, which daily bring in such
store of rich Merchandise from all parts of the World, that it striveth at
this day with the Mart towns in Christendom for the second place, and
affords a most sure, and beautiful rode for shipping. This City does show her
self as the Cedar amongst shrubs: It was the seat of the British Kings, and is
the model of the Land, and Mart of the World: For thither are brought the Silks
of Asia, the Spices of Africa, the Balms from Grecia, and the Riches from both
the Indies. No City has been so long famous, nor in civil Government can be
compared with her. Her walls were first built by Constantine the great, at the
request of his mother Helena, reared with rough stone, and british brick, three
English miles in compass: through which are seven fair Gates, besides posterns.
A long the Thames this wall at first ranged with gates, the one Douregate, now
Dowgate, the other Billingsgate, a receptacle for ships. In the midst of the
City was set a mile mark (as the like was in Rome also) from whence they
measured their stations, which stands till this day, and is commonly known by
the name of London stone. St. Peter's in Cornhill is thought to have been the
Cathedral of Restitutus, a Christian Bishop in Constantine the great's time,
which was afterward removed to St. Paul's, whose greatness exceeds all others,
and spires had so high that twice they were consumed by lightning from heaven:
It has in it besides this Church, one hundred twenty and one Churches more,
viz. ninety and six within the walls, and sixteen without, but within the
liberties, and nine more in her suburbs. Its divided into six and twenty Wards,
governed by so many Aldermen, a Lord Mayor, and two Sheriffs, the yearly choice
whereof was granted them by Patent from King John: In whose time also a Bridge
of stone was built over the Thames upon twenty Arches, built of excellent
freestone, and each Arch being sixty foot high, and full twenty in distance
from one another; so that for length, breadth, beauty, and building, the like
is not again to be found in the world.

King John gave certain void places in London to the City to build upon, and
the profits thereof were to go toward the charges of building and repairing the
same bridge: and the Mason who was the chief wo^kman in building it, erected a
large chapel upon it, at his own charges, and largely endowed it, which is
since turned to a dwelling house. It was finished Anno Christi 1209. having
been thirty and three years in building. Afterward sundry beautiful houses
were built upon it, that it seems a street rather than a bridge, and many
charitable men have given lands, houses, and sums of money toward the
maintenance of it.

At the East end of this City stands the Tower: A most famous and goodly
Citadel, encompassed round with thick, and strong walls full of lofty and
stately Turrets, fenced with a broad and deep moat, furnished with a gallant
Magazine of warlick Ammunition, and other buildings besides, so that it
resembles a big town.

Concerning the Church of St. Paul, an ancient writer says, that it contains
in length six hundred and ninety feet, the breadth thereof is one hundred and
thirty foot; the height of the West arched roof from the ground is one hundred
and two foot, and the new fabric from the ground is eighty eight foot high.
The stone work of the steeple, from the plain ground rose in height two hundred
and sixty foot, and the Timber frame upon the same was two hundred seventy and
four foot high, the Spire before it was burnt down, was five hundred thirty and
four foot high. About the time of William the Conqueror, when Musters were made
of able men to bear arms, London brought into the field under their colors
forty thousand foot men, and twenty thousand horsemen. It has often, and is
daily enlarged with new buildings, and spacious Suburbs stretched forth from
the Gates a great length on every side, but Westward especially, which are the
greatest, and best peopled: In which are twelve Inns for students of the Common
Law. The four principal houses are the Inner Temple, the middle Temple, Grates
Inn, and Lincolns Inn: six smaller belong to the Chancery: besides two Inns
more for the Sergeants at Law.

These Western Suburbs are so carried on, that they join to London another City
called Westminster, famous for the Seat, and Sepulcher of our Kings, and for
the Courts of justice kept every Term in Westminster Hall. No walls are built
about this City: and those of London are left to show rather what it was, than
what it is: whose Citizens, as the Lacedaemonians did, do repute their strength
to consist in their men, and not in their walls. In the City of Westminster
along by the Thames side, are many stately buildings for the Nobles, and great
men of the Land, as Essex house, Arundel house, Summerset house, etc. The Abbey
Church in Westminster, was the last time built by King Henry the third, of
excellent workmanship, supported with sundry rows of Marble Pillars* and the
roof covered over with sheets of Lead: a piece of work that cost fifty years
labor in building: It was afterward much enlarged toward the West end, by
the succeeding Abbots: and at the East end King Henry the seventh built for the
burial of himself, and his children, a Chapel of admirable, and stately
workmanship: called by Leland, the VVonder of the World: for a man would think
that all the curious, and exquisite work that can be devised, is there
compacted together; wherein is to be seen his own most stately, and
magnificent monument all of massy and solid Copper.

Westminster Hall was built from the ground by King Richard the second, and
made his own habitation, which continued so till Henry the eights time, who
removed it to White Hall, which formerly belonged to Cardinal VVoolsey. The
New Exchange was built by the Earl of Salisbury, and so named by King James.

But to return a little again to London: There are in it many public and
beautiful buildings, as that famous Senate House called Guild Hall, built by
Sir Thomas Knowls, Lord Mayor: Leaden Hall, a large, and goodly building,
erected by Simon Eire, to be a common Granarie, wherein to lay up Corn, to
bring down the price thereof in time of a dearth: But especially the Burse,
which Queen Elizabeth with a solemn Ceremony, named the Royal Exchange, erected
upon Pillars for the use of Merchants, and ornament of the City: It was set up
by Sir Thomas Gresham, Citizen, and Knight: A most magnificent work it is,
whether you respect the model of the building, the resort of Merchants from all
Nations thither, or the store of wares therein.

The Royal Exchange.
This Royal Exchange was erected in the year, 1566. in this order: The ground
whereon it stands, and the houses, were purchased by the Citizens of London: It
cost them above three thousand five hundred thirty and two pounds: the houses
they sold for four hundred seventy and eight pounds, to such persons as should
pull them down, and carry them away: Then was the ground levelled at the
charges of the City, and possession thereof was by some Aldermen, given to Sir
Thomas Gresham, Knight, and Agent for Queen Elizabeth, thereupon to build a
Burse at his own proper charges, and he on the seventh of June, laid the first
foundation Brick, being accompanied with some Aldermen, every one laying a
piece of gold upon his Brick, which the workmen took for themselves, and
forthwith followed their work with such diligence, that in September, Anno
Christi, 1567. the same was finished, and covered with slate.

In the year 1570. January the three and twenty: the Queen came from
Summerset-house through Thridneedle-street to Sir Thomas Greshams house in
Bishopsgate-street, where she dined; and after dinner going through Cornhil,
entered the Burse, viewed every part of it, especially the Pawn, which was
furnished with all sorts of fine, and rich ware, and then caused the said Burse
by an Herald, and Trumpet, to be proclaimed by the name of the Royal Exchange,
and so to be called from thenceforth, and not otherwise.

Besides which, this Sir Thomas Gresham gave a most spacious house, sometimes
his own habitation, one part thereof to be an Hospital for poor people, and
the other to the advancement of learning, now known by the name of Gresham
College; standing between Bishopsgate-street, and Broad-street, and instituted
professors of Divinity, Law, Physic, Astronomy, Geometry, Music, and
Rhethorick, allowing them fifty pounds per annum a piece, besides Chambers, and
other accommodations.

Gresham College.
The first professors in this College were Mr. Anthony VVootton, for Divinity:
Doctor Matthew Guin for Physic: Doctor Henry Mountlow for Civil Law: Doctor
John Bull for Music: Mr. Beerwood for Astronomy: Mr. Henry Bridges for
Geometry: and Mr. Caleb Willis for Rhethorick: These Lectures are read daily
in Tearm-time, except Sabbaths, by every one upon his day, in the morning
betwixt nine and ten a clock in Latin; and in the afternoon betwixt two and
three in English, notice whereof is given by ringing the Exchange-Bell at these
hours. Only the Music Lecture is read in English on Saturdayes between ten and
eleven in the morning, and between three and four in the afternoon.

But to pass by Sion College (whereof Doctor White was the founder) which is
governed by a President, two Deans, and four Assistants yearly chosen, and the
many Hospitals, and other public buildings yet amongst them.

The Charterhouse described.
We may not pass by that greatest, and most noble work that ever was done by
one man, and he a subject, which was the building and endowing of the
Charter House by Mr. Thomas Sutton for the entertainment of youth; and decayed
Gentlemen, who by maims in the wars, or by other casualties were undone: where
their provision is so bountious, that it can hardly be matched in Europe: the
very house and appurtenances cost him thirteen thousand pound, besides which,
he endowed it with five manners in Essex, two in Lincolnshire, eight in
VVilt-shire, together with near four thousand acres of rich pasture ground in
that County. Two in Cambridge-shire, beside his lands in Hackney-Marsh, and
Tottenham in the County of Middlesex, and with all, and singular the VVoods,
Reversions, Presentations, and Rights of him the said Thomas Sutton in any of
the aforesaid Manors; over and above he gave five thousand pound to make
additions to his Hospital, and for some other charitable uses. And to the
Treasury of the house to defend their right if need were, one thousand pound,
besides some other gifts.

We may in the next place take notice how commodiously London is supplied with
water, conveyed by pipes under ground from excellent springs, some of them at a
remote distance: besides the New-River water brought twenty miles from Chadwel,
and Amwel, in Hartford-shire, to the North side of the City near Islington,
where a large Cistern is made to receive it. This work was undertaken by Mr.
Hugh Middleton, and begun February twenty, Anno Christi 1608. and in five years
space was fully accomplished: by reason of the inequality of the ground, the
Trench in some places descended full thirty foot: In others it was mounted over
Valleys in a Trough, born up with wooden Arches, some fixed deep in the ground,
others rising in height above three and twenty foot.

Another convenience of water was devised by Peter Maurice, a Dutchman, who by
means of a wheel brings water out of the Thames, into a great part of the City.

Of the beauty and excelleny of this City one made these verses.

Along Thames banks outstretched far the City London lies,
Resembling much her Mother Troy; aloft she lifts her eyes.
While on a gentle rising hill she bears toward East:
A City pleasant for her site, in air and soil much blessed.
Religious, and populous; and hence she looks on high,
And well deserves for to be called, the Britans Britany.
For learning new Lutetia, Ormus for trade, and wealth:
A second Rome for valiant men; Chrysae for plate, and health.
Salisbury described.
In Wilsthire the City of Salisbury was built about the year 1218. at which
time Richard Poor, the Bishop (purposing first to begin with the house of God)
in a most delectable place, began to found a most stately, and beautiful
Minster, which, with an exceeding high spired steeple, and double cross Isles
on both sides he with great cost finished forty years after* viz. one thousand
two hundred fifty and eight, concerning which Church Daniel Rogers made verses
thus in English.

Wonders to tell: how many days in one whole year there been
So many windows in that Church ('men say) are to be seen 365.

So many Pillars made by Art, of Marble there appear.
As hours do flit, and fly away throughout the running year: 8820.

So many Gates do entrance give as months one year do make, 13

A thing well known for truth, though most it for a wonder take.
A Cloister it has besides on the South side, for largeness, and fine
workmanship inferior to none, whereunto adjoined the Bishops Palace: and on
the other side an high bell-Tower, passing strong, standing by it self, apart
from the Minster: Through the City there are Rills, and sewers of water in
every street: It is passing well inhabited, and frequented, plentiful of all
things, especially of fish; adorned with a very stately Marketplace, wherein
stands their common Hall of Timber-work, a very beautiful building. Camb.
Brit.

Bristow described.
The City of Bristow has the River Avon passing through the midst of it: It
stands partly in Sommerset, and partly in Gloucester-shire; But is of it self a
County incorporate: It is situate somewhat high between Avon, and the little
River From: sometimes it was environed with a double wall: it is so beautified
with buildings public and private, that it fully answers the name of
Bright-stow. It has common sewers or sinks so made to run under the ground for
the conveyance, and washing away of all filth, that it is very cleanly, and
wholesome, whereupon there is no use here of Carts; it is excellently furnished
with all things necessary for man's life, so populous, and well inhabited, that
next after London, and York, it may justly challenge the chiefest place of all
the Cities in England. It has a very commodious Haven, which admits Ships
under sail into the very bosom of the City; on the Southside, Radcliffe (by a
stone Bridge with houses on each hand built upon it, which makes it more like a
street, than a Bridge) is joined to the City. It has Hospitals in every
quarter thereof, for the benefit of the poor, and fair Churches. The most
beautiful of all which, is St. Mary's of Radcliff without the walls, into which
there is a most stately ascent up many stairs: large withal, and finely and
curiously wrought, with an arched roof of stone over the head, artificially
embowed: a steeple also of an exceeding height, which was founded by one
William Cannings an Alderman of the City. Hard by there is another Church
called the Temple, the Tower whereof when the Bell rings shakes to, and fro,
whereby it has cloven it self from the rest of the building. There is also St.
Stephens Church, The Tower steeple whereof being of a mighty height, was most
sumptuously and artificially built by one Shipward, alias Barstable, a Citizen,
and Merchant. On the East, and North side its fenced with the River From,
which gently falling into the Avon, makes a dainty harbor for ships, with a
convenient wharf, called the Kay: under which, between Avon and From there is
a plain, set round about with trees, yielding a most pleasant walk: On the
South East there is a large and strong Castle for the defense of the City:
Beyond the River From (which has a Bridge over it) there arises an high
hill, from which is a fair, and goodly prospect of the City, and haven: upon
the top of this Hill, where it spreads into a plain, shadowed with a double row
of trees, is an handsome School. This City is further beautified with many
stately buildings: amongst the rest is the Cathedral Church, etc. Near unto
this City is an high Cliffe by the Avons side, called St. Vincents Rock, very
full of Diamonds, which are not much set by, because of the plenty of them:
They are of a bright and transparent color, matching, if not passing the
Indian Diamonds, in hardness only they are inferior to them: Nature has
framed them four or six pointed with smooth sides; as if cut by a Lapidary.
There is another Rock also on the West side full of Diamonds, which by a
wonderful work of nature, are enclosed as young ones within the bowels of
hollow, and reddish flints.

There are within this City, and suburbs, twenty fair Churches, whereof
eighteen are parish Churches: there is no dunghill in all the City, nor a sink
that comes from any house into the street, but all is conveyed under ground:
they carry all upon sleads, and bring no Carts into the City. The water at the
Kay sometimes ebbs and flows forty foot in height. Four miles below it, the
Avon falls into the Severn; the Bridge is half as long as London bridge, and
yet has but four Arches in it.

The City of Wells Described.
Near unto Mendip hills, which are rich in Lead-Mines, stands the City of
Wells, so named from the springs, or wells that boil up there, which for the
multitude of Inhabitants, for fair, and stately buildings, is worthy to be
regarded. A goodly Church it has, and a College founded by King Ina. Near
unto the Church, there is a spring called St. Andrews well, from whence comes
such a confluence of water, as by and by makes a swift brook. The Church is
throughout very beautiful, but the frontispice thereof in the West end is most
excellent: for it rises up from the foot to the top all of Imagery, in curious
and antike wise wrought of stone carved, and embowed very artificially.

The City of Bath Described.
This City is seated low in a plain, environed round about with hills, almost
of one height, out of which certain rills of fresh water flow continually to
the great commodity of the Citizens; within the City there bubble and boil up
in three several places hot springs of water, of a Sea color, sending up from
them thin vapors, and a kind of a strong sent withal, by reason that the
water is drilled, and strained through veins of Brimstone, and a clammy kind
of earth called Bitumen. These springs are very medicinal, and of great virtue
to cure bodies, overcharged and benumbed with corrupt humors: by their heat
causing much sweat. Of all these the Cross-Bath is of the most mild, and
temperate nature, having twelve seats of stone in the sides of it, and is
enclosed within a wall. A second, distant from this not fully two hundred foot
is much hotter, thence called the Hot-Bath, adjoining to which is a Spittle or
Lazar-house, built by Reginald Bishop of Bath for the relief of poor diseased
persons. The third and greatest is called the Kings-Bath, walled also round
about, and fitted with thirty two seats of Arched work. The City is fortified
with walls; wherein are set certain Antique Images, and Roman inscriptions; and
has in it a fair and large Cathedral Church.

The City of Excester in Devonshire Described.
The City of Excester stands upon the River Ex, whence it receives its name. It
is pleasantly seated upon the gentle ascent of an hill: The Walls of it, which
were first built by King Athelstone, are in a manner round, only toward the Ex
it rangeth almost in a strait line, having six gates for entrance, and many
watch-Towers interposed betwixt, whose compass contains above one thousand
and five hundred paces, or a mile and an half, having Suburbs running out a
great way on each side. In it there are fifteen Parish Churches: and in the
highest part thereof near the East Gate, stands a Castle called Rugemont,
commanding the whole City, and territory about it, and has a very pleasant
prospect into the Sea. In the East quarter of the City stands the Cathedral
Church, having many fair houses round about it. By reason of some Wears the
River is so stopped up that no vessels can come nearer the City than Topsham,
which is three miles off. The soil about it is but barren: yet by reason of the
statlinesse of the place, the riches of the Inhabitants, and the frequent
concourse of strangers, all kinds of commodities are there so plentiful, that a
man can ask for no necessary but he may have it.

The City of Winchester Described.
In the County of Hamtshire is the City of Winchester, situated in a fruitful
and pleasant place, being a valley under hills, having a River on the East, and
a Castle on the West: the circuit of her Walls are well near two English
miles, containing one thousand eight hundred and eighty paces, through which
open six gates for entrance. In this City are seven Churches, besides the
Minster which is seated about the midst of it, and built very sumptuously.

The City of Chichester in the County of Sussex Described.
The City of Chichester is walled about in a circular round form: The Lavant, a
pretty riveret, running hard by it on the West, and South sides. Four gates it
has opening to the four quarters of the world, from whence the streets lead
directly, and cross themselves in the midst, where the market is kept, and
where Bishop Robert Read erected a fair market house of stone, supported with
pillars round about it. Between the West, and South Gates stands the Cathedral
Church: not very great, but handsome, and neat, having a spire steeple of stone
rising a very great height.

The City of Canterbury in Kent Described.
Canterbury is a very Ancient and famous City in Kent, much renowned both for
the situation, and great fertility of the soil adjoining, as also for the walls
enclosing it round about: By reason likewise of the Rivers watering it, and
commodiousnesse of the woods there about; besides the vicinity of the Sea,
yiedling store of Fish to serve it. And though it was sore shaken in the Danish
wars, and consumed in a great part sundry times by fire, yet rose it up
always again more beautiful than it was before. The Cathedral is raised aloft
near the heart of the City with great Majesty, and stateliness.

The City of Rochester Described.
In the same County is the City of Rochester, seated in a bottom, fortified on
the one side with a Marsh, the river Medway, and weak walls. It is now
stretched out with large Suburbs, on the East, West, and South sides: The
Cathedral Church, was built by Bishop Gundulph, a Norman, Anno Christi 1080.
near unto it stands an old ruinous Castle, fortified formerly both by art and
situation. At the end of the City there is a very goodly Bridge of stone
excellently Arched, built by Sir Robert Knowls, at the end whereof Sir John
Cobham erected a Chapel: and the bridge is daintily coped with Iron bars;
under which the River Medway, swelling with a violent, and swift stream, makes
a loud roaring noise.

The City of Gloucester Described.
The City of Gloucester is a very fine, and beautiful City, both for the number
of Churches, and buildings therein. It lies stretched out in length over the
Severn: and on that side where it is not guarded by the River; it has in some
places a strong wall for defense. The Cathedral Church is a stately building,
with an exceeding high and fair steeple. In an Arch of this Church, there is a
wall built in the form of a semicircle full of corners, with such an Artificial
devise, that if a man speak with never so low a voice at the one part thereof,
and another lay his ear to the other; which is a good way off, he may easily
hear every syllable.

The City of Oxford Described.
Where the River Cherwel meets with Isis, and pleasant Ilets lie dispersed by
the sundry disseverings of waters, there this famous City, and University of
Oxford, shows it self aloft in a champion plain, from whence Religion, and
learning have been spread into all the parts of England. A fair and goodly City
it is, whether we respect the seemly beauty of private houses, or the stately
magnificence of public buildings, together with the wholesome situation, and
pleasant prospect thereof. For the hills beset with woods, do so environ the
plain, that as on the one side they exclude the pestilent Southwind, and the
tempestuous West-wind on the other, so they let in the clearing East Wind only,
and the North-East-wind with all, which frees it from all corruption, whence
sometimes it was called Bellositum.

The City of Eli Described.
The City of Eli is situate in the midst of great and large Fens, and was
formerly famous for the reputed holiness of the Nuns there residing: and for a
stately Monastery, so rich that the Abbot thereof, not long after William the
Conquerors time, laid up every year in his own Coffers, a thousand and four
hundred pounds. King Henry the first made it a Bishops Sea, promoting thereto
one Hervey, who sought by all means to advance the dignity of his Church: For
which end he obtained of the King that it might be Toll-free: he made a way
also from Exing to Eli through the Fens, of six miles in length: and the Monks
growing rich, the Cathedral Church being much decayed through age, they by
little and little built it, and brought it to the ample stateliness which now
it has. A Lanthorn it has at the very top thereof, just over the Quire
supported by eight Pillars, and raised upon them right Artificially, built by
John Hothum the Bishop: and under the Church toward the North, stands St.
Mary's chapel, a singular fine piece of work, built by Simon Montacut^ Bishop:
The City it self is not much to be accounted of either for beauty, or resort
of people to it, as having an unwholesome air by reason of the Fens round about
it.

The City of Lincoln Described.
The City of Lincoln is large, and well inhabited, and frequented, It stands
upon the side of an hill, where the River VVitham bends his course Eastward,
and being divided with three small channels, waters the Lower part of the
City. In the highest part of the City the Cathedral is erected, a stately
structure, being built through out, not only most sumptuously, but with rare
and singular workmanship, most beautiously: especially the forefront at the
West end, which in a sort ravisheth, and allureth the eyes of all that
judiciously view it; very ancient this City is, and has been far larger, and
more populous: It has in it fifty Parish Churches: whereof at this day there
remain only fifteen besides the Minster.

The City of Norwich in Northfolk described
Norwich is situated upon the River Yare: the form of it is somewhat long,
being from South to North a mile and an half long, and in breadth about half so
much, drawing it self in by little and little, in the Southend; making in a
manner a sharp point; compassed it is about with strong walls, beautified with
many Turrets orderly placed, and twelve gates: only it is not walled on the
East side, where the River (after it has with many windings in and out,
watered the North part of the City, having four Bridges for passage over it) is
a sufficient defense with his deep channel, and high steep banks. It
flourishes with wealth, plenty of inhabitants, great resort of strangers, fair
buildings, and has in it about thirty Parish Churches: on the East side of it
stands a very fair Cathedral Church near unto the Castle, built upon a very
high hill, which was compassed about with an exceeding deep ditch. In the midst
of the City near the Marketplace is a very fair Townhouse, which on
Market-dayes is plentifully furnished with all things necessary for man's life.
The Netherlanders being driven away by the Duke d' Alva's cruelty, repairing
hither in great numbers, brought in the making of Says, Bays, and other
stuff, to the great gain of the Citizens. Anno Christi 1583. the Citizens
conveyed water out of the River in pipes by an artificial instrument, into the
highest parts of the City.

The City of Coventry in Warwickshire described.
Coventry is a City very commodiously seated, large, sweet, and neat, fortified
with very strong walls which are about three miles in compass, through which
are thirteen gates for entrance, most of them very stately, and strongly
built, besides eighteen other Towers in several parts of the wall for defense.
A little River called Shirburn runs through the City, which is beautified with
many fair and goodly houses, amongst which there rise up on high two Churches,
of rare workmanship: St. Michaels, and Trinity, standing one hard by another,
with stately spire steeples of a very great height. In the midst of the City is
the Marketplace, called the Cross-cheaping, and therein a Cross, or Pillar of
stone of most exquisite, and admirable workmanship: there is also a very fair
Grammer-school, and a neat Library at the end of it, with convenient
habitations for the Master, and Usher: near unto it is VVel-street, and therein
a very large fountain that continually sends forth great plenty of excellent
water. The City had very large suburbs belonging to it, especially in the East
and West ends, most whereof were broken down in our late Civil wars, and a
large Trench made on the outside of the walls.

The City of Worcester described.
Under the City of Worcester runs the Severn with a slow pace, as admiring, and
wondering at the City as it passes by: and truly worthy it is of admiration,
whether you respect the antiquity, or the beauty thereof. It stands in a place
rising somewhat with a gentle ascent by the Rivers side that has a fair
Bridge, with a Tower over it. It is well, and strongly walled; and the
inhabitants are much enriched by the trade of clothing. It is one thousand six
hundred and fifty paces about the walls, through which seven Gates give
entrance, with five other VVatch Towers for defense, there are in it diverse
Churches besides the Cathedral, which is seated on the South side of the City;
and is a passing fair and stately building, adorned with the Tombs, and
Monuments of King John, Prince Arthur, diverse of the Beauchamps, etc.

The City of Lichfield in Staffordshire described.
Lichfield is a very ancient City, known unto Bid by the name of Lichidfield,
i. e. the field of dead bodies, by reason of a number of Christians there
martyred in the bloody persecution under the Emperor Dioclesian. This City is
low seated, of a good largeness, and fair withal, divided into two parts by a
shallow pool of clear water; which parts are yet joined into one by two
Bridges, or causway's made over it, having sluices to let out the water, the
South part is the greater, consisting of diverse streets, having in it a School,
and an Hospital of St. John, founded for the relief of the poor. The farther
part is the less, but beautified with a very goodly Cathedral Church: which is
round about compassed with a very fair wall, Castle-like: This Church mounteth
up on high with three Pyramids or spires of stone, making an excellent show,
and for elegant, and proportionable building yields to few Cathedrals in
England: But by our late civil wars it is much defaced.

The City of Westchester described.
The City of Chester is built foursquare, and is enclosed with a strong wall
that is above two miles in compass, and has in it eleven Parish Churches, the
fairest of which is that of St. John's without Eastgate, being a very stately
building: near unto the River Dee stands the Castle upon a rockie-hill, where
the Courts Palatine, and the Assizes are kept twice a year. The houses are
built very fair, and along the chief streets are galleries, or walking-places,
they call them Rows, having shops on both sides, in which a man may walk dry
from one end to the other. Here King Edgar in a magnificent manner triumphed
over the British Princes: for himself sitting at the foredeck of his Barge,
Kennadie King of the Scots: Malcolin King of Cumberland; Mucon, King of Man,
and of the Isles, with all the Princes of Wales, coming to do homage, like
watermen working at the Oar; rowed him along the River Dee in a triumphant
manner. There is in it a very large, and fair Cathedral Church, wherein is the
Tomb of Henry the fourth, Emperor of Germany, who (as they say) gave over his
Empire, and lived here an Eremites life. This City wants not any thing required
in a flourishing City, but that the Sea, being offended, and angry (as it were)
at certain Mills, and a causway made cross the channel of the River Dee, has
by degrees drawn himself back, and affords not unto the City the commodity of
an haven, which formerly it did enjoy. The wall has in it four fair gates,
opening toward the four quarters of heaven, besides three Posterns, and seven
watch-Towers.

Before the desolations made by our late civil wars, without the East, and
North gate, the City extended herself in her suburbs, with very fair streets,
adorned with goodly buildings, both of Gentlemen's houses, and fair Innes for
the entertainment of strangers. The Watergate leads to the River of Dee,
where it enters into the mouth of the Sea, and by which is a fine spacious
piece of ground, called the Rood-eye, yielding pleasure and profit: and upon
which the Citizens walk for the air, and use sundry recreations. The
Bridge-Gate has lately been beautified by a seemly water-work of stone, built
steeple-wise, by the invention, and charge of Mr. John Tyrer, and is of
excellent use for conveying the River-water into the Citizens houses thro^gh
pipes of Lead, and wood, into almost all parts of the City.

The City of Hereford described.
The City of Hereford is seated amongst pleasant medows, and plentiful
Cornfieldsd, compassed almost round about with Rivers; on the North, and West
sides with one that has no name, on the South side with the River Wy, that
comes out of Wales. It is walled about, having six Gates ^or entrance, and
fifteen Watch-Towers for defense, extending in compass to one thousand five
hundred paces. The Normans upon the side of Wy, built in it a mighty great and
strong Castle, which time has so defaced, that now there remains nothing but
the ruins of it. The greatest glory that this City had, was when King
Athelstan brought the Lords of Wales into it, and forced them yearly by way of
tribute to pay him (besides Hounds and Hawks) twenty pounds of gold, and there
hundred pounds of silver by weight.

The City of York described.
The City of York is very ancient, and of so great estimation formerly, that
the Roman Emperors kept their Courts there. It is at this day the second City
of England, the fairest in all the Country, and a singular, both safeguard and
ornament to all the Northern parts. A pleasant place, large, and stately, well
fortified, beautifully adorned, as well with private, as public buildings,
rich, populous, and was lately an Archiepiscopal See. The River Ouse flowing
with a gentle stream from the North part, Southward, cutteth it in twain, and
divides it as it were into two Cities, which are conjoined with a stone Bridge,
having in it a mighty Arch of extraordinary bigness. The West part is
compassed in with a very fair wall, and the River together, foursquare wise,
and gives entrance only at one gate, from which a long and broad Street
reaches unto the very bridge; which is beautified with handsome houses, having
Gardens, and Orchards, planted on the backside on either hand, and behind them
fields even to the walls, for exercise and disport. On the East side the houses
stand very thick, and the Streets are narrower, and it is fortified also with a
strong wall, and on the South-East it is defended with the deep channel of the
muddy River Fosse, which entering into the heart of the City by a blind way,
has a Bridge over it with houses built upon it, and so close ranged one by
another, that a man would judge it a Street rather than a Bridge, and so a
little lower it runs into the Ouse, where at there confluence, a strong and
stately Castle was built that commanded the City, but is now gone to decay.
Toward the North stands the Cathedral Church, an excellent fair and stately
Fabric.

King Henry the Eight appointed here a Council, not unlike to the Parliaments
in France, to decide and determine the causes, and controversies of these
Northern parts, according to equity and conscience, consisting of a Lord
President, certain Counselors, a Secretary, and under officers. This City is
governed by a Lord Mayor, twelve Aldermen, many Chamberlains, a Recorder, a
Town Clerk, six Sergeants at Mace, and two Squires, which are the Sword Bearer,
and common Sergeant, who with a great Mace goes on the left hand of the Sword.

The City of Durham Described.
The City of Durham is seated high, and is passing strong withal, yet takes
it up no great circuit of ground: It is of an Oval form, and environed on every
side, save on the North, with the River Weer, and fortified with a wall:
Toward the Southside stands the Cathedral Church: built high, and stately,
with an high Tower in the midst, and two Spires at the West end. In the
midst is a Castle placed as it were between two stone bridges over the River.
Northward from the Castle is a spacious Market place, and St. Nicholas Church,
from whence there runs out for a great length North-East, a Suburb compassed
on two sides with the River, like as other on both sides beyond the River,
which lead unto the Bridges, and each of them have their several Churches.
Venerable Bede lies under a marble Tomb, in the Cathedral Church of this City.

The City of Carlisle in the County of Cumberland Described.
The City of Carlisle is passing commodiously, and pleasantly seated between
several rivers; being guarded on the North side with the Channel of Eden, on
the East with Petteril, on the West with Caud: Besides which natural fences, it
is fortified with strong walls of stone, with a Castle, and a Citadel: In form
it is somewhat long, running out from West to East: On the West side stands the
Castle, fair, and large. Almost in the midst of the City, rises on high the
Cathedral Church, the upper and newer part of it being very artificially, and
curiously wrought: On the West side stands the Citadel built by King Henry the
eight, very strongly and with bulworks.

Wales Described.
Wales is bounded with the Seas on all sides but the East, where it is
separated from England by the River Dee, and a line drawn to the River VVie: or
rather by that huge ditch cast up by King Offa, which begins where Wie falls
into Severn, and reaches unto Chester, even fourscore and four miles in
length. The Country is very Mountainous, and barren, yet by the industry of the
Inhabitants is made fruitful; their chiefest commodities are woollen Flannels,
Cottons, Bays, etc. brought weekly to Oswestre, the farthest Town in
Shropshire, and thence dispersed into other Countries. It is divided into
North Wales, and South Wales, in both which are twelve shires, having in them
one Chase, thirteen Forests, thirty and six Parks, ninety and nine bridges:
The chiefest Rivers are Dee, VVie, Conwy, Tivy, and Chedhidy. The Welsh
Language is least mixed with foreign words of any used in Europe, but having
many Consonants in it, is less pleasing. The People are choleric and hasty,
but very loving each to other. In Wales are one thousand and sixteen Parishes,
of which fifty and six are market Towns, besides the Cities, which are four,
viz. St. David's in Pembrookshire, Bangor in Carnarvonshire, Asaph in
Flintshire, and Landaff in Glamorganshire. In Cardiganshire were found some
silver Mines by the industry of Mr. Thomas Middleton, that yielded some good
quantity of Silver.

The twelve shires of Wales are, Pembrookshire, Caermardenshire,
Glamorganshire, Brecknockshire, Radnorshire, Cardiganshire, Moungomeryshire,
Mertonethshire, Denbighshire, Flintshire, Caernarvonshire, and the Isle of
Anglesey, which is separated from the main Land by the River Moenay, wherein
are Beu-marish, and Holi-head, common passages to Ireland.

Scotland described.
Scotland is separated from England by the Rivers Tweed, and Solway, and the
Cheviot-Hills, reaching from one river to the other: Its in length four hundred
and eighty miles: In breadth much less, no place being threescore miles from
the Sea: Its divided into High-land and Low-land. The people of the High-land
living on the VVestern parts of Scotland, have some civility: but those in the
out Isles are very barbarous: The Low-landers are in dispositions, and language
almost like the English. Scotland is far more barren than England. The chief
commodities are course clothes, Freeses, Fish, Hides, Lead-oare, etc. The
principal Rivers are Forth, Clada, and Tay, all navigable.

In Scotland there are four Universities, St. Andrews, Glasco, Aberdeen, and
Edinburgh. The Nobility and Gentry are great affecters of Learning, and
therefore do not only frequent their own Universities, but travel into foreign
parts for improvement of the same. The whole Country is divided into two parts
by the great River Tay: the Southern part is more populous, and fruitful, every
where bestrewed with Cities, and Towns, as England is: the Northerly more
barren, and rude, retaining the customs of the wild Irish, from whence they
came.

The Southren part has in it these Counties, Tividale, Merch, Laudien,
Liddesdale, Eskedale, Annandale, Niddesdale, Galloway, Carrick, Kyle,
Cunningham, Arran, Cluidesdale, Lenox, Sterling, Fife, Strathern, Menteith,
Argile, Cantire, and Lorn.

The Northern counties are, Loquabrea, Braidalbin, Perth, Athol, Anguse, Mer^s,
Mar, Buguhan, Murrey, Ross, Sutherland, Cathnes, and Strathnavern. And these
again are divided into Sheriffdoms, Stewardships, and Bailiwicks.

The chief Cities in Scotland described.
Edinburgh is the Regal City of Scotland, seated in Lothien, where is the Royal
Palace, and the chief Courts of Justice. It consists principally of one street
about a mile long, into which run many petty lanes, so that the whole
compass may be about three miles: Its strengthened by a Castle that commands
the Town.

Glasco in Cluidsdale, where an University was founded by Bishop Turnbull, Anno
Christi. 1554.

St. Andrews in Fife.

Sterling, or Striveling, seated in Striveling hundred.

Aberdeen in Mar.

Dondee, in Anguis.

Perth, or St. John's Town.

Scotland was once inhabited by two populous Nations, the Scots, and Picts: the
former inhabited the Western parts of the land, the latter the Eastern: These
two Nations at length falling out, there were great and large wars betwixt
them, till at last the Scots prevailing they extinguished, not the Kingdom
only, but the very name of the Picts.

Most memorable was that fortification drawn from Abercorn upon the Frith of
Edinburgh, unto Dunbritton opening upon the West Sea, where Julius Agricola set
the limits of the Roman Empire: At this place began the great wood Caledonia,
famous for the wild white Bulls bread therein, with Manes like Lions, thick,
and curled, of nature fierce, and cruel, so hateful to mankind that they
abhorred whatsoever was by them handled, or breathed upon. The Cattle in
Scotland are but small, yet many: Fish so plentiful, that in some places men
on horseback, hunt Salmons with Spears. The Islands belonging to it are, the
Western, the Orknayes, and the Shetlands, in number above three hundred.
Amongst the Western, the Hebrides, Sky, Mula, Ila, and Arran, are the chief:
all abounding with Corn, Wood, Salmons, Herrings; and some with Conies, Deer,
Horses, and Sheep. The Orknay Islands upon the North, lie in a raging Sea,
about three and thirty in number, whereof thirteen are inhabited, the other
replenished with Cattle. In them are no venomous Serpents, nor other ugly
vermin; the air sharp, and healthful, apt to bear Oats, and Barley, but have
no wood: Of these Pomonia is the greatest, that has six Minerals of Lead, and
Tin, and twelve Parishes in it.

Ireland described.
Ireland is divided into four Provinces: Mounster, Leinster, Connaught, and
Ulster. In Mounster are the Counties of Limmerick, Kery, Cork, Waterford,
Dismond, and Holy Cross in Typperary. In Leinster are East-Meath, West-Meath,
Kilkenny, Caterlough, Queens County, Kings County, Kildare, VVeshford, and
Dublin: In Connaught are Clare, ^r Towmund, Gallaway, Maio, Slego, Letrim, and
Roscoman. In Ulster are Dungal, or Tyr-connel, Tyrone-upper, Tyrone-nether,
Farmanagh, Cavan, Monaghan, Colrane, Antrim, Down, Armagh, and Lough.

Ireland has on the East that tempestuous Sea that divides it from England. On
the West, the Western Ocean: On the North, the Deucalidonian Sea: and on the
South the Vergivian Sea: It contains in length four hundred, and in breadth two
hundred miles. The air is temperate, but not so clear as ours in England; it
does not therefore ripen Corn well, but causes grass to grow abundantly: The
Winter is more subject to wind than snow. The soil is uneven, woody, wild,
watrish, and boggy, full of Loghs, and Meers: yea great ponds are sometimes
found upon high mountains: hence new comers are subject to Rheumes,
dissenteries, and Fluxes, the usual cure whereof is Uskebah.

This Island breeds no venomous creature, neither will any live there, if
brought from other places. All the breed in Ireland (except women, and
Grayhounds) are less than in England. The commodities are cattle, and sheep,
which are twice shorn in one year; but their wool is course, of which they
make Mantles, Caddows, and Coverlets: their Hobbies also are of great esteem:
Bees there are in great abundance. The people are generally strong, and nimble,
patient of hunger, and cold, implacable in enmity, light of belief, greedy of
glory. The Kernes, or wild Irish are extremely barbarous, not behaving
themselves as Christians, scarcely as men. The chief Rivers are, 1. Shenin, or
Sinei, beginning in Ulster, and running two hundred miles till it falls into
the Vergivian Sea, and is navigable threescore miles. 2. The Slane. 3. Awiduff,
or Blackwater. 4. Shower, etc. of which Spencer makes these verses.

There was the Liffie rolling down the Lea,
The sandy Slane, the stony Aubrian:
The spacious Shenin spreading like a Sea,
The pleasant Boyne, the fishie-fruitful Bann,
Swift Awiduffe, which of the English man
Is called Blackwater; and the Liffar deep,
Sad Trowis that once his people overrun,
Strong Allo tumbling from Slewtogher steep;
And Mullamine, whose waves I whilome taught to weep.
There also was the wide embayed Mayer,
The pleasant Bandon crowned with many a wood,
The spreading Lee that like an Island fair,
Enclosed Cork with his divided flood,
And baleful Our, distained with English blood:
With many more, etc.
The principal Lakes are, Lough Earn, Lough Foil, and Lough Corbes, in length
twenty, in breadth four miles, in which are three hundred Ilets abounding with
Pine-trees.

Dublin the Metropolis of Ireland is seated on the Liffie in which is an
University. Our King John was the first that was entitled Lord of Ireland,
which title the Kings of England retained till Anno Christi 154^. at which time
in an Irish Parliament, King Henry the eight was declared King of Ireland, as a
name more repleat with Majesty.

The Province of Mounster described.
Mounster has on the South the Vergivian Sea, on the North part Connaught, on
the East Leinster, and on the West the Ocean. Its in length from Baltimore in
the South unto the Bay of Galway in the North, fourscore and ten miles: Its
breadth East, and West from Waterford haven, to Feriter haven, is one hundred
miles. The air is mild, and temperate: the soil in some parts hilly with woods,
and solitary mountains: the valleys beautified with Cornfieldsd: The
commodities are Corn, Wood, Cattle, Wool, and Fish, especially abundance of
Herring, and Cod. The principal City is Limrick, compassed about with the
famous River Shannon, by the parting of the channel. Also near unto the River
Savaren, which issues out of Muskerry mountains, stands the City of Cork: and
lastly in this Province is the fair City of Waterford, having a commodious
Haven for trade, and traffic.

The Province of Leinster described.
Leinster has on the East the Irish Seas: VVestward on Connaught side, its
bounded by the River Shannon: Northward with the territory of Lougth, and
Southward with part of Mounster. Its in length fourscore miles: in breadth
seventy* The airds clear, and mild: the soil generally fruitful, and plentiful
both in fish, and flesh* stored with corn, cattle, and pastures. Its well
watered with Rivers, and for the most part well wooded, except the County
Dublin, where it is much wanting: It breeds excellent Hobbies that amble very
easily.

It has in it three Rivers of note, Shour, Neor, and Barraeo, which issue out
of the huge Mountains Blandinae, and meet together before they empty themselves
into the Ocean. In this Province are, 1. Kilkenny, a fair midland Town. 2.
Kildare. 3. Wexford, which was the first English Collony. 4. Dublin, the
Metropolitan City, which is strong, beautiful, and frequented by Merchants:
Near to it is the beautiful College consecrated to the holy Trinity, which
Queen Elizabeth made an University.

The Province of Connaught described.
Connaught is bounded Eastward with part of Leinster: Northward with part of
Ulser: Westward with the main Ocean, and Southward with part of Munster: Its in
length one hundred six and twenty miles, and in breadth fourscore. The Air is
not so pure, and clear as in other Provinces, by reason of the many Bogs. In it
Twomond, or the County of Clare, is best both for Sea, and Soil. Galway
commodious for shepherds. Maio replenished with Cattle, Deer, Hawks, and Honey,
Slego with pasturidge. Le Trim full of rank grass, and forage. Roscomen,
plain, and fruitful, fit for cattle, or husbandry. The principal City, and
indeed the third in Ireland is Galway, built in manner much like a Tower, and
is well frequented with Merchants, having a convenient Haven: near unto it is
the Isle of Arran.

The Province of Ulster described.
Ulster on the North is divided with a narrow Sea from Scotland, Southward it
extends to Connaught, and Leinster, and on the West is beaten with the vast
Ocean. Its length is near one hundred miles from North to South, the breadth
one hundred and thirty, and odd miles. The air is temperate, which causes the
ground to bring forth great store of several trees, both for building, and
fruit-bearing, plentiful it is of grass for Cattle, well furnished with
horses, sheep, and Oxen. The Rivers carry Vessels for pleasure, and profit,
furnished they are with great store of fish, especially of Salmons, abounding
more in some of these Rivers, than in any other place in Europe. Indeed in some
places this Country is barren, troubled with Loughs, Lakes, and thick woods,
but in other places fruitful enough, if it were but well husbanded. The
principal place in this Province is Armagh near unto the River Kalin, which
though it make but a poor show, yet lately was an Archiepiscopal See: wherein
once sat Richard Fitz-Ralph, commonly called Armachanus, who Anno Christi
1355. wrote so sharply against the begging Friars, detesting such voluntary
beggary in Christians.

Thus was the state of Ireland before the late horrid rebellion brake forth,
what alterations the same has produced, I am not able to write.

The Isle of Man Described.
Man is situated in that part of the British Sea that is called St. Georges
channel: It lies between England and Ireland, containing in length about thirty
miles, the broadest place exceeds not nine miles, the narrowest is not less
than five. Generally its an high land upon the Seacoasts, defended with rocks
lying out into the Sea. The Harbors for shiping are, 1. Douglas the safest. 2.
Rainsway, 3. Ramsey. 4. Laxie, all toward England: and Peel, a poor Harbor
facing Ireland. It abounds with springs of water, which make diverse useful
Rivolets: the soil is indifferently fruitful, yet much of it is mountainous:
It yields Rye, Wheat, Barley, but especially Oats, of which they make their
bread: Its stored with Beasts, Sheep of a course wool, Horses of a small size,
and Goats: there is no want of Fish, and plenty of Fowl. The Air is quick and
healthful: Frosts short, and seldom. Snow will soon dissolve because of the
vicinity of the Sea: and its subject to extraordinary high winds. The
Inhabitants are civil and laborious: their drink water, their meat Fish, their
bedding generally hay, or straw: they are much addicted to the music of the
Violine, so that there is scarce a family but more or less can play upon it:
they are ingenious in learning manifactures, and bear a great esteem, and
reverence to the public service of God: Naturally they are unchaste. Anno
Christi 1649. it was given by the Parliament to Thomas Lord Fairfax, as a
reward of the great services he had done for them.

The Azores Islands Described.
The Islands of Azores are nine in number: Tercera, St. Michael, St. George,
St. Mary, Pico, Fayall, Graciosa, Flores, and Corvo. They are named Azores from
the many Ayeries of Goshawks found there. Of these Tercera is the greatest, and
fruitfullest: It abounds with Oil, Wine, Corn, Oade, Fruits, etc. Her best Town
is Angra, her best Fort Brazeil, her Haven bad to Anchor in.

Pico is the highest, being (as some say) above fifteen miles to the top, which
is many times seen clearly: but about the middle of it hang the clouds. Its
about ten miles in circuit: Its for the most part composed of Brimstone, so
that many times from the top issue forth flames of fire, as out of Aetna: Below
are umbragious shades, and cold Rivolets, into which when the vomited fire is
forced, those opposite Elements echo forth their discontents in an hideous
noise.

In the Island of Tercera are some fountains, the water whereof is so hot, that
it will boil an egg: There is also another fountain that turns wood into stone,
and a Tree that grows by it has that part of the root which grows in the water
petrified: the other that is out, is Wood, as of other trees.

A more particular description of the Kingdoms, and Countries contained in the
continent of Europe. Spain Described.
Spain was seized upon by the Sweves, Goths, and Vandals, Anno Christi* 168.
who remained in possession thereof more than four hundred years, till their
King Rodrigues, with almost all his Nobility, was defeated by the Saracens, who
were brought in by a certain Earl in revenge of the dishonor of his daughter,
whom the King had ravished. These Saracens maintained themselves there, above
seven hundred years, as well against the French, as the Spaniards themselves,
who endeavored to expel them. It was formerly divided into twelve Kingdoms,
which were all reduced to one by Ferdinand, and Isabel Anno Christi 1474,
except that of Portugal, which was subjugated by Philip the second, and
peaceably possessed by him, and his heirs, till the year 1640 as above. It was
in the reign of the aforesaid Ferdinand, that the Indies and many other Islands
were found out, the riches whereof has much augmented the potency of Spain,
and made her to aspire to the Monarchy of the world.

The chief Rivers in Spain are 1. Tagus, formerly famous for his golden sands:
It rises in the mountain of Seira Molina, running by the City of Toledo, and
then smoothly gliding by the walls of Lisbon in Portugal, it pays his tribute
to the Western Ocean. 2. Ana (now Guadiana) which rising about the same place,
afterward runs underground for the space of fifteen miles, as our Mole in
Surrey does. 3. Baetis (now Guadalquiver) 4. Duerus, that runs from its head
in the hills of B^iscay, Westward: 5. Iberus, which having his head in the same
Mountains, runs Eastward almost four hundred miles, of which two hundred is
navigable.

The chief hills are 1. Aurentius Saltus, stretching from the Pyrenean
Mountains toward Portugal. 2. Siera Morena, declining from the midst of
Spain toward the straits of Gibraltar. 3. Seira Nevada, which crosses the
Kingdom of Granata from East to West: steep hills, amongst which the people
speak the Arabic tongue perfectly.

Whilst the Saracen Moors possessed Spain, they divided it into twelve
Principallities, as

1. Leon and Oviedo, having on the East Biscay, on the South Castile, on the
North the Ocean, on the West Gallicia: It yeildeth little, yet swift horses
called Hobbies. The chief Towns are 1. Aviles on the sea side. 2. Palenza. 3.
Oviedo. 4. Astorga. 5. Leon.

2. Navarre, having on the East the Pyrenean mountains, on the West Iberus, on
the North Biscay, and on the South Aragon. The chief Cities are 1. Victoria. 2.
Viana. 3. Sanguessa. 4. Pampelune, the Metrotropolis of the Country, Anno
Christi. 1512. in the reign of Queen Katherine, who was married to John of
Albert: the King of Spain raising an Army under pretense of rooting out the
Moors, suddenly surprised this Kingdom, unprovided for resistance, and keeps
it till this day, though the French have often attempted the recovery of it.

3 Corduba, comprehending Andaluzia, Granada, and Estremadura.

Andaluzia, is the richest, and fruitfullest Country in all Spain: the chief
Towns are, 1. Corduba, the Metropolitan, whence comes our true Cordovan
Leather, made of the skins of a Sardinian Beast. Near this City is a wood
thirty miles long, consisting all of Olive trees. 2. Marchena, where are the
best Jennets in all Spain. 3. Medina Sidonia, the Duke whereof was General of
the Armado in eighty eight. 4. Lucar di Barameda, an haven Town. 5. Xeres, a
haven Town also, whence come our Xeres Sack, commonly called Sherry-Sacks. 6.
Tariffa, seated at the end of the Promontory toward Afric. 7. Sevil, the
fairest City in all Spain, in compass six miles, environed with beautiful
walls, and adorned with many magnificent buildings of Palaces, Churches, and
Monasteries, and has under its jurisdiction twenty thousand small Villages:
Its also divided into two parts by the River Baetis, yet both are joined
together by a beautiful and stately Bridge. Hence come our Sevil Oranges, and
from hence goes the Indian Fleet.

Analuzia in Spain, as well for plenty of all blessings of the Earth, as for
the pleasures, and delights of the fields, is a mere terrestrial Paradise. The
horses which she produces are so swift in course, that they seem (according
to the Proverb) to be engendered by the Wind. Spain feeds an infinite number of
Sheep, especially in Castile, where is made most excellent Cloth, and the
wool for the superlative finenesse thereof, is transported into other
Countries: In other parts it is barren, through the laziness of the people (as
some think) who love much better to put their hands to the Sword than to the
plough. The people are melancholy and choleric: sober, and content with a
little, spending more upon the back than upon the belly: They are very
ambitious, and good Soldiers, knowing as well how to use a victory, as to gain
it; and are more exactly observant of Discipline than any other Nation in the
world. The Kingdom is hereditary, and for want of an heir male it falls to the
distaff.

Granada, which is bounded with Murcia on the East, Andaluzia on the West,
Castile on the North, and the Mediterranean Sea on the South. The chief Cities
are 1. Granata, a neat and stately Town, the houses being all built of
freestone with curious workmanship: It has many wholesome Springs about it, and
is fenced about with a strong wall, in which are twelve Gates, and one hundred
and thirty Turrets. 2. Alamia, famous for her Baths. 3. Malaga, whence comes
our Malaga sacks. 4. Almeria, a great Port-Town. 5. Osuna.

1. Estremedura, watered with the River Batis: the chief Cities are 1. Merida.
2. Guadalo^nal, famous for her Mines of Gold and Silver.

4. Gallicia, a very mountainous Country: In it the chief Cities are, 1.
Compostella, in which is an University. 2. Baiona, at the mouth of Minius. 3.
Coronna, called the Groine, a place often spoken of in our wars with Spain in
Queen Elizabeth's time.

5. Biscaie, having Navarre on the East, Old Castile on the South, Leon on the
West, and the Cantabrian Ocean on the North. The chief Cities are, 1. Tholosa.
2. St. Sebastian. 3. Fontaraby. 4. Bilbo. It abounds with good Wines, store of
cattle, and the best sword-blades: Its mountainous, and woody; out of the hills
arise one hundred and fifty Rivers, of which Iberus and Duerus are the chief.
It yields plenty of Iron, and good Timber for ships. They admit no Bishops
amongst them; and the women at all meetings drink first.

6. Toledo, the chief City is of the same name, standing upon the River Tagus,
beautified with many Palaces of rare and admirable architecture, and fortified
with good walls, on which stand one hundred and fifty Towers: its seated almost
in the midst of Spain, and is well inhabited by Noble men for pleasure, by
Merchants for profit, and by soldiers, it being garrisoned. The Archbishop
hereof is the chief Prelate of Spain, President usually of the Inquisition,
whose revenues amount to three hundred thousand Crowns per annum. It has in it
an University. 2. The next City is Calatrava, on the River Ana. 3. Talbora, on
the River Tagus, a very neat City.

7. Murcia, The chief Cities whereof are, 1. Alicante, whence comes our true
Ali^ant Wine, made of the juice of Mulberries growing here in great plenty.
Murcia, on the River Segourg. 3. Cartagena, a brave haven upon the
Mediterranean Sea.

8. Castile, bounded on the East with Navarre, Arragon, and Toledo: on the West
with Portugal, on the North with Asturias, and on the South with Andaluzia, and
Granada. Its now divided into the new, and old: the Old is on the North side,
wherein the chief Cities are, 1. Soria. 2. Segovia, famous for Wool, and
clothing 3. Validolid, a neat Town, and an University. 4. Avila. 5. Burgos. 6.
Salamanca; the chiefest University in Spain.

New-Castile is on the South of the old: The chief Cities are, 1. Madrid, the
Kings seat, and the most populous City in all Spain, though it be seated in a
barren Country. 2. Alcara de Henares, formerly Complutum, an University. 3.
Alcantara. 4. Signeuca, a small Academy. 5. Cuenca, nigh to which is the
Escurial, or Monastery of St. Lawrence, built by King Philip the second. A
building of that magnificence, that no building, either in times past, or
present is comparable to it. The Front toward the West is adorned with three
stately Gates, the middlemost whereof leads into a very sumptuous Temple; and
into a Monastery wherein are one hundred and fifty Monks, of the order of St.
Jerome, and a College. That on the right hand opens into diverse offices
belonging to the Monastery: That on the left into Schools, and outhouses
belonging to the College. At the four corners are four Turrets of excellent
workmanship, and for height Majestical: toward the North is the Kings Palace:
On the South part are diverse beautiful, and sumptuous Galleries. And on the
East side, sundry Gardens, and walks very pleasing, and delightful. It contains
in all eleven several Quadrangles, every one Cloistered about.

Portugal described.
9. Portugal has on the North the River Minius: On the South the River Ana: On
the West the Ocean: and on the East Castile: formerly it was called Lusitania.
The air is very healthful: the Country for the most part is hilly, and bare of
Corn: But it abounds with Honey, Wine, Oil, Allom, Fruits, Fish, white-Marble,
Salt, etc. Its in compass eight hundred seventy and nine miles: the length
three hundred and twenty: the breadth threescore: the most firtile part is
about Conimbria: The people are excellent Mariners, and happy in foreign
discoveries. The Rivers, great and small, are near two hundred: the greatest is
Minius, full of red Lead, and its navigable one hundred miles. The chiefest
Cities are, 1. Lisbon upon Tagus, famous for traffic: Its seven miles in
compass, containing above twenty thousand houses of neat and elegant building:
Its walled about, wherein toward the Sea are two and twenty Gates, and toward
the land sixteen: on the walls stand threescore and seven Turrets. 2. Miranda.
3. Braga. 4. Conimbra, a famous University. 5. Porto. At the Southern part of
Portugal is the Cape of St. Vincent. After the overthrow of King Sebastian in
the battle in Africa, where three Kings fell in one day, there were diverse
pretenders to the Crown of Portugal, and amongst the rest Philip the second,
King of Spain was one, who made a show that their titles should be lawfully
debated, yet in the mean time he sent an Army under the Duke de Alva, seized
on it by force, and so kept it, till within these few years the Portugals drove
out the Spaniards (as was aforesaid) on a sudden, and made the Duke of
Bragance, one of the family of the former pretenders, King: who keeps it till
this day. The King of Spain by the loss of it has lost one of the fairest
Diamonds in this Crown; having therewith lost the East Indies, and Brasile in
the West.

10. Valentia, The chiefest City is of the same name, situated near the mouth
of the River Guadalander; In it is an University, etc. there is nothing of note
in this Country.

11. Catalonia, which has Iberus on the South, Arragon on the West, the Sea on
the East, and the Pyrenian mountains on the North; the chief Cities are, 1.
Gironne. 2. Barcelona on the Sea, a Town of good strength. 3. Perpignan.

12. Arragon, is bounded with Catalonia on the East, Castile on the West,
Navarre on the North, and Valentia on the South: the River Iberus runs through
the midst of this Country. The chief Cities are, 1. Lerida, an University on
the River Cinga, etc. there is nothing else of note.

The Pyrenean Hills described.
The Pyrenean Mountains stand as a natural boundary between the two great
Monarchs of France, and Spain: they run in a ridge from Sea to Sea, the
Cantabrian Ocean fiercely beating on the West, and the Mediterranean gently
washing the East ends of them. The highest of them is called Canus, because it
has for the most part a white cap of Snow upon it, on the top whereof in a
clear day, a man may see both the Seas. The French side of these mountains is
naked, and barren, the Spanish very fruitful, and adorned with trees.

France described.
The Kingdom of France is composed of four and twenty Provinces, wherein are
fifteen ArchBishopricks, ninety seven Bishoprics, ten Parliaments, fourteen
Universities, and four orders of Knighthood. The French are so naturally
inclined to Arms, that the Proverb says, They are born soldiers, nor indeed
can they stay long at rest; for if they have no war with their neighbors, they
quickly make it amongst themselves: Points of honor make them run into the
field, as to a feast, so that many of the Nobility unhappily fall by Duels.
They go like Thunderbolts to combats, and conquests, and overcome whatsoever
opposes them; but as soon as their heat is cooled, they turn their backs, and
suddenly loose what they had gained with such reputation. The French are more
than men (says the Proverb) at the beginning of a fight, and less than women
toward the end. The French Cavalry is the stoutest and best in the World.
Their generosity is such, that they grudge not to praise the virtue even of
their enemies, when they deserve it. They agree so ill out of their own
Country; that they make themselves disesteemed by it.

France is wonderfully stored with Rivers, the chiefest whereof are, 1. Seine,
which arising in Burgundy, passes by Paris, and Rhoan, and receiving into it
nine navigable streams, disembogueth it self into the British Ocean. 2. Some
upon which stands Amiens, has its head about St. Quintins, divides Picardy
from Artois, and receiving eight lesser streams into it, falls into the Sea.
3. Loyre, on which are seated Nants, and Orleance; it rises out of the great
mountains in Avergne, runs six hundred miles, receives into it seventy two
lesser rivulets, and so falls into the Aquitane Ocean. 4. Rhoane, rising at
Briga, three miles from the head of Rhene, watering Lions, where it meets with
Sone flowing from Alsatia; then it waters Avignion, and admitting thirteen
lesser brooks, it falls into the Mediterranean at Arles. 5. Garond, which
running from the Pyrenean hills passes by the walls of Bordeaux, and Toulouse:
Of these Rivers it is said: The Seine is the richest; the Rhoane the swiftest;
the Garond the greatest; and the Loyer the sweetest. But come we to a more
particular description of the several Provinces.

1. Gascoyn, and Guien, are bounded with the Pyrenean Hills, the Aquitane
Ocean, and the River Garond. The chief Cities in it are, 1. Toulouse, wherein
is a Parliamentary Court for the execution of Justice: the fields about it
extend in length one hundred, in breadth, seventy French Leagues; wherein was
fought that dreadful battle between Attila King of the Huns, that had in his
Army five hundred thousand fighting men, and Aetius, the Roman Lieutenant in
France, wherein the Romans were Victors, and slew of the Barbarians an hundred
and fourscore thousand persons. 2. Bordeaux, where our King Richard the second
was born: In it are an University, and Parliamentary Court, 3. Bazas on the
Garond. 4. Raion, on the coast of Spain.

On the North end of this Country stands the little Province of Xantoigne: the
chiefest Cities whereof are Saints, and Rochel, the best fortified Town in
all France, and formerly the strongest hold of the Protestants.

2. Poictou, which has on the North Britain, and Anjou: on the East the
Duchy of Berry: on the South Xantoigne, and Guien, and on the East the
Aquitain Sea. The chief Cities are, 1. Poictiers* on the River Clarius, next in
greatness to Paris it self. 2. Castle Herald, the title whereof was given to
the family of Hamiltons in Scotland by Henry the second, and Francis his son,
etc.

3. Anjou, is but a little Province, but very fruitful, and yields the best
wines in France. To it are annexed the Provinces of Turrain, and Main. The
chief Towns of Anjou are, 1. Angiers, where is an University. 2. Beaufort,
sometimes belonging to our Dukes of Lancaster. 3. Saumur, pleasantly seated on
the Loyre, and an University: On the North sides of Anjou, between it, and
Normandy, lies Main, whose chief Cities are, 1. Man's, or Main, 2. Beaumont, 3.
Vendosme. On the South-East between Anjou, and Berry, lies Toureine, and in it
the Cities of 1. Toures, near unto which Charles Martel overthrew an Army of
four hundred thousand Saracens, under their Captain Abdaramen, and slew of them
three hundred and seventy thousand, about the year 732. 2. Amboise, 3. Bloys,
4. Orleance, upon the Loyre: an University, wherein especially the civil Law is
studied.

4. Britain, environed with Main, Tourain, and the Sea: in it are two good
Havens, Breast, and St. Malo: the chief Cities are 1. Na^ts upon the bank of
Loyre, where is a Parliament. 2. Rhenes. 3. Vannes. 4. St. Briene. 5. Rohan.

5. Normandy, which has on the South Main, and the I Will of France, on the East
the River Some: on the other parts the Ocean: The river Seine runs through the
midst of it. The chief Cities are; 1. Constance, 2. Cane, 3. Bayeux, on the
Sea side. 4. Pontoyse, 5. Roan, 6. Falaise, 7. Mortaigne. 8. Crecy, 9. Caux.
10. Verneil. The chief Haven Towns are, Hareslew, Deep, and Newhaven.

6. The Isle of France, encompassed with the Seine, and other petty brooks: in
it is seated the regal City of Paris, formerly Lutetia, quasi in luto sita,
because situated in a clayie soil, whence grew the Proverb, It stains like the
dirt of Paris.

The City of Paris Described.
Paris is in compass twelve miles: It stands in a most fertile soil: The
Citizens are reputed to be about five hundred thousand. Its honored with a
Parliament, to which all others may appeal, from which not one: It has in it a
famous University, counted the first in Europe, containing fifty and five
Colleges, built by Charles the great, Anno Christi 800. at the persuasion of
Alcuinus, an Englishman. Its seated on Seine, which serves the Town with
little boats, and Barges, the river ebbing and flowing no higher than
Pontelarch, about seventy and five miles below Paris. It was held by the
English sixteen years, and in it our King Henry the sixth was crowned King of
France and England in the Church of Nostre Dame, or our Lady, which Church is
threescore and five fathom long, four and twenty broad, and fifteen high, above
which the Steeples are raised thirty and four fathoms.

In this Isle of France is also St. Vincents; and somewhat Eastward Soysons,
then Carenton, where the Protestants have a Church: Also the Royal Palace of
Fountainbleau, one of the fairest houses in Christendom.

Northward lies the Dukedom of Valois, whose prime City is Senlis, and next
it Luzarch.

7. Berry and Burbon, which are environed with Poictou, Limosin, Avern,
Burgondy, and Champain. The chief City in Berry is Bourges, well stored with
sheep. Its watered with the River Cher, and has in it thirty and three walled
towns. In Bourges is a famous University. 2. Sancerre. 3. Argenton. 4. Casteau
Rous.

Burbon is watered with the Rivers of Loyre, and Alliere: The Cities are, 1.
Burbon. 2. Molins. 3. Nevers. To Burbon belong Beavois, and Avern: In Beavois
are the Cities of Beavois, and ville Franche: In Avern the chief City is
Clermont; then St. Flower, invincible by its situation. 3. Claudes Argues. 4.
Maregnes, and 5. Aubigny.

8. Limosin, is environed with Berry, Poictou, Xantoigne, and Avergne. Its
watered with the Rivers Vienne, and Vexerew. The chief Cities are, 1. Tulles.
2. Tuviers. 3. Maignai. 4. Limoges. 5. Chalue. South-West to Limosin are the
^^ttle Countries of Perigort, and Quercu, whereof the chief Towns are, 1.
Mountalbon, situated on the Garond: A strong hold of the Protestants. 2.
Cahors, a beautiful rich City. In Perigort are the Cities of Perigeux, and
Sarlat.

9. Daulphine, is environed with Avergne on the West, Provence on the South,
Savoy on the East, and Bresse on the North. The Rhoan runs through this
Country, and meeting with Zone it washes the walls of Lions, a famous mart
Town, and University. 2. Valence. 3. Vienna. 4. Grenoble, where is a Parliament.

In the mountains bordering on this Country, and lying between it, Savoy,
Provence, and Piedmont, dwell the Waldenses, many times formerly, and now of
late grievously persecuted by the Popish Party.

10. Languedoc, is environed with the Pyrenean hills, Gascoin, the River Rhoan,
and the Mediterranean Sea: the chief Cities are, 1. Narbon. 2. Montpelier on
the sea side, which is a famous University for the study of Law, and Physic.
3. Nismes. 4. Agde. 5. Lodove.

11. Provence, is bounded with Languedoc, Dauphine, Piedmont, and the
Mediterranean Sea. Its divided into three parts: one whereof belongs to the
Pope, the Metropolis whereof is Avignion, seated on the River Rosne, wherein
the Popes made their residence seventy years together; in it is an University.
The second part belongs to the Prince of Orang, wherein the chief City is
Orang, famous for her rare and wonderful Antiquities. The third and greatest
part belongs to the King of France: wherein are 1. Marseleis, a famous mart
Town. 2. Aix, where is a Parliament. 3. Arles, wherein was held a Council by
Constantine, Anno Christi 313.

12. Picardy, and Champaigne, are environed about with Normandy, Belgia,
Lorayn, Burgundy, Berry, Burbon, and France: Its divided into the higher, and
lower: In the higher is 1. Callis, taken by our Edward the third after eleven
Months sieg, Anno 1347. and suddenly lost by Queen Mary, Anno 1557. after it
had been English two hundred years, 2. Bullen, taken by our King Henry the
eight, 3. Terwin, taken by the same King, Maximilian the Emperor of Germany
serving under his ensigns.

In the lower Picardy are, 1. St. Quintins. 2. Abbeville, strong frontire
Towns, 3. Peronne, 4. Amience, 5. Monstreville, 6. Guise.

Campaigne has in it, 1. Rheimes, where the Kings of France are Crowned, and
anointed. In it is an University, and one College for the entertainment of
English fugitives. 2. Troys, 3. Brie. 4. Montargis, 5. Sens, 6. Auxerre. 7.
Chalons.

13. The Duchy of Burgundy, is bounded with Champaign, Bresse, and Burbonoys:
The chief Cities whereof are, 1 Dijon, where is a Parliament, 2 Autun, 3
Beaulne, 4 Verdune, 5 Sologne, 6 Chalons, belonging to the Prince of Orange, 7
Alice: Its watered with ten Rivers.

All these Provinces are under the King of France, and besides Cities, have in
them thirty and four good Havens.

Within the limits of France are three other Countries, which are not subject
to the King of France, as

1 Savoy, 2 Lorrain, 3 the County of Burgundy, which last is bounded with
Champaigne, Lorrain, Switzerland, and Bresse, and the Duchy of Burgundy. The
length of it is ninety miles, the breadth sixty: The Inhabitants are a warlike
people, called commonly Walloons: The soil is exceeding fruitful: its watered
with the Rivers Soan, Love, Dayne, and Doux, upon whose banks stands the fair,
and strong City of Bezanson, an University. Dole also stands on the same River,
a strong, rich, and beautiful City, and an University, wherein the Jesuits have
a College. 3. Salines. 4. Gray. 5. Arbois. 6. Boutenant. 7. Chastilion, and
above three and twenty more walled Towns.

2 Lorrain, which is environed with part of Belgia, Alsatia, the County of
Burgundy, and Champaigne: It abounds with Corn, Wine, Mines, Salt, Fish, and an
excellent race of horses The people are hardy and politic, and are governed by
a Duke: In it are store of Lakes well replenished with Fish, one whereof is
fourteen miles in compass: The chief Rivers are, 1. The Meure, 2. Mosa, 3.
Mosella: The chief Cities are, 1. Nancy seated on the Meure, 2. St. Nicholas,
well seated, neatly built, and very populous, but not walled about: 3.
Vausoleur, 4. Pont Moson, 5. Neufa Chateau, 6. Vaudemant. Unto this Country
belongs the County of Barrois, environed with the two streams of the River
Marne: the chief Towns are, Barleduc, Lamot, Arg, and Ligni.

3. Savoy, which is bounded with Dauphine, Bress, Switzerland, and Piedmont.
Within the limits of this Country stands the famous City of Geneva, being but
two English miles in circuit, and the territories thereof stretch but two
leagues and an half of each side. At the end of the City is the lake Lemannus,
and the River Rhoan divides it into two parts.

This little Commonwealth by the assistance of God, resisted a great siedg
laid against it by the Duke of Savoy, Anno Christi 1589: As also another
attempt made by Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, to have taken her by surprise.
He secretly listed one thousand and two hundred men, under the command of
Mounsieur d' Aubigny, who by means of great store of Ladders, and other
instruments got to the number of two hundred into the Town, whilst the Duke was
following with some Regiments for recruit: But being discovered, and the
Citizens running to their Arms, it pleased God to strike those which were
entered with such a Pannick fear, that they returned the same way they came,
without having been able so much as to seize upon one gate, to let in the other
Forces. Thus this great design so long premeditated, so secretly carried on, so
successefully begun, and almost completely executed, was by the watchful eye of
Gods Providence over his people, prevented: and this hot Camisado has made
them of Geneva stand better upon their guard ever since.

They use to punish Adultery with death, and if any malefactor fly thither for
refuge, they punish him after the custom of the country where the crime was
committed. The chief Cities of Savoy, are 1. Chambery the Dukes seat: It stands
in a pleasant valley amongst the Mountains, and is beautified with many neat
houses, well fortified with a strong Castle, and some outworks. 2. Tarentaise,
which commands the passage into Italy through the hills Geneura. 3. Bramont. 4.
Aquibelle. 5. Carboneirs. 6. Maurienne. On the North East of Savoy is the
County of Bresse: the chief Towns whereof are, 1. Chattillion 2. Mont Real, 3.
Bourg, well seated and fortified.

The Marquisat of Saluzzes is seated in Piedmont, a part of Italy. Piedmont it
self, being bounded with Millaine on the East, Savoy on the West, Switzerland
on the North, and the Mediterranean on the South: A fruitful Country compared
with Savoy, but inferior to the rest of Italy. It has in it one hundred and
sixty walled places, and is very populous: It has in it fifty Earldomes, and
fifteen Marquisates: Its divided betwixt the Dukes of Savoy, and Mantua, the
River Tenarus parting their possessions: The chief Towns belonging to the
Savoyard are, 1. Turin built on the banks of the River Duria: In it is the
Palace of the Duke of Savoy, and an University. 2. Aoste. 3. Vercelli, a strong
Town. 4. Inurea, etc.

The Alps described.
The Mountains of the Alps, which require five days to be ascended, divide
France, and Germany from Italy: they are always covered with Snow: Hanibal
made a way through them with fire, and Vinegar. They begin at Savona, and
having run a good space in a continued hill, are at last divided into many
parts: There are five passages over them into Italy: three out of France, and
two out of Germany: The first out of France is through Provence, close upon the
Tyrenean Seas, and so through Liguria, which is the easiest. The second through
the Hills called Geneura, into the Marquisat of Saluzzes, and so into Lombardy:
The third is over Mount Cenis, through the Country of Turin. The first way out
of Germany is through the Grisons Country, by the Town of Valtolin; the other
way is through the Country of Tyrol, by the Towns of Inspurg, and Trent.

Italy described.
This Country abounds with Rice, Silks, Velvets, Sattins, Taffaties, Grograms,
Rash, Fustians, Gold Wire, Allom, Glasses, etc. The chief Rivers in it are, 1.
Poe, which rises out of the Alps, and running through Lombardy, emptieth it
self into the Adriatique Sea. 2. Rubicon. 3. Tyber.

Italy is usually divided into six parts; but the principalities thereof are
ten; as

1. The Kingdom of Naples, having the land of the Church on one side, and the
Sea on all others. Its in compass one thousand four hundred sixty and eight
miles: It abounds with Mines of diverse Metals, and the choicest Wines: The
chiefest Provinces in it are, 1. Terra di Lavoro, formerly Campania, wherein
the chiefest Cities are, 1. Cajeta, seated on the Sea side. 2. Naples the
Metropolis, and a beautiful City containing seven miles in compass: In this
City, the French, or Neapolitan disease was first known in Christendom: It
stands on the Sea shore, and is fortified with four Castles. 3. Capua, which
emasculated the valor of Hanibals soldiers. 4. Cuma, nigh to which is the Lake
Avernus, the stink whereof poisons birds that fly over it. 5. Baiae, famous
for the Baths. 6. Nola. 7. Puteoli. 8. Misenum, nigh unto which is the Hill
Vesuvius, that casts forth flames of fire, and in the reign of Titus it cast
forth such abundance of smoke, and ashes, as darkened the Sun, and overwhelmed
two Cities.

2. Abruzzo, whereof the chief Towns are, 1. Aquilea. 2. Beneventum. 3. Aquino,
where Thomas Aquinas was born. 4. Sulmo, Ovids birthplace.

3. Calabria inferior, whose chief Cities are, 1. Peste, where Roses blossom
thrice in a year. 2. Salernum, famous for the study of Physic. 3. Consensia.
4. Regium. 5. Locris.

4. Calabria Superior, wherein the chief Towns are, 1. Tarentum, 2. Crotona. 3.
Polycastrum. 4. Amicle. 5. Sybaris. 6. St. Severine.

5. Terra di Otranto, wherein the chief Cities are, 1. Brundusium, one of the
best Havens in the world. 2. Hydruntum, now Otranto. 3. Gallipolis.

6. Puglia, the Cities whereof are, 1. Manfredonia. 2. Cannae, where Hanibal
slew of the Romans forty two thousand and seven hundred, and had he followed
that victory he had been Master of Rome. In this Country is the Hill Gargalus,
or Mount St. Angelo, one hundred and twenty miles in compass, strengthened
both by nature, and Art: it abounds with cattle: The people in these two
Provinces are troubled with a Tarantula, which is only cured by Music.

2. The land of the Church, which North and South is extended from the
Adriatic to the Tuscan Seas; the East bounds are Axafenus and Trontus, which
divide it from Naples: North-West its bounded with the Rivers Poe, and Fiore,
which divide it from the Venetians; and South-West with Pisseo, which parts it
from the Florentines: The Provinces hereof are,

1. Romandiola extending from Rubicon East, to the Venetians on the West: from
the Appenine Hills South, to Padus, and the Adriatique on the North. The chief
Cities are, 1. Bononia, the principal University in Italy, where the civil Laws
are much studied, seated on the River Aposa. 2. Rimana, formerly Ariminum, on
the mouth of the River Rubicon. 3. Cervia, on the Adriatique Sea, where great
store of salt is made. 4. Ferrara, whose territories stretch in length one
hundred and sixty miles, and in breadth fifty, wherein are contained the brave
Cities of Modena, and Rhegium: Ferrara the chief-City is seated on the bank of
Poe, a broad, deep, and swift River, which guards it on the one side, and on
the other its fortified with strong walls, and a large moat. In the midst of
the City is a large Green, into which there open on all sides nineteen streets,
most of them half a mile long, and so even, that the ends of them may be
easily seen. The whole compass is five miles. 5. Ravenna.

2. Marcha Anconitana, environed with Romagna, the Appennine, Naples, and the
Adriatique: The chief Towns are, 1. Ancona, seated on the Hill Cimmerius, and
it is an Haven Town. 2. Ascoli the fair. 3. Firmo the strong. 4. Macerata. 5.
Adria, which gave the name to the neighboring Sea. 6. Narma. 7. Humona. 8.
Loretto, famous for the Pilgrimages made thither.

3. The Dukedom of Spoleto, is situate under the Appennine Hills. The chief
Cities are, 1. Spoleto. 2. Ovietto, seated on a very high Rock, where is a
Church very lightsome, and yet the Windows are made of Alabaster in stead of
Glass. 3. Perugia. 4. Asis. In this Country is the Lake of Perugia, thirty
miles in compass. Near which Hanibal slew Flaminius with fifteen thousand of
his Roman soldiers.

4. St. Peter's Patrimony, containing Campagna di Roma (formerly Latium) and
part of Hetruria. The chief Cities are, 1. Alba. 2. Ostia, at the mouth of
Tyber. 3. Antrum. 4. Tybur. 5. Praen^ste. 6. Ardea. 7. Gabii. 8. Veii: a large
and rich City. 9. Tivolis. 10. Rome, seated on the River Tyber, enlarged with
the receipt of two and forty Rivers, and is distant from the sea fifteen miles.
See old Rome described afterward. The Roman Empire was extended from the Irish
Seas in the West, to the River Euphrates in the East, three thousand miles: and
from Danubius in the North, to Mount Atlas in the South, two hundred miles. The
revenues of the Empire were estimated to amount to one hundred and fifty
millions of crowns per annum. But Rome as now, is but eleven miles in compass,
within which also there is much wast ground: The inhabitants are about two
hundred thousand, two parts whereof are Clergy men, and Curtesans, the latter
being seldom under forty thousand, which pay to the Pope thirty thousand
Ducats per annum. The principal buildings are the Church of St. Peter: The
Castle of St. Angelo, an impregnable fortress: The Popes Palace called
Belvidere: And the Vatican Library.

3. The Commonwealth of Venice has many territories belonging to it, the
length whereof is above one thousand miles, but the breadth far less. For the
City of Venice it self, see the description of it afterward. The chief
Provinces belonging to it are,

1. Marca Trevigiana, having on the South the River Poe, on the West the Duchy
of Millaine, on the East Frivli, and the Gulf of Venice, and on the North
Tirol: The chief City is Treviso, 2. Padua, where an University was settled Anno
Christi 1220. famous for Physicians, and their Garden of Simples. See the
description of it afterward. 3. Vincenza. 4. Brescia; the second City for
bigness and beauty in all Lombardy: Her territories are in length one hundred,
in breadth fifty miles. 5. Verona, seated on the Athesis. It boasts of an
Amphitheater, able to contain eighty t^ousand people: Her territories are
threescore and five miles in length, and forty in breadth. 6. Briscello. 7.
Bergamo. 8. Este. 9. Crema, a strong Fort against the Millanois.

2. Frivli, formerly called Forum Julii; Its environed with Istria, the Alps,
Trevigiana, and the Adriatique: Its in length fifty miles, and the breadth no
less. The chief Cities are, 1. Aquilegia, seated on the Natisco. 2. Treist
close to the Sea. 3. Gorritia. 4. Palma, excellently fortified. 5. Cividad di
Austria.

3. Istria environed with the Sea, Frivli, and Carniola: Its in compass two
hundred miles, the air very unwholesome: The chief Towns are, 1. Cape d'
Istria, or Justinople. 2. Pola. 3. Parenza. 4. Portula. 5. Rubinum. 6. Monsona.

The Polity whereby this Commonwealth has so long subsisted is an
Aristocracie: wherein, 1. They exempt their Citizens from the wars, and hire
others in their places, so that by their death the Commonwealth sustains the
less loss. 2. They entertain some foreign Prince for their General, whom,
when the wars are ended, they presently discard, by which means they avoid
factions, and servitude, which were like to happen if they should employ any of
their own people, who by his virtue, and valor might win the hearts of the
soldiers, and so make himself their Prince. 3. Their Laws suffer not the
younger sons of their Nobility and Gentry to marry, least the number increasing
should diminish the dignity, yet they allow them unlawful pleasures, and for
their sakes permit public Stews.

4. The Dukedom of Florence containing the greater part of Tuscany: Its parted
from Genoa on the West by the Magra, and the strong Town Sarezana: From
Romagna, and Ancona on the North by the Appennine Hills: On the East by the
Pisseo, and on the South by the Tyrrhene Seas. The chief Cities are, 1.
Florence seated nigh to the confluence of Arnus, and Chianus: See the
description of it afterward. Charles the Archduke was wont to say, that it
was a City to be seen on Holy days only. 2. Pisa, a brave and strong City. 3.
Sienna, in whose territories are Orbitello, Pienza, Soana, and six and twenty
other walled Towns. 4. Pistoya, where began the factions of the Guelphs, and
Gibbilines. 5. Massa, famous for her Quarries of white Marble. 6. Volaterra. 7.
Arrezzo. 8. Cortona, seated under the Appennine. 9. Carara. 10. Borgo San
Sepulchro. 11. Ligorne, a famous Haven seated at the mouth of the River Arnus.
The whole length of this Dukdome is two hundred and sixty miles, the breadth
not much less. The people are great Merchants.

5. The Dukedom of Millaine, which has on the East Mantua and Parma: on the
South Liguria: on the North Trevigiana, and on the West Piedmont: It stands
wholly in Lombardy, the Garden of Italy. The chief Cities are, 1. Pavia, on the
River Ticinus, an University. 2. Lodi. 3. Alexandria, a place of great
strength. 4. Cremona, famous for her high Tower. 5. Como, seated on a Lake so
named. 6. Millaine, honored with an University: See this stately City
described afterward.

The Dukedom of Mantua bounded on the East with Romagna, on the West with
Millaine, on the North with Trevigiana, and on the South with Parma, and
Placentia. To this belongs the Dukedom of Mountferrat, situated on the
South-East part of Piedmont, the chief Cities whereof are, 1. Alba. 2. Casala
St. Vas. 3. Nicaea, or Niza; and 4. Isola. The chief Cities of Mantua are, 1.
Mirabella. 2. Lucera. 3. Capriana. 4. Modena. 5. Reggio. 6. Cuneto. 7. Mantua,
a very strong Town, environed on three sides with a water that is three
quarters of a mile broad, and on the fourth with a wall.

7. The Dukedom of Urbin which lies in the midst of the Papal territories
having the Adriatique on the North, the Appennine on the South, Romagna on the
West, and Marca Anconitana on the East. In it are two hundred Castles, and
seven Cities, the chief whereof are, 1. Urbin, at the foot of the Appennine, 2.
Belforto, 3. Pisauro, a good Haven, 4. Cabo, 5. Fano, Sea Towns also.

8. The Principality of Parma, and Placentia, which has on the North Mantua,
on the South the Appennine, on the West Millain, and on the East Modena. Here
are made those excellent Cheeses called Parmesans. Parma is seated on the
little River Pirina, and Placentia on the Po. To this principallity belongs
also Mirandula, with her Territories, where was born that famous Scholar, John
Picus Mirandula.

9. The Commonwealth of Genoa, containing Liguria, which has on the East the
River Varus, on the West the River Magra, which parts it from Tuscany, on the
North the Appennine, and on the South the Ligurian Seas: Its in compass
fourscore miles, but not so much in breadth. The people are much given to
Usury, whence one said merrily, that in Christendom there were neither
Scholars enough, nor Gentlemen enough, nor Jews enough, and being answered
that there were of all these rather too great plenty than any scarcity: He
replied, That if there were Scholars enough, there would not be so many
double, and treble beneficed men; and if there were Gentlemen enough, so many
Pesants would not be ranked amongst the Gentry; and if there were Jews enough,
so many Christians would not profess Usury. The chief Towns are, 1. Ceva. 2.
Finaly. 3. Noli. 4. Sarazena. 5. Genoa. in compass eight miles: the building
for the two first stories are built of Marble, curiously wrought, but by the
Law they are forbidden to use marble any higher. It has a very spacious Haven,
well fortified, where ships may ride in safety.

10. The state of Luca, which is situated in Tuscany: the City is three miles
in compass, the Territories eighty miles, in which they can raise three
thousand horse, and fifteen thousand foot upon occasion. And thus I have done
with Italy, and come to the description of the chief Cities in it.

The chief Cities in Italy described. A Description of old Rome, and the
chiefest Rarities thereof.
Rome when it was first built was but two and twenty miles in compass: it was
situated upon dainty hills, in a most healthful air: had a brave River running
by it, with the more ease to convey the inland commodities for her necessity,
and delight; it had the Sea at a convenient distance, not too near, whereby
she might be annoyed with Foreign Navies, nor so remote, but that she might
be supplied with outlandish Commodities. The River Tiber at Rome is four
hundred foot broad, and so deep that it will carry ships of the greatest
burden. Its about sixteen miles distant from the Sea. It was almost round in
compass. The Suburbs in process of time grew so great, that Aurelian the
Emperor built new walls, which were almost fifty miles in compass, the walls
were adorned with seven hundred and forty Turrets: And yet again, the Suburds
in a little time grew so great, that one of them was fifteen miles long, and
reached even to the Sea, and in Augustus his time, there was numbered in Rome
above three hundred, and twenty thousand poor people that received relief from
the public: Besides the number of Bondmen was very great: few rich men, but
they had an hundred and some four hundred a piece: Seneca says in his time
that the Inhabitants were so many, that the spacious and innumerable houses
were scarce able to contain them: that a great part of them were Foreigners
that came from all parts of the world to live there: So that the number of
Inhabitants was reckoned to be at least four millions. These people were
sustained with provisions brought out of all Nations: so that Rome seemed to
be the common Mart of the whole World.

Heliogabalus to show the greatness of the City; caused all the Spiders to be
gathered and put together, which being weighed, amounted to ten thousand pound
weight, and a great plague breaking out at Rome, for many days together, there
dyed ten thousand persons.

The houses were generally built very high, that so they might be the more
capacious, insomuch as Augustus was fain to make a Decree, that their buildings
should not exceed seventy foot in height, conceiving that they marred the
delicacy of the air, by their overmuch shadow: but this extended only to
private men's houses, for the great men were not limited.

But besides the great height of the houses, they were beautified by the matter
whereof they were built, by the Architecture, and by the Symmetry of them,
wherein Art and Elegancy strove for priority. And for that end, what exquisite
workmen soever Greece, or Asia brought forth, they were either sent for, or
came of their own accord to beautify this Imperial City, especially in
Augustus's time, who made his boasts, Marmoream se relinquere, quam lateritiam
accepisset: that he should leave Rome built of Marble, which he found built
of Bricks.

Nero also when he had burned a great part of it, at his own charges built it
up again, beautifying it with excellently composed streets large ways, and
curious porches to all the houses, which three things were a great Ornament to
the City: whereupon Cassiodorus says, Our Forefathers tell us of the seven
wonders of the world: The Temple of Diana at Ephesus: The costly Tomb of King
Mausolus: The brazen Statue of the Sun in the Isle of Rhodes, called the
Colossus: The Image of Jupiter Olympicus made by Phidias: The house of Cyrus
King of the Medes and Persians, built by Memnon: The walls of Babylon built by
Semiramis: And the Pyramides of Egypt. But now (says he) the City of Rome is
the greatest miracle of them all. There were in it four hundred twenty four
Temples erected to their Idol-gods.

There were two Capitols in Rome; The old built by Numa, the new begun by
Tarquinius Priscus, and Superbus, finished by Horatius Pulvillus Consul, upon
the Saturnin, or Tarpeian, or Capitoline hill. It was eight acres, or eight
hundred feet in compass, almost four square. It was ascended unto by one
hundred steps on the South part, which looked toward the market place, and
Palace, it would hold eight thousand men. It was covered with Brasse-tiles all
guilt with Gold; There were three Chapels in it, to one of which (viz.
Jupiters) Augustus gave sixteen thousand pound weight of gold, and jewels worth
almost as much more, twelve thousand talents were spent in gilding of it. The
gates were covered with thick plates of Gold.

The only foundations of this Capitol cost Tarquinius forty thousand pound
weight of silver, the pillars of it were cut out of a Quarry of Marble, called
Pentick-marble, and they were as thick as long. Plut.

Next after the Capitol, the Pantheon is worthily noted. It was built by
Agrippa, son in Law to Augustus in the year of the City seven hundred twenty
and nine. The Architecture of it was admirable, the beauty, and proportion of
all the parts most exquisite: the breadth of it was one hundred forty and four
feet, and the height as much: It was wholly covered over with very great tiles
of Brass richly guilt. In the reign of Trajan it was burnt by lightning, and
rebuilt by H^drian.

The Temple of Peace was built by Vespasian, three hundred foot long, and two
hundred broad: It was the most beautiful of all the Temples in the City, and
enriched with gifts of inestimable value: It was adorned with Statues, and
pictures of most exquisite workmanship: yea and all the rarities were collected
into this Temple, for the sight whereof men formerly used to travel through
the whole world. And here also he placed those vessels which formerly belonged
to the Temple of Jerusalem, and were brought from thence by Titus at the
sacking of it. It was burnt down in the time of Commodus, either with fire from
heaven, or arising out of the earth after a little Earthquake.

There were an infinite number of Baths both public, and private in Rome. Some
of which baths, were all paved with plates of silver and set with rows of
Pillars for ornament. Antoninus's bath had sixteen hundred seats of polished
Marble in it.

The Appian Causey was built by Appius Claudius Censor* It reached from Rome to
Capua, the bounds of the Empire that way, at that time; which was afterward
lengthened to Brundusium by Julius, and Augustus Caesar, in all three hundred
and fifty miles long, and so broad, that two coaches might easily pass by one
another, being about twenty and five foot broad. It was made of hard flinty
stones, hewn and laid so close together (yet without any mortar or claspes of
Iron) that it seemed all of onestone; the stones were three, four, and five
feet square: nine hundred years after it was made, the stones were not one whit
dis-joynted or broken, ever and anon on the sides were stones whereon persons
might sit, or lay their burdens, or get on horseback, and at every miles end,
high stones (or pillars) were raised, whereon were engraven the number of the
miles. Likewise there were many Monuments on both sides with witty
inscriptions, or pretty inventions on them, yielding both matter of mirth, and
seriousness to the travelers.

There were fourteen (says Pliny) twenty (says P. Victor) Aquaeducts in Rome;
the chiefest of which was the Claudian, began by Caligula, and finished by
Claudius; so big as a man might ride on horseback in it; brought forty miles to
the City in a level, through the Mountains, and over the Valleys; as high as
the highest hill in the City: seven millions and a half were spent in making
it. There were besides in the City one thousand three hundred fifty two Lakes,
or great receptacles of water for common use.

The Cloacae, or common sewers, were made by Tarquinius Priscus; they were so
wide, that a Cart laden with Hay might pass along them, viz. sixteen foot
wide, and as many high. There were seven chief arms from the seven hills
(besides several smaller from other parts) which ran into the main Channel.
Notwithstanding all the weight of building upon them, and several earthquakes,
they remained firm almost eight hundred years. And at one time when they were
out of repair, there were a thousand talents spent in repairing of them.

There was an infinite number of Statues, or Images in every part of the City,
costly for their matter, and curious for their workmanship: some Authors say,
that there were near as many of them, as there were living people in the City;
some of them were of polished Marble; infinite of brass, some of Ivory, some of
Silver, and some of Gold.

Domitian the Emperor commanded that no statues should be made for him in the
Capitol, but such as were all of silver, or all gold, solid, and not hollow,
each of them weighing at least an hundred pound weight: Commodus the Emperor
had a statue made for him of gold that weighed a thousand pound weight:
Together with a Bull and a Cow of the same metal, as if he had been the
founder of the City. He had also in the Marketplace a Pillar erected, and his
Statue made upon it, of a thousand five hundred pounds weight of silver. Their
statues of brass were most of them guilt, and so were many of their statues of
silver. Some of them were of a Colossaean bigness, others mounted on
horseback, and in several postures, and habits: For the preserving of all
which from hurt, there was one who was called Comes, or an Earl, whose office
it was, continually to walk up and down in the night, attended with many
soldiers, that none might wrong them, and besides it was death for any man to
do it. Lipsius de Mag. Romans Imperii.

Rome was for her beauty and bravery called Aurea, and Aeterna, and the Romans
thought that the Monarchy of the World was tied to them with chains of Adamant.
But God has confuted their golden dreams by breaking their Empire, and given
up their City six several times in one hundred thirty and nine years space,
into the hands of Barbarians, who exercised therein all kind of cruelty:
besides, it is observed that Rome, since it became Papal, was never besieged by
any enemy, but it was taken. Sybil long since prophesied.

Tota eris in cineres, quasi nunquam Roma fuisses. The manner of the Roman
Triumphs: and particularly that of Palus Aemylius after the conquest of Perseus
King of Macedon.
First, the people having set up sundry scaffolds as well in the lists, and
field called Circos, where the games, and races of horses, and Charrets used to
be, as also about the Marketplace, and in all the streets through which the
Triumph should pass, they all presented themselves in their best gowns, to see
the magnificence, and state thereof. All the Temples of the Gods were set wide
open, hanged full of Garlands of flowers, and all perfumed within. Through all
the quarters of the City were set many Sergeants, and other officers, with
tipstaves to order the straggling people, and to keep them from pestring the
streets, or hindering the triumph which lasted three days.

The first day was scant sufficient to see the passing by of the Images,
Tables, Pictures, and Statues of a wonderful bigness, all won, and gotten of
their enemies, and now drawn upon two hundred and fifty Charrets.

The second day there were carried upon a great number of Carts all the
fairest, and richest Armor of the Macedonians, as well of Copper, as of Iron,
and Steel, all glistering bright, being newly furbished, and artificially laid
in order: Fair Burganets upon Targets, Habergions, and Corslets upon greaves:
Round Targets of the Cretans, and Javelins of the Thracians, and arrows amongst
the armed pikes: All bound so trimly one to another, that one hitting against
another as they were drawn, made such a sound, and noise as was fearful to
hear. After these Carts there followed three thousand men, which carried the
ready money in seven hundred and fifty Vessels which weighed about three Talents
a piece, each of them carried by four men. Others carried great bowls, cups
and goblets of silver, and other pots to drink in, beautiful to behold, as well
for their bigness, as for the great, and singular embossed work about them.

The third day early in the morning the Trumpets sounded the brave alarm they
give at an assault, after whom followed one hundred and twenty goodly fat Oxen,
with their horns guilt, and garlands of flowers, and nosegaies about their
heads, and by them went many young men with aprons of needle work about their
middles, who led them to the Sacrifice, and with them young boys that carried
goodly Basins of gold and silver to receive, and sprinkle the blood of the
Sacrifices about. After these followed all those that carried all coins of
gold, and Basins, and Vessels, each of them weighing three Talents. Then was
carried the great holy cup which Aemylius had caused to be made of massy gold,
set full of precious stones, weighing ten Talents for an offering to the gods.
Next to them went they which carried Plate, made, and wrought after Antic
fashions, and the admirable cups of the ancient Kings of Macedon: as the cup
called Antigonus, and another Seleucus: and to be brief, all the whole
cup-broad of plate of gold, and silver of King Perseus: and next them came the
Kings Chariot with his Armor, and his royal Crown upon the same. A little
after followed the Kings Children, whom they led prisoners with the train of
their School Masters, and other Officers, and their servants weeping, and
lamenting, who held up their hands to the people that looked upon them, thereby
teaching the young Children to do the like, and to ask mercy, and grace at the
peoples hands. There were three pretty little Children, two sons, and a
Daughter amongst them, who by reason of their tender years lacked
understanding, which made them (poor souls) insensible of their present misery,
and that moved the people so much the more to pity them, seeing the poor
little infants that knew not the change of their hard hap: so that through
compassion to them, they had almost let the Father pass without looking upon
him: yea many of the peoples hearts did so melt for pity, that the tears ran
down their cheeks till they were past, and gone a good way out of sight.

King Perseus the Father followed after his Children, and their train: He was
clothed in a black gown, with a pair of slippers on his feet, after his
Country manner: He showed by his countenance, his troubled mind, being oppressed
with sorrow for his most miserable estate, and condition: He was followed with
his kinsfolk, his familiar friends, his officers, and household servants, their
faces being disfigured with blubbering, showing to the world by their
lamentable tears, and sorrowful eyes cast upon their unfortunate Master, how
much they sorrowed, and bewailed his most hard and woeful estate, whilst they
made little account of their own misery.

After all these, there followed four hundred Princely Crowns of gold, which
the Cities, and Towns of Greece had purposely sent by their Ambassadors unto
Aemylius, to honor his victory: And last of all came Aemylius himself in his
Triumphant Chariot, which was passing sumptuously set forth, and adorned: This
was a gallant sight to behold, and yet the person himself was worth looking on
without all that great pomp, and magnificence: for he was clothed in a purple
gown, curiously branched with gold, carrying in his right hand a bough of
Laurel, as all his Army did the like, the which being divided by bands and
companies: followed the Triumphant Chariot of their Captain, some of the
soldiers singing songs of victory, according to the usual manner of the Romans
in the like cases, mingleing them with merry, and pleasant toys, as glorying,
and rejoicing in their General: others of them sang songs of Triumph in the
honor, and praise of Aemylius his noble conquests, and victorys: so that he
was openly praised, blessed and honored of all, and neither hated, nor envied
of any that were good, and honest. Plut. in vita ejus.

Rome was so populous when Paulus Aemylius was Censor, that being mustered by
him, they were found to be three hundred thirty seven thousand four hundred
fifty and two men.

The manner of Pompey's third Triumph.
For the stateliness and magnificence of this Triumph, though Pompey had two
days to show it in, yet were there many things, which for want of time were
not seen; even so many as would have served to have set forth another Triumph.

In the first place there were Tables carried, whereon were written the names
and titles of all the people, and Nations which he had conquered, and for
which he triumphed; as the Kingdoms of Pontus, Armenia, Cappadocia,
Paphlagonia, Media, Colchis, Iberia, Albania, Syria, Cilicia, and Mesopotamia:
as also the people that dwell about Phaenicia, Palaestine, Judaea, and Arabia:
and all the Pirates which he had overcome both by Sea, and Land, in all parts
of the world: In all these Countries, he had taken a thousand Castles, almost
nine hundred Cities, and walled Towns* Of Pirates ships eight hundred: He had
replenished again with people, nine and thirty desolate Towns that were left
without Inhabitants: In these Tables was further declared, that before these
conquests the revenues of the Commonwealth of Rome were but five thousand
Myriads per annum, but now Pompey had made them eight thousand and five hundred
Myriads per annum: and that he had brought now for the Treasury in ready gold
and silver, Plate and Jewels, the value of twenty thousand Talents, besides
that which he had distributed amongst his soldiers, of which he that had
least for his share, had one thousand five hundred Drams: The prisoners
that were led in this Triumph, besides the Captains of the Pirates, were, the
son of Tygranes, King of Armenia, with his wife and daughter: The wife of King
Tygranes himself, called Zosime: Aristobulus, King of Judaea: Mithridates
sister, with her five sons, and some Ladies of Scythia: The hostages also of
the Iberians, and Albanians, and of the Kings of the Commagenians: beside many
other things too large to recite: But that which made his honor the greatest,
and whereunto never any of the Roman Consuls attained, was, that in his three
Triumphs, he triumphed over the three parts of the world: In his first over
Africa, in his second over Europe, and now in this third over Asia, which was
almost all the then known world; and all this before he was forty years old.
Plut. In vita ejus.

A Description of the City of Venice, with her Rarities, which was begun to be
built Anno Christi 421. upon the 25th of March, and upon seventy and two
Islands.
This Wonder of Cities, is seated in the bosom, or betwixt the Arms of the
Adriatic Sea: It is built upon four thousand Islands, and is (as it were)
chained together by four thousand Bridges. The occasion which made these watery
Isles a mansion for men, was when that Northern Deluge of Goths, Vandals, Huns,
and Longobards did overflow all Italy, the people of all sorts fled to these
lakes, to avoid the land torrent that was like to swallow them up; and finding
the Air to be gentle, and fit for habitation, and propagation, they pitched
their Tents upon these Isles, and associated them by conjoyning Bridges.

There are seventy two Isles that support Venice: and the nearest part of the
Continent is five miles distant: There are banks, and ditches cast up to
preserve her from the impetuousnesse of the waves of the Sea, extending in
length above six miles. She is above eight miles in circuit. Through the banks
in seven places, there are passages broken for boats, but not for bigger
vessels. Besides there be above twenty thousand Gondolaes, or Boats, which ply
up and down perpetually, in each of which are two rowers at least, so that upon
occasion, she can suddenly make an Army of above fifty thousand Gondoliers.
She has for her Motto, Nec fluctu, nec flatu movetur. Nor winds, nor waves
can stir her.

Her Fabriques, public and private are extraordinary specious, and sumptuous,
and her streets so neat, and evenly paved, that in the depth of winter a man
may walk up, and down in a pair of Satin Pan-tables, and Crimson Silk
stockings, and not be dirtied. There are above two hundred Palaces fit to
receive any Prince with his ordinary retinue: Her situation is so rare, every
street almost having an arm of the Sea running through it; and her structures so
magnificent, and neat, that she ravisheth therewith all strangers that come to
visit her.

She has in her one hundred and fifty Churches, and Monasteries: but
especially three things worthy of sight, viz. St. Mark's Church and Steeple,
the Treasury, and the Arsenal.

St. Mark's Church is built throughout with rare Mosaique work, and yet the
furniture of the Church surpasses the Fabrique in richness; Her walls are
inlaid in many places with precious stones of diverse colors, and in such a
manner, that they seem rather to be the work of Nature, than of Art.

It is built in the form of a Cross, whose corners are highly vaulted, and
covered with bright Lead, as all the rest of the Church is. The whole Bulk is
supported with most curious Arches joined together by mavelous Art. The
inside from the middle to the highest part thereof glistereth with gold, and
the concavity of the vaults is enriched with diverse curious, and antic
pictures. That which is from the gilding down to the pavement, is excellently
joined together with goodly Tables of Marble, by whose pleasant veins in form
of rays, the eyes of the beholders are rather fed than satisfied. The seats
below are of an extraordinary red stone, like to Porphyry, the Pavement is all
of Marble engraven with diverse figures wholly different, and of various
colors: There are sundry Columns and Tables of Parian, Spartan, and Numidian
work, that environ the seats on both sides the Quire. The entrance into the
Church on both sides, is in a manner of the same trimming: while gilded Arches
are sustained without, by more than three hundred exquisite Pillars, the space
between those Pillars being filled with choice Tables of Marble. On the height
of this entrance, are four great brazen horses all gilded over, in a posture as
if running, and neighing. All this bears up the highest top of the Church
divided into six Steeples, every of which is like a Pyramid, and has on the
sharpest point thereof, a white Marble Statue of a naked man standing upright.
Diverse other representations delightful to the eye, and wrought with exceeding
skill, do beautify the spaces between the Steeples, and all that which is
vaulted underneath is covered with Gold* In sum, there is no place in the whole
Church, either within, or without, but it is either adorned with Marble, Gold,
or precious stones; so that the two Columns of Alabaster, and the Chalcedony
stones which are in the midst of the pavement, are accounted the least
curiosities.

The Arsenal of Venice is one of the greatest Magazines of Arms in all the
World; It Is three miles in compass, wherein there are above three hundred
Artificers, perpetually at work, who make, and repair all things that belong
thereto. This Arsenal has arms to furnish two hundred thousand men, and has
constantly belonging to it two hundred Galleys in Dock, or abroad in course,
besides Galliasses, and Galleons, with all provisions necessary for them.
Amongst the Armors, are one thousand coats of plate; garnished with gold, and
covered with velvet, so that they are fit for any Prince in Christendom.

The Treasury of St. Mark is cried up through the World: They say there is
enough in it to pay six Kings Ransomes. There are Jewels of all sorts, and
sizes, Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, Emerauds, Cups of Agat^ of an huge bigness.
The great Diamond which Henry the third gave when he was made a Gentleman of
Venice: There you may see an Armor all of massy Gold, beset all over with
great Pearls, Turkies, Rubies, and all manner of precious stones, in such a
quantity, and bigness, that they alone would make a rich Treasury. There are
also twelve Corslets of Gold beset with precious stones. There is an huge Gold
chain that reaches from Pillar to Pillar: Diverse Chests of Gold, and amongst
others, one great Iron Chest with this inscription, When this Chest shall open,
the whole earth shall tremble. There are two large Unicorn's horns. A great
Bottle made of a Chalcedonian stone transparent, and clear, which will hold
above a quart. There is a Garnet of a vast size, formed into the shape of a
Kettle which will hold near a Gallon. There are many Crosses, and Crucifixes of
massy Gold beset with Jewels of all sorts: There are the Crowns of Cyprus,
and Candy, as also that of the Dukes of Venice all inlaid with choice rich
Diamonds, great Rubies, Emerauds, Saphires, and other stones that would beget
astonishment in the beholders. In that of the Dukes, there is one great Ruby
worth an hundred thousand Crowns. There are Cups of sundry forms cut out of
rich stones, with dishes of sundry kinds. There are diverse presses full of
plate, huge, and massy, with Statues of Silver, and large Chalices of gold, and
variety of other rich things, the worth whereof no eye is able to judge. There
are moreover twelve Crowns of massy Gold, which were taken at the sacking of
Constantinople, when the French, and Venetians divided the spoils. Pacheco the
Spanish Ambassador, coming to see this Treasury, fell a groping whether it
had any bottom, and being asked why? answered; In this amongst other things, my
great Masters's Treasure, differs from yours, in that his has no bottom, as I
find yours to have. Alluding to the Mines in Mexico, and Potofi.

In one of its Islands called Murano, Crystal Glasses are made where you may
see a whole street; on the one side having above twenty Furnaces perpetually at
work both day, and night. If one of these Furnaces be removed to any other
Island, or but to the other side of the street, though they use the same men,
materials, and fuel, yet can they not make Glass in the same perfections for
beauty, and luster, as in this place. Howels Survey.

The City of Padua Described.
Padua is a City within the Venetian Territories, and was erected into an
Academy. Anno Christi 1222. She is famous every where for a Seminary of the
best Physicians, and has a Garden of great variety of Simples. It was formerly
girt with a treble wall: but a double contents her now, which has very deep
ditches round about: For the River Brent with vast charges, and labor was
brought to this City, which has much advantaged her, both for Strength, and
Navigation: It is situated in a most pleasant, and plentiful plain, enjoying a
sweet temperate Clime, with a singular good soil, by reason of the
Neighborhood of the Eugonian Mountains on the West side of it. Her
circumference is near upon seven miles; Her Temples, and dwelling houses, both
public and private, are more magnificent than elsewhere. She has six stately
Gates: Five large Marketplaces, within the walls twenty two great Churches,
twenty three Monasteries, twenty nine Nunneries. She has the most renowned
Hall for public Justice of any City in Italy, covered all over with Lead, and
yet propped by no pillars. The Council-Court has gates, and Columes of Marble;
She has twenty eight Bridges, Arched over the Brent which runns through her.
She has very spacious Piazza's: She has six Hospitalls, three for the poor,
and three for Pilgrims. She has a place called Monte de Pieta, set up on
purpose to root out the Jews usury, who used to demand twenty per cent: for
Brocage: She has other two Hospitals for Orphans, and poor children. There
are thirty eight thousand Crowns deposited in the hands of several persons of
quality (to whom the poorer sort may repair with their pawns, and if it be
under thirty shillings, they pay no use for their money, if it be above, they
pay five per centum) for relieving the poor.

The City of Millan described.
The City of Millan in Italy lies within a stately wall of ten miles compass.
Its situated in a great Plain, and has about it green Hills, delightful
Meadows, navigable Rivers, enjoyes an wholesome air, and the fertile Country
about it, furnishes it with all store of necessary provision. The City it self
is thronged with Artisans of all sorts. There be many stately Churches in it,
and before that of St. Lorenzo there stand sixteen Marble Pillars, being a
remnant of the Temple of Hercules. But of all the Churches, the Cathedral is
most costly. It Is all of white Marble, and about it are five hundred Statues of
the same: There is a late building added to it which is very glorious,
especially for the huge Pillars of Granito, an excellent sort of Marble:
Private men's houses also in Millan are not inferior to those of other Cities
in Italy. The streets are of a more that common breadth, and there are very
many Gardens within the Walls. The greatest Hospital in Italy is that in
Millan, which is a square of Columns, and Porches six hundred Roods about,
seeming fitter to be a Court for some King, than an Hospital for the poor. The
Castle in Millan is accounted by all Engineers the fairest, and strongest
Citadel in Europe. Riamund's Mer. Ital.

The City of Naples described.
Naples the Metropolis of that Kingdom, stands upon the shore of the
Mediterranean Sea: Its reckoned the third City in Italy, and so great are the
delights that nature has allotted to this place, that it is still frequented
by persons of great quality. The streets of it are generally well paved, of
free stone, large, and even: The houses are very uniform, built flat on the top
to walk on; a notable convenience in those hot Countries. Another like
accommodation which this City has against the heat, is the Mole, which is an
Artificial street casting it self into the Sea, whither all the Gentry at the
evenings resort to take the Fresco. Amongst the Palaces that of the Vice-Kings
is the fairest: It has three Castles; and the Churches generally are very
curious and costly, filled with Marble Statues. This City is exceeding
populous, and consequently vicious: He that desires to live a chaste life must
not set up there: For as their Gardens are well filled with Oranges, so their
houses want not Lemmons; there are usually thirty thousand Courtesans registered
that pay taxes for their pleasure.

Near unto Naples is Virgil's Tomb upon an high Rock. And the Crypta
Neapolitana in the rocky Mountain Pausylippus, cut through, very high, spacious,
and well paved, so that for the space of a mile, two Coaches may go on front
under the earth: In the midst is a Madonna, with a Lamp perpetually burning.
Not far off is the Hill of Brimstone, on which neither grass nor any herb
grows; but it is all white with ashes, and ever casts out of several holes a
continual smoke, with flames, making the very earth to boil: The ground is
hollow underneath, and makes an hideous noise, if struck upon with an hammer.
On the other side Naples, is the Mountain of Vesuvius, brother to Aetna, upon
the top whereof is a terrifying spectacle, viz. a Vorago, or hole about three
miles in compass, and half as much in depth, and in the midst is a new hill
that still vomits thick smoke which the fire within has raised within these
few years, and it still daily increases. Pliny the Naturalist being too
inquisitive after the cause of this fire, changed life for death upon this
Mountain. Idem.

Virgil made a Talisman, or Brazen Fly, which he set upon one of the Gates of
the City of Naples, which for the space of eight years kept all manner of Flies
from coming into the City. Gaffarels Unheard of Curiosities. part. 2. chap. 7.
See more there.

The City of Florence described.
Florence is the Capitol City of Tuscany, situated at the bottom of very high
hills, and environed on all sides with the same, except on the West side,
before which lies a plain Country. This City is divided into two by the River
Arno, over which are built four Bridges of stone; upon one of the two chief is
the Goldsmiths street: upon the other, which is a very stately structure, stand
the four quarters of the year in Marble: Opposite unto which, stands a vast
Column with a Statue of Justice in Porphyrie at the top: Hard by is the Palace
of Strossie, admirable for the immensity of its Fabric; on the left hand
whereof is the Merchants Vault supported with many fair Pillars, and before it
a brazen Boar jetting forth water: Before that is the great place, in the
midst whereof is the great Duke Cosmus on horseback in brass, near unto which
is a Fountain, the like to which Italy affords not. Round about the Laver is
the Family of Neptune in brass, with his Colosse of Marble in the midst,
born up by four horses. In this same Piazza is a Porch arched and adorned with
some Statues, amongst which that of Judith in brass, with the rape of the
Sabines, three persons in several postures cut all out of one stone. Just
against it is the Palazzo Vechio, at the entrance whereof stand two Colossi,
the one of David, the other of Hercules trampling on Caous, excellent pieces.
Within is a Court set about with pillars of Corinthian work. Above is a very
spacious Hall with diverse Statues. Near to it is the richest of Treasures, the
great Dukes Gallery, in the uppermost part whereof are contained as many
wonders as things: some to be admired for the preciousness, and Art; others
for their rarity, and antiquity: On each side of the Gallery stand above
fourscore Statues: One, an Idol brought from the Temple of Apollo in Delphos:
Another of Scipio Africanus holding up his gown under his Arm: Then two curious
triumphant Pillars: Over the Statues hang rare pictures, the most famous
Scholars on the one side, and Soldiers on the other.

At the right hand of this Gallery are several Stanza's full of curiosities,
wherewith the spectators are astonished, both in regard of the richness, and
rarity thereof. In the first Room is an Altar totally compacted of Jewels, and
precious stones: The value inestimable. In the next is a Table with Flowers,
and Birds in their natural colors of precious stones, with a Cabinet worth two
hundred thousand Crowns, covered with Agates, Emerauds, Amethists, etc. Within
it is the History of Christ's Passion, with the twelve Apostles all in Amber. In
the third is a Cabinet with Calcedonie Pillars, filled with ancient Medals of
gold. Round about this Room are an infinite number of Natural, and Artificial
curiosities: As the Emperors head cut on a Turquoise bigger than a Walnut,
with thousands more. Next is the Armory; wherein are the habits, and diverse
sorts of Arms of several ages, and people. There is likewise a Loadstone that
bears up fourscore pounds weight of Iron. In the last Cabinet are curious
turned works of Ivory, A Pillar of Oriental Alabaster, etc. In another Room are
twelve great Cupboards of silver Plate of all sorts, and another of all pure
massy gold: A Saddle all embroydered with Pearls, and Diamonds; besides many
other things of great worth.

From hence is a private passage to the Dukes Court on the other side of the
River: The front of which edifice is very Majestic, toward the Basis of
Dorick work, in the midst of Ionick, and the uppermost story of Corinthian.
In the Court is a Grotto with Statues, and a Fountain over it; and a Loadstone
of a most prodigious greatness.

The Gardens belonging to it, for their largeness have the face of a Forest,
for their variety, of a Paradise. Here are Cypress Groves, their Walks with
Statues: Here a Sea of Fountains; these Swans, Ostriches, and other delighting
Creatures.

The Cathedral Church is of a vast bulk, and exquisite workmanship, made of
Red, White, and black Marble. The Cupola is so high, that the brass Globe at
the top will hold sixteen persons: No less excellent is the Steeple, composed
of the same stone and materials with the Church, but with more Art, and
Ornaments.

The Chapel of St. Laurence seems more than terrestrial: Its wholly overlaid
with fine polished stones, neither is there any color upon Earth, but it is
there in stones naturally. Near to this is a famous Library, filled with great
variety of Manuscripts. In brief, the houses of Florence are generally built
high, the streets are paved with great stones, even and large, and adorned with
many excellent Fountains, and other public Ornaments.

The chiefest Cities of Italy are thus usually distinguished: Rome the Un-holy;
Venice the Rich; Naples the Gentle; Florence the Fair; Genoa the Proud; Millan
the Great; Bolonia the Fat; Padua the Learned; and Verona the Ancient. Idem.

Belgia, or the Netherlands described.
Belgia is bounded on the East with the River Ems, and part of Germany: On the
West with the Germane Sea, on the North with East-Friezland, and on the South
with the Some, Champaigne, and Lorrain: Its in compass one thousand miles. The
Country is very populous, the men well proportioned, and ingenious: the
inventers of Clocks, Printing, and the Compass: They found out diverse musical
instruments, the making of Chariots, Painting with Oil colors, working
pictures in Glass, making of Worsteads, Says, Tapestry, etc. The women govern
all, both within doors, and without: The Country lies low upon the Seas, and
therefore is very subject to inundations. In the reign of our King Henry the
second, Flanders was so overflown, that many thousands of people, whose
dwellings were devoured by the Sea, came into England, and were by the King
first planted in Yorkshire, but afterward removed into Pembrook-shire. Since
then, the Sea has swallowed up in Zealand eight of the Islands, and in them
three hundred Towns, and Villages, the ruins of the Churches, etc. being seen
at low water till this day. The commodities are Linen, Skarlet, Worstead,
Says, Silks, Velvets, Armor, Cables, Ropes, Butter, Cheese, etc. The chief
Rivers are, 1. Rheine. 2. Mosa, which compasses half the Country. 3. Ems,
dividing the two Friezlands. 4. Scaldis, which rising in Picardy, runs through
Artois, divides Henault, and Brabant, and a little above Antwerp emptieth it
self into the Sea. 5. Ley, which runs quite through Flanders.

In Zealand and Holland especially, they are fain to defend themselves against
the Sea by huge banks about ten else high, and five and twenty in breadth at
the bottom, made of the hardest Clay, with great pains, and maintained with
great charge; their inside is stuffed with wood, and stone, and their outside
covered with strong, and thick Mats. Its divided into seventeen Provinces,
which are these that follow.

1. Limbourg, and the Bishopric of Liege, environed with Brabant, and Namurce,
on the West: with Brabant, and Gulick on the North: with Gulick, and Collen on
the East: and with Luxenbourg on the South. In the Bishopric are four and
twenty walled Towns, and one thousand and eight hundred Villages: the chief
City is Liege, seated on the Meuse: the buildings of it are very fair. Its a
famous University, wherein were students at one time, nine Kings Sons: four and
twenty Dukes sons: twenty nine Earls Sons, besides Barons, and Gentlemen. The
next Cities are, 2. Tongres. 3. Dinand, near Namur. 4. Huy. 5. Bilsen. 6.
Truden.

The Duchy of Limbourg, contains five Towns. 1. Limbourg, on the River Weser.
2. Walkenbourgh. 3. Dalem. 4. Rode le Buck. 5. Carpen, besides one hundred
twenty and three Villages.

Luxenbourg, which is bounded on the North with Limbourg, on the South with
Lorrain, on the East with the Bishopric of Triers, and on the West with the
Meuse. Its in circuit two hundred and forty miles, in which stand one thousand
one hundred sixty and nine villages, and twenty and three walled Towns. The
chief are, 1. Luxenburgh on the River Elze, 2. Bostonack, commonly called the
Paris of Ardenne. 3. Thionville. 4. Mommedi. 5. Danvillers, 6. Ivoy. 7. Neuse
Chastel. 8. Rock de March. 9. Arluna. Here is the Forest of Ardenna, once
five hundred miles in compass; now scarce ninety: In the edges whereof are the
famous hot Baths, called the Spaw, which are of most virtue in July, because
then hottest. In the skirts of this Country toward France, is the Dukedom of
Bovillion, whose chief Towns are, Sedan, where is Schola Illustris; and
Bovillon: The Duke is a Peer of France, and has been a great friend to the
Protestants.

3. Gelderland, which has on the East Cleve, on the West Brabant, on the North
Frizland, and on the South Limbourg* It contains three hundred villages, and
twenty four Towns, the chief whereof are, 1. Nimmegen, seated on the branch of
the Rheine, which is called Whael. 2. Ruremond. 3. Arnheim. 4. Harderwick. 5.
Doesbourgh. 6. Buren. Its a fertile soil for feeding of Beasts, which grow so
great and fat, that Anno Christi 1570. there was a Gelderland Bull killed at
Antwerp, that weighed three thousand and two hundred pounds.

4. Brabant, having on the East, North, and South the Meuse, and on the West
the Scheld. Its in length seventy five, in breadth sixty miles, comprehending
seven hundred villages, and twenty six Towns, whereof the chief are, 1. Lovain,
in compass within the walls four miles, and six without. Its an University
wherein are twenty Colleges, and a Seminary of English Jesuits: There are in
it many goodly Gardens, Mountains, Valleys, Medows, etc. 2. Bruxels of the
same bigness, and the Dukes seat, but for pleasure, profit, uniform buildings,
and elegancy thereof, far beyond Lovain. 3. Bergen ap some, famous for the
notable resistance it made to Spinola, Anno Christi 1622. 4. Bolduc. 5.
Tilmont. 6. Mastriecht. 7. Breda, the seat of the Prince of Orange.

5. The Marquisat of the Empire is contained in Brabant: the chief City is
Antwerp, in circuit seven miles: In it are eight principal channels cut out of
the Scheld, on which the Town is seated, the biggest of them being able to
contain one hundred ships. Before the Civil wars, it was a place of wonderful
great Trading: but now the Hollanders have so blocked up the Haven, that the
traffic is removed to Amsterdam.

6. Flanders is divided into the Imperial, Gallick, and Teutonick Flanders.
The last of these is divided from the other two, by the River Ley. The chief
Towns in it are, 1. Gaunt, whose wall is seven miles round. The Rivers Scheld,
and Ley run through it, and make in it twenty six Islands, conjoined with
ninety eight bridges. 2. Burgi^, situated on a fair, and deep channel made by
Art, which much advantageth it. 3. Ypres, a very strong Town standing on a
River of the same name. 4. Winnocks-Berg. 5. Grauling, on the sea side, a
strong Fort. 6. Oudenard. The four principal Ports of Flanders are, 1. Dunkirk.
2. Scluse, at the mouth of the channel of Bruges, having a fair Haven able to
contain five hundred good ships; Its in the hand of the States. 3. Newport,
where was fought that famous Battle between the Spaniards, and States. 4.
Ostend, which held out a siedg of three years, and three months against the
Archduke.

Imperial Flanders, is parted from Brabant, by the River Dender, from the
Gallick Flanders, by the River Scheld about Oudenard. The chief Towns are, 1.
Alost, on the Dender. 2. Dendermond. 3. Hulst, 4. Axelle. 5. Rupelmond.

The Gallick Flanders, is severed from the Teutonick by the River Ley: from the
Imperial by the Scheld. The chief Towns are, 1. Lisle, 2. Doway, where is an
University. 3. Orchies. 4. Armentiers. 5. St. Amand. 6. Turnay. In all Flanders
there are thirty five Towns, and one thousand one hundred seventy and eight
Villages. Its in length ninety six miles, in breadth much less. Its bounded
with Brabant on the East: Picardy on the West: the Sea on the North: and Artoys
on the South.

7. Artoys, which has on the East Heinalt, on the West Picardy, on the North
Flanders, and on the South Champaigne. It contains seven hundred fifty and four
villages, and twelve walled Towns, whereof the chief are, 1. Arras, whence
comes our Arras hangings, 2. Air. 3. Pernes. 4. St. Omer, a good Haven. 5.
Lilliers. 6. Le-Cluse. The frontier Towns are, 1. Hedinfert against Picardy. 2.
St. Paul.

8. Heinalt, bounded on the East with Limbourg, on the West with Flanders, on
the North with Brabant, and on the South with Champaigne: The length of it is
sixty miles, and the breadth forty eight. It contains nine hundred and fifty
Villages, and twenty four Towns, the chief whereof are, 1. Mons, a strong and
rich City, 2. Valenciennes, seated on the Scheld. 3. Conde. 4. Bavays. 5.
Landrecy, on the River Sambre. 6. Mariembourgh. 7. Engien. 8. Reulx. 9.
Avennes. On the South part of Heinalt, is the Town, and territory of Cambray.

9. Namurce, which has on the East Limbourg: on the West Heinalt: on the
North Brabant, and on the South Luxenburg: In this Country are many Coals which
are kindled with Water, and quenched with Oil. It contains one hundred and
eighty villages, and four Towns. 1. Namurce, seated where Sicambris falls into
Meuse. 2. Charlemont. 3. Valencourt. 4. Bovines. Its a fruitful Country,
enriched with Mines of Jasper, and all sorts of Marble, and abounding with
Iron. The Inhabitants are good soldiers.

10. Zutphen, is a Town in Gelderland, an ancient Earldom, seated on the River
Ysell, a strong place, in the siege whereof that mirror of Chivalry, Sir Philip
Sidney lost his life.

11. Holland is a woody Country, having on the East Utrecht: on the West and
North, the Sea: and on the South the Meuse. Its in circuit one hundred and
eighty miles, no part whereof is distant from the Sea three hours journey. It
contains four hundred villages, and three and twenty Towns: whereof the chief
are, 1. Dort, where the National Synod was held against the Arminians, Anno
Christi 1618. 2. Harlem, where Printing was invented. 3. Leiden, a famous
University. Which City consists of forty one Islands, passed partly by Boats,
and partly by Bridges, whereof there are one hundred forty and five, and of
them one hundred and four built with stone. 4. Delft. 5. Alkmer. 6. Rotterodam.
7. Horn. 8. Enchusen. 9. Amsterdam, a very fair Haven Town: the men are good
Seamen, the women very industrious: there is scarce a boy of four years old,
but can earn his own meat. It yields Butter, Cheese, etc. The chief Village is
the Hage, having in it two thousand households.

12 Zealand, consists of seven Islands, and in them three hundred Towns. The
first Island is Walcheren, and in it the chief towns are, 1. Midlebourg, 2.
Flushing, an excellent Haven, and of great strength. Nigh unto it is the Fort
Ramekins, and the Brill. 3. Vere. The next Island is South Beverland, whose
chief Town is Tergowse. The third is Schoven, its chief Town Sixixee. 4. Tolen,
whose chief Town is Tertolen, etc. In all this Country are eight Cities, and
one hundred and two Villages, the soil is fruitful, but they have neither wood,
nor fresh water.

13. West-Freizland, which has on the East Groyning, on the South Overyssel,
on the other sides, the Sea. It contains three hundred forty and five Villages,
and eleven Towns: the chief are, 1. Lewarden. 2. Harlingem, a sea Town. 3.
Zwichen. 4. Doceum. 5. Franeker, an University.

14. Utrecht, is bounded on the East with Gelderland, on the other three sides
with Holland: It contains seventy Villages, and five Towns, as, 1. Rhenen. 2.
Wick de Duerstede. 3. Amesford. 4. Monfoort. 5. Utrecht just in the midst.

15. Overyssel, is bounded on the North with Freizland, and Groaning, on the
South with Gelderland, on the East with Westphalia, on the West with the sea.
It contains one hundred and one Villages, and eleven Towns, the chief whereof
are, 1. Swall. 2. Campene. 3. Deventer, basely betrayed to the Spaniards by Sir
William Stanley. 4. Steinwick. 5. Hasselt. 6. Oldezel. 7. Handerberg. 8. Delden.

16. Machlin, which is a Town in Brabant, which Anno Christi 1546. was much
defaced by fireing of eight hundred barrels of Gunpowder. Besides the Town, it
contains nine Villages. Its a fair and strong Town, being daintily seated
amidst the waters of the River Dele, so that it may be drowned on all sides.

17. Groyning, which is a Town of VVest-Friezland, containing under her command
one hundred forty and five Villages, the chief being Old haven, and Keikerk.
Its bounded on the East with East-friezland, on the West with VVest-Friezland,
on the South with Overyssel, and on the North with the Sea.

These Countries are now divided between the States under an Aristocratical
government, and the King of Spain: The States have the Duchy of Guelders: The
Earldomes of Holland, and Zealand, and Zutphen. The Lordships of Friezland,
Utretcht, Overyssel, and Groaning, seven in all; the rest are Spanish.

Germany described.
The compass of this spacious Country is two thousand and six hundred English
miles: The Inhabitants are little addicted to Venus, but very much to Bacchus;
they are of strong constitutions, and much inclining to fatness. The titles of
the Fathers descend to all their Children, every son of a Duke, being a Duke,
and every Daughter a Duchess. The soil for the most part is healthful, and
profitable, yielding several Minerals, Corn, and Wine, together with Linen,
Quicksilver, Allom, etc. The chief Rivers are, 1. Danubius, which rising out of
Nigra sylva, receives threescore navigable Rivers into it, and having run a
course of one thousand and five hundred miles, emptieth it self at seven mouths
into the Euxine Sea. 2. Rhene, which arising in Helvetia, and running through
Germany, and Belgia, after a course of eight hundred miles, falls into the
German Ocean. 3. Albis, rising on the skirts of Bohemia, passing by
Magdenbourg, Brunswick, and Denmark, after four hundred miles course, falls
into the same Sea. 4. Oder, arising in Silesia, runs through Brandenbourg, and
Pomerania about three hundred miles, and so falls into the Baltic Sea. 5.
Maenus or the Main. 6. Weser.

The Empire of Germany is not hereditary, but elective: and when the Emperor is
dead, the Archbishop of Mentz, writes to the rest of the Electors to meet at
Frankfurt within three months, either in person, or to send their Ambassadors:
In the vacancy, the Elector Palatine is the Vicar; and he who is elected King
of the Romans is declared heir. The three Ecclesiastical Electors, are the
Archbishops of Mentz, Trevers, and Colein: the others are the King of Bohemia,
the Elector Palatine* the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandenburg: to
whom was lately added the Duke of Bavaria. Being assembled at Frankfurt, they
make oath to choose a fit person: they are obliged to finish the choice within
thirty days, and may not go out of the Town till it be accomplished. If the
voices happen to be equal, he who has the King of Bohemia's vote, is
proclaimed Emperor.

The three states of the Empire are, 1. That of the aforesaid Electors, wherein
the Ecclesiastics have the precedence. The second state consists of four
Archbishops, as Magdeburg, Salsburgh, Bremen, and Bezanson: after whom follows
the great Master of the Teutonick Order; and then one and thirty Bishops; ten
Abbots with the title of Princes; and some Abbesses; and lastly the Counts, and
Barons, whereof there are many. The third State is made up of the Imperial
Towns, which are in number threescore and five: the four principal are,
Lubeck, Metz, Auspurgh, and Aixe, or Aquisgra^e.

Another Union there is for the preservation of Trade, and commerce, the chief
Cities whereof are, Lubeck, Colein, Brunswick, and Dansick. These are called
Hanse-Towns.

The Empire is distributed into ten circles; Franconia, Bavaria, Austria,
Swevia: That of the upper Rheyn; that of the four Electors toward the Rheyn,
Westphalia, Saxony, Low Saxony, and Burgundy.

Come we now in particular to the chief Provinces of Germany, which are
fifteen. As,

1. East-Friezland having on the West the River Ems, on the East the Weser, on
the South Westphalia, and on the North the Sea: The chief Towns are, 1. Emden.
2. Ammer Dun. 3. Oldenbourg.

2. Westphalia, which is bounded on the East with Brunswick, on the West with
Belgia, on the South with Hassia, and on the North with the Sea. The soil is
fruitful, the trees yield abundance of sweet Acorns which feed our Westphalia
Bacon: The Northern part is called Bremen, from the chief City of that name:
the next parts belong to the Duke of Saxony, the chief Towns whereof are, 1.
Clappenbourg. 2. Exenberg. 3. Alsdorpe, etc. The other part belongs to the
Bishoprics of Collen, Munster, and Triers. In that of Collen are, 1. Collen,
the Bishops seat. 2. Anderna^h. 3. Lentz seated on the Rhene. 4. Bonna. 5.
Mondenand.

The chief towns under the Bishop of Munster are, 1. Warendorp. 2. Herverden.
3. Munster, seated on the River Ems. Here the frantic Anabaptists seated
themselves, Anno Christi 1522. till they were deservedly punished and destroyed

The chief Towns in the Bishopric of Triers are, 1. Bopport on the Mosel. 2.
Engers. 3. Coblents. 4. Triers on the Mosel also.

3. Cleveland, which Duchy contains Cleve, Gulick, and Berge. It joins to
Gelderland, and the chief Cities are, 1. Cleve. 2. Calkar. 3. Wesel. 4. Emerick.

In Gulick the chief Cities are, 1. Aquisgraue, or Aken. 2. Gulick. 3. Dulken.
4. Newis.

The chief Towns in Berge are, 1. Dusseldorp. 2. Hattingen. 3. Arusberg.

4. Alsatia, which has on the West Lorrain, on the South Helvetia, on the East
the Rhene, and on the North, the Palatinate. The chief Towns are, 1.
Strasbourg, where is a Tower five hundred seventy and eight paces high: It
stands on the Rhene. 2. Psaltburg. 3. VVeisenberg. On the South end of Alsatia
stand Colmer, Hagenaw, and Selestade, three fair Cities belonging to the Empire.

5. Franconia which is bounded on the East with Bohemia: on the West with
Elsas: on the North with Hassia, and on the South with Swevia, Bavaria, and
Helvetia. Its divided betwixt the Palatine of Rhene, the Duke of Wittenberg,
the Marquess of Anspach* and Baden, the Bishops of Mentz, Bamberg, VVestberg,
and the Emperor, of which in order.

The Palatinate of Rhene is in length from North to South, threescore and
twelve miles; in breadth from East to West, fourscore and sixteen. In which
compass are some Towns of the Empire, and some Lordships belonging to the
Bishops of Worms, and Spires, both seated on the Rhene. The Palatinate has
store of fruits, metals, and Rhenish Wines: Has many gallant Towns, as 1.
Mospotch. 2. Heidelberg, an University. On the banks of Rhene stand 1.
Bacharach, whence come the best Rhenish Wines called Bachrach. 2. Coub. 3.
Oppenheim. 4. Cruitznack. 5. Frankendale. 6. Germensheim. 7. Mainhem, etc.
There are in this Country fourteen other walled Towns.

Wittenberg, whereof the chief Towns are, 1. Turbing, an University. 2.
Stutguard, the Dukes seat. 3. Marback. 4. Caustat, etc.

Anspach, the chief Towns whereof are, 1. Anspach. 2. Ha^lbrun. 3. Plenifelt.

Baden, a fruitful Country lying between the Rivers Rhene, and Neccar: The
chief Towns are, 1. Durlach. 2. Pfortshaime. 3. Baden, a neat Town seated on
the Rhene, having hot Baths in it.

Mentz, seated where the Main emptieth it self into the Rhene, whereof the
chief Towns are, 1. Lanstein. 2. Bing, seated on the Rhene.

Bamberg, which is a fair City seated on the Main, the other chief Towns are
Schestlites, and Forchiam.

VVirtzberg, a Bishops seat, formerly called Herbipolis, the other Towns
belonging to it are Schwinfurt on the Main, and Arnsteme.

The Emperors part contains the free, and imperial Cities seated in the
Palatinate, and Wittenberg, the chief whereof are, 1. Norenberg, situated in
the very center of Germany. 2. Frankfurt on the Main, where the two great book
Marts are held in Midlent, and Mid-September.

6. Helvetia, or Switzerland, which is bounded on the East with Tyrol, on the
West with France, on the North with Lorraine, and Elsas, and on the South with
Italy. It contains thirteen Cantons* as 1. Zurick. 2. Bern. 3. Lucern. 4.
Urania. 5. Glaris. 6. Zugh. 7. Basil. 8. Friburg. 9. Underwalt. 10. Soloure.
11. Schaffhausen. 12. Apensol. 13. Swits. The chief Towns are, 1. Zurick, or
Tygure. 2. St. Gall. 3. Basil. where is a famous University. 4. Constance
seated on the Lake Bodenzee; it belongs to the house of Austria. 5. Bern. 6.
Baden; where are good Bathes. 7. Lucerne, situate on the banks of a great Lake,
bearing the same name. The Country is in length two hundred and forty, and in
breadth one hundred and fourscore miles: In it are the heads of^those four
famous Rivers, Poe, Danow, Rhene, and Rhone, that run East, West, North, and
South. These people were sometimes under the Emperor; but being over-burthened
by the Tyranny of their Governors, they shaked off the yoke, and entering into
an offensive, and defensive league, cantoned themselves under a new Government.

These Helvetians are shut up within Mountains, and great Lakes, which make
their Country unaccessible. The tyranny of some Governors, as aforesaid,
caused them to shake off the yoke, not only of the house of Austria, but of
their own Nobility also. Their first league was begun by three Country
Peasants, which in a short time was much augmented, by the aversion of the
people from the abovesaid Government. Let no man trust to his own power, and
maintain it by rigor, for enemies often come from whence they are least
expected. So soon as this league was made, they seized upon the Castles of
their Governors, and drove them out of their Country Anno Christi 1307. But
Archduke Leopold being puffed up by some conquests he had made, and being
provoked by the solicitations of the expulsed Nobility, led his forces against
the Villages, but was defeated in the Mountains, near Morgarten. This victory
of the Switzers produced the perpetual alliance of the three Villages, to which
the rest shortly after adjoined themselves; yea, and many imperial Towns near
them have so leagued themselves with them, that now they have no enemy that
they need fear, except from among themselves: Since which time their alliance
has been sought by Popes, Kings, and Princes of Europe, and especially by
France, which by keeping in with them, through a yearly pension, has drawn no
small advantages from them.

Their Republic is composed of three orders: The Villages to the number of
thirteen. The Associates, or Confederates: And the Towns which depend upon
their direction. They have also diverse forms of Government: for that of the
Villages is Democratical; and that of the Towns, Aristocratical: which mixed
Commonwealth is only kept in unity by the care which she has of her own
preservation. Their Assemblies are made by a general Convocation to treat of
war, peace, etc. at which the Ambassadors from every Town are to meet. Their
Religion in some of the Cantons is only Roman, in others reformed, and in some
mixed. In this Marshal age of ours, bloody Mars has as well skipped over their
Mountains, as through the Seas, Des^^^s, and vast Forests.

7. Suevia, which is divided into the upper, and lower. The upper is bounded on
the East with Tyrol, on the West with Helvetia, on the North with lower Suevia,
and on the South with Millaine: It was formerly called Rhetia, now they are
called Grisons; divided into three confederations. 1. Lega Cadi Dio; whose
chief City is Coyra. 2. Lega Grisa. 3. Lega Dritture, they are Papists, and
Protestants mixed together.

Lower Suevia, or Schwaben has on the East Bavaria; on the West Danubius: on
the North Franconia, and on the South Tirol, and the Grisons. The chief Towns
are, 1. Ulme. 2. Lindwe, on the Lake Bodenzee. 3. Auspurg on the River Leith.
4. Norlingen. 5. VVherlingen. 6. Ravensperg. 7. Dinkle spuhel. 8. Gmund.

8. Bavaria, which has on the East Austria, and Stiria, on the West the Leike,
on the North Bohemia, and part of Franconia, and on the South Tirol, and
Carinthia: The chief Cities are, 1. Munchen, the Dukes seat, on the River Aser.
2. Ingolstat, on the Danow, an University. 3. Ratisbone, on the Danow also. 4.
Passaw. 5. Sulesbourg, on the River Saltzach. 6. Frising. 7. Eystet, etc. being
in all thirty four, and forty six walled Towns besides: the soil is fruitful.

The Northern part of Bavaria is called the Upper Palatinate, whereof the chief
Towns are, 1. Amberg, where are Silver Mines. 2. Newburg. 3. Awerbach. 4.
Sultzbach. 5. Weiden. 7. Castle.

9. Austria, is an Arch-Dukedome that contains the Province of Austria, Styria,
Carinthia, Tirol, and Carniola: Its divided from Hungary on the East, by the
Leita: From Bavaria on the West, by the Ems: From Moravia on the North, by the
Tems: and from Stiria on the South, by the Muer: It was once called Pannonia
superior: the chief Cities in Austria are, 1. Vienna, an University, seated on
the Danow, the beautifullest City in all Germany, adorned with magnificent
Churches, stately Monasteries, and a sumptuous Palace for the Archduke 2.
Emps. 3. St. Leopald. 4. Neustat. 5. Hainburg. 6. Crems.

Styria is in length one hundred and ten miles, and about sixty in breadth. It
has the River Rab on the East, Carinthia on the West, the Dravus on the South,
and the Meur, and Austria on the North: the chief Cities are, 1. Marchpurg. 2.
Gratz.

Carinthia is seventy five miles in length, and fifty five in breadth. It has
Stiria on the East, Tirol on the West, Bavaria on the North, and the Alps on
the South. The chief towns are, 1. Villach. 2. Spittal. 3. Gurach. 4. Freisach.
5. St. Veit.

Carniola is one hundred and fifty miles long, and forty five broad. It has on
the East Sclavonia, on the West Italy, on the North Carinthia, and on the South
Istria: the chief towns are, 1^ Newmark, 2. Esling. 3. Marsperg. 4. Bagonock.
5. Saxenfelt, all on the River Savus, which runs through the middle of the
Country.

Tirol, which is seventy two miles broad, and as many long. It has on the East
Carinthia, on the West the Grisons, on the North Schwaben, and on the South
Marca Trevigeana. Its a fruitful Country, and full of silver Mines: the chief
towns are, 1. Oenipont, or Inspurch. 2. Landeck. 3. Tirol. 4. Bolzan. 5. Trent,
on the River Adesis, where the Council was held against the Protestants.

10. Bohemia, which has annexed to it Silesia, Lusatia, and Moravia.

Bohemia is bounded on the East with Silesia, and Moravia, on the West with
Franconia, on the North with Misnia, and Lusatia, and on the South with
Bavaria, and is encompassed with the Hercynian Forest. The whole Kingdom is
in compass five hundred and fifty miles, in which are contained seven hundred
and eighty Cities, walled Towns, and Castles, and thirty two thousand Villages:
they use the Sclavonian Language. The soil is fruitful, enriched with Mines of
all sorts but Gold. Here are many Forests, and in some of them a beast called
Loris, having under its neck a bladder of scalding water, with which, when she
is hunted, she so tormenteth the Dogs, that she easily escapes them. The
chief Cities are. 1. Prague, in the midst of the Country, seated on the
River Mulda: It consists of four several towns, each of them having their
several Magistrates, Laws and Customs: the principal is called the Old Town,
adorned with many fair buildings, a spacious Market place, and a stately
Senate House: the second is called the New-town, separated from the other by a
deep and wide ditch: the third is called the Little-town, divided from the Old
by the River Mulda, and joined to it by a beautiful Bridge consisting of twenty
four Arches: In this Town is the hill Rachine, on whose sides are many stately
houses of the Nobles, and on the top a magnificent Palace for the Kings: the
fourth is that of the Jews, who have in it five Synagogues, and live after
their own Laws. The second City is Egra, seated on the River Eger, on the
borders toward Franconia. 3. Budwus toward Austria. 4. Melmukle, on the river
Albis. 5. Weldaw. 6. Pilsen.

Silesia, is bounded with Bohemia on the West, Brandenburg on the North, Poland
on the South, and Hungary, and Moravia on the East: Its in length two hundred
and forty miles, and fourscore in breadth, and is equally divided by the river
Oder: the chief towns are, 1. Preslaw, or Uratislavia. 2. Jagundorfe. 3. Glats.
4. Oppolen. 5. Glogaw. 6. Olderberg, all seated on the River Oder.

Lusatia, which has on the East and North Silesia, on the West Brandenburg,
and on the South Silesia: the chief Cities are, Gorlits, and Trabel on the
river Nisse, Spemberg, and Gotthuse, on the River Spe, and lastly Bautsen.

Moravia, which has on the North and East Silesia, on the West Brandenburg,
and on the South Austria, and Hungary. It abounds with Corn, and has much
Myrrh, and Frankincense, which contrary to the usual manner, grow immediately
out of the Earth, not from trees: the chief towns are, 1. Brinne. 2. Olmutz, an
University. 3. Terebitz. 4. Jasa. etc.

11. Brandenburg, which has on the East Poland, on the West Saxony, on the
North Pomerania, and on the South Lusatia: Its in compass five hundred and
twenty miles, in which are contained fifty Cities, and sixty four walled towns:
the chief are, 1. Brandenburg. 2. Frankfurt upon Oder, an University, seated in
a fruitful soil abounding with Corn, and Wine. 3. Berlin, where the Prince
keeps his Court, seated on the River Spre. 4. Havelburg, to this belongs part
of Prussia, called Ducal, with the Dukedomes of Cleve, Juliers, and Berg, etc.
So that in largeness of territories, they exceed the Dukes of Saxony, but not
in revenues.

12. Pomerania; and Meclemburg. The first is bounded on the East, wirh the
River Vistula, on the West with Meclemburg on the North with the Baltic sea,
and on the South with Brandenburg: the chief towns are, 1. Stetin, the Princes
seat, and an University. 2. Wolgast. 3. VVallin. 4. Gripswald an University. 5.
Newtrepton, a Sea Town.

Meclenburg, or Megalopolis stands on the West of Pomeren, the chief towns
whereof are, 1. Malchaw. 2. Sternberg. 3. VVismar. 4. Rostock, an University.
On the West hereof stands the fair Hans-Town of Lubeck; and about ten miles
from it, Hamborough: On the further side of the River is Stoade, where the
English house is to sell their wares.

13. Saxony, which has on the East Lusatia, and Brandenburgh: On the West
Hassia: On the North Brunswick; and on the South Franconia, and Bohemia. It
contains the Countries of Thuringia, Misnia, Voitland, and Saxony.

The chief Cities in Thuringia are, 1. Erdford, a great City. 2. Iene, an
University of Physicians. 3. Smalcald. 4. Hale. 5. VVeimar. The whole Country
is in length one hundred and twenty miles, and about as much in breadth, and
yet it contains two thousand Villages, and twelve Earledoms.

Misnia, environed with Bohemia, Voitland, Thuringia, and Saxony; the chief
Towns whereof are, 1. Dresden, on the River Albis: the Dukes seat, and
principal Magazine. 2. Lipsique, an University. 3. Rochlits. 4. Mulburg.

Voitland is a little Country South of Misnia, whose chief Towns are, 1.
Olnits. 2. VVerde. 3. Cronach. 4. Culmbach. 5. Hoffe.

Saxony, lies on the North of Thuringia, and Misnia: The chief Cities are, 1.
Magdeburg, formerly Parthenopolis. 2. VVorlits seated on the Albie. 3.
Helderick. 4. Wittenberg, the seat of the Duke, and an University, where
Luther lived: within the bounds of Saxony are the two small Principalities of
Anhalt, and Mansfield.

14. Brunswick, and Luneburg, which have on the East Brandenberg: On the West
Westphalia: On the North Denmark: And on the South Saxony, and Hassia. The
River Ems runs through this Country: and the chief Cities are, 1. Brunswick. 2.
Wolfohaiton, where the Duke keeps his Court. Halberstade. 4. Lunebourg. 5.
Cella.

5. Hassia, which has Saxony on the East, Franconia on the South, Westphalia
on the West and North: The chief Towns are, 1. Dormestad. 2. Marpurg, an
University. 3. Geysen. 4. Dries. 5. Frankenburg. 6. Cassels. In this Country is
the VVederaw, containing the Counties of Nassaw, and Hannaw, and the free City
of Friburg. In the County of Nassaw are, 1. Dillingbourg. 2. Nassaw. 3.
Catzenelbagen. and 4. Herborne, an University, where Piscator, and Alstedius
were Professors.

Denmark described.
Denmark contains the Cimbrick Chersoness, part of Scandia, and the Islands of
the Baltic Sea: The Chersoness is in length one hundred twenty miles, and in
breadth fourscore, wherein are contained eight and twenty Cities, and twenty
Royal Castles, or Palaces. The chief Provinces are,

1. Holstein, whose chief Cities are, Nyemunster, and Brumsted. 2. Ditmars,
whose chief Cities are, Meldory, where they cover their houses with Copper, and
Mance. 3. Sleswick, whose chief Cities are, Goterpe, and Londen a Haven Town.
4. Iuitland, whereof the chief towns are, Rincopen, Nicopen, Hol, and Arhausen.

The Islands are five and thirty, whereof the principal are, 1. Senland, or
Zeland, in length threescore and four, in breadth two and fifty miles,
containing seven strong Castles, and about thirteen Cities; the chief being, 1.
Coppenhagen, an University. 2. Elsennour on the Sea side, where they that pass
the Sound pay their customs: This Sound is in breadth three miles, and is
commanded by the Castles of Elsenbourg, on Scandia side, and Cronburg in this
Island. 3. Roschilt. The second Island is Fuinen. 3. Bornholme. 4. Fimera,
wherein Ticho Brahe built his artificial Tower, in which are rare Mathematical
Instruments.

That part of Scandia which belongs to Denmark, is divided into three
Provinces. 1. Hallandia. 2. Scania, in length threescore and twelve miles, in
breadth eight and forty, the pleasantest, and fruitfullest Country in all
Denmark, and having Seas abounding with Herrings. 3. Blicker, where is Colmar,
a strong Fortress against the Swedes.

The Province of Scania reaches up to Sweden, and Ju^land to Holstein. The
Kingdom is elective, and the principal strength of it consists in good, and
stately ships, not only for the defense of the Islands, but of that most
important passage of the Sound, which is a straight separating Scania from
Zeland, and is of huge advantage by reason of the infinite number of ships
which pass through it into the Baltic Sea, and come from all the Havens of
that Sea back into the Ocean. The Noble men are much inclined to the wars;
zealous for their Rights and Liberties, and make no alliance by marriage with
the common people: they refuse Ecclesiastical honors, as below their
condition. The Gentlemen are all equal, and as it were of one family, there
being neither Earl, nor Baron; only the Officers of the Crown, and Counselors
of the Kingdom have the pre-eminence.

Norway described.
Norway is bounded on the North with Lapland, on the East with the Do^rine
Mountains; which part it from Swethl^nd: on the other parts with the Sea. Its
in length one thousand and three hundred miles, in breadth not half so much.
Its much troubled with certain little Beasts called Lemmers, about the bigness
of a field-mouse, which, like Locusts, devour every green thing on the earth,
and at a certain time die in heaps, and with their stench poison the air; so
that the people are long after troubled with the Jaundies, and a giddiness in
the head: but these beasts come not often, The soil is barren, and the common
people live on dried fish in stead of bread. The chief Commodities are
stock fish, butter, rich furrs, train Oil, pitch, masts, cables, deal-boards,
etc. Towns here are few, and the houses are miserably poor: their chief towns
are, 1. Nidrosia. 2. Bergen, an ancient mart town. 3. Asloia. 4. Staffanger: On
the North, and West of it, lies Finmark, a great and populous Province, both
of them are subject to Denmark. The chief towns in Finmark are, 1. Saman. 2.
Hielso, both sea towns. 3. Wardhouse, a place of much trading.

Swethland Described.
Swethland has on the East Muscovy, on the West the Dofrine hills, on the
North the frozen Seas, and on the South the Baltic Sea, which does not ebb,
and flow: This Sea begins at the Sound, and interlaceth Denmark, Swethland,
Germany, and Poland, extending to Livonia, and Lituania. This Country with the
Provinces of Lapland, Scricfinia, and Barmia: is bigger than France, and Italy
joined together. The soil is fruitful, the air healthful, so that many of the
Inhabitants live to one hundred and thirty, and some to one hundred and forty
years old. It yields Mines of Lead, Copper, and Silver, Buck-skines,
Goat-skines, Oxen, Tallow, Tar, costly Furrs, etc. The chief Provinces are,

1. Lapland, which is divided into two parts, whereof the Eastern part belongs
to the great Duke of Mosco, the western containing Lapland, properly so called,
and Scricfinia, belong to Swethland: they have store of rich Furrs, but use not
many, and are good Archers.

2. Bodia, lying on the South of Scricfinia: the chief towns whereof are, 1.
Virtis. 2. Vista. 3. Helsinga.

3. Finland, which has the Baltic sea on the South. Its a very fruitful and
populous Country, containing one thousand four hundred thirty and three
Parishes, wherein are a thousand Families, in some of them: the chief towns are
1. Albo. 2. Name, a strong place, etc.

4. Sweden, which has on the East Sinus Bodicus, on the West the Dofrine
Hills, on the North Lapland, and on the South Gothland: For the most part it is
a fruitful Country: the chief Cities are, 1. Upsale. 2. Nicopia, a sea town.
3. Coperdole, famous for its abundance of Brass.

5. Gothland, which is the best and richest Province of the North: Its divided
into the Island, and the Continent. The Island of Gothland is seated in the
Baltic sea, being in length eighteen miles, and but five broad: the chief Town
is Wisbich. The continent of Gothland joins to Denmark, and has in it the
great Lake Weret, which receiving into it twenty and four Rivers, empties it
self at one mouth, with such an hideous noise, that it is commonly called the
Devils head, The chief Cities are, 1. Stockholm. 2. Lodusia. 3. Walburg. 4.
Colmar, famous for its impregnable Castle.

Sweden is the biggest of all the Northern Kingdoms, the Regal City whereof
is Stockholm, a town with the suburbs of great distent: there are in it many
huge Mountains, Rocks, and Forests, where are sometimes seen and hard, strange
illusions and phancies, as likewise in the water, which are very terrible, both
to men and horses that pass that way. The Swedes are good soldiers both by sea
and Land, of a strong complexion, and fit to endure hardship, and labor: the
Nobility is very mild, and frank, loves learning, and Languages, especially
the Latin, and French: they travel much abroad: are dextrous at exercises, and
seek learned company: they heartily love one another out of their own Country,
hide the vices of their compatriots, and stand much for the honor of their
Nation.

Muscovy Described.
Muscovy has on the East Tartary, on the West Livonia, Lituania, and part of
Sweden, on the North the frozen Ocean, and on the South the Caspian sea, and
lake of Meotis. It is in length from East to West, three thousand and three
hundred miles, in breadth three thousand sixty and five. The women love their
husbands best, that beat them most: they use the Sclavonian Language, and in
their Religion follow the Greek Churches: the Northren parts are so cold, that
the people do not only line their clothes, but their houses with Furrs: the
chief Commodities are rich Furs, Flax, Hemp, Oil, Honey, Wax, Canvasses, Nuts,
etc. It has many great rivers, as 1. Tanais, which emptieth it self into Palus
Meotis. 2. Duina, running into the Scythian seas. 3. Boristhenes, or Neiper,
running into the Euxine sea. 4. Onega, running into the Baltic sea. 5. Volga,
which at seventy mouths empties it self into the Caspian sea. The chief
Provinces are,

1. Novograd, having a City of the same name on the Baltic sea, a place of
great trading.

2. Plescovia, whose chief town is Plescow: it is in length three hundred and
thirty miles, and one hundred and thirty in breadth.

3. Volodomire, a fruitful Country, where usually one bushel of Corn returns
twenty, and sometimes five and twenty: the chief town is of the same name.

4. Rhezan, very plentiful in Corn, Honey, Fish, Fowl, etc.

5. Severia, a great Province upon the lake of Maeotis.

6. Smolensco, whose chief City is of the same name.

7. Rescovy. 8. Rostowia. 9. Corelia.

10. Permia, where are abundance of stags.

11. Condora. 12. Petzora.

13. The Kingdom of Casan, and Citraham.

14. Muscovia, whose chief City is Mosco.

The City of Mosco Described.
Mosco, the Regal City in Russia is almost round, and bigger it is than London,
environed with three strong walls, circling the one within the other, and
having many streets lying betwixt them. The inmost wall, and the buildings
within it being fenced, and watered with the River Moschua, that runs close
by it, is all accounted the Emperors Castle. The number of houses (as they were
formerly reckoned) amounted to forty one thousand, and five hundred. The
streets of this City, instead of paving are planked with great Firr trees,
planed, and laid even together, and very close the one to the other.

The houses are of Timber without Lime, and stone, built very close and warm,
of Fir trees, which are fastened together with notches at each corner: and
betwixt the Timber they thrust in Moss, to keep out the air, which makes them
very warm: The greatest danger is their aptness to take fire, which being once
kindled is hardly quenched, and hereby much hurt has been done, and the City
miserably defaced sundry times.

The whole Country of Russia, in the Winter lies under snow a yard, or two
thick, but greater in the Northern parts, from the beginning of November to the
end of March: in which time the Air is often so sharp, that water thrown upward
congeales into Ice before it comes to the ground: If you hold a pewter dish in
your hand, it will freeze so fast to it, as that it will pull off the skin at
parting: diverse in the Markets are killed with the extremity of cold:
Travelers are brought into towns sitting dead, and stiff in their sleds: some
loose their Noses, some their Ears, Fingers, Toes, etc. which are frozen off:
and yet in the Summer you shall see a new face on the Country: the woods,
which mostly are Firr, and Birch, so fresh and sweet, the Pastures, and Medows
so green, and well grown: such variety of Flowers: such melody of the Birds,
especially of Nightingales, that you cannot travel in a more pleasant Country:
The Summer is hotter than with us in England.

For Fruits, they have Apples, Pears, Plums, Cherries red, and black: Deens
like Muskmelons, but more sweet and pleasant, Cucumbers, Gourds, Straberries,
Hurtleberries, etc. Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, Pease, etc. Their chief
Commodities are Furrs of all sorts, as black Foxes, Sables, Lufernes, dun
Foxes, Martrons, Gurnstales, or Armines, Minever, Beaver, Walverines, a great
water Rat, whose skin smells like Musk: Squirrels gray and red: foxes white, and
red: as also Wax, Honey, Tallow, Hides of Beeves, and Buffs: Train Oil,
Caviare, Hemp, Flax, Salt, Tar, Saltpeter, Brimstone, Iron: Muscovy slate,
Fallow Deer, Roe-bucks, and Goats great store: For Fowl, they have Eagles,
Hawks of all kinds, swans tame and wild, Storks; Cranes, Fesants, white
Partridges, etc. For fresh water fish, they have Carp, Pike, Perch, Tench,
Roach: as also Bellouga of four or five else long, Sturgion, Severiga,
Sterledy, which four sorts breed in Volga, and of all their Roes they make
Caviare, etc.

The streets in their Cities and Towns instead of paving, are planked with Firr
trees planed, and laid even together. Their chief Cities are, Mosco, Novograd,
Rostove, Volodomire, Plesco, Smolensco, Jaruslave, Perislave, Nisnovograd,
Vologda, Ustiuck, Colmigroe, Casan, Astracan, Cargapolia, and Columna.

Its governed by an Emperor, or great Duke* with most absolute authority
(after the manner of the Eastern Countries) though it lie very near the North.
The Muscovites follow the Greek Religion, under a Patriarch, though yet it be
mingled with very many superstitions, which are not like to be amended,
because the Great Duke suffers none of his subjects to travel, and see other
Countries. They are much tormented by the Turks, and Tartars. They have waged
great wars with the Poles, and Swedes, but with many losses.

A Description of the state and magnificence of the Emperor of Russia.
Sir Thomas Smith being sent Ambassador from King James to Boris, Emperor of
Russia, Anno Christi 1604. one of his company thus relates their entertainment.
When (says he) we entr^d the presence, we beheld the excellent Majesty of a
mighty Emperor, seated in a chair of gold, richly embroidered with Persian
stuff: In his right hand he held a golden Scepter, had a Crown of pure gold
upon his head, a collar of rich stones, and Pearls about his neck, his outward
garments of Crimson Velvet, embroidered very fair with Pearls, precious
Stones, and Gold: On his right^hand stood a very fair Globe of beaten Gold, or
a Pyramid with a Cross on it: Nigh that stood a fair Basin and Ewre, which the
Emperor used daily. Close by him on another Throne sat the Prince, in an
outward Garment like his Fathers, but not so rich, with an high black Fox cap
on his head, worth there five hundred pound, having a golden staff in his
hand. On the Emperors right hand stood two gallant Noble men in cloth of
silver, high black Fox Caps, with great long gold chains hanging to their feet,
with Poleaxes of gold on their shoulders; and on the left hand of the Prince
stood two other such, but their Poleaxes were of silver: round about on benches
sat the Council, and Nobility in golden and Persian Coats, and high black Fox
Caps to the number of two hundred, the ground being covered with cloth of
Arras. After dinner (says he again) we were led to have audience through
many Chambers to a very fair and rich room, where was infinite store of massy
plate of all sorts, where we again viewed the Emperor, and Prince seated
under two Chairs of state, each having a scul of Pearl upon their heads. In the
midst of the room stood a great Pillar, round about which for a great height
stood wonderful great pieces of Plate very curiously wrought, with Beasts,
Fishes, and Fowls, besides other ordinary pieces of serviceable Plate. The
Emperor at dinner was served in rare dishes of silver, but most of Massy
gold, etc. Sic transit gloria mundi. Pur. Pil. v. 3. p. 748.

The Permians, and Samoeds described.
The Permians lie North from Russia, and are now subject to the Emperor
thereof: they have broad, and flat faces like the Tartars, from whom probably
they had their original: they live by hunting, and trading with their Furrs.

The Samoeds live more toward the North Sea; they are very brutish, eating all
manner of raw flesh, even to the very carrion that lies in the ditch: they are
also subject to the Russees: they acknowledge one God, but represent him by
such creatures as they have most good by, and therefore they worship the Sun,
the Ollen, the Losh, etc. They are clad in Seals-skins with the hairy side
outward, that reaches as low as the knees; with their breeches and stockings of
the same, both men, and women; they are all black-haired, and beardlesse: the
women are known from the men by a lock of hair hanging down by their ears: they
are ever roving about from one place of the Country to another, without
property either of house, or land: Their leader in every company is a Priest.

Lapland described.
On the North of Russia next to Corelia, lies Lappia, about three hundred
forty and five miles in length, in breadth fourscore and ten. The whole Country
almost is either Lakes or Mountains: those on the outside are barren craggie
Rocks: but in the inland they are well furnished with woods, the Lakes being in
the Valleys: their diet is very mean; bread they have none, but feed only upon
Fish, and Foul: they are subjects, part to Russia, part to Sweden, and the
other part to Denmark, which all exact tribute of them: but the Emperor of
Russia the most. They are wholly unlearned, not having so much as the use of
the Alphabet amongst them: They pass all Nations in witchcraft, and sorcery:
Their weapons are long-Bows, and hand-guns wherein they are very nimble, and
excellent marks-men through their continual practice in shooting at wild
foul: For our English cloth they give Fish, Oil, and Furs, whereof they have
store: when their fishing is done, they draw their boats to shore, turning the
keel upwards, and so let them lie till the next spring-tyde: They travel upon
sleds drawn by Olen-Deer, which they use to turn a grazing all the Summer time
in an Island called Kilden, and toward Winter, when the Snow begins to fall,
they fetch them home for their use.

Anno Christi 1611. William Purseglove, a servant to our English Muscovy
company, makes this relation of his travels in these Countries: we traveled
(says he) in sleds, each of them drawn by two Rain Deer, the Snow was so hard
frozen, that it did bear sleds and Deer. Two hundred and fifty Sleds were in
this Argeshey, or company, with whom we traveled some days: then choosing the
best Bucks; I, with seven Sleds more, rid Post, only staying now, and then for
an hour, where the Samoed, our guide, knew that there was store of white Moss,
wherewith to refresh our Deer, so that in eight and forty hours space we rode
three hundred and fifty miles.

These Samoeds, by their frequent travel, know the ways, though the weather
be thick, and foggy, as also where store of white Moss grows: at which places,
if it be night they pitch their Tents made of Deer, or Elks-skins, which work
is done by the women; and in the mean time the men unyoak the Deer, and turn
them loose to dig through the Snow, though it be very deep, to seek for their
food and sustenance. Pur. Pil. v. 3. p. 548.

When a rich Samoed dies, because he should not travel on foot, his friends
will kill three Deer to carry him into the new World, they will also strangle a
slave to attend on him. If a young child dye under seven years old, they use to
hang it by the neck on some tree, saying, it must fly to Heaven.

The women are very hardy, and at their labor the Husband plays the Midwife;
as soon as the child is born, they wash it with cold, or Snow-water, and the
next day the woman will be able to conduct her Argish of Sleds. The men are
stout, and bold of spirit, not very tall, but broad breasted, broad faced, with
hollow eyes: their weapons are Bows, and Arrows, long Spears, and short Swords.

Poland described.
This Country is plain, and wooddie, the air so cold, that they have no Wine,
or Grapes, but use Ale in stead thereof. It so abounds with Corn, that it sends
much abroad into other Countries: they have also great store of cattle. They
use the Sclavonian language, yet are much addicted to the Latin tongue: They
are generally proud, impatient, delicious in diet, and costly in attire: they
are of all Religions. The chief Rivers are, 1. Vistula, which parts it from
Hungary. 2. Neister, which parts it from Moldovia. 3. Neiper, etc. But to speak
more particularly of the Provinces, which are,

1. Livonia, which is bounded on the East with Muscovy, on the West with the
Baltic Sea, on the North with Finland, and on the South with Lituania. Its in
length five hundred miles, in breadth one hundred and threescore, very
mountainous, and fenny; yet yields plenty of Corn. The chief Cities are, 1.
Riga. 2. Derpt. a town of much traffic. 3. Rivalia, a strong place. 4. Name,
another strong Fortress: Other chief Countries in it are, 1. Curland. 2.
Senugal. 3. Estland. 4. Virland. 5. Harland. 6. Geroenland.

2. Lituania, which has Livonia on the South: Podolia on the North: Poland on
the East: and Muscovie on the West: The chief Cities are, 1. Vilna, an
University. 2. Vilkomire. 3. Brestia. The air is sharp, and the Country barren,
yet are there many beasts, whose skins are good commodities.

3. Volinia, environed with Lituania, Podolia, and Russia; It is a small woody
Province: the chief Cities are Kiovia, and Circassia, on the banks of the river
Nieper.

4. Samogitia, whose chief town is Camia. It joyneth to Livonia on the North,
and the Baltic sea on the West. Its full of wood, and yields great store of
honey.

5. Podolia, which has Lituania on the North, Neister on the South, Russia
East, and Poland West. The ground is so fertile, that of one sowing they have
three harvests: the chief Cities are, 1. Camienza; seated on high rocks. 2.
Orkzacow. 3. Winieczia.

6. Russia nigra, having on the East Podolia, on the West and North Poland, and
on the South Hungary: the chief Towns are, 1. Leopolis, or Lembourg. 2.
Grodeck. 3. Luckzo. A fruitful Country, having store of horses and Cattle.

7. Mazovia, which is environed with Russia, Prussia, Lituania, and Poland: the
chief City is Marzow.

8. Spruce, Prussia, or Borussia, is upon the Baltic sea: that part of it
which belongs to Poland is called Prussia Regal: the chief Cities whereof are,
1. Dantzick, a famous Mart town* 2. Koningsberg; an University. 3. Heilsperg.
4. Maneburg, or Marpurg, 5. Angenberg. 6. Clune.

9. Podlossia, which has Lituania, and Mazovia on the East and West: the chief
Towns are, 1. Tycockzin, a strong fort. 2. Byesko. 3. Knissin.

10. The Dukedomes of Opswitz, and Zator, which have the chief towns of the
same names; they are in Silesia, but under the King of Poland.

11. Poland properly so called, which has Lituania on the East, Germany on the
West, Mazovia on the North, and Podolia on the South: the chief Cities are, 1.
Cracovia, on the bank of Vistula. 2. Lublin. 3. Guisna. 4. Siradia. 5.
Sendomire. 6. Minsko. 7. Posna. 8. Dobrinia. 9. Vlatislavia.

Poland takes her name from the great fields, which produce a huge quantity of
Corn, there are in it many fens, Lakes, and very great Forests, where, in the
trunks of trees is often found great store of honey, whereof they make a certain
drink (chiefly in Lituania) which is most delicate, and yields not a whit in
goodness to Spanish wine: there Winter is very long, and sharp, against the
rigor whereof they serve themselves of stoves, and good furred gowns: the
Nobility is very studious of war, and desirous of travel, and of an humor
much like that of the French: they express their gallantry in the beauty of
their clothes, weapons, and horses: In the sumptuousness of feasts, weddings,
funerals, Christenings, and in numerous trains of servants, when they go a
wooing. The most eminent dignities amongst them, are to be Senators, whom they
call Waiwodes, Chattellans, and starosts, or Captains.

Of Poland it is said, that if a man has lost his religion, let him go seek it
in Poland, and he shall find it there, or else let him make account that its
vanished out of the world. Europae spec.

Hungary Described.
The soil is wonderful fruitful, yiedling Corn thrice a year, the Grass in
some places exceeds the height of a man, which feeds a wonderful number of
Cattle: Besides which, they have Deer, Partridg, and Pheasant in such
abundance, that any man may kill them: They have also Mines of Gold, Silver,
and Copper, Fish, Wine, etc. The chief Rivers are, 1. Danubius, called also
Ister. 2. Savus. 3. Dravus. 4. Tibiscus, which exceedingly abounds with Fish.
The Turk has these chief Cities in Hungary, 1. Buda, on the Danow. 2. Gyula,
on the confines of Transylvania. 3. Pest. 4. Alba Regalis. 5. Quinque
Eccl^siae. 6. Rab. The Emperor has in his part. 1. Presburg upon the edg of
Austria. 2. Strigonium, or Gran. 3. Agraria. 4. Comara. 5. Toctax. 6. Canista.
7. Alkeinburg. 8. Neheusel. 9. Zigeth on the Dravus.

Dacia Described.
This Country is sufficiently fruitful, and abounds with horses, whose manes
reach to the ground: but to speak of the Provinces more particularly, which are,

1. Transylvania, which has on its North the Carpathean Mountains, on the
South Walachia, on the West Hungary, and on the East Moldovia. The chief towns
are, 1. Alba Julia, or Weisenburg. 2. Claudiopolis, or Clausenburg. 3.
Bristitia. 4. Centum Colles. 5. Fogaros. 6. Stephanopolis, etc. Their present
Prince is Rogotzi, a Protestant.

2. Moldovia, is on the North end of Transylvania, and extending to the Euxine
Sea: the chief Cities are, 1. Zucchania. 2. Fucchiana, 3. Falezing.

3. Walachia, divided from Bulgary by the Danow: the chief Cities are, 1.
Sabinium. 2. Prailaba. 3. Tergovista, the Vayvodes seat. It abounds with gold,
Silver, Iron, Saltpits, wine, Cattle, horses, brimstone, etc.

4. Servia, which lies between Bosnia, and Rascia: the chief Cities are, 1.
Stoinburg, the seat of the Despot. 2. Samandria. 3. Belgrade, on the Danow.

5. Rascia between Servia, and Bulgary: the chief City is Boden.

6. Bulgary, joining on the East to the ^uxine sea: on the West to Rascia: the
chief Cities are, 1. Sophia, the seat of the Beglerbeg of Greece. 2. Nicopolis.

7. Bosnia, having Servia on the East, Croatia on the West, Savus on the
South, and Illiricum on the North: the chief Cities are, 1. Cazachium, 2.
Jaziga.

Sclavonia Described.
Sclavonia, is more fit for Pasturage than for Corn: their sheep, and other
Cattle bring forth young twice in a year, and are shorn four times: the
Provinces are,

Illiricum, or Windismarch, which is bounded on the East with the Danow, on the
West with Carniola, on the North with Dravus, and on the South with Savus: the
chief Cities are, 1. Zatha on Danubius. 2. Zakaocz 3. VVindishgretz on Dravus.
4. Sagouna. Its now a member of Hungary.

Dalmatia which has on the East Drinus, on the West Croatia, on the North
Savus, and on the South the Adriatique sea: the chief Cities are, 1. Ragusi, a
sea town, and of great traffic. 2. Sicum, on the sea also. 3. Jadara, another
sea Town. 4. Spalato, a sea town. 5. Scodra, or Scutary. 6. Lyssa, where
Scanderbeg was buried: these two last are under the Turks, the other under the
Venetians.

Croatia, which has on the East and South Dalmatia, on the North Savus, and on
the West Istria, and Carniola: the chief Cities are, 1. Gradiska, situate on
Savus. 2. Bruman. 3. Novigrade, on the Savus near Germany. 4. Sisseg, or
Sissaken. 5. Petrowya. These people are usually called Crabbats, and serve as
mercenaries in the Emperors Armies.

Greece described.
Greece is bounded on the East with the Aegean sea, the Hellespont, Propontis,
and the Thracian Bosphorus. On the West it has Italy, with the Adriatic sea,
on the North with the Mountain Hemus, and on the South with the Jonian sea. Its
situate in the Northern temperate zone under the fifth and sixth Climates, the
longest day being about fifteen hours. The people once were famous for Arms,
and Arts, which made them account all others Barbarians: now they are
degenerated from the Prinstine virtue of their ancesters, and are become
unconstant, ignorant, riotous, and idle: At their feasts they drink till they
come to the height of intemperancy; hence grew our Proverb; As merry as Greeks.

The women are generally brown, yet well-favoured, and excessively amorous:
they use much painting to keep themselves in favor with their husbands, who
when they are wrinkled, and old, put them to all drudgery.

Their Church government was by four Patriarks. 1. Of Alexandria. 2. Of
Jerusalem. 3. Of Antioch. 4. Of Constantinople. Their language was Greek, of
which they had five Dialects. 1. the Attick. 2. the Dorick. 3. the Aeolick. 4.
the Jonick. 5. the common Dialect; but now it is almost devoured by the
Sclavonian or Turkish Tongue.

The soil is fruitful, and would yield good profit if it were well husbanded:
but the natives having nothing that they can call their own, in regard of their
slavery to the Great Turk, neglect husbandry. The Commodities that they send
abroad into other Countries are Wine, Oil, Copper, Vitreal, Velvets, Damasks,
Grogreams, etc. and some Gold, and Silver.

The chief rivers are Cephisus, which rising in the frontiers of Epirus,
emptieth it self into the Aegean sea, Erigon, Alaicmon, Strimon, Athicus,
Stymphalus, Ladon, Inacus, Pineus, Populifer, etc.

Greece is ordinarily divided into these seven parts, 1. Peloponesus. 2.
Achaia. 3. Epirus. 4. Albania. 5. Macedonia. 6. Migdonia. 7* and Thracia.

Peloponesus Described.
Peloponesus, is a Peninsula almost surrounded with the sea, only it is joined
to the firm land by an Istmus five miles broad, which was fortified by a strong
wall, and five Castles called Hexamilium, which reached from sea to sea: It is
in compass six hundred miles, and it is now called Morea, and is divided into
six Provinces, 1, Elis. 2. Messina. 3. Arcadia. 4. Laconia. 5. Argolis. and 6.
Achaia propria.

1. Elis which has on the East Arcadia, on the West the Jonian sea, on the
North Achaia propria, and on the South Messina: the chief Cities are, Argis,
nigh unto the river Alpheus. It was formerly called Olimpia, famous for the
statue of Jupiter Olimpicus, which was one of the Worlds wonders. And Pisa.

2. Messina, which has on the East Arcadia, on the North Elis, on the West and
South the sea: the chief Cities are, 1. Messina, now Golpho di Coron. 2. Pilon,
now Navarino. 3. And Methone, or Medon.

3. Arcadia, which has on the East Laconia, on the West Elis, and Messina, on
the North Achaia propria, and on the South the sea. The chief Cities are, 1.
Psophis. 2. Mantinia. 3. Megalopolis. And 4. Phialia: here was the Lake
Stymphalus, and the River Styx, whose water for the ill taste was called the
Water of hell; this Country was fit for pasturage and grazing.

4. Laconia, which is bounded on the East and South with the sea, on the North
with Argolis, and on the West with Arcadia: the chief Cities are, 1.
Lacedaemon, once a most flourishing Commonwealth. 2. Leuctra, on the sea side.
3. Thalana, nigh unto the Lake Lerna, and Mount Tenarus, and 4. Selassia.

5. Argolis, which is bounded on the East and North with the sea, on the West
with Achaia propria, and on the South with Laconia: the chief Cities are, 1.
Argos. 2. Micene. 3. Nemaea. 4. Epidaurus, and 5. Nauplia.

6. Achaia propria, which has on the South Elis, Arcadia, and Argolis, on all
other parts the sea. The chief Cities are, 1. Corinthians, at the foot of the
Acro-Corinthian hills, near to the fountain Pyrene: this City was formerly
strengthened with a Castle, which standing on the said Hills, was called
Acro-Corinthus, and was impregnable. Here lived Lais, that famous strumpet that
exacted ten thousand Drachmas for a nights lodging. Its now called Crato, and
is a place of small note. 2. Patras. 3. Scycion, now Vasilico; and 4. Dimea.

The Country of Achaia described.
Achaia is bounded on the East with the Aegean Sea: On the West with Epirus: On
the North with Thessaly: and on the South with Peloponesus, and the Sea
thereof. Its divided into seven Provinces. 1. Attica. 2. Megaris. 3. Boeotia.
4. Phocis. 5. Aetolia. 6. Doris; and 7. Locris.

1. Attica, which has on the West Megaris; and on all other parts the Sea: the
soil is barren, yet by the industry of the Inhabitants was made fruitful: their
current money was stamped with an Ox, whence grew that saying of corrupt
Lawyers, Bos in lingua. The chief Cities are, 1. Athens, once famous all the
world over. 2. Marathron, where M^ltiades overthrew the huge Army of Darius. 3.
Piraea, the Haven Town to Athens; and 4. Panormus.

2. Maegaris, which has on the East Attica: on the West Sinus Corinthiacus: on
the North Boeotia; and on the South the Istmus. The chief Cities are, 1.
Megara, now Megra: and 2. Eleusis.

3. Boeotia, which is bounded on the East with Attica: on the West with Phocis:
on the North with the River Cephisus: and on the South with Megaris, and the
Sea. The chief Cities are, 1. Thebes on the River Cephisus. 2. Daulis. 3.
Platea. 4. Leuctra, where Epaminondas gave that great overthrow to the
Lacedaemonians. 5. Ascra, the birthplace of Hesiod. 6. Cheronea; the
birthplace of Plutarch. 7. Orchomenon. In this Country are the streights of
Thermopylae, where Leonidas with three hundred Spartans slew twenty thousand of
Xerxes his Army, and were themselves all slain.

4. Phocis, which has on the East Boeotia: on the West Locris, and Doris: on
the North the Rivers Cephisus; and on the South Sinus Corinthiacus: Here is
Mount Helicon, consecrated to the Muses: Mount Citheron, and Pernassus, whose
twofold top kissed the clouds. The chief Cities are, 1. Cyrra. 2. Crissa. 3.
Anticyra on the Sea side, where grew Eloborum, that cured the Frenzy. 4.
Elladia. 5. Pytho; or Pythia seated in the heart of Greece. Here the
Amphictyons kept their Court. They were men selected out of the twelve
principal Cities in Greece, and had power to decide all controversies, and to
enact Laws for the common good. 6. Delphos, where was the Temple of Apollo,
the most famous Oracle of the Heathens.

5. Locris, which has on the East Aetolia: on the North Doris: and on the
other parts the Sea. The chief Cities are, 1. Naupactum, now called Lepanto,
where was that famous battle between the Turks, and Christians. 2. Ematia.

6. Aetolia, which is bounded on the East with Locris: on the West with Epirus:
on the North with Doris: and on the South with the Gulf of Lepanto: Here is
the Forest of Caledon, where Meleager slew the wild Boar; and the Rivers
Evenus, and Achilous. The chief Cities are, 1. Chalcis. 2. Olenus. 3. Plurona;
and 4. Thirmum.

7. Doris, which has on the East Boeota: on the West Epirus: on the South the
Sea; and on the North the Hill Oeta: The chief Cities are, 1. Amphissa. 2.
Libra. and 3. Citinum.

Epirus described.
Epirus, is bounded on the East with Achaia; on the North with Macedonia; and
on the other parts with the Sea: Here is the Mount Pindus, sacred to Apollo,
and the Muses; and the Acroceraunian Hills: Here are also the Rivers Acheron,
and Cocytus* for their color, and taste, called the Rivers of Hell.

The Eastern part of this Country is called Acarnania; the Western Chaonia: The
chief Cities are, 1. Antigonia. 2. Cassiope. 3. Toronia. These in the Western
part, and in the other, 1. Nicopolis. 2. Ambracia: now Larta. 3. Leucas. 4.
Anactorium; and 5. Actium, nigh to the Sea of Lepanto, where Augustus, and
Anthony fought for the Empire of the world. This Country was once called
Molossia. Here that famous Scanderbeg was King; as also of Albania.

Albania described.
Albania, has on the East Macedonia; on the West the Adriatic Sea: On the
North Sclavonia; and on the South Epirus. The chief Cities are, 1. Albanopolis.
2. Sfetigrade. 3. Durazzo, formerly called Dyrachium. 4. Croya, under whose
walls Amurath lost his life.

Macedonia described.
Macedonia, has on the East Migdonia: on the West Albania: on the North Misia
superior; and on the South Epirus, and Achaia: The chief Cities are, 1. Scydra,
or Scodra. 2. Andaristus. 3. Aedessa. 4. Eribaea. 5. Pidna upon the mouth of
the River Alaicmon. 6. Pella on the same shore, and 7. Syderocaspae, famous for
her gold and silver Mines.

Thessaly described.
On the Southern part of Macedonia, is Thessalia planted. Its a fruitful and
pleasant Country: Here is the Hill Olympus, upon which were the Olympic games,
as running with Chariots, and on foot, wrestling, fighting with Whirlebats,
etc. The reward of the Conquerors was only a Garland of Palm; and yet highly
esteemed by them: Here also are the Hills, Pelion, and Ossa, and betwixt
Olympus, and Ossa was that delectable Valley called Tempe, five miles long, and
six broad; so beautified with natures riches, that it was accounted the Garden
of the Muses. The chief Cities are, 1. Tricca. 2. Lamia. 3. Demetrias. 4.
Larissa, both upon the Pelasgick Bay. 5. Pharsalis, nigh unto which was that
great battle fought between Caesar, and Pompey for the Monarchy of the world.
And 6. Pherae.

Migdonia described.
Migdonia, is bounded on the East, and South, with the Aegean Sea; on the West
with Macedonia; and on the North with Thracia: Here is the Hill Athos, which is
threescore and fifteen miles in compass; three days journey in height, and
casts a shadow as far as Lemnos, which is forty miles off. The chief Cities
are, 1. Stagira. Aristotle's birthplace. 2. Apollonia. 3. Pallene. 4. Neapolis,
on the borders of Thrace. 5. Antigonia; and 6. Thessalonica, now Salonichi,
seated on the Sea, to the Church whereof St. Paul wrote two of his Epistles.

Thrace described.
Thrace has on the East Pontus Euxinus, Propontis, and Hellespont: on the
West Macedonia: on the North the Hill Haemus, and on the South the Aegean Sea:
The Inhabitants are bold, and valiant: The earth ripens Corn slowly, because of
the cold: The Vines yield more shade than juice, and the Trees more leaves than
fruit. The chief Towns are, 1. Sestos on the Hellespont, over against Abidos in
Asia, famous for the love of Hero, and Leander. 2. Abdera, the birthplace of
Democritus, who spent his life in laughing at others. 3. Potidaea. 4. Cardia,
seated on the Thracian Chersonese over against Troas on Asia side. Its now
called St. Georges Arm. 5. Lysimachia, on the Sea shore. 6. Callipolis, on the
Northern Promontory of the Chersonese, which was the first Town that ever the
Turks took in Europe, which was Anno Christi 1358. 7. Trianopolis. 8.
Adrianople. The first seat of the Grand Signiors in Europe. 9. Pera, formerly
Galata; and 10. Constantinople, formerly Bizantium.

The City of Constantinople described.
Constantinople, was built by Constantine the Great; It stands on a cape of
land, near the entrance of the Bosphorus: Its in form triangular: On the East
side washed with the Sea; on the North with the Haven: and the West side joins
to the Continent. Its walled with brick, and stone intermixed orderly, having
twenty four Gates, and Posterns: Its about thirteen miles in Circumference. The
world hardly affords a more delicate object, if beheld from the Sea, or
adjoining Mountains. The lofty, and beautiful Cypresse-trees are so intermixed
with the buildings, that it seems to present a City in a wood to the pleased
beholders. Its built on seven hills, whose aspiring heads are crowned with
magnificent Mosques, or Churches, all of white Marble, round in form; and
coupled above; being finished on the top with gilded spires, that reflect the
Sunbeams with a mavelous splendour: some having two; some four, and some six
adjoining Turrets, exceeding high, and slender: Tarrast aloft on the outside,
like the main top of a ship, in several places equally distant, whence their
Priests with elated voices (for they use no bells) call the people together to
their Mohammedan service.

When Constantine first built this City, he enclosed it with a wall, that for
length, fairness, and thickness, was one of the famousest in the world, every
stone being cemented together with brass couplets, that the whole wall seemed
to be but one stone: He erected also many high Towers, built many sumptuous
Temples, and adorned it with infinite more magnificent buildings, both public,
and private: commanding also by public Edict all Princes of the Empire, that
each of them should build a Palace or some other sumptuous, and splendid
Monument there: He also brought from Rome diverse memorable Antiquities, as the
Palladium of Troy: the high Pillar of Porsido, which he caused to be erected
in a fit place, by which he set Apollo's brazen Image of an unmeasurable
bigness, having his own name engraven thereon: Amongst other glorious buildings
was the proud Palace of the public Library, wherein were one hundred and
twenty thousand choice written Books: in the midst whereof were the guts of a
Dragon, above one hundred and twenty foot long, on which Homers Iliads were
written in letters of gold: In diverse other parts of the City were very rare
things, as the Nymphs Grove: the Marketplace of metal: the famous Images of
Juno, Minerva, Venus, etc. with infinite other varieties: so that strangers
which saw it, being full of admiration were astonished at the beauty of it,
judging it a dwelling meet for the Gods, rather than an habitation for earthly
Emperors.

But now Time, with her Iron teeth, and the many changes which have happened,
have quite altered the face of Constantinople: So that now upon the Hill,
whereon the Imperial Palace once stood, there are kept Elephants, Panthers, and
other wild Beasts in the ruins of it. On the second Hill whereon stood the
Palace of the Patriarchs, in which were buried in chests of fine Marble, most
of the Christian Emperors, a Mosque is now erected. Upon the third Hill is the
Sepulcher of the Great Mahomet, that won the City, of a mavelous greatness,
and magnificence, surrounded with one hundred houses covered with Lead, made to
receive strangers of any Nation, where themselves, servants, and horses, may
remain three days on free cost: Sultan Mahomet leaving two hundred thousand
Ducats revenue per annum, to maintain the same. The fourth Hill has on it the
Church, and Sepulcher of Sultan Selim in the same form, and order as the other.
The fifth has the Church and Sepulcher of Bajazet, with a great and spacious
Piazza about it. The sixth has the Church and Sepulcher of Solomon the
Magnificent, which in greatness, workmanship, Marble Pillars, and riches more
than Kingly, passes all the rest, and deserves to be matched with the seven
wonders of the world: The seventh contained the sumptuous Temple of Sancta
Sophia, which deserves a particular description by it self.

The Temple of Sancta Sophia Described.
The Temple of Sancta Sophia standing upon one of these hills, exceeds not only
all the rest, but all the most stately fabrics in the world: the principal
part thereof rises in an Ovall, surrounded with pillars admirable for their
matter, proportion, and workmanship: Over those are others, through which ample
Galleries curiously paved, and arched above, have their prospect into the
Temple: the roof is compact, and adorned with Mosaic painting; which is
composed of little square pieces of Marble, gilded, and colored according to
the place they are to assume in the Figure or ground, which set together, as if
imbossed, present an unexpressible stateliness, and are of mavelous durance.
The sides, and floor of the whole Church are laid with excellent Marble: it is
vaulted underneath, containing large Cisternes which are replenished with water
from an Aquaeduct: within on the left hand is a Pillar covered with Copper,
which ever sweats: the doors are curiously cut through, and plated. It was from
East to West two hundred and sixty foot long, and in height one hundred and
fourscore; and has contained at once, six and thirty thousand Turks.

In the midst of it there are pillars of gold and silver, huge Candlesticks,
Lanthornes, Lamps, and other Ornaments of gold and silver, whereof the worth is
inestimable. It had in it one hundred gates, and was above a mile in compass.

The Turks Seraglio Described.
In the extremest North-east angle of Constantinople, stands the great Turks
Seraglio or Palace, compassed with a lofty wall three miles in compass,
comprehending goodly Groves of Cypresse-trees, intermixed with plains,
delicate Gardens, Artificial Fountains, variety of Fruit Trees, and what not
rare? Luxury being the Steward, and the Treasury inexhaustible. The proud
Palace of the Tyrant opens to the South, having a lofty Gate House, engraven
with Arabic Characters, set forth with Gold, and Azure, all of white Marble:
This gate leads into a stately Court three hundred yards long, and about one
hundred and fifty wide; at the farther end whereof is another gate hung with
shields, and Cymiters; this leads into a second Court full of tall
Cypresse-trees, being not much less than the former. It is Cloistered round
about, covered with lead, handsomely paved, and supported with Columns of
Marble, which have Chapiters, and Bases of Copper. On the left hand is the
Divano kept, where the Bassa's of the Court do administer Justice: Beyond this
Court on the right hand is a street of Kitchins, and on the left stalles large
enough for five hundred horses. Out of the second Court is an entrance into the
third, surrounded with the Royal buildings, large, curious, and costly. Without
on the North side stands the Sultan's Cabinet, in form of a sumptuous
summer house, where he of ten olaceth himself with variety of Objects, and
from whence taking barge he passes to the delightful places of the adjoining
Asia. In the Seraglio also, are many stately rooms appropriated to the season
of the year, which are called Rooms of fair prospect, into which the Sultan
goes sometimes alone, but more usually with his Concubines for his recreation.
Within a fine little Court adorned with very many delicate Fountains is the
Chamber wherein he gives audience to Ambassadors, etc. one part whereof is
spread with very sumptuous Carpets of gold, and Crimson velvet, embroydered
with very costly Pearls, upon which the grand Signeur sits: the walls of the
room are covered with fine white stones, having diverse sorts of leaves, and
artificial Flowers curiously wrought upon them, which make a glorious show. A
little Room adjoyns to it, the whole inside whereof is covered with silver
plate, hatched with gold, the floor being spread with rich Persian Carpets of
silk, and gold.

There are belonging to the Sultan's lodgings very fair gardens, of all sorts
of flowers, and Fruits, that can be found in those parts; with many very
pleasant walks, enclosed with high Cypresse-trees on both sides, and fountains
in such abundance, that almost in every walk there are some of them.

Besides the former rooms (which are very many) for the Sultan's own use, there
are also the women's lodgings, wherein the Queen, the Sultanaes, and all the
Kings women do dwell, and they have in them bed-chambers, dining rooms,
withdrawing rooms, and all other kinds of rooms necessary for women.

In another place there are diverse Rooms, and lodgings for all the principal,
and inferior Officers so well furnished, that nothing is wanting that is fit,
and necessary. Amongst which are two large buildings, one his Wardrob, the
other his Treasury, with very thick walls, Iron windows, and Iron doors.

In the Seraglio are Rooms for Prayer, Bagnoes, Schools, Butteries, Kitchins,
Stillatories, Swimming places, places to run horses in, wrestling places, butts
to shoot at, and all the commodities that may adorn a Prince's Court.

There is also an Hospital for such as fall sick in the Seraglio, in which
there are all things necessary for diseased persons: And another large place
wherein is kept Timber, Carts, etc. to have them near hand for the use, and
service of the Seraglio.

Over the Stables there is a row of rooms, wherein is kept all the furniture
for the horses, which is of an extraordinary value; for the Bridles, Petorals,
and Cruppers, are set so thick with jewels of diverse sorts, that they cause
admiration in the beholders, and exceed Imagination. The Grand Signior's
Bedchamber has the walls covered with stones of the finest China metal,
spotted with flowers of diverse colors, which make a very dainty show: The
Antiportaes were of cloth of gold of Bursia, and their borders of Crimson
Velvet, embroidered with gold, and Pearls: The posts of his Bedstead were of
silver, hollow, and instead of knobs on the tops, there were Lions of Crystal;
the Canopy over it was of cloth of gold, and so were the Bolsters, and
Matteresses: the floor was covered with very costly Persian Carpets of silk,
and gold, and the Pallats to sit on, and Cushions were of very rich cloth of
gold.

In the hall adjoining is a very great Lanthorn round, and the bars of silver,
and gilt, set very thick with Rubies, Emeralds, and Turkesses; the panes were
of very fine Crystal, which made a very resplendent show. There was also a
Basin, and Ewre, to wash in, of massy gold, set with Rubies, and Turkesses.

In Constantinople is a Piazza, in which is raised upon four Dice of fine
Metal, a very fair Pyramid of mingled stone all of one piece, fifty Cubits
high, carved with Heroical letters, resembling the Agulia of Rome, in whose top
were the enclosed ashes of Julius Caesar: In the same Piazzo also is a great
Pillar of Brass, made with mavelous Art, in form of three serpents wreathed
together with their mouths upward.

There are in Constantinople eighteen thousand Mosques, great and small: In the
chief place of it are two Burses, built four square, high, and round at top,
each having four gates opening upon four streets, round about garnished with
shops, stuffed with all sorts of rich, and costly wares of inestimable value,
as precious stones, Pearls, Sables, and other rich Furs of all sorts; Silk, and
cloth of gold: Bows, Arrows, Bucklers, and Swords: Here also they fell
Christian Slaves of all ages, as we sell horses, the buyers looking them in
the eyes, mouth, and all other parts, which is done every forenoon, except
Fridayes, which is their Sabbath. The Bassa's also in sundry places have built
fair houses, encompassed with high walls, which outwardly have no beauty: but
inwardly full of all riches* and pleasure, the world can afford: For they use
to say, that they build not to please passers by, but for their own Commodity.

The Turkish Empire Described.
The Grand Signior, who has his seat in the stately, and Imperial City of
Constantinople, has under his command, the chiefest, and most fruitful parts
of the three first known parts of the world. In Europe he has all the sea
coasts, from the confines of Epidaurus (the utmost bound of his Empire in
Europe Westward) unto the mouth of the River Tanais, now called Don, with
whatsoever lies from Buda in Hungary, to the Imperial City of Constantinople:
in which space is comprehended the greater part of Hungary, all Bosna, Servia,
Bulgaria, with a great part of Dalmatia, Epirus, Macedonia, Grecia,
Peloponesus, Thracia, the Archipelago, with the rich Islands contained therein.
In Africa he possesses from the river Mulvia (the bounder of the kingdom of
Fesse, to the Arabian Gulf, or Red Sea Eastward, except some sea-towns held by
the King of Spain, and from Alexandria Northward, unto the City of Asna
Southward: In which space are contained the famous Kingdoms of Tremizen,
Algiers, Tunes, and Egypt, with diverse other great Cities, and Provinces. In
Asia all is his from the Hellespont Westward, unto the great City of Tauris
Eastward: and from Derbent near unto the Caspian sea Northward, unto Aden upon
the Arabian Gulf Southward.

The greatness of his Empire may be the better conceived by the greatness of
some of the parts of it: the Mere of Meotis (which is all at his command) being
in compass one thousand miles: and the Euxine, or Black-sea, which is in
circuit two thousand seven hundred miles, and the Mediterranean coast which is
subject to him, contains in compass about eight thousand miles. The like
distance is from Derbent to Aden: And from Balsara upon the Persian Gulf, unto
Tremisen in Barbary, are near four thousand miles. He has also in the
Mediterranean sea, the noble Isles of Cyprus, Euboea, Rhodes, Samos, Chios,
Lesbos, etc.

In this so large, and spacious an Empire, are contained many great Countries,
sometimes famous Kingdoms, abounding with all sorts of temporal blessings, and
natures store; For what Kingdom is more fruitful than Egypt, Syria, and a
great part of Asia? what Country more abounding with all good things, than was
sometimes Hungary, Grecia, and Thracia? In these Countries he has also many
rich and famous Cities, but especially four, which be of greatest wealth, and
trade, viz. Constantinople, Grand-Caire, Aleppo, and Tauris. Constantinople,
for multitude of Inhabitants, exceeds all the Cities in Europe, wherein are
reckoned to be above seven hundred thousand men. Aleppo is the greatest City
of Syria, and the Center whereunto all the merchandise of Asia is brought.
Tauris, of late the royal seat of the Persian Kings, has in it above two
hundred thousand men. Grand-Caire amongst all the Cities in Africa, is the
chiefest, being the storehouse, not only of the riches of Egypt, but of much
of Africa and India.

For his ordinary revenews they are not estimated to exceed eight millions of
gold, but his extraordinary escheates are very considerable, as his
confiscations, forfeitures, fines, amerciaments, tributes, customs, tenths of
all Prizes taken by sea, or Land, etc. which far exceed his standing revenew:
His Bassa's, and great officers, sucking out the blood of his poor subjects,
and heaping up inestimable treasures, which usually falls to the Grand Signiors
coffers. His presents also amount to a great value: for no Ambassador can come
before him without great gifts: none can get Offices, or preferments without
money: none may return to him from their Provinces, or expeditions,
empty-handed: In brief, its easy for so great a Tyrant to pick a quarrel with
any rich man, and so to take away his life, and seize upon his estate be it
never so much.

The strength of his Empire consists especially in these four things. In his
Timariots, which are horsemen, to whom he has given lands for their life,
upon condition of serving him upon all occasions with men and horses: by these,
as with a bridle, he keeps all the rest of his Subjects in his vast Empire in
awe: for they can no sooner move, but they shall have these Timariots, as
Falcons in their necks, for to that purpose they are dispersed all over his
Dominions: and again, out of them he is always able to draw into the field one
hundred and fifty thousand horsemen well armed, without a farthing charge, to
go whither soever he shall command them. The whole number of them is accounted
to be seven hundred and ninety thousand fighting men: whereof two hundred
fifty seven thousand dwell in Europe, the other four hundred sixty and two
thousand in Asia, and Africa.

Secondly, In his Spahi, Ulufagi, and Carapici of his Court, which are another
sort of horsemen, to whom he gives pay, being indeed the Seminaries of the
great Officers, and Governors of his Empire, for from amongst them, he
chooses his Sanzacks, or Captains, whom for their good deserts, he raises to
be Begs, Begler-begs, Visiers, and Bassaes.

Thirdly, Besides these, he has other horsemen, called Acanzii, which for
some privileges are bound to serve* they are of the peasants whom he much
esteems not, only they serve to blunt his enemies swords.

Fourthly, In his footmen, and Janisaries, which are born of Christian parents
in Europe, and taken from them when they are young, and in whom there appears
the greatest strength, activity, and courage: They are bred up to hard labor
and pains, and after a certain time are taken into the Cloisters of the
Aiamoglans (for so they are called, till they be admitted into the number of
Janisaries) and there delivered to governors, who keep them still exercised to
painful labor, using them hardly in apparel, diet, and lodging: there they
learn to shoot in Bows, and Guns, the use of the Scimiter, and feats of
activity, and when they are expert therein, they are admitted into the number
of Janisaries, or Spahi.

Now for his strength by sea, he has as great means to set forth a Fleet as
any Prince whatsoever, the overgrown woods of Epirus, and Cilicia, with those
of Nicomedia, and Trapezund, yield him abundance of Timber for ships, and
Galleys: neither can he want shipwrights and Carpenters for the framing of
them, his large pay drawing many, even from amongst the Christians into his
Arsenals at Constantinople, Synope, Callipolis, etc. Neither has he ever
wanted good store of expert Seamen: for besides those which he has in the
forenamed places, out of his Galleys, which he has at Lesbos, Chios, Rhodes,
Cyprus, and Alexandria, and from the Pirates which frequent his Havens of
Tunis, Bugia, Tripolis, and Algeirs, he can as need requires, choose Captains,
Mariners,, and rowers, sufficient for the storing, and managing of his Fleet.
Notwithstanding all which, this vast Empire is much declined of late: their
late Emperors much degenerating from their warlike Progenitors, their soldiers
generally addicting themselves to unwonted pleasures, their ancient discipline
of war being neglected: their Religion, or superstition rather, not with so
much zeal, as of old, regarded, and rebellions in diverse parts of the Empire,
of late strangely raised, and mightily supported, being all signs of a
declining state. See Knolles his discourse hereof.

America described.
Anno Christi 1486. Christopher Columbus, born at Ner^i in the Country of
Genoa, being a man of projecting wit, excellently skilled in Astronomy, and
Navigation, strongly conceited that some Lands must needs lie in the portion of
the circle* which should make up the World into a Globe; considering also the
motion of the Sun, he persuaded himself that there was another world, to which
the Sun imparted his light, when he went out of our Horison. This world he
hoped to discover, and therefore imparted his intent to the Genowaies, but was
by them rejected. Then sent he his Brother Bartholomew Columbus, to motion the
matter to our King Henry the seventh, but he, falling into the hand of Pirates
by the way, was long a prisoner before he was enlarged; but as soon as he was
free, he came to our English Court, and his motion was readily embraced by the
King: But God, who had otherwise disposed it, so ordered it, that Columbus, not
knowing of his Brothers imprisonment, because he heard nothing from him,
thought that his suit was rejected, and thereupon addressed himself to the King
of Spain, who after many delays, furnished him with two ships only for
discovery: with this small assistance he sailed in the Ocean more than
threescore days, without discovery of any land, so that his discontented
Spaniards began to mutiny, absolutely resolving to go no further; Columbus did
all that he could to pacify and encourage them, but when nothing would
prevail, he was fain to engage himself to them, that if land was not
discovered within three days, he would steer his course back again: At the
end of which time one of the company discryed fire, an evident sign of land,
which they took possession of, Anno Christi 1492. and Columbus in honor of the
Spaniards, called it Hispaniola: after which he discovered Cuba, and so with
much treasure, and greater content he returned into Spain; and after two other
voyages he sickned, and dyed, and was buried at Sivil.

This Columbus being on a time at supper with some of the great Spanish Dons in
the Court, they took occasion to speak very slightly of his Indian
discoveries, as if it was such a small matter which might have been performed
by any man: He hearing them, called for an Egg, and when he had it, desired
them to try if any of them could make it stand an end upon their trenchers:
they all tried, and by endeavoring equally to poise it, labored to make it
stand, but could not; then did Columbus take it, and knocking it down pretty
hard, cracked the end, which caused it to stand upright: at this they all
laughed, saying, that every fool could do so: Yea (says he) and now I have
made a discovery of that new world, every one can go thither, etc.

When the Spaniards first arrived in those parts, they found the Inhabitants
naked, unacquainted with husbandry, making their bread of Cassavy roots,
worshipping the Devils, whom they called Zemes, in remembrance of whom they had
certain Images made of Cotton-wool, like to our Childrens babies: To these they
did great reverence, as supposing the spirit of their Zemes to be in them: and
the Devil to blind them the more, would sometimes make these Puppets move, and
make a noise: they stood also in great fear of them, for if they did not fulfill
his will, the Devil would execute vengeance upon some of the Children of these
poor deluded souls. They thought the Christians to be immortal, wondering at
the Masts, Sails, and tacklings of their ships, and to try whether they were
immortal or no, having taken some straglers, they held their heads under water
till they were strangled, which made them change their opinions. They esteemed
gold and silver no more than dross, yet for the colors sake adorned themselves
therewith, as they did with shells, feathers, and the like.

The Spaniards after their coming amongst them behaved themselves very cruelly,
killing them like sheep, and forcing them like beasts, to labor in their
Mines, to carry their burdens, and to do all manner of drudgery, which caused
them so to hate them, that one Haythney a noble man amongst them being
persuaded to be baptized, with the promise of Heaven for his reward; asked
whither the Spaniards went when they dyed? and when answer was made that they
went to Heaven, he renounced his intended Baptism, protesting that he had
rather go to Hell, with the unbaptised, than to live in Heaven with so cruel a
people.

In some places there was such abundance of gold, that in some Mines they found
more gold than earth, which the Indians exchanged greedily for Hammers; Knives,
Axes, Hatchets, and such tools of Iron; for before, they were fain to make
their Canows or Boats plain without, of the body of a great tree which they
made hollow with the force of fire.

Columbus having thus happily begun this noble enterprise, he was seconded by
Americus Vesputio, a Florentine, from whom (unjustly) it was called America. To
him succeeded John Cabot, employed by our King Henry the seventh. Ferdinando
Magellane first found out the South passage, called the streights of Magellane,
by which he compassed the world, and was afterward followed by our Drake, and
Candish; and the Dutch Nandernoort: since which time another Dutchman called Le
Maire, found out a more Southerly passage into the South Sea, called Le Maires
Streights, by which he also compassed the world.

America is divided into two parts, Mexicana, and Peruana.

Mexicana is the Northern tract, containing the Provinces of Mexico* Quivira,
Nicaragua, Jucutan, Florida, Virginia, Norembega, New-France, New England, etc.

Mexico, is now called New-Spain, in which is that excellent tree called Mete,
which they plant, and dress as we do our Vines, yielding so many sorts of
commodities: For when they be tender, they make of them Conserves, Paper,
Flax, Mantles, Mats, Shoes, Girdles, and Cordage: On the leaves grow prickles
so hard, and sharp, that they use them in stead of sawes. From the root of the
tree comes a juice like unto syrup, which if you sees, it will become Honey, if
you purify it, it will become Sugar: you may also make Wine, and Vinegar of
it: The rind roasted cures hurts, and sores, and from the top boughs is such a
Gum which is an excellent antidote against poison. It abounds also with many
golden sanded Rivers, wherein are Crocodiles which the natives eat: It has
Mines of gold, and a mountain burning like Aetna. Its bounded on the East with
Jucutan, and the Gulf of Mexico: on the West with California: on the South
with Peruana; and the Northern limits are not known.

It was very populous before the arrival of the Spaniards, who in seventeen
years slew six millions of them, roasting some, plucking out the eyes, cutting
off the arms of others, and casting them alive to be devoured of dogs, and
wild beasts. Mechuacan, one of the Provinces of New-Spain, abounds with
Mulberry trees, Silk, Honey, Wax, black Amber, and great plenty of Fish: the
Inhabitants are tall, strong, active, and speak a copious language.

Mexico, has in it a City of the same name, in compass six miles, consisting
of six thousand houses of Spaniards, and sixty thousand of Indians: Its situate
on Lakes, and Islands like Venice, every where interlaced with pleasant
currents of fresh, and Sea waters: The plain wherein the Town stands is
seventy leagues in compass, environed with high hills, on the tops of which
Snow lies continually. The Lake on whose banks the City lies is fifty miles
in compass, the banks whereof are adorned with pleasant Towns, and houses, and
on the Lake are fifty thousand wherreyes plying continually. Nigh to this City
is the Gulf of Mexico, whose current is so swift, and heady, that ships cannot
pass directly to, and fro, but are compelled to bear either much North, or much
South. Its nine hundred miles in compass, and has two Ports, one between the
farthest part of Jucatan, and the Isle of Cuba, at which the tide enters with
a violent stream, the other between the said Cuba, and the farthest part of
Florida, at which the tide with the like violence goes forth: the Sea is very
tempestuous, and has only two safe Havens, viz. Havana on the North side, and
St. John de Luna on the South, which are strongly fortified by the Spaniards.

The Country of Mexico is inferior to Peru, in the plenty and purity of gold,
and silver, but far exceeding it both in the Mechanical, and ingenious arts
here professed, and in the abundance of fruits, and cattle, of which last there
is such store, that many a private man has forty thousand Kine, and Oxen to
himself; Fish also are very plentiful: that only which is caught in the Lake,
whereon Mexico stands, being reputed worth twenty thousand Crowns per annum.

Mexico was conquered by Ferdinando Cortez, Anno Christi 1521. His Army
consisting of one hundred thousand Americans, nine hundred Spaniards, eighty
horsemen, seventeen small pieces of Ordnance, thirteen Brigandines, and six
thousand Wherrie-boats which from the Lake assaulted Mexico.

In Quivira, another Province, the riches of the people consists in cattle,
whose hides yield them coverings for their houses; their bones, bodkins; their
hair, thread; their sinews, ropes; their horns, mawes, and bladders, vessels;
their dung; fire; their Calf-skins, budgets to draw, and keep water in: their
blood, drink; and their flesh meat.

Nova Albion, lies on the West toward Tartary: It was discovered by Sir
Francis Drake, Anno Christi 1585. The King whereof did willingly resign
himself, and land to our Queen. In it is a Hare, resembling a Mole in his feet,
a Cat in his tail; under whose chin nature has fastened a little bag, as a
storehouse; for in it, when he has filled his belly, he reserveth the rest
of his provision. It abounds in good fruits.

Jucutan, is a Peninsula in circuit nine hundred miles, a fruitful Country
situated over against Cuba.

Florida, has on the East the Northern Sea: on the West Mexico; on the North
New-France, and on the South Virginia: It abounds with goodly fruits, and has
some quantity of gold, and silver. Emeralds are also found there, and
Turquesses, and Pearls. Women when their Husbands dye, cut off their hair close
to their heads, strewing it upon their husbands graves, and may not marry
again, till their hair be grown to cover their shoulders.

Virginia described.
Virginia, is seated between four and thirty, and four and forty degrees of
Northerly latitude: Its bounded on the East with the great Ocean; with Florida
on the South: New-France on the North: and the Western limits are unknown. The
Summer is as hot as in Spain; the VVinter is as cold as in France, and England.

It was discovered by the English by the direction, and at the charge of Sir
Walter Rawleigh, Anno Christi 1584. and in honor of our Virgin Queen called
Virginia. It yields store of Tobacco, and now they get Silkworms, and plant
store of Mulberry trees, which is like to be a good commodity.

There is but one entrance by Sea into this Country, at the mouth of a goodly
Bay: The Capes on both sides are named Henry, and Charles: The water flows in
this Bay near two hundred miles, and has a Channel for one hundred and forty
miles, between seven, and fifteen fathom deep, and ten, or fourteen miles
broad. At the head of the Bay, the land is mountainous, from which proceed
great brooks, which make five navigable rivers: the mountains have in them
Milstones, Marble, and some pieces of Crystal: The earth is generally black,
and sandy. The river near to the mouth of the bay is called Powhatan, the mouth
whereof is near three miles broad, and it is Navigable one hundred miles: Hence
their Emperor is called Powhatan. In a Peninsula on the North side thereof, is
placed James Town.

No place in Summer affords more Sturgeons, whereof threescore and eight have
been caught at one draught. In Winter they have abundance of Fowl. Fourteen
miles from Powhatan is the River Pamaunk, seventy miles navigable with big
vessels. Then Toppahanock, which is Navigable one hundred and thirty miles.
Then Patawomeck, one hundred and twenty miles navigable. At the mouth of
Powhatan are the Forts Henerico, and Charles; forty two miles upward, is James
Town, seventy miles beyond that, the Town of Henerico, ten miles higher are the
falls, where the River falls down between Mineral rocks, twelve miles beyond
that, there is the Crystal Rock, wherewith the Indians head their Arrows.

The Commodities are silk-grass, Hemp, and Flax, surpassing ours; A certain
Sedg, which by boiling yields skeines of good strength, and length, some like
silk, some like flax, and some like hemp. There is also Allom, Terra Sigillata,
Pitch, Tar, Rozen, Turpentine, Sassafras, Cedar, Grapes, Oil, Iron, Copper,
etc. Sweet Gums, Dies, Timber, Trees of sweet wood of fourteen kinds: Besides,
plenty of Fowl, Fishes, Beasts, Fruits, Plants, Herbs, Berries, Grains,
espec^ally Maiz, whereof one acre of ground will yield two hundred Bushels of
Corn, Roots, etc. Their chief Beasts are Bears, Deer, a beast like a Badger,
but living in trees like a Squirrel: Flying Squirrels. another beast headed
like a Swine, tailed like a Rat, as big as a Cat, and has under her belly a
Bag, wherein she carries her young: Their Dogs bark not, their Wolves are
little bigger than our Foxes, their Foxes like our silver haired Conies, and
smell not as ours. They have Eagles, Hawks, wild Turkies, etc. The People are
clothed in Deer skines about their middles, else all naked.

Their houses are round, of small poles fastened at the tops; and covered with
bark, or mats: they are good Archers, so that they will kill birds flying, fish
swiming, and beasts running. Their chief God is the Devil, which they call Oak,
whose Image is made ill-favouredly.

On the North of it lies New England, planted with many English Towns,
especially New-Boston, an haven Town, and a place of good trading: The other
Countries in this tract of ground have little that is remarkable in them.

Florida Described.
The length of Florida extends to twenty and five degrees: It runs with a long
point into the Sea, and into land it stretches Westward unto the borders of
New-Spain, and to those Countries which are not yet fully discovered: On other
parts its washed with a dangerous sea. It is very rich with Silver, Gold, and
stones of great value. In it are great variety of Trees, fruits, fowls, Beasts:
as Bears, Leopards, Ounces, Wolves, Wild Dogs, Goats, Hares, Conies, Deer,
Oxen, etc. Their Towns are paled about with Posts fastened in the ground,
having no more entrance than for two men to pass at a time, where stand two
watch Towers for defense: their houses are round, their apparel nakedness,
except a skin about their secrets: they paint and raze their skin curiously,
which they rub over with the juice of an herb, that cannot be gotten out: they
let their nails on their fingers and toes grow long, they are tall, nimble,
and comely.

When the King dies, they bury him with solemnity, and upon his grave they set
the cup wherein he was wont to drink, and about it they stick many Arrows: for
six months certain women are appointed to bewail his death: His house, and
goods they burn together.

They sow, or set their Corn as in Virginia, and have two seeds times, and two
harnests, their meat is Venisons, Fish, and Crocodiles dried in the smoke for
preservation.

Peruana Described.
The other part of this new World, is called Peruana, being in compass
seventeen thousand miles, comprehending in it Golden Castile, Guiana, Peru,
Brisile, and Chili. The first is so called from the abundance of gold in it,
lying in the Northern parts of Peruana, and part of the Istmus, which is but
seventeen miles broad between sea and sea: Its admirably stored with silver,
Spices, Pearls, and medicinal herbs, and is divided into the Provinces of
Castella del oro, Nova Andaluzia, Nova Granata, and Carthagena.

Castella del Oro is in the very Istmus, an unhealthful Country: the chief
Cities are Nombre de dios on the East, and Panama on the West side: Through
which two places comes all the traffic between Spain, and Peru. The
commodities from Peru being unladen at Panama in the South sea, and thence
carried by land to Nombre de dios, in the North sea, and thence shiped to Spain.

In Guiana is the great River Orenoque, which is Navigable with ships of
burden for one thousand miles, and with Boats, and Pinnasses almost two
thousand more: It was discovered by Sir Walter Rawleigh, and the River Margnon,
called the River of the Amazons, which is Navigable almost six thousand miles,
and toward the sea two hundred miles broad.

Peru, lies under the Aequinoctial line, and stretches for the space of eight
hundred leagues, upon six hundred whereof, viz. from Atacama, to Tumbez it
never raineth^ and yet it is as fruitful a land for all sorts of necessaries
for the life of man, as is in the world: On the West frontire, is a mighty ridg
of high Mountains that are always covered with Snow, from whence issue great
store of Rivers into the South sea, with the water whereof, being led by
sluices, and channels, they moisten their vineyards, and Corn fields, which
makes them exceeding fruitful: Besides, Mines of gold and silver, there are
mines of Copper, and Tin, there is also abundance of Saltpeter, and Brimstone.
It is now well replenished with horses, kine, sheep, goats, and Wheat.

The Fortress of Cusco Described.
One of the Incas of Peru built a fort, that may rather seem the work of Devils
than of men, especially considering that these Indians had neither Iron, nor
steel to work, and cut the stones with, nor Cart, nor Oxen to draw them: yet
was this Fort built with stones that seemed Rocks, rather than stones, drawn by
strength of men with great Cables, and that through uneven ways, in rough
mountains: many of them being brought from places that were ten, twelve, and
some fifteen Leagues off: especially that stone which the Indians called
VVearied, which was brought fifteen Leagues, and over a great river in the way:
The most of them came five Leagues off these stones they joined so close
together in the building, that the joints could scarcely be discerned, which
required often lifting up, and setting down, neither could they make Cranes, or
any kind of Engines to help them therein, neither had they square, or Rule to
direct their work. Instead of mortar they used a kind of Clay that held faster.

This Fortress was built on an hill on the North side of the City of Cusco,
the hill was so steep on one side, that that way it could not be assaulted,
and therefore one wall served on that side, which was two hundred fathoms long:
On the other sides they made three walls, one without another, each being above
two hundred fathoms, and were made in the fashion of an half Moon, in which
there were stones admirably great: each wall had in the midst one gate, which
was covered over with one entire stone: each wall stood thirty foot distant
from the other, and at the top of them the battlements were above a yard high:
Within those walls there were three strong forts, the middlemost was round,
which had in it a Conduit of very good water, brought under ground from far.
The walls were all adorned with gold and silver, and had Images of beasts,
birds, and Plants enchased therein, which served instead of Tapestry, the other
two Forts were square, and they had passages under ground from one to another,
artificially made with Labarinthian windings, and turnings, inextricable but by
a thread.

They drew their great stones with great Cables: To draw the stone which they
called Wearied, they had twenty thousand Indians, the one half before, the
other behind, and yet in one uneven passage it crushed three or four thousand
of them to death. This proved so unweildy that they never laid it in the
building, Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1478.

Another of the Incas to show his magnificence, caused a chain of gold to be
made, which was seven hundred foot long, and every link as big as a man's wrist,
two hundred Indians could but lift it.

Caxamalca, another City in Peru, is four miles in circuit, entered by two
gates* on the one side stands a great Palace walled about, having within it a
great Court planted with trees: this they call The house of the Sun, whom they
worship, putting off their shoes when they enter into it: in this City there
are two thousand houses; the streets are as strait as a line, the walls are
strong; built of stone about three fathoms high; within there are fair
fountains of water. In the midst is a very fair street walled about, having
before it a fortress of stone. On one side of this street was the Palace of the
^n^as, or Emperor, with lodgings and Gardens: the houses were all painted with
diverse colors, and in one room were two great Fountains adorned with plates
of Gold: one of them was so hot that a man cannot endure his hand in it, the
other was cold. Atabalipa was Emperor when the Spaniards took it, from whom
they presently got fifty thousand Pezoes of gold, each of them being worth one
ducat, and two Carolines, and seven thousand Marks of silver, besides many
Emeralds.

The Spaniards asked Atabalipa what he would give them for his ransom? He
told them that he would fill that room with Gold, to a mark, that was higher
than a tall man could reach by a span, the room being five and twenty foot
long, and fifteen foot broad: Then they asked him how much silver he would
give besides: He answered, as much as ten thousand Indians could carry in
vessels of silver of diverse sorts. The Spaniards went to Cusco to receive part
of it, where they found a Temple of the Sun covered with plates of gold: as
also many pots and vessels of gold, yea there was such store of gold as amazed
them, especially one seat which weighed ninteen thousand Pezoes of gold: In
another room the pavement, and walls were covered with plates of gold and
silver, they found also a great house full of pots, and tubs of silver: The
Spaniards having worn out their horses shoes in their travel, caused the
Indians to shoe them with gold. In the City of Pachalchami, they found an
Image with many Emeralds at his feet fastened in gold, Idem p. 1490.

Peru is plentiful in all manner of grain; has civil Inhabitants, many Cities,
and an healthful air. It has store of Tobacco, first brought into England by
some Mariners, Anno Christi 1585. the use whereof is now grown too common. It
abounds above all other Provinces with gold and silver. In this Country is the
river of Plate, one hundred and fifty miles broad at the mouth, and two
thousand miles long. In it also is a beast that has a bag in her neck, into
which she puts her young ones when any body approaches, and so runs away with
them, there is also a sort of fig trees, of which they write that the Northside
that stands toward the Mountains, brings forth fruit in the Summer only: and
the Southside toward the Sea is fruitful only in winter. Atabalipa King of
this Country being taken prisoner by the Spaniards, was forced to redeem his
life, with an house full of refined gold and silver, judged to be worth ten
millions, which when they had received, they perfidiously slew him.

The admirable Highways in Peru described.
In Peru in the West Indies are two admirable Highways made by the Ingas, or
Emperors: The one is by the Andes, or Forests from Pasto unto Chile, being
nine hundred Leagues long, the Cawsey five and twenty foot broad; and every
four leagues has a stately house, where was provision of victuals, and
apparel, and every half League, men that stood ready to carry messages, and
orders from hand to hand. The other way was through the Plains along the coast,
of twenty five foot broad, and on each side a wall of a man's height from Piura,
to Chile, where both the ways met. This latter way was between trees that
yielded a very pleasant shadow in those hot Countries, and both of them began
at the imperial City of Cuzco. P. Pil. v. 3. p. 887, 888.

The Emperors Garden described.
There belonged also to the Incas a Garden of silver, and gold, wherein were
many sorts of Herbs, Flowers, Plants, Trees, Beasts, great and small, Snakes,
Snails, Lizzards, Butterflies, small and great Birds, each set in their places
all of gold: They had also Maiz, Quinua; Pulse, Fruit Trees, with fruit on them
all of gold, and silver, resembling the natural. In the Incas house they had
heaps of wood all counterfeit of gold, and silver. All the vessels (which were
infinite) for the Temple-service, Pots, Pans, Tubs, Hogsheads were of gold, and
silver, yea the spades* and pickaxes, for the Garden were of the same. At the
taking of this City by the Spaniards, the Image of the Sun fell to one Captains
share, who lost it one night at dice, whereupon they said, That he had played
away the Sun before it was up. P. Pil. v. 4. p. 1464, etc.

The Temple of the Sun described.
Cusco, the Imperial City of the Incas in America, when the Spaniards first
took it, had in it a Temple of the Sun, all the walls whereof were covered with
plates of gold, from the top to the bottom. At the East end was the image of
the Sun of one plate of gold, as thick again as the other: the face was round
with rays of gold like flames of fire, all of one piece: It was so big, that
it filled all from one wall to the other. On both sides were the bodies of
their deceased Kings, embalmed, set in seats of gold, placed on planks of gold:
All the doors about the Temple were lined with plates of gold; without the
Temple, on the top of the walls ran a champhered work of gold, above a yard
broad, round about the Temple; Beyond the Temple ran a cloister of four
squares, round about the top whereof was such a crown of champhered gold above
a yard broad: In the corners of the Cloister were Chapels* one whereof was
dedicated to the Moon, all which with the Gates thereof were covered with
plates of silver: the image was placed, as that of the Suns, with the face of a
woman, all of one plank of silver* The next Chapel was dedicated to Venus, and
the Stars, lined also with silver, and the porch of silver. The third was
dedicated to the Thunder, and Lightning: The fourth to the Rainbow; which two
last were all lined, and garnished with gold. Hard by was an house for the
Priests, all lined with gold from the top to the bottom. There were twelve
doors to the Cloister, and as many Tabernacles or Shrines which were all plated
over with gold in form of Porches, and the floores covered with gold. The
Images were all set with Turkesses, and Emeralds. In the house also were five
Fountains, of water wherein they washed the sacrifices: out of them the water
ran in Pipes of gold; and many of their pillars were of gold, hollow, and some
of them were of silver.

Brasile, has on the North Guiana, on the South the River of Plate and Chile,
on the East the Ocean, and on the West the Mountains of Peru, called the Andes:
The hills are high, and craggie, full of ravenous beasts, and poisonous
Serpents: on them also inhabit a barbarous people going stark naked. In the
Valleys the air is healthy, the earth fat, and always flourishing. It yields
great store of Sugar, and rich Mines: and Brasil wood to dye with; the natives
go naked, and are very barbarous: In their feasts they used to roast a fat man,
and cutting him to collops, did eat him with much delight: Both men and women
are great swimmers, and excellent diverse, being able to endure long under
water. Here is a beast so slow in motion, that in fifteen days, he cannot go
further than a man can throw a stone, whence the Portugals call it Pigritia.

Brasile, is generally temperate, of a delicate and healthful air, so that many
of the Inhabitants live till they be above one hundred years old: generally,
its neither hot, nor cold: The Heavens are very pure, and clear, especially by
night: The Moon is prejudicial to health, and corrupts things very much: the
mornings are most healthful: there are very little twilights: their Summer
begins in September, and ends in February: Their Winter in March, and ends in
August: the nights and days are almost all equal: The Country is very watery,
both from the plenty of Rain, and Rivers. Its full of great woods, which are
green all the year: Toward the Sea coast it is Hilly: From Parnambuck to the
Captainship of the Holy Ghost, its scarce of stone: From thence to St. Vincent,
mountainous, with many Quarries of stone: there is little provision for
apparel, the Country yielding nothing but Cotton-wool.

They have fair, and large Deer, with large heads, of several kinds: As also
Elks somewhat like a Mule, that have no horns; a snout that they shrink up, and
put forth, and are excellent swimmers. There are store of wild Boars that have
their navel on their backs, whence comes a sent like that of Foxes. There are a
sort of Acuti, like Conies, that live in their houses, that having filled their
bellies, hide what they leave till they be again hungry. Their Pacas are like
Pigs, their flesh is pleasant, but they never bring forth above one at a time.
There are Ounces, some black, some gray, some speckled, a cruel, and dangerous
beast. The Curigue is gray, as big as a Cat, shaped like a Fox, and smells
worse; they have a bag from the fore to the hinder feet, wherein they carry
their young ones, till they can get their own food: they usually have six or
seven young ones.

The Armadillo is as big as a Pig, of a whitish color, having a long snout,
and the body armed with things like Plates, so hard, that no arrow can pierce
them, except in the flank: with their snouts they dig into the earth with
incredible celerity: their flesh tastes pleasantly, and of their skins they
make purses. There are several sorts of Porcupines: If one of their quills
enter the flesh, it works it self in strangely, if it be not pulled soon out.

There are many kinds of Apes with beards, and Monkies; and wild Cats with
excellent Furrs.

There are huge Snakes, some of twenty foot long, that will swallow a whole
Deer; others there are that live of Birds Eggs, black, long, and having a
yellow breast; they live on trees. Another sort there is, big, and long, all
green, and beautiful, that live also of Birds, and Eggs. Another sort with a
long snout that feeds only upon Frogs, there are rattle-snakes so swift, that
they call them the flying-snakes, some of them twelve or thirteen spans long.
There are abundance, of other sorts, with Scorpions, and Spiders, and so many
Lizards that they cover the walls of their houses.

There are abundance of Parots that fly in flocks, and fill whole Islands,
they are fair, and of sundry colors, and are good meat. There are other
curious birds, and amongst the rest, the Awaken-Bird, which sleeps six months,
and lives the other six months: they have Partridges, Turtle-Doves, Blackbirds:
yea and Ostriches, Eagles, Faulcons, etc.

They have many sort of fruit trees, and Cocoes, and above twenty sorts of
Palm Trees; Pine-trees also, and others that are medecinable: some they have
that never rot, and others that yield an excellent smell.

Chilie, has on the East the Virginian Sea, on the West the South Sea, or Mare
del Zur: on the North Peru, and on the South the Streights of Magellane. Its
very cold, and in the Midland very mountainous, and barren, but toward the Sea
level, fruitful, and watered with many Rivers that flow from the mountains: It
yields plenty of gold, abundance of Honey, store of Cattle, and Wine; fruits,
and plants brought from Spain prosper well here: here are the Patagons some of
them are said to be eleven foot high. Here is a River having in the day time a
violent stream, and in the night no water in it, the water proceeding from the
melting of the snow upon the Mountains.

The gold in Chily is gotten two ways: One, by washing the earth in great
trays of wood; the earth by washing wastes, and the Gold remains in the
bottom. The other is by art to draw it out of the Mines: every shower is a
shower of gold: for with the violence of the water falling from the Mountains,
it brings from them gold along with it. There are also rich Copper Mines,
Horses, Goats, and Kine brought thither out of Spain, are so increased, that
there are found thousands in herds, wild, and without owners. They have also
other Cattle, that are natural to America, in some of which the Bezar stones
are found. Amongst the rest, there is a little beast like unto a Squirel, whose
skin is the rarest, delicatest, and softest furr that is: It is of a gray
color. No Fruits that have stones will prosper here.

The Magellanick Streights Described.
Fourteen Leagues within the Cape of St. Mary, lies the first Straight, where
it ebbs and flows violently: the Straight being not full half a mile broad, so
that the first entrance is dangerous, and doubtful: three Leagues this Straight
continues, whence it opens into a sea eight miles long, and as broad, beyond
which lies the second Straight, West, South West, from the first, a dangerous
passage also, being three leagues long, and a mile in breadth, this opens into
another Sea, extending to the Cape of Victory, a place of such a nature, that
which way soever a man steers his course, he shall be sure to have the wind
against him: the length of it is forty Leagues, the breadth in some places two
leagues, in some others not half a mile: the channel so deep, that there can
be no anchorage, the water full of turnings, and the stream so violent that
being once entered there is no returning. On both sides are high Mountains
continually covered with Snow, from whence proceed also dangerous
counter-winds, that beat on all sides of it.

The Principal of the American Islands Described.
Many of the Islands in this part of the World have nothing remarkable in them,
and therefore I will speak but briefly of them.

The Islands near unto the Gulf of Mexico Described.
At Paria begin two ranks of Islands, the one extending East and West, the
other North, and South: Amongst the former is Margarita, so called from the
abundance of Pearls gotten there: but being barren, and wanting fresh water, it
is not inhabited.

Cubag^ua is her next neighbor, yeildeth also store of Pearls, but for the
like barrenness is unpeopled: Here were so many Pearls gotten, that the King
of Spains fifth, amounted ordinarily to fifteen thousand Ducats a year. On the
East part of this Island near unto the Sea, there is a fountain that casts
forth a bituminous substance like Oil, in such abundance, that it is seen
floating upon the sea, two or three leagues off.

Then follow Orchilia, Oruba, and some other Islands concerning which we have
no more than their names upon record.

That other rank that trends Northward* are Granata, St. Vincent, St. Lucia,
Dominica, and North-west, Desiderara, St. Christophers, Holy-Cross, etc. all
which are called the Islands of the Caribes, or Canibals, the Inhabitants
whereof eat man's flesh, and passing over in their Canoes, to other Islands,
hunt for men as others do for beasts At home they only cover their privities,
but in war they use many Ornaments: they are nimble, beardlesse, shoot poisoned
arrows, bore holes in their ears, and nostrils, for bravery, which the richer
sort deck with gold, the poorer with shells, and make their teeth black, which
never ache nor rot: their houses are round, they have hanging beds of Cotton,
called Hammackoe^, and they worship only the Sun and Moon. They have Parrats
bigger than Pheasants, with backs, breasts, and bellies of a purple color. In
Guadabuza is a fountain so hot, that it will quickly boil a piece of meat. In
Mevis also there is an hot bath like ours in England.

In Mona are wild Boars, and great wild Bulls: in Moneta are abundance of Fowl.

The Antiles Islands are seven. St. Vincent, Granado, Lucia, Matalina,
Dominica, Guadalupa, and Aysey, where the Natives paint themselves, to keep off
the Muskitoes, wear their hair long, cut their skins in diverse works, worship
the Devil, and poison their arrows.

Boriquen, or St. John's Island is three hundred miles long, and seventy broad,
traversed with a rough Mountain, out of which flow many rivers: Here the
Spaniards have some Towns: the chiefest is Porto Rico, taken by the Earl of
Cumberland, Anno Christi 1597. from whence he brought about eighty cast
pieces, and much other wealth.

Mevis has in it great store of wood, and in a valley betwixt two hills, there
is a bath like unto ours in England: There are in it store of Conies, sundry
kinds of Fowl, and plenty of Fish; some of our English under Captain Middleton,
Anno Christi 1606, passing through the woods, came to a most pleasant Garden,
being one hundred paces square on every side, and had many Cotton trees growing
in it, and many Guiacum trees; about it were such goodly tall trees growing, as
if they had been planted by Art.

In the Islands of Margarita, and Cubagua, which are situate nigh unto the
Golden Castile, there is neither Corn, Grass, Trees, nor water; so that
sometimes the people will give a tun of Wine for a tun of Water: But they have
abundance of precious stones, hence called Margarites, and the gems called
Unions* because they always grow in couples.

Jamica described.
Jamica, or the Island of St. James, which was once very populous, but now is
almost destitute of Inhabitants; the Spaniards having slain in this, and a
neighboring Island called Boriquen above sixty thousand living souls: so that
the women used to kill their Children before they had given them life, that
they might not serve so cruel a Nation: Its in length two hundred and fourscore
mil^s, and in breadth threescore and ten. Its well watered, and has two Towns
of note, Oristana, and Sevil: Here the English have this last year planted
themselves.

Jamica is very subject to Hurricanes, which are such terrible Gusts of wind,
that nothing can resist them. They ^urn up Trees, overturn houses, transport
ships from Sea to Land, and bring with them a most dreadful confusion* they are
most frequent in August, September, and October, The natives are of quicker
wits, than in other Islands.

Cuba is three hundred miles long* some say three hundred leagues, and
threescore and ten broad. Its full of Forests, Rivers, Lakes salt, and fresh,
and mountains: Here the people were prohibited the eating of Serpents, as a
dainty, reserved for the higher powers. The air is temperate, the soil is
fertile, producing excellent brass, but the gold is drossie: it abounds with
Ginger, Mastick, Cassia, Aloes, Cinnamon, Sugar, Flesh, Fish, and Foul. The
chief Cities being seated on the Northern shore, are, St. J^go, and Havana, a
safe rode for ships, where the King of Spains* Navy rides till they carry home
their rich lading.

In this Isle of Cuba two things are admirable: one a Valley trending between
two hills for three leagues, which produces abundance of stones, of a perfect
round form like bullets: The other a Fountain, whence Bitumen, or a pitchie
substance flows abundantly, and is excellent to pitch ships. In these Islands
the Inhabitans have been wasted by the Mines of Hispaniola, and Cuba to the
number of twelve hundred thousand.

Bermudae were discovered by Sir Thomas Summers, and thence called Summers
Islands: they are four hundred in number: In the biggest is a Colony of
English, who found it fruitful, and agreeable to their constitutions.

The commodities in these Islands, are variety of Fish, plenty of Swine,
Mulberries, Silkworms, Palmitos, Cedars, Pearls, and Amber-greese. They have
great variety of Foul, as big as Pidgions, which lay speckled Eggs as big as
Hens Eggs on the Sand. Another Foul there is that lives in holes, like
Conie-holes: Tortoises they have, and in the belly of one of them they find a
bushel of Eggs, very sweet: One of them will serve fifty men at a meal: Their
winter is in December, January, and February, yet not so sharp, but then you
may meet with young birds. Its so environed with Rocks, that without knowledge
a Boat of ten Tuns cannot be brought in, and yet within is safe harbor for
the greatest ship.

Hispaniola, which lamenteth her loss of three millions of her inhabitants
murdered by the bloody Spaniards. Its in compass one thousand and four hundred
miles, having a temperate air, fertile soil, rich Mines, Amber, and Sugar. It
excels Cuba in three things. 1. In the fineness of gold. 2. In the increase of
Sugar, one Sugar-Cane will here fill twenty, sometimes thirty measures. 3. The
great fruitfulness of the soil; the Corn yielding an hundred fold. The chief
City is St. Domingo, ransaked by Sir Francis Drake, Anno Christi 1585. And
lately attempted by our English, but through miscarriages they lost their
opportunity of taking it, which made them go to Jamica.

Hispaniola seems to enjoy a perpetual spring, the trees always flourishing,
and the Medows all the year clothed in green. Its in a manner equally divided
by four great Rivers, descending from high mountains, whereof Junna runs
East, Attibunicus West, Nabiba South, and Jache Northward: Diverse of their
Rivers after they have run a course of ninety miles, are swallowed up of the
earth. On the top of an high Mountain is a lake three miles in compass, into
which some Rivolets run, without any apparent issue. In one part of this Island
is a Lake, whose water is salt, though it receive into it four great fresh
rivers, and twenty smaller: It is thought, to have some intercourse with the
sea, because some Sharks are found in it: it is subject to storms, and
tempests. Another Lake there is that is partly salt, partly fresh, being twenty
five miles long, and eight broad. These are in a large plain which is one
hundred and twenty miles in length, and between twenty five and twenty eight
miles in breadth. Another valley there is, that is two hundred miles long, and
broader than the former, and another of the same breadth, but one hundred and
eighty miles long.

One of the Provinces in Hispaniola called Magua, is a plain compassed about
with hills, wherein are many thousand Rivers and Brooks, whereof twelve are
very great: some thousands of them are enriched with gold. Another Province is
most barren, and yet most rich, with Mines. From this Island the Spaniards used
to bring yearly, four or five thousand Ducats of gold.

This Island is much infested with flies, whose stinging, causes great
swelling; also there is a worm that creeps into the soles of men's feet, which
causes great swelling, and pain, for which they have no remedy, but to lance
the flesh, and so to dig them out.

They have a certain kind of Beetles, which have four lights that shine much
in the dark, two in their eyes, and two under their wings when they fly; they
use to bring them into their houses, where they do them double service: First,
by killing the Gnats: secondly, by giving them light, which is so great, that
they can see to read by it. Kine in this Island carried thither by the
Spaniards are so multiplied, and grown wild, that they kill them for their
hides and Tallow, leaving their flesh to be devoured by dogs, and fowl: Almost
forty thousand of them have been transported in one year. Anno Christi 1519.
Ants were as noisome to them, as Grasshoppers in other parts of the world; they
spoiled their fruits, and fruit trees; they could keep nothing in their houses,
which was fit to be eaten, from them, and had they continued, they would have
unpeopled the Island. There are worms also which do such harm in Timber, that a
house will scarce stand here thirty years: when the King in this Country died,
they buried the best beloved of his Concubines with him, who also had other
women buried for to attend upon them in the other World, together with their
Jewels and Ornaments: they had also set in their Sepulcher a Cup of water, and
some of their Cassavi bread. Anno Christi 1508, here happened such an Hurricane
as threw down most of the houses in Domingo, and Bona ventura, destroyed twenty
sail of ships, lifted up many men into the air, who falling down again were
miserably bruised.

Newfound-land described.
Newfound-land is an Island bordering upon the continent of America, no farther
distant than England is from the nearest part of France. It lies between six
and forty, and three and fifty degrees of Northerly latitude: Its near as big
as Ireland, and is near half the way between Ireland, and Virginea; even in
winter its as pleasant, and healthful a place as England. The natural
Inhabitants are not many, and those rude, ignorant of God, and living under no
kind of civil Government. In their habits, customs, and manners, they
resemble the Indians, which live upon the continent. They are ingenious, and
tractable, and take great pains in helping those Christians which yearly fish
upon their coasts, to kill, cut, and boil their Whales, expecting nothing for
their labor, but a little bread, or some other trifles.

All along the coast of this Country, there are many spacious and excellent
Bays, some of them stretching into the land more than twenty leagues. And
round about the Coast, and in the Bays, there are many small Islands, all
within a league of the land, which are both fair, and fruitful, neither does
any Country in the world afford greater store of good harbors, nor those more
safe, commodious, and free from danger.

The soil of the Country in the Valleys, and sides of the Mountains is so
fruitful, that without the labor of man it naturally produces great plenty of
Pease, and Vetches, as full, and wholesome as ours in England: Other places
produce plenty of Grass: There are Strawberries red, and white, and Rasberries
as fair, and good as ours in England: Multitude of Bilberries, and other
delicate Berries, in great abundance: There are also Pears, Cherries,
Filbeards, etc. There are Herbs for Sallets, and broth, as Parsley, Alexander,
Sorrel, etc. As also Flowers, as Red, and Damask-Roses, with others; beautiful,
and delightful both to the eye, and smell: There are also diverse Physical
Herbs, and Roots. Some Corn that our men have sowed proved very good, and
yielded great increase: so do Cabbages, Carrats, Turnips, Lettice, etc.

In the Country there are great store of Deer, Hares, Foxes, Squirrels,
Beavers, Wolves, Bears, and other kinds of Beasts, both for necessity, profit,
and delight. Besides great numbers of small Birds, there are Hawks, great and
small, Partridges, Thrustles, Nightingals, etc. As also Ravens, Gripes, Crows,
etc. besides plenty of water-Fowle, as Geese, Ducks, Gulls, Penguines, Pigeons,
etc. Of these there is such abundance, that the Fishermen which yearly trade
thither find great refreshing by them.

The Country yields store of Rivers, and Springs, pleasant, delightful, and
wholesome: together with abundance of fuel for the fire; besides Timber Trees,
as Fir, Spruce, fit for Masts of ships; from whence also comes abundance of
Turpentine: Pines also, and Birch-Trees, etc. The Rivers, and Harbors are
stored with delicate Fish, as Salmons, Pearls, Eeles, Herrings, Makarel,
Flounders, Cods, Trouts, as large, fat, and sweet as any in the world: Besides
Lobsters, Crab-fish, Muscles, etc. There are also Beavers, Otters, etc. The
Seas along the shore yield Whales, Spanish-Makarel, Dorrel, Pales, Herring,
Porposses, Seals, etc. Especially by their Cod-fishing, both our own, and
other Nations are much enriched. Two hundred and fifty sail of Ships go thither
usually in one year from England.

New-Scotland described.
New-Scotland lies on the East of St. Croix: on the North its compassed with
the great River Canada; and has the main Ocean on the South. It has many safe
harbors, and great Rivers, having on the sides of them delicate medows, where
the earth of it self, brings forth Roses red, and white, and Lillies, having
a dainty smell. The soil is fat, producing several sorts of Berries, as
Goos-berries, Straw-berries, Hind-berries, Ras-berries, etc. as also Pease,
Wheat, Barley, and Rye. The Rivers abound with Lobsters, Cockles, and other
small fishes: There are great store of wild foul, as Geese, Herons, Ducks,
Wood-cocks, Pigeons,: The Coast has store of Cod, and other great fishes: The
Land is full of wood. mostly of great Oaks; the rest Fir-trees, Spruce, Birch,
and many other sorts here unknown.

Groenland described.
Groenland is accounted part of America, and is high, mountainous, and full of
broken Islands along the Coast: It has good Baies, and navigable Rivers that
are full of fish: Between the mountains are pleasant plains and valleys: there
a^e store of foul; black Foxes, and Deer: The people wander up and down in the
Summer time, without fixed habitations, for hunting, and fishing, carrying
their Tents, and baggage with them: they are of a middle stature, brown,
active, warlike, eating raw flesh, or a little perboiled in blood, oil, or a
little water, which they drink. Their apparel are Beasts, or Fowls skins, the
hairy, or feathered side outward in summer, and inward in winter: Their Arrows
and Darts have but two feathers, and a bonehead; no wood grows there; they
worship the Sun. Their Winter-houses are built of Whales-bones, covered with
earth, and vaulted two yards deep under the earth; within land they have a King
that is carried upon men's shoulders: They have Hares as white as Snow, with
long fur: Dogs which live on fish, whose pizzels, as also of the Foxes, are
bony. Their Summer work is to dry their fish on the Rocks, for their Winter
provision: Every one has a Boat made of Fir-wood, driven thither from other
Countries, covered with Seals-skins, about twenty foot long, sowed with
sinews, or guts; so light, that one may carry them, and so swift, that no ship
can hold way with them, and yet they use but one Oar which they hold by the
middle, in the midst of their Boat, being broad at both ends wherewith they row
forward, or backward, at pleasure.

A brief Narrative of some of the barbarous, and inhumane cruelties exercised
by the Spaniards upon the Indians in this American world, collected out of
their own Authors.
Bartholomew de las Casas, a Dom^nick Friar, and Bishop in America, who wrote
in the year 1542. says thus of them. The Indians are a simple, harmless
people, loyal to their Lords, and such as gave no occasion of offense to the
Spaniards, till by their extreme injuries they provoked them thereto. To these
Lambs (says he) the Spaniards came as cruel, and hungry Tigers, Bears, and
Lions, intending nothing for these forty years but blood, and slaughter to
satisfy their avarice and ambition: Insomuch that of three millions of
Natives, that they found in Hispaniola there remains not one.

Cuba, and the other Islands endured the like miseries; and in the firm land
ten Kingdoms, greater than all Spain, were dis-peopled, and left desolate, in
which there perished not less than twelve millions by their tyranny, he might
as truly have said fifty millions.

Their cruelties at their first planting in Hispaniola drove the poor Indians
to their shifts, and to their weak defense, which so enraged these Lions, that
they spared neither man, woman, nor child: yea they ripped up the great bellied
women* and used to lay wagers which of them could with greatest dexterity cut
off an Indians head, or cut him in sunder in the midst: They would pluck the
Infants by the heels from their Mothers breasts, and dash out their brains
against the stones, or throw them into the River. They set up Gibbets, and in
honor of Christ, and his Apostles (as they used profanely to say) they would
both hang, and burn them. Others they took, and cutting their hands almost off,
bid them carry letters to their Countrymen, who for fear of these Tyrants were
fled into the Mountains: The Nobles, and chiefest men they broiled on
Gridirons: I once (says mine Author) saw four or five of them thus roasted,
and when they made a lamentable noise, they stopped their mouths, and so made
them endure the torment till they dyed. They kept Dogs to hunt them out of
their coverts, which devoured these poor souls: and if at any time an Indian
thus provoked, killed a Spaniard, they made a Law, that one hundred of them
should be slain for him: One of the Kings proffered to till the ground for
them for fifty miles space, if they would spare him, and his people from the
Mines; but for recompense, the Spanish Captain defloured his wife, and took him
prisoner, and sent him into Spain, where he perished by the way.

In another Province of Hispaniola, the Spanish Governor called before him
three hundred Indian Lords, some of them he burned, slew others with the
sword, and hanged up the Queen; as they did also in another Province: and for
the rest which remained after these Butcheries, they shared them amongst them
for slaves. The men they consumed in the Mines, the women by tillage, and by
heavy burdens that they made them to carry, and both by famine, scourging, and
other miseries.

And thus they did in all other places whithersoever they came: In the Islands
of St. John, and Jamica were six hundred thousand Inhabitants, and within few
years, there were scarcely two ^undred left in either of them: In Cuba a
Cacique, or Lord, called all his subjects together, and showed them a box of
gold, saying, This is the Spaniards God, and made them dance about it, and then
hurled it into the River: And afterward being taken, and condemned to the
fire, when he was bound to the stake, a Friar came and preached to him about
Heaven, and Hell: The Cacique asked if any Spaniards were in Heaven? yea (said
the Friar) such as were good: Then said the Cacique, I will rather go to Hell,
than come where any of that cruel Nation are.

I was once present (says Casas) when the Inhabitants of a Town brought us
forth victuals, and met us with great kindness, and the Spaniards without any
cause given, slew three thousand of them, neither sparing age, nor sex. At
another time (says he) at their request, I sent to other Towns to meet us,
promising them good usage, and when two and twenty Caciques met us, our Captain
against all Faith, caused them to be burned; which base usage caused the poor
Indians to hang themselves: so that a Spaniard seeing them take this course,
he made them believe that he would also hang himself, to persecute them in
the other world, which kept some from this self-execution. Six thousand
Children dyed in three, or four months space of Famine, their Parents being
sent away to the Mines; the rest they hunted out in the Mountains, and desolate
Islands. In the Land of Lucaia they destroyed all, and when they shipped
multitudes of them for the Mines in Hispaniola, for want of food, a third part
of them commonly perished by the way, so that an unskilful Pilot might have
been directed his way by these floating Carcasses. The like havoc they made in
the Continent, almost unpeopling all places whether they came. From Dariena to
Nicaragua, they slew four hundred thousand people with Dogs, sword, fire, and
other torments.

They used to send Friars to Preach, that under pain of confiscation, and loss
of Lands, Liberty, Life, etc. they should acknowledge God, and the King of
Spain: yea they would steal to some places, and half a mile off of the citys by
night they would make this Proclamation where none heard it, and then in the
Night whilst they were asleep, fire their houses, slaying, and taking Captive
at their pleasures, and then fall to search for gold. A certain Cacique gave
the Spanish Governor the weight of nine thousand Crowns in gold, and he by
way of requital to extort more, bound him to a post, and putting fire to his
feet, forced him to send home for three thousand more, and yet not satisfied,
he persisted to torment him, till the marrow came forth of his feet, wherewith
he died; when any of the Indians fainted under their grievous burdens, or for
want of food, the Spaniards, least they should loose time in undoing the chain
wherein they were tied, they would cut off his head, and so let the body fall
out. At another time they robbed the Nicaraguans of their Corn: whereby thirty
thousand of them died of famine, and a mother was driven to eat her own child:
besides, five hundred thousand were carried away into bondage, and fifty or
sixty thousand more were slain in their wars: so that in one of the most
populous Regions in the World (says Casas) there remain not above four or five
thousand persons. Cortes used to have four Kings to wait upon him: he burned
sixty Kings, their children looking on. Another Spaniard cast four of their
Kings to be devoured by his dogs.

In New-Spain from the year 1518 to 1530. within the compass of four hundred
and eighty miles about Mexico, they destroyed above four millions of people by
fire, and sword, besides those that dyed by miserable servitude and drudgery.
In the Province of Naco and Honduras in the space of eleven years, two millions
of men perished by the same ways. In Guatimala, in sixteen years space, were
destroyed five millions of souls. Alvarado, who was the instrument of this
destruction dyed by the fall of his horse, and had his City of Guatimala
destroyed, and overwhelmed by a threefold deluge, of Earth, water, and stones.
In his expeditions, he forced the Indians by ten, or twenty thousand at a time
to go with him, allowing them no other sustenance, but the flesh of their slain
enemies, keeping in his Army Shambles of man's flesh.

In Panuco and Xalisco, they exercised the like cruelties: One of the Spaniards
forced eight thousand of the Indians to wall about his Garden, and suffered
them all to perish with Famine. In Machuachan they tortured the King that came
forth to meet them, that they might extort gold from him: they set his feet in
the stocks, and put fire thereto, binding his hands to a Post behind him, and
then had a boy standing by, that basted his roasted feet with Oil: Another
stood with a Cross-bow bent against his breast, and a third stood with Dogs
ready to devour him, by these tortures he dyed. They forced the Indians to
bring them their gods, hoping they had been of gold, but when their golden
hopes failed, they forced them to redeem them again with Gold. Yea where the
Friars had forced the Indians to cast away their gods, the Spaniards brought
more from other places to sell them. In the Province of St. Martha, they laid
utterly waste and desolate four hundred and fifty miles of land, by destroying
the Inhabitants: The like they did in the Kingdom of Venezula, where they
destroyed four or five millions. Besides, they carried of them Captive out of
the Continent into the Islands, a million of People.

They spared no sort of persons; plucked the Children from the breasts to
quarter them to their dogs, tortured Kings with new devices borrowed either
from the Inquisition, or from hell: they used to cut off the Noses, and hands
of men and women that lived peaceably with them: they sold Fathers, Mothers,
Children, asunder into diverse places, and to diverse persons never to meet
again: they used to ly with the women, that being with child they might yield
them the more money in their sale. The Spanish Priests used to devote them with
Curses to the Devil, and taught them vices by their evil practices and
examples, insomuch as one said, He would persuade the King of Spain to send no
more Priests into America. They teach them Usury, Lying, Swearing, Blasphemy. A
Caciques son that was towardly in his youth, and proved after dissolute, being
asked the reason of it, said, since I was a Christian, I have learned to swear
several sorts of Oaths, to Dice, to Lie, to swagger, and now I want nothing but
a Concubine, to make me a complete Christian: This made them to say, that of
all Gods the Christians God was the worst, which had such bad servants, and to
wish for their own gods again, of whom they never received so much hurt as from
the Christians. A Christian (said one of them) is one that impiously demands
Maiz, Honey, Silk, Raiment, an Indian woman to lie with; they call for gold and
silver, are idle and will not work, are Gamesters, Dicers, wicked Blasphemers,
Backbiters, Quarrellers, etc. And taking a piece of Gold, he said, Lo this is
the Christians God: For this they kill us, and one another, for this they play,
blaspheme, curse, steal, and do all manner of villainies.

In Peru they had public places of torture, whereinto they might put a
thousand of the miserable Creatures at once, by exquisite tortures to force
them to a confession of their hidden treasures: such as escaped these, used to
hang themselves in the Mountains, and their wives by them, and their little
children at their feet. By Dogs at Land they worried them, and in their Pearl
fishings, exposed them to the ravenous Sharks in the seas; by fire, and sword
consuming twenty millions of people, since the Jesuits went amongst them. These
and infinite more, have been the cruelties which the cruel Spaniards have
exercised upon the poor, naked, innocent people: Our Author, a Papist, that
relates these things, least any should think that he wrote too much, protests
that they were a thousand times worse than he had set down, the Reading
whereof might astonish the sense of the Reader, amaze his Reason, exceed his
faith, and fill his heart with horror, and uncouth passions. It is no marvel
that God follows such bloody beasts with his vengeance, as lately he has done
(if the relation be true) which comes from the mouths of some of themselves,
lately taken by some of our Frigots upon the Coast of Spain, as they came out
of these Countries, whereof the Narrative follows.

The Marquess of Baydex, now taken by our Fleet near Cadiz, upon examination
says, that above five months since there happened in Lima a fearful
Earthquake, and a most miraculous rain of fire in Peru, insomuch that the whole
City of Lima is swallowed up, and destroyed, as also the City of Calao, in
which places there perished above eleven thousand Spaniards, and (through the
wonderful distinguishing hand of God) not above one hundred Indians. In the
City of Lima the King of Spain has lost by the Earthquake, one hundred
Millions of silver ready wrought up. Also the famous Mines of Potozi, where
they had their greatest quantities of silver, are destroyed in a wonderful
manner, so that the hill is not to be seen, but all is plain, nor is there any
further possibility of having gold, or silver in Peru: Some of the Spaniards
themselves acknowledge, that this judgment is justly befaln them for their
cruelty to the poor Indians, who crying to God for vengeance, have pulled down
this visible hand of God upon them.

Lima and Potosi Described.
In Lima no houses are covered on the tops, because it never rains, and is a
hot Country: no City in India is richer.

Over the top of the Mountain of Potosi, there always hangs a cloud even in the
clearest day. The hill rises in the form of a Pyramid, being three Leagues
high, environed with cold air: at the foot of it stands the fair City of
Potosi, within six leagues about grows no grass, Corn, nor wood: the entrance,
and Mine works are so dangerous, that few that go in return again. The metal
lies above two hundred fathoms deep, the King of Spain receives thence yearly,
eight, or ten millions of silver.

Lima, is the chiefest City in Peru, standing within two Leagues of the South
sea, containing about two thousand houses, is very rich, and of more trade than
all the Cities of Peru besides. It is the seat of the Viceroy, the
Archbishop, and of the Inquisition.

FINIS.
EXAMPLES OF THE Wonderful Works OF GOD IN THE CREATURES.
CHAP. I Of strange Stones, Earth, and Minerals.
IN Cornwall, near unto a place called Pensans, is that famous stone called
Main-Amber: which is a Camb. Brit. p. 188. The like is in the Country of
Stratherne in Scotland.

In Summerset-shire, near unto Cainsham are found in Stone-quarries, Camb.
Brit. p. 236.

In Gloucestershire upon the hills near Alderly are found certain stones,
resembling Cockles, Periwinckles, and Oisters, which seem to be the gaimsome
works of nature, or such shells turned into stone. Camb. Brit. p. 363.

In Yorkshire, about Whitby are found certain stones fashioned like Camb. Brit.
p. 718.

Huntly Nabb, there ^ye scattering here, and there amongst the Rocks, stones of
diverse bigness, so Artificially by nature shaped round in manner of a Globe,
that one would take them to be big bullets made by the Turners hand, for shot
to be discharged out of great Ordnance; in which, if you break them, are found
stony Serpents, enwrapped round like a wreath: but most of them are headless.
Camb. Brit. p. 721.

In the County of Cornwall, near unto St. Neots, there are a number
Wring-cheese. Camb. Brit. p. 192.

Richmondshire amongst the ragged Rocks, are found stones like unto
Periwinckles, Cockles, and other shell fish. Camb. Brit. p. 727.

Hereford, a hill which they call Marcley-hill, in the year 1571. (as though it
had wakened on a sudden out of a deep sleep) roused it self up, and for the
space of three days together moving and showing it self (as mighty, and huge
an heap as it was) with roaring noise in a fearful sort, and overturning all
things that stood in the way, advanced it self forward to the wondrous
astonishment of the beholders. Camb. Brit. p. 620.

In Glamorganshire in a Rock, or Cliffe by the Sea side, there appears Camb.
Brit. p. 643. This is called Merlins Cave.

At Aspley (...) in Bedfordshire, near unto Woburn, there is a kind Woburn,
that having lien a good while covered in that earth, was dug forth again all
stone. Camb. Brit. p. 401. I have a piece of wood turned into stone by that
earth.

Kile, in Scotland, there is a Rock about twelve foot high, and as much in
breadth, called the Deaf-Craig: For though a man call never so loud, or shoot
off a Gun on the one side, yet his fellow on the other side cannot hear the
noise. Description of Scotland.

In Argile there is a stone found in diverse places, which being laid Idem.

It is most strange, yet true, that the Arms of the Duke of Rohan in France,
which are Fusils, or Lozenges, are to be seen in the wood, and stones through
all his Country: so that if you break a stone in the midst, or lopp a bough
of a Tree, you shall behold the grain thereof (by some secret cause in nature)
Diamonded, or streaked in the fashion of a Lozeng. Camb. Brit.

In VVarwick-shire, the Arms of the Shugburies, which are stars, Shugbury;
so that break the stone where you will, and there is the exact fashion of a
star in the end of it. Idem, I have some of these stones.

In the Kingdom of Fesse in Africa there is a Mountain called Beniguazeval,
Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 807.

In Prussia there is great store of Amber, which grows like Coral in a
mountain of the North sea, which is clean covered with water: Amber is often
broken off, and cast up by the sea into their Havens.

About Bever Castle in Lincolnshire, are found the stones called Astroites,
Came. Brit.

We have Corral, Amber, Emeralds, Calcedony, Pearl, Onix, Sardonix, Sardis,
Bezar, Hemathist, and the Turquoise from Arabia, and Persia. Pearls, Berils,
Saphires, and Adamants, from Zeilan. Jasper, Cornelion, Agate, Heliotrope,
Jacinth, and Chrysolite, from Malabar, Nursinga, and Cochin-china. Diamonds
from Borneo, and Gulkunda. Gold, Silver, Rubies, Saphires, Granats, Topaz,
Emerald, Smaradg, Espinels, Cats-eyes, and Porcellane, from Pegu, Siam,
Bengala, Sumatra, Japan, and China.

A strange report of a City in Barbary that is turned into stone.
They write from Barbary, that a whole City consisting of men, beasts, trees,
houses, Utensils, etc. are turned lately into stone: every thing remaining in
the same posture, as children at their mothers Whiting, Captain of an English
ship, who was a a slave there, coming to the Duke of Florence, told him of it,
having himself seen it, whereupon the Duke) holding fair correspondence with
the Bassa of Tripolis,) wrote to him about it: the Bassa by letter has assured
him of the truth of it, and that himself was an eye witness of the same, going
to the place to see it, and that it was done in few hours, and he has sent
the Duke diverse of th^se things petrified, and amongst the rest some pieces of
gold that are turned into stone. This information Sir Kenelm Digby, had from a
friend of his in Florence, besides other letters that mention it. If it be
true we shall have further confirmation of it. I am not apt to believe such
reports, yet seeing the Psalmist tells us, that strange punishments are for the
workers of Iniquity, I thought fit to insert it, till time discover the truth*

CHAP. II. Examples of the rare works of God in the Creatures. Of Trees,
Herbs, Plants, and Gums.
OF Date-Trees, some are Males, and other Females: the Male Dates will prove
stark naught, and have great stones in them, Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 823.

Near unto the Grand-Cairo in Egypt, is a Garden environed with Pur. Pil. v. 2.
p. 838.

In the Country of Indostan they have a pleasant clear liquor which Taddy,
issuing from a spongie* Tree that grows straight, and tall, without boughs to
the top, and there spreads out into branches, somewhat like to an English
Colewort, where they make incisions, under which they hang earthen pots to
preserve the influence: that which distills forth in the night, is as pleasing
to the taste, as any white Wine, if drunk betimes in the morning; and of a
peircing, and medicinable quallity, excellent against the stone. But in the
heat of the day the Sun alters it, so that it becomes heady, ill-relished, and
unwholesome. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1469.

For Cotton Wool, they plant seeds, which grow up into shrubs P. Pil. v. 2. p.
1470.

Cynamon-tree is a small tree, and low, having leaves like to our Bay Tree: In
the month of March, or April, when the sap goes up to the top of the tree,
they cut the bark off the tree round about in length* from knot, to knot or
from joint to joint, above, and below, and then easily with their hands they
take it away, laying it in the Sun to dry, and yet for all this the tree dies
not, but against the next year it will have a new bark; and that which is
gathered every year is the best Cynamon: that which grows longer is great, and
not so good. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1709.

In India is a tree called Arbore de Ray's, or the Tree of roots, it grows
first up like other trees, and spreads the branches, out of

There is also a tree called Arbore triste, or the sorrowful tree, so called,
Plum-tree: it grows up quickly, and if you break but a branch of the tree,
and set it in the earth, it presently takes root, and grows, and within a few
days after it bears blossoms, which are like Orange-tree-blossoms, the
flower white, and in the bottom somewhat yellow, and redish. P. Pil. v. 2. p.
1780.

There is also an herb in India called by the Portugals, Herba sentida, P. Pil.
v. 2. p. 1781.

Pepper is planted at the root of some other tree, and runs up it Ivy: the
leaves are like the Orange leaves, but somewhat smaller, green, and sharp at
ends: the Pepper grows in bunches like Grapes, but less, and thinner; they
are always green till they begin to dry, and ripen, which is in December, and
January, at which time it turns black, and is gathered. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1782.

The best Ginger grows in Malabar; it grows like thin, and young Netherland
Reeds, two or three spans high, the root whereof is the Ginger, which is
gathered in December, and January. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1782.

The Clove-trees are like Bay-trees, the blossoms at the first white, then
green, and at last red, and hard, which are the Cloves; these P. Pil. v. 2. p.
1783.

Nutmeg-tree is like a Pear Tree, but that its less, and with round leaves,
the fruit is like great round Peaches, the inward part whereof is the Nutmeg;
this has about it an hard shell like wood, and the shell is covered over with
Nutmeg-flower, which is the Mace, and over it is the fruit, which without is
like the fruit of a Peach. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1783.

Gumme-Lac comes most from Pegu: where are certain very great Pismires with
wings, which fly up the trees like Plum-trees, out of which trees comes a
certain Gum which the Pismires suck up, and then they make the Lac round
about the branches of the trees, as Bees make Wax, and when it is full, the
owners come, and breaking off the branches, lay them to dry, and being dry, the
branches shrink out, and the Lac remains. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1783.

Amber-greese, is usually cast upon the Seashore, which as some Whale, or as
others, the sperme, or seed of the Whale consolidated by lying in the Sea. P.
Pil. v. 2. p. 772.

The Herb Addad is bitter, and the root of it so venomous, that one P. Pil. v.
2. p. 850.

Of Palm Trees, which they keep with watering, and cutting every P. Pil. v. 2.
p. 985.

Frankincense grows in Arabia, and is the gum that issues out Idem. p. 1781.

In Mozambique, Manna is procreated of the dew of heaven falling Rozen, whence
its gathered, and put into jars, and is used much for purging in India. Idem.
p. 1554.

Mastick-trees grow only in the Island of Sio: the trees are low shrubs, with
little crooked boughs, and leaves: In the end of August they begin their
Mastick-harvest, men cutting the bark of the Tree with Iron instruments, out of
which the Gum distills uncessantly for almost three months together. Idem. p.
1812.

Spunges are gathered from the sides of Rocks, fifteen fathom under Gibralter,
the people that get them being trained up in diving from their childhood, so
that they can endure to stay very long under water, as if it were their
habitable Element.

In Manica, is a tree called the Resurrection-tree, which for the Pur. Pil. v.
2. p. 1537.

There is in the Island of Teneriff (which is one of the Canaries) Oak of a
middle size, the bark white like Hornbeam; six, or seven yards high, with
ragged boughs, the leaf like the Bay-leaf. It bears neither fruit, nor
flower; it stands on the side of an hill, in the day its withered, and drops
all night (a cloud hanging thereon) so that it yields water sufficient for the
whole Island, wherein are eight thousand souls, and about an hundred thousand
Cammels, Mules, Goats, etc. The water falls from it into a pond made of brick,
paved with stone; from whence its conveyed into several ponds, thorough the
whole Island. They also water therewith their Corn-ground, for they have no
other water in the Island, except Rainwater. The Pond holds twenty thousand
Tun of water, and is filled in one night. Many of our English that have been
there have attested the truth hereof. Idem. p. 1369.

Concerning which Tree, Sylvester the Poet made these verses.

In the I Will of Iron (one of those same seven
Whereto our Elders happy name have given)
The Savage people never drink the streams
Of Wells, and Rivers, as in other Realms.
Their drink is in the air! their gushing spring,
A weeping tree out of it self does wring.
A Tree, whose tender bearded root being spread
In dryest sand, his sweating leaf does shed
A most sweet liquor; and (like as the Vine
Untimely cut, weeps (at her wound) the Wine
In pearled tears) incessantly distills
A royal stream, which all their Cisterns fills
Throughout the Island: for all hither hie,
And all their vessels cannot draw it dry!
Aloes grows in the Island of Socotera which is nothing but Semper it is so
full of a Rosin-like juice, that the leaves are ready to break with it: which
leaves they cut in small pieces, and cast them into a clean pit made in the
ground, and paved: there it lies to ferment in the heat of the Sun, whereby the
juice flows forth, which they put in skins, and hang them up in the wind to
dry, whereby it hardens. P. Pil. v. 1. p. 419.

Indico grows in the Moguls Country, having a small leaf like Sena: the
branches are of a woody substance like Broom: It grows not above a yard high,
the stalk about the bigness of a man's thumb: The seed is included in a small
round Cod of an inch long. This once sowed lasts three years: that of the
first year makes a weighty reddish Indico, that sinks in water, being not yet
come to its perfection: that of the second year is rich, very light, and of a
perfect Violet color, swimming on the water: that of the third year is
weighty, blackish, and the worst of the three. This herb, when its cut, is put
into a Cistern, and pressed down with stones, then covered over with water,
where it remains till the substance of the herb is gone into the water: then
its drawn forth into another Cistern, and labored with staves till it be like
Batter, then they let it sees, and so scum off the water two or three times,
till nothing but a thick substance remains, which taking forth, they spread on
a cloth, dry it in the Sun, then make it into balls, dry it on the sand, which
causes the sandy foot: That is best, which is of a pure grain, Violet-colour,
is glossie, dry, and light. Idem. p. 430.

James Lancaster in his East-Indy Voyage, in the Isle of Sombrero found on the
Sea-sands, a young twig growing up to a tree, and offering to pluck up the
same, it shrank down into the ground, and when it was by strength pulled up, a
great Worm was the root of it, and as the Tree grows in greatness, the Worm
diminishes: This Tree plucked up, the leaves, and pill stripped off, by that
time its dried, is turned into a hard stone; so that this Worm was twice
transformed into different natures, after a wondrous manner: Of these he
brought home many. P. Pil. v. 1. p. 152.

Saffron Walden in Essex, there grows great store of Saffron, which was first
brought into England, in the reign of King Edward the third. This in the month
of July every third year, being plucked up, and after twenty days, having the
root split, and set again in the earth, about the end^ of September it puts
forth a whitish blew flower, out of the midst whereof there come three chives,
which are gathered in the morning before Sunrising, and being plucked out of
the flower, are dried by a soft fire; and so great is the increase that comes
thereof, that out of every acre of ground, there are made fourscore, or an
hundred pound weight of Saffron, whilst it is moist, which being dried, yield
some twenty pound weight. And the ground which three years together has
brought Saffron is so enriched thereby, that it will bear very good Barley,
many years together without dung, or manuring. Camb. Brit. p. 453.

All along the shores of the Red Sea are abundance of Palm Trees, of Herb. Trav.

Italy there grows an Herb called Balilisco, which has this innate property,
that if it be laid under a stone in some moist place, in two days space it
produces a Scorpion: Raimunds Mercu. Ital.

Assa-Faetida Tree is like our Bryer in height, the Leaves resemble Fig Leaves,
the root is like our Radish: though the smell be so base, yet the taste is so
pleasing, that no meat, no sauce, no vessel is pleasing to the Gusarats
pallats where it grows, except it relish of it. Herb. Trav.

Benjamin is either, pure, clear, and white, or yellow, and streaked: Pegu, and
Siam yield the best.

The Coco tree is very rife in the East Indies. In the whole world there Pur.
Pil. v. 2. p. 1466. and 1704.

Mr. Herbert in his Travels thus describes it. The Tree that bears the Coco, is
strait, and lofty without any branches, save at the very top, where

-- The Indian Nut alone
Is clothing, meat, and trencher, drink, and Can.
Boat, Cable, Sail, Mast, Needle, all in one.
Herb. And Sylvester has set them forth to the life in these verses.

The Indian Isles most admirable be,
In those rare fruits called Coquos commonly,
The which alone far richer wonder yields,
Then all our Groves, Meads, gardens, orchards, Fields,
What would thou drink? the wounded leaves drop wine,
Lackst thou fine linen? dress the tender rine.
Dress it like Flax, spin it, then weave it well,
It shall thy Cambrike, and thy Lawn excel.
Longst thou for Butter, bite the poulpous part,
For never better came to any mart.
Do need good Oil? then boult it to, and fro,
And passing Oil it soon becomes so.
Or Vinegar? to whet thine appetite.
Why, Sun it well, and it will sharply bite.
Or want's thou Sugar? steep the same a stownd,
And sweeter Sugar is not to be found.
It Is what you will; or will be what you would:
Should Midas touch it, sure it would be gold.
And God, all-good, to crown our life with Bays,
The Earth with plenty, and his Name with praise,
Had done enough, if he had made no more
But this one plant, so full of choicest store;
Save that the world (where one thing breeds satiety)
Could not be fair, without so great variety.
Plantan Tree is of a reasonable height; the body about the bigness of a man's
thigh, compacted of many leaves, wrapped one upon another, adorned with leaves
in stead of boughs from the very ground, which are for the most part about two
else long, and an ell broad, having a large rib in the middle thereof. The
fruit is a bunch of ten, or twelve Plantans, each a span long, and as big
almost as a man's wrist; the rind being stripped off, the fruit is yellowish,
and of a pleasant taste. Pur. Pil. p. 416.

The Cedars of Mount Libanus grow higher than Pines, and so big, Pur. Pil. v.
2. p. 1500.

In Africa are many Palmeta trees, whence they draw a sweet, and Idem.

In New-Spain there are many trees which they call Manguey: It sweet. This
liquor being sodden, becomes Wine, which being kept till it be sower, makes
good Vinegar: Boil it a little more than for Wine, and it makes a fine Syrup;
and boil it till it be thick, and it makes Honey. Idem. v. 3. p. 957.

There is a certain Tree in New-Spain called Tunalls, in whose leaves
Cochenille, so famous, and dear, wherewith they Dye in grain. Idem.

The Jack, or Giack is an high tree, and uneasy to be ascended; Jack for show
and bigness resembles a Pumpeon: without, it is of a gold yellow, mixed with
veins; within, its soft, and tender, full of golden colored cloves, each full
of kernels, not unlike a great French Bean, but more round, each of them has
an hard stone within it; the fruit is somewhat unpleasant at the first taste;
it is glutinous, and clammy in the mouth, but very restorative, and good for the
back.

The Ananas is not inferior to the Jack in bulk, and roundnesse:

The Duroyen is somewhat like the Jack, in shape round, the inward

The Arec-tree is almost as high as a Cedar, but more like the Palmeto: It is
of a fuzzie, hollow substance, adorned at every top with East Indies.

The Palmeto-tree is long, strait, round, and soft, without leaf, bough, or
branch, save at the top, and those are few, green, and eats like a
Colly-flower. But of more value is the Palmeto Wine, which is sweet, pleasant,
and nourishing; in color, and taste not unlike Muskadine: It purges, cures
obstructions, and kills the Worms. If it stand two days in the Sun it makes
good Vinegar. The Wine is thus gotten. They cut a small hole in two or three
Trees that grow together, which in a short time are filled with the sap that
issues in them, which with a Cane, or Quill they draw forth. Pur. Pil.

In Summersetshire, near unto Glastenbury, in Wiral Park was that Christmas day
to sprout forth as fresh as in May; but now its cut down. Camb. Brit. p. 227.

Egypt grow those sedgie reeds, called Papyri, whereof formerly they made
Paper, and from whence ours that is made of rags assumed that name. They divide
it into thin flakes, whereinto it naturally parts: then laying them on a
Table, and moistening them with the glutinous water of Nilus, they press them
together, dry them in the Sun, and then they are fitted for use Pur. Pil. v.
2. p. 898.

CHAP. III. The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Fountains,
Rivers, and Waters.
Durham, in Dirlington field, there are three pits of a wonderful depth, called
by the Vulgar Hell-Kettles, in which the water by an Antiperistasis, or
reverberation of the cold air, striking thereupon, waxes hot; which pits have
passage under ground, into the River Teese, as Archbishop Guthbert Tonsta!
observed, by finding that Goose in the River which he had marked, and let down
into these pits. Camb. Brit. p. 737.

Yorkshire, near unto Knasburrow Castle is a Well, in which the waters spring
not up out of the veins of the earth, but distill, and trickle down, dropping
from the Rocks hanging over it, whence its called Dropping-VVell: into which,
what wood soever is put, it will in a short space be turned into stone. Camb.
Brit. p. 700.

Caermardenshire, near unto Careg Castle, there is a fountain that twice in
four and twenty hours ebbeth, and twice flows, resembling the unstable
motions of the main Sea. Camb. Brit. p. 650.

In Westmerland, hard by Shape there is a Well, or Fountain, which Euripus,
ebbeth, and flows many times in a day. Camb. Brit. p. 762.

In Ireland is a Fountain, whose water kills all those beasts that Ortelius.

Near unto Lutterworth in Leicester shire, there is a spring of water so Camb.
Brit. p. 518.

In Derbyshire in the Peak-Forrest not far from Buxtone, is a Well Camb. Brit.
p. 558.

Also in the same County at the spring head of Wie there rise, and Buxton
Wells, very sovereign for the stomach, sinews, and whole body. Camb. Brit. p.
557.

In Scotland on the bank of Ratra near unto Stang's Castle, there is, Camb
Brit. Scotl. p. 48.

In Scotland in the Country of Murray, there is a River called Naes Descrip.
of Scotl.

Also in Galloway the Loch called Loch-Merton is of such a strange nature, that
the one half of it does never freeze in the coldest winter. Descrip. of Scotl.

In Lenox is a great Loch, or Mere, called Loch-Lowmond, in length Desc. of
Scotl.

There is a certain Island called Lounda in the Kingdom of Congo, Pil. v. 2.
p. 989.

Not far from Casbine, the Regal City in Persia is a fountain of a Persia to
burn in their houses, and is usually carried all over the Country upon Kine,
and Asses, whereof you may often meet three or four hundred in company. P. Pil.
v. 2. p. 1431.

About three days journey from old Babylon, is a Town called Ait, mile off: the
Moors call it Hell-mouth. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1437.

Clitumnus is a River in Italy, which makes all the Oxen that drink of it,
white. Fulk. Meteor. Lib. 4

The River Melas in Boeotia makes all the Sheep that drink of it, black. Plin.

Jupiter Hammon, is cold in the day time, and hot at midnight.

The Fountain of the Sun has its water extreme cold, and sweet at Plin. lib.
2. c. 103. Augustine.

Palestine called the Sabbatical River, which runs with a violent and swift
stream all the week; but every Sabbath it remains dry. Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l.
7. c. 24. Some question the truth of this.

Idumaea is a fountain called the Fountain of Job, which for one quarter of the
year is troubled and muddy; the next quarter bloody, the third green, and the
fourth clear. Isiod.

The River Astaces in the Isle of Pontus uses sometimes to over flow Plin. l.
2. c. 103.

Furius Camillus being Censor in Rome, the Lake Albanus being environed Plut.

Dee in Merionneth shire in Wales, though it run through Pimble-Meer, yet it
remains entire, and mingles not its streams with the waters of the Lake. Came.
Brit.

Ana a River in Spain, burieth it self in the earth, and runs under
Spaniards brag that they have a bridge whereon ten thousand Cattle feed daily.

Pliny tells us of a fountain called Dodon, which always decreaseth

He also tells us of certain Fountains in an Island near Italy,

Aristotle writes of a Well in Sicilie, whose water is so sharp, that

In Bohemia near to the City of Bilen is a Well of such excellent water, Fulk.

In Paphlagonia is a Well, which has the taste of wine, and it makes Du Bartas,

Salonian Fountain, and thou Andrian Spring,
Out of what Cellars do you daily bring
The oil, and wine that you abound with so?
O Earth, do these within thine entrals grow? etc.
Aelian mentions a Fountain in Boeotia near to Thebes, which makes horses run
mad if they drink of it.

Pliny mentions a water in Sclavonia which is extreme cold, and yet if a man
throw his cloth cloak upon it, it is presently set on

Other waters there are which discolor the fleeces of the sheep which drink of
them: whence Du Bartas.

Cerona, Xanth, and Cephisus do make,
The thirsty flocks that of their waters take,
Black, red, and white: Add near the crimson deep,
The Arabian Fountain makes crimson sheep.
And again.

What should I of the Illyrian Fountain tell?
What shall I say of the Dodonean Well?
Whereof the first sets any clothes on fire;
The other does quench (who but will this admire)
A burning Torch: and when the same is quenched,
Lights it again, if it again be drenched.
In the Province of Dara in Lybia, there is a certain River, which April, it
brings great plenty to the whole region, if not, there follows great scarcity
of Corn. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 823.

In the Kingdom of Tunis, near unto the City El-Hamma, is a Idem. p. 821.

In Africa, there is a River called Margania, and by it a salt spring Idem. p.
1547.

The River Meander is famous for its six hundred windings, and turning in, and
out: whence that of the Poet.

Quique recurvatis ludit Maeander in undis.
Maeander plays his watery pranks,
within his crooked winding banks.
Groenland in the Hyperborean Sea, was discovered Anno Christi 1380. it has in
it the Monastery of St. Thomas, situate in the North-East part thereof at the
foot of a Mountain, where there is a River so hot, that they use to boil their
meat in it, and it serves for other such purposes as fire does with us. Isac.
Chron. p. 275.

The River Hypanis in Scythia every day brings forth little bladders, Fit
Emblems of the vain, and short life of man.

Nilus in Egypt uses once in the year to overflow her banks, whereby the whole
Country is watered. It usually begins to overflow upon the seventeenth of
June, and increases daily, sometimes two, sometimes three fingers, and
sometimes half a cubit high on a day. The increase of it is known by a Pillar
erected in a Cistern, whereinto the water is conveyed by a Sluice; which pillar
is divided into eighteen parts, each a cubit higher than the other. If the
water reach no higher than to the fifteenth cubit, they expect a fruitful year:
if it stay between the twelfth, and fifteenth cubit, the increase of that year
will be but mean. If it reach not to the twelfth, its a sign of scarcity. If
it rise to the eighteenth, the scarcity will be greater, in regard of too much
moisture. This River continues forty days increasing, and forty days
decreasing. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 838.

Another thing is wonderful, which is this: In the Grand Cairo Egypt) the
Plague uses many times to be very violent, till the River begins to overflow
its banks, at which time it does instantly cease. So that whereas five hundred
a day dyed the day before, not one does dye the day following. Idem. p. 897.

Devon, not far from the Town of Lidford, at a Bridge, the River Lid is
gathered into a strait, and pent in between Rocks, whereon it runs down a
main, and the ground daily waxing deeper, and deeper under it, his water is not
seen, only a roaring noise is heard, to the great wonder of those that pass by.
Camb. Brit. p. 199.

In Warwickshire, at Nevenham Regis, three fountains arise out of Idem. p. 562.

In Herefordshire, a little beneath Richards Castle, Nature, who never
Bone-VVell. Idem. p. 619.

In Yorkshire, upon the Seashore by Sken-grave, when the winds Idem. p. 720.

Pliny tells us of the fountain Chymaera, that is set on fire with Plin. not.
Hist. Lib. 2. c. 106.107.

The same Author also tells us, that in the hot deserts of India

At Belgrad in Hungary, where Danubius, and Sava (two great Rivers) Henry Blunt
in his voyage into the Levant) and tasted of the Danow as clear, and pure as a
well; then putting mine hand an inch further, I have taken of the Sava, as
troubled as a street-channel, tasting the gravel in my teeth. Thus they ran
sixty miles together, and for a days journey I have been an eyewitness of it.

CHAP. IIII. The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Fishes.
ANno Christi 1204. at Oreford in Suffolk a fish was taken by the Bartholomew
de Glanvil, Keeper of Oreford Castle. In all his limbs and members he
resembled a man, had hair in all the usual parts of his body, only his head was
bald. The Knight caused meat to be set before him, which he greedily
devoured, and did eat fish raw, or sod: that which was raw he pressed with his
hand, till he had squeezed out all the moisture: He uttered not any speech,
though to try him, they hung him up by the heels, and grievously tormented him.
He would get him to his Couch at the setting of the Sun, and rise again at the
Sunrising. One day they brought him to the haven, and let him go into the Sea,
but to prevent his escape, they set three rows of very strong nets before him,
to catch him again at their pleasure: but he, streightwaies diving to the
bottom, crept under all their nets, and showed himself again to them, and so
often diving, he still came up, and looked upon them that stood on the shore,
as it were mocking of them. At length after he had sported himself a great
while in the water, and there was no hope of his return, he came back to them
of his own accord, and remained with them two months after. But finally, when
he was negligently looked to, he went to the Sea, and was never after seen,
or heard of. Fabians Chron.

Anno Christi 1404. some women of Edam in the Low Countries, Purmer-Meer, they
often saw at the ebbing of the water, a Sea-woman playing up and down, whereat
at the first they were afraid, but after a while, encouraging one another, they
made with their boats toward her, and the water by this time being nor deep
enough for her to dive in, they took her by force, and drew her into the boat,
and so carried her to Edam, where in time she grew familiar, and fed of
ordinary meats: and being sent from thence to Harlem, she lived about fifteen
years, but never spoke, seeking often to ge^ away into the water. Belg. Common
Wealth. p. 102.

In the Seas, near unto Sofala are many VVomen-Fishes; which from Dolphin: the
skin on the belly is white; on the back rougher than a Dolphins. They have
arms, which from the elbows end in fins, and so have no hands: the face is
plain, round, and bigger than a man's, deformed, and without humane semblance:
They have wide mouths, thick hanging lips like a hound; four teeth hanging out
almost a span long, like the tusk of a Boar: and their nostrils are like a
Calves. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1546.

Upon the coasts of Brasile are often found Meer-Men, which are

Captain Richard VVhitburn in his description of Newfound-land, Anno Christi
1610. early in a morning as he was standing by the water side, in the harbor
of St. John's, he espied a strong Creature swimming very swiftly toward him,
like a woman, looking cheerfully upon him: Her face, eyes, nose, mouth, chin,
ears, neck, and forehead were like a woman's. It was very beautiful, and in
those parts well proportioned, having hair hanging down round about the head:
He seeing it come within a pikes length of him, stepped back, whereupon it
dived under the water, swimming to another place, whereby he beheld the
shoulders, and back down to the middle, which was as square, white, and smooth
as the back of a man; from the middle to the hinder part it pointed in
proportion like a broad hooked Arrow: Afterward it came to a Boat wherein some
of his men were, attempting to come in to them, till one of them struck it a
full blow upon the head: Others of them saw it afterward also.

Brasile are many Meer-Men, and Meer-VVomen; that have long hair, and are very
beautiful. They often catch the Indians as they are swimming, embracing them,
and kissing them, and clasp them so hard, that they crush them to death, and
when they perceive that they are dead, they give some sighs, as if they were
sorry. Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1315.

There are also another sort of them, that resemble Children, and Idem.

The Torpedo is a strange kind of fish, which a man holding in his P. Pil. v.
2. p. 1183. See more of it afterward.

In Sofala are many River-horses, as big as two of our horses, with thick, and
short hinder legs, having five claws on each fore-foot, Boars tush; they live
in the water, but feed on the land upon grass: they have teats wherewith they
nourish their young ones: Their Hides are thicker than an Oxes; they are all of
an ash color gray, with white strakes on their faces, or white stars in their
foreheads. Idem. p. 1544.

In the mouth of the River of Goa, there was taken a fish of the Elephant: the
tail was flat, but at the end round, and somewhat sharp: It snorted like a Hog;
the body, head, tail, and legs, were covered with broad scales as hard as Iron,
so that no weapon could pierce them: when he was beaten, he would roll
himself round like an Urchin, and could by no strength be opened, till he
opened of his own accord. Idem. p. 1774.

There are also Toad-Fishes of about a span long, painted, having Indians eat
them. Idem. p. 1314.

The Cuttle-Fish has a hood always full of black water, like Ink, Idem.

There are a sort of fishes, whose wonderful making magnifieth Pilchards,, only
a little rounder, and bigger: they fly best with a side wind, but longer than
their wings are wet, they cannot fly, so that their longest flight is about a
quarter of a mile. The Dolphins, and Bonitos do continually hunt after them, to
prey upon them: whereupon for safety they take the air: but then there is a
Foul called an Alcatrace, much like a Hern, which hovers in the air to seize
upon them.

Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Caribdim.
Out of the frying Pan into the fire, as our Proverb has it.
VVhale and his enemies, viz. The Swordfish, and the Thresher. The Swordfish is
not great, but strongly made, and between his neck and shoulders he has a bone
like a Sword, of about five inches broad, and above three foot long, full of
prickles on either side. The Thresher is a bigger fish, whose tail is broad,
and thick, and very weighty. The fight is in this manner; the Swordfish places
himself under the belly of the VVhale, and the Thresher above with his tail
thresheth upon the head of the Whale, till he forces him to give way, which
the Swordfish perceiving, wounds him in the belly with the Sword, and so
forces him to rise up again. In this manner they torment him, that the fight
is sometimes heard above three leagues off, the Whales roaring being heard much
further, his only remedy in this case is to get to the shore, which he
labors to do as soon as he sees his enemies: for then there can fight but
one with him, and for either of them hand to hand he is too good. Pur. Pil. v.
4. p. 1377.

Herbert in his East-Indy voyage, relates of a Shark taken by one of their men,
that was nine foot and an half in length, and they found in her paunch fifty
and five young ones, each of them a foot in length, all which go out and in at
their pleasures: She is armed with a double row of venomous teeth: and is
guided to her prey by a little Musculus, or Pilot fish that scuds to and fro to
bring intelligence, the Shark for his kindness suffering it to suck when it
pleases.

The Sea Tortoise is not much differing from those at land, only her Herberts
Travels. p. 26.

Indion sea is an Eagle-fish, whose eyes are five quarters asunder, from the
end of one fin to the end of the other are above four yards: Its mouth and
teeth resemble a Portcullis: it has a long small tail, and it is rather to be
wondered at than to be eaten.

In Le Maires voyage about the world, a certain fish, or Sea monster, Port
Desire, where they cleansed and trimmed their ship, they found seven foot under
water, a Horn sticking in the ship, for bigness, and fashion like an Elephants
tooth: yet not hollow, but all solid of hard bone, which had pierced through
three double planks, and was entered into a rib of the ship, it stuck about half
a foot deep in the ship, and by great force was broken off, which caused that
great monster to bleed so much as discolored the water, Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 90.

The Mannaty is a strange fish resembling a Cow: Her face is like a Buffalo's,
her eyes small and round, having hard gums instead of teeth: they feed much on
the shore, which makes them taste like flesh of veal: their intrails differ
little from a Cows: their bodies are commonly three yards long, and one broad,
they swim slowly wanting fins, in the place whereof they have two things like
paps, which are their stilts when they creep on shore to graze, where they
sleep long, sucking in the cool air: they cannot keep under water above half an
hour. The stone generated in their head is most esteemed, being sovereign
against choler adust, the stone colic; and dissenteryes, if beaten small
infused in wine, and drunk fasting. Herb. Trav. p. 26. See more afterward.

The Carvel comes of the foam of the sea, every where floating upon Idem.

In the East Indies is a trade wind, which they call a Briese, or Monson, which
blows West all April, May, June, July, August, and part September, and East the
rest of the year: Only on the East of Sumatra, it blows five months East, and
five months West, and the other two variable. This is well known to our
East-Indy Merchants.

The Torpedo is a Fish like a Bream, but somewhat thicker: some Pur. Pil. p.
1568.

About Jamica in the West Indies is a Fish called a Manati, which is Idem v. 3.
p. 930.

In Brasile are Oxe-fishes, which are very good meat: For head, Idem. v. 4. p.
1313.

In Sir Francis Drakes voyage about the world, when they came to the Island of
Celebes, which is wholly overgrown with wood: amongst the Trees night by night,
they saw infinite swarms of fiery worms flying in the air, their bodies no
bigger than of our English Flies, which made such a show, and gave such a
light, as if every twig or tree had been a burning candle. In which place also
were great store of Bats; as big as large Hens, Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 56.

In Captain Saris his voyage to Bantam, about midnight they fell Pur. Pil. p.
352.

CHAP. V. The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Fowls, and
Birds.
IN one of the Scottish Islands there is a rare kind of Fowl unknown Colca,
little less than a Goose: They come thither every year in the spring, hatch,
and nourish their young ones: About which time they cast all their feathers,
and become stark naked all their bodies over, and then they get themselves to
the Sea, and are no more seen till the next spring: Their feathers have no
quill, as other feathers have, but are all like unto Down, wherein is no
hardness. Descr. of Scot.

In the North Seas of Scotland are great loggs of Timber found, in Claik-geese:
and they do hang by the beak till they are grown to perfection, and then they
receive life and fall off: they are many times found, and kept in admiration
for their rare manner of Generation: They are very fat, and delicious to be
eaten. Idem. Some question the truth hereof.

Storks are so careful of their parents; that when they grow old,

The Town of Delph in the Low Countries is so seated for the breeding, May;
Anno Christi 1536. a great fire happened when the young Storks were grown
pretty big: The old ones perceiving the fire to approach to their Nests,
attempted to carry away their young ones, but could not, they were so weighty,
which they perceiving, never ceased with their spread wings to cover them, till
they all perished in the flames together. Belg. Common Wealth. p. 63.

In America there are certain small Birds called Viemalim, with small October,
sitting upon the bough of a Tree in a warm place, and in April following, when
the Flowers are sprung, they awake again. I have one of them.

In the Arabian Deserts there are great store of Ostriches, that go in flocks,
and often affright passengers that are strangers, with their fearful The
Daughter of my people is become cruel, like the Ostriches in the wilderness:
whereupon she is made the Embleam of folly, Job 39.14. etc: She leaves her
eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust, and forgets that the foot may
crush them, etc.

In Brasile there is a little bird, which they call The risen, or Awaken
because it sleeps six months, and awakes the other six. It has a Cap on its
head of no one color, but on what side soever you look, it shows red, green,
black, and other colors, all very fine. and shining: the breast also shows
great variety of colors, especially yellow, more fine than gold; the body is
gray, and it has a very long small bill, and yet the tongue is twice as long
as the bill: it flies very swiftly, and makes a humming like a Be. It always
feeds flying. Pur. Pil.

In Socotera there are Bats, whose bodies are almost as big as a Conies, their
heads are like Foxes with an hairy Furr upon them: In other Bats. One of them
being killed by some English, his wings when they were extended, were an ell in
length: their cry is shril and loud. Idem.

In Italy are the Flies Cantharides, which by day are of a green shining
Raimunds Mercu. Ital.

In China there is a Fowl of a prodigious shape, and bigness: It is three foot
high: the body being exceeding great, more than a man use to fish, as we do in
England with Cormorants. They will catch fish with great dexterity, and when
they have filled their great bag, which will hold diverse fishes of two foot
long a piece, they will bring them to their Masters. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1643.

African Deserts is a certain Foul called a Nesir, some call it a Vultur. Its
bigger than a Crain. In flying it mounts very high, yet at the sight of a dead
carcass, it descends immediately. She lives long, and in extreme old age
loses her feathers, and then returning to her nest, is there fed by the young
ones of the same kind. Idem.

Near unto the Streights of Magellane, there is an Island called Penguin
Penguins, that go upright; their wings, in stead of feathers, are only covered
with down, which hang down like sleeves faced with white. They fly not, but
walk in paths of their own making, and keep their divisions, and quarters
orderly. They are a strange Foul, or rather, a miscellaneous creature, of
beast, Bird, and Fish: but most of Bird. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 536.

In the Isle of Man, there is a sort of Sea-Fowles called Puffins:

Mauritius is a Foul called a Dodo: Her body is round, and extreme fat, which
makes her pace slow: few of them weigh less than fifty pound: Her wings are so
small, that they cannot lift her above the ground: Her head is variously
dressed, the one half hooded with downy black feathers, the other wholly naked,
of a whitish color, as if a transparent Lawn had covered it: her bill is very
hooked, bending downwards, the breathing place being in the midst of it, from
which part to the end, the color is light green, mixed with a pale yellow: Her
eyes are round, and small, and bright as Diamonds: her clothing is of the
finest down: her train is of three or four short feathers: her legs thick, and
black: her tallons sharp: her stomach so hot, that she digests stones, or
Iron, as does the Ostrich.

Lincolnshire there is a Bird called a Dotterel, so named of his doltish
foolishness: Its a bird of an apish kind, ready to imitate what it sees done:
they are caught by Candlelight by the Fowlers gestures: for if he put forth
an arm, they stretch forth a wing: if he sets forward a leg, or hold up his
head, they likewise do the same: In brief, whatsoever the Fowler does, the same
also does this foolish bird, until it be caught within the net. Camb. Brit.
p. 543.

There is an Island called Bas, bordering upon Lathaien in Scotland, Soland
Geese, which bring with them such abundance of Fish, that, as it is reported,
an hundred soldiers that lay there in Garrison for defense of the place, fed
upon no other meat, but the fish that was thus brought to them: And the said
Fowls also bring such a number of sticks, and twigs wherewith to build their
nests, that thereby the inhabitants are also abundantly provided of fuel for
the fire: and such a mighty gain is made of their feathers, and oil, that no
man would scarcely believe it, but he that has seen it. Camb. Brit. of
Scotland. p. 12, 13.

In Magallanes voyage about the world, the King of the Island of Bacchian sent
the King of Spain two dead birds of a strange shape: Birds of God. Pur. Pil. v.
1. p. 44.

In Sofala in the East Indies is a kind of bird called Minga, green, Idem. p.
1546.

CHAP. VI. The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Beasts, and
Serpents.
WHilst Sir Thomas Row, our English Ambassador, was at the great Moguls Court,
he saw many stately Elephants brought before the Emperor: some of which being
Lord-Elephants (as they called them) had their chains, bells, and furniture of
gold, and silver, each of them having eight, or ten other Elephants waiting on
him: they were some twelve companies in all, and as they passed by, they all
bowed down before the King very handsomely. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 550.

Though these Elephants be the largest of all beasts, yet are they very
tractable, unless at such times when they are mad through lust: their pace is
about three miles an hour; of all Beasts they are most sure of foot, so that
they never stumble, or fall to endanger their rider: they lie down, and rise
again at pleasure, as other beasts do; they are most docible creatures, doing
almost whatsoever their Keeper commands them. If he bid one of them afright a
man, he will make toward him, as if he would tread him in pieces; and yet
when he comes at him, do him no hurt: If he bid him abuse, or disgrace a man,
he will take dirt, or kennel-water in his trunk, and dash it in his face, etc.
Their trunks are long, grissely snouts hanging down betwixt their teeth, which
(as a hand) they make use of upon all occasions. Some Elephants the great Mogul
keeps for execution of malefactors; who being brought to suffer death by that
mighty beast, if the Keeper bid him dispatch the offender presently, he will
immediately with his foot pash him in pieces: If he bid him torture him slowly,
he will break his joints by degrees one after another, as men are broken upon
the wheel.

An English Merchant of good credit being at Adsmeer (a City where Mogul then
was) saw a great Elephant daily brought through the Marketplace, where an
Hearb-woman used to give him an handful of herbs as he passed by. This
Elephant afterward being mad, brake his chains, and took his way through the
Marketplace; the people being affrighted, hasted to secure themselves, amongst
whom was this Hearb-woman, who through fear, and haste, forgot her little
child. The Elephant coming to the place where she usually sat, stopped, and
seeing a child lie about her herbs, took it up gently with his Trunk, and
without harm, laid it upon a stall hard by, and then proceeded in his furious
course. Idem. p. 1472. The Males Testicles lie about his forehead: the Females
teates are betwixt her fore legs; they carry their young two years in their
wombs: conceive but once in seven years: they are thirty years before they come
to their full growth, and fulfill the accustomed age of a man before they dye.

As Pyrrus King of Epyrus was assaulting the City of Argos, one of Elephants
called Nicon. i. e. Conquering, being entered the City, perceiving that his
governor was stricken down to the ground from his back with terrible blows;
ran upon them that came back upon him, overthrowing friends, and foes, one in
another neck, till at length, having found the body of his slain Master, he
lift him up from the ground with his trunk, and carrying him upon his two
tushes, returned back with great fury, treading all under feet whom he found
in his way. Plut. In vita Pyrri.

The Lion has the Jackall for his Usher, which is a little black, Lion as
chief Hunt gives diligent ear, following for his advantage: If the Jackall set
up his chase before the Lion comes in, he howles out mainly, and then the Lion
seizes on it, making a grumbling noise, whilst his servant stands by barking,
and when the Lion has done, the Jackall feeds on the relics. Idem. p. 1575.
See more afterward. Example seventeen.

The Panther has a very sweet smell, so that other Beasts are much taken
therewith, but they are terrified with the ugly deformity of his Plin. not.
Hist. L. 8 C. 17.

The Rhynoceros is so called because of the horn in his nose: he is a large
beast, as big as our fairest Ox in England: His skin lies plated, Bengala,
where are most store of them.

The Camelopardalus is the highest of Beasts, so that a man on horseback may
ride upright under his belly, his neck is long, so that he P. Pil. p. 1381. He
is also called a Jaraff.

In India is a certain beast called a Buffelo, which is very large, has a
thick and smooth skin, but without hair: She gives good milk, and Idem. p. 1469.

In the same Country also are certain wild Goats, whose horns are Pur. Pil. p.
472.

In the Country of Indostan in the East Indies, are large white Apes, Pur.
Pilgrimag. p. 1475.

The Camelion is of the shape, and bigness of a Lizzard, it is a deformed P.
Pil. p. 848.

There was lately found in Catalunia, in the Mountains of Cerdania, a certain
Monster, that had humane shape as far as the waste, and downwards and a mouth
of extraordinary bigness, wherewith he made a noise like a Bull: His picture
was sent by Don John of Austria (now Governor of the Low Countries) to the
King of Spain, and afterward many Coppies thereof. were drawn, and sent abroad
by Ambassadors, and other persons to several Princes, and States in Europe.
Hist. of this Iron age.

Brasile is a certain Beast called a Tamandua, or Ant-Bear, of the bigness of
a great dog, more round than long, and the tail above twice so long as the
body, and so full of hair that under it he shelters himself from rain, heat,
cold, and wind. His head is small; and has a thin snout: his mouth round, with
a tongue three quarters of a yard long: he is diligent in seeking Ant-hills,
which he teareth with his claws, and then thrusts in his long tongue, upon
which the Ants run, and when it is full he licks them in, and this is all his
food. Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1301.

Armadillo is of the bigness of a Pig, and of a white color: It has a long
snout, and the body is covered with shells like Plates, wherewith they are armed:
for they are so hard that no arrow will pierce them except in the Flanks, where
they are softer: their flesh is good to eat, they dig holes in the ground with
their snouts, in which they lie. Idem.

The Porcupine has bristles, or quils, white and black, of a span

The Civet Cat exceeds the Castor for bigness, her head is little,

The Lions in Afric, are more fierce than in colder Countries; here England,
which from the snout to the top of the tail, contained one and twenty foot in
length. They engender backwards as do Camels, Elephants, Rhinoceroses, Ounces,
and Tigers. They spare such men as prostrate themselves to them, and prey
rather upon men than women, and not at all on Infants except compelled by
hunger. His tail is his Scepter, by which he expresses his passion. He
shrinks not at danger, except some covert of woods hides him from witnesses,
and then he will take the benefit of flight, which otherwise he seems to
disdain.

The Hyaena has no joints in her neck, and therefore stirrs not her

In Africa are many wild Asles, whereof one male has many females, suspicious
female, prevent him not by bringing forth in a close place.

The Dabuh is a simple Creature, like to a Wolf, but that his legs

The Zebra is a very beautiful Creature, resembling a curiously

In Sofala there is a certain creature called Inhazaras, as big as a hog, and
somewhat like, with thin and black hair, having on his hinder feet five fingers
like unto a man's, and four on his forefeet; they live merely upon Ants, by
thrusting their tongues which are two spans and an half long into an Ant-hill,
whereon the Ants running, they pull them into their mouths, and so eat them:
some call them Ant-Bears, Pur. Pil.

There is in Africa a certain monster called Pongo, in the whole Idem. v. 2.
p. 982.

In Congo there is a strange Creature as big as a Ram, that has wings like a
Dragon, a long tail, and great chaps, with diverse rows of Idem. p. 1003.

In Africa there is a beast called a Dabuk, in bigness, and shape resembling
Idem. p. 847.

In the Kingdom of Mexico there are Kine, with bunches on their backs, about
the bigness of our bulls, having little horns, and more

Other Creatures there are as big as horses, which the Spaniards for P. Pil. v.
4. p. 1561.

In Virginia is a beast called a Possown, the female whereof has Idem. p. 1772.

In Socotera are Sheep, whose tails weigh twenty eight pounds a piece,

In the Great Mogols Country there are Asses with horns, whereof Unicorns
horn. Idem. p. 436.

Most certain it is that the Irish Cows, will not give down their milk, skin of
the dead Calf must be stuffed with straw, and set by them. Camb. Brit. of
Ireland. p. 1145.

In the Island of Orknay the Ewes are of such fecundity, that they Description
of Scotland.

There are three sorts of Camels: the first sort are gross, and tall
Dromedaries, unfit for burdens, but they excel in swiftness, so that in the
space of one day they will travel one hundred miles, and will so continue for
eight, or ten days together, with very little provender; and they will abstain
from drink eight, ten, and sometimes fifteen days together, without any
inconvenience, as they travel through the Deserts.

Musk is taken from a little reddish beast, that they beat with many Pur. Pil.
v. 2. p. 1500.

Amongst the Blackmoores, there is a strange beast called a Carbuncle, Pur.
Pil. v. 1. p. 416.

Abassia are Kine with horns like unto Hearts horns: Others there be that have
but one horn in the midst of their foreheads of about a span and an half long,
turning upward. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1495.

There is in the Country of Mexico a kind of sheep, which all that of their
Lambs is best: Of their Wool the Indians make cloth some courser, other finer
like half silk; they also make Carpets, and Coverings, and other exquisite
works of it, which last long, and have a very good gloss; they die it into
sundry colors: upon these the Spaniards carry their bars of silver; one of
these sheep carrying about an hundred and fifty pound weight.

In the stomach, or belly of this beast, is found the Bezar's stone; P. Pil. v.
3. p. 969.

There is in Italy the Tarantula (a kind of Serpent) the venom Raimunds
Mercu. Ital.

Examples of Dogs love to their Masters.
When the Athenians quit their City, and betook themselves to Xerxes his
invasion of Greece, Xantippus, the Father of Pericles had a Dog, which for
sorrow that his Master had left him behind him, cast himself after him into
the Sea, swimming still by the Galleys side wherein his Master was, till he
came to the. Isle of Salamina, where so soon as the poor Cur landed, his breath
failed him, and he dyed presently. Plut. In vita Themist.

CHAP. VII. Admirable Works done by the Art of man.
PRotogenes the Rhodian, an exquisite Painter, bestowed seven years Apelles
beheld, he stood amazed at the excellency of the workmanship, so that for a
while he could not speak, but afterward he said, This is an admirable work,
and of huge labor, yet he wants an Orator to extol his workmanship to the
skies. When King Demetrius besiedged the City of Rhodes, he took the suburbs,
and in them this picture, whereupon the Citizens sent on him, requesting him
not to deface it; to whom he answered, That he would sooner burn the Picture
of his Father, than hurt a piece of such admirable workmanship. Diod. Sic. Plut.

Glasses malleable.
Anno Christi 1610. amongst other rare Presents sent from the Sophy of Persia,
to the King of Spain, were six drinking glasses so exquisitely tempered, that
they could not be broken. Turk. Hist. p. 1273.

Stone-henge described.
About six miles from Salisbury, upon the plains, is to be seen a Cicero
calls insanam substructionem. For within the circuit of a ditch there are
erected in the manner of a Crown, in three ranks, or courses one within
another, certain mighty, and unwrought stones, whereof some are twenty eight
foot high, and seven broad; upon the heads of which, others like overtwhart
pieces do bear, and rest cross-wise with tenants, and mortesses, so as the
whole frame seems to hang, whereof its commonly called Stone-henge. Camb.
Brit.

In Westmerland, hard by Shape, there be huge stones in form of Pyramids, some
of them nine foot high, and fourteen foot thick, ranged directly as it were in
a row for a mile in length, with equal distance almost between them. Camb.
Brit. p. 762.

Mausolus his Tomb described.
Artimesia Queen of Halicarnassus, when her husband Mausolus dyed, built him a
stately Tomb, accounted for the rare workmanship, and costly magnificence one
of the worlds Wonders. It was five and twenty cubits high, and supported with
six and thirty curious pillars, of which Martial thus writes.

Aere nam vacuo pendentia Mausolaea,
laudibus immodicis Cares ad astra ferunt.
The Mausolaea hanging in the sky,
the men of Caria's praises Deifie.
Thomas Row was Ambassador there, the Great Mogul built a stately Monument for
his Father: it was about twenty years in building, and three thousand men
working daily at it: it was built square, three quarters of a mile in compass:
it was made with seven heights one above another, and each narrower than other,
till you come to the top where the hearse is: At the outward Gate is a most
stately Palace, and Gardens walled about, at least three miles in compass; all
built at a vast charge. Pur. Pil. p. 226.

Herbert, who saw it afterward, thus describes it. It consists (says he) of
four large squares, each about three hundred paces long, the matter is
freestone polished, having at each Angle, a small Tower of party colored
Marble. Ten foot higher is another Tarras, on each side beautified with three
such Towers. The third Gallery has two Towers, on each side. The fourth, one.
The fifth half, and a small square Gallery mounting to a Royal Pyree, within
which is the Mummy of Ecbar; bedded in a Coffin of pure Gold. The whole
structure is built in the midst of a spacious and curious Garden, surrounded
with a wall of red stone, and planted with beautiful and odoriferous flowers.

Porsennah's Tomb described.
Porsenna King of Hetruria, not far from the City of Clusium, built for himself
a Monument of square stone, each side of it was three Basis there was an
inextricable Labyrinth, into which whosoever adventured without a clue, could
find no passage out. Upon this square he erected five Pyramids, four in the
corners, and one in the midst; in the bottom they were seventy five foot
broad, and each of them one hundred and fifty foot high, on the top was one
brass circle, and covering for them all, from which there hung bells fastened
with chains, which being moved with the wind gave a sound a far off: Upon this
brazen circle stood other four Pyramids, each of them one hundred foot high;
and upon them (being covered with another plain) were again erected five other
Pyramids, the height whereof my Author was ashamed to name: so foolishly did
he waste the wealth of his Kingdom* that in the end the commendation of the
Artificer should be the greatest. Pliny out of Varro; and Greaves out of him.

In the Great Moguls Country, from Agra to Lahor (which are the two chief
Cities in this Empire) is about four hundred English miles: The P. Pil. v. 2.
p. 1468.

The Trees are Mulberry trees. And in all this way, ever and anon, are Inns
built by several Kings, and great men, for the entertainment of strangers: In
which you may have a chamber for your self, room for your horse, and
horse-meat, but little for your servant: when a man has taken up his lodging,
no other may dispossess him. In the morning about break a day, all make ready
to depart, at which time the gates are opened, and none suffered to depart
sooner for fear of thieves. p. 520.

The first invention of Printing.
Laurence Jans, a rich Citizen of Harlem in the Low-Countrys, walking forth one
day into the neighboring Woods for recreation, began four lines which he beat
with Ink, and printed them upon Paper, wherewith he much joyed, and determined
to find out another kind of Ink more fastening, and holding, and so with his
Kinsman Thomas Peterse, found out another way to print whole Sheets, but of one
side only, which are yet to be seen in the said town: afterward he changed
his Letters of Wood into Lead, and after that into Tin, and so by degrees this
famous Art of Printing grew to perfection. Belg. Commonwealth. p. 57.

Some say that John Guttenberg of Strasburg, was the first Inventer of it, Anno
Christi 1440. In which City he first practiced it, and removing from thence to
Mentz, there perfected it. They say that Tullies Offices was the first book
that ever was printed. P. Ramus Schol. Math. L. 2.

It does with wonderful celerity convey learning from one Country, and age, to
another.

Imprimit ille die, quantum vix scribitur anno. The most famous Printers were.
Aldus Manutius, and after him Paulus his son in Venice. In France Crispinus,
Henry Stevens, father to Charles; and Charles to Robert; Robert to Henry, and
Henry to Paul, all Printers.

Christopher Plantine of Antwerp, was a most famous and learned Printer.

Frobenius, that was Erasmus his faithful Printer.

Daniel Bombergus, an excellent Printer of the Hebrew Bible, and many other
Hebrew books, etc.

The first Invention of Guns.
A German Friar of the Order of St. Francis, called Bertholdus Swart,
Venetians, who, having been often vanquished by the Genowayes, did by the help
of these Bombards, or Guns, give them a notable discomfiture. Anno Christi
1380. Bucholtz.

At Middleburg in Zealand, in the Steeple of the Abby-Church, there four small
ones which serve for the Chymes. Belg. Commonwealth. p. 162.

A Description of the situation of Utrecht in the Low Countries.
Utrecht in the Low Countries, is so situated, that one may go to what Town he
please of fifty, that lie round about it, in one day. And Utrecht, he may dine
at any one of twenty six Towns, where he pleases, and return to his own house
to Supper. Idem. p. 200.

Trajan built a Bridge over the River Ister, or Danow, containing twenty
Arches, each Arch being one hundred and fifty foot high, sixty

Ancus Martius, the fourth King of Rome, built a wooden Bridge over Tybur, yet
without nails, or pins, so that in times of war it might be taken down:
Afterward Aemilius the Consul built it of stone: And Lastly Antoninus Pius the
Emperor built it of Marble.

FINIS.
Soli Deo Gloria.
A TABLE OF THE Principal things contained IN THE Geographical part of this
Book.
A General description of Asia. Page 1. A more particular description of it.
Page 3. Cappadocia described. Page 3. Galatia described. Page 3. Pontus and
Bithinia described. Page 3. Paphlagonia described. Page 4. Asia propria
described. Page 4. Phrygia major described. Page 4. Phrygia minor described.
Page 4. Jonia described. Page 5. Doris described. Page 5. Pamphilia described.
Page 5. Armenia minor described. Page 5. Canaan described. Page 5. Galilee
described. Page 6. Samaria described. Page 7. Syria described. Page 12. Persian
Empire described. Page 14. Armenia major described. Page 22. Media described.
Page 23. Parthia described. Page 24. Hircania described. Page 24. Arabia
described. Page 24. Tartaria described. Page 25. Cyprus described. Page 27.
Rhodes described. Page 28. Malabar described. Page 28. Zeilan described. Page
29. Coromandel described. Page 30. Socotera described. Page 31. Narsinga
described. Page 32. Malacca described. Page 33. Siam described. Page 33. Pegu
described. Page 35. Sumatra described. Page 36. Java major described. Page 36.
Celebes Islands described. Page 37. Molucco Islands. Bandaneza's Islands.
Borneo. Japan.
Page 37. China described. Page 38. Industan described. Page 43. Bengala
described. Page 49. Cambaia described. Page 50. Philippine Islands described.
Page 50. Mauritius Island described. Page 51. A general description of Africa.
Page 51. Affrican Islands described. Page 54. A more particular description of
Africa. Page 54. Egypt described. Page 54. Barbary described. Page 61. Tunis
described. Page 62. Algier described. Page 62. Fesse and Morocco described.
Page 63. Numidia and Libia described. Page 65. Land of Negroes described. Page
66. Country of the Mandingos described. Page 67. Aethiopia inferior described.
Page 69. Aian. described. Zandzibar described. Cafraria. described.
Page 69. Cape of Good Hope described. Page 69. Sofala described. Page 71.
Monomopata described. Page 71. Congo, or Manicongo described. Page 71. Loango
described. Page 72. Aethiopia superior described. Page 73. Islands in the
Red Sea described. Page 76. Madagascar described. Page 77. Mohelia described.
Page 78. St. Hellens Island described. Page 78. St. Thomas Island described.
Page 78. Princes Island described. Page 79. Cape verde described. Page 79. Maio
Island described. Page 79. Canary Islands described. Page 80. Malta described.
Page 87.80. A general Description of Europe. Page 81. The Islands in Europe
described. Page 84. Samothracia described. Lemnos described.
Page 84. Lesbos. described. Chios. described. Euboea. described. Sporades.
described. Cyclades. described. Crete. described.
Page 85. Cythera. described. Strophades. described. Zant. described.
Echidnades. described. Cephalenia. described. Corfu. described. Scicily.
described.
Page 86. Corsica. described. Sardinia. described.
Page 87. Majorca. described. Minorca. described. Cales. described.
Page 88. England described. Page 88. Wales described. Page 106. Scotland
described. Page 106. Ireland described. Page 108. Isle of Man described. Page
111. Azores Islands described. Page 111. Spain described. Page 112. Portugal
described. Page 115. Pirenean Mountains described. Page 116. France described.
Page 116. The Alps described. Page 121. Italy described, Page 121. The Roman
Triumphs described. Page 129. Belgia or the Netherlands described. Page 138.
Germany described. Page 142. Switzerland described. Page 144. Bohemia
described. Page 146. Denmark described. Page 148. Norway described. Page 149.
Swethland described. Page 150. Muscovy described. Page 151. The State of the
Emperor described. Page 153. The Permians and Samoeds described. Page 154.
Lapland described. Page 154. Poland described. Page 155. Hungary described.
Page 157. Dacia described. Page 157. Sclavonia described. Page 158. Greece
described. Page 158. Peloponesus described. Page 159. Achaia described. Page
160. Epirus. described. Albania, described. Macedonia. described. Thessaly.
described.
Page 161. Migdonia. described. Thracia. described.
Page 162. The Turkish Empire described. Page 166. America described Page 169.
Mexico, or New Spain described. Page 171. Quivira. described. Nova Albion.
described. Florida. described. Virginia. described.
Page 172. Florida more fully described. Page 173. Peruana, and the Countries
therein described. Page 174. Magellanick Streights described. Page 180.
American Islands described. Page 180. Jamica. described. Cuba. described.
Bermudae. described.
Page 182. Hispaniola described. Page 183. Newfound-land described. Page 184.
New-Scotland described. Page 185. Groenland described. Page 185. Spaniards
cruelty to the poor Indians. Page 186. Examples of the wonderful works of God
in the Creatures. Page 191. Of strange Stones. Page 191. A moving hill. Page
192. ex. 8. Merlins Cave. Page 192. ex. 9. Earth turning wood into stone. Page
192. ex. 10. Wood, and stones with Lozenges in them. Page 193. ex. 13. Stones
with stars in them* Page 193. ex. 14.17. Burning Mountains. Page 193. ex. 15.
Of a City petrified. Page 193. Of strange Trees, Herbs, Plants, and Gums. Page
194. Of strange Fountains, Rivers, and Waters. Page 202. Of strange Fishes.
Page 207. Of strange Fowls, and Birds. Page 212. Of strange Beasts and
Serpents. Page 215. Of strange, costly, and stupendous works done by the Art
of Man. Page 221.
The chiefest Cities in the World, mentioned and described.
Cities in Asia.
NIce, where the Council was held. Page 3. Nicomedia. Page 3. Apamia, now
Bursa. Page 3^ Chalcedon, where a Council was held Page 3. Troy described Page
4^ Cyzicus Page 4^ Halicarnassus Page 5^ The Chief Cities in Canaan Page 6^
Jerusalem described. Page 7. Nineve described Page 10. Babylon described. Page
10. Tower of Babylon described. Page 12. Bagdat described. Page 12. Antioch
described. Damascus described. Aleppo described. Tripolis described.
Page 13. Scandaroon now Alexandretta Page 14. Lar described. Page 15. Shyraz
described. Page 16. Persepolis described. Spahawn described.
Page 17. Casbine described. Page 20. Tauris described. Derbent described.
Hyspaan described.
Page 21. Casan described. Page 22. Callecut described. Page 29. Negapatan
described. Page 30. Goa described. Amadavar described.
Page 31. Ormus described. Bisnagar described. Mesulipatan described.
Page 32. Malacca described. Patania described.
Page 33. Pegu described. Page 34. Bantam described. Page 36. Meacco described.
Page 37. Fucata described. Page 38. Pequin described. Nanquin described.
Page 39. Quinsay described. Page 41. Lahore described. Page 47. Brampore
described. Fettipore described. Candahor described. Mandow described.
Page 48. Surat described. Agra described. Asmeere described.
Page 49. Grand Cairo described. Page 55. Alexandria described. Page 57.
Rosetto described. Page 58. Chanca described. Page 58. Tropolis in Tunis Page
62. Tunis Constantina Page Bugia
Page 62. Algier described. Page 62. Fesse described. Page 64. Sella described.
Morocco described.
Page 65. Teffet Page 66. Suaquen described. Page 74. Amara in Aethiopia
described. Page 74. Saba, etc. described. Page 76. Sues described. Page 76.
Bernice described. Page 76. Siracuse described. Page 87. London described. Page
92. Westminster described. Page 93. Salisbury described. Page 96. Bristow
described. Page 97. Wel^s described. Page 98. Bath described. Page 98. Excester
described. Winchester described. Chichester described.
Page 99. Canterbury described. Rochester described. Gloucester described.
Page 100. Oxford described. Page 100. Eli described. Lincoln described.
Norwich. described.
Page 101. Coventry described. Worcester described.
Page 102. Lichfield described. Westchester described.
Page 103. Hereford described. York described.
Page 104. Durham described. Page 105. Carlisle described. Page 105. Cities in
Scotland. Page 107. Cities in Ireland. Page 109. Sivil described. Page 113.
Granata described. Page 113. Toledo described. Page 114. Escurial described.
Page 114. Lisbon described. Page 115. Paris described. Page 118. Geneva
described. Page 120. Ferrara described. Page 122. Rome described. Page 123,
125. Mantua described. Page 124. Genoa described. Page 125. Venice described.
Page 132. Padua described. Page 134. Millan described. Page 135. Naples
described. Page 135. Florence described. Page 136. Leige^ described. Page 138.
Lovaine described. Page 139. Bruxels described. Antwerp described.
Page 139. Leiden described. Machlin described.
Page 141. The Cities in Germany described. Page 143, etc. Prague described.
Page 147. Mosco described. Page 151. Constantinople described. Page 162. The
Turks Seraglio described. Page 164. Caxamalca described. Page 176.
Stones, Precious-stones, Minerals.
Diamonds where gotten Page 50.98. Gold how gotten: Page 180. Pearls where
gotten: Page 180.181. Strange Stones: Page 191. Amber how it grows: Page 193.
ex. 16. Whence all sorts of precious stones come: Page 193. ex. 18.
Trees, Herbs, Plants, and Gums, strange.
A famous Pine Tree. Page 5. Cedars of Libanus: Page 14. A strange walk with
trees: Page 48. Ebony where it grows: Page 51. Sensitive Trees: Page 68.
Resurrection Trees: Page 71. A very profitable Tree: Page 171. Strange
Fig Trees: Page 177. Of Date-Trees: Page 194. ex. 1. Balm Tree: Page 194. ex.
2. Cotton Trees: Page 194. ex. 4. Cynamon Trees: Page 194. ex. 5. Arbore de
Ray's: Page 195. ex. 6. Arbore Triste. Page 195. ex. 7. Herba sentida: Page
195. ex. 8. Pepper: Ginger: Cloves:
Page 195. ex. 9, 10, 11. Nutmegs: Gum-lack: Amber-greese:
Page 196. ex. 12, 13, 14. Addad: Palm Trees: Frankincense: Manna: Mastick:
Page 196. ex. 15, 16, (etc. Spunges how gotten. Page 196. ex. 20. Resurrection
Tree: Page 196. ex. 21. An Oak yiedling water. Page 196. ex. 23. Aloes: Indico:
Page 197. ex. 23, 24. A Tree whose root is a worm. Page 198. ex. 25. Saffron:
Palm Trees: Basilisco: Assa-faetida:
Page 198. ex^ 26, etc. Benjamin. Page 199. Coquo Trees admirable: Page 199.
Plantane-Trees: Cedars: Palmita Trees: Manguy:
Page 200. Tunals and Cochenille: Jack, or Giack: Ananas: Duroyen: Arec Tree:
Page 201. Palmeto Trees: Page 201. Hawthorn Tree: Papyri:
Page 202. Sergasso: Page 79. Coxscomb: Page 79. Alimos: Page 85. Frankincense:
Page 25. Aloes Socotrina: Page 54.
Fountains strange.
A Fountain that makes drunk. Page 4. Lake of Maeris described. Page 61.
Fountains hot. Page 88.111.181.205. Salt how made. Page 92. Bituminous
Fountain. Page 181, 182. Hell Kettles. Page 202. Fountains turning wood into
stone. Page p. 202. ex. 2. p. 203. ex. 6. p. 205. ex. 37. Fountains that ebb,
and flow. Page p. 202. e. 3, 4. p. 203. ex. 7. p. 204. e. 26, 27. Fountains
hurtful to Beasts. Page 202. ex. 5. Fountains hot. Page p. 203. ex. 8.10. p.
205. ex. 39. Water turned into stone. Page 203. ex. 9. Strange Meers. Page 203.
e. 11, 12. p. 204. e. 24. Fountain of Oil. Fountain of Pitch.
Page 203. e. 14, 15. Fountain that makes Oxen white. Page 204* e. 16. River
that makes sheep black. Page 204. e. 17. Fountain of Jupiter. Page 204. e. 18.
Fountain of the Sun. Page 204. e. 19. Sabbatical River. Page 204. e. 20.
Fountain of Job. Page 204. e. 21. Water that causes black milk. Page 204. e.
22. A swelling Lake. A Fountain like Vinegar. Fountains like Wine.
Page 204. e. 23, 28, 29, 30. Other strange Fountains. Page 205. River hot.
Page 205. e. 36. A River that breeds Flies. Page 206. e. 40. A Fountain like
Milk. Page 206. e. 44. Bone-Well. Page 206. e. 45. A strange noise in the
water. Page 207. e. 46. Fountain Chymaera. Flax that is purified by fire. Two
Rivers that mix not.
Page 207. e. 47. (etc.
Strange Fishes.
A man Fish. Page 207. e. 1. A woman Fish. Page 208. e. 2. Meer-maids. Page
208. e. 3.5. Meer-men. Page 208. e. 4.6. Fishes like children. Page 209. e. 7.
Torpedo. Page 209. e. 8. p. 211. e. 22. River Horses. A very strange Fish. Toad
Fishes. Cuttle Fishes. Flying Fishes.
Page 209. e. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Of the VVhale, Swordfish, and Thresher. Page
210. e. 14. Shark. Sea Tortoise. Eagle Fish. Sea Unicorn.
Page 210. e. 15, 16, 17 18. Sea-Cow. Page 211. e, ^9.23 Sea-Spider. Page 211.
e. 20. Of the Briese, or Trade wind. Page 211. e. ^2. Ox Fishes. Page 211. e.
24. Shining Flies. Page 212. e. 25. Shining Sea, Page 212. e. 26.
Fowls, and Birds strange.
The Stalker. Page 69. In Brasile. Page 179. Cholca. Page 212. e. 1.
Claik-Geese. Page 212. e. 2. Storks. Page 212. e. 3, 4. Awaken Birds.
Ostriches. Strange Bats. Cantharides. A huge Fowl.
Page 213.5, 7, 8, 9, 10. Vulturs: Penguins: Puffins: Dodos: Dotterels:
Page 214. e. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Soland Geese: Strange Birds: Mingas:
Page 215. ex. 16, 17, 18.
Beasts strange.
Jackals: Page 14. Crocodiles: Page 36. Elephants: Page 46. Baboons: Page 68.
Horse Tails highly prized. Page 72. A strange Beast in Congo. Page 72. Musoli:
Page 87. A very profitable Beast. A strange Hare
Page 172. A strange Beast in Virginia. Page 173. A strange Beast in Peru. Page
176. The Beast Pigritia. Page 178. Elks described: Page 179. Strange Boars:
described Acuti: described Pacas: described Carague: described Armadillo:
described
Page 179. A Beast like a Squirrel of a delicate Furr: Page 180. Elephants:
Page 215. ex. 1, 2, 3, 4. Lions: Page 216. ex. 4, 17. Panthers: Rhynoceros:
Camelopardalus: Bufelo's:
Page 217. ex. 5, 6, 7, 8. Wild Goats: White Apes: Camelions:
Page 217. ex. 9, 10, 11. A strange Monster: Page 217. ex. 12. Ant-Bears: Page
218. ex. 13, 22. Armadillo's: Porcupines: Civit-Cats: Hyaena's:
Page 218. ex. 14, 15, 16, 18. Asses: Page 218. ex. 19 Dabub: Zebra: Pongoes: A
strange Beast: Strange Kine: Strange Sheep: Possowns: Asses with horns:
Page 219. ex. 20, 25, 21, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 30 Sheep with great tails: Page
219. ex. 29. Irish Cows: Page 219. ex. 31. Fruitful Ews: Camels. Musk:
Carbuncles:
Page 220. ex. 3^, 33, 34, 35, 37 Kine with Harts-horns. Page 220. ex. 36.
Strange Sheep. Page 220. ex. 37 Bezar stones: Tarantula's: A Dogs love to his
Master.
Page 221. ex. 37, 38 39
Admirable works made by Man. Famous Temples.
Bellona's Temple: Page 3 Jupiters Temple: Page 4 Diana's Temple described.
Page 5 Hierusalems Temple described. Page 8 Priapus Temple: Page 12 Jupitur
Belus's Temple: Page 11 Temples in Pegu. Page 35 Temples in Japan. Page 38
Temples of China: Page 39 Temple in Fesse: Page 64 Temple of the Sun: Page 177
Obelisks, Pillars, and Pyramids.
Obelisk of Semiramis: Page 10 A strange Pillar of heads: Page 19 Colossus at
Rhodes described. Page 28 Egyptian Pharos described. Page 55 Egyptian Pyramids
described. Page 58 Egyptian Mummies described. Page 59 Stones like Pyramids:
Page 222. ex. 4.
Strange, and Stupendous works made by the Art of Man.
The Fortress of Cusco. Page 175. Admirable high ways in Peru: Page 177. The
Incas Garden. Page 177. A rare Picture: Page 221. e. 1. Glasses Malleable:
Stone-heng described. Mausolu's Tomb: Moguls Tomb:
Page 222. e. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7. Porsennahs Tomb: Admirable walk: Printing when,
and how invented:
Page 223. e. 7, 8, ^. Most famous Printers: Guns, when and how invented.
Page 224. e. 10. A huge Bell. Page ^^4. e. 11. Strange Bridges. Page 225. e.
13, 14.
Judgments strange.
Cities Swallowed by Earthquakes* Page 4. People plagued by Sparrows, Mice,
Frogs, Fleas, Grasshoppers, etc. Page 23. Plague by Conies. Page 80. Plague by
Lemmers like Mice. Page 149. Plague by Ants. Page 184. Plague by an Hurricane.
Page 184.
FINIS.

