DIOCESAN CHURCHES NOT Yet Discovered in the Primitive Times.

OR A Defense of the Answer to Dr. Stillingfleets Allegations out of Antiquity
for such Churches.

Against the Exceptions offered in the Preface to a late Treatise called a
Vindication of the Primitive Church.

WHERE What is further produced out of Scripture and Ancient Authors for
Diocesan Churches is also Discussed.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns at the
lower end of Cheap Side near Mercers Chapel 1682.

Errata.
PAge 59. l. 4. r. Sirmond. p. 67. l. 33. r. to. p. 76. r. Euodius. p. 80. l.
14. r. oratorum. p. 86. l. 16. r. Congregations. p. 87. l. 27. r. Bishops. p.
95. l. 2. r. (...), p. ult. l. 9. r. less. besides mis-accenting some Greek
words, and other mis-pointings:

THE PREFACE.
DIssenters are accused of Schism by some of this Church, both these and the
other are branded not only as Schismatics, but as Heretics by the Papists;
who upon this account judge us unworthy to live, and had actually destroyed
both together, if God in Mercy had not discovered their devilish Plot. The
discovery gave them some interruption, and put them upon an after-game, to
retrieve what had miscarryed. And this was so to divide us, as that our selves
should help them in their design to ruin us all, when they had less hopes to
do it alone. In pursuance hereof such influence they have had upon too many, as
to raise in them a greater aversation to Dissenters than to Papists. These the
Conspirators count their own, and think they may well do so, since they are too
ready to concur with them in their design to exterminate those, who are true
Protestants in every point, and differ no more from this Church than those in
France do, who by the same Counsels are at this time in extreme danger to be
utterly extirpated. Others are so far prevailed with as to make use of one of
the sharpest weapons they have against dissenting Protestants, and that is the
charge of Schism, lately renewed and reinforced.

In these hard circumstances, while we do what we can against the common Enemy,
we are put to ward off the blows of such as (notwithstanding some present
distemper) we will count our Friends. Amongst other expedients, sufficient to
secure us against this attaque, it was thought not unuseful, to answer the
allegations out of Antiquity, concerning two points, wherein only the Ancients
were made use of to our prejudice, viz. 1. For Diocesan Churches, and then 2ly.
Against the Election of Bishops by the people in the primitive times. Something
was performed and published in reference to both these in a late discourse. One
half of which, where the latter is discussed, concerning the popular Elections
of Bishops, has yet passed without any exception that I can see or hear of;
yet this alone is enough to defend us against the aforesaid charge: For those
who will not make the primitive Church Schismatical, must not condemn any as
Schismatics for declining such Bishops as that Church would not own.

Against the former part of the Discourse, concerning Diocesan Churches, some
exception has been made, but very little; a late Author in his Preface to a
Treatise of another Subject, has touched about 5 pages in 40. but so as he
has done them no more harm, than another, who to find one fault therein, runs
himself into two or three, about (...), rendered indefinitely according to the
mind of the Author who uses it, and the most common use of it.

I disparage not the Gentleman's Learning who attaques me in his Preface, he
shows that which, (with answerable care and Judgment,) might be serviceable in
a cause that deserves it. But much more than he shows, would not be enough to
support what he would establish. And he might have forborne the vilifying of
those, who are known to be Masters of much more valueable Learning, than
appears in either of us. The neglect of some accurateness in little things,
remote from the merits of the cause, in one who is not at leisure to catch
flies, is no argument that he is destitute of Learning.

I complain not of his proceeding with me; but am obliged by him, that he
treats me not with so much contempt as he does others, who less deserve it. I
wish he had dealt more temperately with M. B. it would have been more for his
reputation, and no prejudice to his undertaking; a good cause, when it has a
sufficient Advocate, does not need any undecent supplements.

After I have cleared my Discourse front this Gentleman's exceptions, I thought
it not impertinent to show what in reason cannot be counted competent proofs of
Diocesan Churches; that if any will pursue this debate farther, instead of
opposing us, they may not beat the Air, and amuse those that enquire after
truth; with what is insignificant. Withal I have given an account of what other
allegations out of Scripture and Antiquity this Author has brought in other
parts of his Treatise for such Churches; and showed that there is no evidence
in them, as to the purpose they are alleged for.

In short, I find nothing in this Author, or any other before him, which may
satisfy a judicious and impartial man, that in the two first Ages of
Christianity any Bishop had more than one particular Church or Congregation for
his proper charge; or that in the third Age, there was any Bishop which had a
Church consisting of more than are in some one of our Parishes, unless it was
the Church of Rome (nor is there sufficient evidence produced for that:) Or
that in the middle of the fourth Age there were 4 Churches, each of which
comprised more than could assemble in one place (though if they had contained
more, that might be far enough from making them Diocesans;) Or that afterward,
within the time of the four first General Councils, where there were several
Churches belonging to one Bishop, he did exercise jurisdiction over them alone,
or only by himself and his Delegates. It will be time enough to censure us as
Schismatics for declining Diocesan Churches, when they have made it appear,
that there was such, in the best ages of Christianity: (which not appearing,
the censure falls upon the primitive Christians, from whom it will slide of
upon themselves.) If they will forbear us, till this be performed, we need
desire no more. Unless we may prevail with those who sincerely profess
themselves Protestants, to regard the securing themselves and their Religion
from the destructive designs of the Papists, more than those things which are
not properly the concern either of Protestant or of Religion.

As for those who prefer the Papists before Dissenters, and revile these as
worse, though they differ in no one point of Religion from other true
Protestants: We need not wonder if we meet with no better treatment from them,
then from declared Papists; since by such preference they too plainly declare
the Protestant Religion to be worse than Popery, in their account. The
following sheets have lain by me many Months, and had done so still; but that
the importunity of some, and the misrepresenting of my silence by others,
forced me to publish them.

Diocesan Churches not yet discovered in the Primitive times.
TO show that many Presbyters in one Church was not enough to prove it a
Diocesan, I I made it manifest that it was usual in the ancient Church, to
multiply Presbyters, beyond what we count necessary; (not beyond what is
necessary, as it is too often misrepresented:) For this I offered two
Testimonies, one asserting it to be so in the First Age, the other in the
Fourth, and thought these sufficient, if they could not be denied, (as they are
not) to evince it to have been so in the Third: For who can reasonably suppose,
but that had place in the Third, which was usual both in the Ages before and
after? The first was that of Bishop Downham, who says, at the first Conversion
of Cities, the number of people converted were not much greater than the number
of Presbyters placed amongst them. But this, its said can be of little use;
because, 1. This was not the case of the Church of Carthage, it was not a new
converted Church, but settled long before, and in a flourishing condition.

The Church of Carthage by the fierce persecutions in Cyprians time (which is
the time we speak of) was brought so low, and reduced to so very few, as if it
had been but new converted, and how was it in a settled and flourishing
condition, when it was so lamentably wasted, and still harrassed one year after
another? or who can believe it, that reads Cyprian lamenting; Pressurae istius
tam turbidam vastitatem, quae gregem nostrum maxima ex part populata est,
adhue and usque populatur, and that they were positi inter plangentium ruinas,
et timentium reliquias, inter numerosam and languentium stragem, et exiguam
stantium paucita^em? Lib. 4. Ep. 4.
Was not this much the case of the Apostolical Churches, unless this of
Carthage was worse, and so less for our Author's advantage? Or if this were
otherwise, the Churches in Nazianzen's time were not newly converted, but
settled long before, and in a flourishing condition; which yet cannot be denied
to have had more Presbyters than we count needful. So that this was the
practice in every condition of the Church, whether flourishing or not.

2. He says, many more Presbyters may be ordained in a City, than is necessary
for the first beginning of a Church, with respect to future increase. etc.

And who will question, but the many Presbyters in the Church of Carthage were
for future increase both in City and Country? So that herein the case is not
different; And the design of that number of Officers might partly be for other
Congregations, (Episcopal Churches, though not Diocesan) to furnish them with
Officers. This is apparent afterward in the practice of the African Churches,
who when a new Church was erected, supplied it with a Bishop or other
Assistants from places better stored with Officers; And it is exemplyfied
particularly (as we shall see hereafter) in the provision which St. Austin made
for Fussala.

He says further, the multitude of Presbyters belonging to one Congregational
Church, might be occasioned by the uncertain abode of most of the Apostles and
their Commissioners, who are the Principal, if not the only Ordainers of
Presbyters mentioned in Scripture.

But herein he does but guess, and had no reason to be positive, unless the
Apostles and their Commissioners, (as he calls them,) had been then the only
Ordainers, which he will not venture to affirm, knowing what evidence there is
against it.

Lastly, he says, if this opinion of Bishop Downham had any certain ground in
Antiquity, we should probably hear of it with both ears, and we should have it
recommended upon antienter Authority than his.

This of Bishop Downham has certain ground in the best antiquity, if the New
Testament be such; where it is plain there were many Presbyters in diverse
Churches, such as are not yet, nor ever will be proved to be Diocesan.

To that of Nazianzen; he says, it has received its answer, and adds, he that
cannot answer it to himself, from the great difference between the condition of
the Church in Cyprian, and in Nazianzen's time, has a fondness for the
Argument.

This is the answer it received, Page 51. and this difference was thus
expressed a little before; But that any Church sixth and settled, having its
Bishop always present, should multiply Presbyters beyond necessity, in the
circumstances of the Primitive Christians before Constantine, is altogether
incredible; for the necessary expenses of the Church were very great, the poor
numerous, the generality of Christians not of the Richest, and the Estates they
had being at the discretion of their enemies, and ruined with perpetual
persecution, etc. He says, multiplying Presbyters beyond necessity, and
without necessity; while he alters my words so as to change the sense, he
disputes against himself, not me; But this looking more like an Argument than
any thing before, I shall take a little more notice of it. 1. Is not all this
applicable to the Churches in the Apostle's times, when it cannot be denied
Presbyters were multiplied beyond what we count necessary? The poor numerous,
the generality of Christians not of the Richest, and the Estates they had being
at the discretion of their enemies, and ruined with perpetual persecution.

Further, the Church before Constantine and Carthage particularly, supposing
these to be its circumstances, might have many Presbyters without any great
charge: For 1st. the Church Stock was reserved only for those in want, (...),
as is determined in one of the Canons which pass for Apostolical, Can. 4.
and the same decreed in the synod at Antioch. Can. 25.
Ambrose even in the 4th. Age, will have none to have a stipend who has other
revenues, Qui fidei exercet militiam, agelli sui fructibus, si habet, debet
esse contentus; si non habet, stipendiorum suorum fructu. Offic. L. 1. ^. 36.
And Chrysostom tells us that in Elections, those of the Competitors that had
Estates did carry it, because the Church would need to be at no charge in
maintaining of such, (...). 2ly. When they had no Estates, and the Church (e)
De sacerd. ^er. 3. Page 23. ^dit. Savil.
could not maintain them, they were to provide for themselves by some honest
employment. The Council of Elvira allows all sorts of Clergy men to drive a
trade, for their living, provided they did it only in the Province where they
lived, Can. 19.
and in the 4th. Council of Carthage it is ordered, that the Clergy, though
they be learned in the word of God, shall get their living by a trade. Can. 51.
and in the next Canon that they shall get food and raiment by a Trade or
Husbandry, with this proviso, that it be not a prejudice to their Office. Our
Author says indeed, Page 154.
that this is contrary to the usage of all other Churches; how true this is may
be seen by the Canon before cited. He says also, that this is forbidden by the
3 d. Council of Carthage; but neither is this so, that Canon adds but another
restriction, viz. that they get not their livings by an employment that is
sordid or dishonest, where the (i) Can. 15. in Cod. 16.
Latin and Greek both agree in it. 3ly. The Church was to allow none of them,
no not Bishops more than necessary, even after Constantine's time. That Canon
called the Apostles, and the other Antioch forecited, express this in the same
words, the Bishop may have of the Church Stock what is needful, if he be
necessitous, (...), for necessary uses, and these are afterward explained to
be food and raiment. Zonaras expresses it fully and clearly, whom he that the
Canon does not satisfy, may consult.

Having showed out of Justinian, that 60 Presbyters belonged to the great
Church in Constantinople, and thence inferred they were numerous in
Constantine's time, the number (says he,) was become extravagant in Justinians
time; but what is this to their number in Cyprian's?

He should have asked the Dean this, who to prove Diocesan Churches from the
number of Presbyters, immediately after Testimonies out of Cyprian, brings this
of Justinian.

For this very edict of Justinian shows that this multiplying of Church
Officers was an innovation, and therefore would have them reduced to the first
establishment.

Justinian took order to retrench the numbers of Presbyters, not therefore
because it was an innovation, but because the Church revenue could not maintain
so many, which is express in the Novel.

But that first establishment it seems admitted great numbers, for one Church
had 60. True; but it must also be noted first, that these 60 were to serve more
than one Church.

Some may be ready to ask how it can be true, that one Church should have 60,
and yet more than one had these 60 amongst them.

For there were three more besides St. Sophia to be supplied by these
Presbyters. etc.

True; but this still confirms what I answered to their argument from the
multitude of Presbyters, that in the ancient Church the Officers were
multiplied above what we count needful: For it is not now thought needful that
any 3 or 4 Churches in a City, should have 60 Presbyters, 100 Deacons, 90
Subdeacons, Readers 110. etc.

Yet after all, there is no argument to be drawn from this number, for these
were Canons of a particular foundation, designed for the service of a
Collegiate Church; and no measure to be taken from thence concerning the
numbers of Presbyters belonging to the Diocese. This is evident from the
Preface of the said Novel.

If no argument is to be drawn from this number, why did the Learned Dean draw
one from it? 2ly. This seems scarce consistent with the former Period: there,
these Presbyters were for 3 or 4 Churches, here they are but for one Collegiate
Church of which they were Canons, and this said to be evident in the Preface,
where I cannot see it. 3ly. Since no measure is to be taken from hence
concerning the numbers of Presbyters belonging to a Diocese; it seems there may
be this number of Presbyters in a place which cannot be counted a Diocese, (as
this one great Church never was, nor can be) and then no argument drawn from
the number of Presbyters at Rome, Carthage, Edessa, etc. will prove a Diocesan
Church; for here was the greatest number, which any where we meet with.

Dr. St. to prove Diocesan Churches from the numerousness of Presbyters,
mentioned 60 in C. P. in Justinian's time; from hence on the by, I thought it
reasonable to suppose they were numerous in Constantine's time, when yet
Theodoret says, all the Brethren met together with the Bishop. That the number
of Presbyters is no proof of a Diocesan Church was evinced sufficiently before:
this fell in occasionally, and was added ex abundanti; Yet upon this
supernumerary stragler he turns his main force, spending about 12 Pages on it.
I am little concerned what becomes of it, since the main Hypothesis is already
secured by the premises; but that this Gentleman may not quite loose all his
labor, I am willing to loose a little, in taking some notice of it.

I must confess that what is added concerning the Church of C. P. is somewhat
surprising, no doubt says he, that the Presbyters were more numerous in C. P.

Indeed it might have been surprising if I had said as he reports me, that they
were more numerous; but I saw reason not to say so, though what reason there
was to impose it on me I know not: I cited Soc: misprinted Soz. saying,
Constantine built two Churches at C. P., but laid no stress on it at all. Soc.
l. 1. c. 12.
It is true, he says not that he built no more than two, but his expression
plainly implies it, and he was concerned if he had known any more to have
mentioned it, when in the same Line, he says Constantine intended to make it
equal to Rome. Eusebius's words agree well enough herewith, he says
Constantine adorned it, (...), with more Churches, and that is true, if he built
but two more, or any more than was there formerly, or any more than was usual.
And these more Churches were not in the City, but (as the Historian speaks)
partly there, and partly (...), which as the word is used, may denote places
many Miles distant from the City, as the Gentleman elsewhere observes after
Valesius. Sozomen says he built (...), many Churches, (not very many as he
will have it) but if he thereby meant more than are named by Socrates, we need
not understand that done before the time Theodoret speaks of; Nor should a lax
expression be more relied on, than one that is punctual and definite; unless we
have a mind either to be misled, or to set the two Historians together by the
ears. Sozomen names but one Church more than Socrates did, and that not in, but
a good distance from the City, (70 Furlongs by Land,) and 3 may pass for many,
when it was a rare thing for any City to have more than one. The best Authors,
as they sometimes express very few by none, and a generality by all; so they
express more than ordinary by many; and two or three such Churches in one City
were more than ordinary at that time, when one City in an Hundred had not two
Churches, and one in a Thousand had not three Churches, that could be styled
(...): all that Constantine built here were such, both Eusebius his more, and
Sozomen's many, are said, by them to be very great, (...). But no considerable
Author that I meet with in that Age, or some Hundreds of years after, names
more than two very great Churches erected by Constantine in that City. And if
comparison be made, there is no Historian of those times, to be more regarded
in matters which concern C. P, than Socrates who tells us, that he was born and
educated in C. P., and continued there (as an L. 9. C. 24.
advocate) when he wrote his History.

But if we should suppose that Sozomen intended more than 3 or 4 Churches, or
that the Emperor built no more than was requisite, and only consulted
convenience, and designed not State or Magnificence, (which yet our Author a
little after says he did; and we know nothing is more ordinary than for great
Cities to have more Churches than are needful: it was so in London before the
Fire, and the retrenching of their number since shows it:) yet this will be so
far from proving Alexander's Church in C. P. to be Diocesan, that it will not
prove it greater than some single Congregations: for there were 12 Churches in
Alexandria, when yet the Church in that City adhereing to Athanasius consisted
of no more than are in some one of our Parishes. For which such Evidence has
been brought, as is not yet, nor I think, can be defaced. Nor can we imagine
that two Churches, much less one, could suffice all the Christians in C. P.
when the City of Heliopolis being converted to Christianity required more, and
Constantine built several for them, (...).

The word plurally expressed is much improved by our Author, he makes out of it
diverse Churches, and all these Churches, when yet all these were but one
Church, as Socrates himself makes it plain a little before Soc. l. 1. c. 18.
; for having related how Constantine ordered a Church to be built near the Oak
at Mambre, he adds, that he ordered another Church (not Churches) to be erected
at Heliopolis, (...). And to put it past doubt, Eusebius whom the Emperor
employed about those structures, and from whom in all likelihood Socrates had
the Relation, gives an account but of one Church there founded by the Emperor,
which he calls (...) l. 3. c. 56. Devita Constant.
, and that it was furnished with a Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons. So that the
Bishop of Heliopolis had but one Church for his Diocese, which our Author
should not be so loath to own, since it cannot be proved that at this time one
Bishop in an hundred, had more.

Valesius (whom our Author much relies on) in his Notes upon this place, is so
far from thinking that Constantine built more Churches in Heliopolis, that he
judges this one at present was not necessary for it, the Town having then no
Christians in it: and assigns this as the reason why Eusebius speaks of it as a
thing unusual, that it should have a Bishop appointed, and a Church built in
it. His words are, Fortasse hoc novum and inauditum fuisse intelligit, etc. He
may think this new and unheard of, that a Church should be built in a City,
where as yet there were no Christians but all were alike idolaters. Therefore
this Church was built at Heliopolis, not for that there was any necessity of
it, but rather in hope that he might invite all the Citizens to the profession
of the Christian Religion. So that the Bishop here had none for his Diocese but
one Church, and that empty, there being then no Christians in lib. 3. de vit.
Constant. c. 58. p. 235.
in that one Parish; which yet was all he had to make him a Diocesan.

The better to confute Theodoret, who says (for they are his words, not mine)
that Alexander with all the Brethren met together, he endeavors to show the
state of that Church about the latter end of Constantine, etc. this he does
here and after by an undue Application of some passages in Sozomen. For the
account which that Historian gives of that City is not confined to
Constantine's time, but reaches beyond it, ay, and beyond Julian's too, which
appears, as by other passages, so by his mentioning the heathen Temples in the
time of that Emperor. And with respect to the time after Constantine must that
expression be understood, which makes C. P. to exceed Rome, not only in Riches,
but in the number of Inhabitants, otherwise it will be apparently false. For
when Chrysostom was Bishop there, about 70 years after (when it is like the
number of the Inhabitants were doubled, it cannot be questioned but they were
far more numerous) he who best could do it, reckons the Christians then to be
an 100000 In Act. Hom. 11. page 674.
; our Author will have us look upon the Jews and Heathen there to be
inconsiderable but let us count them another 100000. Yet both put together will
fall incomparably short of the number in old Rome, which by the computation of
Lipsius was at least two millions De Magnit. Romans lib. 3. c. 3.
. And in Constantine's time new Rome was as far short of the old as to its
greatness in circuit, for whereas Herodian declares that Severus quite
demolished Byzantium for siding with Niger, and reducing it to the state of a
Village subjected it to Perinthus, (...) lib. 3. p. 68.
we cannot in reason suppose it to be extraordinarily spacious; yet as Zosimus
reports, all the enlargement which Constantine gave it, was but the addition of
15 Furlongs, (...) lib. 2. p. 62.
Now suppose it was 30 or 40 Furlongs in compass before (and so larger than one
City in an hundred) yet this addition will leave it less than Alexandria,
which, as Josephus describes it, was 80 Furlongs, that is, ten miles in
circumference De Bello Jud. lib. 2. cap. 16.
, yet Alexandria was four times less than Rome, for by Vopiscus's account, in
Aurelian's time, not long before Constantine, the walls were made by him near
50 miles in circuit. So it will be in comparison of Constantinople when first
built, rather like a Nation than a City, as Aristotle said of the other
Babylon, (...) Pol. lib. 3. c. 2.
. If then we will have this passage of Sozomen to have any appearance of truth,
it must be extended far beyond Constantine's time, when, as Zosimus tells us,
many of the succeeding Emperors were still drawing multitudes of People to
that City, so that it was afterward encompassed with walls far larger, (...),
than those of Constantine lib. 2. p. 65.
. And in an Oration of Themistius, it is made a question whether Theodosius
junior did not add more to C. P. than Constantine did to Byzantium.

Many of the Jews and almost all the Heathen were converted and became
Christians.

The expression of Sozomen does not hinder but as the main body of the Jews
remained, so the numbers of the Heathen might be considerable. Tertullian
speaks of Citizens in his time as if they were almost all Christians, pene
omnes cives christiani Apol. c. 37.
; yet no instance can be given of any one City where the Christians were the
major part of the Inhabitants: those that take his words in a strict sense are
very injurious to him, and make him speak that which no ancient Records will
warrant. Sozomen also may suffer by straining his expression; but I will not
digress to take further notice of what is not material; for I design not, nor
have any need, to make any advantage of the numbers of the Heathens in this
City.

He tells us of 950 Workhouses whose rents were allowed to defray the Funeral
expenses of all that died in the City (for so it is expressed in the
Constitution, (...) Novel. 43.
) these being performed with great solemnity, and multitudes of Attendants
maintained by those rents for that purpose Nov. 59. c. 2.
. How this here makes the Christians in C. P. to be so very numerous as he
would have them, he should have showed us; I am not yet so sagacious, as to
discover it. The number of the Decani was determined by Honorius to 950 Cod. de
Eccl. Lex. 4:
. Our Author thinks it probable they were so many at the first establishment,
but there is more ground to believe, they were much fewer in Constantine's time;
for about 800 were counted sufficient in Justinian's Reign, 200 years after,
when the City was both larger, and much more populous and in its greatest
flourish Novel. 59. c. 2.
. Those that consider the premises, may well think, he might have formed his
conclusion in terms less confident, to say no worse of it.

Next he forms an Objection against himself: notwithstanding the number of
Christians in C. P. might be much too great for one Congregation, yet the major
part might be Heretics or Schismatics, such as came not to the Bishop's
Church, and therefore all that adhered to him might be no more than could meet
in one Assembly.

To which he answers, that the number of Heretics and Schismatics was
inconsiderable, and will not except the Arians or Novatians. For the Arians, he
says, they had not yet made a formal Separation.

But if they did not separate themselves, the Church would have them separated,
and did exclude them from communion, and withstood Constantine's importunity
for their admission, both here and in other places: Athanasius was threatened by
Eusebius of Nicomedia Soc. lib. 2. c. 1;
, and banished by the Emperor for this cause among others. And Alexander being
secured by Arius his death from admitting him to Communion, was the occasion of
this passage in Theodoret which gives our Author so much trouble. Now the
Arians being debarred from communion, lessened the Bishop's Church, both here
and elsewhere, as much as if they had separated themselves. And they were
numerous here, this being the place where they had greatest favor; in
Constantine's Edict against the Heretics whose meetings he would have
suppressed, the Arians were not mentioned when the other are named Eusebius. de
vita Constant. lib. 3. cap. 62. 63.
. Socrates writes that the People in this City was divided into two Parties the
Arians and the Orthodox, they had continually sharp bickerings, but while
Alexander lived the Orthodox had the better; as soon as he was dead (which was
Vales observe. in Soc. and Soz. l. 2. c Soc. lib. 2. c. 6.
while Constantine lived) it seems they appeared equal, for the contest, says
he, was dubious, (...) c. In Nazianzen's time so far they overtopt the
Orthodox, that this great Diocesan Church appeared but in the form of a private
meeting, held in a very little house, where he kept a Conventicle with them,
(...), so Sozomen Lib. 7. cap. 5.
, and Socrates agrees with him in the expression, (...), such a diminutive
place seems as unproportionable for such a Diocesan Church as a Nutshell for
Homer's Iliads, or a Keyhole for a Witch, to use our Author's Elegancies.

As for the Novatians to which he will have no more allowed than a Conventicle,
they were numerous in other places, they had once diverse Churches in
Alexandria, many Churches in Rome and in other places. It is like they were
numerous here, for here they had as much favor or more, and longer too, than
in the Cities forementioned, here Socrates says they had three Churches Lib.
2. cap. 30.
, and if three Churches would but make one inconsiderable Conventicle; it is
possible the other Orthodox Churches (though he will have them to be many)
might be comprised in one vast Congregation.

I might observe how much Sozomen is misrepresented in what he says next of
those concerned in the Edict, the Novatians especially. He speaks not mincingly
as our Author would have him, but fully that the Novatians did not suffer much
by the Edict; he does not say only that it was probable they suffered little,
but says this only of a reason himself gives, why they suffered not much. He
gives other reasons for it than the opinion, the Novatians had of that Bishop.
He does not say the other Heretics were altogether extirpated. He does not
confess that the Novatians suffered the same measure with others every where,
no, nor any where else, it is the Montanists that he says this of. He dares to
affirm they had a Conventicle or more, for he affirms they had an eminent
Bishop in C. P. and were not only numerous there before the Edict, but
continued so after. The Gentleman was in too much haste here, as himself will
perceive, by observing how much his account differs from the Historians.

At last he comes to that passage of Theodoret which occasioned all these
lines, but Theodoret affirms they were no more than could meet in one Church,
and that they did actually do so, I answer, says he, that Theodoret does not
say so, and the passage cited does not conclude it.

I did not say Theodoret affirms they were no more, than could meet in one
Church, but he says the same in effect, viz. that all the Brethren assembled
with Alexander. His words are, Alexander, the Church rejoicing, hcld an
Assembly with all the Brethren, praying and greatly glorifying God. The words
are plain, and the sense, I take them in, is open in the face of them. Nor do I
believe that any disinterested person would put any other sense upon them than
this, that the generality of Christians of which the Church at Constantinople
consisted, assembled together with their Bishop Alexander, to praise God
joyfully for their deliverance by the death of Arius. But he will not have the
words taken in a general sense, but will suppose them taken with respect to
that particular Congregation, in which Arius was to be reconciled. Yet this
supposition has no ground either in the words, or in the contexture of the
Discourse, or any where else that I know of, or our Author either; for if he
had, we should have heard it with both ears, as he speaks elsewhere. He will
not have all the Brethren, to be all the Believers at C. P. yet he knows that
Brethren and Believers are Synonymous terms both in Scripture and ancient
Authors. And those were the Believers or Brethren of the Church of C. P. which
had occasion to rejoice, and that was the whole Church there: as for (...),
rendered Vniversi, I do not take it for all and every one of the Christians
there; for in all Assemblies, of great Churches especially, many are always
absent. He had dealt more fairly with Theodoret, if by all he would have
understood the generality of Christians adhereing to Alexander at C. P. or the
greatest part of them, and about such an abatement of the full import of the
word, there had been no need to contend; but his restraint of it to a
particular Congregation agrees not with the words, nor the occasion of them,
nor has any support elsewhere.

Nor is that better which follows, unless you will say that with all the
Brethren, does not signify their personal presence, but only their unanimity.

This looks more like a shift than a plain answer, and therefore he was well
advised in not venturing to own it.

Theodoret could not think that all the Beleivers of C. P. could come together
to the Bishop's Church, for he cites a Letter of Constantine's a little after,
where he gives an account of the great increase of that Church. In the City
that is called by my name by the Providence of God, an infinite multitude of
People have joined themselves to the Church, and all things there wonderfully
increasing, it seems very requisite that more Churches should be built;
understanding therefore hereby what I have resolved to do, I though fit to
order you to provide 50 Bibles fairly and legibly written.

He does not say an infinite multitude, the words of the Letter are (...), that
there was a very great multitude of Christians is not denied, nor that he
intended to build more Churches; but this confirms what is signified before,
that these very many Churches were not yet built, but only in design, and that
with a prospect of Christians there still increasing. And the Bibles, if they
were intended only for C. P. might be for the future Churches, not the present
only.

His Conclusion is, where Christians were so multiplied that it was necessary
to build more Churches, and to make such provisions for the multitude of their
Assemblies, it could not be that they should all make but one Congregation.

He should have concluded that which is denied, otherwise all he has premised
will be insignificant, and to no purpose: it is granted that all the Christians
at C. P. did make more than one Congregation, and for their convenience met at
other times in several Churches. That which is denied is, that the main Body or
generality of Christians there could not meet in one Assembly, or did not so
meet at this time with their Bishop Alexander, as to this he has proved
nothing, and therefore did well to conclude nothing against that which is
affirmed to be the plain import of Theodoret's expression.

And it may be supposed that Theodoret, if he had not expressed it, might well
think (though the contrary be suggested) that as great multitudes, as
Constantine's Letters signified, might meet together at the Bishop's Church;
for himself declares what a vast Congregation he preached to at Antioch, having
an Auditory of many Myriads Ep. 83.
. I will not ask him what Eusebius could think, when he tells us the Christians
had (...), Assemblies consisting of Myriads Lib. 8. Cap. 1.
. Nor what Socrates thought, when he tells us long after, of C. P. that the
whole City became one Assembly, and meeting in an Oratory, continued there all
day Lib. 7. cap. 23.
, (...), etc. But I would have him tell me how he understands that passage of
Chrysostom, (...) i. What is the import of these words? Do they signify that
ten Myriads were assembled in one place to hear Chrysostom? If so, there will
be no question but that the generality of Christians might meet in one Church
with Alexander in Constantine's Reign; for that then, (about 70 years before)
there was any thing ne^^ so many Christians as an 100000; adhereing to one
Bishop in this City, cannot with any reason be imagined. Or does he mean only,
that there were so many Myriads of Christians contained in that City? If so,
then he says here no more than in another Homily forecited, where the number
of Christians in C. P. is computed to be an 100000, reckoning all besides Jews
and Heathens. Now if they were no more in his time, they cannot with reason be
supposed to have been above half so many in Constantine's (unless any can
imagine, that their numbers advanced more in 6 years than in 70, when the
succeeding Emperors multiplied the Inhabitants excessively, (...), as Zosimus
tells us Lib. 2.
, crouding the City so full as that they could scarce stir without danger:) and
a great part of these were fallen off to Arius while Alexander was Bishop: the
Novatians also, were numerous, having several Churches; and these with other
Sects being deducted, the Christians there that communicated with Alexander
will be no more (if so many) than belong to some one of our Parishes.

It would swell this Preface to too great a Bulk* if I should answer the rest
so particularly.

Since he designed to be so brief, and to have so short a Preface, I wish he
had employed more of it against that which is the strength of the Discourse he
opposes, and of more consequence to the main Cause; and not have spent so many
leaves upon a by-passage, for which we have little reason to be concerned: for
if he could make it appear, that the Christians at C. P. in Constantine's time
were more than could meet in one Congregation, yea, or in two either; that
would be far from proving it a Diocesan Church, unless some one or two of our
Parishes can be counted so.

Let me add in fine, that our Author has done just nothing toward the
disproving of what Theodoret was alleged for; unless he show, that C. P.
exceeded old Rome, was furnished with such an infinite number of Christians, so
many (more than two) magnificent Churches there erected, the 50 Bibles thought
needful to be provided, and almost all the Heathen besides many Jews converted;
before Alexander (who is said to hold this Assembly with all the brethren)
deceased; and so unless he prove that all this was done (which himself I think
can scarce believe) in less than a year. For Valesius (upon whose authority
this Gentleman takes much) proves at large (making it the business of one of
his Books) that Alexander died (and yet must live some while after this
panegyrical Assembly) in the year 331. L. 2. observe. i^ Soc. and Soz.
And its manifest, that C. P, was not built, nor had that name till 331. For
though it was building the year before, yet it was not finished till 25 of
Constantine's Reign (as Jerome and others:) and the beginning of his Reign is
Chronic.
reckoned from the death of Constantius his Father, who was Consul with
Maximiunus in the year 306, and Fast Consul.
died in the middle of it. There needs not a word more to show that all his
discourse on this subject is wholly insignificant, and not at all for his
purpose, though this be the most considerable part of his Preface.

This Author gives several instances of several Bishops being in one City at
the same time, in answer to the Dean of Paul's, who affirmed that it was an
inviolable rule of the Church to have but one, etc. Jerusalem is the first
instance, etc. I wonder to find a man of Learning cite this passage, than which
nothing can be more disadvantageous to his Cause.

There is one who I suppose passes for a man of learning who for the same
purpose makes use of this instance, since mine was published; We have, says
he, Examples in Ecclesiastical story of of two Bishop's at the same time in the
same See, and yet this was never thought Schismatical, when the second was
advanced by the consent of the first. Thus Alexander a Bishop in Cappadocia was
made Bishop of Jerusalem while Narcissus was living, but very old: and
Anatolius at the same time, sat in the Church of Caesarea with Theotecnus, and
this was St. Austin 's own case, who was made Bishop of Hippo while there was
another Bishop living Defense of Dr. St. p. 178.
. He says also, Nothing can be more disadvantageous to my cause than this
passage. If it had been no advantage to my cause, I should have thought it bad
enough; but if nothing could be more disadvantageous, I am very unhappy: let us
see how it is made good.

Narcissus having retired, and the people not knowing what had become of him,
the neighboring Bishops ordained Dius in his place, who was succeeded by
Gordius and after by Germanico, (it should be by Germanico, and after by
Gordius) in whose time Narcissus returned, and was desired to resume his
Office, and did so. What became of Germanico (he means Gordius,) is not said
but probably he resigned or died presently.

There is nothing to make either of these probable, it is altogether as likely,
if not more, that he continued Bishop there with Narcissus for some time; but
because Eusebius says nothing of it, I insist not on it. But besides he tells
us, Narcissus took Alexander, into the participation of the charge. That
signifies Narcissus was not excluded from the Episcopal charge, both had their
parts therein. No, but says he, Alexander was the Bishop, Narcissus retained
but the name and title only, that is, he was but a Titular, not really a
Bishop, and why so? because Alexander, says he, joined with him in prayers,
and the Historian says he was not able to officiate by reason of his great
age. He was not able it may be to perform all the Offices of a Bishop, but what
he was able to do no doubt he performed. Now if they must be but titular
Bishops, who perform not personally all the Offices of a Pastoral charge (when
they cannot pretend (...)) how many real Bishops shall we find in the World?
But besides the Name and Title, did he not retain the Power and Authority of a
Bishop? If not, how came he to loose it? Did he resign, or was he deposed? That
he resigned there is not the least intimation in this Historian or any other;
nor any instance in the ancient Church, that ever any Bishop divested himself
of all pastoral Power upon this account. To have deposed him for his great age
had been a barbarous Act, and such as the Church in those times cannot be
charged with. No doubt but he retained the Episcopal power, though through Age
he could not exercise it in all instances; and if he had not only the Title but
the Power, he was really a Bishop, and there were two Bishops at once in one
Church, and then this instance is so far from being most disadvantageous, that
it serves me with all the advantage I designed in alleging it.

As for the words of Valesius cited by him, if they be taken in the sense which
our Author would have them, that learned man will not agree with himself. For
but a very few lines before, he says, these two were Co-Episcopi, Bishops
together in that City, superstite episcopo, adjutor and coepiscopus est
adjunctus, And though he says (but says it doubtfully with a ni fallor) this was
forbidden at Sardica (above 100 years after); yet he adds that, notwithstanding
it was still usual in the Church, nihil ominus identidem in ecclesia usurpatum
est, which is all, that I need desire. And afterward, where Eusebius in l. 7.
c. 32.
again mentions two Bishops in one City, he observes, that in one of his
Copies, the Scholiast h^s this note upon it in the Margin, (...), here also
there were two Bishops of one Church. Valesius adds, the Scholiast understands
Alexander, who was Bishop of Jerusalem together with Narcissus.

The next instance is of Theotecnus and Anatolius who were Bishops of Caesarea
together. Against this he has little to say, I suppose because nothing can be
said against it in reason. Only he seems willing that Anatolius should pass but
as Episcopus designatus, whereby if he mean one, who is not yet actually a
Bishop, but designed to be one hereafter, as Eradius was by Augustine, it is
inconsistent with what Eusebius says and himself quotes, but one line before,
viz. that Theotecnus ordained him Bishop in his lifetime; for if he was not
actually Bishop after he was thus ordained, he was never Bishop at all Eusebius.
l. 7. c. 32.
.

Another instance was of Macarius and Maximus both Bishops at once of Jerusalem.

He would not have Maximus to be Bishop while Macarius lived, because it is
said he was to rule the Church after his Death.

But Maximus was to govern the Church not only after his death, if he survived
him (as he was like to do being much younger) but while he lived; and so did
actually together with him, (...), which denotes the exercise of the same
Function together Sez. l. 2. c. 19.
: besides the Historian says, Maximus was before this ordained Bishop of
Diospolis, and if he had officiated at Jerusalem, where they were so desirous
of him, in a lower Capacity; their kindness to him had been a degrading him;
which it cannot be supposed they would either offer, or he yield to.

I alleged Epiphanius, who signifies that other Cities had two Bishops
together, and excepts only Alexandria. To which he answers, that Epiphanius
cannot mean that all other Cities had two Bishops at a time, nor did I say that
he meant this, but his expression imports no less than that it was usual for
other Cities to have two Bishops. Nor is there any reason to think that
Epiphanius respects only the cases alleged; it was quite another case that was
the occasion of his words; and diverse other instances might be brought of a
different nature and occasion, though this be sufficient to show, that the rule
against two Bishops in one City was not inviolable: He adds, I do not see what
advantage can be made of this passage.

This passage shows that there was commonly two Bishops in a City at once,
Alexandria is only excepted as varying herein from other Cities. And this is
advantage enough for me, and it is enough against him too; and leaves no reason
for his pretense that it was only in extraordinary cases. I affirmed it could
not be Epiphanius his meaning (as a great Antiquary would have it) that
Alexandria was never so divided, as that several parties in it should have
their respective Bishops there, and brought several Instances to evince it: for
so it was divided in the time of Epiphanius, when the Catholics had
Athanasius, the Arians had Gregorius, and then Georgius; and afterward the one
had Peter the other Lucius, and the Novatians had their Bishops successively in
that City till Cyril 's time.

He answers however I do not see why that learned Antiquarie's opinion may not
be maintained against this Gentleman's objections, he says that Alexandria was
divided before Epiphanius his time between several Bishops (I said in
Epiphanius's time) it cannot be denied. But that is not the thing Epiphanius
speaks of, but that before the Election of Theonas against Athanasius, there
were never two opposite Bishops as in other Churches.

But this does neither agree with the one nor defend the other; it agrees not
with Epiphanius, but makes him contradict himself, for he tells us there were
two opposite Bishops at Alexandria before Theonas was chosen. For this was not
till Alexander's death, but he says Pistus was made Bishop there by the Arians
while Alexander was living Her. 69. Number. 8. p. 733.
. And he could not be ignorant of what Eusebius declares Vita Constable. l. 3. cap.
4.
, that upon the division in Egypt occasioned by Arius, in every City, (...),
there was Bishop against Bishop, and People against People. Nor does it defend
the Antiquary, for he speaks universally without limiting himself to the
Election of Theonas, Ecclesiam Alexandrinam nunquam in parts scissam quarum
singulae Episcopum suum habebant, that Church was never divided so as to have
opposite Bishops.

The instances are all later than this Fact, and therefore are insignificant,
says he.

They are fully significant, both in reference to the Antiquary against whom
they are brought to prove that he mistook Epiphanius, when he would have it to
be his meaning, that Alexandria was never so divided as to have two opposite
Bishops; for they show it was often so divided: and also in reference to
Epiphanius, they were so late as his time on purpose, to show more
unquestionably, that could not be his meaning, which was against his knowledge,
and notorious instances in his own time.

But he will not deny the instance of the Novatians to be significant, only
Socrates does not say that they had their Bishops successively to Cyril 's time.

Nor do I say he does; but he says Cyrill shut up the Novatian Churches there,
and took away all the sacred treasure in them, and deprived their Bishop
Theopompus of all he had. Now when our Author meets with Churches, and a Bishop
over them; he is not wont to question a Succession, unless it appears he was
the first.

It may be they began there after this time, for there is little Account in
Church History, that I know, of any Novatians in Alexandria before Athanasius,

We are little concerned about this, yet it may be they began before this time,
for there is no account at all in Church History, that the Novatians began
there in, or after Athanasius his time.

I had produced evidence that many African Bishops declared, in the case of
Valerius and Austin, that it was usual in all parts, to have two Bishops in a
City at once; to this he answers, but suppose all this true, that this might be
maintained by the Examples of several Churches, what is it that two Bishops may
be in one Church? no, that is not the matter, but that a Bishop when he grows
old, may appoint or ordain his Successor, to prevent the mischiefs, that are
usually produced by popular Elections.

If what the African Bishops did allege, were restrained to that particular
case he contends for; yet this is enough to make good all I intend, viz. that
usually in the ancient Church, there were two Bishops together in one place.
For when one is ordained Bishop in the same place, when another is still
living; with whatever design, upon what occasion soever this is done, yet there
are two Bishops at once in the same place.

I see no reason why this should be restrained to that particular case, the
occasion of what the Bishops affirm may clear it, and that was Austin's
scruple, not to succeed Valerius, but to be made Bishop of Hippo, while his
Bishop there was living, Episcopatum suscipere, suo vivente Episcopo,
recusabat, for so there would be two together, which he took to be against the
Custom of the Church, contra morem Ecclesiae; but they all persuade him that
this was usually done, id fieri solere, and prove it by examples in all parts
Possidon. vita August. cap. 8.
. And Valerius his desire and proposal was, that Austin might be ordained
Bishop of Hippo, Qui suae Cathedrae non tam succederet sed Consacerdos
accederet, not as one that was to succeed him only, but to be Bishop together
with him.

When he assigns this as the reason of appointing a Successor, to prevent the
mischiefs that are usually produced by popular elections, he speaks his own
sense, not theirs; for they were better advised than to brand the general
practice of the ancient Church as mischievous, and how this suggestion becomes
one, who undertakes to write a vindication of the Primitive Church, let himself
consider. Others may judge it, a more intolerable reflection upon the
universal Church in the best and after times, than any M. B. can be justly
charged with. However the reason assigned for it by Possidonius is another
thing than appears in this Authors whole account, it was because Valerius
feared left some other Ibid.
Church, should seek him for their Bishop, and get a person so approved, from
him.

Whereas in fine he says, These Cases specified were not thought to violate
the Rule that allowed but one Bishop to a City. Yet it was thought so by St.
Austin, when he excuses his suffering himself to be made Bishop with Valerius,
by this, that he knew no^ it was forbidden by a rule of the Nicene Council,
Quod Concilio Niceno prohibitum fuisse nesciebam, and gives this as the reason
why he would not so ordain Eradius.

Next he would prove, that this provision for a Successor does not destroy
that Rule, by an instance, I need not transcribe it at large, the sum of it is
this, when the Government is Monarchical, if it fall out once (in many Ages, as
it did in England once in above 500 years) that another King be crowned,
besides him who has the Throne; yet it will be true enough, that it is the
rule of those Kingdoms to have but one King. To which I say briefly, if it be
usual to have two Kings in such a Government, it will scarce be thought true,
that it is the inviolable Rule of those Kingdoms, to have but one King. And
then how this instance will suit his purpose let those judge who take notice,
that, I have already proved it usual in the ancient Church for Cities in all
parts to have two Bishops at once.

From page 12. he passes to page 23. To show there were more Bishoprics than
one in the Region or Diocese of Hippo I brought several instances; and might
have produced more, but that I confined my self to those which the learned Dean
alleged to the contrary. Fussala is one of them, and tha alone this Gentleman
takes notice of. St. Austin calls it Castellum diverse times in one Epistle. He
finds fault that I translate Castellum a Castle. I did no more expect to be
blamed for this, than if I had rendered Oppidum a Town. But I suppose he counts
it no great crime, since he runs into it himself and in a few lines after calls
it a Castle.

But these Castles, says he, were Garrison Towns, with a good dependence of
Villages belonging to them.

They were Fortresses, and sometimes had Villages depending on them, and might
contain so many buildings as there are in some Village or little Town; however
he calls them Castles, and may give me leave to do so too.

He adds, It was 40 miles distant from Hippo, and was in St. Austine's Diocese,
and never had a Bishop of its own.

It is said indeed to belong to the Diocese of Hippo, but I do not find it said
to be in St. Austine's Diocese or Bishopric; these are two things and should
not be confounded. When it is said to belong to the Diocese of Hippo, so far
distant, Diocese is not taken as an Ecclesiastical sense as it is with us, for
part of a Country under the Government of one Bishop; but as it was used in
Africa in a civil sense, for part of a Province, without respect to one Bishop,
or to any one Bishop at all. Some parts there called Diocesses had no Bishops,
nor were to have any by Decrees of the African Councils Con. Carth. 2. Can. 5.
Code Affric. 53.
. Other places called a Diocese had more Bishops than one. Petilian says, that
in the place where his Colleague Januarius was Bishop there were 4 Bishops
besides, all five in una Dioecesi Coll. Carth. D. 1 Number. 117.
. And thus it was in many other places, particularly in that called the Diocese
of Hippo, as I showed by diverse instances, and St. Austin's own Testimony.

Hereby it appears that in Africa, a Diocese and a Bishopric were not the same
thing, though they be with us. There were diverse Diocesses and no Bishoprics
and many Bishoprics where but one Diocese; so that Fussala and 20 other
Castles and Towns might be in the Diocese of Hippo, at 40 miles distance or
more; and yet St. Austin's Bishopric, not one jot the larger for it, nor he
more a Diocesan.

Whereas he adds, that it never had a Bishop of its own. It is unquestionable
that Fussala had a Bishop of its own in Austin's time; and this renders it
wholly unserviceable to their purpose; for the Bishopric of Hippo, said to be
of 40 miles extent, will not upon the count of Fussala be 40 yards larger. Nor
will either of these Bishops, nor any other in that Region be Diocesans; unless
there can be two Diocesans, and I know not how many more, in one Diocese.

I assigned this reason, why Fussala had not a Bishop sooner, because Austin
declares, there was not one Catholic in it, and supposed this might serve the
turn, not dreaming that those who count all the people in a very large Parish,
or in an 100 Parishes little enough for a Diocesan; could think his Diocese
competently furnished when he had not one Soul (or but some few) in communion
with him.

He says, the Town or Castle indeed had none, but the County belonging to it
had some; he will have the Territory or Parish depending on this Castle to be a
County. I cannot but observe the admirable power of a fancy tinctured and
prepossessed. It will turn a Parish into a County, and a Castle into a County
Town; and since a County with us, was a Province with them, one Province must
be as much as all Africa; and a very small part of Numidia, must be far greater
than the whole. But there are some Hypotheses, which may stand in need of such
imaginations.

However he likes not my reason, and why? because, though it had no Catholics
in it then, it might have some before and concludes it had, because it belonged
heretofore to the Diocese of Hippo.

But that it formerly had Catholics, (says he) we may conclude by Mr.
Baxter's reasoning, because it belonged heretofore to the Diocese of Hippo.

If Diocese be taken in a civil sense (as it is frequently in African Authors)
this will be no proof, that there had been any Catholics in it, because in
this sense Fussala might belong to that Diocese, though there had not been
either Christian or Bishop in the whole Region: Nor will it be hereby proved,
taking it in the Ecclesiastical sense; for that part of Hippo, which was under
the Donatist Bishop, had no Catholic; and yet de jure, as he tells us,
belonged to the Diocese, (as he calls it,) or charge of St. Austin. Yet since
he allows Mr. Baxter's Argument, he must admit what it concludes, viz. that a
place that has no Christians or Catholics in it, belongs to no Bishop; and
then Fussala never belonged to St. Austin as its Bishop; either before it had
Catholics, for against this the Argument is admitted to be conclusive: not
after, for then it had a Bishop of its own. And so all they have to allege for
the largeness of St. Austin's Bishopric comes to nothing.

So that I conceive the reason will not hold, for its having no Bishop of its
own, since the same reason destroys its dependence upon the the Diocese of
Hippo, which is expressly affirmed.

The reason I gave for its having no Bishop, was, because St. Austin declares
there was no Catholic in it. This reason will hold, unless they think a place
may have a Bishop where there are no Christians at all; when as yet they judge,
that a place which has Christians enough to make a good Congregation, or many,
ought not to have a Bishop. Whereas he says this reason destroys its
dependence upon the Diocese, I wonder what dependence he imagines, since it is
such, as both the not having of Christians, and also the having of them,
destroys it. The former he here affirms, the same reason (which is its not
having of Catholics) destroys it; the latter is undeniable, for when Fussala
had a competent number of Catholics, a Bishop was there constituted; and then
it depended no more on the Diocese of Hippo, than one Bishop's Church depends
on another, when both are independent.

The dependence of Fussala upon Hippo was such, as that of a Country place
upon a greater Town well furnished with Officers for their help, to convert and
reduce the Inhabitants, and when enough are converted to help them to a Bishop
or Pastor. This St. Austin did for Fussala, he employed Presbyters to reduce
the Donatists there, and when they were reduced, he adds them not to his own
charge, would not have them Episcopo cedere; but advises them to have a Bishop
of their own, and procures one for them. This was the practice of the primitive
times, in these methods were Churches and Bishops multiplied; it was not out of
use in the fifth Age, this of Fussala as managed by St. Austin is a remarkable
instance thereof; and if other Bishops had imitated him, as he did the
Apostles, and best Ages, the Church would not have been troubled with debates
about Diocesans.

That Austin would not take the Charge of a Place so far off as Fussala, he
will have it ascribed to his Modesty. But it was such Modesty as this excellent
Person made Conscience of, being convinced certissima ratione, by most certain
reason, that he was not sufficient for it. If all other Bishops had been so
modest, so conscientious, there might have been, as Nazianzen speaks, when
Bishops were multiplied in Cappadocia, (...), a much more desirable thing, to
those that love Souls, than a great Diocese.

He gives a reason why this must be ascribed to St. Austin's modesty, because
he discharged the Office of a Bishop there, in more difficult times, while the
Presbyt^r^ he employed there, were barbarously used.

I need not deny that he performed the Office of (...) Bishop there; for it is
the office of a Bishop to endeavor by himself or others, the converting or
reducing of all that he can. Only this will not prove Fussala to be then a part
of his Bishopric, no more than it will prove Athanasius to have been Bishop of
India; because he encouraged, and sent Frumentius with others thither, to
convert the Indians Soc. l. 1. c. 15. Soz. l. 2. c. 23.
.

The learned Dean had cited Austin as calling himself the Bishop of that
Diocese (understanding by it a Region of vast extent) I observed that in the
Epistle quoted he only says he had the Episcopal charge of Hippo. By this the
Gentleman changing my words, will have me to signify, that he was the Bishop
of the Town only. This I did not intend, but that, he was not the only Bishop
of that whole Region. But whether he was Bishop of part of the Town only, or of
that and some part of the Region also, I am not much concerned. His words are
as if he had been Bishop of the Town only, nay, but of part of that neither,
for the Donatists had their Bishop there: so this will strangely diminish the
Bishopric of St. Austin which at first appeared so large. Then he answers, for
the Donatists having a Bishop there, it signifies little to our present
purpose, since he was but an Usurper.

But this signifies as much to my purpose as I need; for the Donatists having a
Bishopric in Hippo, St. Austin's must needs be diminished thereby, and
altogether as much lessened, as if they had not been Usurpers. And they were
counted no otherwise Usurpers, but so that if the Donatist Bishop had been
reconciled; by a Decree of the African Church he was to continue in his
Bishop-there, as a rightful Possessour, and there would have been still two
Diocesses (such as they were) in one Town.

He would have us believe Austin as if he declared, that he was not the Bishop
of the Town only; but his words are, Vt modum dispensationis meae non
supergrediar hoc Ecclesiae ad Hipponensem Regionem pertinenti prodesse
contestor, which, says our Author, plainly signifies, that all the Church
belonging, not only to the Town, but but also to the Region of Hippo, belonged
to him.

But if he please to view the words again which himself has quoted, he will
find it plainly signified, that Austin's Church belonged to the Region of
Hippo, but not that all the Church both in Town and Region, belonged to him.
Antonius Bishop of Fussala might have said this as truly of his Church there,
as Austin did it of his Church at Hippo; it did ad Hipponensem Regionem
pertinere, belong to the Region of Hippo. And it may be as justly inferred from
hence, that all the Church both in the Town and Region of Hippo belonged to the
Bishop of Fussala. If our Author will allow of this (as he must if he will
stand to his own account of this passage) Austin's Bishopric will be strangely
diminished indeed, it must be confined to a part of Hippo and made less than I
represent it. For I did not say, nor had I any need to assert, that he was
Bishop of the Town only. We may allow him besides his part of the Town, diverse
Villages in the Country (though I have not seen it proved) without any danger
of assigning him a Diocesan Church. For Kidderminster (as one tells us, who
very well knows it) has 20 Villages belonging to it, and some thousands of
Souls therein, yet according to our modern measures will scarce make a Diocesan
Church M. B. of Episcopacy, Part 2. p. 9.
.

To show that there were more Bishops in the Region of Hippo, than St. Austin,
besides particular instances (which he passes by) I alleged a passage of his
where the Donatists were desired to meet together with the Catholic Bishops,
that were in that Region, and who there suffered so much by the Donatists: to
this he answers, That these Bishops who are said to be in Regione Hipponensi,
were not the Bishops of that Region, but some Bishops of the Province met
together there.

But that these were Bishops of the Province met together there, is a mere
conjecture of his own, without the least ground either in this passage or any
other in that Epistle. It will not be hard to answer any thing at this rate. If
there had been a Provincial Council then held in that Region, there might have
been some pretense for what he says; but there is not any hint of this in the
whole Epistle. That which is desired is a Meeting for conference, Hoc est ergo
desiderium nostrum, etc. Primum si fieri potest ut cum Episcopis nostris
pacifice conferatis --, ideo nos confer volumus --, and the prime occasion of
it was the outrages committed in that Region by the Donatists, wherein the
Bishops of that place were particularly concerned. This is signified, as in
other parts of the Epistle, so particularly in the passage cited, Episcopos
nostros qui sunt in Regione Hipponensi, ubi tanta mala patimur. This Meeting
was to be with the Catholic Bishops upon the place, in Regione Hipponensi, not
any to be called from other parts. And these words seem brought in to prevent
an objection which the Donatists might make against a more general, or more
public meeting, as that which might bring them in danger of the Laws in force
against them; An forte istae leges Imperatoris vos non permittunt nostros
Episcopos convenire, and then immediately follows these words in answer to it,
Ecce interim Episcopos nostros qui sunt in Regione Hipponensi, etc. so that
this to me seems the plain sense of both Objection and answer; If because of
the Laws you dare not meet us in a more General or Provincial Council, yet give
a Meeting to the Bishops of this particular Region, where there can be no
apprehension of danger. All which makes me judge, what he says concerning the
Bishops of the Province as here intended, to be no better than an Evasion.

To prove that there was but one Bishop in the Region of Hippo, he tells us,
That the Clergy there called in the Inscription of an Epistle, Clerici Regionis
Hipponensium, speaking of the Bishop of Hippo, do call him their Bishop, and
not one of their Bishops, etc.

But the Clergy so called, may be only the Clergy of Hippo, and so they are in
the Title of the Epistle Clerici Hippone Catholici: and well may they of Hippo
be called the Clergy of the Region, both because they were in that Region, and
were the Clergy of it (...). But if the expression should be extended to more
or to all in the Region, their calling him Episcopus noster, will be no proof
that they had no other Bishop, but him at Hippo. For that phrase Episcopus
noster or Episcopi nostri, all along in this Epistle, does not denote the
Bishop of that particular Church to which they belonged (as he would have it)
but a Bishop of their party or persuasion. So they call Valentinus nostrum
Catholicum Episcopum, who yet was not Bishop of Hippo. So they call them
Episcopos nostros, whom they desired the Donatists to meet once and again page
373:
, and thrice in another page, where our Author finds Episcopos nostros page 371.
. He may have many more instances hereof in that Epistle. If there was so many
Bishops in Hippo or in that Region, as the Clergy call Episcopos nostros, he
must grant many more Bishops in that Region than I need desire. So that this
Phrase however it be understood, is a medium unhappily chosen: if it be taken
in my sense it is impertinent and can conclude nothing for him; if it be taken
in his own sense, it will conclude directly against him.

He passes to Alexandria, and to page 32. The instance of Mareotis he says
little to, so our Author, I might think it enough, where there was so little
occasion.

He insinuates as if Mareotis might not have number enough of Christians to
have a Bishop, but this Athanasius does sufficiently show to be a groundless
conjecture.

I had no intention or occasion to signify that Mareotis had not Christians
enough to have a Bishop, I knew that it both had many Christians, and a Bishop
also, and named him too; and therefore the groundless conjecture may be fixed
somewhere else.

And even before Athanasius, the generality of the People there were
Christians.

How long before? Dionysius in the latter part of the third Age declares it
(...), quite destitute of Christians Eusebius. l. 7. c. 11.
, and the gaining the generality there, to the Faith, required some
considerable time, and it is like proceeded not far, till Christianity
generally prevailed.

Besides Ischyras, I had mentioned Dracontius, both Bishops in the Territory of
Alexandria (as Agathammon also was Apol. 2. p. 612.
) of Dracontius he takes notice, and says, possibly he was a Chorepiscopus.

But a Chorepiscopus is elsewhere with him a Diocesan a, and here he says that
he did accept page 590.
Bishopric. Now these put together will go near to make a Diocesan Bishop. But
then if there were two or three Bishops in the Diocese of Alexandria, besides
Athanasius; they will scarce be so much as half Diocesans.

He says Athanasius pressed him to accept it. If so this great Person was no
more unwilling to have another Bishop in his Diocese, and in a Country place
too, than Austin was to have one at Fussala, He says further this was an
extraordinary case, though what was extraordinary in it I cannot imagine; to
prove any thing there mentioned to be so, will be an hard task.

And allowing this man a Country Bishopric, that of Alexandria would be a
great deal too bigg for the Congregational measure.

And so it might be, and yet be no Diocesan Church; if that will satisfy him
which is too big for those measures, he seems content to drop his cause, and
may leave it in the hands of Presbyterians. And he is in the more danger,
because he seems not apprehensive of it, but counts it enough if he thinks a
Church is any where found larger than one Congregation.

I had given instances of several Towns that had Bishops, and were but two or
three or four etc. miles distant one from another this he denies not: but asks
what does this conclude? might not those Diocesses be yet much larger than one
Congregation?

I might conclude that these were just such Diocesses as our Country Parishes
are; and had such Congregations as those Parish Churches have. And some of them
in time might have provision (as some of ours have) for more Congregations than
one. And if our modern Diocesses were of this proportion, they would be much
more conformable to the ancient Modells.

Suppose the chief Congregations of Holland had each a Bishop, yet I conceive
they would be Diocesans, though those Cities lie very close together.

He might have laid the scene at home, where we are better acquainted, and
supposed this of our Country Towns; or of both the chief, and lesser Towns in
Holland; if he had designed what would be most parallel. But to take it as it
is formed, though those Cities lay not further distant, and had each of them a
Bishop, yet if their Churches were governed in common by Bishop and Presbyters,
as the ancient Churches were; they would not be Diocesan, but more like the
Model of the Churches and Government which Holland has at present.

And now after all this, though we have several instances out of Egypt, how
near Cities were together in some parts; yet upon the whole account the
Diocesses do appear to be large enough, from the number of them.

He would have us think where Cities are so near together (as I had showed) yet
because of their number the Diocesses might be large enough. But where they
were so near together, they could not be large enough to make any thing like
the modern Diocesses, no, nor larger than our Country Parishes if they had
Bishops in them. And the Ancients thought themselves obliged by the Apostle's
rule to have a Bishop, not only in some but in every City, (...), says
Chrysostom, (...) In 1 Timothy Hom. 11.
, and Theophilact expresses (...) by (...), without exception of the smallness
of the place or its nearness to others. The reason diverse Cities had none, was
the want, or the inconsiderable number of Christians in them. Nothing but this
hindered any City from having a Bishop in the four first Ages; though the
greatest part of their Cities (as may be made manifest) were no greater than
our Market Towns or fairer Villages. And upon this account many Cities might
want Bishops, and it may be did so, in Egypt particularly; Heathenisme
prevailing in many places there, even in Athanasius his time; for which I could
produce sufficient evidence; but will not now digress so far. Afterward the
affectation of greatness in some, was the occasion of new measures; and orders
were made that Towns which had no Bishops before should have none after: though
the reason why they had none before was gone; and those places had as many or
more Christians in them, than most Episcopal Cities had of old.

For in Athanasius his time there were not an hundred Bishops in all Egypt,
Lybia and Pentapolis Athan. Apol. 2.
.

I was a little surprised to read this, and see Athanasius cited for it. For I
knew that Athanasius reckons 95 Bishops from Egypt besides himself, at the
Council of Sardica; and others from Africa, wherein Lybia and Pentapolis are
usually included; and it was never known that a major part or a third of the
Bishops in a Country, did come to a Council at such a distance as Egypt was
from Sardica. It is scarce credible that Athanasius would so far contradict
himself, as to say there were not so many Bishops in all those three Countries,
when he had signified there were many more in one of them. Some mistake I
thought there must be, and consulting the place I found it not entirely
represented. There is this Clause (immediately following the words he cites)
left out, (...), none of these accused me, whereby it appears that the meaning
of the whole passage is this, there was an hundred Bishops in the Diocese of
Egypt who appeared not against him, or that favored him. But those who
favored Arius (whom he calls Eusebians) and Meletius, to say nothing of
Coluthus (for into so many parties was that Country then divided) are not
taken into the reckoning; otherwise it would have amounted to many more than an
hundred. Sozomen says the Bishops there, who took Arius his part were many,
(...) Lib. 1. c. 14.
, and in Athanasius there is an account of many Meletian Bishops by name Apol.
2. p. 614.
; and in Epiphanius it is said, that in every Region through which Meletius
passed, and in every place where he came he made Bishops Ep. Haer. 68.
.

The next thing he takes notice of is the defense of Mr. Baxter's Allegation
out of Athanasius, to show, that all the Christians of Alexandria (M. B's words
are, the main body of the Christians in Alexandria) could meet in one Church.

It is to be confessed that the expressions of that Father seem to favor him,
(...) and that the Church did (...) hold all, etc.

I am made more confident by all that is said to the contrary, that the
evidence is really such, as will need no favor, if it can meet with Justice.

Now suppose that all the Christians in Alexandria, the Catholics at
leastwise, could meet together in that great Church, yet all the Diocese could
not.

All that was undertaken to be proved by the passage in question, was, that the
main body of Christians in Alexandria adhereing to Athanasius could, and did
meet in that one Church. If this be granted nothing is denied that he intended
to prove. As for a Diocese in the Country, if he will show us what, or where
it was, and that it had no other Bishop in it, he will do something that may be
considered; yet nothing at all against what this Testimony was made use of to
evince.

He says 2dly, Suppose this great great Church could receive all the
multitude, yet if that multitude was too great for Personal Communion it is
insignificant.

Upon this supposition it might be too great for an ordinary meeting in the
Congregational way, yet not big enough for a Diocesan Church. But the
supposition is groundless and contradicts Athanasius who says they had
Personal Communion, they all prayed together, and did not only meet within the
Walls, but concurred in the worship, and said, Amen.

He says 3dly, Before the Church of Alexandria met in distinct Congregations,
but we are told that those places were very small, short and strait places.

All these save one, I said, which he ought not to have omitted. And they were
so small, because those who were wont to meet in them severally, so as to fill
them, could all meet in one Church, and did so as Athanasius declares.

But that they were such Chapels or Churches, as some of our Parishes in
England have as great a number as Alexandria, is hardly credible.

I know not how those places could be well expressed with more diminution than
Athanasius has done it, he says they were not only strait and small, but the
very smallest. If he will make it appear that our Churches or Chapels are less
than those that were (...), I shall understand that which I could never before,
that something is less than that which is least of all. But he will prove they
were not so small, because first the Church of Alexandria was very numerous
from the beginning. Why it should be counted so very numerous from the
beginning, I know no reason, but the mistake of an Historian who will have a
Sect of the Jews (which was numerous in or about Alexandria) to be Christians.

And if they met all in one place it must consequently be very large.

The ground of the consequence is removed, Valesius his own Author says they
had but one Church to meet in, in Dionysius his time, almost 3 Ages from the
beginning page 64
. If that one was large, yet it is not like that it stood till Athanasius his
time; after so many Edicts for demolishing of all Christian Churches, and a
severe Execution of them in Diocletian's Persecution.

Nor is it likely they should divide till they were grown too numerous for the
biggest Meeting Place they could conveniently have.

It is as likely as that Athanasius speaks truth, in a matter which he
perfectly knew; he tells us they did divide, and yet were not too numerous for
one great Church, in which they met conveniently too; yea, better than when
dispersed in those little places, as he says and proves, (...), etc.

2dly, He says, Though before the Empire was converted they might be confined
to little places, and forced to meet severally; yet after Constantine became
Christian, it is not likely that the Alexandrians would content themselves with
small and strait Chapels.

Nor did they content themselves with those little ones, for besides this built
in Athanasius his time, there was one greater than those small ones finished in
Alexander's time, where the body of Catholics assembled with Alexander, the
other places being too strait, (...), this is that one I excepted, when I said
(after Athanasius) that the rest, all save one, were exceeding small. But is it
any proof that these were not very small which Athanasius represents as such,
because there was one (expressly excepted from that number) something larger? As
for what he adds, that then every ordinary City, built very great and
magnificent Cathedrals, it is easily said, but will never be proved.

3dly, Some of these Churches had been built with a design of receiving as many
as well could have personal Communion in Worship together.

Neither will this hold, unless some of those Churches could have received all,
which had Personal Communion with Athanasius in this greatest Church; which he
denies, and makes use of to Constantius as a plea why he made use of the
greatest.

As Theonas is said by Athanasius to have built a Church bigger than any of
those they had before.

Where Theonas is said by Athanasius to have built a Church, etc. I find not,
nor does he direct us where it may be found, I suppose for very good Reason.
Indeed Athanasius in this Apology speaks of a Church called Theonas (it is like
in memory of a former Bishop of that place) where he says the multitude of
Catholics met with Alexander, (...); in like Circumstances, as a greater
multitude assembled with himself in the new Church, which was greater, and
pleads Alexander's example in defense of what he did. But Theonas could not
build this Church, for he was dead many years before, being Predecessor to
Peter whom Achillas and Alexander succeeded Eusebius. l. 7. c. ult. Theodoret ^.
1. c. 2.
.

And yet this and all the rest were but few and strait in comparison of the
great multitude of Catholics that were in Alexandria.

I expected another Conclusion, but if this be all, he might have spared the
premises; for one part of it we assert, the other we need not deny, only
adding with Athanasius, that the greatest Church was capable (...), of
receiving this great multitude.

But here he sticks, and will wriggle a little more, But I conceive, says he,
after all this, that the expressions of Athanasius do not conclude that all the
Christians in Alexandria were met in this great Church.

That all and every one did come, was never imagined. It is but the main body
of the Catholics that M. B. intends, as our Author observes a little before.

For the tumultuous manner in which they came to their Bishop to demand a
general Assembly, makes it probable that not only Women and Children, would be
glad to absent themselves, but many more, either apprehensive of the effect of
this tumultuous proceeding, or of the danger of such a crowd.

The Women he will not admit; but was it ever known that such a great and
solemn Assembly for Worship consisted only of Men? Were not the Women in
Communion with Athanasius's Christians, that they must be left out, when he
says all the Catholics met? Can all be truly said to assemble when the far
greater part (Women, Children and his many more) were absent? Are not the Women
in the Primitive Church often noted for such Zeal for the Worship of Christ, as
made them contemn far greater dangers, than here they had any cause to be
apprehensive of? The supposed danger was either from the Crowd or the Tumult.
For the former, did the Women and many more never come to Christian Assemblies,
when there was any danger of being crowded? I think there was as great danger
from a crowd in Basiliscus his Reign, when the whole City of C. P. is said to
have met together in a Church with the Emperor, but yet the Women stayed not
behind but crowded in with the men, as Theodorus Lector reports it, (...)
Collect. lib. 1*
. Besides Athanasius here signifies the danger of a crowd was in the lesser
Churches, (not in this) where they could not meet but (...), and so drefers
their assembling together in the great Church as better.

As for the Tumults (which might have been concealed in a Vindication of the
primitive Church) if there was any thing tumultuous, it was over when
Athanasius had complied with their desires to meet in the great Church. And so
no apprehension of danger left to women, or any else, upon this account.

And even those that did assemble there were too many for one Congregation, and
was an assembly more for Solemnity and Ostentation than for Personal Communion
in Worship, and the proper ends of a religious Assembly.

Here he runs as cross, to the great Athanasius and the account which he gives
of this Assembly as if he had studied it, debasing that as more for Ostentation
than for Personal Communion in Worship, and the proper ends of a Religious
Assembly, which Athanasius highly commends both for the more desirable
communion which the Christians had there in Worship, and for the greater
efficacy of it as to the proper ends of a Religious Assembly. Let any one view
the passages Apol. 2. p. 531. 532.
and judge. He sets forth the harmony, and concurrence of the multitude in
worship with one voice. He preferrs it before their assemblies, when dispersed
in little places, and not only because the unanimity of the multitude was
herein more apparent, but because God would sooner hear them, (...). For if,
says he, according to our Savior's promise, where two shall agree concerning
anything it shall be done for them by my Father, etc. how prevalent will be the
one voice of so numerous a people, assembled together and saying Amen to God?
and more to that purpose, by which we may perceive, Athanasius being Judge, how
true is it that this Assembly was more for Solemnity and Ostentation, than for
Personal Communion in Worship and the proper ends of a Religious Assembly. And
thus much to let us see through the Arts used to cloud a clear passage alleged
out of Athanasius; if M. B. had betaken himself to such little devises, in like
Circumstances; our Author would have taken the Liberty to tell him, that he was
driven to hard Shifts.

Before we leave Alexandria I am to take notice of what is said by our Author,
to part of a Letter writ by a Friend to M. B. concerning this City and the
number of Christians therein in Constantius his time. The Writer of it observes
a gross abuse put upon him in the Vindicator's Answer to it, and desires his
defense may be here inserted. It contains an argument to confirm what was
concluded from th^^ passage in Athanasius here insisted on, that the Catholics
then could meet in one place. After that passage and to this purpose M. B.
introduced it, as is very apparent Church Hist. page 9. 10.
. This our Author seems to observe when he begins with it; he adds, says he,
to this of Athanasius (the very passage mentioned) another argument given him
by a learned Friend Page: 58.
. And after he has done with it Page 63.
, because M. B. has endeavored to represent the Church of Alexandria so
inconsiderable even in Constantius his days, etc. And yet, how it comes to
pass I know not, it is quite out of his thoughts while he is examining it. He
was so hasty for confuting, that he stays not to take notice what he was to
confute, though the intent of it be most plain and obvious, both by the
occasion and words of the Letter: But Forces that sense on it, and makes that
the design of it; which I was far from thinking, would ever come into any man's
Fancy, when he was awake. The words of the Letter are these; The City of
Alexandria, says Strabo, is like a Soldiers Cloak, etc. and by computation
about ten miles in compass, a 3 d. or 4th. part of this was taken up with
public buildings, Temples and Royal Palaces; thus is two miles and an half or
three and a quarter taken up. He answers, I will not say this learned friend
has imposed on M. B. but there is a very great mistake betwixt them.

But the mistake is his own, and such a one, as I wonder how he could fall into
it. He takes it for granted, that the Argument is brought to prove what
Christians Alexandria had in Strabo's time. Here is not the least occasion
given for this, unless the citing of Strabo showing the dimensions of that
City: but Primate Usher is quoted too, on the same account; and so as much
reason to fancy the design was to show what Christians Alexandria had in the
Primate's time. Jcrome, Epiphanius, Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomen are also cited
there; why could not these as well lead him to the right Age, which their words
plainly point at, without the least glance at any Age before, as Strabo alone
(cited without any respect to the time when he writ) so far mislead him? Nay,
the 4th. age is expressly mentioned in the Letter; and the numerousness of the
Novatians and Arians in Alexandria at the time intended, is insisted on; could
he think any man so stupid, that had but the least acquaintance with those
things, as to speak of Arians, and Novatians in Strabo's time? But it may be,
though I would hope better, our Examiner was too inclinable to fix an absurd
thing upon the Writer of the Letter; that he might be excused, from giving a
better answer when it was not ready.

But let us hear what he says to it; yet what can be expected to be said by
one who makes his own dream the Foundation of his Discourse? However let us try
if we can find any one clause that is true and pertinent in the whole, and
begin with the best of it.

Though Strabo says that Temples and great Palaces took up a 4th. or a 3d. of
the City, yet our Examiner will have us think there might be inhabitants there;
when Epiphanius says, as I cited him, that part was (...), destitute of
Inhabitants, so he tells us Bruchium was. The Examiner denies not Bruchium to
be that Region of the City which Strabo says, was taken up with Public
Buildings, but adds, what all the public buildings of the Town in one Region?
But who said all the Public Buildings? This is his own fancy still.

And that an outer skirt too, as it is described by the Greek Martyrology in
Hillarion, etc.

If he mean it was not a Part or Region of the City Strabo and Epiphanius will
have Credit before a story out of the Greek Martyrology, or him that tells it,
when it appears not in the words cited. In Strabo it is (...) part of the City,
in Epiphanius it is a Region, (...). For as Rome was divided into 14 Regions,
and de pond. ut men's p. 166.
C. P. in imitation of it, so Alexandria was divided into 5, whereof Bruchium
was one, and the greatest of all. So I understand Ammianus Marcellinus, who
upon the loss of Bruchium says, amisit regionum maximam parteni quae Bruchium
apellatur; Alexandria lost the greatest of its Regions, which was called
Bruchium.

This Epiphanius says was destitute of Inhabitants in his time, and not
unlikely, and perhaps destitute of Public Buildings too, for it was destroyed
after an obstinate siege in the Reign of Aurelian as Ammianus Marcellinus, or
of Claudius as Eusebius.

When he has granted all that I designed, that this part was destitute of
Inhabitants, and more too, that it was destroyed, yet he would have the City no
less, no necessity of this, says he, sure we are not yet awake? can a City
loose (...), in the Historian's words, a 4th. yea, or a third part of its
largeness, and yet not be so much the less? He has nothing to salve this, but
it may be, and it might be, groundless surmises, without either reason or
authority.

They might enlarge upon another quarter, being it may be forbid to build
Bruchium -- they might dwell closer than before, and so their multitude be
undiminisht.

How far it is from being true, that their multitude was undiminisht; and how
needless either to enlarge -- or to dwell closer, may soon appear. The
multitude must needs be much diminished in such a War, and a close siege of
many years continuance, for so it is reported both by Eusebius and Jerome; and
it was much wasted in Chronic.
and in a consumptive condition, before it was thus besieged and dismantled by
Claudius 2. or Aurelian.

It was greatly diminished in numbers by Caracalla who Massacred a great part
of the Inhabitants. Herodian says, (...), etc. the slaughter was such that
with the streams of blood, which ran from the place, not only the vastest
outlets of Nilus, but the Sea, all along the Shore of Alexandria was
discolored Hist. Lib. 4.
. Toward the latter end of the third Age, Dionysius gives an account of the
strange diminution of the Alexandrians In Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 22.
, signifying that in former days the elderly men were more numerous, than in
his time, both young and old, comprizing all from infancy, to extreme old age,
(...).

However certain it is, that this City long after the destruction of Bruchium,
retained its ancient Greatness; and is represented by no Author as diminisht
either in Number or Wealth.

This is certain no otherwise than the former, i. e. quite the wrong way. For
not long after the destruction of Bruchium, in the Egyptian War made by
Diocletian upon Achilleus, which Eusebius, Eutropius and others mention: It was
greatly diminisht both in numbers and wealth. For Alexandria after a long
siege, was taken by force and plundered, great Execution done upon the Citizens,
and the Walls of the Town demolished.

A great part of the City (says the Letter) was assigned to the Jews, so
Strabo indefinitely as Josephus quotes him, others tell us more punctually,
that their share was two of the five divisions; though many of them had their
habitations in the other divisions, yet they had two 5th. parts entire to
themselves; and this is I suppose the (...) which Josephus says the Successors
of Alexander, set apart for them; thus we see how 6 or 7 miles of the 10 are
disposed of. To this he says, The number of those Jews was much lessened
within a little while after Strabo by an insurrection of the Alexandrians
against them.

I suppose he means by that slaughter of them which Josephus mentions De Bello
Judaic. l. 2. c. 21.
, where 50000 were destroyed; but what were these to the vast number of Jews in
Egypt, which Philo Legate. ad Caium.
says amounted to no less than a million?

The civil Wars afterward under Trajan and his Successor had almost extirpated
them.

It was in Palestine where these Tragedies were acted, and was so far from
extinguishing them in Egypt or Alexandria, that thereby, in all probability;
their numbers were there increased; for being divested of about 1000 Towns and
Garrisons by Severus (Adrian's General) as Dion reports, and forbidden all
access to Jerusalem as Aristo Pelleus in Eusebius Lib. 4. cap. 6.
, this made other places more desirable, those particularly where they might
have good entertainment as they were wont to have at Alexandria, and what Dion
Chrysostom says, confirms it.

But all this which he says, if there were truth in it, is impertinent; for
the Letter is not concerned what Jews were there near Strabo or Adrian's time,
but in the fourth Age. Yet this is all that he has to say to the rest of the
Letter, besides the publishing and repeating of his own mistake, and upon no
other ground making himself sport with the Writer of it.

Thus he begins, by the same rule he might have disposed of all at once, and
concluded out of Strabo 's division of the Town, that there was not one
Christian in it: and repeats it thrice in the same Page, No matter what number
of Jews or Heathens it had in Strabo 's days --, it is kindly done to provide
for Christians before they were in being, surely Strabo, who makes the
distribution, never intended the Christians one foot of ground in all that
division, and this learned Friend might have spared his little Town of 8 or 10
Furlongs, which he so liberally bestows upon the Bishop of Alexandria, before
our Savior was born --, and he is at it again several times in the following
discourse Page 69. 94.
.

How desirable a thing is it to have M. B. and his Friend rendered ridiculous?
when rather than it shall not be done, our Examiner will publish his own
indiscretion so many times over to effect it. But I will forbear any sharper
reflections upon this Author, for taking him to be an ingenuous Person, I may
expect he will be severe upon himself, when he discerns his error; which I
doubt not but he will see clearly by once more reading that Letter.

Next he would disprove M. B's representation of the Church of Alexandria in
Constantius's time, by giving a view of that Churches greatness from the first
Foundation of it Page 61.
; which because it may concern the Letter duly understood, I shall take some
notice of it very briefly. But there is something interposed, between this and
the Letter, which requires some observance; there we may have an instance of
this Gentleman's severity upon M. B. and how reasonable it is; His remark,
says he, upon two Bishops living quietly in Alexandria is so disingenuous a
suggestion, that he has reason to be ashamed of it.

But what is there in this so disingenuous and shameful? Does not Epiphanius
say this, and our Examiner acknowledge it page 107.
? Ay, but M. B. means that there were not only two Bishops, but their distinct
Churches in this City. Well, and does not Epiphanius give him suffici-ground
for it? Does he not tell us that Meletius made Bishops, who had their (...) in
every place where he came? Does he not signify that the Meletians in
Alexandria had their distinct Churches or Meetings both in the time of
Alexander and Athanasius? says he not particularly of Meletius that being
familiar with Alexander he stayed long in that City, having (...) a distinct
Meeting with those of his own Party? Were there not innumerable Cities in that
Age which had two Bishops and their Churches, some three or four at once (those
of the Arians, the Donatists, the Novatians, the Meletians, etc. besides those
who were styled Catholics) Would this Gentleman take it well if M. B. should
tell him, that he who denies this is disingenuous if he know it, and has some
reason to be ashamed if he know it not? Ay, but Epiphanius was deceived in this
account of the Meletians, and mis-represents them. Indeed our Examiner makes as
bold with Epiphanius (a Bishop of great Zeal and Holiness, a Metropolitan, a
famous Writer (as he does with M. B. charging him with much weakness (as one
easily imposed upon) many oversights, gross mistakes, diverse absurd things,
and such stories, that he will scarce wish worse to his Adversary, than to
believe him Page 112. 113. etc.
. Nor does Epiphanius alone fall under his censure in his Vindication of the
Primitive Church (as he calls it) he goes near to accuse more particular
Persons (Bishops amongst others) of eminency in the ancient Church, than he
defends; so that one may suspect his design was, not so much to defend eminent
Bishops, as great Bishoprics such as the ancient Church had none, and to run
cross to M. B. more than to vindicate any.

In St. Mark's time Alexandria had several Churches, though but one Bishop, etc
Eusebius. l. 2 c. 16
.

What Eusebius says of Churches in Alexandria at that time, is grounded upon a
mistake, as appears, because immediately after the words cited, he adds, so
great was the multitude of Beleivers at Mark's first attempt there, that Philo
in his writings thought fit to give an account of them, (...). Eusebius
conceived that the Essenes, as Scaliger, or the Therapeutae, as Valesius, whom
Philo describes, were the Christians of Mark's Conversion; and there being
Assemblies of that Sect of the Jews in Philo's time, the Historian speaks of
Christian Churches at Alexandria in Mark's time; but those who believe that he
erred in the former, can have no reason to give him credit in the latter. Our
Examiner does not deny that he was mistaken, but says, it is not material
whether they were Jews or Christians; yet those who inquire after Truth
sincerely, will think it material; and little value a Testimony which has no
better ground than a mistake.

The next is no better Page 62.
, that is an Epistle of Adrian, which others are puzzled to make sense of, or
such sense as can have any appearance of Truth. That very passage in it, which
is the only ground of our Author's Argument, himself acknowledges to be false;
for he would show the Christians in Alexandria to be numerous enough for his
purpose, because it is there said that some (whom he takes to be Christians)
did force the Patriarch (whoever he be) to worship Christ, and yet adds, there
is no doubt but Adrian does the Christians wrong in this point, for they never
forced any to their Religion. Will he have us to rely upon reasonings, which
have no better Foundation, than what is undoubtedly false by his own
Confession? He says also it is not material to our purpose whether this
Patriarch were Bishop of Alexandria, or chief Governor of the Jews. If so,
then it is not material with this Gentleman, either to argue from that which is
not true, or else from that which is nothing to his purpose. For if this
Patriarch was the Bishop of Alexandria, that they forced him to worship Christ,
is not true, he did it of his own accord: and if it be not one, who was no
Christian, that they forced; then is not any thing in this passage to his
purpose, and Adrian's Epistle might have been waved as a mere impertinency.

That which follows Page 63.
, has not the show of a reason, the great Catechists of Alexandria, as
Pantenus, Clemens, Origin and Heracles, did not a little advance the growth of
Christian Religion in that place, etc.

Must there needs be a Diocesan Church there because the Catechists did advance
Religion not a little?

The next concerning Dionysius his Church meeting at Chebron (Cephro it should
be) and Coluthio, is already fully answered, as it is offered with better
improvement than our Examiner gives it No Evidence for page 35, 36.
. It cannot easily be apprehended how a larger Church meeting with Dionysius,
made up of those banished with him, and others from several parts of Egypt, at
Cephro, a Village in Lybia, a distinct Province; should prove that he had a
Diocesan Church in Alexandria, to any, but those who are very inclinable to
believe it without proof. Nor will others understand that Dionysius is better
proved to be a Diocesan by the Christians which came from Alexandria to
Coluthio in Mareotes; (there being none there besides) for the Believers in
Alexandria it self, were no more than one Church could hold, as Valesius
collects from this very place to our Examiners regret, Ex hoc loco colligitur,
aetate quidem Dionysii, unicam adhuc fuisse Alexandriae Ecclesiam, in quam
omnes Vrbis illius fideles, Orationis causa, conveniebant Not. in Eusebius. lib.
7. cap. 11.
.

In the next Paragraph our Examiner argues for the great numbers of Christians
at Alexandria, from the multitude of Martyrs at Thebes.

Under the Persecution of Diocletian what numbers of Christians might be at
Alexandria, may be judged by the multitude of Martyrs that suffered at Thebes
Page 64.
, etc.

But here he mistakes Eusebius, who gives an account not of the Martyrs which
were (...), in the City Thebes, but (...), the Province Thebais: which was half
of that large Kingdom, according to the ancient division of it into the upper
and lower Egypt. The Superior Egypt was Thebais, the inferior was called
sometimes the Delta, sometimes Egypt in a restrained sense, and this division
in these terms we have in Eusebius (to go no further) a little before Cap. 6.
, (...), where he begins his account of the Martyrs in this Country. Now if
the Christians in that Provice of large extent, and comprising very many Cities
may be concluded to be very numerous from the multitudes of Martyrs which
suffered there; yet nothing at all can be inferred for any numbers to his
purpose in the City Thebes, by which he would conclude their numerousness in
Alexandria. But if M. B. had mistaken one City for so large a Country with
multitudes of Cities in it, and made that mistake the ground of his reasoning;
it is like our Examiner would have exposed him for it in his Preface, as he
does for some lesser matters.

In the following Paragraph Page 65.
, there is a groundless supposition, that the division of Alexandria into
Parishes was antienter than Arius, there being no mention of it by any ancient
Author: as also an accusation of Petavius as mistaking Epiphanius his words,
without any Sermon. of Separation p. 28.
cause that I can discern in those words, though he says, it is plain there.
That which he says is plain, the learned Dean of Paul's could not discern, but
understood Epiphanius as Petavius and others did before him. These I took to be
preliminaries and expected his Argument, but found it not, unless it be couched
in the first words.

The Division of Alexandria between several Presbyters, as it were into so many
Parishes, etc.

But this signifies nothing for his purpose, if those in Alexandria thus
divided could all meet in one place, as Athanasius declares they did; and that
so plainly that any one will judge so, whose interest is not too hard for his
judgment. Valesius (who had no bias unless what might lead him the other way)
understood it as I do; and expresses it in these words. (deciding the matter so
long insisted on, against our Author) Afterward in the times of Athanasius,
when there were more Churches built by diverse Bishops of Alexandria, the
Citizens assembled in several Churches severally and in parcels, as Athanasius
says in his Apology to Constantius; but on the great Festivals, Easter and
Pentecost, no particular assemblies were held, sed universi in majorem
Ecclesiam conveniebant, ut ibidem testatur Athanasius, but all of them
assembled together in the great Church as Athanasius testifies.

So that there can be no pretense that the Church in Alexandria was Diocesan at
this time, unless those who could meet together in one place might make such a
Church. Yet this was then the greatest Church in the Empire save that at Rome,
and what he adds makes that at Rome very unlike such Diocesan Churches, as are
now asserted.

Valesius inferrs from the same passage of Pope Innocent's Epistle to
Decentius, which Petavius brings to prove the contrary, that though there were
several Titles or Churches in Rome then, and had been long before, yet none of
them was as yet appropriated to any Presbyter, but they were served in common
as great Cities in Holland and some other reformed Countries, that have several
Churches and Ministers, etc.

The Advocates for these Churches, who assign the bounds of a Diocese with most
Moderation, will have it to comprize a City with a Territory belonging to it;
but there was no Church in the Territory which belonged to the Bishop of Rome,
he had none but within the City, as Innocentius declares in the cited Epistle,
whereas now the greatest City with a Territory larger than some ancient
Province is counted little enough for a Diocese. Further it is now judged to be
no Diocese which comprises not very many Churches with Presbyters appropriated
to them; but he tells us none of the Churches in Rome were appropriated to any
Presbyter, but they were served in common. How? as greater Cities in Holland
and some other reformed Countries, and then they were ruled in common as these
Cities are. The Government of many Churches is not there, nor was of old, ever
entrusted in one hand; and thus the Bishop of Rome was no more a Diocesan than
the Presbyters of that City.

He concludes Page 66.
with two Assertions which will neither of them hold good. The first that it is
evident out of Athanasius how the Bishop of that City had from the beginning
several fixed Congregations under him.

This is so far from being evident in Athanasius, that he has not one word
which so much as intimates that the Bishop of Alexandria from the beginning had
any such Congregations under him.

The other is that those of Mareotes must be supposed to receive the faith
almost as early as Alexandria.

How true this is we may understand by Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria toward
the latter end of the third Age, who declares that then Mareotes was (...)
Eusebius. l. 7. c. 11.
, it was so far from having any true Christians in it, that it had none of our
Author's old Christians, i. e. virtuous, good men page 60.
. Nor is it likely that the faith was there generally received till many years
after; and therefore not almost so early as Alexandria, unless the distance of
above 200 years will consist with his almost. For Alexandria received the Faith
by the preaching of Mark, who arrived there, says Eusebius, in the 2d. of
Claudius Chron. Eusebius.
, others in the 3d. of Caligula Chron. Alex.
. But in the time of Dionysius it does not appear that Mareotes had so many
Christians, as Bishop Ischyras his Church there consisted of, though those were
but seven, (...) Athan. Apol. 2. page 615.
. But enough of Alexandria, though our Author is far from bringing enough to
prove it even in the 4th. age a Diocesan Church. He may be excused for doing
his utmost to this purpose, considering the consequence of it, for if this
Church was not now so numerous as to be Diocesan, it will be in vain to expect
a discovery of any such Churches in the whole Christian World in those times;
for this is acknowledged to be the greatest City and Church in the Roman Empire
next to Rome. So that there cannot be so fair a pretense for any other
inferior to this, such as Jerusalem, Carthage, Antioch, etc. much less for
ordinary Cities, which were 10 times less considerable than some of the former,
as may be collected from what Chrysostom says of one of them (...), that it
was able to maintain the poor of ten Cities In Mat: Hom. (...).
.

So far the Writer of the Letter. Let me now return to our Author's Preface; To
show that the Christians in Alexandria adhereing to Athanasius were not so
exceeding numerous as is pretended, and not to be compared with the Christians
now in London, I had said, that the greatest part of the Inhabitants of that
City were at this time Heathens or Jews; of those who passed for Christians, it
is like Athanasius had the lesser share Page 34.
, the Novatians and other Sects, the Meletians especially, and the Arians, did
probably exceed his flock in numbers, it may be the Arians there were more
numerous. This last clause (which appears by the expression, I was not positive
in) he alone sixes on, and would disprove it by a passage out of Athanasius.
But the Greek is false printed, and and the sense defective for want of some
word, and so no Judgment can be well passed thereon, unless I saw it; and where
to see it he gives no direction. My concern therein is not so great as to
search for it through so voluminous an Author. It will serve my turn well
enough, if the Arians were but very numerous, or as Sozomen expresses them,
(...) Lib. 1. c. 14:
, which cannot be denied, though they alone were not more numerous. The last
thing he would take notice of, is the Diocese of Theodoret, but this is
remitted to the Dean of Paul's, yet one thing he says he cannot omit; though
some may think that he had better have passed it (as he had many other things);
than being so much in haste, to slip at almost every line, as he does in those
few which concern it.

If these 800 Churches, not 80 as this Gentleman reckons them (it was not he
but the Printer that so reckoned them, as the Errata show) belonged to him as
Metropolitan, and they were all Episcopal Churches (I never met with any
before, that took them for Episcopal Churches, and how he should fall into this
mistake I cannot imagine; I will not believe that he creates it, to make
himself work) this poor Region of Cyrus would have more Bishops than all Africa
(not so neither, for by the conference at Carthage, and the abbreviation of it
by St. Austin, much more to be relied on, than the Notitia published by Simond,
which is neither consistent with others, nor with it self, Africa had many more
Bishops than 800) notwithstanding they were more numerous there than in any
part of the World besides. Nor will this pass for true with those, who take his
own account concerning their numbers in Africa (which he reckons but 466
Vindic. p. 149.
taking in those of the Schismatics too; about 66 for each Province one with
another, counting them as he does seven:) and the account which others give of
their numbers, in the ancient Roman Province, the Kingdom of Naples, the Island
Crete, Ireland, to say nothing of Armenia, and other parts of the World.

That which follows, is I suppose, instead of an Answer to the other part of my
discourse concerning the popular election of Bishops, which this Gentleman was
as much concerned to take notice of, as of the few passages he has touched in
the former part, why he did not I will not enquire further, but satisfy my
self with what is obvious; especially since he tells us he intends a discourse
of such a Subject. If in this designed work he satisfies me, that it was not
the general practice of the ancient Church, for the People to concur in the
choice of their Bishops, he will do me a greater displeasure, than the
confutation of what I have writ, or any other that I can fear he intends me; by
taking me off from further Conversation with ancient Authors, as persons by
whose Writings we can clearly know nothing. For if that point be not clear in
Antiquity. I can never expect to find any thing there that is so.

I intended to conclude this discourse here, without giving the Reader further
trouble; but considering there are misapprehensions about the Subject in
question, those being taken by diverse, for Diocesan Churches which indeed are
not such, and arguments used to prove them so which are not competent for that
purpose, (of which there are many instances, as elsewhere so particularly in
the latter end of this Authors discourse): I thought it requisite for the
rectifying of these mistakes, and to show the insufficiency or impertinency of
such reasonings, to give an account what mediums cannot in reason be esteemed,
to afford competent proof of Diocesan Churches.

In general, Those who will satisfy us that any Churches, in the first Ages of
Christianity, were Diocesan, should prove them to be such Diocesans as ours
are, as large or near as large; otherwise what they offer, will scarce appear
to be pertinent. For the rise of this debate is the question between us,
whether the Bishops of these times be such as those in the primitive Church.
This we deny, because modern Bishops will have another sort of Churches or
Dioceses, than were known in the best Ages. Not that we reject all Dioceses or
Diocesan Churches, for both (...) and (...) are used by the Ancients for such
Churches as we allow. It is those of a later Model, that we approve not, as
vastly differing from the ancient Episcopal Churches. The modern Dioceses, and
Churches thence denominated are exceeding great and extensive, consisting of
many scores, or many hundred particular Churches, whereas for the three first
Ages we cannot find 3 Bishops that had two particular Churches in his Diocese,
nor in the 4th. one in 50 (if I may not say one in a hundred) that had more. So
that the difference is exceeding great, and more considerable in the
consequence thereof, which I had rather give an account of in the words of the
very learned D. St. than mine own. Dioceses generally, says he, in the
primitive, and Eastern Churches were very small and little, as far more
convenient for this end of them in the Government of the Church under the
Bishops charge Iren. p. 376.
, and elsewhere, Discipline, says he, was then a great deal more strict,
Preaching more diligent, Men more apprehensive of the weight of their Function,
than for any to undertake such a care and charge of Souls, that it was
impossible for them even to know, observe or watch over, so as to give an
account for them Page 332.
, Men that were employed in the Church then did not consult for their ease and
honor, and thought it not enough for them to sit still, and bid others work
Page 333.
. St. Austin speaking of the 3d. Age, makes account of many thousand Bishops
then in the World Contra Crescon. lib. 3.
. Our Author seems to treat that excellent Person something coursely on this
occasion, and goes near to question his judgment or veracity for it, Page 534.
some may think this not over decently done (to say no more) when it is his
business, to vindicate some ancient Bishops who need it, to reflect upon one,
so untainted, as to need none. However since he says that Father judged of
other Ages by his own, when Dioceses were exceedingly multiplied Page 535.
, we may suppose he will grant there were many thousand Bishops in the 4th.
Age. Yet among so many thousand Bishops I do not expect that any can show me 20
(if I may not say 10.) who had so many Churches in their Diocese, as some
Pluralists amongst us may have, who yet never pretend to have a Diocesan
Church. Those therefore who will make proof of such Diocesan Churches as are in
question, must show us some in the primitive times something like ours in
largeness and extent. Amongst the instances produced for this purpose by former
or later Writers, I find none any thing near to ours, save that only of
Theodoret in the 5th. Age. But this in the former Discourse was showed to be so
insufficient to serve the ends it is alleged for, that I may hope it will be
pressed no more for this Service.

More particularly. 1st. It proves not a Church to be Diocesan because it
consists of more than can meet together in one place, for there are Parishes in
this Land that contain many hundreds or thousands more than can meet in the
Parish Church, and yet are but counted single Congregations. Though multitudes
in such Churches be far from proving them to be Diocesan, yet I think two
instances cannot be given in the third Age of more in one Church than are in
some single Congregations amongst us; nor many afterward, till Arianism and
Donatism were suppressed; which the latter was not in Africa till after the
famous Conference at Carthage, Anno 410; nor the former in other parts during
the 4th. Age; for though Theodosius made some sharp Declarations against them
and other Heretics, yet none but the Eunomians were prosecuted, if we believe
Socrates Lib. 5. c. 20.
; that Emperor gave not the least trouble to the rest, forced none to
communicate with him, but allowed them their Meetings, and even in C. P. when
afterward the Arians divided among themselves, each party had several
Congregations in that City Lib. 5. c. 23.
; both that which adhered to Marinus, and that also which followed Dorothius,
these keeping the Churches which they had before and the other erecting new
Churches.

I know there are those, who from some passages in Tertullian Apol. c. 37. and
ad Scapulam.
, would infer that the Christians in his time were the major part of the
Inhabitants in all Cities, and so enough not only for vast Congregations, but
for Diocesan Churches. But Tertullian was a great Orator and frequently uses
hyperbolical expressions, which ought not to be streined. Such are those
insisted on, and by regular construction they import no more than that the
Christians were very numerous in many parts of the Empire. Those that will have
them streined, and understood as they found, offer great injury to Tertullian,
making him intend that which has no warrant in any Records of Antiquity, Civil
or Ecclesiastical, that I can meet with. Before they impose such a sense on
him, they ought in reason to make it manifest, that the Christians were the
major part of the inhabitants in some considerable Cities at that time; when I
believe they cannot produce two instances in the whole Empire, I never yet
could meet with one.

Our Author from these Oratorical expressions sticks not to conclude, that it
is evident that the Christians were the major part every where, but in Rome
more eminently so, and Dr. Downham signifies that Tertullian speaks chiefly of
the City of Rome Defense l. 2. c. 5. p. 98.
, this Gentleman says, that by his account it is made very probable, that they
were the better half of the Roman Empire, and tells us, it is page 54.
certain that the number of Christians at Rome was proportionably greater than
in any part of the Empire. Now how far the Christians at Rome were from being
the major part of the Inhabitants, we may judge by the vast disproportion
between the poor in the Church at Rome, and those in the whole City. Cornelius
near 50 years after Tertullian (when it was of more growth by half an Age)
reckons the poor of his Church to be 1500; whereas out of Suetonius and others,
the poorer sorts of Citizens, quae e publico victitabat, are computed to be
320000 Lipsius d^ Mag. Romans l. 3. cap. 2.
.

Many take occasion from the thousands converted at Jerusalem, Acts 2. and 4.
to conclude the vast number of Christians and exceeding largeness of Churches
elsewhere. Our Author has nothing from Scripture for Diocesan Churches but
this, which is considerable Page 435, etc.
; nor will this appear so, if but a small part of those thousands can be
counted inhabitants of Jerusalem, and so fixed in that Church. And this is as
demonstrable as any thing of this nature can be. For this miraculous Conversion
was at Pentecost, one of the three great Feasts, when there was a vast
concourse of Jews and Proselytes from all parts to that City: These converted
were not only Inhabitants of Jerusalem but Foreigners; and in all reason more
of these proportionably, as they exceeded the Inhabitants in number. And then
those of the City will scarce be a 20th part of the 5 or 8000 Converts. For the
Foreigners that resorted to Jerusalem at these great Solemnities are reckoned
to be three millions, (...) Joseph de Bell. Judaic. Lib. 2. cap. 24.
, whereas the Inhabitants of that City were but about an 120000 (...), but of
this elsewhere more fully.

The Author of the Vindication will not have so great a part of those Converts
to be Strangers, and to return home when the Feast was over, and assigns
something like reasons for it.

1st, That the Scripture gives no countenance to this Conjecture, but says all
those strange Nations were Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Original word
inclines most on this side.

That he should say the Scripture gives no countenance to this, is something
strange. It is plain in Scripture, that God enjoined the Children of Israel to
repair to Jerusalem from all quarters of the Country where they dwelt thrice a
year, for the observance of the three great Feasts. And it is apparent also
that they were wont to come up to Jerusalem at those Solemnities, both Jews and
Proselytes, (...) In Eusebius. l. 2. c. 23.
. And it is evident in that Chapter cited, Acts 2. The Feast of Pentecost being
come, there was a resort of Jews and Proselytes from all those parts of the
World to this City. Ay, but the Scripture says, all those Strange Nations were
inhabitants of Jerusalem.

He cannot judge that the Scripture says this, but upon a supposition that the
word (...), Acts 2. 5. can signify no other thing than inhabitants, but this is
a mistake, for the word denotes such as abide in a place, not only as
inhabitants, but as strangers or Sojourners. Thus Dr. Hammond will have it
translated abiding, rather than dwelling In loc.
, those that were there as strangers In Act. 10. 2.
, and here expresses those abiding at Jerusalem, to be Jews which came up to
the Feast of the Passover, and Proselytes which had come from several Nations
of all Quarters of the World. Thus also Mr. Mead In Exercit. in Act. 2. 5.
, for the word (...), says he, which I translate sojourning rather than
dwelling (for so I understand it, that they were not proper dwellers, but such
as came to worship at Jerusalem from those far Countries, at the Feast of the
Passover and Pentecost, and so had been continuing there some good time) it is
true that in the usual Greek, (...) and (...) signify a durable mansion, but
with the Hellenists in whose Dialect the Scripture speaks, they are used
indifferently for a stay of a shorter or longer time, that is, for to sojourn
as well as to dwell, as these two examples out of the Septuagint will make
manifest, Genesis 27. 44. 1 Kings 17. 20. there (...) is to sojourn only. In a
word (...) and (...) answer to the Hebrew Verb (...) which signifies any stay
or remaining in a place. Grotius says it answers the Hebrew word which is
rendered not only by (...) but (...), etc. adding, therefore it is not said
only of them who had fixed their habitation, but of those who were come to the
City for the celebrating of the Passover or Pentecost, staying there for a
while. The best and most learned Expositors generally take it so in this place,
as denoting, not settled Inhabitants, but such as resided there only for a
time. Indeed when this Author would have the Scripture say all these strange
Nations were inhabitants of Jerusalem, he makes it speak things inconsistent.
For it is said ver. 9. they were (...), dwellers at Mesopotamia, Judea,
Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, etc. by which must be understood, either that they
were inhabitants or Sojourners in those Countries; that they were now
Sojourners there, no man will imagine, nor can any man be said to be actually a
sojourner in a place where he is not, And if they were inhabitants of those
Regions they could not be inhabitants of Jerusalem, unless they could be
inhabitants of several distant Countries at once. To the same purpose Mr. Mead
Ibid.
. (...), where note by the way, that (...) are comprehended in the number of
those whom my Text says were (...), which confirms my interpretation that
(...) there signifies sojourning, and not dwelling; for that they could not be
said to dwell in both places.

2. Suppose there were some of them strangers, etc.

Suppose, says this Gentleman, there were some of them Strangers? but does any
man that understands how or by whom those Feasts were celebrated, ever suppose
that there were not very many thousands of strangers, such as were not
Inhabitants, present at those Solemnities? Josephus (and Eusebius after him)
says, there were three millions in the City at the Passover, and declares what
course was taken to give Cestius Gallus a certain account of their numbers; but
then they were all in a manner strangers, for he adds, (...), this vast
multitude consisted of Foreigners De bell. Jud. lib. 7. c. (...).
. Yet our Author goes on and confirms himself in the former mistake by another;
the verse he cites to prove them fixed Inhabitants at Jerusalem is
misunderstood, the words are (...), which do not signify any fixed abode in
that place, but only their constancy or persevering in the duties mentioned
while they were there. This is the use of the Expression in the New Testament,
Col. 4. 2. (...), and so Romans 12. 12. Continuing in Prayer, which they might do
if they never had a fixed habitation, nor continued as inhabitants in any
place. And thus the Evangelist Luke uses the phrase in this book of the Acts c.
1. ver. 14. c. 2. 46. c, 6. 4. But our Author I think will never find it used
in this form for any settled or continued abode in a place, and had no reason
to fancy it here.

He thinks it not probable Page 437.
that the zeal and devotion of those Converts would suffer them to leave the
Apostles, whereas it is certain that the Primitive Zeal and Devotion, though it
crucified them to the World, yet heightened and improved a Christian care of
their Families and the Souls of their Relatives and others. And their zeal for
Christ, and love to Souls would hasten them homeward, that they migh acquaint
their Families and others with Christ and the Doctrine of Salvation, as those
dispersed from Jerusalem did, chapter 8.

The five thousand mentioned chap. 4. ver. 4. he will have to be a new
accession to the three thousand before Converted, but should not have been so
positive in it without reason. Those who are engaged in the same cause with him
(besides many others) are not of his opinion herein, as they would have been if
they had seen any ground for it. Dr. Hammond In loc.
takes the 5000 to be the number of the Auditory, not of the Converts, Bishop
Downham includes the three thousand in those five Defense l. 2. c. 5. page 85.
, and the Dean of Paul's makes account but of five thousand in all Sermon. of
Separation Page 26.
. To me it is not material whether they were 5000 or 8000 or many more, seeing
there was not the twentieth part of them other than Foreigners, and such as
for any thing I can see or hear designed not to dwell at Jerusalem, and so
intended not fix themselves in that particular Church. There can be no just
reckoning of the numerousness of a Church, from an occasional recourse of
strangers, who inhabit remote parts or foreign Countries.

If there had been more Christians in the Church of Jerusalem than could meet
in one place, that would be no Evidence that it was a Diocesan Church, whereas
the whole is said in the Acts to meet in one place Act. 2. 44. 6. 2. etc.
. He has nothing to say against this which is considerable, but that the all,
may denote only those that were present Page 441.
, and so the sense will be, all that were in one place, were in one place, if
this can please himself, I think it will satisfy none else. Let Dr. Hammond
decide this business, for in such a cause we may admit a Party to be Umpire
Answer to L. Ministers. page 78. 79.
, What follows, says he, of the paucity of Believers, and their meeting in one
place, is willingly granted by us. What they say of the point of time, Acts 2.
41. that believers were so numerous, that they could not conveniently meet in
one place, this is contrary to the evidence of the Text, which says expressly
ver. 44. that all the believers were (...), which in the last Paragraph they
interpreted meeting in one and the same place: the like might be said of the
other places, Acts 4. 3. and 5. 14. for certainly as yet, though the number of
Believers increased, yet they were not distributed into several Congregations.

Concerning the dispersion, Acts 8. 1. P. 442. 443.
he tells us, Though they are all said to be scattered besides the Apostles,
yet it cannot be understood of all the Beleivers.

No, but of the generality of them, all that could commodiously fly as
strangers might do. Nor must it be confined to all the Officers only, the
generality of Expositors are misrepresented if this be made their sense, nor
does it appear that Eusebius so understood it, (...) is used in Scripture and
other Writers, and Eusebius himself, to denote Believers and not Officers only.
As for the time of the dispersion (though I need not insist on it) probably it
was nearer this great Pentecost than some would have it. On the first day of
the week in the morning were the three thousand converted, the next or (as some
tell us) the same day afternoon, at the ninth hour D. L:
, the number of the Converts was increased to five thousand. While this Sermon
was preaching the Apostles are apprehended and committed to Custody till the
next morning. Another, it is like the day after, they are imprisoned, but
enlarged by an Angel in the night, chap. 5. In or near that week were the seven
Deacons chosen, presently after the Disciples were thus increased and the
Apostles imprisoned and dismissed. The expression signifies it, chap. 6. 1. It
is not (...), in those days which may admit a latitude and some good distance
of time, but (...), in these days, which denotes the time instant, or that
which immediately ensues, without the interposure of any such distance. And so
the phrase is used by St. Luke both in the Gospel and in the Acts. It is Dr.
Hammond's observation upon Luke 1. 39. The phrase (...), in these days, says
he, has for most part a peculiar signification, differing from (...), in those
days. The latter signifies an indefinite time, sometimes a good way off, but
the former generally denotes a certain time then present, instantly, then at
that time; so here, that which is said of Mary's going to Elizabeth was sure
immediately after the departing of the Angel from her, and therefore it is said
she rose up (...), very hastily, so ver. 24. (...), i. e. immediately Elizabeth
conceived, so chap. 6. 12. (...), i. e. then, at that point of time he went out
to the Mountain. See Chap. 23. 7. c. 24. 18. Acts 1. 5. c. 11. 27. and 21. 15.

Immediately after the choice of the Deacons, Stephen one of the Seven is
apprehended (...), as soon as ever he was ordained, as if he had been ordained
for this alone, says Eusebius (l. 2. c. 1.) And at the same time the
Persecution began which dispersed that Church. Whereas he says, whatsoever
numbers were forced away; it is likely they returned, if he understand it of
the strangers driven from Jerusalem, that they returned to fix there, or
otherwise than occasionally, it is no more likely nor will be sooner proved
than what he asserts a little after (page 444.) viz. that the empty Sepulcher
preached with no less efficacy than the Apostles.

This is enough to satisfy what our Author would draw out of Scripture
concerning the Church of Jerusalem. After some trifling about Objections which
he forms himself, and then makes sport with, he comes to prove that Jerusalem
was a Diocesan Church in the Apostles time. But first he would have us believe
that James was the proper Bishop of that Church, and would evince it by two
Testimonies, that of Clemens and Hegesippus. But what says his Clemens? He
says not only that James was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem presently after our
Saviors Ascension, but what I think our Author was loath to mention. If he had
given us the entire sentence it might have been better understood. After the
Ascension of our Savior, Peter, James and John, the most honored by our Lord,
would not yet contend for the first degree of honor, (...), but chose James
the just Bishop of Jerusalem, Apostolorum Episcopum. Ruffinus reads it, This
seems to signify that his being made a Bishop there, was some degree of Honor
above their being Apostles. A learned Romanist tells us Val^^.
, that the books where Eusebius had this did so abound with Errors, that they
were not thought worth preserving, and so are lost (as those of Papias and
Hegisippus are for the same reason) this may prove one instance of those many
Errors. That which seems to be the sense of his words is more fully expressed
by one who goes under the name of Clemens too l. 2. Recognit.
, James the Lord's Brother was Prince of Bishops, and by his Episcopal
Authority commanded all the Apostles, and so the former Clemens in Ruffinus
calls him the Bishop of the Apostles Hist. l. ^. c. 2.
. If he means such a Bishop as ours (and otherwise his meaning will not serve
our Authors purpose) then the Apostles were but the Vicars or Curates of James.
This is bad enough if James was an Apostle, the absurdest Papist will scarce
ascribe as much to Peter. But if he was not an Apostle, it is yet more
intolerable. If our Author can believe his own Witness, some may admire, but I
think few will follow him.

Let us hear Hegesippus (not quite so ancient as this Gentleman makes him,
since he was alive in the Reign of Commodus) he says, James ruled that Church
(...). If we take this as it is rendered in Jerome after the Apostles, it is
not only against Grammar, but without Truth, and makes James to be Bishop when
he was dead, for he was martyred about the 4th. of Nero, and all the Apostles
but the other James survived him. But if the meaning be that he ruled that
Church with the Apostles, it speaks him no more the Bishop of Jerusalem than
the rest of the Apostles, who were not fixed or topical Bishops, but
Ecumenical Officers of an extraordinary Office and Power and accordingly is
James described* One ancient Author says that he no less than Peter did (...).
And Epiphanius reports Here Is. Cerdon:
, that Hyginus after James, Peter and Paul was the ninth Bishop of Rome
successively, signifying that he was as much Bishop of Rome as Paul and Peter.
I need not quote that other Author who says he ruled the holy Church of the
Hebrews, as also he did all Churches every where founded Ep. to James.
.

However certain it is that James was Bishop of Jerusalem, not only from
Hegisippus and Clemens Alex. but also from St. Paul, who mentions him as one of
the Apostles that he had Conversed with in Jerusalem, and it is likely there
were no more there at that time but he and Peter.

This is no way certain from Clemens and Hegesippus, and so far from being
certain by St. Paul, that his mentioning him as an Apostle makes it rather
certain that he was not a Bishop; for the Offices of an Apostle and of a Bishop
are inconsistent, as is acknowledged and proved by an excellent Person of your
own. Dr. Barrow Suprem. p. 120, 121.
The Offices of an Apostle and of a Bishop are not in their nature well
consistent, for the Apostleship is an extraordinary Office, charged with the
instruction and Government of the whole World, and calling for an answerable
care (the Apostles being Rulers, as St. Chrysostom says, ordained by God,
Rulers not taking several Nations and Cities, but all of them in common
entrusted with the whole world) but Episcopacy is an ordinary standing charge
affixed to one place, and requiring a special attendance there, Bishops being
Pastors who, as Chrysostom says, do sit, and are employed in one place. Now
he that has such a general care can hardly discharge such a particular Office,
and he that is fixed to so particular an attendance, can hardly look well after
so general a charge, etc. Baronius says of St. Peter, that it was his Office
not to stay in one place, but as much as it was possible for one man to travel
over the whole world, and to bring those who did not yet believe to the Faith,
and thoroughly to establish believers. If so how could he be Bishop of Rome,
which was an Office inconsistent with such vagrancy. It would not have beseemed
St. Peter the prime Apostle to assume the charge of a particular Bishop, it had
been a degradation of himself, a disparagement to the Apostolical Majesty for
him to take upon him the Bishopric of Rome, as if the King should become Mayor
of London, as if the Bishop of London should be Vicar of Pancras. And little
before, St. Peter's being Bishop of Rome (it holds as well of James 's being
Bishop of Jerusalem) would confound the Offices which God made distinct, for
God did appoint first Apostles, then Prophets, then Pastors and Teachers,
wherefore St. Peter after he was an Apostle could not well become a Bishop, it
would be such an irregularity as if a Bishop should be made a Deacon.

Ecclesiastical History makes James the ordinary Bishop and Diocesan of the
place.

There is nothing in Ecclesiastical History for it, but what is derived from
Hegesippus and Clemens, whom others followed right or wrong.

It is strange to see Salmasius run his head so violently against such solid
Testimonies as those of Hegesippus and Clemens.

That great person understood things better, and discerned no danger in running
his head against a shadow, and there is nothing more of Solidity in what is
alleged from those Authors.

Further he would prove it a Diocesan Church by a passage in Hegesippus, who
says, that several of the Jewish Sectaries who believed neither a Resurrection
nor Judgment to come, were Converted by James, and that when a great number of
the Rulers and principal men of the City were by this Ministry brought to
believe the Gospel, the Jews made an Uproar, the Scribes and Pharisees saying,
that it was to be feared that all the people would turn Christians Page 446.
.

He says many of the prime Sectaries were converted by James, but this will
scarce prove such a Diocesan Church as he contends for. That which would serve
his turn (that all the people would turn Christians) was not effected, but only
feared by the Jews, who took a course to prevent it by killing James. But if
this were for his purpose, Hegesippus is not an Author to be relied on, part of
the Sentence cited is false, that the Sects mentioned (and he had mentioned
seven) did not believe the Resurrection nor Judgment, whereas the Pharisees and
others of them believed both, which Valesius observes. In Eusebius. 2. c. 23.
One false thing in a Testimony is enough to render it suspected, but there are
near twenty things false or fabulous in this account he gives of James, many of
them marked by Scaliger Animad. in Eusebius. p. 178.
, diverse by Valesius In Eusebius. l. 2. cap. 23.
, and some acknowledged by Petavius Not. ad Here Is 78.
.

He would not have us suspect that the numbers of the Church at Jerusalem were
not so great as he pretends, because Pella, an obscure little Town, could
receive them all besides its own Inhabitants, but we must understand that Town
to be their Metropolis, and the Believers all scattered through the whole
Country, and this as Epiphanius writes.

But where does Epiphanius write this? Not in the place cited, he writes the
contrary both there and elsewhere, that all the Believers (in one place Epiph.
Her. 30.
) that all the Disciples (in another place) (...) De Ponder. and Men's. cap. 15.
, what he adds is but to describe where the Town was situated, all the
Disciples, all the Believers dwelt beyond Jordan in Pella. Archbishop Whitgift
brings this as a pregnant proof that the Christians at Jerusalem were but few
in comparison (and no more than could all meet in one place, as a little before
he affirms again and again) his words are how few Christians was there at
Jerusalem not long before it was destroyed, being above Forty years after
Christ? Does not Eusebius testify Lib. 3. cap. 5.
that they all were received into a little Town called Pella? yet the Apostles
had spent much time and labor in Preaching there; but the number of those that
did not profess Christ in that City was infinite Defense of Answer. Treat. 3.
c. 6. page 175.
. This might be farther cleared by what Epiphanius says of that Church in its
return from Pella, but I design briefness.

Our Author adds one Testimony more, to show that under the Government of
Simeon great numbers were added to that Church, many thousands of the
Circumcision receiving the Christian Faith at that time, and among the rest
Justus, etc. page 448.

But those who view the place in Eusebius will see, that he does not say those
many of the Circumcision were converted by Simeon, or were under his
Government, or belonged to that Church; and so it signifies nothing for his
purpose. And so in fine, the account wherewith he concludes his Discourse of
Jerusalem will not be admitted by any who impartially consider the Premises.

As for his other Scripture instances, there is not so much as the shadow of a
proof showed by him, that there were near so many Christians as in Jerusalem,
or as are in some one of our Parishes, yea, or more than could meet in one
place, either in Samaria (where he says it appears not what kind of Government
was established, page 451.) or in Lydda, which was but a Village, though a fair
one, and far from having Saron for its proper Territory, that being a plain
between Joppa and Caesarea; or in Antioch, page 452. much less in Corinth and
Ephesus which he advisedly passes by, page 456.

Our Author does in effect acknowledge that in Scripture it appears not that
these Churches were Episcopal, much less Diocesan; It is to be confessed, says
he, page 461. that the Scriptures have not left so full and perfect an account
of the Constitution and Government of the first Churches, etc. Thus we have no
more notice of the Churches of Samaria and of Judaea (Jerusalem excepted) than
that such were founded by the Apostles; but of their Government and
Constitution we have not the least Information. What information then can we
have that they were Diocesan or Episcopal? He goes on, And the prospect left of
Antioch in Scripture is very confused, as of a Church in fieri, where a great
number of eminent persons labored together to the building of it up; but only
from Ecclesiastical Writers, who report that this Church, when it was settled
and digested, was committed to the Government of Euodias, and after him to
Ignatius, etc. So that after what form the Church at Antioch was constituted
does not appear (it may be Congregational and not Diocesan, for any thing this
Gentleman can see in Scripture) but only from Ecclesiastical Writers.

But his Ecclesiastical Writers do so contradict one another as renders their
testimonies of little value. Nor is there much more reckoning to be made of the
traditional account they and others give concerning the Succession and
Government of the first Bishops, than this Author makes of Eusebius his
traditional Chronology, page 454. Some make Euodias the first Bishop and he
being dead Ignatius to succeed him Eusebius. l. 3. c. 22.
; on the contrary some will have Ignatius to have been the first, and make no
mention of Euodias Chrysostom. Orat. in Ignat.
; others will have them to have governed that Church both together Clemens
Constitut. l. 7. c. 46.
; some will have Euodias ordained by Peter, and Ignatius by Paul, others report
Ignatius ordained by Peter, and some modern Authors of great eminency, both
Protestants and Papists (not only Baronius but Dr. Hammond) find no more
tolerable way to reconcile them, than by asserting that there were more Bishops
than one there at once, which quite blasts the conceit of a Diocesan Church
there.

And what is alleged for the numbers of Christians there, to support this
conceit of a Diocesan Church, is very feeble, page 452, 453. A great number
believed, Acts 11. 21. and much people, ver. 24. The next verses show, that
there were no more than Paul and Barnabas assembled within one Church; meeting
(...), for a year together, and there taught this (...) or (...). The same
divine Author says, Acts 6. 7. (...), a great Company of the Priests were
converted, and will this Gentleman hence conclude that there were Priests
enough converted to make a Diocese?

He has no ground from Scripture to think otherwise of Rome (that we may take
in all his Scripture instances together) however he would persuade us that
there were several Congregations there in the Apostles times. Let us see how.
By the multitude of Salutations in the end of that Epistle he makes appear the
numbers of Christians in that City. Salute Priscilla and Aquila with the Church
that is in their house.

The Dean of Paul's will have this Church in their house to be but a Family,
this Author will have it to be a Congregation, as if it might be either to
serve a turn. I think it was such a Congregation as removed with Aquila from
one Country to another, for this Church which was in their house at Ephesus
before, (1 Cor 16.) is said to be in their house at Rome, Romans 16. that is,
there were some of the Church which belonged to their Family. It is a question
whether there was now at Rome any one Congregation such as our Author intends,
Grotius In Romans 16.
thinks it probable there was none at all. But let us suppose this to be a
Congregation, where finds he his several others? why where another person would
scarce dream of any? It is not improbable, says he, that several that are
mentioned with all the Saints that are with them, may be the Officers of
several Congregations, page 457. 458.

But it is manifest that in the Apostle's times one Congregation had many
Officers, how then can several Officers be a good Medium to prove several
Congregations? The ancient Authors which count those Officers (mentioned Romans
16.) do make them Bishops (and some except not Narcissus nor Prisca, i. e.
Priscilla, though her Husband also has an Episcopal Chair assigned him) Now if
they were not Bishops at Rome but other places, they are alleged to no
purpose; if they were Bishops at Rome, there will be very many Bishops in that
one Church (it may be more than Priscilla's Congregation consisted of) which
rather than our Author will grant, I suppose he will quit his plurality of
Congregations here. Indeed what he adds next does no ways favor them, and
this number was afterward increased considerably by the coming of Paul, who
converted some of the Jews, and afterward received all that came, whether
Jew's or Gentiles, and preached to them the Kingdom of God for the space of two
whole years, no man forbidding him, page 458.

Paul preached at Rome in his hired house for two years, all this while he
received all that came to him; there is no question but that all the Christians
there did come to hear this most eminent Apostle: so that it seems from first
to last there were no more Christians at Rome than a private House could
receive.

He would prove what he intends from Nero's Persecution, who is said to have
put an infinite multitude of Christians to death upon pretense that they had
fired Rome, page 458. Tacitus speaks of the Christians as guilty, and says
they confessed the Crime, and detected many others.

Now those who suffered, either confessed that they fired Rome and then they
were no Christians; or they did not confess it, and then he wrongs them
intolerably, and deserves no credit. But our Author to excuse him (against the
sense of such who best understand him, Lipsius particularlay, besides Baronius
and others) says, they confessed not that they burned Rome, but that they were
Christians. Whereas the inquiry being concerning the burning of Rome, the
question was not whether they were Christians, but whether they fired the City,
of this last Tacitus speaks, and will be so understood by those who think he
speaks pertinently. But for truth in those accounts he gives of Christians, it
is no more to be expected than from other Heathen Authors of those Ages, with
whom it is customary on that subject splendide mentiri. Some other instances
hereof we have in this report of Tacitus, which I suppose our Author will
scarce offer to excuse, as when the Christian Religion is called Exitiabilis
superstitio, and when the Christians are said per flagitia invisos vulgo fuisse.

But suppose he speaks truth, what is it he says? Nero put an infinite
multitude of them to death, but ingens multitudo, which are his words, may be
far less than an infinite multitude. Two or three hundred may pass for a great
multitude, and extraordinarily great, when that which is spoke of them is
extraordinary. The Martyrs burnt in Queen Mary's days were a great multitude;
and few may be accounted very many, to suffer in such a manner, as these did by
Nero's Cruelty, Ferarum tergis contecti ut laniatu canum interirent, aut
crucibus affixi, aut flammandi, atque ubi defecisset dies in usum nocturni
luminis uterentur, in the words of Tacitus.

To this he adds the general account which Eusebius gives of the success of the
Christian faith immediately after the first discovery of it, that presently in
all Cities and Villages Churches abounding with innumerable multitudes were
assembled, etc. page 459.

If he will not deal unkindly with Eusebius he must not set his expressions
upon the Rack, nor stretch them beyond his intention, nor forget what is
observed to be usual with him; Oratorem more rem amplificare. These Churches
consisting of innumerable multitudes are said to be not only in all Cities, but
Villages; now I believe it will be an hard matter for our Author to show us any
Villages, even in Constantine's time, where there were a Thousand, yea, or 500
Christians. Those who will not abuse themselves or their Readers must give
great allowance to such expressions, and not rely on them in strict arguing.

And here it may not be amiss to take notice of what he says of Rome in
another Chapter, M. B. had declared, that he found no reason to believe that
Rome and Alexandria had for 200 years more Christians than some London Parishes
(which have 60000 Souls) nor near, if half so many Church Hist. p. 7. Vindicat.
p. 27.
. The chief, if not the only argument to prove them at Rome more numerous, is a
passage in Cornelius his Epistle showing the number of the Officers and of the
poor, this was in the middle of the third Age, and so not within these 200
years, but yet proves not what it is alleged for in Cornelius's time, near
Anno 360. The number of Officers signifies no such thing, as has been made
evident, the number of the poor, being 1500 rather proves the contrary. This
was cleared by comparing the proportions of the poor with the rest in other
places, at Antioch in particular, as was showed out of Chrysostom, who reckons
the poor to be a tenth part of the Inhabitants, and if it was so at Rome in
Cornelius's time, the Christians were about 15000. This will serve M. B's
purpose well enough. But the time and circumstances being exceeding different,
makes it most probable that the Christians then at Rome did nothing near so
much exceed the poor in number. It is far more likely that the proportions were
nearer that at Constantinople, where Chrysostom says, the poor was one half,
this would spoil all our Authors pretensions, and so he advisedly takes no
notice of it.

However something he would say against M. B. if one, could understand it. It
is about the word (...) in Cornelius's Epistle rendered the poor. Valesius
observes the word is used by the Roman Clergy in an Epistle to those at
Carthage, sive Viduae sive Thlibomeni, i. e. indigentes, says he, as Rufinus
translates it, and tells us also that Cyprian Ep. 4.
calls them pauperes and indigentes qui laborant. These, says our Author, were
not only poor, but sick and diseased, alleging that of the Roman Clergy for it
after Valesius, and if he mean not only the poor, but the sick also and the
diseased he is right, for Cornelius signifies those that were maintained by the
Church, Widows and Indigent whether sick or well. But when he says these poor
were such only as were not able to come abroad, he seems to confine it to the
sick and diseased, and then it contradicts the former, and is without reason,
against the use and import of the word, as rendered by all Interpreters former
and later that I meet with, and indeed against common sense; for the number
Cornelius speaks of is fixed, as that of the Presbyters and Deacons, such as
may be constantly known and a certain account given of it, whereas the number
of the sick is not fixed, but such a contingency as is very uncertain and
various.

But Cornelius says in the same Epistle that the people of his Church were
innumerable. True, that is, according to the frequent use of the word, very
many (it is granted they were more than in any other Church) as when Dio says
the Nations conquered by Trajan were innumerable, and Socrates expresses those
wounded in the fight between the Christians and Heathen in Alexandria about the
demolishing of an Idol Temple were (...) Lib. 5. c. 15.
, which in Sozomen is but many Lib. 7. c. 15.
; and another ancient Author says there were innumerable Bishops in Africa,
which yet this Gentleman can easily count, and tells us that Schismatics and
all were but 466 Page 131:
. M. B. may allow him what he falls short in this reckoning, which is more than
half, and may grant there were many more hundreds of Christians in Rome than
any of these innumerables come to, and yet make good what he supposes.

The great liberality of the Roman Church is offered as no small argument of
its greatness, they sent to a great many Churches, releiving those that were in
want, and sending necessaries to such as were condemned to the Mines; thus in
Severus's time, and in the time of Dionysius the Provinces of Syria with Arabia
were thereby relieved every one, page 53.

M. B. need not doubt, but some one Parish near him might do what is equivalent
to this, if the ancient Charity were revived, which opened the hearts of
Christians in those times further than their Purses could well extend.

But the words are odly stretched, for they did not relieve every one in all
those places, but such as were in great want, and those particularly who were
condemned to the Mines; and (...) must denote as it were the alsufficiency of
the Roman Church, which some would say is, as it were Blasphemy, but our Author
meant better, the proper import of the word is no more than stipem confer.

He alleges two passages in Eusebius Page 54.
, the former concerns not Rome more than any other place in the Empire, the
import of it is this, not that every soul of every sort, but that many of all
sorts were lead to the Christian Religion, if (...) be stretched to every soul
Eusebius is made to speak what is in a manner notoriously false, and
monstrously extravagant. The later which concerns Rome does but signify, that
more of Good quality for Riches and Birth with their Families and Relatives
came over for Salvation Lib. 5. c. 21.
. These he will have to be of the Nobility, but those were counted noble who
descended from such as had been Magistrates in Cities or free Towns. How this
can make that Church near so great as our Author would have it, or greater than
M. B. supposes, I don't understand.

What he subjoyns is very surprising and must seem Page 54.
strange to those who are acquainted with the state of Church in those times,
that the Christians were the better half of the Roman Empire, that they were
the major part every where, but in Rome more eminently. This has no good
warrant from ancient Authors, no, not from Tertullian, though he writ many
years after Commodus. He like an Orator draws something bigger than the life
(as our Author says of Nazianzen, page 137.) and must have allowance on this
account by those who will not be injurious to him. In that very Age wherein
Commodus reigned, it is said the Christians were so often slaughtered that few
could be sound in Rome who professed the name of Christ Platina v^^ Xysti.
. And near 150 years after, when Constantine had reigned near 20 years in Rome
the generality of the Inhabitants showed such disaffection to Christianity, as
that is given for one reason why he transferred the seat of the Empire to
Byzantium Zosimus, Hist. l. 2. p. 61.
.

He runs beyond M. B's bounds toward the middle of the third Century, and
tells us the greatest part of Alexander Severus his Family were Christians. And
so they might be, and yet no more Christians in Rome for that, if they were
Christians before they came into his family, which is more likely than that
they were converted in it. However many more such Additions will not increase
that Church beyond M. B's Measures, nor make it near so numerous as that Parish
to which Whitehall belongs.

What he next offers neither concerns Rome, being Page 55.
general expressions, nor M. B. referring to the Ages after those which he is
concerned for, whether by (...) we understand the great multitudes which were
gathered into the Christian Profession (as Valesius) or that assembled together
for Christian worship (as our Author) is not material; though the former is
more likely, unless we can think Eusebius, an elegant Writer, would use so much
tautology in so few lines. That from which he may expect more service is the
next expression, which he renders the multitude of their Meetings in every
City, but may with better reason be rendered, the numerousness or multitudes of
those that assembled in several Cities. For it is so far from being true, that
every City had many Congregations of Christians in it; that there were many
Cities long after, which had no Christians in them. And two instances cannot be
given of any Cities in the whole Empire that at this time had more
Congregations than one; unless where they all might have assembled in one
place, they thought it better in Prudence to disperse themselves into several
Meetings. For in Alexandria, which was the greatest City next to Rome, and the
most populous Church in the whole World, there is no appearance of more
assemblies till the end of the tenth Persecution, and the death of Peter Bishop
there, who suffered in the ninth year of it Eusebius. l. 7. c. 32.
. And therefore the elegant gradation, in discovering of which this Gentleman
would have us take notice that he has a more comprehensive faculty than
Valesius, seems not very well founded.

That which follows is an hundred years or more beyond Page 55.
the time to which M. B. limits his Assertion, About this time or not long
after Rome had above 40 Churches, which we must not imagine to be built all at
the same time, but by degrees, according as the number of Believers did
require; etc. page 55.

From the number of Churches he cannot reasonably conclude such a multitude of
Christians as he contends for. There were many Churches in Alexandria when
Athanasius was Bishop of it, and yet there were no more Christians in his
communion than could meet together in one place. Baronius tells us, that there
was a City in Germany which had 400 Churches in it; and yet no reason Anno 108,
^, ^.
to think that Town was comparable for Circuit and Populousness, either to Rome
or Alexandria. If I should say that in Optatus there were not so many Churches,
but the number mistaken by the Transcribers, this would be as good an answer as
that of our Author, who will have the 12 or 14 years of Athanasius his
Banishment in Epiphanius not to be so many months, and that years are put
instead of months by the mistake of the Copies, page 113. Or that other about
the number of Bishops in the Council at Anticch, where he will have 30 in
diverse Authors to be a mistake of the Transcribers for, 90 (or 97 or 99. page
123, 124* 125. Interpret vo^. Ecclos.
) Onuphrius must have liked such an Answer to this of Optatus, who though he was
as much concerned for the greatness of the Roman Church as any, and no less
inquisitive into the ancient state of it, yet delivers it as a thing manifest
and certain, that Rome had but 28 Titles, and this number not completed till
the fifth Age. But there is no need to insist on any thing of this nature, it is
not so material how many Churches there was, as when there was so many, and
about the time he will have Blondel to mistake, and M. B. to follow him
therein; he had been nibbling at Blondell a little before upon a small occasion
and with as little reason, as might be showed, if it were sit to follow one in
his Vagaries. Let us see whether here he does not follow Valesius in his
mistake, who will have Optatus to speak of the Churches at Rome in the time of
Diocletian 's Persecution, tempore persecutionis Diocletiani In Eusebius. lib. 6.
c. 43.
. But Optatus speaks of those Churches when extant and capable of receiving
Congregation, as is plain by his words; but what Churches were at Rome or other
places, in the very beginning of that Persecution, were all quite demolished,
and that in one day, says Theodoret Hist. l. 5. c. 38.
, or the Paschal days, as Eusebius Chron.
; and there is no probability they could rebuild them while the Persecution
lasted, or that so many could be raised in less than many years after.
Nicephorus speaks but of 14 Churches at Constantinople in the reign of
Theodosius junior, nor meet I with any Author that gives an account of more,
yet this was about an hundred years after Byzantium was re-edifyed, and both
Constantine and the succeeding Emperors endeavored to make that City as
populous as could be, and furnished it with Churches answerable to the numbers
of the Inhabitants. So that there is no likelihood there could be 40 Churches in
Rome at any time nearer Dioclesian's than Optatus's.

But to help this our Author tells us out of Optatus, that there were three
Donatists Bishops at Rome successively before Macrobius, who was Contemporary
with Optatus, and that the first of them was Victor Garbiensis, and he will
have Optatus to speak of the State of Rome (the 40 Churches there) not as it
was in his own time, but in that of this Victor, when this was, he says, is
not easy to six. page 56.

Yet this is certain, it cannot be in the time of Dioclesian's Persecution, for
the Schism of the Donatists did not break out till Majorinus was ordained (who
was the first Bishop of the Faction made in Africa or elsewhere) and this was
sometime after the Persecution was there ended, as Optatus and Valcsius after
him, and others declare De Schis. Denat. cap. 3.
; and sometime must be allowed after this for the Donatists settling in Rome,
and such an increase of them there as to need a Bishop. Baronius makes this
Victor to be Bishop in Silvester's time, which might be long enough after
Dioclesian's Persecution, for he lived till 335. All which our Author has to
allege for the more early date of Victor's Bishopric, is that there were two
or three Donatist Bishops between Victor and Optatus; but this will scarce
serve his turn. For there were four Bishops of Rome in the former part of that
very age wherein we are now concerned, who held not the Chair ten years among
them, Marcellus, Eusebius, Melchiades and Marcus. But we may allow the three
Donatist Bishop at Rome near ten years a piece from the time of Optatus, 378
(as both Blondel and Valesius agree) and yet Victor Garbiensis may not be
Bishop till Anno 350 and so nearer to Optatus his time, than Dioclesians.

2dly, It is no proof of Diocesan Churches that those who belong to it, do
occasionally divide themselves into distinct Meetings, A large Church, and
sometimes a small Congregation may have occasion to divide and meet in parcels
for their convenience or security. Particularly in time of Persecution, that
they may assemble with more safety, and be the better concealed from those who
would disturb or apprehend them. The people that belonged to Cyprian did meet
all together on several occasions, as is apparent in his Epistles; yet when
Persecution was hot, he thought it advisable, caute non glomeratim nec per
multitudinem simul junctam, conveniendum Ep. 5.
, they durst not in some parts (...), in the beginning of Constantine's Reign
Soz. l. 1. c. 2.
.

Damasus, the supposed Author of the Pope's lives, says, Euaristus Titulos
Presbyteris divisit, divided the Titles in Rome to the Presbyters, and by
Titles some will have us to understand Parish Churches. But it is incredible
that the Christians in Trajan's time when Euaristus was Bishop, could erect any
structures in form of Churches, or had any distinguishable from other houses,
so as the Heathen might take notice of them, as used or designed for the
religious exercises of Christians. Who can imagine that when it was death for
any one to be known to be a Christian, they should frequent any known places
for Christian Worship? It is far more reasonable which Platina says of
Calistus's time, more than an hundred years after, that then the meeting of
Christians were all secret, and rather in Chapels, and those hidden, and for
the most part underground; than in open and public places Cum ea tempestate ob
crebras persecutiones occulta essent omnia, and sacella potius, atque eadem
abdita and plerumque subterranea; quam apertis in locis ac publicis fierent.
Dr. St. says, I confess it seems not probable to me that those Tituli were so
soon divided as the Iren. page 357.
time of Euaristus, who lived in the time of Trajan, when the Persecution was
hot against the Christians; but Damasus seems not to believe himself, for in
the life of Dionysius he says, Hic Presbyteris Ecclesias divisit. His reason
concludes as much or more against the Titles under this notion ascribed to
Marcellus 200 years after (which some will have to be 25, but Onuphrius shows
they could not be more than 15 Interpret. Voc. Eccles.
) for Marcellus was Bishop of Rome for six years of the tenth Persecution begun
by Dioclesian, which was the longest and fiercest that ever befell the Church;
when the Christians were so far from erecting any Churches, that all before
erected were by severe Edicts to be quite demolished. But what is said of
Titles divided by Euaristus may be true in this sense, that since they could
not safely meet together in the Persecution under Trajan, they dispersed
themselves into distinct meetings, and had Presbyters assigned to officiate in
each of them. And yet the Christians at Rome were then no more, nor long after,
than might all meet together for Worship, and did so when it could be done in
safety. In the time of Xystus who had the Chair at Rome under Adrian, it is
said because of the frequent slaughters of the Christians, there were few found
who durst profess the name of Christ, propter frequentes caedes pauci
reperirentur qui nomen Christi profiteri auderent Platina.
. And there was an order in that Church that when the Bishop celebrated, all
the Presbyters should be present. Zepherinus voluit Presbyteros omnes adesse
celebrante Episcopo, quod etiam Euaristo placuit, this is said to be made in
the time of Euaristus to whom this division of Titles is ascribed, and it was
in force an hundred years after, being renewed by Zepherinus who was Bishop
till Anno 218 about 30 years before Cornelius, who speaks of 46. Presbyters at
Rome. Now the Lords Supper was frequently administered in those times, at least
every Lord's Day, and when the Bishop was present, he himself did celebrate, and
if all the Presbyters were to be present when he did celebrate, then all the
People likewise were to be present, or else they had no Public Worship, for
they could have none without Bishop or Presbyters.

3dly, A Church is not proved to be Diocesan by the numbers of Presbyters in
it, this I have made evident before, and made it good against our Authors
exceptions. But he brings a new instance Page 552.
, and will have Edessa to have been a Diocesan Church because of the numerous
Clergy, the Clergy, says he, of the City of Edessa was above 200 persons, not
reckoning that of the Country within his Diocese, and this was a Diocesan
Bishop to purpose.

He did well not to reckon that of the Country in his Diocese: unless he had
kown that something of the Country was within his Diocese. It was not unusual
for the Bishops charge to be confined to a Town or City Rome it self is an
instance of it Innocent. Ep. ad Decentium.
, Cum omnes Ecclesiae nostrae intra Civitatem constitutae sunt. But why it
should be judged to be a Diocesan Church because 200 such Persons belonged to
it, seeing the great Church at C. P. had above 500 Officers assigned it after
Justinian had retrenched the numbers Novel. 3. c. 3.
, and yet was never couned a Diocese, I do not well understand. But he has
some other reasons for it, and because he thinks they prove the Bishop of
Edessa to have been a Diocesan to purpose, let us on the by a little examine
them; these he gives in summarily, This was a Diocesan Bishop to purpose, who
besides a large Diocese, had excommunicating Archdeacons, and a great revenue.

I find nothing alleged to show he had a large Diocese or any at all, but
this, the City of Battina was in the Diocese of Edessa, for Ibas is accused of
having endeavored to make one John Bishop of it, etc.

Battina had a Bishop of its own, how then can it be said to be in the Diocese
of Edessa, unless Province and Diocese be confounded? Edessa was the Metropolis
of Mesopotamia, the Bishop of it was the third Metropolitan in the Patriarchate
of Antioch, as they are ordered in the ancient Notitia. The Bishop of Battina
was one of the many Suffragans belonging to that Metropolitan. How then comes
the Diocese of Edessa to be any ways large upon this account? Is the Diocese
of Canterbury one foot the larger, because there is a Bishop of Peterborough in
that Province? These things are not easily apprehended nor can be well digested.

2dly, The greatness of his Revonue is no more apparent, there is nothing to
prove it but the riches of that Church, and its great Revenues, and hereof our
Author gives us no clear account, no value of the Numismata, nor is there any
Evidence in the Council for the Manors he speaks of but only the felling of
some wood in a certain place there named. But where there was a Diocesan and
Archdeacons, decorum required there should be Manors and vast Revenues for the
Bishop. Nor do I quarrel with it, only this breaks the squares a little, and
disturbs the correspondence between those and our times; that if the Revenues
of that Church had amounted to ten times more, yet the Bishop would scarce have
been one jot the richer for it. This will not seem strange to any, who take
notice of the ancient Orders, concerning the revenues of an Episcopal Church.
The Bishop was to have nothing thereof if he could maintain himself otherwise.
When he was necessitous, nothing was allowed him for himself but necessaries,
food and raiment Con. Antioch C. 25.
. He was to purchase nothing while he lived, nor to leave any thing got by his
Bishopric when he died, to his Relatives or others, but only to the Church
that maintained him Code Justin. Lex 42. Sect. 2* c. de Episc. Nov^ 131. c. 13.
Con^ Car. 3. Can. 49*
. The Bishop of Edessa, or any other in these Circumstances, must be a poor
Diocesan, and one in a good English Rectory or Vicaridge, is in a fairer way to
be rich, than any in the ancient Bishoprics, so ordered. And if Riches or
Revenues be good Arguments to prove a Diocesan, one of our Vicars may be a
better Diocesan than the Bishop of Edessa. It is true there is some intimation
from Rome, that the Bishop should have the 4th. part of the Churches revenues,
but there is no appearance of such a distribution, till after the time of the
four first general Councils; nor in any Country but Italy till an hundred
years after: Nor did it ever obtain (that I can discover after some inquiry) in
the Greek Churches.

3. The other proof that Ibas was a Diocesan, viz. because he had
excommunicating Archdeacons, our Author would make good by telling us, that one
of his Archdeacons excommunicated Maras. Now this though it prove not what it
is alleged for, may prove more than he likes. An Archdeacon in the ancient
Church (though he be another thing now) was not so much as a Presbyter, he was
but in the lower Order of Deacons, though chief amongst them, and chosen by
them, as Jerome signifies Ep. ad Evagrium.
, Diaconi eligunt de se quem industrium noverint, and Archidiaconum vocant, the
Deacons choose from amongst themselves one whom they know to be industrious, and
call him Archdeacon. Now if a Deacon had the power to excommunicate, there can
be no doubt but the Presbyters had it, being of a Superior Order and Power.
And excommunication being counted the highest act of Jurisdiction, it cannot be
questioned but the other acts thereof belonged to them; and so the Presbyters
having all the Jurisdiction of Bishops (all the power of Government) what did
they want of being Bishops but the honor of presiding in their Assemblies? And
if they were no farther from being Bishops, they will go near to be as much
Diocesan, and so this Gentleman may choose, whether he will have all of both
sorts to be Diocesans, or none of either.

4ly, It is no Argument to prove a Diocesan Church to show that it consists of
such who live at a good distance one from another. Dionysius had a great
Congregation at Cephro, a Village in Lybia, but those which made up this Church
were of another Country, coming partly from Alexandria, partly from other
parts of Egypt, as Eusebius shows us, yet none ever esteemed that to be a
Diocesan Church. In Justin Martyr's time those that were in the Country, and
those that were in the City, when those were no more than made one
Congregation, met together in one place, (...), the Meeting consisted of such
as lived at a good distance, but none will imagine it to be a Diocesan Church,
but those who will have a single Congregation to be such a Church. All the
Christians in City and Country, says Dr. Downham, if they had been assembled
together, would have made but a small Congregation. Defense l. 2. c. 4. p. 69.
.

Our Author would prove the largeness of Basil's Diocese by the distance
between Caesarea and Sasima. *. x page 546, 547
He makes much of it and takes the pains to measure the distance between these
Towns, or rather, as he says, to make some guess at it out of an Itenerary and
Putinger's Tables; yet tells us the distance must be as great at least as
between Hippo and Fussala, that so St. Basil's Diocese may be as great at least
as that of St Austin's. I think they will prove much alike, for as I have
showed that Austin's Diocese was not one foot larger for Fussala, so it will
appear that St. Basil's had not the least enlargement upon the account of
Sasima. That he might not be out in his measures nor have lost all his labor,
two things should first have been cleared, neither of which is (or I think can
be proved; 1st, That Sasima was in Basil's Diocese, for if it was but only in
his Province, how far soever it was from Caesarea, his Diocese can be nothing
the larger for it, though his Province might. To prove it in his Diocese I find
nothing but his own assertion, that Sasima is said expressly to be taken out of
the Diocese of Basil; but where is this said expressly, or by whom, except by
himself? The words in the Margin signify no such thing, but only some attempt
to deprive a Metropolis of Sasima. For a Metropolis may be deprived of a Town
which is in any part of the Province, when another Metropolitan seizes on it.
And I believe our Author is yet more out in taking the Metropolis which
Nazianzen speaks of to be Caesarea, when it appears by the Epistle to be rather
Tyana. For as the whole Epistle is writ to Basil, so these words cited, after
many others by way of sharp expostulation, are directed to him as endeavoring
to deprive a Metropolis of this Town, called ironically (...): Now Caesarea was
not the Metropolis which Basil would have deprived of Sasima, he earnestly
endeavored to have it annexed thereto; but he would have deprived Tyana of it,
if Anthimus the Metropolitan there, had not made a stout opposition. 2dly, He
should have proved, that after this part of Cappadocia was divided into two
Provinces, Sasima was in that Province which fell to Basil's share (for if it
was not in his Province how could his Diocese be any larger for it?) but
instead of this our Author offers what may serve to disprove it, telling us
that in the ancient Greek Notitia, Sasima is set down in the second Cappadocia
(which belonged to Anthimus as the first did to Basil) and so, says he, it is
not likely to be very near Caesarea. No indeed, it is thereby proved to be so
far from Caesarea, that it did not enlarge Basil's Province, much less his
Diocese. Thus it is also placed in the (...) of Leo Sophus under the
Metropolitan of Tyana, not of Caesarea. It is true Basil laid claim to it, but
after some contest he yielded, and Anthimus carried it, placing Eulalius there
as one of his Suffragans, when Nazianzen had quitted it.

He goes farther on to show the largeness of Dioceses in Basil's Province.

It is plain by Nazianzen that Cappadocia had but 50 Bishops, for so many he
says Basil had under him, and considering the extent of that Country the
Dioceses must needs be large.

He does not say Basil had no more under him, nor that he was making no more;
he knew Basil was constituting more Bishops in that part of Cappadocia which
was his Province, and Nazianzen commends him for it as an excellent undertaking
on several accounts Orat. de Bal.
.

Considering the extent of that Country, the Dioceses must needs be large, for
the Country as Strabo computes, is near 400 miles in length, and little less
in breadth.

If he means Basil's own Province, where he told us there were 50 Suffragans
under him besides Sasima, etc Page 546.
: (as I know not what he can mean else, if his Discourse be not impertinent and
inconsistent; for Basil as Metropolitan had no Bishops under him, but those in
his proper Province) Strabo is strangely misrepresented to serve a turn; for it
is the whole Country which passed under the name of Cappadocia, that the
Geographer gives us the dimensions of in the place cited, and tell us it was
divided into ten Prefectures, Meletena, Cataonia, Cilica, Tyanitis, Isauritis,
etc. whereof Basil's Province was but one, viz. that called Cilica, and that of
Anthimus, Tyanitis, another, etc. Mazaca (afterward called Caesarea) being
Metropolis of Basil's and Tyana of Tyanitis, etc. and after he has given some
account of these ten Praefectures, he adds the dimensions of the whole
Country, in these words, the extent of Cappadocia in breadth from the Euxine
to Taurus, is 1800 Furlongs, in length 3000. So that our Author will have the
extent of Basil's Province to be no less than that of the whole Country, when
it is but the tenth part thereof. And as if this were not enough, he makes the
breadth of the whole Country, to be near twice as much as it is in Strabo; but
he has some salvo for this, such as it is.

And little less in breadth, as Causabon restores the reading of 1800 Furlongs
in the 12th. Book, by a passage in the second where the breadth is made 2800.

It is true Causabon observes some difference in the places cited, but he shows
how they may be easily reconciled, without changing the Text here, or making
the Country broader than it is here described, viz. by taking Pontus in one
place for the Sea, in the other for the Region so called, separated from
Cappadocia by mountains parallel to Taurus; and then concludes, Sic non erit
discedendum a vulgata lectione. So that he has no relief by Causabon without
curtailing the Passage.

And in this compass Bishops may contrive 50 Dioceses of very competent extent,
and not inferior to many of ours.

Let him try how in Basil's Province of about 40 miles in length, he can
contrive room for above 50 Bishops, with as large Dioceses as those he pleads
for. That which is now thought little enough for one Bishop Basil conceived too
big for Fifty.

What Dioceses Basil (and others before him) thought sufficient for Bishops
both then, and in formertimes, appears by a passage which our Author next
cites, where Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, is directed to constitute Bishops
for the Province of Iconium, in little Corporation, and Villages. Ep. 406.
Hundreds of instances might be brought of Bishops elsewhere, in such little
places and Villages, but I will go no further now, than the instance himself
offers us, whereby it is manifest that a little Corporation, or a Village might
furnish a Bishop with such a Diocese, as was then thought competent, both by
Basil, and the Church before him. For in such little places there was Bishops
before, as Basil there signifies, and he gives direction that it should be so
still. Yet he, that would advise the reducing of Bishops to such Sees now,
would be counted an enemy to Episcopacy; and his advice destructive to Bishops.
So much do we now differ, both from the judgment and practice of the ancient
Church, and the most eminent Bishops in it.

Hereby also it appears that the multiplying of Metropolitans was no such
occasion of multiplying Bishops, but that their numbers increased, when there
was not that occasion; And this in Cappadocia, which is our Author's eminent
instance. Page 545.
For Bishops were multiplied by erecting Episcopal Sees in Villages, and little
places, this was done in Isauria, a Province in Cappadocia, as appears by these
passages in Basil, before the contest between him and Anthimus, upon the
constituting of a new Metropolitan: and after that difference was Composed,
Basil thought it advisable that it should be done still. And the like may be
said of Africa, the instance he most insists on, and spends many Pages upon it,
pretending the occasion why Bishops were so numerous there, was the Schism of
the Donatists, Whereas the rule by which the African Fathers proceeded in
erecting Bishoprics in little places, and so increasing the number of Bishops,
was as themselves declare, who best knew it, the increase of the number of
Christians: Council. Carth. 2 Can. 5.
Where these were multiplied, and desired a Bishop, they thought themselves
obliged to let them have one; not excepting the meanness or smalness of the
places, where he was to be constituted. And we must believe (if we have any
reverence for those Fathers) that they would have done, what they judged
themselves obliged to, though there had been no Donatists amongst them. And
when there can be no such pretense of occasion from the Donatists, the practice
was continued, as appears by St. Austin's procuring a Bishop for Fussala, which
he calls a Castle, upon some increase of the Catholics there, diverse years
after the noted conference at Carthage, where the heart of the Donatists was
broken; Nay, many years after the invasion of the Vandals, and the death of St.
Austin they proceeded in the same methods, or rather exceeded their
Predecessors in multiplying Bishops, by erecting Episcopal seats in smaller,
and more inconsiderable places, if Leo his Epistle may be credited. Ep. 85.


But to return to our Author, and the passage of Basil, insisted on, by which
says he, it appears that Isauria was part of Basil's Province; How this
appears by any thing therein, I cannot imagine, our Author signifies before
that Isauria was a distinct Province, the Metropolis of it (as he supposes)
Seleucia, which had a metropolitan and suffragans before, and being now
destitute, the Bishops in the Vicinity were careful to provide others. Which
being so, that it should be part of Basil's Province seems as incongruous, as
if it were said, that the Province of York, is part of the Province of
Canterbury: but if this could be digested, that one Province is part of
another, yet Isauria would rather be part of Amphilochius his province, who (as
he tells us) was to constitute a Metropolitan and other Bishops therein, than
of Basil's, who is only represented as giving advice about it. Or if giving
advice and direction, would prove any thing of this nature, the Papists might
think it a good argument, that Africa was part of the Roman Province, because
Leo Bishop of Rome gives advise, how Bishops should be there constituted. Ibid.


Next he brings in the Chore-piscopi in order to his design, and tells us Page
550.
they were Country Bishops, and their Church consisted of many Congregations,
and those at a good distance one from another, and also that some of them had
the inspection of a large Territory, no less it is like than the County of
Fussala.

But not a word for proof of this, save Basil's mentioning a Chor-episcopus
(...) of some places; Whereas if he had been the Bishop of two or three
Villages, this might be enough to satisfy the import of that expression. Yet
he knows there is some one Country Parish, that has ten times as many, or
more Villages in it, but never pretended to be a Diocesan Church, and that such
a pretense would be now counted ridiculous.

He adds, that which, if it were true, wouldgo near to dethrone these Country
Bishops; (for Basil speaks of them, as having their Thrones in Villages) and
render them less than ancient Presbyters, for all their large Territory, and
there being Diocesans.

But yet these were but the Deputies or Surrogates of the City Bishops in point
of jurisdiction, for they were to do nothing of moment without their Bishop.

If this be so, it would be less wonder that the Pope will have Bishops to be
but his substitutes; and that some Bishops will have the Pastors of Parochial
Churches to be but their Vicars or Curates. I hope our Author intends better,
however it is well that such odd Hypotheses have no better support than that
which is added, for says he, they were to do nothing of moment without their
Bishop; this is his argument, and he is not alone in urging it. Let us see
whether it will not do the Bishops (for whose advancement it is designed) as
much disservice, as it can do the Chorepiscopi, or Presbyters; divesting them
of that which is counted more necessary and advantageous to them, than a large
Diocese. The Provincial Bishops were obliged to do nothing, (...), without the
Bishop of the Metropolis, this the synod at Antioch decrees, according to an
ancient Canon of the Fathers. Can. 9. Can. Apost. 35. Council. Milev. Can. 13.
By this argument we must conclude, that the Bishops in a Province were but the
Deputies and Surrogates of the Metropolitan. And it may proceed proportionably
against the Metropolitans with respect to the (...) or Primates; and also to
their prejudice in reference to the Patriarchs. It will go near to destroy the
Bishops likewise, if we follow it downwards. In the ancient Church the Bishops
were to do nothing of moment, without the Presbyters, this the most judicious
and Learned Asserters of Episcopacy acknowledge; B. Bilson, Dr. Field, Dr.
Downham, B. Hall, M. Thorndike, B. Usher.
Nay further, in the best Ages of the Church, the Bishops were to do nothing
without the people, that is, without their presence and consent. This is most
evident in Cyprian's Epistles, and is acknowledged by such Prelatists as are
otherwise reserved enough. Vide defense of Dr. St. Page 407.
Now by this Argument we may conclude that Bishops were but the Deputies or
Surrogates of the Presbyters; or which will be counted more intolerable, that
Bishops had their jurisdiction from the people by Deputation and Vicarage. It
may be this Gentleman will not like his argument so well, when he sees what
improvement it is capable of, yet in pursuance of it he adds, Basil is so
resolute upon his prerogative, that he will not endure they should ordain, as
much as the inferior Clergy, without his consent; and if they do, let them
know, (says he) that whosoever is admitted without our consent shall be
reputed but a Layman.

I suppose the Prerogative for which he will have Basil so resolute, is a
Negative in ordinations upon the Country Bishops; but this cannot be concluded
from the words cited. For the Council of Nice gives the Metropolitan a power,
as to ordinations in the same words, Can. 6.
declaring that if a Bishop be ordained by the Provincials, (...), without the
judgment of the Metropolitan, the great Council will have him accounted no
Bishop; and yet the Metropolitan had no Negative upon the Provincials in
Ordinations, for the same Council determines, that in ordinations plurality of
Votes shall prevail, which is utterly inconsistent with any ones Negative
voice. What then is the import of Basil's (...)? take it in the words of a very
Learned and Judicious Dr. of this Church, it is indeed there said, that none
should be ordained (...) without the opinion of the Metropolitan, but that does
not import a Negative voice in him, but that the transaction should not pass in
his absence, or without this knowledge, advice and suffrage, etc. Barrow of the
Popes Supremacy, Page 314


5. It is no proof of a Diocesan Church, to show that a Town, besides the
Clergy or Officers in it, had some Presbyters or Congregations in the Country
belonging to it. The instances which signify no more, or not so much, are
produced as sufficient arguments to prove there were such Churches. As that of
Gaius Diddensis Presbyter, supposed (with what ground I examine not) to have
been a Country Presbyter belonging to Carthage, and under Cyprian.
Vindication. p. 504.
And that of Felix said to do the Office of a Presbyter, under Decimus another
Presbyter; a thing unheard of in those times, but let us take it as we find it;
and upon the very slender reason alleged against Goulartius (who is of another
Judgment) believe, that he was a Priest in some Village belonging to Caldonius
his Diocese. Page 506. 507.
And that order for the Presbyters from their Churches, to repair to their
proper Bishop for Chrism in Africa, Con. 4. Can. 36.
in Spain, Tol. 1. Cap. 20.
and in France. Vascon. Can. 3.
To these are added, for further evidences, the Churches (said without ground
to be many,) belonging to Hippo Diaeritorum; Also the Church of Thyana,
belonging to Alypius Bishop of Tagesta, which without reason, we must take to
be a considerable City, Page 527.
and the City Milevis, because Petilian says Tunca belonged to it once, though
now it had a Bishop of its own; and by our Authors Art of computation, Towns,
Villages and Cities must belong to Milevis, upon the sole account of Tunca,
sometime appertaining to it, Page 528.
and these with Fussala, (of which before) are the chief instances to prove
that Africa had very large Dioceses not inferior to those of ours, in extent
of Territory. Page 516.
Besides in the Council of Neocaesarea Country Presbyters are distinguished
from others; Can. 13.
and that of Antioch provides that Country Presbyters shall not give Canonical
Epistles, Can. 8.
and allows the Bishop to order his own Church, and the C^^^trey places
depending on it. Can. 9. Page 536.
And Epiphanius speaks of a Church belonging to his charge, which we must
understand to be his Diocese, though in the passage cited, it is twice called
his Province, Page 555.
in fine, Jerome speaks of some baptized by Presbyters or Deacons in Hamlets,
Castles, and Places remote from the Bishop.

These and such like are used as good arguments for Diocesan Churches, whereas
there are diverse Towns in England, which besides the Officers in them, have
many Congregations and Presbyters in Villages belonging to them, and contained
within the Parish; and yet our Author and those of his persuasion would think
Diocesans quite ruined, if they were reduced, and confined to the measures of
those Parish Churches, and left no bigger than some of our Vicarages and
Parsonages, though such as Mr. Hooker affirms to be as large as some ancient
Bishoprics; he might have said most, there being not one in many greater or so
large. I yet see no ground in antiquity, nor can expect to have it proved, that
the larger sort of ordinary Bishoprics in the fourth age, and sometime after,
were of more extent than two such Vicarages would be, if united. Yet a Bishop
of such a District in our times would be counted so far from having a competent
Diocese, that he would scarce escape from being scorned as an Italian
Episcopellus.

But his greatest argument, (in comparison of which his other Allegations, he
tells us, are but accidental hints, Page 508.
.) which he most insists on, and offers many times over; so that it makes a
great part of his discourse on this subject. Page 508. to Page 555. to 539.
Page 556. to 562.
It is drawn from the number of Bishops in Councils, by which he would evince
the largeness of ancient Dioceses, when it no way proves Diocesan Churches of
any size. He proceeds upon this supposition that there were great numbers of
Christians in all parts and Cities, Page 530.
in the first age: And that the Bishops were fewer in former times than
afterward. The former part of his Hypothesis, if he understands the numbers of
Christians to be any thing comparable to what they were after Constantine, when
Bishops were much multiplied; (as he must understand it, if he expect any
service from it) wants proof, and he offers none but some passages in
Tertullian, strained far beyond what is agreeable to other ancient Authors, of
which before. Let me add that Nazianzen comparing the numbers of Christians in
former times, with those in Julian's Reign, says, they were not many in former
Persecutions, (Christianity had not reached many, (...),) no, not in that of
Dioclesian, etc. (though they were at that time, far more numerous, than in
Tertullian's age) but that Christianity was found only in a few (...) Orat. 3.
. The other part which needs no proof, since it is granted, (and may be without
any advantage to him) he attempts to prove largely and industriously; but by
such a medium as makes that which is granted to be questionable, such a one
which as it is ordered may conclude backward, and prove the contrary to what he
designs. That this may be manifest, let it be observed, that he will have us
take an account of the number of Bishops in the Church by their appearing in
Councils, more or fewer; and accordingly judge in several periods, whether they
were less numerous, and consequently their Dioceses larger in former times than
afterward. And to this purpose we need view no other instances than himself
produces. At Lambese in Africa there were 90 Bishops against Privatus; but not
so many in any Council after (though not a few are mentioned in that Country)
till the Donatists grew numerous page 509.
. In Spain the Council of Eliberis had 19 Bishops in the beginning of the 4th.
Age, and the first Council of Toledo had no more in the beginning of the age
after. But the following Synods, at Saragossa, Gerunda, Ilerda, Valentia,
Arragon, had not so many page 557. 558
. In France the Council at Valence had 21 Bishops in the fourth Age, but those
following them, in that and the after ages had still fewer, viz. That of Riez,
Orange, the third of Arles, that at Angers, that at Tours, and Vennes and
another at Arles. For General Councils, the first at Nice had 318 Bishops in
the beginning of the fourth Age, that at Ephesus above an hundred yearsafter,
had but two hundred, that at C. P. in the latter end of the fourth Age had but
one hundred and fifty Bishops.

So that if we take account how many Bishops there were of old, as he would
have us, by their numbers in Councils, there will be more before the middle of
the third Age, than in the beginning of the fourth; more in the beginning of
the fourth than in some part of the fifth; and more in the beginning of the
fifth, than in some part of the sixth; quite contrary to the Hypothesis on
which he proceeds. Whether by his argument he would lead us to think Dioceses
did wax and wane so odly, as it makes Bishops to be more or fewer, I cannot
tell. However since he grants that in the fourth and fifth Ages Dioceses were
very small page 552.
, and crumbled into small pieces page 516.
, (and so nothing like ours): there is no expectation he can find any larger, if
any thing near so great, in any former age: unless they can be larger when
incomparably fewer Christians belonged to these Bishops; which will be no less
a paradox than the former. For it cannot but be thought strange, that the
Bishops Diocese should be greater when his flock was undeniably far less. And
they seem not to be Christian Bishoprics, whose measures must be taken by
numbers of Acres rather than of Souls; or by multitudes of Heathens rather than
Christians.

He denies not, that the generality of Bishops, for a long while after the
Apostles, had but one Congregation to Govern. Page 71.
What then? says he, If all the Beleivers in and about a City would hardly make
a Congregation, that is to be ascribed to the condition of those times.
Dioceses with him, were largest in the first times; but Bishops being still
multiplied, they became less and less, and so were very small and crumbled into
very little pieces in the fourth and fifth Ages. This is the tendency of his
discourse all along. Thus Dioceses must be largest, when a Bishop had but one
Congregation; but in after ages when he had more Congregations under his
inspection Dioceses were very small. If he will stand to this, our differences
may be easily compromized. Let him and those of his persuasion, be content with
the Dioceses in the first ages, when he counts them largest; and we shall never
trouble any to reduce them to the measures of the fourth and fifth ages, when
in his account they were so lamentably little, and crumbled so very small.

The particulars premised contain enough to satisfy all, that I have yet seen
alleged out of Antiquity for Diocesan Churches, so that no more is needful,
yet let me add another, which will show there is a medium between
Congregational and Diocesan Churches. So that if some Churches should be showed
out of the Ancients exceeding the Congregational measures (as some there were
in the times of the four first General Councils) yet it cannot thence be
immediately inferred that they were Diocesan, since they may prove a third sort
of Churches, and such as will as little please those of this Gentleman's
persuasion as Congregational.

6. It Is no argument for a Diocesan Church, that there were several fixed
Churches, with their proper Presbyters in a City or its Territory; so long as
these Churches, how many soever were governed in common by the Bishop and
Presbyters in such a Precinct. For though few instances can be given of such
Churches, in or belonging to a City in the 4th. Age; yet wherever they were
extant in that, or the following Age, in things of common concern to those
Churches, they were ordered in common by a Presbytery, that is, the Bishop with
the Presbyters of that Precinct. Jerome declares it de jure, they ought to be
governed in common, in communi debere Ecclesiam regere. In Titus 1.


And Felix 3 Bishop of Rome, (than whom no Bishop was higher, or more absolute
in those times,) declares it de facto, when he speaks of the Presbyters of that
Church, as (...), ruling that Church with him. It is the same word that the
governing of Churches by other Bishops, is expressed by (...), as Alexander
says of Narcissus, (...). Eusebius. l. 6. c: 11:
It imports no less than praesidere, and is ascribed to Bishops and Presbyters,
jointly by Tertullian, Apol. c. 39!
Cyprian Lib. 1. Ep. 3.
and Firmilian. Ep. 75:
Hence the Presbyters are frequently said to be (...) with the Bishop, Theod.
Hist. l. 4. c. 8. Epiphan. Her. 42.
for then the Governing power of Bishops was but counted a Ministry, (...),
Isidore Lib. 4. Ep. 260.
and the Presbyters fellow Ministers with him, and joint Administrators in the
Government. They are styled (...), Naz. Orat. 1. Orat. 7.
fellow Pastors, they did not then dream that a Bishop was sole Pastor of many
Churches. They are also called (...), which is no less than (...), Ignat. ad
Tral in Chrysostom. Tom 7. Hom. z. a.
for the Presbyters had their Thrones with the Bishop. So Nazianzen speaks of
Basil when ordained Presbyter, as promoted (...) to the Sacred Thrones of the
Presbyters. Orat. 20.
They are also called (...). s Chyys. in Tim. Hom. 1.


But further evidence is needless, though abundance may be produced, since the
great Patrons of Episcopacy seems not to question it, that the Church was
governed in common, and the Bishop was to do nothing of importance without the
Presbyters, it is acknowledged by Bishop Bilson, Perpet Govern. Cap. 11.
Bishop Downham, Defense. lib. 3. L. 1. c. 8.
Bishop Hall asserts it, as that which is Universally accorded by all
antiquity, that all things in the ancient Church were ordered and transacted by
the general consent of Presbyters. Iren. P. 47.
Mr. Thorndike proves at large, that the Government of Churches passed in
common; Prim. Govern.
Primate Usher more succinctly but effectually. Reduct. of Episcopacy.
Add but Dr. St. who both asserts and proves it, Iren. Page 354. 355. 356.
there was still one Ecclesiastical Senate, which ruled all the several
Congregations of those Cities in common, of which the several Presbyters of the
Congregations were Members, and in which the Bishop acted as the President of
the Senate, for the better Governing the affairs of the Church, etc.

Let me add, when the Churches were so multiplied in City and Territory, as
that it was requisite to divide them into Parishes, and constitute several
Churches; the Bishop was not the proper Ruler or Pastor of the whole Precinct,
and the Churches in it, or of any Church, but one. The Parishes or Churches
were divided among Presbyters and Bishop, they had their several distinct cures
and charges; the Bishops peculiar charge was the Ecclesia principalis, the
chief Parish or Church so called, or (...). The Presbyters performed all
Offices in their several Cures, and ordered all affairs which did particularly
concern the Churches where they were incumbents; those that were of more common
concern were ordered by Bishop and Presbyters together, and thus it was in the
Bishops Church or Parish, he performed all Offices, administered all Ordinances
of Worship himself, or by Presbyters joined with him, as Assistants. He was to
attend this particular cure constantly, he was not allowed to be absent, no,
not under pretense of taking care for some other Church; if he had any business
there which particularly concerned him, he was to make quick dispatch, and not
((...), as Zonaras) stay there with the neglect of his proper flock; this is
all evident by a Canon of the Council of Carthage a, Rursum r In Zona. N. 77 in
Code 71.
placuit ut nemini sit facultas, relicta principali Cathedra, ad aliquam
Ecclesiam in Diocesi constitutam se confer, vel in re propria, diutius quam
oportet constitutum, curam vel frequentationem propriae Cathedrae negligere. Of
this Church or Parish he was the proper Pastor or Ruler, called there (...),
and elsewhere Can. 53.
(...), in contradistinction to other parts of the Precinct, called here
Dioceses; and the people of it are called (...) by the ancient Canonist Zona.
in loc.
, his proper flock or people, his own special charge. This was the particular
Church under his personal Government, but he was not Ruler of the Precinct, or
any other Churches in it, save only in common, and in conjunction with the
other Presbyters; who jointly took cognizance of what in his Church or theirs,
was of greater or more general consequence, and concerned the whole, and gave
order in it by common consent.

And while this was the form of Government, if there had been as many Churches
there, thus associated, as Optatus in the fourth age says there was at Rome, or
far more, they could not make a Diocesan Church, unless a Diocesan and a
Presbyterian Church be all one. For this is plainly a Presbyterian Church, the
ancient Presbyteries differing from the modern but in a matter of smaller
moment. In those their President being fixed and constant, in these commonly
though not always circular. The Presbyteries in Scotland comprised some twelve,
some twenty, some more Churches, their Moderators were at first, and for some
years, circular, King James afterward, Anno 1606 Hist. p. 559.
, would have them to be constant, and so it was ordered; yet when they were
fixed, no man ever counted these Presbyteries to be Diocesan Churches. The
Church of Geneva consists of twenty four Parishes, governed in common by a
Presbytery with a Moderator, who is sometimes changed, sometimes continued for
Life. Calvin was President while he lived, yet that of Geneva is not wont to be
taken for a Diocesan Church. Nor were those ancient Churches such, while they
were governed, not by one Bishop, but by a Senate of Presbyters where he
presided; as in the Council of Constantinople all things in the Province are
said, to be governed, not by the Metropolitan, but by the Provincial Synod Can.
2. Soc. l. 5. cap. 8.
.

Finally, the Presbyters are in the ancient Church acknowledged to have had the
power of the keys, both as to the ministration of the Word and Sacraments, and
the exercise of Government and censures. This power they exercised either
jointly in conjunction with the Bishop and Senate of Presbyters; or distinctly
in the particular Churches whereof they had the charge. The former power
concerning the Word and Sacraments is not questioned, nor is there any ground
to question, the latter, if some were not swayed more by the practice of their
own times, than the principles and declarations of the ancients. Chrysostom
ascribes to Presbyters, not only (...), the power of order, but (...) the power
of Government f, giving this as the reason why the In 1 Timothy Iom. 11.
Apostle gives the same rules for the ordering both of Bishops and Presbyters,
there is but little difference betwixt them, says he, for they are ordained
both to the teaching ((...),) and ruling of the Church Now that (...), denotes
jurisdiction or presidentiam cum potestate, and is as Hesychius renders it,
(...), is plain in Chrysostom himself; he tells us the Apostle Paul had (...),
In 1 Cor. Hom. 23. and Hom, 25.
which he elsewhere expresses by (...) In 2 Cor. Hom. 25.
: and speaking of Moses, he says, it was wonderful, that he who was to be a
Ruler, (...), should be born at such a time In Act. Hom. 16.
. Theophilact makes the difference as little between Bishop and Presbyters, and
ascribes as much power to the later, almost in the same words In 1 Timothy
. So Theodoret declares (...), jurisdiction to belong to every Presbyter In 1 Timothy 5. 19.
, against an Elder especially, no less than two Witnesses must be admitted,
because he having (...), the Government of the Church, and in the exercise of
it often grieving Delinquents, they being ill affected to him, will be apt to
bring false accusations. And this is the (...) included in the Presbyters
Office, (...), as Nazzanzen speaks and much more to that purpose Orat. 1.
. And besides many other passages of like import, the Title of Governors is
all a long in ancient Writers given to Presbyters; and all the expressions
which signify Authority and Government, are ascribed to them. Thereby those
that would curtail their power, and make it no more of old than it is now, are
not a little encumbred; to extricate themselves a distinction is devised of a
power internal and external, the former they will allow to Presbyters in their
respective Churches, not the later.

But this is devised to disentangle themselves, and salve the deviations and
irregularities of later times, not that there is any ground for it in
Antiquity. For the highest act of that external power of jurisdiction, is
Excommunication; and if this was in the Presbyters power of old, no other act
of that power will, or can in reason be denied them; but this the ancients
ascribe to them; So Jerome, Ad Heliodorum.
Mihi ante Presbyterum sedere non licet, illi si peccavero licet me tradere
satanae ad interritum carnis, ut spiritus salvus sit. Chrysostom threatened
some of his Auditory, while he was a Presbyter, to Excommunicate them, (...),
Hom. 17. in Matthew.
to wave all of like nature insisted on by others; Justinian in the 6th Age
signifies plainly, that not only Bishops, but Presbyters* might Excommunicate
Offenders, in his Constitutions he forbids Bishops and Presbyters to exclude
any from Communion, till such cause was declared, for which the Canons
appointed it to be done, (...), etc. and will have the sentence of
Excommunication rescinded, which was passed by Bishops or Presbyters without
cause. Novel. 123. c. 11.
In the Code both Bishops and Clergy are forbid to Excommunicate in certain
cases, and then mentions the cases for which they must not, (...), although
they had been accustomed to it. Lex 39, Sec. 2. Tit. de Episc: and Clericis.


Now while Presbyters had this power there could be no Diocesan Churches,
whether they exercised it in common, as was showed before, or particularly in
their several Churches, as will now be made apparent; For by virtue of these
powers the Presbyters were really Bishops, though they had not always the
Title, yea, they are called Bishops, as a Learned Prelatist observes, by the
antientest Authors, Clemens, Ignatius, Tertullian, Thornd. Prim. Govern. Page
73. 74.
and have frequently the Names and Titles which some would appropriate to
Bishops, and which the Fathers use to express the Office of Bishops by, (...)
Praepositi, Antistites, Praesidentes, Idem. service. Page 68.
etc. And so there was as many Bishops really in every Diocese, as there were
particular Churches and Presbyters there; And well may they be said to be
really the same, since they were of the very same Office; for Bishops in the
ancient Church, were not a superior Order to Presbyters, but had only a
Precedence in the same Order. This some of the most judicious and learned
Defenders of Episcopacy assert. And those who hold that Patriarchs,
Metropolitans and Bishops differed not in Order, but in degree only, which is
the common opinion of Episcopal Divines, and yet contend that Bishops and
Presbyters were of a different order, will never be able to prove it. The
difference they assign between Bishops and Metropolitans is, that these
presided in Synod, and had a principal interest in Ordinations, and what more
did the preeminence of ancient Bishops, distinguishing them from Presbyters
amount to? It consisted in nothing material but their presidency in
Presbyteries, and their power in Ordinations. This last is most insisted on, as
making the difference wider, between these than the other. But with little
reason all things considered. For those to be ordained, were first to be
examined and approved by the Presbyters, (...) Theophilus Commonitor. cap. 6.
, the ordaining of one to the Presbytery was to be (...) Clem. Constitut. lib.
8. cap. 18.
It was a crime for which the greatest Bishop in the World was censurable, to
prefer any, or make Ordinations (...), as appears by what Chrysostom was
accused of, though it is like falsely Phot. in Chry Tom. 8. page 155 Council.
Carth. ^ cap. 22. Turon. 2
, and this is counted by some the substance of Ordination, wherein the
Presbyters had no less share (to say no more) than the Bishop. And in imposing
hands, which was the Rite of Ordaining, the Presbyters were to concur with the
Bishop, for which there is better Authority than the Canon of an African
Council, for says a very learned Do^^or Iren. p. 27^
, to this purpose, the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery 1 Timothy 1. ^.
, is no ways impertinently alleged, although we suppose St. Paul ^o concur in
the action; because if the Presbytery had nothing to do in the Ordination, to
what purpose were their hands laid upon him? Was it only to be Witnesses of the
fact, or to signify their consent? Both these might have been, done without
their use of that Ceremony, which will scarce be instanced in, to be done by
any but such, as had power to conferr what was signified by that Ceremony. And
diverse instances are brought by the same hand to show that Ordinations by
Presbyters was valid in the ancient Church page 379.
.

But if the Presbyters had been quite excluded from Ordination, and this power
had been entirely reserved to the Bishops, yet this would not be sufficient to
constitute them a superior Order. For the Rite of Ordaining was so far from
being an act of Government or jurisdiction, that it did not infer any
superiority in the Ordainer; nothing being more ordinary in the practice of the
Ancient Church, than for those were of a lower Degree and Station, to Ordain
their Superiors.

While there was no more distance betwixt Bishop and Presbyters but only in
Degree, so that as the Bishop was but primus Presbyter, (as Hilary under the
name of Ambrose, and others In 1 Timothy Author. Quest. in V. ^t N. T.
; or Primicerius as Optatus, defined by a Learned Civilian to be (...))
Gothofrid. in Code.
the first Presbyter, so the Presbyter was a second Bishop (...), as Nazianzen.
As the Bishop was summus sacerdos, in the style of Tertullian and others, that
is, chief Presbyter, so the Presbyter was Bishop a degree lower; not that he
had less pastoral power, but because he wanted that degree of dignity or
preeminence, for which the other was styled chief. As the Praeter Vrbanus was
called Maximus, yet he had no more Power than the other, Praetorum idem erat
collegium, eadem potestas Bodin. lib. 3. c. 6.
, but only some more privilege and dignity, dignitate coeteros anteibat
propterea maximus dicebatur Fest. in verb. major.
, and the (...), at Athens was Praetor maximus, yet all the rest were pares
potestaet Ibid.
; Bishops and Presbyters had idem ministerium as Jerome, eadem Ordinatio, as
Hilary In 1 Timothy 3.
, they were of the same Order and Office, had the same power, the power of the
Keys, all that which the Scripture makes essential to a Bishop. While it was
thus, there could be no Diocesan Churches, that is, no Churches consisting of
many Congregations which had but one Bishop only.

POSTSCRIPT.
A Late Writer presumes he has detected a notable mistake in the Author, of No
Evidence for Diocesan Churches (ascribed to one who owns it not) about (...),
which I suppose he would have Translated Ten Thousands definitely; but there it
is rendered indefinitely thousands, as we are wont to express a great many, when
the precise number is not known. Those who understand the Language, and have
observed the use of the Word, will be far from counting this a fault: and
those who view the passage will count it intolerable, to render it as that
Gentleman would have it. That of Atticus Bishop of C. P. may satisfy any
concerning the import and use of the word, who sending money for the releif of
the poor at Nice to Calliopius, he thus writes, (...), where he tells him that
by (...) he understands a multitude whose number he did not exactly know, thus
(i. e. indefinitely) is the word most frequently used by Greek Writers, and
particularly by Eusebius the Author of the passage cited. So he tells us, Nero
killed his Hist. l. 2. c.
Mother, his Brothers, his Wife, (...), of her Kindred: And Timotheus of Gaza,
he ^ l. 8. C. 13.
says, endured (...). Many more might be added, where the word is not rendered
by the best Translators (Valesius particularly) ten thousand; but still
indefinitly innumerabiles or infiniti, or sexcenti, etc. Nor have I met with
one instance (though possibly there may be some) in him where it is used to
express ten thousand precisely.

However it had been an unpardonable injury to Eusebius, to have rendered it so
in this place; as if he would have deluded the World with a most palpable
untruth, which both he, and all men acquainted with the state of the Church in
those times, know to be so. For this make him say that ten thousand Bishops met
in Council at Antioch in the third Age; when as he never knew a Synod of six
hundred Bishops in the fourth Age, while he lived; though then Bishops were
far more numerous, and had all encouragement to meet in greatest numbers. This
makes him signify, that ten thousand Bishops assembled in the skirts of the
East part of the Empire: When as their was not near so many (this Gentleman is
concerned to maintain there was not one thousand) in the whole Christian World.

This is more than enough to show that there is sufficient warrant to Translate
(...), Thousands more than once; though that it is in that discourse (which he
styles a little Pamphlet) so translated more then once, is another of his
mistakes. And a third (all in two lines) is that the Author grounds his
Argument on it. Whereas those that view the passage, and the occasion of it,
will see it had been more for his advantage to have translated it ten
thousands. He that can allow himself to write at this rate, may easily be
voluminous, and look too big to be despised, as a writer of little Pamphlets.

The Letter mentioned page 45. being communicated to me by M. B. that part of
it which concerns Alexandria is here added, that it may appear how much it is
mistaken, and how far from being answered.

For Alexandria it was the greatest City in the Empire next to Rome, (...),
says Josephus de bello Judaic lib. 5. c. cult. And Epiphanius gives an account
of many Churches in it assigned to several Presbyters, viz. besides Caesarea
finished by Athanasius, that of Dionysius, Theonas, Pierius, Serapion, Perseas,
Dizia, Mundidius, Annianus, Baucalas, adding (...). Haeres 69. page 728: This
notwithstanding that the Christians at Alexandria which held Communion with
Athanasius, might and did meet together in one Church, he himself declares
expressly in his Apology to Constantius, page 531. Tom. 1. Edit. Commelin. Anno
1601. The whole passage is too large to transcribe or translate, this is the
sense of it. He being accused for assembling the People in the great Church
before it was dedicated ((...)) makes this part of his defense. The confluence
of the People at the Paschal solemnity was so great that if they had met in
several assemblies ((...)) the other Churches were so little and strait, that
they would have been in danger of suffering by the crowd, nor would the
universal harmony and concurrence of the People have been so visible and
effectual, if they had met in parcels. Therefore he appeals to him, whether it
was not better for the whole multitude to meet in that great Church (being a
place large enough to receive them altogether (...)) and to have a concurrence
of all the people with one voice ((...).) For if says he according to our
Saviviours promise, where two shall agree as touching any thing, it shall be
done for them of my Father, etc. How prevalent will be the one voice of ^^
numerous a People assembled together and saying Amen to God? Who therefore
would not wonder, who would not count it a happiness to see so great a People
met together in one place? And how did the people rejoice to beh^ld one
another, whereas formerly they assembled in several places?

Hereby it is evident that in the middle of the fourth Age, all the Christians
at Alexandria which were wont at other times to meet in several assemblies,
were no more than one Church might and did contain, so as they could all join
at once in the Worship of God and concur in one Amen.

He tells him also that Alexander his Predecessor, (who died An. 325) did as
much as he in like circumstances, viz. assembled the whole multitude in one
Church before it was dedicated, page 532.

This seems clear enough, but being capable of another kind of proof which may
be no less satisfactory, let me add that also. This City was by Strabo his
description of it, (...), like a Soldiers Coat, whose length at either side was
almost 3^ Furlongs, its breadth at either end 7 or 8 urlongs, Geogr. lib. 17.
page 546. so the whole compass will be less than ten Miles. A third or fourth
part of this was taken up with public Buildings, Temples, and Royal Palaces,
(...). ibid. two Miles and half or three and a quarter is thus disposed of. I
take this to be that Region of the City which Epiphanius calls (...), (where he
tells us, was the famous Library of Ptolomeus Philadelphus) and speaks of it in
his time as destitute of Inhabitants, (...), de Ponder. and mensur, n. 9. p.
166 A great part of the City was assigned to the Jews, (...). So Strabo
indefinitely, as Josephus quotes him. Antiquit. Jud. l. 14. c. 12. Others tells
us more punctually, their share was two of the five divisions (Ushers Annals
Latin, page 859.) Though many of them had their habitation in the other
divisions, yet they had two fifth parts entire to themselves, and this is (I
suppose) the (...) which Josephus says, the Successors of Alexander set apart
for them ((...), bello Jud. l. 2. cap. 21. Thus we see already how 6 or 7 miles
of the 10 were taken up. The greatest part of the Citizens (as at Rome and
other Cities) in the beginning of the 4th. Age were Heathens. Otherwise
Antonius wronged the City, who, i^ Athanasius's time, is brought in thus
exclaiming by Jerome. vit. Paul. p. 243. Vae tibi Alexandria quae pro Deo
portenta veneraris; vae tibi civitas mere^^ix in quam totius orbis daemonia
confluxere, etc. a Charge thus formed; supposes the prevailing party to be
guilty. But let us suppose them equa, and their proportion half of the 3 or 4
miles remaining, Let the rest be divided amongst the Orthodox, the Arrians, the
Novatians and other Sects* And if we be just a large part will fall to the
share of Heretics and Sectaries. For not to mention others, the Novatians had
several Churches and a Bishop there, till Cyrils time, vid. Socrat. Hist. l. 7.
c. 7. The Arians were a great part of those who professed Christianity, (...),
(Sozom. Hist. l. 1. c. 14.) and if we may judge of the followers by their
leaders, no loss than half. For whereas there were 19 Presbyters and Deacons in
that Church (Theod. Hist. l. 4. c. 23.) (12 was the number of their Presbyters
by their Ancient Constitution, as appears by Eutychius, and 7 their Deacons, as
at Rome, and elsewhere) 6 Presbyters with Arius, and 5 Deacons fell off from
the Catholics. Sozom. Hist. l. 1. c. 14. But let the ^rians be much fewer, yet
will not the proportion of the Catholic Bishops Diocese i^ this City, be more
than that of a small Town, one of 8 or 12 Furlongs in compass. And so the
numbers of the Christians upon this account, will be no more than might well
meet for Worship in one place.

FINIS.

