portrait All that thou seis't and read is Divine:
Learning thus used is water turned to wine:
Well may we then despair to draw his mind,
View here the case; in the Book the Jewel find.
T. C^^^^ sculpsit



THE LIFE AND DEATH Of the Thrice Noble and Illustrious EDWARD Surnamed, The
Black Prince, SON to our Victorious King EDWARD the Third, By whom he was made
the First Knight of the Most Honorable Order of the GARTER.

By SAMUEL CLARK sometime Pastor of St. Bennet Fink, London.

LONDON, Printed for William Birch at the Blew Bible, at the lower-End of
Cheap Side, at the Corner of Bucklers-bury. 1673.

The Life and Death of EDWARD Surnamed, The Black Prince.
THIS Edward was the eldest Son of that victorious Prince, King Edward the
third: His Mother was the fair Philippa, Daughter to William Earl of Henault
and Holland, who was delivered of this her first born Son at Woodstock, July
15. Anno Christi 1329. and in the third year of his Fathers Reign. He was
afterward created Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitain and Cornwall, and Earl of
Chester. He was also Earl of Kent in right of his Wife Joan, (the most admired
Beauty of that Age,) Daughter of Edmund Earl of Kent, Brother by the Fathers
side to King Edward the second.

King Edward was very solicitous in the Education of this his Son, and provided
him choice Tutors, to train him up both in Arts and Arms: And among others
Walter Burley, a Doctor of Divinity, brought up in Merton-Colledge in Oxford,
who wrote many excellent Treatises in Natural and Moral Philosophy, for his
great Fame in Learning, had the Honor to be one of the Instructers of this
hopeful Prince.

When he was but 15 years old, his Father King Edward passing over into France
with a great and gallant Army, took this his Son along with him, making him a
Soldier, before he was grown to be a Man: But (it seems) he longed to try what
Metal his Son was made of in the bud; and happily he was loath to omit any thing
that might give countenance and credit to this Battle, wherein two Kingdoms
were laid at the stake.

Anno Christi 1345. our King Edward was upon the Sea in a Fleet of above a
Thousand Sail, and landed in Normandy: His Landforces were about two Thousand
five Hundred Horse, and his Foot thirty Thousand, most of them Archers. Making
pitiful havoc in Normandy, he marched up almost to the very Walls of Paris.
Philip the French King had not slept all this while, but had raised and brought
together one of the bravest Armies that ever France had seen, consisting of
about a Hundred or sixscore Thousand fighting men.

King Edward, laden and rich with Spoils, seemed not unwilling to retreat. But
they were now in the heart of their Enemies Country, between the two good
Rivers of Sein and Some: And it was judged meet by our King to seek a passage
out of these straits: and this Enquiry was interpreted by the enemy to be a
kind of flight, and King Edward was willing to nourish this conceit in them.

The River of Some, between Abeville and the Sea, was at low water fordable,
and Gravelly ground, whereof our King was informed by a French Prisoner whom
they had taken. But the French King (well acquainted with his own Country) had
set a Guard upon that Pass of a Thousand Horse, and above six Thousand Foot,
under the Conduct of one Gundamar du Foy, a Norman Lord of special note. King
Edward coming to this place, plunges into the Ford, crying out, He that loves
me, let him follow me, as resolving either to pass or die. These words, and
such a President, so inflamed his Army, that the passage was won, and du Foy
defeated almost before he was fought with (the incomparable courage and
resolution of the English appaling him) and carried back to King Philip sewer
by two Thousand then he carried with him, besides the terror which his retreat
brought along with it: And if the English were before unappaled, now much more
they resolved to live and die with such a Sovereign.

Now was King Edward near unto Crescie in the County of Ponthieu, lying between
the Rivers of Some and Anthy (a place which unquestionably belonged to him in
the right of his Mother) where he was careful to provide the best he could for
his safety and defense. King Philip, being enraged for the late defeat,
precipitates to the Battle (wherein the Great and Just God intended to scourge
the Pride and sins of France) being the rather induced thereto by his
confidence in his numerous and gallant Army, who were ready to tread upon one
another heels, till the view of the English Colors and Battle put them to a
stand.

King Edward, having called upon God for his gracious Aid and Assistance, full
of Heroic Assuredness, without the least perturbation, divided his Army into
three Battalia's. The first was disposed into the form of an Hearse, where the
Archers stood in the Front, and the Men of Arms stood in the bottom; And this
was led by the Young Lion of Wales, our brave Prince Edward, to whose
Assistance the King joined some of his Prime and most experienced Captains; as
Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, Godfrey of Harecourt; the Lords, Thomas Holland,
Richard Stafford, John Chandois, Robert Nevil, La'ware, Bourchier, Clifford,
Cobham, etc. And many other Knights and Gentlemen, to the number of eight
hundred men at Arms, two thousand Archers, and a thousand Welch-men. In the
second were the Earls of Northampton and Arundel, the Lords Rosse, Willoughby,
Basset, St. Albine, etc. with eight hundred Men at Arms, and twelve hundred
Archers. In the third was the King himself, having about him seven hundred Men
at Arms, and three thousand Archers, with the residue of his Nobles and People.

The battle thus ordered, our King mounted upon a white Hobby, rode from rank
to rank to view them, and with quickening words encouraged them, that bravely
they should stand to, and fight for his Right and Honor. And he closed the
battles at their backs (as if he meant to barricado up their way from flying)
which he did by plashing and felling of Trees, and placing his Carriages there,
and all his other Impediments. He commanded all men also to dismount, and to
leave their horses behind them; and thus all ways and means of flight being
taken away, the Necessity doubtless did double their Courages.

The French King Philip had with him John of Luxenbourg, King of Bohemia, the
King of Majorca, the Duke of Alanson his Brother, Charles de Bloys the Kings
Nephew, Ralph Duke of Lorrain, the Duke of Savoy, the Earls of Flanders,
Nevers, Sancerre, with many other Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Gentlemen bearing
Arms, and those not only French, but Almains, Dutch, and others. And just the
Night before the Battle, there came to the French Army Anne of Savoy, with a
thousand men at Arms, so that all things seemed to elate the Pride of the
French, and to fit them for destruction.

The French Army was also divided into three Battalia's. The Vaunt-Guard the
King committed to his Brother, the Duke de Alanson, and the King of Bohemia;
The Rear to the Duke of Savoy. And the main Battle he led himself, being so
impatient of all delays, that he would scarce permit time for a little Council
to consider what was fittest to be done. He caused also the Auriflamb to be
erected, which was an hallowed banner of Red Silk, whereof the French had a
Wonderful high conceit, as of a thing sent them from Heaven, as the Ephefians
thought of their Diana. The King of Bohemia though he was short sighted,
hearing in what good Array the English attended their coming, said plainly
(contrary to the proud conceits of the French, who thought them in a posture of
flight) Here will the English end their days or Conquer. He advised also that
the Army should take some repast, and that the Infantry consisting of the
Genoueses (who were about fifteen Thousand Cross-Bows, and sure men) should
make the first front, and the Cavalry to follow, which was done accordingly.

A little before the fight began, God, to show that he was Lord of Hosts, and
the only giver of Victory, caused the black Clouds to power down upon them
plenty of water, like so many Funeral Tears, enarching the Air with a
spacious Rainbow; and discharged sundry Peals of Thunder. The Sun also, which
before had hid his Face under a black dark Cloud, now brake forth, shining full
in the French men's Faces, and on the backs of the English. At the same time
also great Flocks of Ravens, and other balefull Birds of prey came flying over
the French Army.

The Duke of A lanson, contrary to his order, took it ill that the Genoueses
were set in the Front, and therefore in fury caused them to change place which
changed that seat of the Army, and wrought that discontent also in these
Italians as irritated them more against these French then against their enemies.

The sign of Battle being given by King Philip, was entertained with clamours
and shouts, all things showing the dread, and horror of War: Drums and
Trumpets sounding to a charge, Banners flying in the Air, and every where the
glittering weapons threatening Death and Destruction. The French calamities
began at their Genowayes, who under Carolo Grimaldi, and Antonio Doria, their
Colonels, being all of them Cross-bow men, were to open a way by their Arrows
for the French Horse: but this was the success of their service: Their
bow-strings being wett with the late Rain, their Bodies weary with a long
March, their Ranks (after the English had received their first Volley upon
their Targets) opened with innumerable Gapps, occasioned by the fall of their
slain fellows, who were overthrown by our home-drawn Arrows, were at last most
out ragiously scattered, and trampled under foot by Charles Duke of Alanson (by
command of King Philip himself) who bringing up the Horse with a full carier,
cried out, On, On, let us make our way upon the Bellies of these Genoueses, who
do but hinder us: and instantly pricks on through the midst of them, followed
by the Dukes of Lorain and Savoy, never staying till he came up to the English
Battle wherein our Gallant Prince commanded. This fiery young Count (contrary
to good Discipline) had also otherwise disobliged them, by disgraceful
speeches even when they were ready to join Battle.

These French Gallants, being thus mingled amongst them, were very many of them
overthrown and slain by the English Arrows, which equally brought to
destruction both French and Genowayes, shooting thickest where the crowd and
confusion was greatest. Some Rascals also that followed the English Army, as
they saw opportunity, stepped in among them, and helped to cut their throats,
sparing neither Lord nor Lozell.

The French Men at Arms, half out of breath with their Post-hast, and terribly
disordered by the perpetual storms of our whistling Arrows, were now at handy
strokes with the Princes Battle: Neither was it long before the bright
Battel-Axes, glittering Swords, and Lances, and such like other English
weapons, had changed their hue, being covered over with humane gore, which
having thirstily drunk out of the enemies wounds, let drop in bloody tears to
the Ground.

The fight was sharp and fierce whilst each strove for Victory. But here may
not be forgotten, the high resolution and valor of the King of Bohemia, who
(as only seeking an honorable Grave for his old Age) thrust himself into the
first Ranks of his own Horsemen, and with full carrier charging the English, was
slain with his Sword in hand, the Troop of his faithful Followers, with their
slaughtered Bodies covering him even in Death: This was soon seen by the fall
of the Bohemian Standard, whereupon his Son Charles (who was lately elected
Emperor of Germany, whilst King Lewis was yet alive) wisely took care for his
own safety, by a timely retreat, when he saw the case desperate.

Now was King Philip himself in Person, with the full power of his Army, come
to the rescue of his Brother, and Friends, who while they had breath, were
fighting hard for their hoped for Victory, but finding the English Valor far
beyond what they expected, they were beaten to the Earth in great numbers, so
that the carnage was very great. Yet was not our brave Prince without danger,
though now the second Battle of the English, for the preservation of their
Prince, rushing in among their Enemies fought most courageously.

Our King Edward all this while was standing upon Windmill Hill, with his
Helmet on, which never came off till all was ended, juditiously watching,
beholding the whole Field, to see how all things went, and ready to bring down
his Army (which stood about him like a black hovering in a cloud) when just
necessity should require it. The Prince in the mean time, being hard put to it,
having the whole power of France against him, some of the Nobles, sensible of
his danger, sent to the King, requesting for his Presence for the aid of his
Son in this necessity: The King asked the Messenger, Whether his Son was slain
or hurt? And when they answered, No, but that he was like to be overpowered
with the multitude of his Enemies: Well then (said the King) go back to them
that sent you, and tell them that so long as my Son is alive, they send no more
to me, what ever happen. For I will that the honor of this Day shall be his,
if God permit him to survive, and that he shall either win his Spurrs, or lose
his Life.

This Message, though it carried not back men to to assist, yet it inspired
such new life and spirits into the English, that they fought like Lions, as
resolving either to conquer or die. On the other side King Philip, whose
Kingdom lay at the Stake, performed the Duty of a good General and gallant
Soldier, fighting so long in his own Person till his Horse was killed under
him, himself twice dismounted, and wounded both in the neck and thigh, and near
being trodden to Death, had not the Lord John of Henault Earl of Beaumont,
rescued and remounted him: The French also about him (out of a loyal desire of
his preservation) almost against his will, conveyed him out of the Field, who
rather seemed desirous to end his days in so Noble company.

The King being departed out of the Field, and the matter being divulged in
both the Armies, it soon put a period to this bloody medly, wherein as yet none
were taken to mercy, but all were put to the Sword. The French King himself,
with a small Company, got to Bray in the night, and approaching the walls, and
the Guard asking who was there? He answered, The Fortune of France: By his
Voice he was known, and thereupon received into the Town, with the Tears and
Lamentations of his People. The rest of his Army sought to save themselves by
flight, whom the English (warily fighting upon the defensive) and loath to
hazard so glorious a Victory, by breaking their rancks to pursue the enemy too
far in the night (which was now come on) suffered them to be followed only by
their own fears, contenting themselves to make good their ground, by standing
still upon their Guard, according to the Rules of true Martial Discipline,
knowing that there were so many of the Enemy escaped, as might yet serve to
overwhelm their weary Army with their multitude.

Our King Edward, seeing the Coast for the present cleared of all his Enemies,
came down from the Hill with his entire Battle toward his Victorious Son, and
most affectionatly embracing and kissing him, said, Fair Son, God send you good
perseverance to such prosperous beginnings: You have acquitted your self right
Nobly, and are well worthy to have a Kingdom entrusted with your Government for
your Valor. To which the most noble and Magnanimous of Princes replied with
silence, most humbly falling on his Knees at the feet of his triumphant Father.

As for other things concerning this famous Victory, I refer my Reader to my
Narrative of it in the Life and Death of King Edward the third: contenting my
self here only to describe it, so far forth as our Noble Prince was therein a
prime Actor, and without which I could not have given a just Account of his
life.

Immediately after this Victory our King marched with his Army through France,
and sat down before Calice. But as the splendour of the Sun darkens the stars,
so did the Presence of the Father obscure the Actions and Virtues of the Son,
that I read no more of him till the year 1355. At which time our King was
informed, that John the now King of France (his father Philip being dead) had
given the Duchy of Aquitain to Charles the Dolphin; whereupon King Edward
being much incensed, conferred the same upon his own Son, the Prince of Wales,
commanding him to defend his right therein with the Sword against his
Adversaries.

He was also appointed by Parliament to go into Gascoin with a thousand Men at
Arms, two thousand Archers, and a great number of Welch-men, who accompanied
their Prince: And in June following he set forward with three hundred Sail of
ships, attended with the Earls of Warwick, Suffolk, Salisbury and Oxford; and
the Lords, Chandois, Audley, Beufort, Lile, with Sir Robert Knowls, Sir Francis
Hall, with many others*

With these arriving in Aquitain, he betook himself to do things worthy of his
Name and courage. He did wonders in France. For with his Victorious Army, he
recovered multitudes of Towns and Prisoners: He entered Guienne, passed over
Languedoc to Toulouse, Narbone, Bruges, without any encounter, sacks, spoils
and destroys where he goes, and laden with Booties, returns to Bordeaux. In
the mean time the French King gathered all the Power he possibly could, and the
Prince, (the Winter being spent) sets forth upon a new Expedition.

He had in his Army about eight Thousand brave expert and well Disciplined
Soldiers, and with them he advanced through Perigort and Limosin, into the
bosom of France, even up to the very Gates of Bruges in Bery, the terror of
his Name flying before to his great advantage. Thus satisfied for the present,
he wheeled about with purpose to return by Remorantine in Blasois (which Town
he took) and so through the Country of Tourain, Poictou, and Xantoyn, to his
chief City of Bordeaux. But John King of France, having assembled a great and
complete Army, followed close, and about the City of Poictiers overtook our
invincible Prince.

Where the Armies (with the odds of six to one against the English) drew near
each other, two Cardinals sent from Pope Clement mediated (as they had done
before) to take up the quarrel. But the French King supposing that he had his
enemy now at his mercy, would accept of no other conditions, but that the
Prince should deliver him four Hostages, and as vanquished, render up himself
and his Army to his discretion. The Prince was content to restore unto him all
the places which he had taken from him, but without prejudice to his Honor,
wherein (he said) he stood accountable to his Father, and his Country* But the
French King would abate nothing of his former demands, as being assured of the
Victory, as he supposed; and thereupon was ready instantly to set upon the
Prince, who seeing himself reduced to this strait, took wha advantage he could
of the ground, and by his diligence got the benefit of certain Vines, Shrubs
and bushes upon that part where he was like to be assaulted, whereby to pester
and entangle the French Horse, which he saw was ready to come furiously upon
him.

The success answered his expectation. For the Cavalry of his enemy in their
full carrier, were so entangled and encumbered among the Vines, that the Princes
Archers galled, and annoyed them at their pleasure. For the French King, to
give the honor of the Day to his Cavalry, made use of them only without the
help of his Infantry: Hence it was that they being disordered, and put to rout,
his whole Army came to be utterly defeated. Here (if ever) the Prince and his
English gave full proof of their Valor, and undaunted courage, never giveing
over till they had wholly routed all the three French Battles, the least of
which exceeded all the Princes numbers. The King himself fighting Valiantly,
and Philip his youngest Son (who by such his boldness and zeal defended his
distressed Father, as it purchased unto him the Honorable Surname of Hardy
were taken Prisoners.

Those of the Princes side, whose Valor and great deeds was most conspicuous,
were, the Earls of Warwick, Suffolk, Salisbury, Oxford, and Stafford: The
Lords, Chandois, Cobham, Spencer, Audley, Berkley, Basset, etc. and of Gascoin,
Subjects to the Crown of England, The Capital de Beuf: The Lords Lumier,
Chaumont, with others of inferior Title, but not of unequal Valor: Among
others, James, Lord Audley wan immortal Renown at this bloody Battle, in which
he received many Wounds, and was rewarded by the Noble Prince with a Gift of
five Hundred Marks, Land in Fee-simple in England, which he divided among his
four Esquires, who had stood by him in all the fury and brunt of the Battle:
Hereupon the Prince asked him, if he accepted not of his Gift? He answered,
That these men had deserved it as well as himself, and needed it more; With
which reply the Prince was so well pleased, that he gave five Hundred Marks
more in the same kind. A rare Example, where desert in the Subject, and reward
in the Prince strove which should be the greater. This Lord Audley having vowed
to be foremost in the Fight made good his words accordingly.

It was the misfortune, or rather the Glory of the French Nobles in these
disasterous times, that the loss fell ever heavily upon them. For in this great
overthrow and Carnage (by their own confession) there fell fifty and two Lords,
and about seaventeen Hundred Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, that bore Coats
of Arms: Among the Knights were fifty two Bannerets. The chief among the slain,
were Peter of Bourbon Duke of Athens, The high Constable of France John de
Clermont Marshal, Ieffery de Charmy High Chamberlain; The Bishop of Chalons,
the Lords of Landas, of Pons, and of Chambly. Sir Reginald Camian, who that day
carried the Auriflamb, was slain also, and as many others as made up the former
number: And of the common Soldiers there died about six Thousand. So
wonderfully did the great God of Battles sight for the English in those Days.

There escaped from this bloody Battle three of the French Kings Sons (for he
brought them all with him) Charles Prince of Dauphin, Lewis, afterward Duke of
Anjou, and John, Duke of Barry, all of them great Actors in the times
following. The French Prisoners taken were, John King of France and Philip his
Son, afterward Duke of Burgoine: The Archbishop of Sens; James of Bourbon,
Earl of Ponthieu: John of Artoys, Earl of Eu: Charles his Brother, Earl of
Longuevil: Charles Earl of Vendosm: The Earls Tankervile, Salbruch, Nassaw
Dampmartin, La Roch; The Counts of Vaudemont Estampes and John de Ceintre,
accounted the best Knight of France, and many other great Lords; and about two
Thousand Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, that bore Coats of Arms. And in this
Expedition the English took an Hundred Ensigns.

But here great contention arose between many who should be the man that took
King John Prisoner: The Prince wisely commanded them to forbear till they came
into England, where, the matter being heard, it was adjudged by King John's own
Testimony, that one Sir. Denis Morbeck of St. Omers had taken him Prisoner; for
which service the Prince rewarded him with a Thousand Marks.

And now, though King John had the hard hap to fall into the hands of an
Enemy, yet he had the happiness to fall into the hands of a Noble Enemy. For
Prince Edward, having conquered his Person by force of battle, now strove to
overcome his mind by his humble deportment, expressing himself in a Language
so ponderous, humble, grave, and natural, and yet so stately, as none but the
best Soul, adorned with the best education was able to have performed. And the
next Day, causing the Chaplains, and the other Priests in the Army to celebrate
Divine Service, he put off from himself the whole Glory of Victory, and most
devoutly gave it unto God: After which, in the sight and hearing of the
Prisoners, he highly commended and heartily thanked his Soldiers, with
speeches full of life and affections, sealing his words to every one with
bountiful large fees as his present means would permit. Mr. May in his Edward
the third, sets forth this Battle excellently in these words,

-- The first hot Charge
The valiant Lord, renowned Audley, gave;
Who to perform a Noble vow, in Deeds
Almost the Prowess of a Man Exceeds;
And like the stroke of Joves resistless Thunder,
Shoots forth, and breaks the strongest Ranks asunder.
Here in the thickest throng of Enemies,
Like Thracian Mars himself, Black Edward plyes
Deaths fatal task. Here Noble Warwick gives
A furious onset. There brave Suffolk strives
T'out go the foremost: Emulations fire
Is kindled now, and blazes high: Desire
Of Honor drowns all other Passions there;
Not in the Chiefs alone: Each Soldier
In that small Army feels bright Honors flame,
And labors to maintain his proper Fame.
Never was a Battle through all parts so fought,
Nor such high wonders by an handful wrought.
White Victory, that soared above, beheld
How every English hand throughout the Field
Was stained with Blood: Amazed to see the Day,
And that so few should carry her away.
The Fields no more their verdure can retain,
Enforced now to take their Purple stain,
And be obscured with slaughter, while the wounds
Of France manure her own unhappy Grounds.
Where mixed with Plebeian Funerals
Her greatest Princes die: There Bourbon falls,
And Marshal Clermont welters in his gore,
There Noble Charney's beaten down, that bore
The Standard Royal that sad Day: Here dies
Athens Great Duke: There Valiant Eustace lies,
Who as a badg of highest Honor wore
A Chaplet of bright Pearls, that had before
(Won by King Edward, in a skirmish, near
To Callice he was taken Prisoner)
As testimony of his Prowess showed
Bin by that Royal Enemy bestowed.
Great are the French Battalia 's, and in room
Of those that fall, so often fresh Soldiers come.
So often the bloody Fight 's renewed, that now
The English weary with subduing grow.
And 'gin to faint, oppressed with odds so great;
When lo, to make the Victory complete,
Six hundred Bowmen (whom to that intent,
Before the battle, the brave Prince had sent
Abroad, well mounted,) now come thundering over
The Field, and charge the French behind so sore,
As with confusion did distract them quite:
And now an Execution, not a Fight
Ensues. All routed that great Army flies,
A Prey to their pursuing Enemies.
What his disheartened battle, Orleans
Forsakes the Field: with him the Heir of France,
Young Charles of Normandy, and thousands more
Not overthrown, but frighted by the foe.
Nor are the English, though enough to gain
The day, enough in number to maintain
So great a chase: And not so well suffice
To follow, as subdue their enemies.
Nor yet (which more declared the Conquest sent
From Heaven alone, to strike astonishment
In overweening Mortals, and to show
Without that help how little Man can do)
Are all the English, Conquerors in the Field,
Enough to take so many French as yield;
Nor to receive the Prisoners that come:
Though some in fields are Ransomed, and sent home;
Yet more from thence are Captive born away,
Then are the Hands that won so great a Day, etc.
And now though King John had the unhappiness to fall into the hands of an
enemy, yet that which alleviated his affliction was, that he fell into the
hands of a Noble Enemy: for Prince Edward used him with such respect and
observance, that he could not find much difference between his captivity and
liberty, Mr. May gives us this Narrative of it.

The chase together with the day was done,
And all returned In his Pavilion
Brave Edward feasts his Royal Prisoner;
At which as Noble did the Prince appear
As erst in battle, and by sweetness won
As great a Conquest as his Sword had don.
No fair respect, or Honor that might cheer
That Kings afflicted breast was wanting there.
No Reverence, nor humble courtesy,
That might preserve his state and dignity,
But Edward showed at full. And at the Feast
In Person waited on his captive Guest.
But what content, what Object fit could Fate
Present, to comfort such a changed State
-- For him.
Whose State the Morning Sun had seen so high,
This night beholds in sad captivity;
His restless passions rolling to and fro
No calm admit: when thus his noble Fo,
Prince Edward spoke, (Great King, for such you are
In my thoughts still, whatever the Chance of War
Has lately wrought against you here) forgive
Your humble Kinsmans service, if I strive
To ease your sorrow, and presume to do
What is too much for me, to counsel you.
Do not deject your Princely thoughts or think
The Mnrtial Fame that you have gained, can sink
In one succesless Field: Or too much fear
Your Nations Honor should be tainted here.
Men's strength and Honors we most truly try,
Where Fields are fought with most equality.
But God was pleased to make this days success
The more miraculous, that we the less
Might challenge to our selves, and humbly know,
That in so great and strnge an overthrow
Some secret Judgment of our God was wrought,
And that the Sword of Heaven, not England, fought, etc.
And for your self, Great King, all History,
That shall hereafter to the World make known
The event of Poictiers Battle, shall renown
Your Personal Prowess, which appeared so high,
As justly seemed to challenge Victory,
Had not Gods secret Providence opposed:
But though his Will (Great Sir) has thus disposed;
Your State remains, your Person, and your Fame,
Shall in my humble thoughts be still the same.
And till my Father see your Face, to show
How he respects your Worth, and State, to you
As to himself, were he in Person here,
In all observance, Edward shall appear.
The Noble King, a while amazed to see
Victorious Youth so full of Courtesy;
At last replies: Brave Cousin, you have shown
Your Self a Man built up for true Renown;
And, as in Action of the Wars, to be
This Ages Phaenix in Humanity.
Why do you wrong me thus, as to enthrall
Me doubly? Not insulting over my Fall,
You rob me, Cousin, of that sole Renown,
Which I, though vanquished, might have made mine own,
To bear Adversity. I might have showed,
Had you been proud, a Passive Fortitude;
And let the world, though I am fallen, see
What spirit I had in scorning misery.
But you have robbed me of that Honor now,
And I am bound in Honor to allow
That Noble Theft, content (since such are you)
To be your Captive and your Debtor too;
And since my Stars ordein'd a King of France,
Armed with such odds, so great a Puissance
Must in a fatal Field be lost, to raise
So great a Trophie to another Praise,
I am best pleased it should advance thy Story,
And John's dishonor be Prince Edwards Glory.
After the Battle, which was fought on the 19. day of September, Anno Christi
1357. Prince Edward led King John and the Captive Nobles Prisoners to
Bourdeaux, the Archiepiscopal See, and chief City of his Dominions in France,
where he retained them till the Spring following: But sent present News of this
Victory to his Father, who thereupon took speedy Order by Simon Archbishop of
Canterbury, that a Thanksgiving should be celebrated all over England for eight
days together.

The Prince, having sufficiently rested and refreshed his people, the May
following set sail for England, with his Prisoners, and safely arrived at
Plymouth, and was with great joy and acclamations received every where. At his
coming to London (where at that time, a magnificent Citizen, Henry Picard (he
who afterward at one time so Nobly Feasted the four Kings of England, France,
Scotland, and Cyprus) was Lord Major) who received him with all imaginable
Honor. And the multitude of People, that came to see the Victorious Prince,
with the King of France, his Son Philip, and the other Prisoners, was so great,
that they could hardly get to Westminster between three a Clock in the Morning,
and twelve at Noon. Great Edward, saving that he forgot not the Majesty of a
Conqueror, and of a King of England, omitted no kind of Noble courtesy toward
the Prisoners. King John, and his Son, were lodged under a safe Guard at the
Savoy, which was then a goodly Palace belonging unto Henry Duke of Lancaster;
and the other Prisoners in other places

Some time after Prince Edward, by dispensation, was married to the Countess of
Kent, Daughter to Edmund, Brother to King Edward the second, and his Father
invested him with the Duchy of Aquitain: So that he was now Prince of Wales,
Duke of Aquitain, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester and Kent. And not long
after, he with his Beloved Wife, passed over into France, and kept his Court at
Bourdeaux.

The Prince of Wales was now grown famous over all the Christian world, and the
man to whom all wronged Princes seemed to Appeal, and to fly for succor. For
which end there came at this time to his Court James, King of Majorca, and
Richard, King of Navarr, just when his beloved Lady brought him a Son, for whom
these two Kings undertook at his Baptism, giving him the Name of Richard.

The Companies of Soldiers, most of whose Captains were English, either by
Birth, or Obedience, wanting employment, because the Wars of Britain were
quieted for the Present, ranged tumultuously up and down France: But about this
time Sir Bertram de Glequin (having paid his Ransom) found employment for them,
drawing the greatest part of that Millitary Pestilence into another Coast. For
by the assistance of Peter King of Arragon, and the Power of Glequin, with his
floting Bands, called The Companions, or Adventurers, Peter King of Castile and
Leon (a cruel Tyrant) was driven out of his Kingdom, his Bastard Brother Henry
being chosen in his room, and Crowned King of Spain at Burgos.

This Peter was Son to Alphonsus the eleventh King of Castile, and had to Wife
a French Lady called Blanch, Daughter to Peter Duke of Bourbon, who was Father
also of Joan, the French Kings Wife. His Tyrannical cruelties were so many and
so foul, that the Spanish Stories, scarce suffer Nero or Caligula to go beyond
him: For which, by his Subjects he was deposed, and his Brother Henry (as is
said before) was substituted, and Crowned in his room.

Peter thus driven out of his Kingdom, by the aid of the French, applied
himself to Prince Edward, craving his assistance for his restitution, making
many and large Promises to him upon the accomplishment thereof. And the Prince,
partly out of Charity to succor a distressed Prince, and partly out of policy
to keep his soldiers in exercise, having first sent to his Father, and gotten
his leave, marched with a gallant Army of thirty thousand men (burning with
desire of Renown) upon confidence of good pay for his men, and other
Commodities, when Peter should be reestablished upon his Throne.

He made his way through the famous straits of Rouncevallux in Navarre, by
permission of the King thereof, who yet suffered himself to be taken prisoner,
and carried into Castile, that he might not seem to cross the Freneh Kings
designs, who favored Henry the Usurper.

Our Prince had in his Company, besides most of all the principal Captains of
the English, two Kings, Peter of Castile whose the quarrel was, and the King of
Majorca; As also John Duke of Lancaster, who somewhile after Don Pedro his
death, having married his eldest daughter, wrote himself King of Castile and
Leon.

On the other side, King Henry for the defense of his new Kingdom, had amassed
together a very great Army, consisting partly of French, under Glequin their
famous Captains; and of Castilians and others, both Christians and Saracens to
the number of about an hundred thousand. And upon the Borders of Castile it
came to a bloody battle, wherein the valiant Prince of Wales obtained a very
great victory, having slain many thousands of his enemies. Henry himself
fighting valiantly, was wounded in the Groin, but yet escaped. There were taken
Prisoners, the Earl of Dene, Bertram de Glequin (who yet shortly after, by
paying a great Ransom was set at liberty) The Marshal Dandrehen, and many
others. Neither was this Victory less worth to Peter then a Kingdom: For our
most Noble Prince left him not, till at Burgos he had set him upon his Throne
again.

But this unworthy Kings falsehood and ingratitude were odious and monstrous.
For the Prince, notwithstanding his so great goodness extended to him, was
enforced to return to Bordeaux without money wherewith to pay his Army, which
was the cause of exceeding great mischiefs to himself, and the English
Dominions beyond the Seas, as if God had been displeased with his succouring
such a Tyrant. The Prince himself, though he came back with Victory, yet he
brought back with him such a craziness, and indisposition of Body, that he was
never thoroughly well after. And no marvel, considering the Country, the season,
and the action it self, and it may be more marvelled that his Soldiers came
home so well, then that he came home so ill.

Being now returned, there was presently, to his indispositon of Body, added
coffeehouse of mind. For not having money wherewith to pay his Soldiers, he
was forced to wink at that which he could not choose but see, and seeing to
grieve at. For they preyed upon the Country, for which the Country murmured
against him. And now to stop this murmuring, his Chancellor the Bishop of
Rhodes devised a new Imposition of levying a Frank for every Chimney, and this
to continue for five years to pay the Princes debts.

But this Imposition (though granted in Parliament) made the murmuring to be
increased. For though some part of his Dominions, as the Poictorians, the
Xantoigns, and the Limosins, in a sort consented to it, yet the Count of
Armigniac, the Count of Cominges, the Vicount of Carmain, and diverse others, so
much distasted it, that they complained thereof to the King of France, as unto
their Supreme Lord: Pretending that the Prince was to answer before King
Charles, as before his Superior Lord, of whom (they said) he held by homage and
fealty: whereas King Edward and his Heirs by the Treaty at Bretagny, were
absolutely freed from all manner of Service for any of their Dominions in
France; King Charles did openly entertain this Complaint, and hoping to regain
by surprise and policy, what the English had won by dint of sword, and true
Manhood, he proceeded to summon the Prince of Wales to Paris, there to answer
to such Complaints as his subjects made against him.

Our stout Prince returned for Answer, That if he must needs appear, he would
bring threescore thousand men in Arms to appear with him. And now began the
Peace between England and France to be unsettled and wavering. For while our
King Edward rejoiced in the excellent Virtues and Actions of his Sons and
people, Charles the French King, warned by so many calamities as his Dominions
had sustained by the English in fair War: and withal, earnestly coveting to
recover the Honor of his Nation, betook himself wholly to secret practices and
designs: Never adventuring his own Person in the Field, but executing all by
his Deputies and Lieutenants, especially by the valor and service of Bertram
de Glequin, Constable of France, who from a low estate was raised to this
height for his prudent and magnanimous Conduct in War. And our truly Noble King
(without suspicion of craft) reposing himself upon the Rules of Virtue and
Magnanimity, did not reap the stable effects of so great and important
victories, nor of the Peace so Ceremoniously made, that (in the Worlds opinion)
it could not be broken, without the manifest violation upon one side, of all
Bonds both divine and humane.

The Prince of Wales by Letters advised his Father not to trust to any fair
words, or overtures of further Amity made by the French, because (as he said)
they entertained Practices underhand in every place against him: But his
counsel was not hearkened to, because he was judged to write thus out of a
restless humor, delighting in War, though the event showed that his words were
true. For now King Charles, having by quick paiments, and by one means or other
gotten home all the Hostages which had bin impledged for performance of the
Articles of Peace, set all his wits on work to abuse the King of Englands
credulity. He courted him with loving Letters and Presents, while in the mean
time his Plots were ripened abroad, and he surprised the County of Ponthieu
(our Kings undeniabe inheritance) before King Edward heard thereof.

King Edward hereupon calls a Parliament, declares the breach, craves aid, and
has it granted. And then again claims the Crown of France, and sent over his
Son John, Duke of Lancaster, and Humfry de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, with a
great Army to Calice to invade France.

Among the States and Towns made over to the English at the Treaty of Bretigni,
which had revolted to the French, was the City of Limosin: Thither did the
Prince march, and sat down with his Army before it: And not long after came
unto him out of England, his two Brethren the Duke of Lancaster, and the Earl
of Cambridg, with a fresh supply of Valiant Captains, and Soldiers. The City
stood it out to the uttermost, and was at last taken by storm, where no mercy
was showed by the enraged Soldiers, but the Sword and Fire laid all desolate:
After this Service, the Princes health failing him more and more, he left his
Brethren in Aquitain to prosecute the Wars, and himself taking Ship, came over
to his Father in England, his eldest Son [Edward] being dead a little before at
Bordeaux, and brought over with him his Wife and his other Son Richard.

The Prince having left France, his Dominions were either taken away, or fell
away faster then they were gotten, Gueschlin entered Poictou, took Montmorillon,
Chauvigny, Lussack and Moncontour. Soon after followed the Country of Aulnis,
of Xantoyn, and the rest of Poictou: Then St. Maxent, Neel, Aulnay: Then
Benaon, Marant, Surgers, Fontency, and at last they came to Thouras, where the
most part of the Lords of Poictou, that held with the Prince, were assembled.
At this time the King, Prince Edward, the Duke of Lancaster, and all the Great
Lords of England set forward for their relief: But being driven back by a
Tempest, and succor not coming, Thouras was yielded up upon composition: In
fine, all Poictou was lost, and then Aquitain, all, but only Bordeaux, and
Bayon. And not long after Prince Edward died, and with him the Fortune of
England. He was a Prince so full of Virtues as were scarce matchable by others.
He died at Canterbury upon Trinity Sunday, June the eighth, in the forty sixth
year of his Age, and the forty ninth of his Fathers Reign: and was buried in
Christs-Church there Anno Christi 1376.

Among all the Gallant men of that Age this our Prince was so worthily the
first, that.

Long erit a Primo quisque secundus erit. He had a sumptuous Monument erected
for him, upon which this Epitaph was engraven in Brass, in French thus
Englished.

Here lies the Noble Prince Monsieur Edward, the Eldest Son of the thrice
Noble King Edward the third, in former time Prince of Aquitain, and of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, who died on the Feast of the Trinity,
which was the eighth of June, in the year of grace 1376. To the Soul of whom,
God grant mercy. Amen.

After which were added these verses in French, thus Translated according to
the homely Poetry of those times.

Who so thou art that passest by
Where these Corpse entombed lie:
Understand what I shall say
As at this time speak I may.
Such as thou art sometime was I:
Such as I am, such shall thou be.
I little thought on the hour of Death
So long as I enjoyed Breath.
Great Riches here I did possess
Whereof I made great Nobleness.
I had Gold, Silver, Wardrobes, and
Great Treasures, Horses, Houses, Land.
But now a Caitife Poor am I,
Deep in the Ground, lo here I lie:
My beauty great is all quite gone,
My Flesh is wasted to the Bone:
My House is narrow now, and throng;
Nothing but Truth comes from my Tongue:
And if you should see me this Day
I do not think but yet would say,
That I had never bin a Man,
So much altered now I am.
For Gods sake pray to the Heavenly King,
That he my Soul to Heaven would bring. See the ignorance and superstition of
those times and bless God for our clearer light.

All they that Pray and make accord
For me unto my God and Lord;
God place them in his Paradise,
Wherein no wretched Caitiff lies.
The Death of this Prince (says Daniel in his History of England) was a heavy
loss to the State, being a Prince of whom we never heard no ill, never received
any other note but of goodness, and the Noblest performance that Magnanimity
and Wisdom could ever show, insomuch as what Praise could be given to Virtue,
is due to him.

FINIS.

