

All that thou sees't and read is Divine:
Learning thus used is water turned to wine:
Well may we then despair to draw his mind,
View here the case: in the Book the Jewel find.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF HANNIBAL THE GREAT CAPTAIN OF THE CARTHAGINIANS, Who
maintained Wars against all the power of ROME for eighteen years together in
ITALY. AS ALSO The LIFE and DEATH of EPAMINONDAS the GREAT CAPTAIN of the
THEBANS, Who was famous both for his Virtues and Valor.

By SA. CLARKE sometime Pastor in St Bennet Finck, London.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door. 1665.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF HANNIBAL the Great CARTHAGINIAN CAPTAIN. Who maintained
Wars in ITALY against the ROMAMS for eighteen years together.

By (...) (...) Pastor in St Bennet Finck, London.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Sign of the Guilded-Acorn in St.
Paul's Churchyard near the little North door. 1665.

Licensed

Roger L'estrange.
October 20. 1664.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF HANNIBAL THE GREAT.
HAnnibal, the Son of Amilcar was about tweenty six years old, Hannibal chosen
General.
when he was chosen General of the Carthaginian Forces in Spain. He was
elected by the Army as soon as Asdrubal (their late General) was dead, and the
election was approved, and confirmed by the Senate of Carthage, wherewith
Hanno, and his faction was nothing pleased. This was now the third of the
Barchine Famely (so called of Amilcar, whose surname was Barcas) that commanded
in chief over the men of War. Hanno therefore and his Partisans, being neither
able to tax the Virtue of their enemies, nor to perform the like services to
the Commonwealth, had nothing left whereby to value themselves, excepting the
general reprehensions of War, and cautelous advise of not provoking the
Romans: but they were little regarded. For the Carthaginians saw apparently,
that the Oath of the Romans to the Articles of Peace, was like to hold no
longer, than till the Romans could find some good advantage to renew the War.
It was therefore rather desired by the Carthaginians, that whilst they were in
a fit condition, the War should begin, rather than in some unhappy time of
Famine or Pestilence, or after some great loss in their Army or Fleet, they
should be driven to yield to the impudent demands of their insulting enemies.

This disposition of his Citizens Hannibal well enough understood. Neither was
he ignorant that in making War with the Romans it was no small advantage to get
the start of them. Could he but bring his Army into Italy, he hoped to find
Friends and assistance, even from those People, that helped to increase the
Armies of the Romans. But his design must be carried privately, or else it
would be prevented. He resolved therefore to lay Siege to Saguntum in Spain,
where he now was with his Army, which might seem not greatly to concern the
Romans, and would highly please the Carthaginians.

Having resolved hereupon, nevertheless he went orderly to work, beginning
with those that lay next in his way. First therefore he entered into the
Territory of the Ol^ades, He besieges, and takes many Towns.
and besieging Althaea, in a few days he became Master, not only of it, but of
all the other Towns in their Country; and the Winter coming on, he rested his
Army in New Carthage, or Carthagena, imparting liberally to his Soldiers of
the Spoils that he had gotten in his late Conquests.

In the Spring he made War upon the Vacc^i, and with little difficulty wan,
first Salamanca, and after it Arbucala, though not without a long Seige and
much difficulty: But in his return he was put to the height both of his Valor,
and Prudence. For all such of the Va^caei that could bear Arms, His Valor,
and Policy.
being made desperate by the Spoil of their Country, with diverse others that
had escaped in the late overthrow, joining with the Toletans, made up an Army
of one hundred thousand able men, waiting for Hannibal on the Banks of the
River Tagus. They knew that he was very adventurous, and had never turned his
back upon any enemy, and therefore hoped, that having him at such an advantage,
they should easily have foiled him. But at this time our Great man of War, knew
as well how to dissemble his Courage, as at other times to make good use of it.
For he withdrew himself from the River side, as seeming fearful to pass over
it, aiming thereby to draw over that great multitude from their Banks of
advantage. The Spaniards, as Hannibal expected and desired, thinking that he
retreated out of fear, thrust themselves in a disordered manner into the
River, to pursue him. But when Hannibal saw them well near over, he turned
back his Elephants to antertain them at their landing, and thrust his Horsemen,
both above and beneath them into the River, who by the advantage of their
weapons slew almost all of those in the River without resistance, and then
pursued the rest, His Victory.
who being amazed, fled, and so he made a very great slaughter of them.

The Saguntines perceiving the storm drawing near to them, hastened their
Ambassadors to Rome, who complained that they were like to be undone, only
for their Friendship to the Romans. This so moved the Senate, that some would
have War presently proclaimed, both by Sea, and Land, and the two Consuls sent
with Armies, one into Spain, the other into Afric: But others went more
soberly to work (according to the Roman gravity) whereby it was concluded, that
Ambassadors should be sent into Spain, to view the State of their Confederates.

These Ambassadors found Hannibal at Carthagena, where they had Conference
with him, who carried himself so reservedly, that they departed, as doubtful
as they came. But whilst they were passing to and fro, Hannibal prepared, not
only his Forces, but some Roman pretenses against Saguntum. For the Tudetani,
who were neighbors to the Saguntines, complained to him of sundry wrongs that
they had received from them of Saguntum: Probably Hannibal himself had hatched
some of them. Having therefore such an occasion, he sat down with his whole
Army before Saguntum. The Romans were glad of the Quarrel, He besieges
Saguntum.
as hoping that Carthage, with all belonging thereto, would in short space
become their own. Yet were they not hasty to threaten before they were ready to
strike; but meant to temporize until they had an Army in readiness to be sent
into Spain, where they intended to make Saguntum, the seat of War.

In the beginning of Hannibals Siege, his Carthaginians were much discouraged
by reason of the brave Sallies which the Saguntines made upon them, in one of
which Hannibal himself received a dangerous wound in the thigh that made him
unable to stir for many days. Yet in the meantime he was not unmindfull of his
business, but gave order to build certain movable Towers that might equal
those upon the City walls, and to prepare to batter the Curtains, and to make
a breach. These being finished and applied, had soon wrought their desired
effect. A large breach was made by the fall of some Towers, whereat a hot
assault was given: But it was so gallantly defended by the besieged, that the
Carthaginians were not only beaten from the breach, and out of some ground
within the City, which in the first fury they had wan, but they were pursued
even to their own Trenches and Camp. Yet at length the Carthaginian Army
(wherein were one hundred and fifty thousand men) did so tire out the Townsmen
by their continual Allarms* that at length it gat into the Town, and had been
Masters of it, but that they were hindered by some Counter-works which the
Besieged had raised.

In this extremity there was one Alcon, that came out of the City to treat
with Hannibal, who would give no other terms but these hard ones, That they
should deliver up to him all the Gold, Silver, and Plate, and other Riches
which they had in the City; That the Citizens should leave the City, and take
up such other habitations as he should appoint them; neither should they carry
any more out with them, save the clothes on their backs. These terms seemed
so unreasonable to Alcon, that he durst not return into the City to propound
them to the Citizens. Yet might they far better have submitted thereto, how
hard soever, because thereby they might have saved their lives, and the honor
of their wives and Daughters, whereas, the City being shortly after taken by
storm, Saguntum taken.
they saw their Wives and Daughters defloured before their faces, and all put
to the Sword that were above fourteen years of age. The Treasures found in
Saguntum, which were very great, Hannibal reserved, therewith to pay his Army.
The Slaves, and other booty, he divided amongst his Soldiers, reserving some
choice things, wherewith to present his Friends at Carthage, to encourage them
to the War.

This news exceedingly vexed the Romans, Roman Ambassadors sent to Carthage.
being angry at their own slownesse to send help to Saguntum, which held out
eight months, looking still for succor, but in vain. Then did the Romans
send Ambassadors to Carthage, to demand whether this act were done by their
consents, or whether it were Hannibals presumption alone? If they granted the
former, they were to give them defiance. Answer was made them in the Senate of
Carthage by one of the Senators, to this effect. That by this Message the
Commonwealth of Carthage, was urged to plead Guilty, or not Guilt: That it
belonged to them to call their own Commanders in question, and to punish them
according to their faults; The Carthaginians answer.
but to the Romans to challenge them if they had done any thing contrary to
their late League and Covenant. Its true (said this Speaker) that in our
negotiations with Luctatius your Ambassador, the Allies of both Nations were
comprehended, but the Saguntines were not then your Allies, and therefore no
parties to the Peace then made: For of your Allies for the future, or of ours,
there was no question: As for the last agreement between you and Asdrubal,
wherein you will say that the Saguntines were comprehended, its you that have
taught us how to answer that particular. For whatsoever you found in the
Treaty, between us and Luctatius, to your disadvantage, you said it was his
presumption, as promising those things for which he had no Commission from your
Senate: If then it be lawful for you to disavow the Actions of your
Ambassadors and Commanders, concluding any thing without precise Warrant from
you; the same liberty may we also assume, and hold our selves no way bound in
honor to perform the contract that Asdrubal made for us, without our Command,
and Consent.

In conclusion, the Carthaginian Senate moved the Roman Ambassadors to tell
them plainly the purposses of those that sent them? whereupon Q. Fabius,
gathering up the skirt of his Gown, as if something had been in the hollow
thereof, made this short reply; I have herein my Gown-skirt both Peace and War;
Make you (my Masters of the Senate) election which you will have. All answered,
even which of them you have a fancy to offer us. Then (quoth Fabius) take War,
and share it amongst you. Which all the Assembly willingly accepted. War
denounced by the Romans.


War being thus proclaimed, Hannibal resolved not to put up his Sword which he
had drawn against the Saguntines, till he had therewith opened his passage to
the Gates of Rome. So began the second Punick War; indeed second to none that
ever the People of Rome met with. Hannibal wintered at Carthag^na, giving
license to his Spanish Soldiers to visit their Friends, and refresh themselves
against the Spring. In the mean while he gave Instructions to his Brother
Asdrubal for the Government of Spain in his absence. He also took order to send
many Troops of Spaniards into Africa, Hannibal prepares for Italy.
to supply the rooms of those Affricans which he had drawn into Spain, as also
that the one Nation might remain as Pledges for the other. He selected also
four thousand Foot, all young men, and Persons of quallity, out of the best
Cities of Spain* which were to be Garisoned in Carthage it self, not so much
to strengthen it, as that they might serve for Hostages* He also left with his
Brother, to guard the Costs, and Ports, fifty seven Galleys, whereof thirty
seven were ready Armed. Of Africans and other Nations, strangers, he left with
him above twelve thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, besides one and twenty
Elephants.

Having thus taken order for the defense of Spain and Africa, he sent some to
discover the Passages of the Pyrenaean Mountains that part Spain from France;
and of the Alps, that part France from Italy. He sent Ambassadors to the
inhabitants of the Pyrenes, and to the Gauls to obtain a quiet passage, that he
might bring his Army entire into Italy. These being returned with good
satisfaction; In the beginning of the Spring he passed over the River of Iberus
with an Army of ninety Thousand Foot, and twelve Thousand Horse.

All those parts of Spain which had not before been entered, he now subdued; He
Conquers much of Spain.
and appointed one Hanno to Govern Spain on the East side of Iberus, with whom
he left ten Thousand Foot, and one thousand Horse. When he came to the borders
of Spain, some of his Spanish Soldiers returned home without asking leave;
which, that others also might not attempt, he courteously dismissed such as
were willing to be gone: Hereby the Journey seemed the less tedious to such as
accompanied him voluntarily. With the rest of his Army, consisting now but of
fifty Thousand Foot, and nine Thousand Horse, he passed the Pyrenes, and
entered into Gaul (now France:) But he found the Gauls bounding upon Spain
ready in Arms, His passage through France.
to forbid his entrance into their Country; but with gentle Speech, and rich
Presents, which he sent to their Leaders, he wan them to favor his expedition.
So without any other molestation, he came to the Banks of Rhodanus, where dwelt
on each side of the River a People called Volcae. These being unacquainted with
the cause of his coming, sought to stop his passage over the water: But he was
greatly assisted by those of Vivarets, and Lionois: for though many of them had
transported themselves, and their goods into Daulphine, thinking to defend the
Banks against him; yet such as remained, being willing to free their Country
from such unwelcome Guests, they helped him to make Boats: informed him of a
better passage higher up the River, and sent him Guides.

When his Boats were ready, he sent Hanno the Son of Bomilcar, He is opposed.
up the River to the Foard, and himself in the mean time made a show of
entering the Foard below, that Hanno charging the Gauls on their own side, and
himself at the same time passing the River in their faces, His Victory in
France.
might win the further Bank, which was done accordingly, though with some
difficulty, and thereby the enemies were dispersed.

Having passed this first brunt, and overcome both the rage of the River and
those that defended it, he was visited by the Princes of the Cisalpine-Gauls,
that inhabited Piemont, and Milan, who had lately revolted from the Romans.
Some Gauls encourage him.

He passes the Alps.


These informed him that the passage over the Alps was not so difficult as
report made it, and gave him Guides, with many other encouragements. Yet found
he himself extremely encombred by the Savoyards, and lost more of his Carriages
and Carthaginians than he could well spare. For he was twice strongly assaulted
by them before he could recover the plains on the other side. He was fifteen
days passing over the Alps, wherein, besides the trouble of his enemies, he
was much assaulted by foul weather, and Snow, it being now the beginning of
Winter. But the fair and fertile plains which they now were entering into, with
the assistance, and encouragment of the Cisalpine Gauls, gave them much
comfort, having nothing else of difficulty remaining, but that which from the
beginning they made account to overcome by their proper valor and resolution,
namely the Roman Armies and resistance.

The Roman Ambassadors who had denounced War at Carthage, in their return
homewards, took Spain in their way, with a purpose to draw into their Alliance
as many Cities, and Princes as they could: The first that they attempted were
the Volcians, from whom they received this answer: that they would never join
with them who had forsaken the Saguntines in their greatest need; and that
themselves had found the Cathaginians such good neighbors, that they meant
still to adhere to them. From Spain the Ambassadors passed through Gaul,
persuading them not to suffer Hannibal to pass through their Countery, and
gloried much in their own strength: But the Gauls laughed them to scorn, and
had scarce patience to hear them speak: Telling them that they meant not to set
their own Houses on Fire to save the Romans from burning; That the
Carthaginians had never offended them as the Romans had done, who had already
forced some of them out of their habitations, and made others Tributaries, who
were as free as themselves.

With these unpleasing answers the Ambassadors returned home; carrying no good
news of friends like to help them, but rather that the Gauls intended to take
part with their enemies. And accordingly when the Cisalpine-Gauls heard that
the Carthaginians had passed Iberus, and were marching toward Rome, the B^ij,
The Gauls rise aganst the Romans,
and Insubrians rose up against the Romans: Their quarrel was the late planting
of Roman Colonies at C^emona, and Placentia, within their Territories. Relying
therefore upon the Carthaginian succor, which they thought to be at hand,
laying aside all regard of those Hostages, that they had lately given to the
Romans, they fell upon those Colonies. The Towns they could not win, but they
forced the Roman Comissioners, which were abroad, to fly into Modena, They
besiege Modena.
where they besieged them. But the Gauls, having little skill in besieging
Cities, grew weary, and were desirous of Peace: This they did on purpose to
draw on some meeting, that laying hands on the Roman Deputies, they might with
them redeem their Hostages; and it fell out in part according to their wish:
For Ambassadors coming to them from Rome to treat with them, they made them
Prisoners. Manlius the Praetor, hearing of this outrage, marched with his Army
to relieve the besieged. But the Gauls laid an Ambush in his way, that falling
upon him, utterly routed him, and slew most of his Army except a few that
escaped into a defensible place upon the River Po. This being heard of at Rome,
C. Atilius, the other Praetor, hasted with an other Army to relieve the
besieged.

But as the Gauls were too hasty, so the Romans were too slow in the beginning
of this War. The Romans send an Army into Spain.
For they could not believe that Carthage, which had almost servilely endured
so many indignities from them in the late peace, durst be so bold on a sudden
as to attempt the Conquest of Italy itself. Wherefore they appointed one of
their Consuls to make War in Spain, and the other in Africa. Titus Sempronius
went into Africa, with one hundred and sixty Galleys of five to an Oar, which
preparations seemed to threaten Carthage her self. P. Cornelius Scipio, the
other Consul, hasted toward Spain, and by the way, touching at Massilia, he
was there informed, that Hannibal had passed the River Rhodanus, whom he had
thought to have found busy in Spain. Hannibal also heard of the Consuls
arrival, with whom he meant to have nothing to do. Yet both sent forth Scouts,
Hannibal sent out five hundred Numidians, and Scipio three hundred of his best
Horse* They met, and fought, and the Romans had the better of it. But when
Scipio drew near, thinking to have me^ with the Carthaginians, he found that
they were gone three days before with an intent to see the Walls of Rome.

Scipio hereupon sent his Brother Cn. Cornelius Scipio into Spain, with the
greatest part of the Army against Asdrubal, and himself with the choicest
returned ba^k, and landing at Pisa, he marched through Tuscany, and Lumbardy,
where he drew together the broken Bands of Manlius, and Atilius, who were
lately beaten by the Gauls, intending therewith to oppose the enemy, thinking
to find them tired with their long Journey.

Five months Hannibal had spent in that tedious march from Carthagena. When he
had passed Rhodanus, he had in his Army but thirty eight thousand Foot, and
eight thousand Horse, the rest having perished with Diseases, Enemies, Rivers,
and Mountains, Hannibals losses in his march.
Having newly passed the Alps, and scarce refreshed his wearied Army in
Piemont, he sought the friendship of the Taurini, who being at this time in War
with the Insubrians, (his good Friends) the Taurini refused it* whereupon he
besieged their chief Town, and in three days wan it, the spoil whereof did
much encourage his Army, and the others Calamity terrified their Neighbors.
Most of those parts would willingly have joined with Hannibal, but when the
Consul Scipio came amongst them, they began to be better advised* This wavering
affection amongst the People, made the Generals to hasten to a Battle. Their
meeting was a^ Tie^nun^ [now Pavia] where each of them wondered at the others
expedition.

The Senate at Rome were much amazed at Hannibals arrival in Italy: wherefore
they sent presently to Sempronius, and the other Consul, now in Sicily to give
him notice of it, and to require him speedily to return with his Army for the
safeguard of Italy, Hannibal prepares to fight.
which accordingly he did. Scipio and Hannibal were now so near, that fight
they must ere they could part, and therefore each of them encouraged their
Soldiers by the best arguments they had: Hannibal assuring his men that there
was no mean betwixt Victory and Death.

A Battle.
When the Armies approached near each to other, Scipio sent forth his Horsemen
of the Gauls to begin the fight, lining them with his Darters for their
assistance; himself with his men at Arms followed slowly in good order. The
Gauls, being in their Generals sight, behaved themselves gallantly, and were as
bravely opposed; but their Darters at the very first, ran cowardly away without
casting a Dart, for fear of being trodden down by the enemies Horse. Yet did
the Gauls maintain it stoutly, and did more hurt than they received: neither
was Scipio unmindfull to relieve them; wherefore he adventured himself so far,
that he received a dangerous wound, and had there perished if his Son
(afterward called Africanus) had not brought him off. Whilst the Romans were
busy in helping their Consul, an unexpected storm assailed them at their backs:
Hannibal had appointed his Numidian Horsemen to charge the Romans in their
Flank, and to compass them about, whilst he, with his men at Arms sustained
their charge, and met them in the face. The Numidians preformed it well,
cutting in pieces the scattered Foot that ran away at the first encounter, and
then falling on the backs of those that charged Hannibal* by this impression
the Romans were shu^^ed together and routed, betaking themselves to their
heels, The Romans beaten.
and leaving to their enemies the honor of the day.

Scipio perceiving how things were like to go, almost stole the Retreat with
most of his Footmen yet unbroken, and recovered the Bridge over Ticinus* but
notwithstanding his have, he lost six hundred of his men which brought up his
Rear, and should have broken down the Bridge. It was two days after, ere
Hannibal could pass the River: Scipio in the mean time refreshing his men, and
easing himself of his wound in Placentia: But when Hannibal presented them
Battle again, and they durst not accept of it, the Gauls, which before assisted
the Romans out of fear, took courage and left them, and thinking that now the
time was come for the recovery of their liberty, that night they fell upon the
Roman Camp, wounded and slew many, especially of those that kept the Guard,
with whose Heads in their hands, they fled over to the Carthaginians, The Gauls
forsake the Romans.
and presented their service: Hannibal received them exceeding courteously, and
sent them to their own homes that they might preswade the rest of the Nation to
become his confederates.

The same night the Consul stole a retreat as he had done before, but not with
the like success: For Hannibal had an eye upon him, and ere he was gone far,
Hannibal beats the Consul.
he sent his Numidians after him, and himself followed with the Body of his
Army. Then had the Romans received a great blow, but the Numidians, greedy of
prey, fell to ransacking their Camp, and thereby gave them liberty of escaping,
only some in the Rear were either slain or taken Prisoners. Scipio being
unable to travel by reason of his wound, and judging it meet to stay for the
coming of his fellow Consul, entrenched himself strongly upon the Banks of the
River Trebia; which so diminished his reputation, that every day more of the
Gauls fell to Hannibal, amongst whom came in the Boij, that brought with them
the Roman Commissioners: Hitherto they had keept them as pledges wherewith to
recover their own Hostages* but now they delivered them to Hannibal as tokens
of their affection to him. Hannibal being in great want of victuals, he
attempted the taking of Clastidium, He wins Clastidium.
wherein the Romans had laid all their Store, and Ammunition, and a Brundusian,
that had the keeping of it surrendered it to him for a little money.

The news of these disasters coming to Rome, filled the Senate, and People
with a desire of revenge, their Foot wherein their greatest strength lay, being
yet entire: they therefore hasted away Sempronius with his Army, who by speedy
marches came to Scipio upon the Banks of Trebia. The Consuls took counsel what
was fittest to be done, now that their Armies were conjoined: Sempronius, was
eager to fight before Scipio recovered of his wound, that he might get the
whole glory of the Victory: He also feared the election of new Consuls, his
time being almost expired: But Scipio persuaded the contrary by many arguments:
yet would not Sempronius be taken off, wherewith Hannibal was exceedingly
pleased, who feared nothing so much as delays. To further the desire of
Sempronius, the Gauls that inhabited near to Trebia, complained of injuries
done to them by the Carthaginians. Indeed they neglected to supply Hannibal
with necessaries, and therefore he was bold to be his own Carver. Hereupon
Sempronius sent forth a thousand Horse, which coming unlooked for upon
Hannibals Forragers, who were heavy laden, Hannibals Forragers beaten.
they cut many of them in pieces, and chased the rest even to their Camp. This
indignity made the Carthaginians to sally out, who caused them to retire faster
than they came: Sempronius relieved his own men, and Hannibal did the like: So
that at length the Roman Army was drawn forth, and Battle offered, if the
Carthaginians had not refused it.

This Victory (for so the Consul would name it) made the Romans very desirous
to try it out in open Field, notwithstanding Scipios diswasion from it. This
Hannibal was informed of by the Gauls that were in the Roman Camp: therefore he
resolved to secure the Victory by adding a Stratagem to his fortes. He found in
a hallow place overgrown with Reeds, a fit trench to cover an Ambush: Therein
he cast his Brother Mago with a thousand choice Horse, and as many Foot. The
rest of his Army, when he had well fed, and refreshed them, he led into the
Field and marched toward the Consuls. Early in the morning he had sent over
the River some Numidian Horsemen to brave the enemy, and draw him forth to a bad
Dinner before he had broken his Fast. Sempronius readily embraced the
opportunity of fighting, and forthwith sent over the River, in a miserable cold
day, his Footmen, who were almost to the armeholes, which together with the
want of food, did much enfeeble them: The Romans were strong in Foot, having in
all thirty six thousand: the Mass of those were ranged in a gross Battalion,
Another Battle.
guarded on the Flanks with three thousand Horse, thrusting their light-armed
and Darters in loose Companies before the rest in the nature of a Vau^^guard.
The Carthaginians equalled them in Foot, and exceeded them in Horse: when
therefore the Roman Horse were broken by the Numidians: when their Foot were
charged, both in Front and Flank, by the Spaniards, Gauls, and Elephants, and
when all were pressed in the Rea^e by Mago and his men out of the Ambush, The
Romans beaten.
then fell the Romans by heaps under their enemies Swords, and were beaten down
as well fighting as flying, so that of thirty six Thousand, there escaped no
more than ten thousand of all sorts.

The remainder of this broken Army was collected by Scipio, who got therewith
into Placentia, stealing away the same night, which was very rainy. Sempronius
e^caped with great danger, and fled to Rome, where he did his Office in
choosing new Consuls for the year following, and then returned to his Province
with a fresh supply against Hannibal.

The Winter proved very sharp, and unfit for service, which well pleased the
Romans, who lay warm in Placentia, and Cremona. Yet did not Hannibal suffer
them to lie very quiet, but vexed them with continual Alarms, assaulting diverse
places, and taking some. He also wan the Lygurians to him, who, to testify
their faithful love, presented him with two Roman Questors, [Treasure^s,] two
Colonels, and five young Gentlemen, Hannibals Policy.
the Sons of Senators. These and all his other Prisoners, Hannibal held in
straight places, laden with Irons, and misserably fed. But their followers he
entreated courteously, and sent them to their own Countries without ransom,
protesting that he undertook the War in Italy to free them from the oppression
of the Romans. By these means he drew many to his party, and assistance. But
some of the Gauls, fearing that their Country should be made the seat of War,
conspired against his Life: others discovered the danger to him, who yet,
Treacheries against him.
soon after, were ready to practice the same* which enforced H^^nibal to use
Perukes and false Beards the better to conceal himself from them.

At length when Summer was come, he resolved to leave these giddy Companions
and so passed the Appeni^^ Hills that he might approach nearer to Rome. So away
he went having his Army much recruted with Ligurians and Gauls; and to prevent
the obstructions in the ordinary way, he chose to travel through the Fennes of
Tuscany. His dangerous march.
In those Marshes and Bogs he lost all his Elephants save one, with one of his
own eyes, through the moistness of the Air, and by lodging on the cold
Ground: Yet at last with much ado, he recovered the firm and fertile Plains,
and Quartered about Arretium, where he somewhat refreshed his weary Army, and
heard news of the Roman Consuls.

C. Flaminius and Cn. Servilius, were newly chosen Consuls for this year: The
first a tractable man, wholly governed by the Senate; the other a hotheaded
man, who fearing some obstruction, gat him out of the City before the day of
Election, that he might, as soon as he was chosen, take possession of his
Office: fearing least he should lose his Honor, which he hoped to gain in the
War. The Senators were so displeased at this, that they sent for him back; but
he neglected their Command, and hasted to meet with the Carthaginians, whom he
found at Arretium.

Hannibal was well pleased with the fiery disposition of this Consul: and
therefore provoked him by many indignities, hoping thereby to draw him to
fight, ere Servilius came with the rest of the Army. For which end he put to
Fire and Sword all the Country round about him, even under the Consuls nose. By
this Flaminius thought his Honor to be much empaired, and therefore advanced
toward the enemy. Many advised him to stay for his Colleague, but he would not
be persuaded: Then he commanded the Army to march.

All the Territory of Cortona as far as to the Lake of Thrasymene was on a
light fire, which, whilst Flaminius thought to quench with his enemies blood,
he pursued Hannibal so unadvisedly, that he fell, with his whole Army into an
Ambush: from thence he was charged unaware from all sides, so that he knew not
which way to turn, nor how to make resistance. There was he slain in that
place, accompanied with the carcasses of fifteen thousand of his Countrymen:
About six thousand of his Vantguard took courage out of desparation, and
breaking through their enemies, they recovered the tops of the Mountains: but
being discovered there, Maharbal was sent after them, The Romans beaten again^
who overtook them by night in a Village, and surrounded them with his Horse,
and so they yielded, rendering up their Arms upon promise of life and liberty.
This accord Hannibal refused to confirm, and so made them all Prisoners.

At this time he had about fifteen thousand Prisoners: all that were not Romans
he set free without ransom, still portesting, that for their sakes he came
into Italy: But the Romans he kept in straight Prison, and held them to hard
meat.

Presently after the Battle of Thrasymene, C. Sempronius, with four thousand
Horse came near to Hanaibals Camp. He was sent from Ariminum by Servilius, the
other Consul, to increase the strength of Flaminius, but coming too late, he
only increased the misadventure. Hannibal sent out Maharbal to intercept him,
The Romans beaten.
who finding them amazed at the ill news of the late loss, charged, and brake
them, killing almost half of them, and drew the rest simply to yield to mercy.
Servilius hearing of the overthrow and death of his Colleague, hasted to Rome
for the defense of it.

Greatly were the Romans amazed at these disasters, and their aproaching
danger. Great fea^ at Rome.
Wherefore they had recourse to a remedy which had been long out of use, and
that was, to choose a Dictator, whose power was above the Consuls, and scarcely
subject to the Control of the whole City: A Dictator chosen.
And now they chose Q. Fabius Maximus, the best reputed man of War in the City,
and Fabius chose M. Minutius Rufus, Master of the Horse, who was as the
Dictators Leiutenant.

The first act of Fabius was the reformation of somewhat that was amiss in
matter of Religion: then were the Walls and Towers of Rome repaired, and
fortified, the Bridges upon Rivers were broken down, and all care taken for the
defense of Rome it self. Four Legions the Dictator raised in have, and from
Ariminum he received the Army which Servilius had conducted thither. With these
he marched apace after Hannibal, not to fight, but to affront him. Fabius his
wariness.
He always lodged upon high grounds, and of hard access, knowing that the
Roman Horse were far inferior to the Numidians. Hannibal in the mean while
pursued his Victory, and ranged over all the Countries, using all manner of
cruelty toward the Inhabitants, especially those of the Roman Nation, of whom
he put all to the Sword that were able to bear Arms. Passing by Spoletum, and
Ancona, he encamped upon the Adriatic shores, refreshing his diseased and
over-traveled Army: and armed his Africans, after the Roman manner, and made
his dispatches for Carthage, presenting his Friends, which were very many) with
part of the Spoils that he had gotten.

Having refreshed his Army, cured his wounded, and fed his Horses, he followed
the course of the Adriatic Shore toward Apulia, a Northern Province of the
Kingdom of Naples, spoiling all that lay in his way. Yet took he not one City
in all those Countries. Indeed he assaied Spoletum, but finding it well
defended, he presently gave it over. All his care was to weaken the Romans in
force and reputation; Hannibals Policy.
knowing that when he was absolute Master of the Field, it would not be long
before the walled Cities would open their Gates to him. To this end he
presented Fabius with Battle, and provoked him with all manner o^ bravado's;
but Fabius would not bite: His design was to attend the Carthaginians so near
as to keep them from straggling, Fabius his wisdom.
and to preserve the Country from utter spoil. Thus by degrees he inured his
men to dangers, and brought them first to look on the Lion afar off, that at
length they might adventure to sit on his tail.

But Minutius had a contrary disposition, and was as fiery as Flaminius, taxing
Fabius with cowardlinesse and fear; yet nothing moved this wary Dictator: He
suffered* Hannibal to cross the Apenni^e Mountains, and to fall upon the rich
and pleasent Territories of Campania: Fabius still keeping upon the Hills, and
fast grounds. When Hanibal saw that he could by no means draw him to fight, and
that the Winter drew on, he resolved to rest his Army that was laden with
spoil, in some safe and plentiful Country till the Spring came again. But
before he could do this, he must pass along by the Dictators Camp, that hung
over his head* For there was no other way for him to get out of this fertile
Country which he had already wasted. But by the error of his Guide he was
brought (as it were) into a pinfold. Now began the wisdom of Fabius to be
admired, and aplauded, as if he had caught the Carthaginians in a trap. But
Hannibal freed himself by a fine invention: He had gotten about two thousand
Kine, upon whose Horns he tied dry Fagots, Hinnibals Stratagem.
and in the dark night seting them on fire, he caused them to be driven up the
Hill. The sight was strange and terrible to the Romans, and Fabius himself
thinking it to be a devise to circumvent him, kept within his Trenches. So
Hannibal and his Army escaped the danger, and gat into a safe Country. Then did
he make semblance of marching toward Rome, the Dictator coasting him after the
wonted manner; and keeping still on the high grounds betwixt him and the City,
whilst the Carthaginians wasted all the plain Countries, and taking Geryon in
Apulia, he turned it into Barnes and Storehouses for the Winter, and encamped
under the broken Walls. Thus little was done till the Dictator was called home
to Rome about some business of Religion; and when he went, he left the Army in
charge with Minutius, the Master of the Horse.

Minutius was glad of this opportunity to show his sufficiency. He was persuaded
that the Romans in plain field would beat the Carthaginians, who had got the
former Victories by subtilty, and ambushes. All the Army was of his opinion,
and therefore they perferred his forwardness before the cold wariness of
Fabius: Hereupon he resolved to fight, though he had been peremtorily forbidden
by the Dictator, and the breach of whose command was Death: But Minutius
thought that the honor of the Victory, and love of the Army, would secure him.
Hannibal on the other side was very glad that he should play with a more
adventurous Gamster: therefore he drew near, and provoked the Romans, sending
forth a third part of his Army to wast the Country. There was a piece of high
and advantageous Ground between the two Armies: Hannibal sent two thousand
Horse to seize upon it: but Minutius by fine force, won it from them, and
encamped upon it, whereby he became a nearer neighbor to Hannibal.

Minutius for many days not stirring, Hannibal sent forth many of his men to
fetch in Harvest. This advantage Minutius wisely espied, and therefore drawing
forth his Army, presented Battle to Hannibal, but he was not now in case to
accept of it; wherefore Minutius sent out some against the Forragers, who were
scattered all over the Fields, and laden with Booty, Hannibal Forragers beaten.
and so were easily overthrown. It angered Hannibal that he was not able to
help them, but it angered him worse when the Romans took heart to assault his
Trenches. But in the heat of this business Asdrubal came from Geryon with four
thousand Horse, which emboldned Hannibal to issue forth against the Romans, to
whom he did not so much hurt as he had received.

For this piece of service Minutius was highly honored by the Army, and more
cried up by the People at Rome, all judging him more worthy of Command than
Fabius. But the Dictator was not so joyful of the news, as angry that
Minutius had disobeyed his command. He said, that he knew his own place, and
that he would teach the Master of the Horse to know it also; and that he would
make him give an account for what he had done in his absence. The People much
disliked these his speeches, and made an Act, Minutius made equal with Fabius.
that Minutius should be joined in equal authority with the Dictator.

Before this Business was effected, Fabius seeing how things were like to go,
dispatched the election of a new Consul in the room of Flaminius, and having
finished his business, went out of the City toward his Army. But the news of
Minutius his advancement was at the Camp as soon as he, so that his Lieutenant
treated with him now as his Colleague, asking him how they should devide their
authority: Fabius briefly told him, that seeing the Citizens had made the
Master of the Horse equal with the Dictator, he would divide the Legions with
him by Lot, according to the custom: Minutius was ill pleased with this, for
with half the Army he could not work such wonders as he hoped for. Yet meant he
to do his best: and so taking half the Army, he encamped about a mile and a
half from Fabius.

It behoved the Master of the Horse to make good the opinion which had thus
advanced him; therefore he fought good occasion to fight, to which Hannibal,
was as forward as he. The Country between them was open and bare, yet Hannibal
found means to lay an ambush in it: For the sides of the valley had many
spacious Caves, A Battle.
and Hannibal in the night, thrust into them five hundred Horse, and five
thousand Foot: and least they should be discovered, he made offer betimes in
the morning to seize upon a piece of ground that lay on the other side from the
Caves, thereby turning all their eyes that way. Minutius hoping to increase his
honor as he had gotten it, sent first his light Armuture, then his Horse, and
at length he followed in person with the Legions. He was soon caught, and so
environed on all hands, that he neither knew how to make resistance, nor a safe
retreat. In this dangerous case, whilst the Romans defended themselves, they
lost many of their best men. The Romans beaten.
But Fabius drew near in good order to relieve them, and doing therein the
office of a good Citizen, regarding more the good of his Country, than the
disgrace which he had wrongfully sustained.

Upon Fabius his approach, Hannibal retired: Fearing (as he said) to be well
wet with the cloud that had hung so long upon the Hil-tops. Minutius forthwith
submitted himself to Fabius, by whose favor he acknowledged, that his life was
preserved. Thence forward the War went on slowly whilst Fabius his Dictatorship
lasted, and the year following also when he had delivered up his charge to the
Consuls, that followed his instructions.

With little pleasure did they of the poorer sort in Rome hear the great
commendations which were given to Fabius by the principal Citizens, because
the War was not finished, nor much done tending thereto: And this affection was
very helpful to Terentius Varro in his suit for the Consulship; and farther to
help him, he had a kinsman, Bibius Herennius, Tribune of the People: He boldly
affirmed that Hannibal was drawn into Italy, and suffered there to range at his
pleasure by the Noblemen; that without a Plebeian Consul the War would never be
ended, etc. By which persuasions the multitude were won to be wholly for
Terentius, to the great vexation of the Nobles, who could not endure such an
upstart: But nothing could hinder the choice of Terentius: Wherefore the
Nobles, (to ballast this hotheaded man) set up L. Aemilius Paulus, a gallant
man and a brave Captain, to stand for the other Consuls place, and he easily
carried it.

These new Consuls, Varro, and Paulus, omitted no diligence in preparing for
the War, wherein, though Varro made the greater noise, boasting what wonders he
would do if he could but once see Hannibal, yet the care, and Prudence of
Paulus did tend much more toward the effecting of it. He wrote to the two old
Consuls to forbear fighting, and yet to ply the Carthagians with daily
Skirmishes, and so to weaken them by degrees, that when he and his Fellow
Consul came with the new Army, they might find the four old Legions well
accustomed to the Enemy, and the Enemy well weakened. These new Consuls raised
an Army of above eighty thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse.

Hannibal all this while lay at Geryon, where all his provision, and store was.
The Romans, to be near him, lodged about Canusium, laying up most of their
provisions in the Castle of Cannae. This place Hannibal wan, and thereby not
only furnished himself, but compelled his enemies to want many necessaries:
Cannae Castle taken.
Hereby he also enabled himself to stay in that open Country, fit for the
service of the Horse. Of this mishap when Servilius had informed the Senate, it
then seemed needful to them to adventure a Battle with the Carthaginian,
rather than to suffer him thus to root himself in Italy.

When all things were ready in the City, and the season of the year commodius,
the two Consuls, with their Army set forward against Hannibal. This was done
with great solemnity: Sacrifices and solmne Vows were made to Jupiter and the
other Gods, for good success and Victory: and the Generals were accompanied
with a great number that brought them out of the City, and dismissed them with
Friendly leave-taking, and good wishes.

These new Generals arriving at the Camp, dismissed M. Atilius, one of the last
years Consuls, because of his age, and retained Servilius with them, as their
Assistant. Aemilius labored to encourage his men, telling them, that the enemy
had stole all the former Victories by his Ambushes; that otherwise the Romans
were far beyond them in Valor etc. and therefore he exhorted them to play the
men and to do their best. This set them on fire to be dealing with the
Carthaginians, and herein Varro concurred with them, longing for an opportunity
to get the honor which he promised to himself, having now such a numerous Army
By this means the Romans fell into a great inconvenience by the disagreement of
of their Generals; Varro would fight, and Aemilius would not for the present,
Varro makes have to fight.
hoping for better advantage ere long, when the enemy should be forced to
dislodge out of the plain Country. The Consuls command in in turns every day.
Aemilius lodged six miles from Hannibal where the ground was uneven. Terentius
the next day descended into the plains, his Colleague beseeching him to stay,
but could not prevail. He sat down near to the Carthaginian, who yet gave him
but a rude welcome, and intertainment. The Carthaginian Horse, and light
Armature fell upon the Roman Vant-Courriers, and put the whole Army into a
tumult, whilst it was yet in its march; but the Carthaginians were beaten off,
though not without loss. The next day Aemilius, who could not securely draw
back the Army, encamped upon the River Au^^us, sending part of his Forces over
the River where they encamped themselves, with the rest he fortified and kept
within his Trenches. Varro was persuaded that it concerned him in honor to
make good his word to the People of Rome. When therefore it was his turn to
Command, (...) the break of Day he began to pass the River, with^out staying
to bid his Colleague good morrow: But Paulus came to him, laboring by all
means to dissuade him. Terentius had nothing to answer but that his honor was
engaged. Hannibal had twice or thrice b^aved them, which must not be endured.
When Aemilius perceived that he could not prevail, he was careful that what
must be done, might be done well. Ten thousand Foot he caused to be left behind
in the Camp, opposite to the Carthaginians, to the intent that Hannibal might
be forced to do the like, or else when they were in fight, these might fall
upon his Camp, They prepare to fight.
and take it, with all the wealth therein, which would much distract the
Carthaginians This done the Consuls drew forth their Army over the Water, and
ranged them in order of Battle.

This Hannibal was very glad of, and therefore without any delay, passed over
the River also, leaving in his own Camp enough to defend it, and no more. To
encourage his men, he told them how fit the ground was wherein they were to
fight; and that therefore they were to thank the Gods who had so infatuated the
enemies as to choose such a place where the stronger in Horse was sure to
pervail: Besides (said he) These are the men whom you have beaten as often as
you have seen them: and now you are to fight for their Cities, and all the
Riches that are in them, and ere many hours pass ye shall be Lords of all
that the Romans enjoy. This set his men on fire to be at it; and at the same
time came his Brother Mago, whom he had sent to view the countenance of the
enemy, to whom he said, What news? What work are we like to have? Work
enough, answered Mago, for they are a horrible company; As horrible a many as
they be, said Hannibal, I tell thee that amongst them all, there is not one man
whose name is Mago, and therewith he fell a laughing, which all the Soldiers
also took for a good Omen.

In this great day the Carthaginian excelled himself, expressing abundance of
Military skill, The great Battle at Cannae.
and of gre^tnesse of spirit, and courage. He so marshalled his Army, that all
hands were brought to fight, where every one might do the best service. His
Darters, and Slingers he sent before to encounter the Roman Velites: His
Africans Armed after the Roman manner, made the two Wings, very deep in File.
Between these he ranged the Gauls and Spaniards armed, the first with broad
Swords, and the other with short and well-pointed Blades. The Gauls were strong
of Body, and furious in giving the Charge, but soon wearied, spending their
violence at the first brunt. The Spaniards were less eager but more wary.
These Hannibal caused to advance, leaving void the place wherein they had
stood, and into which they might fall back, if they were overhardly pressed.
Between the left Batallion by the River side, were the Gauls and Spanish Horse
under Asdrubal: On the right Wing was Maharbal with the Numidian Horse.
Hannibal himself with his Brother Mago, led the Rear. His Army this day was ten
Thousand Horse, and forty Thousand Foot: His enemies had two to one against
him in Foot, and he five to three against them in Horse.

The Roman Army was marshalled after their usual manner. On the right hand
were the Roman Horsemen under the Consul Paulus: On the left Wing was Var^o
with the rest of the Horse which were of the Latins and other associates, and
Servilius had the leading of the Battle. The Sun was newly risen, and offended
neither part, the Carthaginians having their faces Northward, and the Romans
Southward.

After some light Skirmishes between the two Forlorns, Asdrubal brake in upon
the Consul Paulus, and after a rough charge, and much execution done, the Roman
Horse were overborn, and driven by plain force to a staggering recoil. When the
Battles came to joining, the Roman Legionaries found work enough, and more than
enough to break that Body upon which at first they fell; yet at last Hannibals
men were forced to a hasty retreat. But whilst the Legions, following their
supposed Victory, rushed on upon those that stood before them; and thereby
engaged themselves deeply within the principal strength of the enemy, the two
African Battalions on either side, advanced so far, that getting beyond the
Rear of them, they almost wholly enclosed them. Asdrubal having broken the
Troops of the Roman Horse, followed them along upon the River side, beating
down, and killing most of them without regard of taking Prisoners. The Consul
Paulus left his Horse, and cast himself amongst the Legions, as hoping by them
to make good the day. But he failed of his expectation: Yet did he cheer up his
men as well as he could both by Words, and Example, slaying many with his own
hands. The like did Hannibal amongst his Carthaginians in the same part of the
Battle, but with better success. For the Consul received a blow from a Sling
that wounded him much, and though a Troop of Roman Gentlemen did their best to
save him from further harm, yet was he so hardly laid at, that by wounds and
weakness he was compelled to forsake his Horse: whereupon all his company also
allighted.

Hannibal being near* and seeing this, said, pleasantly, I had rather he would
have delivered them to me bound hand, and foot, meaning, that he had them
almost as safe as if they had been so bound. All this while Varro, with his
associates in the left Wing, was marvelously troubled with Maharbal, and his
Numidians; who beating up and down upon the great Sandy plain, raised a foul
dust, which by a strong South wind, was driven into the eyes and mouths of the
Romans. These using the advantage both of their number and lightness, wearied
the Consul and his followers exceedingly, neither giving nor sustaining any
charge, but continually making offers and then wheeling about. Yet at the
first, they seemed to promise him a happy day of it. For when the Battles were
even ready to join, five hundred of these Numidians came pricking away from
their fellows, with their Shieldes on their backs, as was the manner of those
which yielded, and throwing down their Arms, yielded themselves, Varro had no
leisure then to examine them, but bad them to rest quietly behind his Army till
all was done. These crafty marchchants did as he bad them for a while, till
they had opportunity to put their design in execution. Under their Jackets they
had short Swords, and Poniards, with which and other weapons that they gathered
up of those that were slain, they flew upon the hindmost of the Romans, whilst
all eyes were bent another way, where they did much mischief, Hannibals Policy.
The Romans beaten.
and raised great terror. Thus Hannibal in a plain ground found means to lay
an Ambush at the back of his enemies.

The last blow that put an end to all, was given by the same hand that gave the
first. Asdrubal having routed and slain all the Roman Horse, save the company
of Aemilius that joined themselves to the Foot, did not stay to charge upon the
face of the Legions* but, fetching a compass, he came up to the Numidians with
whom he joined, and gave upon Terentius. This fearful cloud prognosticated a
dismal storm; wherefore Terentius his followers, having wearied themselves
much in doing little, and seeing more work toward than they were like to
sustain* thought it their safest (...) not how to use a Victory* and God had
otherwise determined.

When Hannibal had sacked the Roman Camps, and trused up the spoils, he
dislodged and marched away to Samnium, finding a disposition in many People
thereabouts to forsake the Romans, and to make aliance with him. The first Town
that opened their Gates to him, was Cossag, Many Towns inertain Hannibal
where he laid up his Baggage; and leaving his Brother Mago to take in other
p^aces, he hastened into Campania. He dismissed all his Prisoners that were not
Romans, without ransom; whereby he won the affections of most of the Common
People in Italy, to incline to him. He also gave leave to his Roman Prisoners
to send to Rome to procure their ransom, with whom he sent Carthal^* the
General of his Horse, to see how Rome stood affected to peace. The Senate
commanded Carthal^ to depart out of their Territories, and refused to redeem
their Prisoners; probably, because they wanted Money wherewithal to do it.

Campania is a most pleasant and fruitful Country, and Capua, the chief City
in it, rich and wealthy, the Citizens despised now the unfortunate virtue of
the Romans, and sent Ambassadors to Hannibal with whom these Articles were
agreed upon: That the Campans should be absolutely free, and Governed by their
own Laws: That no Citizens of theirs should be subject to any Carthaginian
Magistrate in War or Peace; and that Hannibal should deliver to the Campans
three hundred Roman Prisoners, such as themselves should choose, whom they
might exchange for their Gentlemen that were Hostages with the Romans. Then did
Hannibal hasten toward Capua, leaving Naples that he had thought to take in by
Scalado, but found the Walls too high, and himself not fully furnished for a
Siege. At Capua he was entertained with great solemnity and Pomp; Capua
intertains him.
all the Town being so earnestly in love with their new Guests that they
murdered all the Romans that at present they could come by.

The same course with these of Capua, ran the other Cities thereabout, except
Nola, Nu^eria, Naples, Cassili^e, and Acenae, which yet stood out for the
Romans. Rome it self was in great fear of Hannibals coming at the first report
of the overthrow at Cannae* and the grief of that loss was so general* and
immoderate, The Romans mourn.
that it much hindered their provision against apparent danger. All the Senators
found work enough to quiet the Peoples lamentations. Courriers were sent forth
to bring them certain tidings how things went, whereof when letters from the
Consul Varro had fully informed them, they were so amazed, that they ran into
Barbarous Superstition, and by the advice of their Southsayers* they buried two
men, and two women alive in the Ox-market. Ambassadors also were sent to the
Oracle at Delphi, Their Superstition
to enquire with what Prayers and Supplications they might pacify the Gods,
and obtain an end of their calamities.

In the midst of these extremities they called home their Consul Terentius that
he might name a Dictator, and all sorts of people went forth to meet him, and
welcome him home, which was done to hold up their reputation. M. Junius was
chosen for the Dictator, A Dictator chosen.
and T. Sempronius Master of the Horse. These fell presently to the ^^ustring
of Forces, and raised four Legions and a thousand Horse, yet were they faign to
take some that were very (...), and they increased their number by adding to
them eight thousand sturdy Slaves, to whom liberty (...) promised if they would
deserve it by their manly service: The Dictator also Proclaimed, that*
whosoever were in debt and could not pay it, or that had committed (...)
capital offense, should be pardoned if they would (...) in the War* (...) to
Arm these they were faign to take down out off their Temples the spoils of
their enemies* (...) had been there (...).

The Dictator having dispatched all needful businesses in the City, took the
Field with twenty five Thousand men, with whom he marched into Campania, and
did little more then to keep Hannibal from spoiling the Country. Marcellus, one
of the Roman Praetors, lying at O^ti^a with a Legion and fifteen hundred
Soldiers newly taken up, with whom he should have gone into Sicily, hearing of
the overthrow at Cannae, sent his new livied men to Rome for the defense of it,
and with his Legion marched to Nola to help the Citizens there: Hannibal had
many Friends in Nola amongst the common People, and therefore brought his Army
thither* and on a day seeing the Walls unmanned, he bad his Soldiers bring
their L^dders and scale them: But whilst they did it, Hinnibal beaten.
and were in confusion, Marcellus with his men, issued out at three several
Gates, and set upon the Carthaginians, expecting no such thing, and did such
execution amongst them, that this was accounted a Victory, and reputed the
bravest act in all those Wars, from whence they concluded that Hannibal might
be overcome.

From thence Hannibal went to Acerrae, where being refused entrance, Acerrae
taken by Hannibal.
he laid Seige to it on every side, wherewith the Citizens being terrified,
before his works were finished, they stole out by night, and left the Town
empty; which Hannibal sacked and burnt, then hearing that the Dictator was about
Cassiline, thith^^ went he, but found him not; only many companies of the Roman
Confederats were gotten into the Town, and kept it: The Citizens were affected
to Hannibal, and would faign have been free from there Guests, who finding
their intent, Cassiline besieged^
in a night slew all the Citizens, and fortified a part of the City against the
enemy. Hannibal gave diverse assaults to it, but was still repelled with loss,
and many sallies they made with variable success: Hannibal mined, and they
countermined, so that he was thriven to enclose them, that he might win it by
Famine. T. Sempronius Gracchus, Master of the Horse lay up the River with the
Roman Army, and would faign have relieved the Besieged, but durst not venture.
Barrels of Corn he sent floating down the River to relieve them, which, being
discovered, came into Hannibals hands. Gracchus cast abundance of Nuts into the
stream, which faintly sustained the Besieged. At length when all their food was
spent, and whatsoever green thing grew under the Walls, the Carthaginians
plowed up the ground, and the besieged presently sowed it with Rape-seed.
Hannibal admired their patience, and said, That he meant not to stay there till
the Rapes were grown, and therefore, whereas he had intended to have made them
an example for their obstinacy, he was now content to grant them their lives
upon an easy ransom, and so quietly dismissed them. The time of the year now
being come, Hannibal retired into Capua, where he wintered, and where (as some
say) his Army was corrupted with the pleasures and plently there, and made more
effeminate than before.

About this time Hannibal sent his Brother Mago to Carthage with the joyful
news of this great Victory. Mago sent to Carthage.
He told the Carthaginian Senate, with how many Roman Generals his Brother had
fought, how many Consuls he had chased, wounded, or slain. How the Romans, who
never used to shun a Battle, were now grown so cold that they thought their
Dictator Fabius the only good Captain. That not without reason their spirits
were thus abated, since Hannibal had slain above two hundred and six Thousand
of them, and taken above fifty Thousand Prisoners. He told them how many States
in Italy followed the Fortune of those great Victories. He told them that the
War was even at an end, if they would follow it close and give the Romans no
time of breathing. He wished them to consider that the War was carried into an
enemies Country, that so many Battles had diminished his Brothers Army, that
the Soldiers that had deserved so well, ought to be well rewarded, and that it
was not good to burden their new Italian Friends with exactions of money, Corn,
etc. But that these must be sent from Carthage. Lastly he caused the Gold
Rings, taken from the fingers of the Roman Knights that were slain, to be
powered out before them, which being measured, filled three Bushels.

This errand of Mago for the present found extraordinary good welcome; And
large supplies were voted to be sent to him: Large supplies promised to
Hannibal.
But his old enemy Hanno, obstructed them, and the too much Parsimony, of the
Citizens was the cause that there was very little done, and that which was done
came too late. However, Mago brings the news of the great supply which was
decreed to be sent; which much rejoiced Hannibal and his new confederats. The
Spring drew on when the supply was expected, but there came no more than a few
Elephants, and Hannibal was forced to rest contented with them. Then did he
take the Field, and sought to make himself master of some good Haven Town that
might serve to intertain the Carthaginian Fleet when it should arrive with the
supplies. For this end he sent Himilco, who by the help of his good Friends the
Brusians, won Petilia; he won also Concentia and Crotan, and the City of Locri,
and many other places; only the Town of Rhegium, Diverse Cities taken.
over against Sicily, held out against him.

The Romans at this time were in such a case, that Hannibal with a little help
from Carthage, might have reduced them to great extremity. But his own Citizens
suffered him to languish with expectation of their promised supplies, which
being still deferred from year to year, The promised Supplies come not.
caused as great opportunities to be lost^ as a Conqueror could have desired.
But whatsoever Hannibal thought, he was faign to apply himself to his Italian
Friends, and to feed them with Hopes* and to trifle away his time about Nola,
Naples, Cumae, etc. being loath to weaken his Army by a hard Siege; that was to
be reserved for a work of more importance. Many offers he made upon Nola, but
always with bad success. Once Mercellus fought a Battle with him there, under
the Walls of the City, having the Citizens to assist him, wherein Hannibal lost
a thousand men; which was no great marvil, his forces being then divided, and
employed in sundry parts of Italy at once.

At this time T. Sempronius Gracchus, and Q. Fabius Maximus, the late famous
Dictator, were chosen Consuls. But Fabius was detained at Rome about matters of
Religion, or Superstition rather, wherewith the City was commonly, especially
in the times of danger, very much troubled, so Gracchus alone, with a Consular
Army, waited upon Hannibal amongst the Campanes, not able to meet him in the
Field, yet attentive to all occasions that should be presented. The Slaves,
that lately had been Armed, were a great part of his followers. These and the
rest of his men Gracchus continually trained, Gracchus his Prudence.
and had not a greater care to make his Army skillful in the exercises of War,
than in keeping it from quarrels that might arise by their upbrading one
another with their base condition.

Gracchus at this time had a bickering with the Capuans, upon whom he came at
unawars, The Capuans beaten.
and slew above two thousand of them, and took their Camp, but staid not long
to rifle it for fear of Hannibal, that lay not far off. By this his Providence
he escaped a greater loss, than he brought upon the Capuans: For when Hannibal
heard how things went, he presently marched thither, hoping to find these young
Soldiers and Slaves busied in loading themselves with the Booty: But they were
all gotten safe into Cumae, which so angered Hannibal, that at the earnest
request of the Capuans, he assailed it the next day: Much labor, and with ill
success he spent about this Town. He raised a wooden Tower, and brought it
close to the Walls thereby to assault it, Cuma besieged.
but they within built a higher Tower, whence they made resistance, and found
means to set Hannibals Tower on fire, and whilst the Carthaginians were busy
in quenching the fire, they issued out, charged them valiantly and drove them
to their Trenches. The Consul wisely sounded a retreat in time, or Hannibal had
requited them. The day following, Hannibal presented Battle to them, but
Gracchus refused it: Seeing therefore no liklyhood to prevail, The Siege raised.
he raised his Siege and departed.

About this time Fabius, the other Consul, took the Field, and recovered some
small Towns that Hannibal had taken, and punished the Inhabitants severely for
their revolt, the Carthaginians Army was too small to Garrison all the Towns
that had yielded to them, and with all, to abide (as it must do) strong in the
Field. Wherefore Hannibal, attending the supply from Carthage that would enable
him to strik at Rome itself, was driven in the mean time to alter his course of
War; and instead of making (as he had formerly done) a general invasion upon
the whole Country, he was faign to wait upon occasions, that grew daily more
commodious to the enemy, than to him. Hannibal delays.
When Hannibal was gone to Winter in Apulia, Marcellus wasted the Country of
the Hirpines, and Samnites* the like did Fabius in Campania.

The People of Rome were very intentive upon the work they had in hand, they
continued Fabius in his Consulship, and joined with him Cladius Marcellus. Of
these two, Fabius was called the Shield, and Marcellus the Roman Sword. The
great Name of these Consuls, and the great preparations which they made, put
the Campans in fear that Capua it self should be besieged, wherefore at their
earnest request Hannibal came from Arpi, and having comforted his Friends, on a
sudden he fell upon Puteoli, a Sea-town of Campania, about* which he spent
three days in vain, there being six thousand in Garrison, wherefore he left
it, and marched to Terentum, werein he had great intelligence.

In the mean time Hanno made a journey against Beneventum, where T. Gracchus met
him. A Battle
Hanno had with him about seventeen thousand Foot, Brutians, and Lucans,
besides twelve hundred Horse, most of them Numidians and Moors. Four hours he
held the Romans work ere it could be perceived to which side victory would
incline. But Gracchus his Soldiers, which were most of them Slaves, had
received from him a peremptory denunciation, that this day or never they must
purchase their Liberty, by bringing every man an enemies head. The sweet reward
of Liberty was so desirable, that they feared no danger in earning it, though
the cuting off their enemies Heads troubled them exceedingly, which Gracchus
perceiving, proclaimed that they should cast away the Heads, assuring them that
they should have their liberty presently after the Battle, if they wan they
day. This made them run headlong upon the enemy, whom their disparate fury had
soon overthrown, if the Roman Horse could have made their party good against
the Numidians. But though Hanno did what he could, and pressed so hard upon the
Roman Battle, that four thousand of the Slaves retired to a ground of Strength,
yet was he glad at length to save himself by flight with two thousand Horse,
all the rest being either slain or taken. The Carthaginians b^aten.
Gracchus preformed his promise to the Slaves, making them free: only on those
four thousand, that went aside in the Battle* he inflicted this slight
punishment, that as long as they served in the Wars, they should eat standing,
unless sickness forced them to break this order. So Gracchus with his Army
returned into Beneventum, where they newly enfranchised Soldiers, were Feasted
in public by the Townsmen, some sitting, some standing and all with their
Heads covered, as the manner of such was, with white Caps. This was the first
Battle worthy of note, that the Carthaginians lost since the coming of
Hannibal into Italy.

Thus the Romans by degrees began to get heart, and repair their breaches, only
their Treasury was very empty, The Romans poverty, how supplied.
whereupon the People were called together, and were plainly told, that in this
exigent, there must be no taking of money for victuals, weapons, apparel, or
other necessaries for the Souldies, but that they must trust the Commonwealth
with the loan of these things till the Wars were ended. This was willingly
assented to, and the Armies were well supplied both at home, and abroad.

In the mean time the Roman Generals omitted no part of industry in seeking to
recover what had been lost. Cassil^ne taken by the R^mans.
Cassiline was besiged by Fabius, unto whose assistance Marcellus came* The
Town was well defended by a Carthaginian Garrison for a longtime, but at
length, the Inhabitants grew fearful, craved a Parlee, and agreed to deliver
it up, so as all might have liberty to depart whither they pleased. This was
consented to, yet as they were issuing out, Marcellus seizing upon a Gate,
entered with his Army and put all to the Sword: only about fifty that had gotten
out, ran to Fabius, who saved them, and sent them to Capua.

Hannibal was this while about Tarentum, but after long expectation of having
it delivered to him, he was faign to depart without it. So he went to Salapia,
which he intended to make his wintring place, and began to Victual it.

The new Counsuls chosen at Rome, were, Q. Fabius, the Son of the present
Consul, and T. Sempronius Gracchus the second time. The old Fabius became
Lieutenant to his Son; and on a time when the old man came to the Camp, his Son
rode out to meet him. Eleven of the twelve Lictiors, let him pass by on
Hotsback, which was against the custom: but the Son perceiving this, bad the
last of the Lictors to take notice of it, who thereupon bad old Fabius alight,
and come to the Consul on Foot: the Father cheerfully did so, saying, It was my
mind, Son, to make trial, whether thou did understand thy self to be Consul.
Altinius a wealthy Citizen of Arpi, came to Fabius and offered to deliver the
Town into his hands. Hannibal hearing of it, was glad, and sent for the Wise
and Children of Altinius into his Camp, he examined them by torment, and being
assured of the Treason, he commanded them to be burnt, and seized upon all
Altinius his wealth. Fabius shortly after came to Arpi, which he took by
Scalado in a stormy night. Arpi taken by the Romans.
Five thousand of Hannibals Soldiers day in the Town, and of the Arpines there
were about three thousand. These were thrust foremost by the Carthaginian
Garrison, who suspected them, and therefore thought it no wisdom to trust them
at their backs. But after some little resistance, the Arpines gave over the
fight, and Parlied with the Romans, and the Arpine Praetor, going to the Roman
Consul, received his Faith for the security of the Town, wherefore they
presently made head against the Garrison, yet did the Carthaginians make stout
resistance, till it was agreed that they should pass safely, and return to
Hannibal.

About this time Cliternum was taken by Sempronius Tudi^anus, one of the Roman
Praetors. Also one hundred and twelve Gentlemen of Capua offered their service
to C. Fulvius, the other Praetor, only upon condition to have their goods
restored to them: which showed that their affections were turned from Hannibal
to the Romans. The Consentines also and the Thurines, which had yielded to
Hannibal, when there was no appearance of those great succors which were
promised from Carthage, returned to their old allegiance again. The Romans
beaten.
Others would have done the like, but that at this time Hanno met with, and
slew L. P^mponius, and a great multitude that followed him.

Hannibal in the mean time had all his care about Tarentum, which if he could
take, it would be very commodius for the Landing of the supplies* which he yet
expected. Long he waited for an opportunity, and at last by the help of his
Friends within it, Tarentum ^ake by Hannibal.
he one night entered at the two Gates that were opened for him, and presently
made to the market place; which the Governor perceiving, fled to the Port, and
taking Boat, got into the Citadel that stood at the mouth of the Haven.
Hannibal having gotten the spoil of the Roman Soldiers goods, he addressed
himself against the Citadel, which stood upon a Peninsula, and was joined to
the Town by a causway, which was fortified with a Wall and a ditch. Against
this Hannibal raised some works, hoping in a short time to take it, but whilst
he was thus busied, there came in a strong supply by Sea to them, which made
his attempt hoplesse. The Tarentins Fleet lay in the Haven and could not go
forth by reason of the Citadel, whereby the Citizens were likely in a short
time to suffer want: To help this, Hannibal caused their ships to be drawn up,
and carried through the streets, which were long and plain, and lanched them
into the Sea without; which done, they so cut off all supplies, that the
Citadel began to suffer want.

Now this while the Roman Forces grew strong, and Q. Fulvius Flaccus, with
Appius Claudius, the new Consuls, prepared to besiege the great City of Capua,
having now armed twenty three Legions, though to fill them up, they had listed
many Boys, and they made a Law for their encouragement, that their years
should go on from that time, as if they had been of lawful age.

Before the Roman Army drew near, the Capuans, through their own
wretchlesnesse, began to feel want of Victuals, they sent therefore to
Hannibal, desiring him to succor them before they were closed up, and he sent
Hanno with an Army to supply their wants. Hanno appointed them a day to bring
store of Carriages to convey in the provisions which he should make, but when
the day came, they brought only forty Wagons, with a few pack horses. Hanno
was much vexed at it, and appointed them another day when they should come
better provided: But in the mean while Q. Fulvius the Consul, came privately to
Beneventum, The Carthaginians beaten.
and having learned that Hanno was gone abroad a Forraging, he marched all
night, and by the break a day, assaulted his Camp, which for a long time was
gallantly defended, but at last, though with great loss, he won it, in which
six thousand were slain, seven thousand taken Prisoners, besides a great Booty
that Hanno had lately gotten from the Roman Confederats. This misadventure, and
the near approach of the Roman Consuls, made them of Capua to send a pitiful
message to Hannibal, entreating him to hasten to their relief, considering how
faithful they had been to him. Hannibal answered them with fair promises, and
sent away two thousand Horse to keep their lands from spoil, whilst himself
was intent about taking the Citadel, and some other Towns in th^se parts.

The Consuls, fortifying Beneventum, to secure their backs, addressed
themselves to the siege of Capua. Capua besieged by the Consuls.
Many disasters befell the Romans in the beginning of this great enterprise.
Gracchus, a brave Soldiers, and lately twice Consul, was slain. He was
honorably interred by Hannibal, some of whose straglers had slain him, the
Manumissed Slaves that served under him, took this opportunity to go every man
whither he pleased, so that it was long ere they could be got together again.
Yet the Consuls proceeded in their work. Mago and the Citizens gave them but
bad welcome, sallying out, and slaying fifteen hundred of their men. The Seige
raised by Hannibal.
Neither was it long ere Hannibal himself came, fought with them, and caused
them to dislodge. They removed by night and went several ways* Fulvius,
toward C^nn^, and Claudius into Lucan^a. Hannibal followed Claudius bin could
not reach him* Yet by the way he met with one Penula, a stout man that had the
charge of near sixteen thousand men, The Romans beaten.
with him he fought, and slew him, and almost all his men, scarce a thousand of
them escaping. Then was Hannibal informed that Cneus Fulvius, a Roman Praetor,
was in Apulia with about eighteen Thousand men. Coming to Fulvius, so forward
he was, that needs he would have fought with him that night. Hannibal set Mago
with three thousand men in an Ambush, Another victo^y.
then offering Battle to Fulvius, he soon had him in the Trap, whence he was
glad to escape himself, leaving all, save two thousand of his men, dead behind
him*

These two great blows much astonished the Romans. Yet when they had gathered
they remainders of those Armies, the Consuls fell hard again to the Seige of
Capua. Capua besieged again.
At the first sitting down of the Consuls they proclaimed, that whosoever would
come out of Capua by such a day, should be pardoned, and enjoy his estate, if
not, no grace was to be expected: the Capuans relying on their own strength,
and the assistance of Hannibal rejected this offer with scorn: And before they
were wholly closed up, they sent to Hannibal requesting his help: He gave them
good words, and dismissed them. But he, thinking that they were well able to
hold out for a long time, staid to dispatch his business, before he went, by
which means the Consuls had time enough to entrench and secure themselves.

When the Consulship of Claudius and Fulvius was expired, Hannibal comes to
relieve them.
they were continued in their charge of the Army as Proconsuls, and their
design was to take Capua by Famine. But Hannibal came before he was expected
by the Romans, and took one of their Forts, and fell upon their Camp; the
Capuans also at the same time sallyed out but were beaten in again; Yet did
Cl^^i^ in pursuing them, receive a wound, that ere long brought him to his
Grave. Hannibal followed his business better and had almost taken the Camp,
yet at length was repelled.

This extremely angered Hannibal and made him intertaine a haughty resolution,
even to set upon Rome, which accordingly he pursued, and because that work must
be done with celerity, he caused his men to provide victuals for ten days* and
so marched forward. This news coming to Rome, they sent to acquaint their
Generals with it, wishing them to do what they judged best for the safety of
the City. And thereupon Q. Fulvius took fifteen thousand choice Foot; and a
thousand Horse, and with them hasted toward Rome.

As Hannibal drew near, making woeful havoc as he went, all the streets and
Temples in Rome were filled with women, crying, and praying, Hannibal intends
for Rome and leaves it.
rubbing the Altars with their hair, the Senators were all in the Great market
place, ready to give advice upon all emergencies. But Fulvius and Hannibal
arrived at Rome near together. The Consuls and Fulvius encamped without the
Gate of Rome, attending Hannibal, who coming within three miles of the City,
advanced with two thousand Horse, and rode along a great way under the Walls,
viewing, and considering how he might best approach them. Yet went he back
without doing or receiving any hurt. Many tumults were at this time raised in
the City, and the multitude were so affrighted, that they would have run out of
the Gates if they could have done it with safety.

The day following Hannibal brought up his Army and presented Battle to the
Romans, who would have accepted it, had not a terrible shower of rain caused
both the Armies to return into their Camps and this happened two days
together, and the weather cleared up presently after. But Hannibal, who had
brought but ten days provision with him, could not stay any longer, he
therefore made all the spoil he could in the Roman Territories, passing like a
Tempest over the Country, and run toward the eastern Sea so fast, that he had
almost taken Regiu^ before his arrival was suspected. As for Capua he gave it
for lost, and (...) faction of Hanno, which thus disabled him to relive that
fair City

Fulvius returned back to the Siege of Capua, which now began to suffer want.
And faign they would have sent again to Hannibal but that all ways were
intercepted. The truth is, Hannibal had already done his best, and now began to
faint under the burden of that War, wherein (as he afterward protested) he was
vanquished by Hanno and his Partisans in the Senate of Carthage, rather than by
any force of the Romans. Capua being now brought to extremity, the multitude
forced the Senators to consult about the delivering of it up to the Romans: The
bravest of the Senators foresaw what the issue would be, and therefore one of
them invited the rest home to supper, telling them that when they had Feasted
themselves he would begin to them such a Health as should for ever free them
from the malice of their enemies, the Romans: Twenty seven of the Senators
embraced the motion, and when they had supped, drank Poison, Capua taken.
whereof they died: The rest, hoping for mercy, yielded to discretion. So a
Gate was opened whereat a Roman Legion entered, disarmed the Citizens, and made
the Carthaginians Prisoners; The Senators were laid in Irons; and presently
after, Fulvius caused all the Campane Prisoners to be bound to stakes, and
scourged a good while with Rods, The Consuls cruelty.
after which he struck off their heads. The like rigor Fulvius used to all the
Towns of the Campanians: most of the Inhabitants, with their Wives and Children
he sold for Slaves, the rest were banished; after which the Glory of Hannibal
began to shine more dim, and most of Italy by the terrible example of the
Capuans, had a general inclination, upon good conditions, to return to the
Roman side.

Marcellus and Levinus being chosen Consuls, Levinus went into Sicily, and
Marcellus was to make War with Hannibal: They were busy in raising Soldiers,
but wanted money extremely; many ways were proposed how to supply that want. At
last the Consuls said, The public wants supplied.
that no preswasions would be so effectual with the People, as good examples;
wherefore they propounded and it was presently resolved, that every one should
bring and put into the Treasury all the money, Jewels, and Plate that they had,
and none reserve more than one Salt, and a Bowl wherewith to make their
offerings to the Gods: as also a Ring for himself: and some other small
Ornaments for his Wife and Children; and this was accordingly done by all, with
much cheerfullnesse.

Then went forth Marcellus against Hannibal, whose Army was now greatly
diminished by long and hard service. His credit also amongst his Italian
Friends was much weakened by the loss of Capua: This put him upon pillaging
those Towns which he could not keep, thinking that the best way both to enrich
himself, and to pres^^^ it from his enemies: but this farther alienated them
from him, Salapia yielded to Marcellus
whereupon Salapia yielded to Marcellus, and betrayed to him a gallant Regiment
of Numidians, the very best that Hannibal had. After this the Consul took two
Cities of the Samnites, wherein he slew above three thousand of Hannibals men;
which Hannibal could not prevent, the Romans being grown stronger in the Field
than he. But now came news that Massanissa was at Carthage, with five thousand
Horse, ready to set sail for Spain, whither, when he came, he was to accompany
Asdrubal, the Brother of Hannibal into Italy. This did not more comfort
Hannibal and his followers, than it terified the Romans.

At this time Hannibal was informed that Cn. Fulvius, a Roman Prator, lay near
to Herdonea, to get the Town by practice: Hannibal made great marches
thitherward, and when he came, offered Battle to Fulvius, The Romans beaten.
who readily embraced it. The Roman Legions made good resistance a while, till
they were compassed round with the Carthaginian Horse: then fell they to rout,
and a great slaughter was made of them; Fulvius, with twelve Colonels, and
about thirteen thousand were slain, and Hannibal set Herdonea on fire because
it was appointed to be delivered up to the Romans.

Marcellus hearing this, hasted thither: At Venusia they met, A Battle
and fought a Battle from morning till the night parted them, and ended with
uncertain Victory. Many more skirmishes they had, but none of importance.

Then Q. Fabius Maximus, and Q. Fulvius were again chosen Consuls: and Fabius
resolved to besiege Tarentum, which if he could win, like it was that scarce
any one good City would remain true to Hannibal, and in the mean time he
desired Fulvius, and Marcellus, with their Army, to press Hannibal so hard
that he might have no leisure to help Tarentum. Marcellus was glad of this
opportunity, judging that no Roman was so fit to deal with Hannibal as himself:
He followed him therefore from place to place, desiring ever (...) come to
Battle, but upon unequal terms. Hannibal only entertained him with
skirmishes, meaning to keep his Army entire, till Asdrubal came to him. But
Marcellus was so importunate, that he could not be rid of him, wherefore
Hannibal bad his men to beat soundly this hotspur Roman Captain of whom he
could not be rid till he had let him blood. Then followed a Battle wherein
Hannibal had the victory, A Battle.
took six Ensigns and slew about three thousand of the Romans. The Romans
beaten.
Marcellus rated his men exceedingly, and called them cowards, which did so
shame them, that they asked pardon, and desired him to lead them forth again
against the enemy. Hannibal was angry to see that nothing would make them
quiet, and so they fought again, and though the Romans had the better of it,
fighting very desparately, yet they lost so many men that they had little cause
to boast of the Victory: Only this advantage they had, that hereby Fabius got
time to prosecute his Siege at Tarentum without disturbance. Fulvius the other
Consul this while took in diverse Towns of the Hirpines, Lu^uls, and
Volscentes, that willingly rendered themselves and betrayed Hannibals Garrisons
to him.

Fabius, by the Treason of a Brusian Captain in Tarentum had the Town delivered
into his hands, and yet when he was entered he put all to the Sword, Brutians
as well as others, Tarentum taken.
whereby his credit was much empaired. All the Riches of the Town he sought
out, which was very great, and sent it to the Treasury at Rome where there was
much need of it. Hannibal having gotten clear of Marcellus, fell upon those
that besieged Caulonia, all whom he slew or took Prisoners, The Romans beaten
and then he hasted to relieve Tarentum; But when he came within five miles, he
heard that it was lost. This grieved him, yet he said no more than this, The
Romans have also their Hannibal: We have lost Terentum in like sort as we got
it. But lest he should seem to retreat out of fear, he encamped there four or
five days, and thence departing to Metapont, he bethought himself how to take
Fabius in a trap. He caused the chief of Metapont to write to Fabius; offering
to betray it into his hand. These Letters were sent by two young men of the
City, who did their errand so well, that the Consul wrote back, and appointed
the day when they should expect him. Hannibal being glad of this, at leisure
made ready his Ambushes for the wary Fabius; but something hindered him from
coming, and so a^l was frustrated.

M. Claudius Marcellus, and T. Quintus Crispinus were chosen Consuls, who had a
strong desire to make War upon Hannibal, assuring themselves of Victory.
Crispinus had also a desire to make his Consulship Famous by taking some good
Town, as Fulvius and Fabius had done by taking of Capua, and Tarentum:
wherefore he went and besieged Locri, Locry besieged*
the best City in Italy that held for the Carthaginian, bringing all sorts of
Engines to promote the work. But Hannibal was not slow to relieve the City, at
whose approach, Crispinus rose and retreated to his fellow Consul. Thither
followed Hannibal, to whom the Consuls off^red Battle: He ^^fused it, yet
daily entertained them with ^kirmishes, waiting for some advantage, and
reserved his Army to a time of greater employment when his Brother Asdrubal
should come into Italy. Marcellus was not well pleased with this, and therefore
sought to force him to fight; for which end, he commanded a Navy by Sea, and the
Garrison of Tarentum again to besiege Locri: But Hannibal had an eye behind
him, The Romans beaten.
and by the way, laid an Ambush for those of Tarentum, slew three Thousand of
them, and made the rest to fly back into Tarentum. As for the Consuls,
Hannibals desire was to wast them by little, and little. Betwixt him and them
was a little Hill, overgrown with bushes, amongst them he hid some Numidians,
willing them to attend every advantage. To this Hill the Consuls thought fit to
remove their Camp; thither therefore they rode to view the place, taking with
them the son of Marcellus, a few Colonels, and other principal men, and about
two hundred Horse. The Numidian Sentinel gave warning of their approach, and
the other discovered not themselves till they had surrounded the Consuls and
their Company. The Consuls defended themselves hoping to be quickly releived
from their Camp that was near at hand: But all their Horse save four, The
Consuls slain.
forsook them and fled. Marcellus was slain with a Lance; Crispinus had his
Deaths wound, and young Marcellus was wounded, yet got to the Camp, the rest
were all slain. Hannibal gave an honorable Funeral to Marcellus, bestowing his
ashes in a Silver pot, covered with a Crown of Gold, and sent it to his Son to
be interred where he pleased.

Then icinius the Roman Admiral laid hard Siege to Locri, The Romans beaten.
wherefore Hannibal went thither again, but as soon as his Vant-couriers
appeared, the Romans ran in confused heaps to their Ships, leaving all their
Engines, and whatsoever was in their Camp to Hannibal.

C. Claudius Nero, and M. Livius were chosen Consuls, at which time Asdrubal
was already come into France, and was approaching toward Italy* Livius would
not stir against him but with a considerable Army, and those of the choicest
men: and Claudius with an other Army, was sent against Hannibal. By this time
news came that Asdrubal was passing the Alps, and that the Ligurians, and
those about Genoa were ready to join with him. When all was ordered according
to the Consuls mind, they went forth of the City; each his several way. The
Citizens were full of fears, Great fear at Rome.
there being an other Son of Amilcar come into Italy, and one that in this
expedition seemed to be of more sufficiency than Hannibal. For whereas in that
long and dangerous march through so many Barbarous Nations, over great Rivers,
and Mountains, Hannibal had lost a great part of his Army, Asdrubal in the same
journey had increased his* descended from the Alps like a rolling Snowball, far
greater than when he came over the Pyrenes. This made the People wait upon
their Consuls out a Town, like a pensive train of Mourners.

Asdrubal at his first coming into Italy set upon Placentia; but there he lost
a great deal of time, Asdrubal comes into Italy.
and yet was faigne at last to leave it, whereby he gave the Roman Consuls
leisure to make ready for him, and caused his Brother Hannibal to make no have
to meet him, knowing that Placentia would not be taken in have.

Nero made what speed he could to meet with Hannibal, and stop him from joining
with his Brother. He had with him forty thousand Foot, besides Horse, with
which he often offered Hannibal Battle, and in diverse Skirmishes had the better
of him. At Crumentum Hannibal fought with him, but was worsted* yet ^at he off
and marched away to (...), with Nero still at his heels. Thence he went to
Canu^^^m, and sat down there near the place where he had obtained his most
memorable Victory. There also Nero sat down by him, thinking it enough to
hinder him from joining with his succors. There was he advertised of Asdrubals
approach by letters that were going to Hannibal which he intercepted: wherefore
he resolved that it was better to run some desparate adventure than to suffer
them to join together. He therefore took six thousand Foot and a thousand
Horse, all of his choicest men, and away he posted as fast as he could to
assist his Fellow Consul. Livy at that time lay encamped near to Serea Gallica,
and Asdrubal within half a mile of him. In six days Nero finished his journey
thither, and by the way his company was increased by some voluntaries. The next
day after his coming, they consulted together, and resolved to fight the enemy,
Asdrubal perceiving that both the Consuls were now together, and thereupon
feared that Hannibal was slain, and though before he was forward to fight, yet
now he thought it no shame to retreat farther from them. So he dislodged
secretly by night, intending to get over the River Metaurus: but being misled
by his Guids, he had not gone far before: Nero was at his heels with all the
Horse, which hindered him from going any farther, and the other Consul followed
with the Legions in order of Battle. Asdrubal, seeing a necessity to fight,
omitted no care, or circumspection. His Gauls he placed in the left wing upon a
Hill, A Battle.
which the Enemy could not ascend without much difficulty. In the right wing he
stood himself, with his Africans and Spaniards: His Lygurians he placed in the
midst, and his Elephants in the Front of the Battle. On the Romans side Nero
had the right Wing, Livius the left, and Portius led the Battle, Livy and
Portius found strong opposition, and with great slaughter on both sides,
prevailed little or nothing. Nero labored much in vain against the steep Hill,
where the Gauls stood out of his reach: wherefore taking part of his Forces, he
led them round behind Livy and Portius, and charged Asdrubal in the Flank,
which made the Victory incline to the Romans: For Nero ran all along the depth
of Asdrubals Battle, and put it to rout. Of the Spaniards and Africans the
greatest part were slain: the Ligurians and Gauls saved themselves by flight:
Of the Elephants only four were taken alive: the rest were slain, most by
their riders: the Guide having in readiness a mallet and a chissel wherewith he
gave a stroke between the ^ars in the joint next the Head, wherewith he killed
the Beast upon a sudden.

Asdrubal strove with great Patience against many difficulties, and performed
all the duties of a worthy General, and stout Soldier, Asdrubal slain.
and when he saw the loss irraparable, he rode manfully into the thickest of
the Enemies, where fighting bravely, he was slain. The number of the slain on
both sides is variously reported, the Camp and all the Riches in it fell into
the hands of the Romans.

When it was known at Rome how Nero had left his Army, they were much amazed
and full of fears: The People filled the Market place, the Women ran to the
Temples with Vows and Prayers, and all were filled with melancholy: therefore
the news of this Victory was intetained with exceeding joy, as if Hannibal
were already driven out of Italy. Nero returning to his Camp, threw the Head of
Asdrubal before the Carthaginians and brought forth his African Prisoners
bound, sending two of them to give Hannibal notice what had happened.

Hannibal having in this unhappy fight, lost, besides his worthy Brother, all
hope that had so long sustained him in Italy, Hannibal retires into Brusia.
withdrew himself into the Country of the Brutians, and thither he caused all
the Lucans, his Friends, to remove, as likewise all that dwelt in Metapontum.
For he wanted men to defend so many places as he held, lying so far asunder.
Wherefore he drew them all into ^^ester compass in the utmost corner of Italy;
it being a Country of much fastness, and the People exceedingly devoted unto
his service. This was in the thirteenth year after his coming into Italy: and
from thence to the eighteenth year wherein he departed, there was no memorable
thing done. For Hannibal wanted strength wherewith to make any great attempt,
the Romans had little mind to provoke him, but thought: it well that he was
quiet. This commendation is given him by the Roman Historians themselves. That
making War upon a People, of all others the most Warlike, he obtained so many
Victories by his own good conduct: And that leading an Army compounded of so
many sundry Nations Africans, His Prudence.
Spaniards, Gauls, Carthaginians, Italians, and Greeks, which were neither in
Language, Laws, Conditions, or any other thing, one like to an other, yet he
held them all in such good order, that they never fell to sedition amongst
themselves, or against their General. And here we must leave him till he be
drawn into Africa by Scipio.

P. Cornelius Scipio having Conquered Spain, returned home to Rome, Scipio coms
from Spain^ Is chosen Consul.
where he made suit for the Honor of a Triumph, which was denied him, because
he only had the place of a Proconsul: Yet to make him amends, they chose him
Consul, together with P. Licinius Crassus, who being High Priest also, might
not go far some the City, as being to attend the matters of their Superstition:
which made well for Scipio, who was desirous to be sent into Africa, to
transfer the War thither. Some there were of the Senators, especially Q. Fabius
Maximus, that opposed him therein: yet at length he obtained to have the Isle
of Sicily for his Province, with leave to pass into Africa if he found it
expedient.

The Treasury at Rome being extremely exhausted, no money was given to Scipio,
neither was he allowed to press Soldiers for his African Voyage: But the
People made up the backwardness of the Senate with their forwardness* For
besides his Roman Soldiers, he had about seven thousand Voluntaries that came
to him from sundry parts of Italy. Several Towns also furnished him, with
Corn, Iron, Handmils, and all other necessaries, so that having his Navy in
readiness, he transported his Army into Sicily, where he found, besides other
Forces, He go^ into Sycily.
two gallant Legions of old Soldiers that had served at Cannae. For increasing
his number of Horse, he pressed three hundred young and rich Gentlemen of
Sicily, and then discharged them again, upon condition that they should deliver
their Horse and Arms to as many Roman Gentlemen whom he had brought along with
him for the same purpose.

Then did Scipio employ Laelius into Africa, rather to make discovery than to
do any thing, Sends inti Africa.
who yet took a great Booty, and struck no little terror into the
Carthaginians, who saw their affairs now to be upon the terms of change. He
also procured King Massanissa to revolt from the Carthaginians and to join with
the Romans. Then did Scipio embark his Army for Africa, And goes himself.
where he landed near the Fair Promontory, and presently after encamped before
Vtica.

The Carthaginians at this time had no Captain of note in their City, nor a
better Army than of raw Soldiers that were levied in have. Asdrubal the Son of
Gesco, that was lately chased out of Spain by Scipio, was their best man of
War. But before he was ready to take the Field, Scipio had beaten the Troop of
Cathaginian Horse that were sent to impead his landing, and slain Hanno their
Captain; he had also sacked one of their Towns, and taken eight thousand
Prisoners, and sent them into Sicily. He took also Salva which he fortified.
Then passed he to Vtica and besieged it forty days with all sorts of Engines,
but prevailed not. Vtica besieged.
By this time Asdrubal had gotten thirty thousand Foot, and three thousand
Horse, but all raw Soldiers, and King Syphax brought to their help fifty
Thousand Foot and ten Thousand Horse, with which they marched bravely toward
Scipio, who thereupon left the Siege, and encamped upon the Shore in a place of
advantage which he strongly fortified, and Winter drawing on, Mussanissa
brought in great store of Corn, Cattle, and other Provisions to him. Asdrubal
and Syphax encamped near unto him: their Soldiers covered their Huts with Mats
and Reeds, and dry Boughs* and being held in hand about a treaty of peace, they
grew remiss, and carlesse in keeping their Guard, The Carthaginians beaten.
which Scipio being informed of, took his opportunity in the night to set their
Camps on fire, and in the confusion slew, and took Prisoners most of them.

Yet did the Carthaginians make shift to raise another Army of near thirty
thousand, reckoning in Syphax, and his men, and four thousand Spaniards,
Mercenaries, And a second time.
that were lately come to them: Scipio went to meet them, and another Battle
was fought, and the Victory easily obtained by Scipio against those raw and
untrained men. Thus Scipio became Master of the Field, and took in diverse
Cities, and sent Massanissa and Laelius after Syphax into his Kingdom, whom
they beat again, took him Prisoner, and partly by fair means, and partly by
foul, became Masters of most of his Kingdom, which Scipio bestowed upon
Massanissa. And this was the first time that the Romans took upon them to make
Kings.

The Carthaginians were extremely dismayed, when they heard this news, and for
the calamity which had befaln their good Friend Syphax, and when they
understood that Massanissa, their immortal enemy, had gotten possession of his
Kingdom. This made them send forth Ambassadors to Scipio to make suit for
Peace. When these came into Scipios presence, They sue for Peace.
they basely prostrated themselves on the ground, and kissed his Feet, and made
as unworthy a Speech, beseeching him to pass by their offenses,, and to grant
them Peace.

Scipio knew well in what a poor case Rome then was, and how unable to defray
the charge of the War if it should be continued, and therefore he was willing
to grant them Peace upon these conditions. That they should render up all the
Prisoners, and all their Renigadoes, and slaves; That they should withdraw
their Armies out of Italy and Gaul: That they should not meddle with Spain, nor
with any Islands betwixt Italy and Africa: That they should deliver up all
their Ships of War, save twenty: That they should pay him a great sum of
Money, with some hundred thousand Bushels of Wheat and Barley: All these they
assented to, whereupon he granted them a Truce that they might send their
Ambassadors to the Sanate of Rome. But the truth was, They dealt deceitfully.
they desired only to get time till Hannibal might come back, in whom they
reposed all their confidence: And therefore they took occasion to pick new
quarrels with the Romans, which they were the rather encouraged to, hearing
news that Hannibal was already landed in Africa, by whose means they hoped
either to drive the Romans out of Africa, or to procure better terms of Peace.

Hannibal departed out of Italy no less passionate then men are wont to be,
Hannibal* leaves Italy.
when they leave their own Countries to go into Exile: He looked back to the
shore, accusing both Gods and men, and cursing his own dullness in that he had
not led his Army from Cannae, hot and bloudied as it was, to the Walls of Rome.

Arriving in Africa he disembarked his Army at Leptis, almost one hundred miles
from Carthage. Comes into Afrck.
He was ill provided of Horse, which he could not easily transport out of
Italy. From thence he passed through the inland Country, gathering Friends by
the way. Tychaeus, a Numidian Prince that had the best Horses, he allured to
join with him: and one Mezetallus, an other Prince brought him a thousand
Horse. The Carthagians in the mean time neglected to make those preparations
that would have secured the Victory and yet they sent to Hannibal, requiring
him with out delay to do what he could. Hannibal answered, that they were his
Lords, and therefore might dispose of him and his Army, but since he was
General of their Forces, he desired that he might have leave to make choice of
his own time. Yet to please them, he made long marches to Zama, and there
encamped.

From Zama he sent forth his Scouts to learn where the Romans lay, and what
they were doing. Some of these were taken and brought to Scipio, who showed
them all his Camp and so dismissed them. Hannibal admired at his Generosity,
and had a very great desire of an interview that he might talk with him: and
this he signified by a Messenger. Scipio embraced the motion and sent him word
when and where he might meet with him. Accordingly the two Generals rode forth,
An interview of the Generals.
with each of them a Troop of Horse till they met, and then their men were bid
to stand off: Each of them had his Interpreter, and when they met they stood
silent for a while, viewing one the other with mutual admiration. Then began
Hannibal to salute the Roman to this effect. Hannibals Speech to Scipio.
That it had been better both for Carthage and Rome, if they could have
contained their ambition within the shoars of Africa and Italy: for that the
Countries of Sicily and Spain, were no sufficient recompense for so many Fleets
as had been lost, and so much blood as had been shed, in making those costly
purchasses: But since what was past could not be recalled, he said, That it was
time for them at the length to put an end to these contentions, and to Pray the
Gods to endue them with more wisdom for hereafter. To which peaceable
disposition his own years, and long trial of Fortune, both good and bad, made
him inclineable: But he feared that Scipio, for want of such experiences, would
rather f^x his mind upon uncertain hopes, than upon the contemplation of that
mutability, whereunto all humane affairs are subject: Yet (said he) my own
example may peradventure teach thee moderation. For I am that same Hannibal
that after my Victory at Cannae, wan the greatest part of Italy, and devised
what I should do with your City of Rome which I hoped verily to have taken.
Once I brought my Army to your Walls, as thou have since brought thine to ours
of Carthage: But see the change, I now stand hear entreating thee for Peace.
This may teach thee Fortunes instability. I fought with thy Father Scipio. He
was the first Roman General that I met with in the Field: I did then little
think that the time would come when I should hove such business with his Son:
and thou may have experience of the like in thy self, who knows how soon?
What say thou? Can thou be content that we leave to you Spain, and all the
Islands between Italy and Africa? By effecting this thou shall have Glory
enough, and the Romans may well be glad of such a bargain: and we will be
faithful in observing the Peace with you. If thou refusest this, consider what
an hazard thou must run to get a little more: If thou staiest but till to
morrow night, thou must take such Fortune as the Gods shall allot. The issue of
Battles is uncertain, and often beguiles expectation. Let us therefore without
more ado make Peace. Say not that some false-hearted Citizens of ours, dealt
fraudulently of late in the like Treaty. Its I Hannibal that now desire Peace,
which I would never do but that I think it expedient for our Country: and
judging i^ expedient I will always maintain it.

To this Scipio answered, Scipios reply.
That he was not ignorant of the mutability of Fortune: That without any note
of insolence he might well refuse the conditions offered: But (said he) if thy
Citizens can be contented, besides what I proposed and they formerly assented
to, to make such reparation for these late injuries as I shall require, then I
will further advise what answer to give you, otherwise prepare for War, and
expect the issue.

Hereupon they brake off, and each returned to his own Camp, They prepar to
fight.
bidding their Soldiers to prepare for Battle, wherein should be decided the
quarrel between Rome and Carthage. The next morning at break of day they issued
into the Field, each of them ordering their men as they judged most convenient.
After which Scipio rode up and down his Army, biding them remember what they
had achieved since they came into Africa. He told them, that if they wan the
day, the War was a^ an end, and this Victory would make them Lords of all the
World, for after this, none should be able to resist them: But if they were
beaten, there was no possibily of escaping; they must either Conquer or die, or
be miserable slaves under must merciless enemies.

Hannibal was far the weaker in Horse and a great part of his Army were raw
Soldiers, yet his Lords of Carthage would brook no delay. He encouraged
therefore his men as was most suitable to their qualities. To the Mercenaries
he promised bountiful rewards. The Carthaginians he threatened with inevitable
servitude if they lost they day: but especially he animated his old fellow
Soldiers by the many Victories which they had gotten over those that far
exceeded them in number. He bad them look on their Enemies and see whether
they were not by far fewer than that huge Army they had slaughtered at Canna.
He bad them remember that it was the Father of this Scipio whom they had made
to run away, etc. Wherefore he entreated them, upon whose virtue he meant wholly
to repose himself, that they would strive that day to make good their honor,
and to purchase the fame of Men Invincible.

When the Armies drew near, the Numidian Horsemen on both sides began to
Skirmish: the Trumpets, and other instruments sounded to Battle. A Battle.
Hannibals Elephants (which were always an uncertain kind of help) were to
break upon the Romans: But some of them ran back upon their own Horse, which
they so disordered, that Massanissa, taking the advantage, before they could
re-ally, charged them, and drove them quite out of the Field. The rest of these
Beasts, made a great spoil amongst the Roman Velites, but being wounded, they
ran back upon the right point of their own Battle, and disordered the
Carthaginian Horse that were in that wing; which gave such advantage to the
Roman Horse, that charging them when they were in disorder, they drove them
away likewise. Then did the Battles of Foot advance, and ran one at the other,
and the Mercenaries at the first seemed to have the better of the Romans: But
at length the Roman Discipline prevailed against boisterous strength. And
whereas the Romans, were seconded by their Friends, these Mercenaries received
no help from those that should have seconded them. For the new raised Africans,
when they saw the Mercenaries give back, they retired also, which made the
hired Soldiers think themselves betrayed, whereupon they declined the fight.
The Carthaginian Battle was herewith more terrified then before, so that
refusing to give way to the Mercenaries they sell out amongst themselves, and
forbore to make head against their Enemies. Thus were many of them beaten down
and slain through their own indiscretion: And this gave the Romans such
advantage that the made a great slaughter both of the Carthaginians and
Mercenaries, who could neither fight nor easily fly. Such as could, ran toward
Hannibal, who kept his ground and would not stir to help these run-wayes.

Then did Scipio advance against Hannibal who entertained him after an other
manner than ever he had been received in his life before. All the former days
work, seemed but a Pastime in comparison of this. The Romans were encouraged
because they had prevailed all the day before they were also far more in
number: But Hannibals old Blades were fresh and the better men. They fought
with such obstinate resolution that no man gave back one Foot, but rather chose
to die than to lose their ground, so that for a long time the Victory was
uncertain: But the return of Massanissa and Laelius with the Horse from the
pursuit of the Enemies, was to the Romans most happy and in a needful time.
These upon a sudden, Hannibal beaten.
charging Hannibal upon the Rear, overbore them with mere violence and put them
to ^ou^.

Hannibal with a few Horse saved himself by flight, and staid not till he came
to Carthage; where, He flies to Carthage, and persuades them to seek Peace.
coming into the Senate, he told them plainly, that there was no other way left
but to make such a Peace as could be procured. Amongst other things it was
agreed, that the Carthaginians should pay to the Romans two hundred Talents a
year for fifty years together. Which money, when it came to be collected, there
was pitious lamentation amongst the People, the Roman yoke beginning to pinch
them already, that some of the Senators could not forbear weeping; but Hannibal
could not refrain from laughter: For which Asdrubal Haedus (one of Hanno's
faction) checked him, saying, that it ill becommed him to laugh, since he had
been the cause why all others did weep. He answered, that laughter did not
always proceed from joy, but sometimes from indignation. Yet (said he) My
laughter is more seasonable, and less obsurd, than your tears. For you should
have wept when you gave up your Ships and Elephants, and when you bound up your
hands from use of Arms without the good leave of the Romans. This miserable
condition keeps us under, and holds us in assured sevitude. But of these things
you had no feeling: Now when a little money is wrung from you, you are very
sensible of that, God grant that the time come not, wherein you shall
acknowledge, that it was the least part of your misery for which you have shed
these tears.

His Civil employment.
Afterward Hannibal in the Civil administration of the City, gave an overthrow
or two, to the Judges which at that time bore all the sway in Carthage, having
all the lives, goods, and fame of the rest in their power. Shortly after
Hannibal was chosen Praetor, by virtue of which Office, he was superior to
them for that year. He sent upon an occasion for one of the Treasurers to come
to him, but he proudly refused, whereupon Hannibal sent a Pursevant for him, and
brought him in Judgment before the People, accusing, not only him, but the rest
of the Judges for their insolency, and unbridled power, withal, propounding a
Law that the Judges should be chosen from year to year. He found also that they
had robbed the Treasury, which caused the Taxes to be laid upon the common
People, whereof he made such plain demonstration, that they were compelled to
restore with shame what they had gotten by knavery. This so irritated his
Enemies, who were of the Romans Faction, that they complained to the Roman
Senate that the Barchine Faction grew strong again, He is complained of to the
Romans.
and that Hannibal would shortly be in Arms: For he was like a wild Beast that
could never be tamed: that he held secret intelligence with King Antiochus, who
was an enemy to the Romans, etc.

Hereupon the Senate sent three Ambassadors to Carthage to demand Hannibal, but
he kept such good espiall upon the Romans that he was informed of their
intentions, against which he was never unprepared: And therefore when night was
come, he stole out of the City, accompanied with two Friends whom he could
trust, and having Horses in a readiness, he rode all night, and came to a
Tower of his own by the Sea s^^e, and having provided a Ship in readiness, he
bad Africa farewell, He flies from Carthage to Tyre^
lamenting the misfortune of his Country more than his own, and shaped his
course to Tire* which was the Mother City of Carthage: There he was entertained
Royally, in whose worth and honor the Tyrians thought themselves to have
interest because of the affinity between the Cities. Thence went he to
Antiochus, He goes to Antioccus.
who was exceeding glad of his coming, intending War against the Romans.

To him Hannibal gave excellent advice how he might carry on his War against
the Romans, His counsel neglected.
with best advantage; but Antiochus hearkened more to his Courtiers than to him,
and so was shamfully beaten by the Romans: at which time he admired Hannibal as
a wise man, yea as a Prophet, who long before had foreseen, and foretold him
what now was come to pass, and when it was too late, wished that he had
followed his Counsel. To be brief, Antiochus was forced by the Romans to sue
for Peace, which at last the Romans yielded to: Provided amongst other things,
that Hannibal might be delivered into their hands. Hannibal getting an incling
of this, He flies to Prusias.
fled to Gortina in Creet, where he lived a long time very quietly, but at
length he fell into the envy of many by reason of his great wealth, whereupon
he filled certain great chests with Lead, and deposited them in the Temple of
Diana there, as if he kept the Treasure for a dead lift* and thereupon the
People, having such a Pledge as that of him, looked less after him: But he in
the mean time stole away to Prusias, King of Bythinia, having first molten his
Gold, and powered it into some hollow Statues of Brass, which he carried away
with him.

Shortly after there fell a War between Prusias, and Eumenes, King of Pergamus,
Prusias being encouraged to break his League and to make War upon him, by his
confidence in Hannibal, whom he had there to manage his War for him. The War
therefore grew hot betwixt them, both by Land and Sea. But Eumenes, by the
assistance of the Romans, overpowred Prusias in both: And whereas Prusias was
but weak of himself, Hannibal procured him the assistance of some other Kings
and States, and those of very Warlike Nations: and amongst them the aid of
Philip, King of Macedonia, who sent him Philocles his General, with a very
considerable Army to help him.

When Prusias had received an overthrow from Eumenes by land, he sought to try
his Fortune by Sea, wherein yet he was too weak for him: wherefore Hannibal
advised him to try whether he could not do that by Policy, which by plain force
he was not able to effect. He put therefore a multitude of all sorts of
Serpents into Earthen Pitchers, to be hurled aboard the Enemies Ships when they
were in fight: giving order to the Soldiers and Seamen to set all upon the
Ship wherein Eumenes himself was, and to defend themselves from the rest as
well as they could: and that he might the more certainly know in which Ship
Eumenes was, he sent an Herald beforehand with a Letter, containing nothing
but a mere flout to Eumenes, and full of abuses to his Person. Whenas therefore
Prusias his men came to it, they fought neither against great nor small, but
on-against the Ship wherein Eumenes was, whereupon he he was fain to seek his
safety by flight; yet had he perished had he not thrust in upon the next shore,
where he had placed, for a relief upon all occasions, a company of his men.

As for Eumenes his other Ships, when they pressed hard upon the Enemy, they
let fly amongst them their Earthen Pitchers full of Snakes, which at first
seemed to them a ridiculous thing: but when the Pitchers, falling upon the
Decks, brake in pieces, out flew the Snakes, so that they could stir no where
in the Ships by reason of the Serpents, whereby they found themselves no less
annoied by their stings, than with the Arrows of their Enemies, which caused
them to give over fighting, and to fly to their Camp which was upon the Shore.

Thus Hannibal by this trick, got the better of Eumenes in that fight. Nor then
only, but also in sundry other encounters; and by one Stratagem or other, he
ever put Eumenes to the worst. And once when he advised Prusias to fight, and
he durst not, because the entrails of the Beast (said he) forbid me. What
(said Hannibal) will you r^ly more upon a little piece of flesh in a Calfe, than
upon the Judgment of an old experienced Captain in the Field?

Now as soon as news of these things came to the Senate at Rome, they sent T*
Quinti^s Flaminius Ambassador to Prusias, not so much to withdraw him from
prosecuting the War against Eumenes, as to entreat him to deliver to them
Hannibal, the most spiteful enemy they had in all the world.

Prusias, to gratify the Romans resolved either to kill Hannibal, Who betrays
him.
or to deliver him alive into the hands of Flaminius, for which end he sent a
Troop of Soldiers to inviron the lodging where Hannbal lay. But Hannibal
having before found cause to suspect the faith of Prusias, had made some secret
sallies under ground to save himself from any Treasonable, or sudden assault.
But finding now that all passages were shut up against him, he had recourse to
his last remedy, which he was constrained to put in practice, as well to
frustrate his enemies from their Triumphing over him, as to save himself from
their torture and merciless hands, who, as he well knew, would neither respect
his famous enterprises, his Honor, nor his Age. When therefore he saw no other
way of escaping, he took the poison, which he always had in readynesse for
such an exigent, and being ready to swallow it down, he uttered these Words,
His last Speech.
I will now (said he) deliver the Romans from the fear which has so long
possessed them: that fear which makes them impatient af attending the Death of
an old man. This Victory of Flaminius over me, which am disarmed, and betrayed
into his hands, shall never be numbered in the rest of his Heroical deeds, No:
it shall make it manifest to all the Nations of the World, how far the Ancient
Roman virtue is degenerated, and corrupted. For such was the Nobleness of
their forefathers, as when King Pyrrhus invaided them in Italy, and was ready
to give them Battle at their own doors, they gave him intelligence of the
Treason intended against him by Poison: whenas these of a latter race, have
employed Flaminius, a man who heretofore has been one of their Consuls, to
practice with Prusias, contrary to the honor of a King, contrary to his Faith
given for my safety, and contrary to the Laws of Hospitality, to slay, or
deliver up his own Guest. He poisons himself.
Then drank he off that Poison, and died.

P. Scipio Africanus in a discourse which he had with Hannibal, asked him,
which of all the famous Captains that ever lived, he judged most worthy?
Hannibal gave to Alexander the great, the first place: to Pyrrhus the second:
and the third he challedged to himse^f. But Scipio, who thought his own Title
better, then that it ought to be forgotten, asked yet further, What then
would thou have said, Hannibal, if thou had vanquished me? The
Carthaginian replied, Then would I not have given the first place to Alexander,
but have claimed it as due unto my self.

When the Conditions of Peace granted by the Romans to the Carthaginians were
reported to the Citizens, they were very unpleasing, whereupon one Gesco, stood
up to speak against them, persuading the People not to yield to such
intolerable demands: But Hannibal observing what favorable audience was given
to this vain Orator, by the unquiet, yet unwarlike multitude, he was bold to
pull him down from his standing by plain force: Hereat all the People murmured,
as if their common liberty were too much wronged by such insolence of this
presumptuous Captain: Which Hannibal perceiving, rose up and spoke unto them,
saying; That they ought to pardon him if he had done otherwise than the Customs
of the City would allow, for as much as he had been thence absent ever since he
was a boy of nine years old, until he was now a man of five and forty. Having
thus excused himself, he exhorted them to embrace the Peace, as wanting ability
to defend themselves, had the demands of the Enemy been yet more rigorous.

His Father Amilcar, at what time he did Sacrifize, being ready to take his
journey into Spain, called his Son Hannibal, being than but nine years old,
caused him to lay his hand upon the Alter, and to swear, that being come to
man's estate, he should pursue the Romans with immortal hatred, and that he
should work them all the mischief that possibly he could.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF EPAMINONDAS, THE GREAT CAPTAIN OF THE THEBANS.
THe Father of Epaminondas was Polymnis, His Parentage and Education.
who was descended of one of the most ancient, and renowned Famelies amongst
the Thebans, the most part of which Noble lineage had upon their Bodies for a
natural Birthmark, the resemblance of a Snake. This Polimnis had two only
Sons, Caphisias, and Epaminondas, whom he educated very carefully, and had them
very well instructed in all the liberal Arts, and honest Sciences: especially
Epaminondas, who had the more stayed wit, and Was most inclined to Virtue, His
parts.
desirous to learn, humble, obedient, and won^erfull docible: and of one
Dyonisius he learned to be very skillful in Singing, and Music. And for
Philosophy it happened well for him that he fell into an excellent Masters
hands by this means.

The Colleges of the Pythagorian Philosophers that were dispersed through the
Cities of Italy, were banished by the faction of the Cylonians, yet such as
still kept together, met in a Council at Metapont to consider of their affairs:
But some seditious Persons rose up against them, and set the House wherein they
were on fire, and burnt them all; only Phylolaus and Lysis, being lusty young
men, escaped through the fire. Phylolaus fled into the Country of the
Lucanians, and resided there with his Friends: But Lysis got to Thebes, where
Polymnis entertained him, entreating him to undertake the Tuition of his Son
Epaminondas, who, though he was but a young Boy, yet was he of good capacity,
and of very good Hopes. This Philosopher accordingly applied himself to manure
this noble and quick wit of Epaminondas, and in a short time made him perfect
in all Sciences and Virtue, so that it was hard to find a more wise, grave, and
virtuous Person than he was,

He exercises and studies.
When he was but fifteen years of age, he gave himself to all manner of
exercises of the Body, as to run, wrestle, use his Weapons, and all feats of
Arms: and having quickly attained to skill in these, he applied himself to his
Book. He was naturally silent, fearful to speak, but never a weary to hear and
learn; whereupon Spintharus, the Tarentine, being familiarly acquainted with
him in Thebes, used to say, that he never knew any man that knew so much, and
spoke so little as Epaminondas. If he fell into any company that discoursed of
Philosophy, or of State matters, he would never leave them, till the matter
propounded was at an end. He was of a pleasant disposition, and so witty that
he could break a jest as well as any man.

Lysis after he had lived long in Thebes, died, and was honorably buried by
his Scholar Epaminondas. His Discourse with a Philosopher.
Not long after, Theanor, one of the Pythagorians in Sicily, was sent to bring
Lysis thither, but when he came to Thebes, he found him dead and buried,
therefore going to Epaminondas, after salutations, he told him that his
companions, who were rich, willed him to give Polymnis, and his children, a
good sum of money in recompense of that courteous entertainment which they had
given to Lysis: Epaminondas, after pleasant excuses made, told him that none
could be received, saying further, Jason, a Captain of the Thessalians thought
that I gave him a rude and uncivil answer, when he, having earnestly entreated
me to receive a good sum of Gold, I sent him word that he did me wrong, and
began to make War with me: for that he, aspiring to make himself a Lord, would
corrupt me with money, who am a plain Citizen of a free Town, and living under
the Law. But for thee Theanor, I commend thy good will, because its honest and
virtuous, but I tell thee thou bring Physic to them that are not sick.
Admit that thou, hearing we had been in Wars, had brought us Arms to defend
us, and when on the contrary thou had found us quiet, and at peace with all
our neighbors, thou would not have thought fit to bestow these Arms, and
leave them with those that had no need of them. Even so, thou art come to
relive our poverty as though it were a burden to us, whereas on the contrary,
its an easy and pleasant thing to us to carry, and we are glad we have it in
our Houses amongst us, and therefore we have no need of Arms* or money against
that which does us no hurt at all. But tell thy brethren that they use their
goods very honestly: and also that they have Friends here which use their
Poverty as well: and as for the intertainment* and burial of Lysis, he has
himself fully recompensed us, having taught us, amongst many other good
lessons, not to be afraid of Poverty, nor to be grieved to see it amongst us.
Theanor having made some reply about the good and evil of Riches, and told him
that as Poverty was not evil in it self, so neither was Riches to be had in
contempt and despised: No truly (said Epaminondas) yet considering with my self
that we have a World of covetous desires, some natural that are born with us,
and bred in our flesh by the lusts pertaining to it: Others strange to us,
grounded upon vain opinions, which taking settling, and becoming an habit in us
by tr^ct of time, and long use through evil education, oftentimes do draw us
down, and weigh our Souls with more force and violence, than those that be
connaturall to us. For reason, through daily exercise of virtue, and practice
thereof, is a means to free us from many of those things that are borne, and
bred with us. Yet we must use continual force and opposition against our
concupisences which are strangers to us, to quench them, and by all possible
means to repress, and subdue them in us.

And when this is done, there is also (said he) an exercise of justice against
greedy Covetousness, and a desire of getting, which is not, not to go rob our
neighbors Houses, nor, not to rob men by the high way, nor not to betray our
Friends, or Country for money: for such an one opposes, not covetousness, but
possibly, its Law, or fear that bridleth his covetous desire to offend: But
that man that ofttimes willingly abstaines from just gains, he it is that by
exercise keeps himself far from unjust, and unlawful taking of money. For it is
impossible in great pleasures that are wicked and dangerous, the Soul should
contain it self from lusting after them, unless formerly, being often at his
choice to use them, he had contemned them. Its not easy to overcome them, nor
to refuse great Riches when they are offered, unless a man long before has
killed in him this covetous desire of getting, the which, besides many other
habits and actions, is still greedily bent shamefully to gain, pleasiing
himself in the pursuit of Injustice, hardly forbearing to wrong an other so he
may benefit himself. But that man that disdaines to receive gifts from his
Friends, and refuses Presents offered him by Kings, and that has rejected the
bounty of Fortune, putting by all covetous desires of glistering Treasures laid
before him, he shall never be tempted to do that which is unjust, nor shall his
mind be troubled, but he will content himself quietly to do any thing that is
honest, having an upright heart, finding nothing in it but that which is good
and commendable. Yet was the Life of Epaminondas far mor excellent than his
discourse, as will appear by that which follows.

Diomedon, the Cizicenian, at the request of Artaxerxes, King of Persia,
promised to win Epaminondas to take the Persians part. To effect this, he
came to Thebes, and brought a great mass of Gold with him, and with three
Thousand Crowns of it, he bribed a young man called Mycethus, who was greatly
beloved by Epaminondas. This young man went to him and told him the occasion of
the other man's coming to Thebes: But D^omedon being present, Epaminondas said
to him, I have no need of money: If the King of Persia wish well to the Thebans,
I am at his service without taking one penny: His contempt of Riches.
If he has any other meaning, he has not Gold nor Silver enough wherewith to
corrupt me: For I will not sell the love which I bear to my Country for all the
Gold in the World: and as for thee that do now tempt me, not knowing me, but
judging me like unto thy self, I pardon thee for this time, but get thee
quickly out of the City lest thou corrupt others, having failed to prevail over
me: and for thee Mycethus, deliver him his money again, which if thou do not
presently, I will send thee before a Justice.

Hereupon Diomedon besought him that he would let him go away in safety, and
carry that with him which he brought thither: Yea (said Epaminondas) but it
shall not be for thy sake, but for my honour-sake, lest thy Gold and Silver
being taken from thee, some man should accuse me that I had a share in that
privately which I had refused openly. Saying further, whither would thou that
I should cause thee to be conveyed? To Athens, said Diomedon: This was done
accordingly, and he had a strong convoy sent with him, and that he might not be
troubled by the way, betwixt the Gates of Thebes and the Haven wherein he was
to imbark himself, Epaminondas gave Chabrias the Athenian charge of him, that
he should see him safe at his jorneys end.

His Poverty.
Though Epaminondas was very Poor, yet would he never take any thing of his
Citizens or Friends: and being so inured to poverty, he was enabled to bear it
the more patiently by his study of Philosophy. For on a time, having the
leading of an Army of the Thebans into the Country of Peloponnesus, he borrowed
five Crowns of a Citizen for the defraying of his necessary chatges in that
Journey. Pelopidas being a man of great wealth and his very good Friend, could
never possibly force upon him any part of his Goods, but he rather learned of
him to love Poverty. For Epaminondas taught him to think it an honor to go
plainly in his Apparel, to eat moderately, to take pains willingly, and in
War to fight lustily. Yet when he had occasion to relieve others, he would make
bold with his Friends goods, which in such cases were common to him. If any of
his Citizens were taken Prisoners by the Enemy, or if any Friend of his had a
Daughter to be married, His Charity.
and was not able to bestow her, he used to call his Friends together, and to
assesse every one of them at a certain sum, after which he brought him before
them who was to receive the money, and told him how much every one had bestowed
upon him, that he might return thanks to them all.

But once he went far beyond this: For he sent a poor Friend of his to a Rich
Citizen of Thebes to ask of him six hundred Crowns, and to tell him that
Epaminondas desired him to let him have them. The Citizen being amazed at his
demand, went to Epaminondas to know what he meant to charge him so deeply, as
to make him to give six hundred Crowns to the other? It is (said Epaminondas)
because this man, being an honest man, is poor, and thou who have robbed the
Commonwealth of much, art rich.

His Sobriety.
He lived so soberly, and was such an enemy to all superfluity and excess, that
being on a time invited to Supper to one of his Neighbors, when he saw great
preparation of dainty meats, made dishes, and perfumes, he said unto him, I
thought thou had made a Sacrifice by this excess and superfluity, and so
immediately went his way. The like also he spoke of his own Table, saying, that
such an Ordinary, was never guilty of Traitors, and Treason. On a time being at
a Feast with some of his Companions, he drank Vinegar, and when they asked him
what he meant by it, and whether he drank it for his health? I know not (said
he) but this I am sure of, it puts me in remembrance how I live at home. Now it
was not that his stomach was an enemy to dainty meats, or that he lived so
penuriously at home, for he was marvelous noble minded: But he did it, that by
his strict and unreprovable life, he might bridle and restrain many
insolences and disorders which then reigned amongst the Thebans, and to reduce
them to the former temperance of their Ancestors.

Upon a time, a Cook giving up an account to him and his Fellows of their
ordinary expenses for certain days, he could find fault with nothing but the
quantity of Oil that was spent: which his Companions marvelling at; Tush (said
he) it is not the expense which offends me, but because we have powered in so
much Oil into our Bodies. The City of Thebes upon an occasion made a public
Feast, where they were very merry, and jolly: But on the Contrary, Epaminondas
went up and down without Oil and perfumes, or decked with brave apparel,
seeming very sad: Some of his Familiar Friends meeting him in this posture, and
wondering at him, asked him why he walked so alone, His Vigilance.
and ill apparrelled through the City? Because (said he) you may in the mean
time freely and safely drink your selves drunk, and make merry, taking thought
for nothing.

His modesty also was such, that it would in no wise suffer him to seek
advancement, but on the contrary he withdrew himself from Government, that he
might with the more quiet apply himself to the study of Philosophy. It happened
upon a time that the Lacedaemonians entreated aid of the Thebans, who at that
time were in League with them, and acordingly they sent them certain Foot
Companies: at which time Epaminondas being about thirty five years old, Armed
himself and went along with them. At this time it was, that that intimate
Friendship began betwixt Pelopidas and him, which continued even to the end of
their lives. These two being in a Battle the one by the other against the
Arcatians, whom they had in front against them in the plains of Mantinea, it
fell out that one of the points of the Battle of the Lacedaemonians in which
they were, retired, and many fled: But these two resolved rather to die than
fly, and accordingly they stood to it gallantly, His Valor.
till Pelopidas being wounded in seven places, fell down upon a heap of dead
Bodies. Then did Epaminondas (though he took him for dead) step resolutly
before him to defend his Body and Arms, he alone fighting against many,
resolving rather to die in the place than to leave Pelopidas amongst the dead
men, until that himself being thrust into the breast with a Pike, and wounded
in the Arm with a Sword, was ready to faint: at which time Providence so
ordered it, that King Agesipolis came on with the other point of the Battle,
and saved them both.

Not long after the Lacedaemonians by a stratagem, won the strong Castle of
Thebes called Cadmaea, and put a strong Garrison into it, and gave the
Government of the City of Thebes unto Archias, Philippus, and Leontidas,
authors of all the mischief: Tyran's in Thebes.
whereupon, to avoid their Tyranny, Pelopidas, and many others were fain to
save themselves by flight, upon which they were banished by sound of Trumpet.
But as for Epaminondas they as yet said nothing to him, but let him alone in
the City: for he was contemned as a man of no account, because he was so much
given to his Book: and if he should have any mind to stir against them, yet
they judged he could could do nothing because of his Poverty.

Whilst Pelopidas and his Companions were at Athens, they laid a plot to free
Thebes from those Tyrants: But Epaminondas not making a show of any thing, had
devised an other way to effect it, by raising the hearts and courages of the
young men of the City. For when they went out to play, and exercise themselves,
he always found out a way to make them wrestle with the Lacedomonians; and
when he saw the Lacedomonians throw them, and give them shrewd falls, they
being the stronger, he would prvately rebuke the Thebans and tell them, that it
was a shame for them to suffer the Lacedomonians to set their feet upon their
throats for want of courage, who yet were not half so strong, and boiste^ous as
themselves were. All* this while Pelopidas and his followers went on in their
Plot, His prudence.
and had such good success, that one night they got privily into the City of
Thebes and met at Charons House about forty eight in number. Epaminondas knew
all this well enough, and at night some took him aside and endeavored to
persuade him to join with them in delivering their City from these Tyrants, to
whom he answered, that he had taken order with his Friends, and Gorgidas, to
put themselves into a readiness upon any such occasion, but for his own part he
would not have a hand in putting any of his Citizens to death, unless they were
legally condemned: yet (said he) if you will make an attempt for the delivery
of the City so as that it be without murder or blood shed, I will join with
you with all my heart: But if you will persevere in your former determination,
pray you let me alone, pure, and not defiled with the blood of my Citizens,
that being blameless I may take hold of another occasion which may tend more to
the good of the common wealth. For the murders that will be committed in this
way, cannot be contained within any reasonable bounds. I know indeed that
Pherecid^s, and Pelopidas will especially set upon the Authors of the Tyranny:
but (...), and S^mi^das, being fierce and Choleric men taking the liberty of
the night, will never sheath their swords, till they have filled the whole City
with murder, and slain many of the chief Citizens. Besides, its very
convenient for the People of Thebes, that some be left free, and blameless of
these murders, and guiltless of all that should be done in the fury of this
action.

Notwithstanding all that was said, the enterprise was executed, The Tyrants
slain.
and the Tyrants put to death, the City was restored to her ancient liberty,
the Castle of Cadmaea was rendered up by composition, and Lysandrad^s, the
Lacedemonian, and other Commanders that were in it, were suffered safely to
depart, with their goods and Soldiers. This was the occasion of the long Wars
which followed between the Lacedomonians and Thebans, with whom the Athenians
joined in League.

Epaminondas still applied himself to his Book: yet at last he was put forwards
by Pammenes, His Modesty.
a chief man amongst the Thebans, and he began to follow the Wars very eagerly,
and in diverse encounters gave good proof of his prudence, hardiness, and
valor, insomuch as by degrees he attained to the highest charges of Government
in the Commonwealth: and his Citizens, who before made small account of him
till he was forty years old, He is advanced to Honor.
after, when they knew him better, they trusted him with their Armies, and he
saved the City of Thebes, that was like to be undone, yea, and freed all Greece
from the servitude of the Lacedaemonians, making his virtue, as in a clear
light, to shine with Glory, showing the effects when time served.

Upon a time Agesilaus, King of Lacaedemon entered into Boeotia with an Army of
twenty thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse, wherewith he harrased and
spoiled all the plain Country, and presented Battle to the Thebans in the open
Fields, which yet they would not accept of, finding themselves the weaker:
Howbeit, they defended themselves so well by the assistance of the Athenians,
and the wise conduct of Epaminondas and Pelopidas, that they caused Agesilaus
to return home with his Army. But when he was gone, the Thebans went with their
Companies before the City of Thespies, The Spartans beaten.
which they surprised, and put to the Sword two hundred of the Garrison, and
afterward returned back with their Army to Thebes; and P^aebidas, the
Lacedemonian, who was then Governor of that City, sallye^ out of the Town, and
charged upon the Thebans in their retreat, who entertained him so hotly, that
he lost five hundred of his men, and himself was slain in the fight.

Not long after, the Lacedaemonians returned with their former Army to make War
with the Thebans, who having seized upon certain straights, and places of
advantage, so blocked up the way, that they could not over run the Country, and
spoil it as they had done before; yet did Agesilaus so molest, and trouble
them, that at last it came to a main Battle that held long, and was very cruel:
A Battle.
and though at the first Agesilaus had the better, yet the Thebans charged him
so furiously, that at the length he himself was wounded and forced to retire,
being well paid for teaching the Thebans Millitary Discipline. And this was the
first time that the Thebans knew themselves to be as strong and lusty as the
Lacedaemonians, whereupon they Triumphed in sign of Victory, and from that time
forward, they grew more courageous to make head against the Enemy, and to
present them battle. But that which most encouraged them, was, the presence of
Epaminondas, who counseled, commanded, and executed very wisely, valiantly,
and with great success.

At another time they went with a great number of chosen men before the City of
Orobomene, where yet they prevailed not, because there was a strong Garrison of
the Lacedaemonians that sallied out upon them, and the fight was very sharp
between them: yet, though the Lacedaemonians were far more in number, The
Spartans beaten.
the Thebans gave them the overthrow, which never happened to them before. For
all other Nations thought that they had done excellent well, if with a far
greater number they had overcome a small number of the Lacedaemonians. But this
Victory, and an other, which fell out shortly after under the conduct of
Pelopidas, did so lift up and encourage the Thebans, that they became more
famous than (...) were before*

The year following, Artaxerxes King of Persia, intending to make War against
Egypt, and therein to intertain diverse strangers, labored to make Peace
amongst the Grecians, in hope that they, being at Peace amongst themselves
would be the more willing to have Soldiers leavied amongst them. For which end
he sent Ambassadors to all the Towns of Greece, to preswade and entreat them
to be at Peace amongst themselves. The Greeks were very willing to harken
hereto, being wearied on all sides with such long Wars, and so were easily
drawn to make Peace; Peace among the Greeks.
wherein it was especially agreed, and concluded, that all the Cities of Greece
should be free, and use their own Laws: and Commissioners were sent abroad to
withdraw all the Garrisons where any were kept. Unto this the Thebans only
refused to agree, that every Town should severally capitulate for it,
requesting that the Towns in the Country of Boeotia should be comprehended
under the City of Thebes: but the Athenians mightily opposed themselves against
this, and Calistratus, one of their Orators, made a notable Oration about it
before all the States of Greece. Epaminondas on the contrary, made an excellent
and vehement speech in defense of the right of the Thebans, insomuch as this
controversy was left undecided, and the Treaty of Peace was universally agreed
to amongst all the other Grecians, The Thebans are excepted.
the Thebans only excepted, who were not comprised in it.

At this time the Athenians, and Lacedaemonians, who had long contended amongst
themselves about the Principality of Greece, now agreed, that the one should
command by Sea, and the other by Land: And therefore they could not endure that
the Thebans should aspire to be chief, which made them seek to dismember the
other Towns of Boeotia from them, the rather, for that the Thebans, being
strong and lusty of Body, and much encouraged by their late Victories over the
Lacedaemonians, would now contend with them for their superiority, having a
wonderful confidence in the Wisdom and Prowess of their Captains, especially
of Epaminondas.

Matters resting thus doubtful, the Citizens of Plataees, a Town of Boeotia,
were desirous to enter into League with the Athenians, promising that if they
would send them Soldiers, they would put the Town into their hands: But the
Governors of Boeotia having intelligence of it, and being desirous to prevent
the Athenians, brought a party of Soldiers against it, who came before
Plataees before the Citizens heard any news of them, so that part of them were
surprised in the Field by the Horsemen, and the rest fled into the Town: where
having no aid, they were faign to accept of such terms as it pleased the
Thebans to grant them, which were, presently to depart the Town with bag and
baggage, Plataees destroyed.
and never to return again into the Country of Boeotia. Then did they raze the
City to the ground, and saked the Town of Thespies which also was at enmity
with them.

The Ambassadors of Persia again solicited the Greeks to a General Peace, and
Commissioners from every Town were to meet at Sparta about it. Epaminondas was
yet scarce known, having labored to conceal himself. and in all his exploits
of War, had ever preferred the advancement of his great Friend, and Companion
in Arms, Pelopidas, before himself. He was now chosen by ye Thebans to go to
Sparta, where, finding that the other Commissioners did much comply with
Agesilaus, he spoke boldly, and plainly, not only in behalf of the Thebans, but
for all Greece also: making it evident to all, Hi^ wisdom.
that War still increased the greatness of Sparta only, which kept all the
other Towns of Greece under. He therefore advised them to establish a firm
Peace, which would last the longer, when all comprised in it should be equals.

Agesilaus perceiving all the Commissioners to be very attentive to and well
pleased with this speech, he asked him aloud, if he thought it just, and equal,
that all Boeotia should be set at liberty. Epaminondas resently, And courage.
and boldly asked him, if he thought it not also just and reasonable that all
Laconia should be set at liberty? Thereupon Agesilaus, in great anger, stood
up, and commanded him to answer plainly, if they should not restore all the
Towns in Boeotia to their Liberty? and Epaminondas answered him as before. This
so displeased Agesilaus (who had an old grudge to the Thebans) that immediately
he put their Name out of the List of those that should be comprised within the
Treaty of Peace, and proclaimed open War against them, and now there was no
remedy but the Thebans must bear the whole brunt alone, for there was no one
Town that durst send them any aid, because they were all sworn to the Peace,
insomuch as all judged them to be utterly undone. Friends pitied there estate,
and their enemies rejoiced, verily believing that they could never stand before
the Lacedaemonians.

Then did the Lacedaemonians send King Cleombrotus with an Army toward Thebes,
who being come near to Chaeronea with ten thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse,
he pitched, his Camp there staying for his Allies. The Thebans being informed
of the approach of the enemy, chose Epaminondas to be their Captain General,
giving him the charge of this War, with six other Counselors to be assisting
to him. Now there came Oracles to Thebes from all parts; some promising
Victory, and others threatening their overthrow; and Epaminondas commanded them
to set those on the right hand of the chair for Orations, that promised
Victory, and the other on the left hand, which being so disposed of, he gat up
into the chair, and said to his Citizens, If you will be obedient to your
Captains, and valiant against your enemies, these Oraoles on the right hand
belong to you: His Prudence.
But if through faintness of heart, ye refuse dangers, those on the left hand
shall be your Portion.

Then did he list the Names of all the Thebans which were able to bear Arms,
and chose out of some parts of Boeotia, such as he thought fittest for the
Wars. His Presence exceedingly cheered up his Army, and all the time that he
was Captain, the Thebans never saw in their Campany of those which they call
sudden fears. He used to say, that there was no Death more honest and
desirable than to die in the Wars, and that the body of a Soldier should be
hardened to endure any labor or pains. He could not abide fat men, Fat men
cashired.
and therefore cashired a whole Company of them as unprofitable burdens in his
Army. He had in all, but six thousand fighting men: and as they marched
forwards, they met with some unlucky signs, as many esteemed them; but he
valued them not, thinking that a resolution to fight in a good cause, ought to
be much stronger, and of more force to raise up in him good Hope, than these
evil signs that appeared, to make him fear the worst.

As he was marching toward the Lacedaemonians, they heard it Thunder, and they
that were near him, asked him what that meant. He answered, that it betokened
that the Enemies brains were troubled, and beclouded, who, having places of
advantage hard by them, yet encamped in the plains. Indeed the Lacedaemonians
waited there for their Allies, who yet failed them. For all of them, having at
leisure considered of the speech of Epaminondas at Sparta, began to distaste the
ambition of the Lacedaemonians. Epaminondas seeing his advantage, caused his
Army to march with speed, His Prudence.
and wan the straights by the City of Coronea, and encamped there: Cleombrotus
understanding that the Thebans had possessed themselves of that pass,
despairing to recover it, he made his Army to march a great compass about the
Country of Phocide, going along the Sea Coast through a dangerous, and
troublesome way, and so at the last he entered into the Country of Boeotia: and
as he went, he took in some little Towns, and certain Galleys that lay upon the
Coast, and at the last arrived at Leuctres, and there sat down to refresh his
men, who were overwearied with their tedious march. Then did Epaminindas
presently advance that way to meet them, and having passed over some little
Mountains, he discovered them in the plain of Luctres, where his men were much
amazed to see so great an Army of their Enemies.

The six Counselors came together to consider whether they should go forward
and fight, few against many, or else retreat, waiting for some beter advantage.
In this Council, their opinions fell out to be equal. Three judged it best to
retreat, the other, whereof Epaminondas was one, thought it best to fight, and
with these three, Pelopidas, who was Captain of the Sacred Band, joined,
whereupon they all agreed to give them Battle. And Policy.
Epaminondas seeing his Soldiers somewhat affirighted at the former ill
signs, to put courage into them, he suborned some that were newly come from
Thebes, to scatter a report, that no man could tell at Thebes what was become
of the Arms that hung up in the Temple of Hercules; but it was commonly said,
that the Demigods, their Ancestors, had taken them away, to aid their
posterity, at this present time. He caused another also, who was newly come
from Trophonius hole, to report, that the God which gives his Oracles therein,
commanded him to tell the Boeotians that when they had overcome their enemies
in the plain of Leuctres, they should celebrate yearly Plays to the honor of
Jupiter: and to gain the more credit to these devices, Leandridas, a Spartan,
that was banished out of his own Country, and now was assisting the Boeotians,
being brought before the Soldiers, he encouraged them to fight valiantly that
Day: For he swore unto them, that the Lacedaemonians had many Oracles, biding
them to beware of Leuctres.

Epaminondas also, assembling his Army, encouraged them with strong, and lively
reasons, to show their valor, so that at lasty Soldiers being freed from
their superstitious fears, longed for nothing more than to come to blows.
Epaminondas ever concluded his Orations to them with these Words: O worthy men,
embrace sacred Death: Advance your selves to a most honorable, and famous Fight
for your Country, for the Tombs of your Ancestors, and for your Holy things.
Just at this very time there came to the Thebans an aid of five hundred Horse,
and fifteen hundred Foot, all Thessalians, conducted by Jason. This Jason
endeavored to have made peace with both parties, but could not prevail.

Also as Cleombrotus retired with his Army out of Boeotia, he met a great
supply of Lacedaemonians, and their Allies, brought to him by Archidamus, the
Son of Agesilaus. These he sent before, thinking to daunt the courage of the
Thebans with the sight of them, and himself with the rest of his Army suddenly
returned into the plain of Leuctres, being fully resolved to fight: and the
Boeotians for their part shrunk not an inch back, and so on both sides they set
their men in Battle array. Epaminondas ordered his Battle after a new fashion
never before practiced by any Captain: For having chosen out of his Army the
best, and most valiant Soldiers, he placed them together in one of the Points
of his Battle, where himself meant to fight in Person, seconded by Pelopidas,
and his three hundred chosen men; called the Holy Band: In the other Point he
placed his weaker men, commanding them expressly not to abide the charge of
their enemies that should assail them in Front, but fair, and softly retire
when they saw them come near them: and it fell out as he wished: and he hoped
to determine the Battle by the virtue, A Battle
and prowess of those where he had placed all the flower, and choice of his
Army.

Now the sign of Battle being given, the Lacedaemonians advanced with the two
Horns of their Battle, ordered in the form of a Crescent. On the contrary, one
of the wings of the Battle of the Boeotians began to give back, and the other
with great fury ran to charge the enemy in the Flank, and soon they were come
to the Swords point. At the first, because either side fought desperately, the
Victory for a time stood doubtful, But at last Epaminondas his Troop brake in
amongst the Lacedaemonians, and slew most of those that were about Cleombrotus.
Yet while the King was alive, he kept back the Thebans from the victory, being
accompanied with all the flower of his Army, who fought very valiantly about
him: But after he fell dead to the ground, having received and given an
infinite number of wounds, then thronged they together on all sides, and there
was a bloody and cruel fight about his Body, where were heaps of men slain one
upon another, and though Epaminondas did all that possibly he could, yet the
Lacedaemonians made such resistance, that at last they forced the Thebans
somewhat to give back, whereby they conveyed the Body of the King out of the
press: But this continued not long: For Epaminondas both by his words and
example, did so raise up and encourage the hearts of his men, The Spartans
beaten.
that they fought like Lions, and gave so fierce a second charge upon their
enemies, that they wholly routed them and made them fly for life, and
Epaminondas fiercely pursuing the flying enemy, made a great slaughter of them,
and obtained the most glorious victory that ever Captain won, having in a
pitched Field overcome the most Noble, and warlike Nation of all Greece, and
that with a far smaller number of men than his enemies had. He also rejoiced
more in this, than in all his other victories, because it happened to him in
his Fathers lifetime: and he often used to say, that of all the honest and
happy Fortunes that befell him, nothing joyed his heart more, than that he had
vanquished the Lacedaemonians at Leuctres, his Father and Mother living to see
it: and indeed, he that day, did not only preserve their lives, but of all his
Citizens besides, His Humility.
the Lacedaemonians having fully resolved utterly to destroy the Thebans.

Epaminondas used at all other times to come abroad fine and neat, and with a
pleasant countenance: but the next day after this Battle, he came out very sad,
heavy, and pensive, and when his Friends asked him whether he had heard any ill
news which occasioned this posture, he said, No: but (said he) I perceive by my
self yesterday, that being overjoyed with the victory I obtained, my heart was
more elevated than it ought, and therefore to day I correct that joy, which
yesterday exceeded its due bounds. He knowing that it was the manner of the
Spartans, as much as possible, to conceal their losses, he suffered them not to
carry away all their dead Bodies together, but every City one after another, by
which it appeared that there were four Thousand of them slain: But of the
Booetians there were not found above three hundred dead. This Battle was fought
in the beginning of the second year of the hundred and second Olympiade.

The Lacedaemonians having by this overthrow lost the greatest part of their
honor, which they had maintained so long, yet lost not their courage; but to
keep their youth still in heart, and to take away all fear from such as had
escaped, they sent Agesilaus, with an Army into Arcadia, who was contented to
take a few small Towns of the Mantineans, and so to return home again. Some say
that Lycomedes, Captain of the Arcadians, making an inrode near to Orchomene,
slew in an encounter, Politropus, Captain of the Lacedaemonians, and two hundred
Spartans with him, which provoked the Lacedaemonians against them: and thereupon
the Arcadians, finding themselves too weak for them, they sought alliance and
aid from the Thebans. Sure it is that these two States were now at enmity,
which occasioned the Arcadians and Thebans to join together, who, with their
Allies being led by Epaminondas entered into Laconia, with an Army of forty
thousand men, besides thirty thousand others that followed the Camp. At this
time the Athenians sent Captain Iphecrates, with twelve thousand men, to aid
the Lacedaemonians: He plunders Laconia.
But before their coming, Epaminondas was entered into Laconia, and had sacked
all the Country which had not been wasted by any enemy for six hundred years
before.

The Spartans seeing their Country thus plundered, and destroyed, were desirous
to have gone out with such Forces as they had, but Agesilaus would not suffer
them, telling them how dangerous it was for them to leave their City, and to
set upon such a potent, and numerous enemy. This made them quiet: and
Epaminondas in the mean time marched with his Army toward the River Eurotas,
which at that time was risen very high, because of the Winter raines. He
endeavored all he could, to draw forth Agesilaus to a Battle, who beholding
Epaminondas a great while, marching with his Army in Battle array along the
River side at the Head of his Troops, He braves the Spartans.
he wondered at his boldness, and Valor, but would by no means adventure out
of his Fort: So that when this Army had plundered all Laconia, Epaminondas led
them back again laden with a very rich Booty. And though Agesilaus was
commended for pteserving his City in safety; yet Epaminondas had by this
inrode, and especially by his Victory at Leuctres, so impoverished the Country,
that Sparta could never after recover that loss, nor grow into that reputation
and power which it had before. Yea, notwithstanding the aid sent by the
Athenians, and the skill and experience of Iphicrates, Epaminondas returned
with his Army entire as he came.

Epaminondas that he might keep the Lacedaemonians still underfoot, and heap
new troubles upon them, gave Counsel to the Arcadians, and their Allies, to
re-edify, and replenish with People the City of Messina, which the
Lacedaemonians had long before destroyed, and when all the whole Council had
given their consents to it, Messina re-edified.
he forthwith, by diligent enquiry sought out all that had been ancient
Inhabitants in that City, and in the space of eighty five Days, having
repaired the ruined Houses, he raised again one of the most Noble, and ancient
Cities of Gr^ece, and left there a strong Garrison for their security. This gat
him as much, if not more love and honor than any other service which he had
ever done,

The Lacedaemonians being freed from a great fear by his departure, made an
agreement with the Athenians, leaving to them the chief command by Sea, and
reserving to themselves that by Land. And afterward, by the assistance of the
Athenians and that aid which came to them out of Sicily, by little and little
they recovered their Towns again.

The Arcadians, to stop their proceedings, assaulted ye City of Pallene in
Laconia, and taking it by storm, put all the Garrison therein to the Sword,
and then razed the Town, Pallene destroyed.
and plundered all the Country there abouts. And expecting that the
Lacedaemonians would seek revenge, they sent for aid to the Thebans, who sent
Epaminondas and the other Counselors to assist them with six thousand Foot,
and five hundred Horse. The Athenians having intelligence hereof, sent their
Army under the Conduct of Chabrias, who marched directly to Corinth, where he
met with a good supply of Soldiers from the Megarians, Pallenians, and
Corinthians, so that now he had a Brigade of ten thousand men. These intended
to fortify and stop all the passages and entrances into the Country of
Poloponesus. The Lacedaemonians and their Allies joining also with them, made up
an Army of twenty thousand men: And accordingly, Peloponesus fortified.
beginning at the City of Cencrees, unto the Haven of Lecheum, they blocked all
the ways from one Sea to an other with mighty great pieces of Timber laid
acrosse, and with a marvelous deep ditch: and this great work was followed with
such speed, both by reason of the great multitude of laborers, as also through
the forwardness of them that prosecuted it with such earnestness, that they
had quite finished it before the Boeotians could arrive there.

Epaminondas when he came thither, viewing this fortification, perceiving that
the easiest place to storm it, was that which the Lacedaemonians themselves
guarded, he sent to give them defiance though they were thrice as many in
number as he was, yet for all this they durst not come out, but kept close
under their fortification: Notwitstanding he assaulted them in it, and at last
drove them out. In the heat of the fight every one doing his best, some
assailing, others defending, Epaminondas chose out the valiantest men in all
his Army, and bravely charging the Lacedaemonians, he forced them to give back,
and in dispite of them, he entered into Peloponnesus, which of all other his
Noble exlpoites, was the most wonderful and memorable action. From thence he
marched to the Cities of Epidaure, and Troezen, and so pillaged all the
Country: He beats the Spartans.
But he stayed not to take any of the Towns, because they had strong Garrisons
in them: Yet he put Sicyone, Phuente, and some other Towns into such fear, that
they yielded themselves to him.

This being done, he went to Corinth, and overcame the Corinthians in a set
Battle, and beat them home, even to the Gates of their City: Yea some of his
men were so unadvised, trusting to their own valor, that they entered the
Gates of their City pel mel with those that fled, which put the Corinthians
into such a terrible fear, that they ran with all speed possible to shelter
themselves in their Houses: But Chabrias making head, beat them out again, and
slew some, whereupon he caused a token of Triumph to be set up, as if he had
given the Thebans an overthrow, for which Epaminondas laughed him to scorn. The
Boeotians brought their Army as near unto Corinth as they could, and Chabrias
with his Army encamped without the Walls in a very strong Place of advantage,
and there were many Skirmishes betwixt them, in which Chabrias behaved himself
with such Valor that he gained great reputation even of Epaminondas himself,
who upon a time being asked, whom he thought to be the Greatest Captain,
himself, Chabrias, or Iphicrates? Its hard (said he) to judge whilst we are all
alive.

News was brought to him that the Athenians had again sent an Army into
Poloponnesus, furnished with new Armor: Indeed this Army consisted of ten
thousand Spaniards and Gauls, whom Dyonisius the Tyrant, sent out of Sicily to
aid the Lacedem^nians, having paid them for five months: they did some
reasonable service in this War, and at the end of Summer returned home again.

It fell out in these last encounters that Epaminondas having forced the
Lacedaemonians that guarded the fortification before mentioned, had many of them
in his power to have slain them: His Clemency.
but he contented himself only with this Glory, that in dispite of them, he had
entered into Peloponnesus, seeking to do them no more hurt; which gave occasion
to those that envied his Glory, to blame him, and to accuse him of Treason, as
having willingly spared the enemies, because they should in particular thank
him only: But here it will not be improper to take notice how he behaved
himself amongst his Citizens, and how wisely he defended his own Integrity.

Amongst all those that envied his Glory and virtue, He is envied.
there was one Meneclides, an Orator, and an eloquent man, but with all, most
wicked, and very malicious. He finding that Epaminondas won so much honor by
the Wars, never left persuading the Thebans to embrace Peace, and prefer it
before War, and that because hereby they should not always live under the
obedience, and command of one man. But Epaminondas one day told him in the open
Counsel: Thou will (said he) deceive the Thebans whilst thou advisest them to
leave the Wars: and highly commending ease and Peace, thou go about to put
iron bolts upon their feet. For War begets Peace, which yet cannot hold long
but amongst them that know how to maintain it with the Sword. Then turning
himself to the Citizens, he said, If you will have the Principallity and
command of all Greece, you must shroud your selves in your Tents, and lie in
your Pavillions in the open Fields, and not follow sports and Pastimes here at
home. For he knew well enough that the Boeotians undid themselves by ease and
Idleness, which made him endeavor continually to keep them in exercise and
War*

Upon a time when the Thebans were to choose Captains, they went about to
choose Epaminondas, one of the six counselors, whereupon he said to them: My
Masters, pray you consider of it now you are at leisure before you choose me:
For I tell you plainly, if I be chosen your Captain you must to the Wars. He
used to call the Country of Boeotia, which was a plain, and Champion Country,
the Stage of War, saying, that it was impossible to keep it, unless the
Inhabitants had their Targets on their Arms, and their Swords in their hands:
and this was not, because he did not love Peace, and privacy to study
Philosophy, or that he was not more careful of them that were under his charge
than he was of himself, using always to watch and forbear his meat, when the
Thebans were at their Banquets, and Feasts, giving themselves over to their
pleasures: but because he knew them well enough, and was never more careful of
any thing than to keep his Army from idleness.

Upon a time the Arcadians desired him that some of his Companies might come
into one of their Towns to lie dry and warm there, all the winter, but he would
by no means yield to it. For (said he to his Soldiers) now they see you
exercising your selves in Arms, they wonder at you as brave and valiant men;
but if they should see you at the fire side parching of Beans, they would
esteem no better of you than of themselves. Neither could he endure
Covetousness: for if at sometimes he gave his men leave to go a free^booting,
his meaning was, that whatsoever they got, should be bestowed in furnishing
them with good Arms; and if any went about to fill his Purse with money he
judged him unworthy to be a Soldier. Upon a time he understood that his
Target-bearer had received a great sum of money for the ransom of a
Prisoner, whereupon he said to him: Give me my Target, and go thy ways home,
and buy thee a Tavern wherein to spend the rest of thy life: for I perceive
thou will no more, like an honest man, put thy self in danger in the Wars, as
formerly thou have done, because now thou art grown rich and wealthy.

Though Epaminondas was thus virtuous, and unblameable in his life, yet the
aforementioned Menectides would never cease contending, and reproaching of him:
and one day he went so far as to upbraid him because he had no children, and
was not married, His prudence.
and that he magnified himself more than ever King Agamemnon had done* To this
Epaminondas answered, Thou have nothing to do to counsel me to marry, and in
this respect, there is never a man here whose advise I would less make use of
than thine (and this he spoke because the other was taken notice of to be an
Adulterer) And whereas thou think that I envy the fame and renown of
Agamemnon, thou art fowly deceived. Yet let me tell thee, that whereas he was
ten years in winding one City, I on the contrary, by putting the Lacedaemonians
to flight in one day, have delivered not only our own City, but all Greece
from their slavery. But thanks be to you? My Lords Thebans (speaking to all the
Assembly) by your assistance I did it, and thereby overthrew the power and
government of our insulting enemies.

Yet after all his brave deeds, He is accused and abused.
both he and Pelopidas were ill rewarded for all their good service, by their
ungrateful Citizens: For at their return from Laconia, they, with some other
of the six Counselors, were accused, that after the time that their Government
was expired, they retained their power four months after the time appointed by
the Law. With much ado Pelopidas was quitted: But Epaminondas willed all his
other Companions to lay the fault upon him, who by his Authority forced them to
it; and instead of excusing himself, he told them all the brave exploits which
he had done at that time: Adding withal, that he was willing and ready to die,
if they so pleased, Provided that they wrote upon his Tomb, that Epaminondas
was put to death, because he had compelled the Thebans against their wills to
burn the Country of Laconia, which in five hundred years before had never been
plundered. That he had repeopled the City of Messina with Inhabitants, two
hundred and thirty years after it had been laid wast by the Lacedaemonians. That
he had brought all the people and Towns of Arcadia to be as one Body, in League
together, and had set all the Greeks at liberty: and all these things (said he)
we did in that Journey. The Judges when they heard this worthy and true
defense, they all arose from their seats, and laughed heartily, and would not
take up their Balls to Ballot against him.

But for the second accusation, to wit, that he had showed favor to the
Lacedaemonians for his own particular honor, he would make no particular answer
to it before the People, but rising out of the Theater, he passed through the
Assembly and went into the Park of Exercises. Upon this the people being
incensed against him, refused to choose him into Office as they had wont to do,
though there was great need of him, and Created other Counselors to go into
Thessaly: and the more (as they thought) to despite him, they commanded him to
go that expedition as a private Soldier, which he refused not, but went very
willingly.

Pelopidas being sent a second time into Thessaly to make peace between the
people and Alexander the Tyrant of Pheres, was by this Tyrant (not regarding
that he was an Ambassador, and a Theban) committed to prison, together with
Ismenias. Pelopidas imprison? ed by a Tyrant.
Upon this, the Thebans being justly offended, sent an Army of eight thousand
Foot and five hundred Horse against him, howbeit under the conduct of
unskillfull Captains, who, wanting judgment to use their advantages, thought
good to return home without doing any thing: But as they went back Alexander,
being stronger in Horse than they, pressed hard upon their Rear, killing some,
and wounding others; so that the Thebans knowing neither how to go forward nor
backward, were in great distress; and that which aggravated their misery was,
that their victuals were almost spent. Being thus almost out of hope ever to
get home in safety, Epaminondas being at that time a common Soldier amongst
the Foot, both the Captains and Soldiers earnestly entreated him to help to
redress this disorder. He thereupon chose certain Footmen that were light
armed, and all the Horsemen, and with these putting himself into the Rere of the
Army, he so lustily repulsed the Eenemy, that the rest of the Army afterward
marched in great safety, His Policy.
and still making Head, as occasion served, and keeping his Troops in good
order, he at last brought them all well home.

This brave Act Crowned him with new Glory, confounded his enemies, and made
him well spoken of every where, and by it he obtained the love and good will of
the Citizens, who set great Fines upon the heads of those Captains who had
behaved themselves so unworthily in that expedition. And now the People seeing
that by so many worthy deeds he had stoped the slanderous mouths, and confuted
the accusations of his ill willers, they chose him again their Captain General
to conduct a new Army into Thessaly: At his coming all the Country wonderfully
rejoiced, only the Tyrant with his Captains, and Friends were exceedingly
dejected, and possessed with fear, being Thunderstruck with the fame of so
Noble a Captain, and his subjects had a good mind to rise up against him,
hoping that they should shortly see the Tyrant fully recompensed for all the
wicked and cursed deeds that he had done amongst them.

Epaminondas when he came into Thessaly, preferred the safety and deliverance
of his Friend Pelopidas before his own honor and Glory, His Prudence.
and fearing lest Alexander when he should see himself and his State in danger
to be overthrown, should in his rage revenge himself upon Pelopidas, he
therefore purposly drew this War out in length, marching often about him, but
never setting upon him in good earnest, often seeming to make preparations, and
yet still delaying: and this he did, to mollify the heart of this Tyrant, and
not to provoke (to the danger of his Friend) the inhumane and unbridled passion
of this cruel Bloudsucker. Yet he being a Monster compounded of cruelty, and
cowardlinesse, was so afraid of the very name and reputation of Epaminondas,
that he presently sent some to him to excuse his fact, and to crave Peace. But
Epaminondas was not willing that his Thebans should make Peace and Alliance
with so wicked a man, only he was content to grant him a Truce for thirty
Days, Pelopidas released.
upon the delivering to him Pelopidas and Ismenias.

So with them he returned back to Thebes, and always continued a faithful
Friend to Pelopidas so long as they lieved together: Yet would he never share
with him in his Riches, but did still perseveare in his former strict poverty
and Discipline. He was very bold, and yet it was mingled with a winning
sweetness and a livly grace, as may appear in sundy Examples. Besides his bold
speech to Agesilaus, mentioned before: At another time the Argians having made
a League with the Thebans, the Athenians sent their Ambassadors into Arcadia,
to see if they could gain the Arcadians to be their Friends. And these
Ambassadors began roundly and hotly to charge and accuse both the one and the
other, and Callistratus speaking for them, reproached them with Orestes, and
Oedipus: Epaminondas being present at that Assembly, stood up, and said, My
Lords, His witty speeches.
we confess that in times past we had a man that killed his Father, and in
Argos, one that killed his Mother, but as for us now, we have banished all such
wicked murderers out of our Country, and the Athenians have intertaned them.

At another time when the Spartans had laid many great and grievous imputations
to the charge of the Thebans, he said, If they have done nothing else, my Lords
of Sparta, yet at least they have made you forget to speak little. But that
which was most excellent, and observable in Epaminondas, and which indeed did
stop the mouth of envy it self was his moderation, and temperance, knowing how
to use any state or condition, and never to rage either against himself or
others, always bearing this mind, that howsoever they took him, and in what
place soever they set him, he was well contented, so that he might but advance
the good of his Country: As may appear by this Example: on a time his
evil-willers, thinking to bring him into disgrace, and merely out of spite,
made him superintendant or overseer of all the customs, whilst others of his
inferiors, His Humility-
unworthy to be compared with him, were placed in the most honorable Offices:
Yet despised he not this mean Office, but discharged it very Faithfully: For
(said he) the Office or Authority shows not only what the man is, but also the
man what the Office is.

Shortly after Epaminondas was returned out of Thessaly, the Arcadians were
overcome by Archidamus and the Lacedaemonians, who in the fight lost not a man,
and therefore they called this journey the tearlesse Battle: and Epaminondas
forseeing that the Arcadians would yet have another storm, he gave them
counsel to fortify their Towns, which they did accordingly, and built that
City which afterwads was called Megalopolis, Megalopelis built.
situated in a very convenient place. Whilst the Thebans made War with the
Elians, their neighbors, the mind of Epaminondas was always lifted up to
high enterprises for the good of his Country, wherefore in an Oration which he
made to his Citizens, he preswaded them to make themselves strong by Sea, and
to endeavor to get the principality, and to make themselves the Lords thereof.
This Oration was full of lively reasons whereby he showed and proved unto them,
that the enterpize was both honorable, and profitable, which he made out by
sundry Arguments, telling them that it was an easy thing for them, who were now
the stronger by Land, to make themselves also the stronger by Sea: and the
rather, for that the Athenians in the War against Xerxes, though they had armed
and set forth two hundred Gallyes, armed and well appointed with men, yet they
willingly submitted themselves to the Lacedaemonians. He alleged many other
reasons, whereby he prevailed so far, that the Thebans were willing to
undertake the enterprise, and thereupon gave present order to build an hundred
Galleys, and an Arsenall with so many rooms that they might lay them under
covert in the Dock: The Thebans build a Navy.
They ordered also to send to them of Rhodes, and of Chio, and of Byzantium, to
desire their furthrance in this enterprise: for which end Epaminondas was sent
with an Army unto these Cities: In his Passage he met with Leches* a Captain of
the Athenians, with a number of Ships in his Fleet, who was sent on purpose to
hinder this design of the Thebans: Yet Epaminondas so affrighted him, that he
made him retire back again, and holding on his course he brought the aforenamed
Cities to enter into League with the Thebans. Shortly after the Thebans fell
out with the City of Orchomene, which had done them great hurt, and mischief,
and having won it by assault, slew all the men that were able to bear Arms,
and made all the women and children Slaves.

Some time after the death of Pelopidas, certain private Persons of Mantinea,
fearing to be called to an account for their bad behaviors, and robberies
which they had committed, if the Arcadians and Elians should agree, they so
brought it about, that they raised a new quarrel in the Country, New Wars.
which was divided into two Factions, whereof the Mantineans were the chief on
the one side, and the Tageates on the other. This quarrel went so far, that the
Parties would needs try it by Arms. The Tageates sent to request aid of the
Thebans, who accordingly chose Epaminondas their Captain General, and sent him
with a good number of men of War to aid the Tageates. The Mantineans being
terrified with this aid that came out of Boeotia to their eneemies, and at the
reputation of their Captain, they immediately sent to the Athenians, and
Lacedaemonians, the greatest enemies of the Boeotians, for their assistance,
which both the Cities granted. Upon this there fell out many and great
skirmishes in diverse parts of Peloponnesus: and Epaminondas being not far off
from Mantinea, understood by some of the Country men, that Agesilaus, and his
Lacedaemonians, were come into the Field, and that they wasted all the
Territories of the Tageates; whereupon, judging that there were but few men
left in the City of Sparta to defend it, he undertook a great exploit, and
dangerous, and had certainly effected it, if the marvelous good Fortune of
Sparta had not hindered it. His design was this: A notable atempt*
He departed from Tegea by night, the Mantineans knowing nothing of it, and
taking a by way, he had certainly surprised Sparta without striking a stroke,
had not a Post of Candia speedily carried word of it to Agesilaus, who
immediately dispatched away an Horsman to give intelligence to them of Sparta to
stand upon their guard, and he himself speedily hasted after, and arrived there
a little before the coming of the Thebans, who being very near the City a
little before day, they gave an assault to them that defended it. This made
Agesil^us to bestir himself wonderfully, even beyond the strength of so old a
man: But his Son Archidamus, and Isadas, the Son of Phaebidas fought valiantly
on all parts* Epaminondas seeing how prepared the Spartanes were to oppose him,
began then to suspect that his design was discovered; yet notwithstanding he
left not off to force them all he could, though he fought with great
disadvantage, considering the places wherein he was: yea, he continued fighting
courageously, till the Army of the Lacedaemonians came on, and till the night
approached, whereupon he sounded a retreat.

Then being informed that the Mantineans came on also with their forces, he
withdrew his Army somewhat farther off from the Town, and there Camped. After
which he caused his men to refresh themselves with victuals, and leaving
certain Horsemen in the Camp, he commanded them to make fires in the morning,
and in the mean time himself with the rest of his men, went to surprise
Mantinea before any should discover that he was departed. An other but
frustrated.
Yet herein also he failed of his purpose, the prosperity of the Thebans being
come to its height, and the course of Epaminondas his Life drawing near to an
end, whereby Greece was deprived of this Noble and famous Captain, from whom
was taken a most notable Victory, and that twice, by strange accidents.

For at the second time, when he was come near to Mantinea that was left
without guard and defense, just then, on the other side of the Town there
arrived six thousand Athenians, conducted by their Captain Hegelecus, who
having put sufficient force into the Town, ordered the rest of his Army in
Battle array without the Walls, and immediately also came the Mantineans, and
Lacedaemonians together, who prepared to put all to the hazard of a Battle, and
therefore sent for their Allies from all parts: and when they were come
together they were in all twenty five thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse.
The Arcadians, Boeotians, and their partakers were thirty thousand Foot, and
three thousand Horse. When they came to the Battle, first the Horse charged
with great fury, A Battle.
and the Horsemen of the Athenians encountering with the Thehans, proved too
weak for them, not because they were less valiant, or hardy than the other,
but because they had not so good Chieftains, and had few Archers amongst their
Troops. The Thebans on the other side were all excellently well appointed, and
had Thessalians amongst them, men very skillful in their Bows, who so plied
the Athenians that they wholly brake them, and put them to the rout, yet in
their flight they did not run amongst their Footmen, which made them somewhat
recover their Honor which they had lost by running away. On the contrary part,
as they fled, they met with some Companies of Negropont, whom the Arcadians had
sent to take in certain Hills hard by the plain where the Battle was fought,
whom they put all to the Sword.

The men at Arms of the Thebans seeing them turn their backs, did not pursue
them at all, but presently gave charge upon a great Battalion of Footmen,
forcing them all they could to break, and run through them. So the fight was
very cruel and sharp, yet in the end the Athenians were forced to quit the
place: whereupon a Colonel of Horsemen of the Elians, who stood as a reserve
to guard the Rere, defended them, and encountering with the Bo^otians, he
resisted them, and made them give back, which reinforced the fault of the left
point of their Army. But in the right point, after the Horsemen had charged one
another, the fight was soon determined: For by reason of the great number of
men at Arms of the Thebans, and Thessalians, the Mantineans and their
partakers were soon put to rout, and having lost a great number of their men,
they sheltered themselves under the Battalion of their Footmen, and this was
the issue of the fight between the Horsemen.

As for the infantry, after they came once to the Sword, it was a mavelous
bloody, and cruel fight. For never before that time was there so many Greeks in
the Field one against another, nor so great and expert Captains, nor such
valiant Soldiers as were now. The two Nations that at that time bare the name
to be the bravest Footmen in all the world, to wit, the Thebans, and
Lacedaemonians, were now set in Front one against the other, and they began to
charge, neither sparing Life nor limb. The first charge they gave was with
their Pikes, which being soon broken with the huge blows they gave each other,
then they came to it with their Swords, and lustily laying about them, Body to
Body, Death raged in every place, and there was a mighty carnage made: for
neither part shrunk back, or gave over with weariness, but stood to it like
undaunted men. And so continued this dangerous Fight for a long time, by reason
of the valiantness of either party, the victory stood doubtful for a great
while, and it could not be judged which side was like to have the upper hand.
For every one that fought, had this resolution in his heart, not to fear Death
whatsoever befell them: But rather desiring to make proof of their utmost
Valor, they willingly parted with their lives to lie in the Bed of Honor. By
reason whereof, though the fight was sharp and cruel, yet the event remained
for a long space so uncertain, that it could not be discerned to which side the
Victory should fall

But at last, Epaminondas seeing no other remedy, but that the issue of this
doubtful fight depended upon his own virtue and valor, he resolved with
himself to adventure his life upon it: and presently* gathering about him all
the best, and choicest men of his Army, and of them having compounded a Company
of stout and resolute Blades, he ran with great fury into the thickest, and
greatest press of all his enemies, marching himself the foremost man in all his
Troop, with a Spear in his hand, with the which at the first blow he gave, he
slew the Captain of the Lacedaemonians, and straightway the rest of his company
began to assail their enemies. But Epaminondas laying about him like a Lion,
slew so many in the place where he stood with his own hands, that at last he
opned the Battle of the Lacedemonian, whom he pursued and laid on them so
lustily, that they being unable any longer to defend themselves against ye
irristable fury of himself and his followers, were enforced to give back and
leave the place to the Boeotians, who yet followed them at their heels, beating
them down so eagerly, that in a short space the whole Field was covered with
dead Bodies, lying on heaps one upon another.

But in the end, the Lacedaemonians seeing that they could no way save
themselves, gathered courage out of despair, and a Company of them joining
together, all set upon Epaminondas throwing an infinite number of Darts at him,
of which some he avoided, others he received upon his Target, but yet there
were many that stuck in his Body which he pulled out, and fought with the same
weapons against those that had thrown them at him. At last, when he had done
more than a man, and beyond all humane strength, thereby to win Honor to his
Country by gaining them the victory, a certain L^co^ian called Anticrates,
thrust him into the breast with a Dart with such force, as breaking the wood,
He is deadly wound^d.
he left the iron Head sticking in his Body. Having received this deadly wound,
he fell immediately to the ground: But then was there a more cruel fight about
him than ever there was before, which occasioned great slaughter on both sides,
till the Thebans by fine force made their enemies to fly for their lives, and
when they had pursued them a while, they returned back to their Camp that they
might keep the dead Bodies in their power, which was a certain sign that the
victory was theirs, and then they sounded a retreat, and so the Battle ended.

Both sides challenged the victory and made Triumphs for it. The Lacedaemonians
did it, The Spartans beaten.
because the Athenians had slain those of Negropont that were sent to seize
upon the Hills before mentioned, and kept their Bodies in their power. The
Thebans on the other side having overcome the Spartans, had the Bodies of them
that were slain in the Battle, in their power, which was by far the greater
number, wherefore they said, that they were the Victors. Thus both standing
upon their terms, it was a good while before either would send a Trumpet or
Herald to the other for leave to bury their dead. Yet at last the
Lacedaemonians sent first, and then they all betook themselves to give the dead
an Honorable Burial. And as for him that had killed Epaminondas, he was highly
esteemed and honored for his valiant act, and the Lacedaemonians gave him many
rich Presents, and made him and his Posterity free from all public Taxes and
contributions in the Commonwealth.

As for Epaminondas he was brought yet alive into his Tent; how beit his
Physicians, and Surgeons being called together to dress his wounds, they all
concluded that so soon as they plucked the head of the Dart out of his Body,
he must needs die. And truly he made a most noble and worthy end. For first he
called for his Target-bearer, who was always at his hand in the Battle, and
asked him: Is my Target safe? He brought it strait. Then he asked, who had the
Victory? The Boeotians answered, the Target-bearer. Then he commanded them to
bring to him Diophantus and Jolidas: they told him they were both dead: Upon
this he advised his Citizens to make Peace with their enemies, His advice to
the Thebans.
for that they had not any Captain of skill to lead them to the Wars. And now
(said he) it is time for me to die, and therefore pluck the Dart Head out of my
Body. At this word all his Friends that were about him fetched grievous sighs,
and even cried out for sorrow: and one of them weeping, said unto him: Alas
Epaminondas! Thou die now and leavest no Children behind thee: Yea (said he)
that I do: Eor I leave two fair Daughters behind me, whereof the one is the
Victory at Leuctres and the other, this of Mantinea. So they pulled out the
Dart, His death.
and immediately he gave up the Ghost, without showing any sign that he was at
all troubled at it.

He used often to say, That War is the Bed of Honor, amd that it is a sweet
Death to dye for ones Country. He was one of the bravest Captains that ever we
read of: His character.
For whereas others excelled in some one or two Virtues by which they made
their Fame great and glorious, he excelled in all the Virtues and good Parts
that could be desired in a Grave, Politic and Great Captain, to make him
complete in all things that could be expected in an Heathen. In his time he
advanced his Country to the Principality of all Greece. But after his Death
they soon lost it: and not long after Alexander the Great, utterly* ^rake them
in pieces, made slaves of those that survived, and razed their City to the very
ground. A^ in hi^ life time he had always detested covetou^n^sse* so after his
Death the Thebans were faigne to bury him at the common charge of the City, H^s
poverty.
because they found no money in his house to defray the least patt of the
Funeral expenses.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, be pleased to take notice that these Books following, are
Printed for, and sold by William Miller, at the (...) in St Paul's Churchyard,
near the little North Door*
HIckes Revelation, Revealed, Folio.

Clerks Martyrology Complete, with the Persecutions of England to the end of
Queen Mary's Reign, Folio.

-- Lives of ten Eminent Divines, some being as follow; Bishop Usher, Dr Gouge,
Dr Harris, Mr Gataker, Mr Whittaker, etc. and some other famous Christians.

-- Life of Christ, 4o

-- Life of Herod the Great, 4o

-- Life of Nebuchadnezzar, and Cyrus the Great; the one, the first founder of
the Baylonian Empir, the other, the first founder of the Empire of the Medes
and Persians, 4o

-- Life of Alexander the Great the first founder of the Grecian Empire, As
also of Charles the Great, commonly called Charlemagne, the first founder of
the French Empire, 4o

-- A Prospect of Hungary, and Transylvania, together with an account of the
qualities of the Inhabitants, the Commodities of the Countries, the Chiefest
Cities, Towns, and Strongholds, Rivers, and Mountains, with an Historycal
Narration of the Wars amongst themselves, and with the Turks, continued to this
year 1664. As also a Brief Description of Bohemia, Austria, Bavaria, Steirmark,
Cr^atia, Dalmatia, Moravia, and other Adjacent Countries, contained in a Map
joined therewith, by which Map you may know which Places are in the Power of
the Turk, and which Christians have, 4o

Cradock's KNOWLEDGE and PRACTICE; Or, a Plain Discourse of the Chief Things
necessary to be KNOWN, BELIEVED, and PRACTICED in Order to SALVATION, 4o

Ford, of Baptism, 8o

Cotton, on the Covenant of Grace, 8o

Culverwell, of Assurance, 8o

Records Urinal of Physic, 8o

Ravins Oriental Grammar, 12o

Peacocks Visitation, 12o

Dr Tuckney's Good Day well Improved, 12o

-- Death Disarmed, 12o

-- Balm of Gilead, 12o

Clamor Sanguinis, 12o

Aristipp^^ or B^lsac's Master piece, 12o

(...) Charles's Works, 24o


