Three Practical ESSAYS VIZ.

On Baptism, Confirmation, Repentance.

CONTAINING Instructions for a Holy Life: With Earnest Exhortations, especially
to young Persons, drawn from the Considerarion of the Severity of the
Discipline of the Primitive Church.

By Samuel Clark, M. A. Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God JOHN Lord
Bishop of Norwich: And Fellow of Cains College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1699.



To the Right Reverend Father in God JOHN Lord Bishop of Norwich.
My Lord,
AS the many undeserved Favors, with which Your Lordship has already been
pleased to honor me, oblige me not to omit any Opportunity of testifying
publicly the grateful Sense which I ought always to have of Your Lordship's
Kindness; so they encourage me to presume further upon Your Lordship's Candor,
in publishing these short Discourses under the Patronage of Your Lordship's
Name.

The singular Zeal which Your Lordship has shown in making frequent
Confirmations, gives us reason to hope, that if the Directions which Your
Lordship has formerly given for the preparing Persons to be Confirmed, be as
strictly observed, as the regular and pious Use of that excellent Institution
seems to be a most probable means of promoting true Religion and Holiness; that
Part of the Church, over which God has placed Your Lordship, may become
exemplarily eminent for the Restoring of Primitive Piety and Order: To which
State that it may effectually arrive; and that Your Lordship may long see it
continue therein; and that these short Discourses may contribute their Mite
toward the promoting so Noble and Excellent a Design, is the Prayer of,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Dutiful Chaplain and most Obedient Servant, S.
Clarke.

THE PREFACE.
ST. Chrysostom observes concerning the ancient Heretics, that though their
Opinions were never so widely different both from the truth and from each
other, yet every one pretended that his particular Opinion was agreeable to the
Scripture and founded in it, and that all different Opinions were
discountenanced by it, and might be confuted out of it: He observes also
further, That the true reason of this their Confidence was, because every one
picked out of the Scripture all those Passages, which according to the letter
and sound of the Words seemed to favor his particular Opinion, without at all
regarding their cohaerence and connection, or the occasion and design of their
being written. Thus from those Passages which speak of Christ as a Man and in
his state of Humiliation, some were so unreasonable as to collect that he was
but a mere Man, and so denied his Divinity: Others on the contrary from those
Passages which speak of him as God and in his state of Exaltation, did as
weakly take occasion to deny his Humanity, asserting that the humane Nature was
wholly swallowed up by the Divine.

I wish the same Observation might not too truly be made, of most of the later
Disputes which have arisen among Christians in our Days. For thus I believe, if
we search on the one hand into the ground of many of those Men's Assertions, who
love to aggravate the Corruption of humane Nature, and the natural Misery of
Mankind, we shall find the true Foundation of them to be the applying those
places of Scripture to the whole bulk of Mankind, which are evidently and
expressly spoken of some of the worst of Men: On the other hand, the reason why
others have so magnified the natural Faculties of Men, as to diminish and
detract from the Grace of God, is because they applied those Texts to the
generality of Men, which are meant only of the most perfect Christians. Again,
the Foundation of those Men's Opinion, who have extolled some one particular
Virtue, in opposition to, or as an equivalent for, all other Duties, is their
having interpreted those places of Scripture concerning some one particular
Virtue, which are plainly meant of the whole Christian Religion; and the reason
why others have thought no moral Virtues at all, necessary to be practiced by
Believers, is because they have applied those Texts to the most Essential and
Fundamental Duties of the Christian Religion, which were intended only of the
Ceremonial Performances of the Jewish Law.

And thus, to come to the subject of our present Discourses, in the great
Business of Repentance and Conversion, the reason why some Men have attributed
the whole of Man's Conversion to such an extraordinary and uncertain Grace of
God, as has given Men occasion to sit still in their Sins, in expectation of
the time when this extraordinary Grace should be poured down upon them; is
because they have fixed that Assistance of God's Grace to an uncertain Period,
which God himself has constantly annexed to his Ordinances, and which he
certainly bestows upon Men at their Baptism, or at their solemn taking upon
themselves the Profession of Religion. And the reason why others have made
Repentance so short and so easy a business, is because they have too largely
applied those great Promises in the Gospel, to the circular and repeated
Repentences of Christians, which are, at least in some measure, confined to the
great Repentance or Conversion of Unbelievers.

My design in the following Essays, is to endeavor briefly to set this great
and most important Matter in its true Light; from the Analogy of Scripture, and
from the Sense of the purest Ages of the Primitive Church: To show that at
Baptism God always bestows that Grace, which is necessary to enable Men to
perform their Duty; and that to those who are Baptized in their Infancy, this
Grace is sealed and assured at Confirmation: That from henceforward Men are
bound with that Assistance to live in the constant practice of their known Duty
and are not to expect (except in extraordinary Cases) any extraordinary, much
less irresistible Grace, to preserve them in their Duty or to convert them from
Sin: That if after this they fall into any great Wickedness, they are bound to
a proportionably great and Particular Repentance: And that as the Gospel has
given sufficient assurance of such Repentance being accepted, to comfort and
encourage all true Penitents; so it has sufficiently shown the difficulty of it
at all times, and the extreme danger of it when late, to deter Men from
delaying it when they are convinced of its Necessity, and from adding to their
Sins when they hope to have them forgiven.

There is nothing with which the Devil more effectually imposes upon Men in
these latter Ages of the World, than with false notions of Repentance: And if
it must be confessed that many in the Primitive times were too severe in their
apprehensions concerning it, it is certain there are many more in our Days not
severe enough: At least I am sure there is no Man who has a true Sense of
Religion, and a just apprehension of the vast concern of eternal Happiness or
Misery, but will be much more desirous to know the utmost strictness of the
Conditions upon which so mighty a Stake depends, than to run the hazard of
being mistaken in judging too loosly of them.

THE CONTENTS.
Essay the First. Of Baptism.
CHap. I. Of Baptism in general. CHap. II. What was required of Persons to be
baptized in the Primitive Church, in order to fit them for Baptism. CHap. III.
In what manner Persons converted to Christianity were Baptized; to what
Privileges they were admitted; and to what Duties they were engaged, by their
Baptism. CHap. IV. What was required of Persons after Baptism. CHap. V. Of the
Baptism of Infants. CHap. VI. Of the Duty of Godfathers and Godmothers.
Essay the Second. Of Confirmation.
CHap. I. Of the Nature, Design and Use of Confirmation. CHap. II. What is to
be done before Confirmation, Of Faith; Of the Necessity of Religion; Of the
Necessity of Revelation; Of the Evidence of the Christian Religion; and of
Consideration. CHap. III. Of right Notions concerning Religion in General.
CHap. IV. A Digression concern the Doctrine of Faith and Works, delivered by
St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, and in that to the Galatians. CHap. V.
Of the Duties of Religion in Particular. CHap. VI. What is to be done at
Confirmation: Of solemnly renewing the Baptismal Vow. CHap. VII. Of the
Certainty of God's Grace, and the Assistance of his Holy Spirit. CHap. VIII.
What is to be done after Confirmamation. Of Perseverance; and of the danger of
Apostasy. CHap. IX. Of Innocence, and an early Piety. CHap. X. Of making
Religion the Principal Business of our Lives. CHap. XI. Of the Contempt of the
World. CHap. XII. Of our Obligation to be particularly careful to avoid those
Sins, to which we are most in danger to be tempted. CHap. XIII. Of Growth in
Grace, and of Perfection.
Essay the Third. Of Repentance.
CHap. I. Of Repentance in General. CHap. II. That God allows Repentance even
to the greatest of Sinners. CHap. III. That true Repentance must be Early.
CHap. IV. That true Repentance must be Great: And of Penance. CHap. V. That
true Repentance must be Constant and Persevering in its Effects: And of the One
Repentance of the Ancients.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 2. r. converted. p. 4. l. 23. r. (...). l. 27. r. pervigiliis. p.
44. l. 7. r. wilful. p. 48. l. 17. r. the Ministers. p. 72. l. 5. r. a matter.
p. 151. l. 6. r. magnificas. p. 162. l. 29. r. Integrity. p. 176. l. 8. r.
subtracted. p. 199. l. 22. r. Intemperance. p. 201. l. 16. r. things. p. 216.
l. 32. r. poenitentiam. l. 35. filium. p. 230. l. 29. r. medician. l. 31. r.
fletibus. p. 238. l. 26. r. (...).

Essay the First. Of Baptism.
CHAP. I. Of Baptism in general.
1. BAptsm is the Rite, whereby those who believe in Christ, are solemnly
admitted to be Members of the Christian Church. What the first original of
Baptizing with Water was; how See Lightfoot's Harm. of Evangel.
the Jews used to Baptize their Proselytes, and the (...). Clem. Alex. Strom.
6. Sed enim nationes extraneae sacris quibusdam per lavacrum initiantur. Certe
ludis Apollinaribus and Pelusiis tinguntur, idque se in regenerationem and
impunitatem perjuriorum suorum agere praesumunt. Tertull. de Baptism.
Heathens those who were to be initiated to any sacred Function; I shall not
now enquire. Sufficient it is to our present purpose, that our Savior has
instituted this Sacrament, as a Rite whereby Converts at their Admission into
his Church, do solemnly oblige themselves to live suitably to the Profession
they then enter into; and whereby they are entitled to all the Benefits and
Privileges belonging to the Society into which they are admitted.

2. This Baptism is either, 1. Of Persons of riper years; or 2. Of Infants. At
the first Preaching of the Gospel, the main body of Christians consisted of
those, who had by the Apostles Preaching been converted from the Jewish or from
the Gentile Religion, to the Christian; and these were consequently baptized
into the Name of Christ, after they were come to riper years. Afterward, when
the Christian Religion had spread it self over whole Countries and Nations, the
Church consisted chiefly of such as were born of Christian Parents, and
educated from the beginning in the Christian Religion; and these were
generally, even in the Primitive Times; admitted into the Church by Baptism in
their Infancy.

3. In the Baptism of Persons of riper years, we must observe, 1. What was
required of them beforehand, in order to prepare them for Baptism: 2. In what
manner they were baptized; to what Privileges they were admitted; and to what
Duties they were engaged, by their Baptism: And 3. What was required of them
after their Baptism.

CHAP. II. What was required of persons to be baptized in the Primitive Church,
in order to fit them for Baptism.
1. THE first thing to be considered in the Baptism of Persons coverted to
Christianity, is, what was required of them beforehand, in order to fit them
for this most solemn Admission into the Church of Christ. Now that which was
indispensibly necessary to prepare them for this solemnity, and to qualify
them to be partakers of this Holy Sacrament, was Faith and Repentance; i. e. a
declaration of their firm (...)
belief of the great Doctrines of the Christian Religion, and of their (...),
etc. Justin. Martyr.
resolution to live suitably to that belief.

2. In the Apostles times, when the Miracles wrought by those first Preachers
of Christianity, were so convincing, and the extraordinary Grace of God, poured
down upon Men, so effectual, as to convert them to the Faith of Christ as it
were in an instant; a single declaration of their Faith and Repentance, seems
to have been accounted sufficient to prepare them to receive Baptism
immediately. For thus we find St. Philip baptizing the Eunuch immediately upon
his professing his belief that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, Act. 8. 38. and
St. Paul baptizing the Jaylour immediately upon his being converted by the
Miracle of the Prison doors opening with an Earthquake, Act. 16. 33.

3. But afterward, when these mighty operations of the Spirit grew less
common, and men began to be convinced more gradually by the ordinary means of
the Preaching of the Word, it was not thought sufficient in most Churches, for
men upon their Conversion to Profess their Faith and their Repentance, but they
were obliged to give some evidence of the sincerity of both, before they could
be admitted into the Church by Baptism. If they had formerly been great
sinners, they were to evidence their Repentance by (...). Justin. Martyr.
Ingress^ros baptismum crationibus crebris, jejuniis and geniculationibus and
previgiliis orare oportet, and cum confessione omnium retro delictoru^.
Tertull. de Baptism.
Prayers, and Watchings and Fastings, and Confessing their Sins: They were to
demonstrate by the real change of their whole course of life, that they had
actually renounced all the rites and practices of their former Profession, and
would for the future conform their lives to the Rules of the Christian
Institution: They were to endeavor to purge their Conscience from every evil
work, that their Baptism might be, not the putting away of the filth of the
flesh, but the answer 1 Pet. 3 21.
of a good Conscience toward God.

4. They who were willing thus to make proof of their Repentance, and of their
sincere desire to be admitted into the Church of God, were Catechized in all
those necessary Articles of the Christian Faith, which they were to make
public profession of at their Baptism; They were fully instructed in the
excellent Moral Precepts of that Divine Religion, which they were to practice
the remaining part of their lives. And then they were thought prepared for the
washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. III. In what manner persons converted to Christianity were baptized; to
what Privileges they were admitted; and to what Duties they were engaged by
their Baptism.
1. WHen the person to be baptized was thus prepared, and the time appointed
come; which was usually at Diem Baptismo solenniorem Pascha praestat, cum and
Passio Domini, in qua tingimur, adimpleta est. -- Exinde Pentecosta ordinandis
lavacris latissimum spatium est, quo and Domini Resurrectio inter Discipulos
frequentata est, and gratia Spiritus Sancti dedicata. Tertull. de Bapt.
Easter or Whitsontide, the Commemorations of our Savior's Passion and
Resurrection, and of the great Effusion of the Holy Spirit, things principally
respected in this Sacrament; (though it might also upon occasion be celebrated
at Caeterum omnis dies Domini est, omnis hora, omne tempus habile est baptismo:
si de solennitate interest, de gratia nihil resert. Tertul. de Baptismo.
any other time;) When the Person, I say, was thus prepared, he was brought by
the Priest to a convenient place, where there was plenty of Water; and being
stripped of all his clothes, he in the first place, with stretched out Arms in a
most solemn manner Aquam adituri, sed and aliquanto prius in Ecclesia sub
Antistitis manu, contestamur nos renuntiare Diabolo and Pompae and Angelis
ejus. Tertull. de Corona Milit.
renounced the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked
World, and all not only the absolutely sinful, but also the lawful desires of
the flesh, so far as to keep them within the most strict bounds, and most exact
obedience to the Laws of Reason and Religion. Then he made Profession of his
Faith (...). Constitut. Apost. l. 6. c. 14. vid. and l. 7. c. 42.
in One God, the Father Almighty, etc. in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord,
etc. and in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, etc. After which he was
baptized (...). Justin. Apol. 2.
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; being
immersed in the Water Novissime mandans ut tingerent in Patrem and Filium and
Spiritum Sanctum; non in unum; nam nec semel, sed ter; ad singula nomina in
personas singulas tingimur. Tertull. adversus Prax.
three times, once at the Name of each Person in the ever Blessed Trinity.
Which being done, he came up out of the Water; and then (according to the
Custom of some Churches) he was Vid. Tertull. de Baptismo.
anointed with Oil, with the addition of some other Ceremonies, which as they
were in their own nature indifferent, so they were used only in some places,
and that diversely according to the different usage of particular Churches.
After all which he was clothed with a Fulgentes animas vestis quoq candida
signat, Et grege de niveo gaudia pastor habet. Carm. Lactautio ascrip^.
white Robe, and so admitted among the Faithful to the Communion of the Church:
which last Ceremony the Greeks (as a Dr. Patrick out of ^helavius.
Learned Writer of our own observes,) keep up to this day; putting upon the
Child immediately after Baptism a white Garment, with this Form, Receive this
white and immaculate Clothing, and bring it with thee unspotted before the
Tribunal of Christ, and thou shall inherit eternal life.

2. This was the Form and Manner, in which Persons converted to Christianity
were Baptized in the Primitive Church: And by all these outward and visible
Ceremonies, were significantly represented certain inward and invisible things;
which were either the Privileges to the enjoyment of which the Person Baptized
was entitled, or the Duties to the performance of which he was engaged by his
Baptism.

3. The first Grace or Privilege, which God annexed to the right use of this
Ordinance of Baptism, and to which the Person Baptized was consequently
entitled, was Remission of all past sins. The design of our Savior's coming
into the World, was by the Merit of his Death and Suffering to purchase Pardon
and Remission for all those, who should believe in his Name and obey his
Gospel; Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith
in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of God. Now the Means by which this Pardon is
applied, and the Seal by which it is secured to all those who Believe, and by
Repentance begin to Obey the Gospel, is Baptism. Whosoever therefore was
converted to Christianity, and was baptized, was baptized into the death of
Christ; i. e. was by Baptism entitled to the benefit of the Pardon purchased by
his Death and Passion: As his Body was washed with pure Water, so his Sins were
absolutely done away by the Blood of Christ, and his Heart sprinkled from an
evil Conscience, Heb. 10. 22. Hence Baptism is called the Washing of
Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. and they who by the Apostles Preaching* or by any
other more extraordinary means, were convinced of the Truth of the Gospel, were
exhorted immediately to be baptized, and wash away their sins; Acts 22. 16. And
now why tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling
on the Name of the Lord; And Acts 2. 38. Repent and be baptized every one of
you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins: To which those
Places also seem manifestly to allude, Rev. 1. 5. Unto him that loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own Blood; and Rev. 7. 14. These are they which
have washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb. The
plain meaning of all which passages is this; That as a newborn Infant is
without Spot, Innocent and Sinless; so every one that is born of Water, i. e.
regenerated by Baptism, is in the account of God as if he had never sinned,
clothed with the white and spotless Garment of Innocence, which if he never
defile by gross and wilful sins, he shall walk in white with Christ, Revel. 3.
4.
for he shall be worthy.

4. The next Privilege which Baptism principally and most significantly
represented, was the Admission of the Convert into the Church or Family of God.
All that received Baptism, were thereby actually admitted into the Society of
Christians, and to the participation of all the benefits which God bestows upon
his Church: They were admitted to the Communion of the Saints of God, and to
the Fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 9. They were made
Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19. being
come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of Angels, to the general Assembly and
Church of the Firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of
all, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of
the New Covenant, etc. Heb. 12. 22. More particularly, they were made, first
Members of Christ; i. e. they were incorporated into that Body, whereof Christ
is the Head. Secondly, They were made Children of God; i. e. they were enrolled
in the number of those, whom God had chosen to be his Peculiar and Elect
People, and whom he designed to govern with the same tenderness, as an
affectionate and merciful Father does his most beloved Children: which is what
the Apostles express by our being called the Sons of God, 1 John 3. 1. by our
having received the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4. 5. and by our having power given
us to become the Sons of God, John 1. 12. Lastly, They were made Heirs of the
Kingdom of Heaven; i. e. they who before were Aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, and Strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no hope and without
God in the World, did by Baptism enter into that Covenant, wherein God assured
the promise of Eternal Life, to all those who should believe and repent: And
this is what the Apostle intends by our having our (...)
Citizen-ship in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. and by our being Heirs of God, and joint
Heirs with Christ, that we may be glorified together with him, Romans 8. 17.

5. Another Privilege which was represented and conferred by Baptism, was the
Influence and Assistance of Gods Holy Spirit. All Persons that were baptized,
as their Bodies were washed and purified with Water, so their Minds were
sanctified by the Spirit of God: But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but
ye are justified, in the Name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God,
1 Cor. 6. 11. At their Baptism they received By the Imposition of Hands, which
was anciently joined immediately with Baptism.
the Holy Ghost, as a Gift constantly annexed to that Ordinance; and unless
they quenched and grieved it by their sins committed afterward, it always
continued with them from thenceforward, assisting and enabling them to perform
their Duty, strengthening and comforting them under Temptations and Afflictions,
and bearing Romans 8. 16.
witness with their Spirit, that they were the Children of God. At the first
Preaching of the Gospel, this influence of the Holy Spirit frequently
discovered it self, in those extraordinary Gifts of Speaking with Tongues,
Working Miracles, etc. as appears in the History of the Acts of the Apostles.
But these by degrees ceasing, it afterward continued to evidence it self in the
strange and almost miraculous change, which it made in the Minds of Men, from
the most corrupt and vicious, to the most virtuous and heavenly Disposition,
almost in an instant upon their being baptized. And when this effect also grew
less frequent, as the Zeal and Purity of the Christians declined, it yet
continued always by its secret Power to renew and transform Men's Minds, to
instruct Men in their Duty, and to enable them to perform it. Hence Baptism is
called the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. and a being born of Water and
of the Spirit, John 3. 5. and by the Ancients frequently (...).
Illumination: And Persons baptized are said to have been enlightened, to have
tasted of the heavenly Gift, and to have been made Partakers of the Holy Ghost,
Heb. 6. 4.

6. The last Privilege which Persons Baptized were entitled to by virtue of
that Ordinance, was an Assurance of a Resurrection to Eternal Life. They
received, as has been said, the Holy Spirit of God; and that Spirit, so long
as it dwelt with them, was a 2 Cor. 1. v. 22. Ephesians. 1. 13 chapter 4. v. 30.
Seal and 2 Cor. 1. v. 22. 5. 5. Ephesians. 1. 14.
Earnest of their future Resurrection: For if the Spirit of him that raised up
Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall
also quicken your mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you, Romans 8.
11. And this was most significantly represented by their descending into the
Water, and rising out of it again: For as Christ descended into the Earth, and
was raised again from the dead by the Glory of the Father; So Persons baptized
were buried with him by Baptism Romans 6. 4.
into Death, and rose again after the similitude of his Resurrection: They were
planted together in the likeness of his Death; and they were by this Sign
assured, that they should be also in the likeness of his Resurrection. Thus the
Apostle St. Paul, Colos. 2. 12. Ye are buried with him in Baptism, wherein also
you are risen with him through the Faith of the Operation of God, who has
raised him from the dead. To which St. Peter seems likewise to allude, 1 Pet.
3. 21. The like figure whereunto ( viz. to the saving of the Ark by the Water
of the Flood) even Baptism does also now save us, by the Resurrection of Christ.

7. These are the Spiritual Graces or Privileges, which were represented by the
Outward and Visible Signs in Baptism, and conferred by their means; And These
are what God on his part engages and assures to us, in that Great and Holy
Covenant. There are other things, which the Persons Baptized obliged themselves
to on their part in that Covenant; and These are the Duties which by their
Baptism they vow and take upon themselves to perform, represented also by the
same Outward and Visible Signs. The first of these Duties which the Persons
baptized promised and obliged themselves to perform, was a Constant Confession
of the Faith of Christ and Profession of his Religion. They were admitted by
Baptism into the Church and Family of Christ; and they were bound at all times,
to own themselves his Disciples: They were solemnly baptized into his Death;
and they Romans 6. 3.
were obliged not to be ashamed of the Cross of Christ, and to confess the
Faith of him crucified: They owned publicly at their Baptism, their Belief in
God the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord; and they
were bound at all times to make Profession of this Faith: They had with the
heart believed unto Righteousness; Romans 10. 10
and they thought that with the Mouth, Confession was necessary to be made unto
Salvation: They were assured, that if they confessed Christ before Men, he
would also confess them before his Father which is in Heaven, Luke 12. 8.
and before the Angels of God; but if they were ashamed of him, and denied him
before Men, he would also be ashamed of them when he came in the Glory of his
Father with the Holy Angels. And so mighty an effect had this consideration
upon the primitive Christians, that in the times of Persecution, when they were
tempted to deny their Savior and renounce the Faith which they had once
Embraced, they chose rather to endure the most exquisite Torments that the wit
of Man could invent, than either to renounce or dissemble their Christianity;
and those who out of Fear denied or were ashamed to confess their Faith, they
looked upon to have forfeited and renounced their Baptism, as having crucified
to themselves Heb. 6. 6.
the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.

8. The Second Thing to which Persons baptized solemnly obliged themselves by
their Baptism, was a Death unto Sin, and a New Birth unto Righteousness; i. e.
they engaged utterly and for ever to forsake, all manner of Sin and Wickedness;
all Idolatrous and Superstitious Worship of false Gods; all Injustice, Wrong,
Fraud and Uncharitableness toward Men; all the Pride and Vanity, the Pomp and
Luxury of this present World; all the Lusts of the Flesh, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Revellings,
and such like: And for the future they promised to make it the business of
their lives, to fulfill all Righteousness according to the strictest Rules of
the Christian Doctrine and Discipline; to Worship the only true God, with all
Devotion, Reverence and Humility; to be exactly just in their Dealings with
Men, and generously charitable upon all occasions; in fine, to be Temperate and
Sober, Chaste and Pure, as the Worshippers of God, and the Temples of the Holy
Ghost. This was indeed a Dying unto Sin, and Living unto Righteousness; This
was properly a being Regenerated or Born again; This was truly a being Washed,
Sanctified and Justified, in the Name of Christ, and by the Spirit of God: And
indeed this was the principal thing which was signified in Baptism, and the
principal end for which the whole Ordinance was designed; This was what the
Person to be baptized was to profess with his own Mouth, when he renounced the
Devil and all his Works; and this was what was principally represented by that
main part of the Ceremony, the descending into the Water and rising out of it
again; For so the Apostle St. Paul most fully explains it, Romans 6. 3. Know ye
not that so many of us, as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into
his Death? Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of Life; Knowing this, that our old Man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve sin: that is, the design of our descending into the Water to be
baptized, and rising again out of it, was to mind us, that as we then received
remission of our past sins by Virtue of Christ's having died for sin; so we our
selves were in like manner to die and be buried to sin, and rise again to walk
for the future with Christ in newness and holiness of Life. This therefore was
the principal thing respected in Baptism, and without this answer of a good
Conscience toward God, the washing or putting away of 1 Pet 3. 21,
the filth of the Flesh, could nothing avail in the sight of God. Baptism is
not the (...). Just. Mart.
Washing and Cleansing of the Body, but the Purifying of the Mind, from every
evil Work, to serve the living God; without which, Baptism is so far from being
available to the remission of sin, that on the contrary it makes it far the
more grievous and inexcusable. But of this more in the next Chapter.

9. The third and last thing, to which Men were solemnly engaged at their
Baptism, was Self-denial and Contempt of the World. Our Savior had told his
Disciples, That whosoever would come after him, Luke 14. 26.
must deny himself and take up his Cross and follow him; that whosoever was not
willing to forsake all that he had, Father and Mother, and Wife and Children,
and Brethren and Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he could not be his
Disciple: And therefore when any Man came to be baptized, he was accordingly
obliged to renounce the World, and all its Glory, the Pomps and Vanities, the
Splendour and Pleasures of it: He professed himself a Candidate for the Glory
that should be revealed hereafter; and that therefore he would never be
ambitious for that Honor, which Men so earnestly contend for here: He declared
that he expected his Portion in those spiritual Joys, which eye has not seen,
1 Cor. 2. 9.
nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of Man to conceive them;
and therefore he would never set his heart and affections, upon any gross and
sensual Pleasure: He professed that from thenceforward his Treasure should be
in Heaven, where Mat. 6. 20.
neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through and
steal; and that therefore he would never be covetous of any Riches, or
Possessions on Earth: In a word, he engaged to make it the main business of his
Life, to prepare and fit himself to be partaker of those things, which God had
for them that love him laid up in the next World; and that therefore he would
never be extremely solicitous, after any thing in this. This was what the
Primitive Christians understood by their Renouncing the World. They thought
themselves obliged not only to forsake all gross and palpably sinful Lusts, but
also to be very sparing in their Enjoyments of what was Lawful: They looked
upon this World and the next, as (...). Clem. ad Cor. 2.
Enemies to each other; and that they were to fight as Soldiers under the
Banner of Christ, against the Pleasures and Temptations of this World, for the
Glories of the other. And for an Emblem of this it was, that in some Churches
they anointed the baptized Person with Oil: He was compared to a Combatant, to
a Runner just preparing to start in the Christian Race; and they minded him, 1
Cor. 9. 29.
that if those who strive for the Mastery only to obtain a corruptible Crown,
are temperate in all things, much more ought he to confirm and strengthen
himself, to prepare and harden himself, to be ready and expedite, to be
temperate and abstemious, and to get perfectly above all those earthly desires,
which would hinder and clog him in that great race, which he was to run for the
Crown of Immortality. It Is true, the forsaking all worldly Possessions for the
Name of Christ, was a condition more particularly required in those Primitive
times of Persecution: But how far it still obliges us, (as it most certainly
does in some Sense) shall be considered in its proper place.

CHAP IV. What was required of Persons after Baptism.
1. WHEN the whole Ceremony was finished, the Person baptized was clothed (as
has been already observed) with a white Garment; and then he was (...). Justin.
Mart.
admitted to the Communion of the Faithful: And that which was afterward
required of him, was this One Great and Necessary thing. To keep his Baptism
Pure and Undefiled, the remaining part of his Life.

2 To the keeping a Man's Baptism pure and undefiled through the remaining part
of his Life, that which was thought absolutely necessary in the Primitive
Church, was this: First, That he from that time forward preserved himself from
falling, not only into the Habit, but even so much as into the single Act of
any of these gross and palpable Wickednesses; Idolatry, Perjury, Blasphemy;
Murder, Sedition, Theft, manifest Injustice, Cheating; Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Revelling; and such like; of which St. Paul expressly
and peremptorily declares, and repeats it with great earnestness over and over
again, that they who do such things, shall have no inheritance in the Kingdom
of Christ and of God. One that was born of God, might be surprised into an
unheeded sin; but into the gross Act of any of these manifest and notorious
Impieties, they thought he was Haec non admittet omnino, qui natus e deo
fuerit; non futurus dei filius, si admiscrit. Tertul.
never to be seduced, and if he were, that he ceased to be the Servant of God;
For whosoever abides in him, sins not; and whosoever is born of God, does
not commit sin; for his Seed remains in him, 1 John 3. 6.
and he cannot sin because he is born of God. From the Acts therefore of any of
these great and plain Wickednesses, which stare Men in the Face, and at the
first view terrify Men's Consciences, they thought it indispensably necessary
that a Man abstained wholly; and that these things were not so much as to be
once named among Christians. Ephesians. 5. 3.
But then secondly, To the keeping a man's Baptism pure and undefiled, that
which was thought further necessary was, that from falling into an habitual
practice of any of those smaller and less scandalous sins, which carelessness
and culpable ignorance would be very apt to betray a man into the Acts of, he
ought to endeavor to secure himself by great cautiousness, and sincere enquiry
after the knowledge of his Duty; that from sins of omission, from growing cool
in Religion, and remitting of his first Love, he ought to endeavor to preserve
himself by constant Meditation, and hearty Prayer to God for the assistance of
his holy Spirit; that in order to grow in Grace, he ought to be always humble
and teachable, penitent and devout, meek in spirit, and pure in mind; and that
to attain Perfection, he ought to be always pressing forward toward Phil. 3. 14
the mark of the prize of the high calling, with a perfect contempt of the
World, an entire Love of God, and a boundless Charity to all Mankind.

3. This was what the Primitive Christians understood by keeping their Baptism
pure and undefiled; viz. A regular and constant practice of all Holiness and
Virtue, from the time of their Baptism to their Death. And to this they thought
themselves most strongly obliged, by the very Form of their Baptism: They were
immersed into the Water, and they rise out of it again, and this great
Solemnity was never after to be repeated; in token that as Christ once died for
Sin, and Rose again never to come under the power of Death any more; so they
were this once to have their Sins perfectly washed away by his Blood, and were
bound never to return under the Power of them any more. Thus St. Paul himself
most expressly and excellently argues, Romans p. 6. v. 9. Knowing that Christ
being raised from the dead, dies no more; death has no more dominion over
him; For in that he died, he died unto Sin once; but in that he lives, he
lives unto God: Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto
sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord: Let not sin therefore
reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. The
force of which Argument is plainly this: When we descended into the Water, and
rise out of it again, we made public profession, that as we hoped for pardon
of our past sins through the Merits of the Death of Christ; so we our selves
would thenceforth die unto sin, that is, utterly cast it off and forsake it,
and for the future rise again to walk with Christ in newness and holiness of
Life: So that unless from the time of our thus putting off sin, we continue
constantly to live in all holiness and righteousness, we have no just reason to
expect Remission by virtue of the Death of Christ, into which we were baptized:
For it being the express Condition of the Remission of sin, that we continue no
longer in it, but live from thencefotth unto God; the Blood of Christ it self,
which was shed to be a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, can avail
nothing for one that continues in Sin, whom our Savior himself has
particularly excepted from the benefit of the Pardon purchased by his Death and
Passion.

4. Accordingly Persons after their Baptism were instructed, That they must now
utterly and for ever renounce, all the sinful pleasures and desires of the
World: They were told, that they now received remission of their past sins, by
virtue of the Death of Christ; and therefore they must take great heed that
they sinned no more: They were told, that they now washed their Garments in the
Blood of the Lamb; Rev. 7. 14.
(for a signal whereof they were accordingly clothed in white;) and that they
must take care to bring this unspotted Innocence with them, before the Tribunal
of Christ: (To which Custom our Savior himself seems to allude, Rev. 3. 4.
Thou have a few Names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their Garments,
and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy;) They were told,
that they were now baptized for the remission of all their past sins; and if
they kept not this Baptism pure and undefiled, Non debemus superbi esse, sed
timere, re sort post agnitionem Christi agentes aliquid quod non placeat Deo,
remissionem ultra non habeamus delictorum, sed excludamur e regno ejus.
I^enaeus, l. 4. c. 45.
they could not be sure they should ever be able to obtain the like full and
perfect Remission again: They were told, that they now started in that great
Race, which they were to (...); Clem. ad Cor. 2.
run for the Crown of Immortality; and (...) Clem. ad Cor. 2.
if those who were found tardy in an earthly Race, were beaten and disgraced,
of how much sorer punishment should they be thought worthy, who negligently
faultred in the race of Immortality? They were told, that they now entered into
that Covenant of God, ^ Tim. 2. 19
the Seal whereof was, Let every one that Names the Name of Christ, depart from
Iniquity; and if they (...) Clem. ad Corinth. 2.
kept not this Seal, their punishment would be among Apostates, whose Worm
shall not die, and whose Fire shall not be quenched: They were told, that they
had now escaped the Pollutions of the World, through the 2 Pet. 2. 20.
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and if after this they should
be again entangled therein, and be overcome, and turn from the Holy Commandment
delivered unto them, their Punishment should be Ideoque hi quidem [ Ethnici]
morti destinati sunt; at vero ii qui cognoverunt Dominum, atque ejus mirabilia
opera viderunt, si nequiter vivunt, duplo amplius punientur, and morientur in
aevum. Hermae Past. Lib. 3. Sim. 9.
double to that of those, who had never known the way of Righteousness.
Finally, They were told, that they were now enlightened, and had tasted of the
heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and were sealed
thereby unto the day of Redemption; and if after this they should fall away, it
would be Heb. 6. 6.
exceeding difficult to renew them to Repentance: That they had now received
the perfect knowledge of the Truth; and if after this they sinned wilfully,
there would remain no more Sacrifice for sin, but a certain Heb 10. 23.
fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which should devour the
Adversary: In a word, That they now received a certain Promise and Assurance of
Eternal Life; but if they would sell this blessing for the momentary
gratifications of sense, they might perhaps afterward be rejected when they
Heb. 12. 17.
should desire to inherit it, and find no place for Repentance, though they
might seek it carefully with Tears.

5. These were the severe cautions, with which the Primitive Church obliged
baptized Persons upon their utmost Peril, to keep themselves steadfast from the
time of their Baptism in all holy and blameless Conversation. Those who did
continue to walk suitably to this Profession, were said to be washed, to be
sanctified, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
to be justified, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of
our God: And because in those purest times, there were hardly any among
Christians, who did not walk suitably to their Profession; it being the (...).
same thing then, to be a Christian and to be a good Man; therefore those
Terms, Elect, Regenerate, Sanctified, born of God, and the like, which we now
appropriate only to the best and most holy Men, are not in Scripture so
appropriated, but applied promiscuously to all Christians; as appears from the
Titles of the Apostles Letters, in which whole Churches in general are called
Elect, Sanctified, and the like; and most evidently from St. John, who in his
first Epistle, chap. 5. ver. 1. Whosoever, says he, believes that Jesus is
the Christ, is born of God: Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ; i. e.
every Christian; there being hardly any one in those times, who was not indeed,
what he professed and pretended to be, a Regenerate, Sanctified and Elect
Person. And as Christians who then lived thus suitably to their Profession,
were styled Regenerate, Sanctified, and the like; so they who continued to live
thus suitably to the end, were said to Persevere: and of such only, was it said
that they Persevered; in opposition to those who after their Baptism lapsed,
into any notorious Transgression. For one that had thus lapsed, they did not
think it sufficient that he should repeat his Crime no more, (which was the
condition of Baptismal Remission,) but he was obliged by Corpus quidem cito
ablui potest, men's autem -- inquinata, non potest nisi and longo tempore, and
multis bonis operibus, ab ea quae inhaeserit colluvione purgari. Lactant. l. 6.
c. 23.
a long course of Mortification, Prayers, Tears and good Works, to endeavor to
wash out the Stain and Guilt. Nay, and even this course also they allowed of
but Post Vocationem illam Magnam and Sanctam, [ Baptismum,] si quis tentatus
fuerit a Diabolo and peccaverit, Vnam poenitentiam habet. Hermae Past. 2. 4.
Once; not that true Repentance would at any time be in vain and unacceptable
to God, but (as an Ambrose.
Ancient Writer expresses it,) that that which was the only remaining remedy,
might not by being made too easy, grow contemptible and ineflectual.

6. And now let Us think upon this; let Us consider this, with shame and
confusion of Faces; who I do not say after Baptism and the solemn taking upon
our selves the Profession of Christianity, but after frequent Purposes and
Promises of Reformation, after repeated Vows and Resolutions of Amendment, nay,
perhaps after confirming all these by the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ, do yet continue in sin and defer our Repentance. The Primitive
Christians thought themselves absolutely obliged to live in the constant
Practice of all Holiness and Virtue, from the time of their Baptism to their
Death; and can we hope to be accepted, if notwithstanding all our Pretenses to
Repentance and Reformation, we still continue under the weak excuses of
Infirmity and Inadvertency, to live in any known sin? Does our Baptismal Vow
lay no obligation upon us? or has God established a Covenant with us upon
slighter Terms, and entailed his Promises to us upon easier Conditions, than he
did to the first and purest Christians? Let no Man deceive you, says St. John,
He that does righteousness, is righteous, 1 John 3. 7. It Is true, the case is
not altogether the same with us, as it was with them: We live in Christian
Nations and under Christian Governments, where there are no Pagans to be
converted to Christianity, and to be baptized after their Repentance, and with
a full conviction of Mind: And of those who are born of Christian Parents,
there are very few so happy, as not to be entangled in the Habit of any sin,
before they come to a perfect understanding and complete conviction of all the
Truths of Religion; And (...) Clem. Alex. Quis dives, etc.
in this case it must indeed be confessed, that it cannot but require some
time, perfectly to overcome a vicious disposition, and to obtain the Habit of
the contrary Virtue. But may we therefore spend our whole Lives in little and
weak struglings against sin, without ever arriving at that pitch of Virtue,
which was anciently thought necessary to prepare a Man for Baptism? May we
therefore be excused from ever becoming perfect Christians, because we were all
along brought up in the Christian Religion, and were never converted by any
sudden Conviction? When a Man is in that state described by St. Paul in the 7th
Chap. to the Romans, that he is convinced of the evil of great and known sins,
and sets his Mind to resist and strive against them, yet not so but that
through the viciousness of his inclination or the force of evil Habits he
frequently relapses and is entangled in them again; it is a Sign indeed that
such a one is not yet hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; there is hopes
that through the Grace of God he may at length prevail and overcome his
Temptations; but he has not yet overcome, he has not yet attained to be a good
Christian; nor can he be said to have done so, till he has brought himself into
such a state, as that he be perfectly gotten above all the Temptations to know
sin, and assured by the Grace of God, that he shall not fall into it any more.
To such a state as this, he must resolve to arrive; and he must resolve to
arrive at it timely, that he may have a certain Title to the reward of
Obedience. There is hardly any Man so wicked, who does not design to repent at
one time or other before he dies; and our Savior has indeed in his Gospel made
the same Promises to Repentance, that he has to innocence and continued
Obedience: But let no Man deceive himself by a fatal Error: The Repentance to
which our Savior has made such large Promises, is not the late Repentance of a
Christian, but the timely Repentance of a Jew or a Heathen at his Conversion to
Christianity; and is therefore the very same, and no other than Baptism it
self. Indeed if a Christian by an unhappy Education be brought up in sin, and
habituated to Wickedness; whenever he comes by the Power of God's Word, and the
Influence of his Holy Spirit, to be convinced of the evil of his Ways and of
the necessity of Religion, he is then in the same state that a Heathen Convert
is supposed to be at his Baptism, and the same Promises are made to them both:
But when a Christian who has a clear Knowledge of his Duty, does notwitstanding
that, continue wilfully all his Life in sin, our Savior is so far from
assuring him that God and Angels will rejoice at his Conversion, if when he
grows old he leaves off sinning, because he can sin no more, that he has no
where promised that such a Repentance shall be accepted at all. We must
therefore so break off our sins by Repentance, as to attain the Habits of the
contrary Virtues, and to live in them. Such a Repentance as this, our Savior
will accept; and (...). Justin. Dial. cum Tryph.
he that after such a Repentance lives constantly Virtuous, shall certainly be
esteemed in the sight of God, as if he had always been innocent: but without
the evidence of such a Life of Virtue and renewed Obedience, how far soever the
Mercy of God may possibly extend it self, We can never have any assurance that
our Repentance will be accepted.

CHAP. V. Of the Baptism of Infants.
1. AS those who by the Preaching of the Apostles and their Successors had been
converted from Judaism or Gentilism to Christianity, were baptized at riper
Years, upon their publicly professing their Faith and their Repentance; so
those who were born of Christian Parents, and designed to be educated in the
Christian Religion, have by the general Practice of the Christian Church been
baptized in their Infancy, upon Promise made by Sureties, that they should be
instructed in the Faith and in the Obedience of the Gospel.

2. And that Infants are rightly so admitted to this Ordinance, (besides the
almost general consent and practice of the Christian Church,) I shall use but
this One Argument to demonstrate. Those who are fit to be admitted into the
Kingdom of Christ in Heaven, (as our Savior himself pronounces Infants to be,
Mar. 10. 14 and 15.) are certainly qualified to be received as Members of his
Church on Earth. The Qualifications which fit Men for both, are Repentance and
Faith: Now though Infants have not Repentance, yet they have Porro autem si
etiam gravissimis delictoribus, and in Deum multum ante peccantibus, cum postea
crediderunt, remissi peccatorum datur, and a baptismo atque a gratia nemo
prohibetur; quanto magis prohiberi non debet Infans, qui recens natus nihil
peccavit, nisi quod secundum Adam carnaliter natus, contagium mortis antiquae
prima nativitate contraxit. Cyprian. Epist. 59.
Innocence, which is better than Repentance, and which makes them that they
need it not: For if those who have been the most enormous sinners, are yet by
their Repentance qualified for Baptism; how much more are Infants, who have
never sinned, fitted for it by their Innocence? And though Infants have not and
cannot have actual Faith, yet they are Cor. 7. 14.
Sanctified by being born of Believing Parents, they are already in some sense
within the Limits of the Church and of the Covenant of Promise, and are ready
without Prejudice to be instructed in the Truth of the Gospel, and in the
Obedience thereof.

3. Infants therefore are rightly admitted to Baptism, and thereby to the
Privileges appropriated by Christ to the Members of his Church. But because
Baptism is a Covenant, wherein there is as well a Promise made on the part of
the Person baptized, of certain Duties to be performed, as one on God's part,
of certain Graces and Privileges to be conferred; and because Infants are not
capable of making any Promise immediately by themselves; it has therefore been
the wisdom of the Church to appoint certain Sureties, who should promise in the
Name of the Child, what it self should afterward be obliged to perform; i. e.
who should undertake to see it instructed in the Nature and Obligation of those
Duties, which upon account of its being a Member of the Church of Christ, it
would at years of Discretion be bound to perform.

CHAP. VI. Of the Duty of Godfathers and Godmothers.
1 THAT therefore which the Sureties undertake for a Child at its Baptism, is
briefly this: That it shall be taught all the Articles of the Christian Faith,
with the reasonableness of their Belief, that it shall be instructed in all the
Duties of the Christian Life, with the necessity of their Practice; and that it
shall be minded in convenient time to make a public Declaration of its being
hearty in this Belief, and to enter into a renewed Engagement to continue
constant in this Practice. They promise that it shall be taught to Believe in
one God the Father Almighty, etc. and in Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord,
etc. and in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, etc. They promise that
it shall be instructed, to renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and
Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh; i. e.
that it shall be taught to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in this
present World. And they promise, that it shall in fit season be brought to
declare solemnly, in the presence of God and of the whole Congregation, its
firmness in the Faith of these Articles of Religion, and its Resolution to
continue in the Obedience of these Commands.

2. This is what the Godfathers or Godmothers promise for a Child at its
Baptism; This they promise solemnly in the presence of God, and in the face of
the Congregation: And is it a small thing, to undertake for the Soul of a
Person to be admitted into the Church of Christ? Is it a light thing to enter
into such a Promise solemnly before God and his Church? I doubt not but whoever
considers the matter seriously, will hardly find any Duty of greater
Importance, or any Promise of more solemn Obligation: yet is there no Duty more
generally and more shamefully neglected, nor any Promise more lightly regarded.

3. If a Man be made Guardian to the Son of a deceased Friend, and be entrusted
with the Care of his Education, how justly do we expect, that he should be
careful to have him instructed in all that necessary Knowledge, on which
depends the management of his Life and Conversation; that he should be zealous
to have him further endued with all those useful Accomplishments, which may
become his Quality and recommend him in the World; but above all that he should
spare no pains to secure to him his Estate, and to improve his Fortunes? And do
we not look upon that Man as the vilest and most unfaithful of Men, who having
such a charge committed unto him, should wholly neglect all or any of these
things? Yet how much a greater Trust does he betray, who having the Soul of a
Child committed to his care by God and the Church, neglects wholly to have it
taught those necessary Truths, in the Knowledge and Practice of which consists
its everlasting Happiness; who takes no care at all to secure to it that
Portion, which God has designed and prepared for it in Heaven; and who seeing
the Soul of an Innocent Babe, (perhaps merely for want of good Advice and
Instruction,) beginning to be overrun with the Seeds of those Vices, which in
time must drown it in destruction and perdition, does yet show no Care or
Concern for it? What greater Uncharitableness can a Man possibly be guilty of
toward the Soul of his Brother, or what greater Mockery of God? It Is True, the
Education of a Child is not wholly committed to the Care of those who are its
Sureties in Baptism, but first and principally to the Parents themselves: But
undoubtedly they are bound to be Assistants; and if the Parents either through
Wickedness neglect to instruct it, or by Death are taken away from it, the
Sureties must look upon this Care as chiefly devolved upon Them, and of which
they must give a strict Account.

4. In what Station soever God appoints any Man over the Soul of his Brother,
either to warn the wicked or to instruct the ignorant, if he neglects his Duty
and his Brother perish through his default, the Blood of him that perishes
will be required at his hands: Ezekiel 3^. 8. When I say unto the Wicked, O Wicked
Man, thou shall surely die; if thou do not speak to warn the Wicked from his
ways, that wicked Man shall die in his Iniquity, but his Blood will I require
at thine hand. How much more, when the Soul of an innocent Child is committed
particularly to the care of any Person, if through his neglect it be corrupted
and perish, shall its Blood be required at his hand? With what Confusion and
Amazement shall we at the day of Judgment hear those who have been committed to
our Charge, accuse us for having been through carelessness the causes of their
Destruction? How shall we be astonished and cut to the heart, to hear them curse
us and say, Had those who should have instructed us, been as careful to teach
us our Duty, as we were capable and willing to have learnt it, we had never
come into this miserable condition! And how will it double the Torments even of
Hell it self, to have the punishment not only of our own Sins, but also of all
the sins of those, who have been undone by our neglect, inflicted upon us?

5. It Is not therefore a slight and trivial matter, to be Sureties for Children
in Baptism; it is not enough barely to make Profession of our Faith in their
Name at the Font; but we are bound afterward to perform conscientiously, what
we there solemnly promised for them before God and his Church, as a Duty
wherein their Souls and our own, and the welfare of the Church of Christ, are
highly concerned. Tertullian thought it a great objection against the use of
Infant Baptism, that Quid enim necesse est Sponsores etiam periculo ingeri, qui
and ipsi per mortalitatem destituere promissiones suas possunt, and prove^tu
malae in^olis falli? Tertul. ^ Baptismo.
the Sureties were there obliged to promise, what they were not sure they
should live to perform, and what, if they did live, they could not be sure they
should be able to persuade the baptized Person to take upon himself: He never
once thought that so great a Trust might be wilfully betrayed, or so solemn a
promise carelessly neglected; which would have been a much stronger Objection.
What would he have said, if he had lived in these times, wherein nothing is
more common, than for Men to take upon themselves this great Charge, without
ever designing to think more of it?

6. Let those Men consider this, who make no scruple to promise in the presence
of God and his Church, what they never design to think upon after. Let those
consider this, who make no scruple to Answer readily for a Child, whom by
reason of its great distance they have no probability of ever seeing more: Let
those consider this, who when they have been Sureties for a Child, deliver it
immediately to its Parents, as if they were by that Mockery released from their
Promise, and God deluded as easily as Men: Lastly, Let those consider this, who
think themselves obliged to restifie their Love to a Child whom they have been
Sureties for, by some little and trifling Marks of Kindness; while they are at
the same time most inhumanely and unchristianly cruel to it, by neglecting that
one great Kindness which they have promised and vowed to do for it.

7. I doubt not but the notorious neglect of this important Duty, is one great
cause of the shameless Wickedness of our present Age. For while Parents and
Sureties are careless to instruct Children in the Nature and Obligation of
their Baptismal Vow, vicious Inclinations prevail upon them and insensibly grow
into Vicious Habits, before they come to a perfect Knowledge of the Necessity
and Excellency of Religion, of the Extent and Obligation of their Duty, and of
the Greatness and Certainty of the Happiness annexed to it. Whereas were
Sureties, according to their solemn Promise made to God and his Church,
conscientiously careful to see that those for whom they have Undertaken, be
timely and diligently instructed; Religion would have the first Possession, of
innocent and unprejudiced Minds; Children would for the most part, though
differently according to their different Tempers, be early wrought upon to
admire the Beauty and the Pleasure of Virtue; to thirst after the Love of God
and the Happiness of Heaven; and would be brought to Confirmation, with a deep
Sense and Conviction of their Duty, with an earnest desire of professing the
reality of their Faith and renewing their Promises of Obedience, and with a
full resolution of living suitably to that Profession and those renewed
Promises, the remaining part of their Lives.

THE END.
Essay the Second. Of Confirmation.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature, Design and Use of Confirmation.
THAT there is a certain Period of time, at which every Man that is truly
Religious, began to be so, and from which the beginning of his Religious Life
might truly be dated, is evident: But of what use the Knowing and Fixing this
Period in a Man's own Mind, may be, is generally very little considered: For
whilst some have groundlesly asserted, that there is a certain Time of every
good Man's Conversion, after which it is impossible for him to fall away into a
state of Wickedness; and whilst others have weakly imagined, that there is a
certain Time of Conversion, after which though a Man does fall into great
Wickednesses, yet he cannot fall finally from a State of Grace; most others
have thought that there is little or no use of inquiring at all into the exact
time when the Religious Life begins, or if there were, that it is hardly
possible for a Man to Fix and Determine it, since Men generally become
Religious not by a sudden Conversion, but by a gradual Progress. But though it
be indeed true, that Men generally become Religious, not at once, but by
degrees, yet may a Man nevertheless certainly Fix to himself the Period, from
whence to date the beginning of his Religious Life: For if his Progress has
been only from a more imperfect State of Virtue, (which consists in a constant
sincere endeavor to obey all the Commandments of God, but accompanied with
many Frailties, Inadvertencies and Surprises,) to a more perfect and uniform
practice of Holiness; he has been all along in the Course of a Religious Life:
But if his Progress has been from a Course of known and wilful sin, to a
Victory or Conquest over his Lusts and Temptations; he must reckon his
Religious Life from no longer a time, (notwithstanding any pious Intervals and
Struglings which he may have had with his Habitual Temptations,) than from that
Period since which he has never fallen into any known and gross sin. And the
Uses of a Man's fixing within himself such a Period, would be that more assured
and settled Peace of Conscience, which would arise from the distinct and clear
View of a well examined course of past Holiness; that effectual bar against
falling into the Act of any known sin, which would be put by a Man's
considering, that by such an Act he must lose all the comfort of his past
Virtue, and be forced to begin his Religious Life again from a new Period; And
above all, that mighty dread of going on in a circle of Sinning and Repenting,
Repenting and Sinning, into which Men would be rowzed, by being brought to
understand clearly, that such a course is no part of a Religious Life at all.

2. Now this Period, from which I suppose a Christian to begin his Religious
Life, must be either Baptism, Confirmation or Repentance. In those who are
converted from the Profession of any other Religion to that of Christianity,
the Period from whence their Religious Life ought to begin, is Baptism: And the
Principal cause of that strict Piety, for which the Primitive Christians are so
deservedly Eminent, seems to be that great rigor with which they insisted upon
Men's living in a constant course of Piety from the time of their entering into
this solemn Covenant. In those who have been educated from their Infancy in the
Christian Religion, the Period from whence their Religious Life ought to be
dated, is Confirmation; the time from their Baptism being only their
Preparation, or time of Instruction. But then for those who have neglected this
great and solemn Opportunity, or have since fallen into any great and wliful
sins; the only remaining time from whence their Religious Life can be reckoned,
is Repentance, i. e. the Time since which they have so perfectly had the
Conquest over all their Temptations, as not to have been seduced by them any
more, into any gross or wilful sin. Of Baptism I have already spoken in the
former Essay; of Confirmation I shall treat in this; of Repentance in the next.

3. In the Primitive Church, those who upon Profession of their Faith and
Repentance were by Baptism admitted into the Church of Christ, had this their
Admission completed or perfected afterward, by the Imposition of Hands. When
the Samaritans had received the Word of God, and many of them were baptized in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, only the Holy Ghost was as yet fallen upon none of
them, we find that Id quod d^erat, a Petro and Johanne factum est, ut Oratione
pro ^is habita and manu imposita, invocaretur and infunderetur super eos
Spiritus Sanctus. Cyprian. ad Jubaian: Ep. 73.
two of the Apostles were sent to lay their hands on them, and then they
received the Holy Ghost, Acts 8. 17. This was the constant practice of the
Apostles, stles, to perfect or complete Baptism by the Imposition of Hands:
which two things are therefore laid down together among the Principles or
Foundations of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6. 2. and were accordingly
practiced jointly by the Church in succeeding Ages. This Custom (says Quod
nunc quoque apud nos geritur, ut qui in Ecclesia baptizantur, per praepositos
Ecclesiae offerantur, and per nostram orationem ac manus impositionem Spiritum
Sanctum consequantur, and signaculo Domini consummentur. Cypri. Ep. 73.
St. Cyprian) is also descended to us, that they who are baptized be brought by
the Rulers of the Church, and by our Prayer and the Imposition of Hands, may
obtain the Holy Ghost, and be consummated with the Seal of the Lord. And Dehinc
manus imponitur, per Benedictionem advocans and invitans Spiritum Sanctum: Tunc
ille Sanctissimus Spiritus super emundata and benedicta corpora libens a Patre
descendit. Tertul. de Baptismo.
Tertullian, After Baptism the hand is imposed, by Blessing calling down and
inviting the Holy Spirit: Then that most Holy Spirit willingly descends from
the Father upon the Bodies that are cleansed and blessed.

4. But of this Confirmation of Persons baptized at riper years, which was
anciently administered immediately after Baptism, and is therefore by many not
without reason looked upon as a Part of the Ceremony of Baptism it self, it is
not my purpose to speak now more largely. That which I am at this time more
especially to consider, is that Confirmation, as it is now in use in the
Church, whereby those who have been baptized in their Infancy, are at Years of
Discretion perfected or made complete Members of the Church. And the Design and
Use of Confirming such Persons, is plainly this: Baptism being a Covenant,
wherein there are as well certain Conditions promised to be performed on the
part of the Person Baptized, as certain Privileges assured to be conferred on
God's part; and Infants, though they be capable of being admitted to the
Privileges of Members of the Church, yet not being capable of promising or
performing any Conditions, any otherwise than by means of certain Sureties, who
engage to instruct them in the Nature and Obligation of the Promises made in
their Name at their Baptism; it is manifest that these baptized Infants, when
they come to Years of Discretion, if they desire to continue to be Partakers of
the Privileges, which God has appropriated to the Members of his Church, they
must be willing also to perform the Conditions, which God has indispensably
required of all those Members: That they may enter therefore into these
Obligations, with the advantage of greater Solemnity and Choice, it has most
wisely been instituted, that as soon as they be of Age to understand the Nature
and the Obligation of that Promise, which was made in their Name at their
Baptism, they should be brought to make a public Declaration, in the presence
of God and his Church of their taking freely upon themselves that Vow, and of
their Resolution to live from thenceforward conformably to the Conditions of
that great and solemn Covenant; and that upon this public Profession of their
Faith, and most solemn Purposes of Obedience, they should by Imposition of
Hands have the great Privileges of Baptism sealed anew and secured to them.

5. And that this might be done the more solemnly and effectually, so as to
have a lasting effect upon the Minds and Lives of Men, as the solemn
Administration of Baptism had anciently among the Primitive Christians; it were
very much to be wished, that as in those Primitive Times Persons converted to
Christianity were not before Baptism admitted as complete Members to the
Communion of the Church, but were esteemed only as Candidates desirous to be
instructed in the Christian Religion; so those who have now been only baptized
in their Infancy, should before Confirmation be looked upon by others, and by
themselves too, as no other than Catechumens: It were to be wished, that no one
might be admitted to the Communion, before he were confirmed; and that no one
might be admitted to Confirmation, before he had attained a perfect Knowledge
of the extent and obligation of all the Duties of Religion, and given
sufficient evidence of his Resolution to live suitably to that Knowledge: It
were to be wished, that as in the Primitive Church there were certain solemn
Times appointed for Baptism, as Easter and Whitsontide, at which those who were
before prepared by a regular course of Catechizing, were admitted with great
solemnity into the complete Communion of the Church; so there were now such
solemn seasons appointed, against which Ministers of particular Parishes should
for some time beforehand diligently instruct and prepare those, who were of
Age to be presented to the Bishop to be confirmed: And above all, it were to be
wished, that the whole Process might be performed with so much Reverence and
Solemnity, that all the Persons confirmed might understand and be convinced,
that they came now to have all the Privileges, which God has promised to the
Members of his Church, sealed and assured to them; that they now received the
Assistance of the Holy Spirit, to enable them effectually to perform their
Duty; and that they now solemnly undertook for themselves before God and the
Church, what their Sureties promised for them before at Baptism, to Live from
henceforward in all Holiness and Purity, and in constant Obedience to all the
Commands of God, the remaining part of their Lives.

6. Were this excellent Institution thus solemnly and religiously observed,
exceeding great would be the Effects which we might justly hope to see produced
by the use of it. The Effect that the Imposition of the Apostles hands had upon
the first Converts to Christianity, was no less than the induing them with
those extraordinary Gifts of Speaking with Tongues, Working Miracles, and the
like: And though these mighty Operations of the Spirit did afterward by degrees
cease; yet the constant Influence of the Holy Ghost, and the Blessing of God
conferred by the Imposition of Hands, did in all succeeding Ages express and
show forth it self in great and very remarkable Effects: It filled Men with
Spiritual and Internal Strength; it endued them with Courage and Wisdom and
Fortitude, to confess boldly the Faith of Christ Crucified, and to promote
zealously the Service of the Church; it wrought in their Minds an Ardent Love
of God, and a continual Joy in the Holy Ghost; a perfect Purity of Heart, and
Contempt of all Worldly Enjoyments; a boundless Charity toward all Mankind,
and an infinite desire of doing good in their Generation. And were Young
Persons taught Now to receive Confirmation with the same Preparation, with the
same Reverence, and with the same Expectations, that they did in the Primitive
Times; we might yet expect, that God would annex the same Inward Blessings, to
the Use of the same External Means. Were none esteemed Perfect Christians, or
looked upon as Complete Members of the Church, before Confirmation; Parents and
Sureties would be obliged to instruct and prepare Children in order to be
Confirmed; and we should not see the generality of Men esteeming themselves
Perfect Christians, and Faithful Members of the Church, without ever knowing
how, or upon what Conditions they were admitted into it. Were none admitted to
Confirmation, who had not first passed through such a regular course of
Catechizing, as to understand perfectly the Extent of their Duty, and their
Obligation to perform it; this would breed in Young Persons a great Reverence
and Esteem for Religion, and a great Zeal in preparing themselves that they
might be thought worthy to be admitted to the complete Communion of the Church,
and to the Participation of its higher Mysteries: By this means Children would
be fully and distinctly instructed in the nature and design of Religion, as
soon as they came to the knowledge of Good and Evil; and we should not see Men
live all their Lives in the Communion of the Church, and in the Participation
of its Sacraments, without ever understanding the very first Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, or what it was that they promised at Baptism: By this means
that gross Ignorance, in which so many thousand Christians live and die, would
in great measure be prevented; and we should not see Children for want of
Instruction so soon possessed and corrupted by Vice, as to Lie and Swear, to be
Disobedient and Ill natured, to be Vain and Idle in that tender Age, wherein
they might as easily be formed to all the contrary Virtues with the same
advantage of Prejudice and first Possession. Were none received to
Confirmation, who did not express a sincere Resolution to live from
thenceforward according to the Purity and the Equity of the Gospel in all
Holiness and godly Conversation; or who did not with free Choice and a zealous
Disposition of Mind desire to take upon themselves their Baptismal Vow, and to
make public Profession of their Faith and Obedience in the presence of God and
his whole Church; this would give a mighty Reputation to Religion and Virtue;
this would prevent that Goldness and Deadness in Religion, which proceeds from
Men's taking up the Profession of it in course, without due Preparation and
Disposition of Mind; this would make Men earnest and serious in the Profession
of Christianity, and solicitous not to contradict their Profession by their
Lives: such a Solemn Renuntiation of the World, the Flesh and the Devil; such a
Vow solemnly confirmed and ratified by our personal Protestation in the
presence of God, and in the sight of the Congregation, could not but be a
mighty Bridle to restrain Men from Sin, and a mighty Spur to provoke Men to
Good Works: The Fear of God, and the Shame of Men, in whose presence so sacred
an Obligation was entered into, could not but be of great force to bind men to
live worthy of this great Vocation, that they might answer the expectation of
God and his Church, and not become a blemish and dishonor to their Religion.
Lastly, Were none admitted to Confirmation, without being first fully
persuaded, that they came now to receive the Perfection and Strength of
Baptismal Grace; that they came now to receive Signaculum Domini
the Seal of the Lord, whereby they are separated unto the Service of God, and
to the Day of Redemption: In a word, that they came now to receive the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost, which should from henceforward continue with
them, to enable them to perform all the Commands of God, and to resist and
overcome all the Temptations of the Enemy; we might have reason to hope, that
as in the Primitive Times, so Now also these External Ordinances would be
accompanied with such plentiful Effusions of inward and sanctifying Grace, as
would have a visible effect in the Lives and Manners of Men: The time was, when
the Professors of True Religion could challenge the Unbelieving World to give
them a Lustful, Malicious, Passionate, Revengeful Man, and they would by the
Administration of Baptism and Confirmation, transform him into the Purest, the
Meekest, and the Gentlest Spirit upon Earth; and since God has promised to be
always with the Church by his Spirit even unto the end of the World, I see no
reason why Confirmation of Baptized Persons, if it were celebrated by us with
the same Preparation and Reverence as it was among the Ancients, might not be
as effectual Now to Confirm Men in Virtue, as it was Then to Transform them
from Vice; and have as proportionably great an effect upon the following part
of our Lives, as it had upon theirs. By these means the Church would be again
restored to its Ancient Regular Constitution: By these means many perplexing
Scruples about the Worthy Receiving the Holy Communion, would in great measure
be removed; no one being capable of being admitted to that Holy Sacrament,
without having been first Confirmed; and no one being capable of being
Confirmed, without having first passed through such Preparation, as would sit
him for the Communion: Lastly, By these means, if any one after Confirmation
lapsed into the practice of any great and notorious Sin, a fair opportunity
would offer it self of restoring some degree of that Ancient Discipline, the
want of which is so justly lamented by the Church; this Solemn Preparation, by
which I suppose persons fitted for Confirmation, being the most likely thing in
the World to work in Men's Minds such a Dread of Sins to be committed
afterward, as would dispose them to submit to, and to profit under Discipline.

7. These are the exceeding great Benefits, which would arise from such a
Solemn and Religious Use of Confirmation: But till this excellent Institution
can be restored to its Ancient Solemnity and Reverence, (which as it is much to
be wished, so in the present degeneracy and corruption of Manners it is hardly
to be hoped,) all that can be done, is earnestly to exhort those who are in any
capacity entrusted with the Instruction of Children, that they be careful for
the Honor of God, and for the Welfare of his Church, to teach them to Love God
and Religion with their first Love; to improve in them those Natural Principles
of Justice and Truth, Honesty and Thankfulness, Simplicity and Obedience, which
God has planted in their very Creation; to teach them to resist the Prejudices
and first Insinuations of Vice, and to be afraid of a Sin as of Death; to fill
their Minds with great and honorable thoughts of the Privileges of being made
Members of Christ, Children of God, and Heirs of Heaven; to instruct them fully
in the Extent and Obligation of all the Duties of the Christian Life, which in
their Baptism they engaged to perform; and, when they be thus Qualified, to
bring them with Understanding and Resolution, with Desire and Zeal, to receive
at Confirmation the Consummation of Baptismal Grace, and a joyful Assurance of
Glory and Immortality, if they shall persevere in their Faith and their
Obedience to the end.

8. My Design in the following Essay, is not to enter into any Question of
Dispute, but only to lay down some brief and practical Directions, by which one
that designs to be Confirmed, (whom I always suppose of Age to understand the
whole Doctrine of Religion,) or one that is already Confirmed and is sincerely
desirous to lead a Religious Life, may attain to that Primitive Holiness and
that Perfection of Virtue, which becomes the Truth and the Purity of the Gospel.

CHAP. II. What is to be done before Confirmation. Of Faith; of the Necessity
of Religion; of the Necessity of Revelation; of the Evidence of the Christian
Religion; and of Consideration.
1. FIrst then, in order to receive Confirmation, or to begin the great Work of
Religion, with due preparation of Mind, Endeavor before all things to attain a
real and firm Belief of the great Doctrines of the Christian Religion. This is
the only Foundation, that will be able to support the Design of a truly
Religious Life. If we do really and firmly believe, the Being and the
Providence of God; if we be indeed convinced, that the Christian Religion is a
Revelation of the Divine Will; if we be in earnest persuaded, that there will
certainly come a Day of Retribution, wherein every Man shall receive according
to that he has done, whether it be Good or Evil; this is a Faith, which will
assuredly overcome the World; this is a Belief, which will certainly baffle all
the Temptations of Sin and Satan; this will make all the Glories of the World
seem mean, and all the Pleasures of Sense insipid; in a word, this will inspire
Men with such a vigorous Zeal* as will make them not only with Ease and
Contentment, but with a mighty Pleasure sacrifice all earthly Enjoyments, to
the doing the greatest Good here, and obtaining the greatest Happiness
hereafter. But if we enter upon the Profession of Religion rashly and
inconsiderately, more for Form and Custom than upon any mature Deliberation and
Conviction of Mind, it is not possible we should persevere in well-doing with
Resolution and Patience: The Cares of the World and the Deceitfulness of
Riches, the Solicitations of Pleasure and the Lusts of other things, will
certainly prevail over us and seduce us into Sin. Nothing but a firm Faith,
grounded upon an impartial View and a deep Consideration of things, can
possibly carry a Man through the Difficulties and Discouragements of a
Religious Life: But he that begins to build upon this Foundation, and lays down
his first Principles of Faith immovable as a Rock, will be able to surmount all
Difficulties with Bravery and Constancy, and will attain the end of his Hopes
with Triumph and Joy.

2. The true Reason why so great a number of those who make Profession of
Christianity, are either wicked and licentious, or at least cold and
indifferent in Matters of Religion, is plainly this, That they do not in
earnest believe, as they pretend and profess to do, the great Articles of
Religion: They in course profess themselves to be Christians, without having
ever considered what Christianity is, and therefore it has little or no
Influence upon their Lives and Actions. For did Men indeed as firmly believe
the Doctrines of the Christian Religion, as the Character they are willing to
bear in the World obliges them to pretend they do, it would be in a manner as
strange to find a Man whose Actions should give his Words the Lie, and his Life
be unsuitable to his Profession, as to hear one disputing whether there were a
Hell or no, while he were actually tormented in the Flames thereof. For though
Faith has not the Evidence of Sense, as indeed it is impossible it should, yet
if it be well grounded, it could not but have in good measure the same effect
upon the Lives of Men, as the Evidence of Sense would have. When a Temporal
Prince declares, that whoever be found guilty of such or such Crimes, shall
certainly undergo this or that particular Punishment, such a Declaration has
generally the same Influence upon all the Subjects concerned, as if they saw
the Punishment already actually inflicted upon the Criminals: When therefore
the Supreme Governor of the World declares to Mankind his Will, which is their
Law and Rule of Life, and inforces the Obligation of that Law by such Threats
and Promises, as the Scripture, which is that Declaration of his Will,
contains; If these Threats and Promises of the Almighty have not the same
influence upon the Hearts and Lives of Men, as those of an earthly Prince in
other Cases generally have, is it not evident either that Men do not in earnest
believe that these Threats and Promises are indeed the Declaration of his Will,
or else that they imagine that though he now so earnestly presses, and seems so
severely to exact Obedience to his Laws, yet at last he will not punish the
Contempt of them? If this be not the case, how comes the Christian Religion to
have lost that Efficacy in reforming the Lives and Manners of Men, for which it
was once so eminent even amongst its Enemies themselves? If We do indeed
believe the same Gospel, and live under the power of the same Religion, that
the Primitive Christians did; how comes that Religion not to have the same
Influence upon our Lives and Actions, that it had upon theirs? Can we hear Men
daily profane the Sacred Name of God with impious and horrid Oaths; and yet
think they believe there is a God, jealous of his Honor, and that will avenge
himself on such a Nation as this? Can we see Men cheat and cozen, destroy and
prey upon one another, without the least scruple or appearance of remorse; and
yet think they believe the Truth of the Christian Religion, and the Severity
thereof? In a word, can we see Men dally with Eternity, and for the sake of a
few empty and momentany Gratifications, hazard their everlasting Welfare? Can
we think it possible, I say, that rational Creatures should act with so
prodigious a Carelessness, who yet believe not that the Scene of this World
shall be shut up in everlasting Oblivion, but that there will come a Day
wherein they must give Account for their Works, and be accordingly happy or
miserable for ever? No certainly; whatever Pretenses Men may make to deceive
others, and perhaps in some measure themselves too, there must lurk some secret
Seeds of Infidelity in the Heart of every wicked Man; and the true Reason why
this World has so much the Ascendant over the Lives of Christians, must be
their not having a firm Belief of the Glories of the other. Whoever therefore
will so enter into a religious course of Life, as to be able to persevere in
well-doing to the end; whoever will so lay the Foundation, as to be able to
finish; must before all things attain a firm and settled Belief of the great
Truths of Religion: And as without this Groundwork, it is not possible he
should ever be resolute enough, to overcome the Enemies of his Religion and
Happiness; so with it, it is not possible he should ever be overcome by them.
He that has a firm and steady Belief of the Greatness and Excellency of those
Riches, which neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, and to which Thieves cannot
break through to steal, will never be so dazzled with the glittering of Gold, as
to let it steal away his Heart and Affections: He that has a great and noble
Idea of the Glory which shall be revealed hereafter, will never be enticed to
squander away those Talents which God has given him, only in appearing splendid
and great here: He that has a strong and vigorous expectation of those
Pleasures which God has prepared for them that love him, which Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard, neither have they entered into the 1 Cor. 2. 9.
Heart of Man to conceive, will never be persuaded to give himself up to the
voluptuousness and sensuality of a Beast: In a word, he that is full of Faith,
and can look with assurance beyond things Temporal to those which are Eternal,
has left Sicut enim homo, cum implet amphoras bono vino, and inter il^as paucas
amphoras semiplenas posuit, and venit ut tentet and gustet, etc. Sic Diabolus
venit ad homines servos Dei, ut tentet illos. Quicunque pleni sunt fide,
resistunt ei fortiter, and ille recedit ab illis, quia non habet locum
intrandi: Tunc vadit ad eos qui non sunt in side pleni, and quoniam habet
locum, intrat, etc. Hermas 2. ult.
no room in himself where the Devil can enter with his Suggestions, but is
fortified on all sides against all Temptations.

3. Now to attain such a Faith as this, not slight and superficial, but firm
and well-grounded, and immovable against all Assaults, a Man ought to proceed
by these steps. First he must by serious Consideration work in his own Mind a
full and perfect Conviction of the Being of God, and of the Excellency of his
Attributes: From thence he must collect the certainty of God's Providence over
Men, and the Obligation of Men's Duty toward God: From hence will follow the
necessity of Religion here, and the certainty of the Reward of Virtue
hereafter: After this he must consider the necessity of a Divine Revelation to
establish true Religion, and the Proofs which evidence the Christian
Institution to be such a Revelation: And above all, he must fix these Things
strongly, and imprint them on his Mind, by deep and constant Meditation.

4. He that comes to God, must in the first place believe that he Is; i. e. he
must not only by a slight and careless assent go along inconsiderately with the
common Opinion, but he must form in his Mind a considerate and rational, a
strong and vigorous Persuasion of the Being of God. Take a view of this great
and glorious Fabric of the World; consider the stupendous Magnitude and the
exquisite Order of its Parts; consider the numberless Instances of Infinite
Power and unfathomable Wisdom, which appear in this our Spot of Earth; consider
the exquisite Artifice which discovers it self in the Structure of the Body of
Man, and the inconceivable Subtilty of the Operations of his Mind; consider at
the same time how frail, and depending, and corruptible all these things are;
how weak and unable even Man, the noblest Part of the visible World, is, to be
the Cause, or so much as the Preserver either of himself or any thing else: And
this will raise in the Mind such a powerful Conviction of the Being of God, as
will be a lasting and immovable Foundation, on which to build a rational and
considerate Design of Religion.

5. To one that is thus persuaded of the Being of God, it will be easy to
conclude, That as that Supreme Being, from whom all other Things received their
Original, must himself be Eternal; as he, from whom all the Powers of all
Things that exist, are derived, must himself be Allpowerful; and as he, by
whose Establishment all Things in all Places were made to move in such wise and
wonderful Order, as far exceeds the Capacity of the wisest of Men to
comprehend, must himself be All-knowing and All-wise: So it cannot be, but that
he who is All-knowing, All-powerful and All-wise; who sees through all things
at one view, and can effect all things with the same ease that he can will
them; must govern, direct and manage all things by an Overruling Providence:
And because his Power is so great as not possibly to be compelled, and his
Wisdom so perfect as not possibly to be seduced, to do any thing contrary to
those Eternal Rules, which the immutable Law of the Divine Nature, and the
unalterable Constitution and Relation of Things has fixed; that therefore this
his Government of the World must be Just and Equitable, according to the nicest
and exactest Measures, of Infinite Goodness, Righteousness and Truth.

6. From this Notion of the Being, of the Attributes, and of the Providence of
God, most evidently follows the Necessity of Religion. For if God be a Being of
Infinite Power, Knowledge and Wisdom; it is manifest he is to be Reverenced, to
be Honored, and to be Feared: If he concerns himself with the Government of
his Creatures, and imploys these infinite Perfections in Ruling and Ordering
the World; it is manifest he is to be Worshipped, Prayed to, and Adored: And if
this his Government of the World be regulated by the exactest Measures of
infinite Goodness, Righteousness and Truth; it is manifest he is to be Loved, to
be Praised, and to be Imitated.

7. And because it cannot be, but that a just, and true and good Being, whose
Nature and whose Happiness consists in the Perfection and in the Exercise of
these Attributes, must be pleased with those Creatures, who love to imitate his
Justice, his Goodness and his Truth; therefore there must of necessity be a
Reward, laid up in store for Virtue; and those whose delight it has been to
conform themselves to the likeness of the Divine Nature, shall certainly be
admitted to partake in some degree of the Divine Happiness. Wherefore if this
Reward be not given to Virtue in this present Life; if the good things of this
World be distributed not only promiscuously, but even generally to the
disadvantage of the Virtuous, and to the advantage of those who are Enemies of
God and Haters of his Religion; it follows, that if a righteous and good God
has any regard to Righteousness and Goodness, there must be a future State,
wherein Rewards and Punishments shall be dispensed impartially to Virtue and
Vice.

8. Thus as certain as is our Knowledge of the Being of God and of the
Constitution of Things, so certain may we be of the Obligation of Religion, and
of the Reward of Virtue. Yet by Experience it has been found, that these
Considerations, however in themselves strong and concluding, have
notwithstanding been insufficient so to convince Men's Judgments and Overruled
their Passions, as to keep them constant in the Knowledge and in the Practice
of their Duty. The greatest Part of the Gentile World, before the appearance of
the Glorious Light of the Gospel, were an amazing Instance of this. They
quickly fell from the worship of the true God, to the worship of Idols and
impure Spirits; and were thereupon given up to a reprobate Mind, to work all
Uncleanness with greediness: Ephesians. 4. 19.
They were by degrees entangled in all manner of wicked Practices, till their
very Mind and Conscience was defiled; and Tit. 1. 15.
so accustomed themselves to run into all excess of Riot, that even their most
sacred and religious Performances became at length the very extremest
Abominations. And though there always were among them some Philosophers, who
stood up for the Cause of Virtue and true Religion; yet they never were able to
keep together any considerable number of Men, who could agree among themselves
about the Notion of the Truth, and persevere in the practice of it. Even that
Happiness it self, which was to be the ultimate end of all humane Actions, they
were so little settled in their Apprehensions about, that St. Austin somewhere
out of Varro reckons up no less than 280 Opinions concerning the chief Good.
The means to attain this Happiness, namely the great Rules of Morality, they
agreed indeed pretty well in; but their Understandings they complained were so
dark and cloudy, their Wills so biassed and inclined to Evil, their Passions so
outrageous and rebelling against Reason, that those Rules were looked upon as
hardly practicable: In a word, they confessed that humane Nature was strangely
corrupted; and they complained of this Corruption as a Disease whereof they
knew not the Cause, and could not find out a sufficient Remedy; so that the
great Duties of Religion were laid down by them as Matters of speculation and
dispute rather than practice, and not so much urged upon the Hearts and Lives
of Men, as proposed to the admiration of those, who thought them scarce
possible to be effectually attained to by the generality of Men. Lastly, The
Method, by which those who have erred from the right way and have offended God,
may yet again restore themselves to the Favor of God and to the Hopes of
Happiness, the Philosophers were in a manner absolutely ignorant of. From the
Consideration of the Goodness and Mercifulness of God, they did indeed
reasonably hope, that God would show himself placable to Sinners, and might be
some way reconciled: But what Propitiation he will accept, and in what manner
this Reconciliation must be made, here Nature stops and expects with impatience
the aid of some particular Revelation. That God will receive returning Sinners,
and accept of Repentance instead of perfect Obedience, they cannot certainly
know, to whom he has not declared that he will do so; for though this be the
most probable and only means of Reconciliation that Nature suggests, yet
whether this will be alone sufficient, or whether he requires something further
before he will restore Men to the Privileges they have forfeited, they cannot
be satisfactorily assured. There arises therefore from Nature no sufficient
Comfort to Sinners, but an endless and anxious solicitude about the means of
appeasing the Deity. Hence those diverse ways of Sacrificing and numberless
Superstitions, which overspread the face of the Heathen World, but were so
little satisfactory to the wiser part of Mankind, even in those times of
Darkness, that the Philosophers could not sometimes forbear declaring, That
they thought those Rites could avail little or nothing toward appeasing the
Wrath of a provoked God, or making their Prayers acceptable in his sight;
insomuch that (...). Plato Alcibiad. 2. prope fin.
Plato in the Person of Socrates speaks out, that since they knew not in what
manner to apply themselves acceptably unto God, he expected and did assure
himself, that in due time some Person would be sent from God, who should
declare to them his Will in that particular.

9. And now if these wisest of Philosophers were thus puzzled about that which
was their highest Concern, how are the Disputers of our Age certain, that if
themselves had lived without the Light of the Gospel, they should have made
such a right use of their Reason, as to have discovered the Truth exactly,
without being any way led aside by Prejudice or Interest? If their Lot had been
among the Vulgar, how are they sure they should have been so happy, or so
considerate, as not to have been involved in that Idolatry and Superstition,
which overspread the whole World? If they had joined themselves to the
Philosophers, which Sect would they have chosen to have followed, and what Book
would they have resolved upon to be the adaequate Rule of their Lives and
Conversations? Or if they would have set up for themselves, how are they
certain they should have been skilful and unprejudiced enough, to have deduced
the several Branches of their Duty, and applied them to the several Cases of
Life, by Argumentation and dint of Reason? It Is one thing to see that those
Rules of Life, which are beforehand plainly and particularly laid before us,
are perfectly agreeable to Reason; and another thing to find out those Rules
merely by the Light of Reason, without their having first been any otherwise
made known. We see that even many of those, who profess to govern their Lives
by the plain written Rule of an instituted and revealed Religion, are yet most
miserably ignorant of their Duty; and how can any Man be sure he should have
made so good Improvement of his Reason, as to have understood it perfectly in
all its parts, without any such help? We see that many of those, who profess to
believe firmly that great and everlasting Happiness, which Christ has promised
to Obedience, and that great and eternal Misery which Christ has threatened to
Disobedience, are yet hurried away by their Lusts and Passions to transgress
the Conditions of that Covenant, to which these Promises and these Threatenings
are annexed; and how can any Man be sure he should be able to overcome those
great Temptations, if these mighty Motives were less distinctly known, or less
powerfully enforced? But suppose he could, and that by strength of Reason he
could demonstrate to himself these things with all clearness and distinctness;
yet could all Men do so? Assuredly all Men are not equally capable of being
Philosophers, though all Men are equally obliged to be Religious. At least thus
much is certain, that the Rewards and Punishments of another World, the great
Motives of Religion cannot be so powerfully enforced to the influencing the
Lives and Practice of all sorts of Men, by one who shall undertake to
demonstrate the reality of them by force of Reason and Arguments, as by one who
showing sufficient Credentials of his having been himself there, shall assure
them of the truth and certainty of these things.

10. Though therefore nothing be more evident to Reason, than the Necessity of
Religion in general, and the Certainty of the Reward of Virtue; yet because
it is too nice and laborious a work in the matter of such vast Importance, for
Men of all Capacities to discover by the Light of Nature all the particular
Branches of their Duty; and because in the discovery of such matters, as are
the great Motives of Religion, Men are apt to be more easily wrought upon, and
more strongly affected, by Testimony than by Arguments; and because some things
necessary in our present corrupt State, such as for instance the means by which
a sinner may appease God after he has offended him, cannot certainly be
discovered by the Light of Nature and Reason at all; therefore there is
evidently a necessity of some particular Revelation, which may supply these
defects. And this the Heathens themselves were so sensible of, that there never
was any Principal Lawgiver among them, who did not pretend to receive his
Laws, or at least his Instructions for making those Laws, by some Divine
Revelation; and Plato in that most remarkable Passage before-cited,
acknowledges so plainly the want of such a Revelation, as even to question
whether it would not be better that Men should forbear sacrificing wholly, till
such times as God should discover to them in what manner he would have it done.
It Is therefore agreeable to the Natural Expectations of Men, that God should
make some particular Revelation of his Will, which may supply the Defects of
the Light of Nature: And that it is not unworthy of the Wisdom of God to make
such a Revelation, is also evident; For can any Man say that it is an unwise
thing, for the Creator of the World to reveal to his Creatures more fully the
way to Happiness, and the means of becoming like himself? Can any Man say, that
it is an unwise thing, for God to declare what Satisfaction he will accept for
sin, and upon what conditions he will receive returning Sinners? Can any Man
say, that it is a thing unworthy of the Wisdom of God, to make particular
Discoveries of his Will to his Creatures, and to set before them in a clearer
light the rewards and punishments of a future State? This is so manifest, that
nothing needs further be said about it.

11. Now that the Christian Religion is such a particular Revelation, actually
made by God: That the peculiar Duties, which it injoyns, are indeed the express
Commands of God; and the peculiar Motives, by which it inforces those Duties,
things true and in reality established by God: Of this we have all the proof
that the nature of the thing will bear, and that is agreeable either to the
Wisdom of God to give, or the Reason of Men to expect. To represent the
Motives, which are to enforce the practice of any thing, more evidently and
strongly, than is consistent with the nature of the thing designed to be
enforced, is inconsistent with the Wisdom of an All-wise God; and to expect
other proof of any thing, than what the nature of the thing to be proved is
capable of, is unreasonable in the Judgment of understanding Men. The design
then of Religion, being to make Men Happy by making them Religious, that is, to
make Happiness not the Fate of Men's Nature, but the Reward of their Virtue;
it is plain the Motives of Religion ought of necessity to be such, as might
abundantly encourage all wise Men to cleave inseparably to their Duty as to
their Life, and yet leave room for Men desperately wicked and incorrigible, to
avoid being forced into the Enjoyment of that Happiness, which they are not
willing to purchase at the rate of being Religious The Reward of everlasting
Life promised to Obedience, and the Punishment of Eternal Misery threatened to
Disobedience, are Motives in themselves infinitely and irresistably strong: For
were the Happiness of Heaven, and the Torments of Hell openly exposed to view,
and proposed as the immediate and unavoidable Consequence of a Man's choosing or
refusing his Duty, 'twould be as impossible for a Man in actual view of these
two different states not to choose his Duty and refuse the contrary, as for a
heavy Body not to fall downward to the Ground. Though therefore the infinitely
gracious and merciful God has indeed proposed to us these great and most
powerful Motives, that Men by choosing their Duty might choose their Life, and
become Happy in consequence of their becoming Religious; yet has he so
proposed them, invisible at present and at a distance, that good Men might have
some exercise of their Virtue by choosing their Duty in order to their
Happiness, and that Men obstinately impenitent might not partake of the
Happiness, without choosing the Duty to which that Happiness is annexed. Again,
the Nature of a revealed Institution of Religion being such, that excepting the
agreeableness of its Doctrines to the eternal Rule of Reason, the chief
evidence of its being from God must of necessity depend upon the credible
Testimonies of Matter of Fact: it is manifest that that evidence, of which such
Matters of Fact are capable, ought to be accounted sufficient in the present
case; and to require greater proof, than the nature of the thing will bear, is
absurd and unreasonable.

12. That the Christian Religion therefore is indeed a Revelation, sufficiently
demonstrated to be from God, may be satisfactorily evidenced to a Man's own
Mind by These Considerations: That the Duties, which it injoyns, are all such,
as are most agreeable to our Natural Notions of God, and most conducive to the
happiness and wellbeing of Men: That the Motives by which it enforces those
Duties, are such as are most suitable to the excellent Wisdom of God, and most
answerable to the natural expectations of Men: That the peculiar Circumstances,
with which it injoyns these Duties, and urges these Motives, are such as are
most exactly consonant to the Light of Nature, and most wisely perfective of
it: and, That all these things, are proved moreover to be taught and confirmed
of God, by the most credible and convincing Testimony, that ever was given to
any matter of fact in the World.

13. In the first place, the Duties which the Christian Religion injoyns, are
all such, as are most agreeable to our natural notions of God, and most
conducive to the happiness and well-being of Men. This is a proof, which were
alone sufficient to convince a wise man of a Religion's being from God: For
that Institution of Religion, which requires no other Duties, than what are
perfectly agreeable to the eternal and unchangeable Law of God, and manifestly
perfective of the Moral Virtue and the Happiness of Men, has already the Mark
of God upon it, and cannot possibly but come from him. The Nature and Life of
God are unchangeable, and the Constitution of his Laws is also unchangeable:
Whoever therefore Preaches and Institutes such a Religion, as leads men to
nothing else, but to the Obedience of the Laws, and to the Imitation of the
Nature and Life of God, may without any other Testimonials be admitted as a
Preacher of Divine Truth; and that Religion, which stands on such a Foundation,
is of it self sufficiently recommended, to the Belief, and to the Practice of
all Wise Men. Now that the Christian Religion is such an Institution, is so
plain and evident, that its greatest Adversaries have hardly been able to deny
it: The Duties of Love, Fear and Adoration, which it obliges us to render unto
God, are so manifestly incumbent upon us on consideration of the excellent
Attributes of the Divine Nature, and our relation to him as our Creator and
Preserver, that no man who considers, can break loose from the Obligations
which our Religion lays upon him to practice these Duties, without denying the
very Being of God, and acting contrary to the reason and all the Natural
Notions of his own Mind: The Duties of Justice, Righteousness and Truth, which
the Christian Religion commands us to exercise toward Men, are so apparently
reasonable, and so directly conducive to the Happiness of Mankind, that even
those Men who have broken through all the Bonds of Religion, and the
Obligations of Virtue, have yet thought it necessary to the preservation of
Society, and the well-being of Mankind, that the observation of these Duties
should be enforced by the Penalties of Humane Laws: The Duties of Sobriety,
Temperance and Contentment, which our Religion injoyns us to practice in our
selves, are so undeniably agreeable to the inward Constitution of Humane
Nature, and so perfective of it, that the principal design of all true
Philosophy was to recommend and set off these Duties to the best advantage;
though, as the Philosophers themselves confessed, it never was able to work men
up to that pitch of cheerful and generous Obedience to the Rules of these
Duties, which the Christian Religion in its primitive and purest State was
acknowledged to have done, and which, if it were now believed and practiced as
it then was, it must still do: Lastly, Even those positive and external
Observances, (such as the Sacraments, etc.) which are Instituted in the
Christian Religion as means and assistances to keep men steadfast in the
practice of those great and moral Duties which are the weightier matters of the
Law, are so free from all appearance of Superstition and Vanity, and so wisely
fitted to the end for which they were designed; that many of the Adversaries of
our Religion have yet been forced to admire, the Wisdom and the Excellency of
their Institution.

14. Again, The Principal Motives of the Christian Religion, I mean the
Discovery of a Future State, and the Rewards and Punishments therein to be
dispensed; are things so suitable to the excellent Wisdom of God, and so
agreeable to the unprejudiced Reason, to the Natural Apprehensions and
Expectations of Men, that were their truth and reality confirmed by no other
Argument or external proof, yet were they sufficient to influence the practice,
and regulate the Actions of wise and considerate men. That the Soul of Man is
immortal, and shall survive after the dissolution of this corruptible Body, is
a truth which has always been thought demonstrable from Principles of Reason,
and from the consideration of the nature of the thing: That Man is a Creature
capable of doing good or evil, and consequently of giving account of his
Actions, and being judged for them, is also evident: That therefore in a future
State there shall be a time of Retribution, wherein every Man shall receive of
God according to what he has done in this Life, whether it be good or evil, has
been collected by the wiser and more considerate part of Men among the Heathens
themselves. The Resurrection of the Body, has indeed been looked upon by most
of the Philosophers, as a thing utterly absurd and impossible: But there is
nothing impossible in the nature of the thing; And the Jews, who had no express
Revelation of that matter, did yet believe it upon a constant Tradition; as
appears from all their Writings, and particularly from the Translation of the
last verse of the Book of Job, which according to the Seventy runs thus; So Job
died being old and full of days (...) Job 42. ult.
, but it is written, that he shall rise again with those whom the Lord raises up.

15. Further, the peculiar Circumstances, with which the Duties and the Motives
of the Christian Religion are enlarged and enforced are such as are most
exactly agreeable to the Light of Nature, and most wisely perfective of it. For
what can be more perfective of the Light of Nature, than to have those Duties,
which Nature hints at only in general, explained fully and largely, and urged
in particular, and inculcated upon the meanest Capacities, and exemplified in
the Lives of Holy Persons proposed as Patterns for Men's imitation? What can be
more perfective of the Light of Nature, than to have those great Motives of
Religion, the Rewards and Punishments of a future State, which Nature only
obscurely points at, described to us most plainly, affectionately and lively?
What can be more perfective of the Light of Nature, than to have the means of
attoning for sin, which Nature discovers only the want of, plainly declared and
exhibited to us? What can be more perfective of the Light of Nature, than such
a Discovery of the heinousness of Sin and the necessity of Holiness, as the
Death of Christ and the Purity of the Gospel, does make unto us? In fine, what
can more effectually perfect the Religion of Nature, than the gatbering the
Worshippers of God into one Body, the uniting them by certain positive Rites in
one common Communion for mutual assistance and improvement, and the
establishing a certain Order of Men, whose Business may be to promote the
Interest of Religion, by instructing the Ignorant and by admonishing the Wicked.

16. Lastly, Besides all these Proofs of the Truth of the Christian Revelation,
drawn from the Consideration of the Nature of the Thing, God has moreover
confirmed it by the most undeniable external evidence, that ever was given to
any Matter of Fact in the World. The Great Motives of the Christian Religion,
are things not only most probable and most credible in themselves, but God has
moreover confirmed the certainty of them by most clear Testimony, (which is a
proof suited to all Capacities,) and has most strongly urged upon Men the
Rewards and Punishments of a future State by the Preaching and Exhortations of
one, who by that convincing Proof of his Resurrection from the Dead did
undeniably demonstrate that he had himself been there, and was able to give Men
a satisfactory Account of the Nature of that State: The great Duties of the
Christian Religion, are things not only most reasonable and most excellent in
themselves, but they are moreover taught and inculcated by one, who has given
the most credible and convincing Evidence that could possibly be desired, of
his being sent immediately from God. The Miracles which our Savior wrought,
were to his first Disciples, who were Eyewitnesses of them, a most perfect
demonstration of the Truth of his Doctrine: And the History of his Life, Death
and Resurrection, delivered down to us upon the Testimony of those Disciples,
are to Us also a sufficient Evidence of the same Truth. Their having conversed
from the beginning with our Savior himself; their having heard, and having
seen with their Eyes; their having looked upon, and having handled with their
Hands of the Word of Life, (as St. John expresses it, 1 John 1. 1.) made it
impossible that they should be deceived themselves: And their whole Life and
Conversation, their Sufferings and Deaths, were invincible proofs against the
Adversaries of Christianity, that they had no design of imposing upon others
They saw all the Prophecies of the Old Testament precisely fulfilled in the
Life and Doctrine, the Sufferings and Death of our Blessed Savior; they saw
him confirm what he taught with such mighty works, as his bitterest and most
malicious Enemies could not but confess to be above the Power of Nature, even
while they were blaspheming that Holy Spirit which wrought them; they saw the
whole course of his Life to be such, as to all unprejudiced beholders loudly
proclaimed his Divine Commission; they saw him so constantly despise all
worldly greatness, as once when the People would have made him a King, even to
work a Miracle to avoid that, which was the only thing that was possible to be
the aim and design of an Impostor: In fine, they saw him alive after Act. 1. 3*
his Passion by many infallible proofs, conversing with him for forty days
together, and at last beholding him ascend visibly into Heaven. These were such
demonstrations of his being a Teacher sent from Heaven, and consequently that
his Doctrine was nothing less than an immediate and express Revelation of the
Will of God, that nothing but the extremest Malice and Obstinacy could
withstand them: And the same reason that these Disciples of our Savior had to
believe his Doctrine, the same reason the rest of the World had to believe
theirs: They confirmed what they taught, by Signs and Miracles; they lived
according to the Doctrine they Preached, though manifestly contrary to all the
Interests and Pleasures of this present World; and, which no Deceiver could
ever do, they died with all imaginable cheerfulness and joy of mind, for the
Testimony of their Doctrine, and the Confirmation of their Religion. So that
unless God should work upon Men by such Methods, as are wholly inconsistent
with the Design of Religion, and the Nature of Virtue and Vice; which we are
sure he will not do; nothing can be done more than has already been done, to
convince Men of Religion, and to persuade them to Happiness. It Is true, the
Resurrection of Christ is not such an ocular demonstration to after
Generations, as it was to those Men who then lived and saw him, and conversed
with him: But since the matter of fact is as clearly proved to us, as it is
possible for any matter of fact at that distance of time to be; since the
Evidence of this is as great and greater, than of most of those things on which
Men venture the whole of their Secular Affairs; and on which they are willing
to spend all their time and pains; since I say the Case is thus, he that will
rather venture all that he can possibly enjoy or suffer; he that will run the
hazard of losing Eternal Happiness, and falling into Eternal Misery, rather
than believe the most credible and rational thing in the World, merely because
he does not see it with his Eyes; it is plain that that Man does not dis-believe
the thing, because he thinks the Evidence of it not sufficiently strong, but
because it is contrary to some particular Interest of his that it should be
true; and for that reason he might also have disbelieved it, though he had seen
it himself.

17. This is in brief the Evidence which we have, of the Necessity of Religion
in general, and of the Truth of the Christian Institution in particular: And he
that would so lay the Foundation of a Religious Life, as to be able to Conquer
all the Temptations of the World, and persevere in Well-doing to the end, must
at least so far consider this evidence, as before all things to work in his own
Mind a Firm, Settled and Well-grounded Belief of the great Truths of Religion.
To produce which Effect, this Evidence is most abundantly sufficient. For if in
other Cases, we assent to those things as certain and demonstrated, which if
our Faculties of Judging and Reasoning do not necessarily deceive us, do upon
the most impartial view appear clearly and plainly to be true; there is the
same Reason, why in Moral and Religious Matters, we should look upon those
things likewise to be certain and demonstrated, which upon the exactest and
most deliberate Judgment that we are capable or making, do appear to us to be
as clearly and as certainly true, as it is certain that our Faculties do not
necessarily and unavoidably deceive us, in all our Judgments concerning the
Nature of God, concerning the proper Happiness of Man, and concerning the
difference of Good and Evil. And if in other Cases, we always act without the
least hesitation upon the Credit of good and sufficient Testimony, and look
upon that Man as foolish and ridiculous, who sustains great Losses, or lets
slip great Opportunities and Advantages in Business, only by distrusting the
most credible and well-attested things in the World; it is plain there is the
same reason, why we should do so also in Matters of Religion. So that unless
our Actions be determined by some other thing, than by Reason and Judgment; the
Evidence which we have of the great Truths of Religion, ought to have the same
effect upon our Lives and Actions, as if they were proved to us by any other
sort of Evidence that could be desired.

18. There are indeed some Men, who being conscious to themselves that they act
contrary to all the reasonable Evidence and Convictions of Religion, are yet
apt to imagine, that if the great Truths of Religion were proved to them by
some stronger Evidence, they should by that means be wrought upon to act
otherwise than they do. But if the true reason why these Men act thus
foolishly, is not because the Doctrines of Religion are not sufficiently
evidenced, but because they themselves are hurried away by some unruly Passions
to act directly contrary to all Reason and Evidence; it is plain (unless God
should irresistibly compel them) they might well continue to act as they do,
though the Evidence of these things were really greater than it is. They are
willing to imagine, that if they had lived in our Savior's time; if they had
heard his Preaching, and seen his Miracles; if they had had the advantage of
beholding those mighty Works, which he wrought for the proof of his Divine
Commission; as the Jews then had; they should not like them have rejected the
counsel of God against Luke 7. 30.
themselves, but with all cheerfulness have believed his Doctrine, and embraced
his Religion. They fancy they should immediately have become Disciples of
Christ, and that the Truths which he taught, would have had a most powerful
Influence upon the whole course of their Lives. And if their Hearts and
Affections were not set upon this World, more than upon the next; if they
valued not the present enjoyments of Sense, above the expectation of the Glory
that shall be revealed; most certainly they would do the same now. But if their
Hearts be set upon earthly things, and their Passions be stronger than all the
Arguments of Reason; if they do indeed so love the Pleasures of Sin now, as
that they cannot persuade themselves by all the Motives of Religion to live
like Christians; we need not question to affirm, that they might very well have
been in the same case, though they had lived in our Savior's time. The Jews
are a notorious and standing Instance, how far Prejudice and Affection are able
to prevail over the strongest Convictions: When our Savior began to preach
that he was sent from God to instruct them in their Duty, they required a Sign
of him, and they would believe him; but when he had wrought so many Miracles,
that even the World it self could not contain Joh. 21. 25.
the Books if they should all be written, they persisted still in their
Infidelity: When they saw him hanging upon the Cross, and thought themselves
secure of him, they said, Let him now come down from the Mat. 27. 42,
Cross, and we will believe him; but when he arose out of the Grave wherein he
had lien three Days, which was a much greater and more convincing Miracle, they
grew more hardened and obstinate in their Unbelief.

19. Others there are who imagine, that if they could but be convinced of the
Truth of another World by the appearance of one sent directly from that unknown
State, they would immediately become new Creatures; but if God should satisfy
their unreasonable Demands, by sending one on purpose from the Dead to convince
them, I doubt not but as they listened not to Moses and the Prophets, so
neither would they be persuaded by one rising Luke 16. 31.
from the dead. They might indeed at first be surprised and terrified, at the
appearance of so unusual and unexpected a Messenger: But as wicked Men upon a
Bed of Sickness, at the amazing approach of Death and Eternity, resolve in the
utmost anguish of Horror and Despair to amend their Lives and forsake their
Sins, but as soon as the Terror is over and the danger of Death past, return to
their old habits of Sin and Folly; so it is more than probable it would be in
the present Case: Should God send a Messenger from the Dead, to assure Men of
the certainty of a future state, and the danger of their present Wickedness, as
soon as the Fright were over and their present terrible Apprehensions ceased,
it is by no means impossible that their old vicious Habits and beloved Sins
should again by degrees prevail over them. Many there are in our present Age,
who pretend to be convinced of the being of Spirits by the powerful
demonstration of their own Senses; and yet we do not observe, that their Lives
are more remarkably eminent for exemplary Piety, than theirs, who being
convinced by the less violent, but more rational Evidence of the Gospel, go on
in a sober, constant, and regular exercise of Virtue and Righteousness.

20. In sum therefore, Consider that the Evidence of Religion is such, as upon
the fullest view of things, and the exactest and most deliberate Judgment that
we can possibly make, ought infinitely to determine the Actions of a wise Man;
Consider that the great Doctrines of Religion are of such a nature, that upon
the final upshot of things, if all our Knowledge be not Deceit, if all our
Hopes and Fears be not Vain, if there be any Good, if there be any Evil, if
there be any Excellency, if there be any Happiness, these things must be true:
Consider this, I say, thoroughly; and then Resolve, deliberately and with full
persuasion of Mind, to act always suitably to this Consideration, and to put
all upon this one Issue. And when Temptation and Melancholy shall succeed; when
vain Scruples and unreasonable Suspicions, shall cloud the Understanding and
perplex the Mind; be sure to stick immovably to that Resolution, which has once
been founded upon the wisest Judgment and the fullest Conviction possible; and
when the present Indisposition of Mind shall be over, things will again appear
in their true Light, and the first Resolution will grow continually stronger.

21. Only in the last place and above all, be sure to fix these things deeply
upon the Mind, by frequent and serious Meditation. The Passions and Affections
of Men are strong; and unless these also can by some means be interested, the
bare Conviction of a Man's Judgment will hardly be able to govern constantly
all the Actions of his Life. It Is not enough that we be convinced in our
Judgments, of the Truth of the great Doctrines of Religion; Quaecunque
salutaria sunt, saepe agitari debent, saepe versari, ut non tantum nota sint
nobis, sed etiam parata. Seneca Ep. 95.
but we must by constant Meditation fix and inculcate them upon the Mind, that
they may move our Passions and excite our Affections. Be not content to believe
slightly the Being of God, but represent him frequently in your Mind with the
most lively Characters of Glory and Majesty; consider him as that Supreme
Being, who has measured the Waters in the hollow of his hand, and Isai. 40. 12.
meted out Heaven with the span, and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a
measure, and weighed the Mountains in scales, and the Hills in a balance; to
whom all Nations are as a drop of the bucket, and are counted as the small dust
of the balance; Consider him as that All-powerful Being, before whom the
Pillars of Heaven tremble, Job 26. 11.
and are astonished at his reproof; before whom all Nations are as nothing, and
they are counted to him less than nothing and vanity. Isai. 40. 17.
Be not content to believe in general the Providence of God, but think of him
always as actually present, observing all our Words and Actions, and
understanding even our Thoughts afar off. Be not content Psalm. 139. 2.
to believe in general a Judgment to come, but frequently represent to your
self the Solemnity and the Terror of that great Day; imagine our Savior
sitting in Judgment, as in that Prophetical Allusion, with his Throne like the
fiery flame, Dan. 7. 9.
and his Wheels as burning fire; A fiery stream issuing, and coming forth from
before him; Thousand thousands ministering unto him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand standing before him; the Judgment set, and the Books opened. Lastly,
be not content to believe slightly and in general a state of Reward or
Punishment for Virtue or Vice; but meditate frequently on the Happiness of
those, who shall be admitted to the heavenly Jerusalem, to the general Assembly
Heb. 12 23.
of the firstborn, to an innumerable company of Angels, and to God the Judge
of all, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant: Consider the Happiness
of those, who shall Rev. 5. 10.
be made Kings and Priests unto God, and shall reign with him for ever; who
shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and
ever: And on the Dan. 12. 3.
other hand meditate seriously on the Misery of those, who shall be cast into
the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not
Mark 9. 44.
quenched; and where they shall be tormented Day and Night for ever and Rev.
20. 10.
ever.

22. I have been the longer upon this Head, because it is the first and most
necessary Foundation of all Religion; and because that Quae a sapientibus viris
reperta sunt, non satis credimus, nec apertis pectoribus haurimus, leviterque
tam magnae rei insistimus. Seneca, Ep. 60.
slight, careless and only customary Assent to the great Truths of Religion,
which is the Sum of most Men's Faith, seems to be the chief reason why things
of the utmost importance have so so small an effect upon the Lives and Actions
of Men. There is no need that every Man should proceed just by those steps,
which I have set down; but whoever will indeed make Religion the Business of
his Life, must by some like Method work in his Mind a firm and well-grounded
Belief of all its great Doctrines, and a deep and vigorous Sense of them.

CHAP. III. Of right Notions concerning Religion in general.
1. SEcondly, Endeavor to attain right Nations concerning Religion in general.
Next to the Belief of the Truth and of the Necessity of Religion, there is
nothing of greater Importance than the framing right Notions concerning the
Nature of it. For when Religion is represented as requiring any thing, that is
either not possible or not necessary to be practiced; when it is represented as
consisting in such things, as are either not worthy of God, or not profitable
to Men; in a word, when Religion is so represented, that Men may hope to be
religious without being virtuous, and to be accepted of God for some outward
performances, without a holy temper and disposition of Mind; this cuts the very
Sinews and undermines the Foundation of all Religion.

2. Now therefore to attain right Notions concerning the Nature of Religion, a
Man ought firmly to persuade himself of these following Considerations: That
the exercise of those great Moral Virtues, of Godliness, Righteousness and
Temperance, which are the eternal and unchangeable Law of God, is a thing in
its own Nature both truly excellent, and indispensably necessary to prepare Men
for that Happiness which is the Reward of Religion: That God truly and
sincerely desires to make Men happy, by the exercise of these Virtues: And that
therefore the great and ultimate Design of all true Religion, is to recommend
these Virtues, and to enforce their practice.

3. That the exercise of these great Moral Virtues, of Godliness, Righteousness
and Temperance, which are the eternal and unchangeable Law of God, is a thing
in its own Nature truly Noble and Excellent, is evidently acknowledged by the
common Consent and Verdict of all Men's Consciences. These Virtues are the
imitation of the Perfections of God; and as no Man is so brutish, as not to
admire the Perfections of Justice and Goodness, when he considers them
abstractedly in God; so he cannot but pay a proportionable respect, to whatever
he sees carry their resemblance in Men. Hence Virtue is the most lovely and
venerable of all things, and approves it self to the Reason and Consciences of
Men: Hence Vice becomes truly odious, and however it may insinuate it self into
the Practice, can never recommend it self to the Judgment of Mankind. Hence
even those very Persons, who by the prevailing Power of some Interest or Lust,
are themselves drawn aside out of the Paths of Virtue, Placet suapte natura,
adeoque gratiosa virtus est, ut insitum etiam sit malis probare meliores.
Seneca de Benef. 4.
cannot yet forbear to give it its true Character and Commendation in others.
Thus the Officers, who were sent by the Pharisees to apprehend Jesus, could not
forbear declaring, that he spoke as never Joh. 7. 46.
Man spoke: And the Roman Governor, when he gave Sentence that he should be
Crucified, could not at the same instant forbear openly professing, that he
found no fault in him. Men cannot Joh. 18. 38.
choose but think well of that Virtue, which the Dominion of their Lusts forces
them to desert, or the necessity of their Affairs compels them to discourage:
They cannot but wish, they were the Men they are not; and pray with Balaam,
that though they imitate not the Life, yet at least they might die the death of
the Righteous, and that Numb. 23. 10.
their last end may be like his. Though therefore virtuous Men are frequently
persecuted in the World, and sometimes merely for their Virtue; yet it is not
because Virtue can ever be hated, but because those from whom they suffer,
mistake it to be what it is not; or else because, knowing it to be what it is,
they are notwithstanding prevailed upon by some private Interest, to persecute
it contrary to the Judgment of their Conscience, which would force them to
honor and respect it. An Instance of the former Case, are all the Persecutions
of the Christians in the Primitive Times: It Is certain these Men were Virtuous
and Religious, and it is certain they suffered merely upon that account: But
then it is also as certain, that those from whom they suffered, did not
persecute them because they thought them Religious, but because they mistook
them not to be so; they did not persecute them because they thought them to be
worshippers of the true God, but because they looked on them as despisers of
their false ones: They were so unhappily blinded by Prejudice and Idolatry,
that they mistook Religion for Superstition, and Superstition for Religion:
Hence they implacably persecuted that Doctrine, whose Evidence and Conviction,
if they would have opened their Eyes, they could not have resisted; and
endeavored to root out the true Religion, out of Zeal to the honor of a false
one. An eminent Instance of the latter Case, is the Condemnation of our
Savior: He was manifestly innocent of the Crimes laid to his Charge, and
Pilate knew him to be so; but then it is also manifest, that he did not condemn
him because he was Innocent, but because he was willing to do the Jews a
pleasure: Our Savior's Innocence Act. 24. 27.
was sufficient, to convince the Mind of his Judge; and 'twas only Interest,
that overpowered the force of that Conviction. Virtue therefore is truly Noble
and Excellent in it self; and wicked Men, even while they are persecuting it,
cannot deny it to be so.

4. Again, That the exercise of those great Moral Virtues, of Godliness,
Righteousness and Temperance, is a thing indispensably necessary to prepare Men
for that Happiness which is the Reward of Religion, is evident from the
Consideration of the Nature of that Happiness. The Happiness which Religion
promises to holy and good Men, is this; That they shall be received into the
blessed Society of Angels, and of the Spirits of just Men made perfect; and
that Heb. 12. 23.
with them they shall be admitted into the immediate presence of God, to enjoy
that Satisfaction which must necessarily arise, from the Contemplation of his
Perfections, and from the (...) of his Favor. And if this be the Case, then
nothing is more evident, than that the exercise of Virtue is indispensably
necessary, to prepare Men for the enjoyment of this Happiness. For what
agreement can there be, between a sensual, spightful, or malicious Soul, and
the pure Society of the Spirits of just Men made perfect? We see even in this
Life, how ungrateful the Society of good Men is, unto those that are wicked;
and as it is in this, so doubtless it will be in the other World. Those Souls
which have been wholly immersed in Sense, and given up to the Pleasures of this
present World; can never be fit Company for those spiritual and refined Minds,
whose Desires and Enjoyments are as far exalted above every thing that is gross
and sensual, as Heaven is above Earth: And those malicious Spirits, whose
delight upon Earth was in nothing but Hatred, Envy and Revenge; can never
converse in Heaven with those Divine Souls, who feed and live upon no other
Pleasures, but those of Goodness, Holiness and Love. In like manner, what can
be more impossible, than for an earthly and wicked Soul, to be made happy by
the Vision and Fruition of God? To see God is to behold and contemplate those
glorious Perfections, of infinite Goodness, Purity and Truth; and to enjoy God,
is so to love and adore those amiable Perfections, as to be transformed into
the likeness and resemblance of them: And is it possible for a wicked Soul, to
be made partaker of this Happiness? Tell a covetous Worldling of a Treasure
laid up in Heaven, where neither Mat. 6. 20.
Moth nor Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through and steal:
Tell him of a never-fading Inheritance in the World to come, or of a City not
made with Hands, whose Builder and Maker is Heb. 11. 10.
God: Tell an ambitious aspiring Mind, of the Glory that shall be revealed
hereafter; Romans 8. 18.
or a voluptuous Person of spiritual and refined Pleasures, which Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive
them; 1 Cor. 2. 9.
and will they have any relish of these things? Will they not be much more
inquisitive after the Glories of Earth, and the Gratifications of Sense? So
that unless we suppose God should work a Miracle for these Men, and when he
removes them into another World, should transform them also into new Creatures,
it is no more possible for them to enjoy the Happiness of Heaven, than for Body
to enjoy the Pleasures of Spirit, or for Darkness to have communion and
agreement with Light. I do not say, That if God should transplant these Men
into Heaven, he could not make them happy there; but while they are so
exceedingly indisposed for it, nothing is more certain than that he never will.
The exercise therefore of Virtue, is the indispensable Condition of Happiness:
And in proportion as we draw nearer to the Perfection of Virtue, so do we to
the Fountain and Perfection of Happiness. The greater degrees of Virtue any
Being is endued with, so much the higher Rank does it obtain in the Order of
Creatures: The highest Angels, so much as they obey the Will of God more
entirely, and imitate the Divine Life more perfectly than Men do, so much are
they exalted above Men, and have a nearer approach to the immediate presence
and enjoyment of God: And by how much one Man in this Life obtains a greater
degree of Holiness than another; so much a more excellent degree of Happi-ness
is he prepared to receive in the World to come.

5. And That God agreeably to this natural Order of things, does truly and
sincerely desire to make Men happy by the exercise of Virtue, is evident both
from our natural Notions of God, and from the Revealed Declaration of his Will.
God, who is a Being infinitely happy in the enjoyment of himself, and who
created all things for no other reason, but to communicate to them his
Perfections and his Happiness, cannot possibly but make every Man as happy, as
the condition of his Nature, and the improvements of his Virtue make him
capable to be: And that he will do so, he has moreover assured us by most
express and repeated declarations: He declares that his Delight is in them that
fear him, and that he Rejoices over them for good; He invites men with all the
tender promises of a compassionate Father, to Repentance and Reformation; and
swears by himself that he has no pleasure in the destruction of the wicked,
but earnestly desires that they should return and live: And nothing can be more
absurd, than to imagine that God has secretly made any determination, which may
be contrary to what he has so openly and expressly revealed. What sort of Men he
has decreed to be happy or miserable he has clearly and fully declared to us in
his Word: And other Decrees than this, if he has at all made any, it is neither
necessary nor possible for us to know. Sufficient it is for us, that as sure as
God and his Scriptures are true, so sure are we, that he that believes and
obeys the Gospel, shall be happy; and that God neither has, nor can Decree any
thing, whereby a truly Religious Man may be excluded from Happiness, or a
Sincere Man from the possibility of becoming truly religious.

6. Since therefore God truly and sincerely desires, to make men Happy by the
exercise of Virtue; and since that Virtue, which is the Condition of this
Happiness, is no other than the Practice of those great Moral Duties, of
Godliness, Righteousness and Temperance, which are the Eternal and Unchangeable
Law of God; as has already been shown; it follows necessarily, that the great
and ultimate design of all true Religion, can be no other than to recommend
these Virtues, and to enforce their practice. Other things may be Helps and
Assistances of Religion; many External Observances may for wise Reasons be
positively commanded, and may be of exceeding great use, as means to promote
Devotion and Piety; but the Life and Substance of all true Religion, the End
and Scope in which all things else must terminate, cannot possibly be any
other, than the Practice of these great and Eternal Duties.

7. In Natural Religion this is very evident: For the Foundation of its
Obligations being nothing else, but a due consideration of the Nature of God,
and his Relation to Men; it is plain, all that these things naturally led Men to,
was only to keep up in themselves such a Holy Temper and Disposition of Mind,
as might discover it self in a constant endeavor of being Like unto God, and
of obeying his Laws. And though this most simple and absolute Religion, did
through the corruption of Men's Wills and Affections, quickly degenerate into
the grossest Idolatry, and most ridiculous Superstition; though instead of real
and substantial Virtue, the generality of Men soon fell into the Observance of
foolish and absurd Rites, and the World was overspread with Ignorance and Vice;
yet the wisest and most considerate Men amongst the Heathens always understood,
that (...). Plato Alcibiade 2.
God did not look so much at the Outward Pomp and Ceremony of Religion, as at
the Inward Holiness and Purity of the heart; that Cohtur autem, non taurorum
opimis corporibus contrucidatis, nec auro argentoque suspenso, nec in thesauros
stipe infusa, sed pia and recta-voluntate. Seneca Ep. 116.
God valued not Sacrifices and Rich Offerings, but only the Piety and Devotion
of the Mind: and that the Vis Deos propitiare? Bonus esto: Satis illos coluit,
qui imitatus est. Seneca Ep. 96.
only way to keep the Favor of God, was to imitate his Nature, and to obey his
Commands.

8. Nor is it less evident that the great and ultimate design of the Jewish
Religion, was to preserve and increase the Moral Virtue of Men. For though God
did impose upon the Jews a burdensome System of Rites and Ordinances; yet it is
plain he did it, not that he took any delight in that External and Ceremonial
Service, but that by condescending in that manner to the infirmities and
prejudices of a stiffnecked People, he might keep up the Worship of the True
God, and restore that Holiness and Inward Religion of Men's Minds, which the
Light of Nature had not been sufficient to maintain. This therefore God
perpetually inculcates to them by his Prophets, that he did not value their
Ceremonious Performances without Holiness and Obedience to the Moral Law: I
spoke not to your Fathers, says he, nor commanded them in the day that I
brought them out of the Land of Egypt, concerning Burnt-Offerings and
Sacrifices; but this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my Voice, Jer. 7. 22.
Nay, so far was God from Instituting the Jewish Service upon any other design,
than the making that People more holy than the Heathen about them were, that
whenever it failed of having that desired Effect, he declares that he even
abhorred all their Religious Exercises: He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew
a Man; he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs neck; he that
offers an Oblation, as if he offered Swines Blood; and he that burns
Incense, as if he blessed an Idol; yea they have chosen their own ways, and
their Soul delights in their Abominations, Isa. 65. 3. And though the later
Jews grew generally so superstitious in the observance of their Ceremonies, as
thereby even to neglect the weightier matters of the Law; yet those who
considered things more thoroughly, always maintained and taught zealously, that
(...) Philo Jud^us.
it was not slaying a multitude of Sacrifices, or bringing splendid Offerings,
or even building and adorning the Temple of God with all the cost and beauty in
the World, that could truly denominate a Man religious; that it was a great
deceit for Men to think that God would be flattered and put off with Outward
and Ceremonious Services instead of Truth, Righteousness and Holiness of Mind*
and that (...) Philo de Plantati^ne Noe.
nothing could be more ridiculous, than for Men to be very careful not to enter
into the Temple, which is built of Wood and Stone, without first washing and
cleansing their bodies; and yet not be afraid to appear before God in Prayer,
with unclean and polluted Minds.

9. Lastly, That the only design of God's Instituting the Christian Religion,
was to make Men yet more Virtuous and more Holy; is evident from the whole
Tenor of the Gospel. The design of our Savior's Life and Preaching, was to
give Men a body of more Spiritual and Refined Laws; to set them an Example of a
more perfect and holy Life; and to make a clearer Revelation of the Wrath of
God against all Romans 1. 18.
ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men: The Design of his Death and Passion,
was to make an Expiation for Sins that are past, and to make a fuller discovery
of the heinous nature of Sin, which God would not pardon even upon true
Repentance, without so great and sufficient a Satisfaction: And the Design of
his sending the Holy Spirit, was to purify to himself a peculiar People, by
teaching and enabling Men, that denying ungodliness and worldly Tit. 2. 12.
lusts, they should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World.

10. Accordingly we find the Apostles every where in their Epistles, plainly
declaring and giving Men warning, that since they had now received a most full
Revelation of the Will of God, and a most clear Discovery of the Rewards and
Punishments of a future State; if their Virtue did not become proportionable to
their Knowledge, and they purified not themselves from all filthiness both of
flesh 2 Cor. 7. 1.
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God; it would be even worse for
them, 2 Pet. 2. 21.
than if they had never known the way of Righteousness. Be not deceived, says
Saint Paul, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Thieves,
nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, etc. i. e. no unrighteous person, shall inherit
the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. And again, Let no man deceive you with vain
words; For because of these things comes the Wrath of God upon the Children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 5. 6. And again, Of which things I tell you before, as I
have also told you in times past, that they who do such things, shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 21. And all those Metaphorical Expressions,
such as the New Man, the New Creature, the New Birth, Regeneration, Conversion,
and the like, by which the Apostles frequently represent Religion, do
manifestly tend to this; that under the Gospeldispensation, nothing will stand
a Man in any stead, but an entire Reformation of Life and Manners; and that all
other things are nothing, except only the keeping ^ Cor. 7. 19.
the Commandments of God.

11. How miserably then do those Men abuse this great Salvation, and turn the
Grace of God into lasciviousness, who imagine, that because Christ has
disannulled the Old Law, which was appointed only for a time, therefore we may
be excused by our Christian Liberty from obeying the Eternal Commands of God;
that because Christ has established for us a Covenant of Grace, therefore we
need not be zealous to abound in good Works; that because Christ has Redeemed
us from the Punishment of Sin, by the Sacrifice of himself, therefore we need
not be zealous to rescue our selves from under the Power and Dominion of it;
that because the Righteousness of Christ shall be available for us unto
Justification, therefore there is no necessity we should have any of our own:
In a word, that because Christ has promised Salvation to those who believe the
Gospel, therefore there is no necessity we should be solicitous to obey it.

12. Our Savior has indeed disannulled the Ceremonial part of the Law, which
was appointed only for a time* but he has thereby more firmly Established the
Moral part of the Law, which is of eternal and unchangeable Obligation: And
therefore as nothing could be more foolish than the Opinion of those Judaizers,
who thought that Christ had not abrogated any part of the Law; so nothing can
be more impious than the Opinion of these Gentilizers, who contend that he has
destroyed it all. Our Savior has indeed purchased for us a Covenant of Grace,
that is, a Covenant wherein Pardon is granted to past sins upon Repentance; but
the indispensable Condition of that Covenant, is, that we be for the future
zealous of good works: 2 Timothy 1. 10
He has indeed brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel, and
opened to us an abundant entrance into the Kingdom 2 Pet. 1. 11
of God; but it is not that any unrenewed Nature should be admitted to have a
share in those pure and undefiled Rewards, but that those who have broken Dan.
4. 27.
off their Sins by Repentance, and their Iniquities by showing mercy to the
poor, may through his Merits be restored to the Love and Favor of God. Our
Savior has indeed redeemed us from the Punishment of Sin, by the Sacrifice of
himself; but it is expressly upon condition, that we rescue our selves from the
Power and Dominion of it. In order to this, he has made a most clear Discovery
of the Will of God to us, and enabled us to obey it according to that
Discovery* he has beaten off our Chains, and opened us a way to retreat out of
the bondage of Sin and Satan, into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God; he
Romans 8 21.
ha^ paid the Price, and Redeemed us out of Captivity: But if notwithstanding
all this, we still continue in Sin, it is our own fault and extreme folly here,
and will be our condemnation and misery hereafter; if notwithstanding all that
Christ has done for us, we will yet sit still under the Power of Sin, we shall,
notwithstanding all that he has done and suffered for us, at last fall into the
Punishment thereof. The Righteousness of Christ is indeed so far available to
those who sincerely desire to obey the Gospel, as that for his sake that
Imperfect Righteousness, by which they could not be justified according to the
Law, shall be acceptable before God (through Faith in him) unto Justification;
But for one who uses no endeavors to be righteous himself, to expect to be
justified by the external Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, is for a
Sick Man to expect to be made whole by the Imputation of another Health; or
for a Miserable Man to be made happy merely by the Imputation of another Man's
Felicity. Righteousness is not an outward imaginary Quality, but an inward and
real Disposition of heart and mind, which must show forth it self in real and
substantial acts of Holiness and Piety: Little Children, says St. John, let no
man deceive you; He that does Righteousness is righteous, 1 John 3. 7. Lastly,
Our Savior has indeed promised Salvation, to those who Believe the Gospel; but
it is most expressly upon this condition, that they Obey it also. Not every one
that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven* but he
that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matt. 5. 21. Without this
Obedience, nothing in the World can stand a Man in any stead: His Believing and
Professing the Truth of the Christian Faith, will avail him nothing: His
continuing in the Communion of the Church of Christ, will profit him nothing:
If any man seems to be religious, Jam. 1. 26.
and continues in any one Sin, deceiving his own heart, that Man's Religion is
vain: For though he could speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels, and had all
1 Cor. 13. 2.
Faith, so that he could remove Mountains; yet if he were not holy in his Life
and Conversation, it would profit him nothing. Many will plead before our
Savior at the Day of Judgment, that they have not only believed his Doctrine,
but also have taught in his Name, and in his Name have cast out Devils, and in
his Name done many Luke 13. 26.
wonderful Works, that is, have had the extraordinary Gift even of working
Miracles; and yet if they be workers of Iniquity, he will say unto them, Depart
from me, I know you not.

CHAP. IV. A Digression concerning the Doctrine of Faith and Works, delivered
by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, and in that to the Galatians.
1. THere is but one thing, that I know of, that can with any color be urged
against this Notion of true Religion which I have now laid down: And that is
the Doctrine of Faith and Works, delivered by St. Paul in his Epistle to the
Romans, and in that to the Galatians. Which because it is a Doctrine of the
greatest Importance, and liable to be misinterpreted to countenance the most
pernicious Errors; I shall therefore in this Chapter, by way of Digression,
endeavor to give a brief Account of the Occasion of the writing these two
Epistles, and to explain the Doctrine delivered therein.

2. Before the coming of Christ, the Jews we know were the peculiar People of
God, selected out of all the Nations of the Earth to be the Standard of true
Religion, and to be the People among whom God would choose to place his Name. To
them were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. To them pertained the
Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the
Service of God, and the Promises; whose are the Fathers, and out of whom
according to the flesh Christ came, who is over all God blessed for ever, Rom
9. 4, and 5. that is; with them were entrusted the Revelations of the Will of
God, the Law and the Prophecies: To them was granted the peculiar Honor and
Privilege, that they should be accounted the Sons or People of God, and that
they should be accordingly under the more (...). Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
peculiar Care and Protection of his Providence: Among them was the Ark and
Temple of God, the Shecinah or Glorious Presence of the Divine Majesty; In
Judah was God known, his Name was great in Israel: In Salem also was his
Tabernalce, and his dwelling place in Sion: With them God entered solemnly into
Covenant, that he would be their God and they should be his People, and
confirmed this Covenant with the Sacramental Seal of Circumcision, and with
sprinkling of Blood. To them God himself prescribed a Law or Form of Worship in
a wonderful and miraculous manner; and their Polity also was of Divine
Institution and Appointment; God showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and
his Judgments unto Israel: He did not deal so with any other Nation, neither
had the Heathen knowledge of his Laws. Lastly, They were the Posterity of those
Patriarchs, to whom God had so often promised and sworn by himself, That in
their Seed should all the Nations of the Earth be blessed; and among them was
born that Messiah, of whom so great things had been Prophesied, and who was
therefore the expectation of all the Ends of the Earth. These were the great
and glorious Privileges, which by the peculiar Favor of God, the Nation of the
Jews enjoyed before the preaching of the Gospel; these were the Grounds upon
which that People so highly valued themselves, above the rest of Mankind: And
most justly might they have done so, with an humble and thankful acknowledgment
of the Mercy and Favor of God: But they looked upon these high Privileges, not
as the free Gift of God, but as a Right and Propriety, to which they only had a
just Claim, who could reckon their Descent from Abraham and the Patriarchs: All
other Nations in the World they looked upon with the utmost Scorn and Contempt,
as Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, Strangers to the Covenant of
Promise, and scarce worthy of the Protection of the Divine Providence* The
Establishment of their Law and Ceremonies they imagined to be such, as was
designed by God to continue for ever; and the Promises contained in the Law and
the Prophets they thought to belong so peculiarly to themselves, that they
would not believe any other People could ever come to be partakers of them.
When the Messiah himself should appear, they were persuaded that he was to
establish an everlasting Kingdom over the Jewish Nation only, and so become
indeed the Wonder and Amazement, but not the Salvation of the Gentiles. This
Opinion was so firmly rooted among them in our Savior's time, that even those
who believed in his Name, and were convinced that his Kingdom was not to be a
Temporal but a Spiritual Kingdom, did yet imagine that the Jews only were to be
admitted to be Subjects of this his Spiritual Kingdom, and that the Gospel was
not to be preached to the Gentiles: Till St. Peter having an express Command
from Heaven not to count any Man common or unclean, as you may read Acts 10.
went and preached the Gospel to Cornelius the Centurion; and his Preaching
being seconded by the miraculous effusion of the Holy Ghost upon the Gentile
Converts, convinced them that God was of a truth no respecter of Persons, but
that he had unto the Gentiles also granted Repentance unto Life. Act. 10. 34.
The great Mystery of the receiving in of the Gentiles being thus discovered,
and God having himself declared by such a remarkable Miracle, that in every
Nation he that fears God and works Righteousness is accepted of him; there
immediately arose a question whether those who by being converted to
Christianity were admitted into the Number of the elect People of God, and
thereby became partakers of all the Privileges which had hitherto been confined
to the Jewish Nation, were not thereupon obliged to become Proselytes also to
the Jewish Law. The converted Jews, who had not yet laid aside their old
Prejudices, but retained an extreme fondness for their Ceremonial Law,
contended most earnestly, that (...)* Eusebius. Hist. Lib. 3. c. 21.
it was necessary that the Jewish Religion should be continued together with
the Christian, teaching the Brethren every where, and saying, Except ye be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved, Acts 15. 1. Upon
this, the Apostles and Elders which were gathered together at Jerusalem, held a
Consultation; where St. Peter having delivered it as his Opinion, That since
God himself had born witness to the Gentiles, by giving them the Holy Ghost,
'twould be no better than tempting God, to put a Yoke upon their Necks, which
neither themselves nor their Fathers had been able to bear; they immediately
agreed to write unto them, that they did not think it necessary to lay upon
them any such Burden; as you may see at large, Acts 15. And now the Question
being decided by such an authoritative Sentence as this, It seemed good unto
the Holy Ghost, and to us the Apostles and Elders* etc. one would have thought
there should have been no more Debate about this Matter: But the restless Jews,
moved with envy that the Gentiles should be admitted into the Number of the
elect People of God as well as themselves, persisted still in their Obstinacy
notwithstanding this positive Determination, persuading the Gentile Converts
that they must needs observe the Law of Moses, and constraining them to be
circumcised; insomuch that St. Paul, who as far as he could lawfully, conformed
himself to the Humors of all men, that he might by all means gain some, was
forced to circumcise Timothy at Derbe, because of the Jews that were in those
quarters, Acts 16. 3. Though at other times, as being the Apostle to whom was
especially committed the preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, he always
earnestly exhorted his Gentile Converts to stand fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ had made them free; and particularly, his Epistle to the Romans, and
that to the Galatians, were written upon this very Occasion; as will be evident
to any one, who shall impartially consider the Matter.

3. For that there are abundance of Passages in these Epistles, which so
evidently relate to this Controversy, that they cannot possibly be interpreted
to any other Sense, is manifest from but cursorily reading the Epistles
themselves. A great part of the Epistle to the Romans is professedly about the
casting off the Jews, and the coming in of the Gentiles; particularly the 9th,
10th and 11th Chapters: And the 14th Chapter is wholly spent in showing the
unnecessariness of the Jewish observation of Days, and distinction of Meats;
One Man esteems one day above another, another esteems every day alike,
Verse 5. and I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean of it self; but to him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him
it is unclean, Verse 14. and so on. In the Epistle to the Galatians, the
Apostle tells his Gentile Converts, that he was amazed they should so soon be
drawn away from the Truth, by some that troubled them and would pervert the
Gospel of Christ, Chap. 1. ver. 7. He gives them warning, that the reason why
those perverters of the Gospel persuaded them to Judaize, was only that they
might make a fair show in the Flesh; they constrain you, says he, to be
circumcised, only lest they should suffer persecution for the Gross of Christ;
For neither they themselves, who are circumcised, keep the Law, but desire to
have you circumcised that they may glory in your flesh, Chapter 6. Ver. 12, and 13.
He assures them that in Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature, Chapter 6. ver. 15. He urges them earnestly
to stand fast in their Christian Liberty, and not to be entangled again with
the yoke of Bondage, protesting that if any man would be circumcised, Christ
should profit him nothing, but he should become a debtor to fulfill the whole
Law, Chapter 5. ver. 1. He tells them also how he openly rebuked St. Peter at
Antioch for withdrawing and separating himself from the Gentiles, for fear of
them which were of the circumcision, Chapter 2. Ver. 12. All which, and many other
the like Passages, do so evidently refer to that Controversy, Whether the
Jewish Religion was to be mixed with the Christian, or no, that I know not
whether any one ever attempted to interpret them to any other Sense.

4. And that those other Parts also of these Epistles, which have by some been
otherwise interpreted, ought indeed to be understood wholly to relate to the
same Controversy, appears sufficiently from the Apostles way of arguing. For
according to any other Interpretation, the Terms, which the Apostle makes use
of, are improper; and his reasoning is hard, intricate, and not concluding. As
is sufficiently evident from the difficulty that some Expositors have met with,
to vindicate St. Paul from thwarting the main Design of the Gospel, from
contradicting the express Words of some other of the Apostles, and also from
contradicting himself. But if these whole Epistles be understood to refer to
that Question, Whether the Christian Religion be alone sufficient to Salvation,
or whether it be necessary to observe together with it the Ceremonies also of
the Jewish Law; the Terms, which the Apostle uses, are most apt and proper; and
his Reasoning is most easy, strong and conclusive: As will most evidently
appear from a brief view of them both.

5. The design then of the Apostle being on one hand to magnify the Christian
Religion, by setting forth its sufficiency to Salvation; and on the other hand,
to demonstrate the insufficiency and unnecessariness of the ceremonial
observances of the Jewish Law; the Terms which he all along makes use of to
express the Christian and Jewish Religion by, are such as may best serve to set
forth the excellency of the one, and diminish the opinion which Men had taken
up of the necessity of the other. Thus because the first and most fundamental
Duty of the Christian Religion, is believing in God, and believing that most
perfect Revelation of his Will, which he has made to Mankind by our Savior
Jesus Christ; whereas on the contrary, the principal part of the Jewish
Religion, or at least of that Religion which the Judaizing Christians so
earnestly contended for, was an anxious observance of the burdensome Ceremonies
of the Mosaic Law; therefore the Apostle calls the Christian Religion Faith,
and the Jewish Religion the Law. Thus in the Epistle to the Romans, chapter 3. ver.
28. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by Faith, without the deeds
of the Law; that is, It clearly appears from what has been already said, that
Obedience to the Christian Religion is sufficient to justify a Man, without
observing the Ceremonies of the Jewish: And ver. 31. Do we then make void the
Law through Faith? God forbid; yea, we establish the Law; that is, Do we then,
as some Men object, by our preaching up the Christian Religion make void the
Law of God, or that Revelation of his Will which he made to the Jews? No, we
are so far from that, that by introducing Christianity we establish, confirm,
and perfect the moral and immutable part of the Law much more effectually, than
the Jewish Ceremonies were able to do. Thus likewise in the Epistle to the
Galatians, chapter 3. ver. 2. This only would I learn of you. Received ye the
Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? Or, as it is
expressed, ver. 5. He that ministers to you the Spirit, and works Miracles
among you, does he it by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? that
is, I appeal unto your selves, who contend so earnestly for the necessity of
keeping up the Jewish Ceremonies; was it by your observing the Rites of the
Jewish Religion that ye received the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, or by your being
converted to the Christian? So also, ver. 24. The Law was our Schoolmaster to
bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith; that is, The Jewish
Dispensation was appointed by God in condescension to the weakness of that
People, to fit them by degrees for the reception of the Christian: And chapter 2.
ver. 15. The Apostle having rebuked St. Peter openly, for withdrawing himself
from the Gentiles at Antioch, adds, We who are Jews by nature, and not Sinners
of the Gentiles, knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law,
but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that
we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of the Law;
that is, If we our selves, who were brought up in the Jewish Religion, being
convinced that that Religion was not able to justify us in the sight of God,
have thought fit to forsake it and embrace the Christian Religion, in hopes to
be justified thereby, how much less reason have you to compel the Gentiles, who
were never brought up in the Jewish Religion, to conform themselves to the
Customs of the Jews, after their Conversion to Christianity?

6. Again, because the Christian Religion teaches us to expect Salvation not
from our own Merits, but from the Grace of God, that is, according to the Terms
of that new and gracious Covenant, wherein God has promised to accept of
Sincerity instead of perfect Obedience; whereas on the contrary, the Jews
depended upon their exact performance of the Works of the Law; therefore the
Apostle calls the Christian Religion Grace, and the Jewish Religion Works. Thus
in the Epistle to the Romans, chapter 11. ver. 5. So then at this present time
also, there is a remnant according to the election of Grace; that is, though the
Jewish Nation having rejected the gracious offer of the Gospel, are thereupon
rejected from being the People of God, yet has God reserved to himself a
Remnant from among them, even those who have embraced the Christian Religion;
And if by Grace, then is it no more of Works; that is, and if it be upon
account of their having embraced the Christian Religion, that they are reckoned
the peculiar People of God, then is not this Privilege any longer annexed to
the Professors of the Jewish Religion; otherwise Grace is no more Grace; that
is, otherwise the Christian Religion is in vain, and not, what it pretends to
be, the Grace of God: Thus also, chapter 6. ver. 14. Sin shall not have the
dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law but under Grace; that is, ye
are not under the Jewish Religion, but under the Christian. So likewise in the
Epistle to the Galatians, chapter 5. ver. 4. Christ is become of no effect unto
you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace; that
is, whosoever will needs retain the Jewish Religion, he takes upon him to
fulfill the whole Law, forsaking the gracious Dispensation of the Christian
Religion, and therefore Christ shall be of no effect unto him.

7. Again, because the Duties of the Christian Religion are almost wholly Moral
and Spiritual, respecting the inward disposition of the Heart and Mind; whereas
on the contrary, the Ceremonies of the Jewish Law were for the most part
external, and as the Apostle to the Hebrews calls them, Carnal Ordinances,
respecting chiefly the outward purification of the Body; therefore the Apostle
calls the Christian Religion Spirit, and the Jewish Religion Flesh. Thus in the
Epistle to the Romans, chapter 8. ver. 3, and 4. For what the Law could not do, in
that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful Flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the Flesh; that the righteousness of
the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit; that is, whereas the Jewish Religion, because of its outward and carnal
Ordinances, was weak and insufficient to make Men truly Righteous; God sending
his own Son in the likeness of sinful Man to offer up himself a Sacrifice for
the Sins of Mankind, established the Christian Religion, which purifying
thoroughly the whole Heart and Mind, and purging the Conscience from dead Works,
might through the Grace and Mercy of God avail to justify Men from all things,
from which they could not be justified by the Law. Thus also in the Epistle to
the Galatians, chapter 3. ver. 3. Are ye so foolish? Having begun in the Spirit,
are ye now made perfect by the Flesh? that is, Are ye so foolish as to think,
that after ye have embraced the Truth of the Christian Religion, you can become
yet more perfect by observing the Ceremonies of the Jewish Law?

8. These are the Terms which the Apostle expresses the Christian and Jewish
Religion by in these Epistles: And according to this Interpretation, the
substance of both these Epistles may clearly be resolved into certain
Arguments, by which the Apostle plainly and strongly proves, against the
Judaizing Believers, that Obedience to the Christian Religion is sufficient to
Salvation, without observing the Ceremonies of the Jewish.

9. His first Argument is this. The Jewish Religion having proved insufficient
to make Men truly good, as the Natural Religion had before done, there was a
necessity of setting up another Institution of Religion, which might be more
available and effectual to that End; now the setting up a new Institution of
Religion necessarily implying the abolishing of the old, it follows that
Christianity was not to be added to Judaism, but that Judaism was to be changed
into Christianity, that is, that the Jewish Religion was from thenceforward to
cease, and the Christian Religion to succeed in its room. This Argument the
Apostle insists upon in the 1st, 2d, 5th, 6th and 7th Chapters to the Romans,
and in the 1st and 4th Chapters to the Galatians. In the 1st and 2d Chapters of
the Epistle to the Romans, he shows that the Jewish Religion had proved
insufficient to make Men truly Holy, as Natural Religion had also done: In the
5th and 6th Chapters of that Epistle to the Romans, and in the 1st to the
Galatians, he gives an account of the Institution of the Christian Religion, as
more available to that End; in the 7th Chapter to the Romans he shows that this
new Institution of Religion necessarily implies the abolishing of the old one;
and this he does from the similitude of a Woman's being bound by the Law to her
Husband so long as he lives, but if her Husband be dead, she is free from the
Law of her Husband; which Similitude he applies, ver. 4. Wherefore my Brethren
ye also are become dead to the Law by the Body of Christ, that ye should be
married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should
bring forth fruit unto God: In the 4th Chapter to the Galatians, he proves the
same thing from the Similitude of a young Heirs being under Governors or
Tutors, ver. 1. I say that the Heir, as long as he is a Child, differs
nothing from a Servant, though he be Lord of all; but is under Tutors and
Governors, until the time appointed of the Father; even so we, when we were
Children, were in bondage under the elements of the World: But when the fullness
of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law,
to redeem those that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
Sons; that is, The Jewish Law was an Institution of Religion adapted by God in
great Condescension to the weak Apprehensions of that People; but when the
fullness of time was come, God sent his Son Jesus Christ to institute a more
perfect Form of Religion, after the settlement of which in the World, the
former Dispensation was to be disannulled, for the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof.

10. The second Argument, by which the Apostle proves that the Christian
Religion is sufficient to justify a Man, without mixing therewith the Rites of
the Jewish, is this: The Sum and Essence of all Religion, is Obedience to the
moral and eternal Law of God; since therefore the Ceremonies of the Jewish Law
were instituted only for that very reason, that they might promote this great
End, and prepare Men's Hearts for the reception of that more perfect Institution
of Religion, wherein God was to be worshipped and obeyed in Spirit and in
Truth; it is manifest, that when this more perfect Institution of Religion was
settled, the former, which was designed for no other reason but to be a
preparatory to this, must be abolished. This Argument the Apostle insists on in
the 2d Chapter to the Romans, and in the 3d to the Galatians: In the 2d to the
Romans he shows, that every Institution of Religion, and particularly the
Jewish, was no otherwise of any esteem in the sight of God, than as it promoted
that great end of Obedience to his Moral and Eternal Law: For Circumcision,
says he, verily profits if thou keep the Law; but if thou be a breaker of
the Law, thy Circumcision is made Uncircumcision; Therefore if the
Uncircumcision keep the Righteousness of the Law; shall not his Uncircumcision
be counted for Circumcision? And shall not Uncircumcision, which is by nature,
if it keep the Law, judge thee who by the Letter and Circumcision do
transgress the Law? For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision which is outward in the flesh; But he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit and not in the
letter, whose praise is not of Men but of God, v. 25. to the end. In the 3d to
the Galatians he argues, that the Jewish Religion having been thus instituted
only to prepare Men for that Obedience to the Eternal Law of God, which was to
be the sum and essence of the Christian Religion; it follows that when this
latter and more perfect Institution took place, there was no need of continuing
the former: The Law, says he, was added because of transgressions, till the
Seed should come, to whom the Promise was made, v. 19. And v. 23. Before Faith
came we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith which should afterward
be revealed; Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ,
that we might be justified by Faith; But after that Faith is come, we are no
longer under a Schoolmaster.

11. The Third Argument which the Apostle makes use of to prove that those who
were converted to the Christian Religion, were not bound any longer to observe
the Jewish, is this: The Religion of Abraham was such a Religion, as was
acceptable to God, and available to Justification; But now the Religion of
Abraham was the same with the Christian Religion, consisting only of Faith and
Obedience without the works of the Jewish Law; (For the Scripture says
expressly, that the Gospel was Preached before unto Abraham, and that his Faith
was reckoned unto him for Righteousness, when he was not in Circumcision, but
in Uncircumcision;) It follows therefore, that the Faith and Obedience of the
Christian Religion shall be imputed unto us for Righteousness, without the
works of the Jewish Law. This Argument the Apostle largely and strongly insists
upon in the whole 4th Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and in the 3d to
the Galatians, as you may there read at large.

12. The fourth and last Argument, by which the Apostle proves that the
Christian Religion is sufficient to Salvation without retaining the Jewish, is
this: The Posterity of Abraham were the Elect and the peculiar People of God;
But by the Posterity of Abraham is not meant strictly those who descend from
Abraham according to the flesh, but the Children of the Promise, (that is, as
many as are of the Faith of Abraham,) shall be counted for the Seed: The true
Religion therefore and Service of God, is not confined to the Jewish Nation,
who are the Posterity of Abraham according to the flesh, but the Gentiles also
which believe, have attained to Righteousness, even the Righteousness which is
of Faith; that is, those of all Nations, as well Gentiles as Jews, who embrace
the Christian Religion, which is the same with the Religion of Abraham, shall
be justified with faithful Abraham. And this Argument the Apostle insists upon
in the 9th, 10th, and 11th Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans, and in the
4th to the Galatians.

13. This is the Sum of the Arguments, which the Apostle makes use of in these
two Epistles, to prove against the Judaizing Christians, that there was no
necessity of retaining the Jewish Religion together with the Christian. And
from the largeness, clearness, and strength of these Arguments, it is evident
that the determination of this Question is indeed the principal scope and
design of the Apostle in these Epistles. For nothing can be more absurd than to
suppose, that the Apostle should most strongly and largely demonstrate a thing,
which was not really the design of his discourse; or that on the other hand he
should make a thing the professed Subject of his discourse and yet prove it by
such intricate and obscure Arguments, as the wisest and cunningest of Men
should never be able to reconcile, either with the rest of the Scripture, or
with themselves.

14. We must not therefore so understand any passages in these Epistles, as if
the Apostle designed to magnify one Christian Virtue in opposition to all or
any of the rest; but only that he would set forth the Perfection of the Virtues
of the Christian Religion, without the Ceremonies of the Jewish. Thus when he
tells us that we are justified by Faith without Works, we must not interpret it
of the Faith of the Christian Religion, in opposition to the Works of the
Christian Religion, but of the Faith of the Christian Religion, in opposition
to the Works of the Jewish. For so the Apostle himself most expressly explains
it, Gal. 5. 6 In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love; that is, it matters not
whether a Man observes the Works of the Jewish Religion or no, if he maintains
but the Faith, and the Obedience of the Christian. But as to the Works of the
Christian Religion, the same Apostle every where urges their necessity, and
particularly the five last Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans are a most
earnest exhortation to be fruitful therein.

15. From which it follows most evidently, that there is no contradiction
between St. Paul and St. James, when the one says that a Man is justified by
Faith without Works, and the other says that Faith without Works cannot
justify. For the one speaking professedly of the Works of the Jewish Religion,
and the other of the Works of the Christian, it is plain that the Faith of the
Christian Religion may avail to justify a Man without the Works of the Jewish
Religion, (which is the Assertion of St. Paul;) though it cannot do so without
the Works of the Christian Religion, (which is the Assertion of St. James.) The
Faith of Abraham, says St. Paul, was accounted to him for Righteousness; that
is, his Faith was accepted without Circumcision, and without observing the
external Rites of the Law: But it was by Works, says St. James, that Abraham
our Father was justified; that is, it was by real (...). Clem. ad Cor. 1.
(...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 1.
Obedience to the moral and eternal Law of God, such as is now required by the
Christian Religion, that his Faith was made available to Justification. So that
there is no other difference between these two great Apostles, than as if a Man
should say, That believing the Christian Religion is sufficient to Salvation,
without obeying the Jewish Religion, but that it cannot be so without obeying
the Christian.

16. From all which it is plain, that the Doctrine of St. Paul concerning Faith
and Works, delivered in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, is so far
from contradicting what I have laid down in the foregoing Chapter, concerning
the True Notion of Religion in general, (namely that the Essence and End of all
true Religion is Obedience to the Moral and Eternal Law of God,) that on the
contrary nothing does more clearly and more strongly confirm it.

CHAP. V. Of the Duties of Religion in particular.
1. THirdly, Endeavor to gain a clear and distinct Knowledge of the particular
Duties of Religion. It Is not sufficient to understand in general wherein True
Religion consists, and to have right Notions concerning its Obligations in
general, but we must also consider the Particulars of our Duty, and view them
distinctly under some proper Heads. Many there are who have right and true
Notions concerning the Nature of Religion in general, who understand well
enough and are convinced that the only thing that can be accepted in the sight
of God, is Holiness of Life and Universal Obedience to all his Commands; who
yet Nemo nostrum in altum descendit, summa tantum decerpsimus, and exiguum
temporis impendisse Philosophiae satis abundeque occupatis fuit. Sen. ep. 60*
contenting themselves with this slight, general, and superficial Knowledge,
and never giving themselves time to meditate seriously on the several
particular Branches of their Duty, are very apt to impose upon themselves with
a partial Obedience; and while they satisfy their own Minds with some loose
and general Considerations, that their Lives are Religious in the main, that
they have a general esteem for Virtue and Religion, and that they hate
Profaneness and professed Irreligion, they make a shift to live in the habitual
Practice of some great Sin, or in the constant neglect of some important Duty.

2. My design is not in this short Essay, to make a large and particular
Deduction of all the several Branches of our Christian Duty. This has already
been fully and excellently done See Whole Duty of Man, and Mr. Kettelwel's
Measures of Christian Obedience. Book 2.
by some of our own Writers. I shall only lay down the chief Particulars of our
Duty under some brief Heads, which may be easily remembered and carried
constantly in Mind, as perpetual Memorials of what upon all occasions we must
remember our selves to be absolutely and indispensably obliged to: And they
shall be these Three.

3. First, That we ought to be always devout toward God, with the profoundest
Veneration of Mind possible, and to seek all opportunities of expressing that
Devotion. By this Rule is commanded Faith in God, Trust and Dependence upon
him, Submission and Resignedness to his Will, Fear and Love of him, Zeal for
his Honor, Prayer and Thankfulness to him, and a conscientious Attendance upon
his Worship and Ordinances: And by it is forbidden, Blasphemy and Profaneness,
Superstition and Idolatry, Witchcraft and Consulting with such as are reputed
to have Skill in any evil Art, Perjury and vain Swearing, Unbelief and Distrust
of God, want of Zeal for his Honor, Unthankfulness and Neglect of Prayer,
Carelessness in Religion and Neglecting to attend upon the Public Worship.

4. Secondly, That we ought constantly to endeavor in the whole Course of our
Lives, to promote the Good and the Happiness of all Men. By this Rule is
commanded Honor and Reverence, Fidelity and Obedience toward those who are
our Superiors; Goodness and Kindness, Affability and Courteousness, Justice and
Honesty, Gentleness and Candor, Meekness and Peaceableness, Forgiveness of
Injuries, and a Desire of doing all possible Kindnesses to those who are our
Equals; Pity and Succor, Mercifulness and Compassion, Alms and Beneficence,
Instruction and Assistance, and all manner of Help and Encouragement to those
who are our Inferiors: And by it is forbidden, Disobedience and Rebellion,
Traiterousness and Speaking Evil of Dignities; Murder and Stealing, Extortion
and Fraud, Perfidiousness and Lying, Oppression and Over reaching, Calumny and
Evil-speaking, Hatred and Revenge, Sourness and Unkindness, Anger and Passion,
Peevishness and Ill Nature, Sullenness and Moroseness, Discord and
Unpeaceableness; Cruelty and Uncharitableness, Pride and Haughtiness, and
Unconcernedness at the Wants and Miseries of Others.

5. Thirdly, That we ought to be Temperate and Abstemious in the Use of all
Temporal Enjoyments, as Soldiers of Christ, and Candidates for Heaven; as those
who look for their Portion not in the Pleasures of this World, but in the
Happiness of the other. By this Rule is commanded Temperance and Sobriety,
Chastity and Purity, Contentment and Contempt of the World, Patience and
Watchfulness, Mortification and Self-Denial, Heavenly-mindedness and Humility:
And by it is forbidden, Gluttony and Drunkenness, Adultery and Fornication,
Uncleanness and Lasciviousness, Voluptuousness and Sensuality, Covetousness and
Ambition, Idleness and Softness, Impatience and Discontent.

6. This is the Sum of the Duties, which every one who will in earnest
dedicate himself to the Service of God, and seriously enter upon a Religious
Course of Life, must resolve to perform. Whoever will bear his Cross and come
after Christ, must first consider, whether for the sake of God and Religion, he
can be able to bear the Scorn and Contempt of Impious and Profane Men, and
suffer all things rather than be compelled to do any thing to the dishonor of
his God; he must consider whether for the sake of Justice and Charity he can be
able to Sacrifice his dearest Interests, to conquer his most natural Passions,
and to despise the Glory and Splendor of the World; and he must ask himself
whether for the sake of Temperance and Purity, he can be able to mortify his
most darling Lusts, and as a resolute follower of a Crucified Savior, contemn
all the Pleasures of Flesh and Sense: For unless he can peremptorily resolve
with himself to do all this, his Profession of Religion will certainly be in
vain, and he cannot be the Disciple of Christ. Which of you, says our blessed
Savior, intending to build a Tower, sits not down first, and counts the
cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? Lest happily after he has laid the
Foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him,
saying, This Man began to build, and was not able to finish. Or what King going
to make War against another King, sits not down first, and consulteth
whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him that comes against him with
twenty thousand? So likewise, whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all
that he has, that is, who does not resolve with himself to perform his Duty,
whatever it may cost him, he cannot be my* Disciple, Luke 14. 28, etc.

CHAP. VI. What is to be done at Confirmation: Of solemnly renewing the
Baptismal Vow.
1. WHen a Person is thus arrived to a firm Belief of the great Truths of
Religion; When he Understands distinctly the Extent and Obligation of his Duty;
and is come to a settled Resolution of conducting the whole course of his Life,
according to that Knowledge; then is it that he becomes truly meet for the
Kingdom of God, and is rightly prepared to make a solemn Profession of his
being a Disciple of Christ. Which the Church has wisely ordained should be done
publicly at Confirmation: where by Ratifying with our own Mouth the Vow made
in our Name by our Sureties, we solemnly take upon our selves to perform all
the Duties, which the Condition of our Baptismal Covenant obliges us to
observe; and by Imposition of Hands, (according to the constant practice of the
Church since the times of the Apostle) we have sealed and Confirmed to us all
the Privileges, which the condition of the same Baptismal Covenant intitles us
to receive.

2. First therefore, at receiving Confirmation, Consider that you now Solemnly
undertake for your self to perform all the Duties, which the Condition of your
Baptismal Covenant obliges you to observe. Consider that you now confirm and
ratify, all that your Sureties promised and vowed for you at your Baptism.
Consider that you now engage in your own Person, To renounce the Devil and all
his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this Wicked World, and all the sinful
Lusts of the Flesh; that you now engage to stand firm in the Belief of the
Christian Doctrine, and never to be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ
crucified, or afraid to own your self his Disciple; and that you now engage to
obey from henceforward all the Commandments of God, that is, to live (with all
the Strictness and Purity of the Gospel) in the constant Practice of every one
of those Duties, of which I have briefly set down the Heads in the former
Chapter.

3. And consider, that you promise all this most solemnly, in the Presence of
God and before the whole Congregation. Consider, that you enter into this
Promise with such solemnity, as lays upon you the strongest possible
Obligations to Virtue: Consider that you so enter into this Promise with
Knowledge and Deliberation, that if you shall afterward fall into any Course
of sin, in contempt of such repeated Obligations to the contrary, the Guilt
thereof will be extremely increased; and that therefore you ought now, to
affect your Mind deeply with a sense of the heinousness of sin, and to
strengthen mightily your good Resolutions. Anciently, every one that was
baptized, was taught to look upon himself as entering into so solemn an
Obligation of Religion, that if after that Great and Sacred Vow he should fall
into any wilful and known sin, it could not be forgiven him but upon a
proportionably great and long Repentance: And the same Reason there is now, why
every one that by Confirmation dedicates himself to the Service of God, and
makes public Profession of his being a Disciple of Christ, should look upon
himself as entering into such a solemn Obligation, as should make him exceeding
fearful of falling for the future into any great sin, the Guilt of which will
be extremely increased by being committed after such repeated Vows and Promises
to the contrary.

4. Yet is this no Reason why any one should defer being Confirmed, as if by
omitting to bind himself by this New and Solemn Promise, he might continue to
sin with less guilt and less danger. For though the guilt of sin be indeed
mightily increased, by being committed after repeated Obligations to the
contrary; yet if any one omits to renew his Obligations, only for that reason,
that he may continue in sin; his sin is then equally heinous and against
Knowledge, as if he had renewed his Obligation. Baptism is a solemn Obligation
to be Religious; and many of the Ancients, because they thought sin would be
more heinous after so solemn an Obligation, did therefore defer to be Baptized
till the end of their Lives. The Lord's Supper is also a solemn Obligation to
be Religious; and many in our days, because they think sin will be more heinous
after so solemn an Obligation, do therefore defer receiving the Communion all
their Lives. But it is plain these men run into a very great Error. For the
reason why sin after repeated Obligations to the contrary, becomes more
heinous, is because it is committed with greater Deliberation and against
clearer Convictions: When therefore a man who Believes Religion, and
Understands its Obligations, omits these Duties for no other reason, but that
he may sin (as he thinks) with less danger; his sins are then equally
deliberate, and against equally clear Knowledge; and he moreover adds to them a
contemptuous neglect, of the means of becoming more Religious.

CHAP. VII. Of the Certainty of God's Grace, and the Assistance of his Holy
Spirit.
1. SEcondly, Consider that you come now to have Sealed and Confirmed to you
all the Privileges, which the Condition of your Baptismal Covenant intitles you
to receive. At Baptism we are admitted into the Church of God, and have a Title
to the Graces and Assistance of the Holy Spirit; and at Confirmation this Grace
is Sealed and Assured to us, by the external Sign of Imposition of Hands. When
therefore you come in this solemn manner to make Profession of your Religion,
and to dedicate your self to the Service of God, be sure to come with earnest
desires, and a longing Soul, with firm Faith, and a well-assured Hope, with a
pure Heart, and a Mind prepared for the reception of the Holy Ghost; and God
will not fail, to pour down upon you the abundance of his Grace; to give you
strength from thenceforward to overcome both the inward corruption of your
Nature, and the outward temptations of the World and the Devil; to enable you
to continue firm in the Faith of Christ, and in the Obedience of his Commands;
to preserve you always from the Dominion of Sin, and to bring you safe unto his
Kingdom of Glory.

2. There is nothing more pernicious to the Souls of Men, than an Opinion of
the Uncertainty of the Grace of God, and its not being annexed constantly to
the use of means. If we imagine that our Nature is so utterly corrupted, that
we can no more do or will any thing that is good than a dead Body can move, or
bring it self to Life, till we be acted by such a mighty and extraordinary
Grace of God, as nothing that we can do can in the least prepare us to receive;
If we imagine that the Temptations of the World and the Devil are so strong,
that we cannot possibly overcome them without such a powerful Assistance of the
Holy Spirit, as God has not annexed to the use of any Ordinances or Means of
Religion; If we imagine that the Commandments of God are so impossible to be
kept, that after all we can do, we must sit still in expectation of being
converted suddenly by an irresistible Grace; this must needs make all our
Endeavors weak and faint, dead and without heart, and we shall certainly never
be able to overcome our Temptations and to Persevere in Well-doing:

3. It must indeed be confessed, that the 2 Cor. 9. ^.
Corruption of our Nature is really so great, that we cannot do any thing as of
our selves: It must be confessed, that the Temptations of the World and the
Devil are really so strong, that we can never, merely by our own strength, be
able to stand and Persevere unto the end: It must be confessed, that the
Commandment of God is so exceeding broad, that by all that we can do by our own
power, we can never be justified in the sight of God. But then if our Savior
has delivered us from this Corruption of our Nature, and has broken all the
Powers of Sin and Satan: If Christ by his Death has purchased this Grace for
us, that upon our attending the Ordinances and Means of Religion which he has
appointed, God will as certainly bestow upon us the sufficient Assistance of
his Holy Spirit, as a tender Father cannot deny his Child any reasonable
Request: If God will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but
will with the Temptation 1 Cor. 10. 13
also make a way to escape, and whenever he requires more of us than we are
naturally able to perform, will certainly afford us an extraordinary Assistance
proportionable to the difficulty we are obliged to encounter; (as he constantly
did to the Primitive Christians, who through the mighty Power of the Spirit
were enabled to bear all the most exquisite Torments, that either the wit of
Man, or the Malice of the Devil could invent, with less concern than we can
even endure to hear or read of them:) If all this, I say, be true, it is evident
that if notwithstanding this we still continue in Wickedness, all these
specious Pretenses will by no means excuse us, but we shall be found to have
done despite unto the Spirit of Grace, and to have neglected our great
Salvation.

4. Think not therefore that the Corruption of your Nature is greater, than
that Grace and Assistance which God now affords you; For so you may sit still
under the Dominion of sin, in a vain expectation of being converted by some
sudden and All-powerful Grace of God, till you be surprised by the Revelation
of his righteous Judgment: But know, that to all those who are Baptized in his
Name, and who Profess and Endeavor to obey his Commandments, God does give
both to will and to do of his good Pleasure; and therefore you are from
henceforward indispensably bound, to work out your own Salvation with Phil. 2.
12*
fear and trembling. Think not that the Temptations of the World and the Devil,
are more powerful than that strength wherewith God now indues you; For so you
will be sure to be overcome by them: But know, that our Savior has Overcome
the World and the Devil, so that they have Diabolum autem ne timeas: Timens
enim Dominum dominaberis illius; quia virtus in illo nulla est. Hermae Past. 2.
7. Minas autem Diaboli in totum timere ^olite; sine virtute enim sunt, sicuti
mortui hominis nervi. Idem 2. 12.
no more power over the Servants of God; and therefore we are bound to overcome
them also, and to be more than Conquerours through him that loved us, Romans 8.
37. Think not that the Commandments of God are hard and impossible to be kept;
For Haec mandata facile custodies, and non erunt dura; sed si tamen in cor tuum
posueris non posse haec ab homine custodiri, non custodies ea. Idem Ibid.
so you will certainly not be able to keep them: But know, that through Christ
who now strengthens you, you may make them Ponite ergo vobis qui vacui and
leves estis in fide, Dominum Deum vestrum and in cord habete; and intelligetis
quia nihil facilius est his mandatis, neque dulcius, neque mansuetius neque
Sanctius. Idem Ibid.
easy, and light, and pleasant; and therefore you are from henceforward
indispensably obliged to keep them.

5. These are the Qualifications, with which a Person ought to come to
Confirmation, that he may receive it with Advantage and Profit. I shall now
give some brief Directions, how one that has thus solemnly entered into the
Profession of Religion, may continue to live worthy of that Holy Profession.

CHAP. VIII. What is to be done after Confirmation. Of Perseverance; and of the
danger of Apostasy.
1. AND First, Persuade your self of the necessity of Persevering in the
constant Practice of Religion and Virtue, from this Period. The Primitive
Christians thought themselves absolutely obliged, to live in the constant
Practice of all Holiness and Virtue, from the time of their Baptism to their
Death: And if we have taken upon our selves the same Baptismal Vow; if We have
entered into the same Profession of Religion; We ought also from that time
forward to have the same Apprehensions. Think not that the making a Public and
Solemn Profession of Religion will be of any advantage to you, unless the
following part of your Life be suitable to and worthy of that Profession. Think
not that your present Zeal and warmth of Devotion will stand you in any stead,
unless it work in you such a lasting Disposition of Mind, as will afterward,
when Temptation and Trial shall succeed, preserve you steadfast and unmovable
in the performance of your Duty.

2. The Christian Life is a Spiritual Warfare, wherein we must fight against
the Temptations of this World, for the Glories of the other; and the Reward is
promised, not to him that shall fight, but to him that shall overcome. We are
told, that many should embrace the Doctrine of Christ, and receive his Word
even with joy; but because in time of Temptation they would fall away, it
should profit them nothing to have once been Believers. This whole Life, is a
state of Trial and Probation; and however painfully we have labored, yet if we
leave off before our Work be done, we must lose our Reward. They that run in a
race, says the Apostle, run 1 Cor 9. 24.
all; but it is not they that run, but they that continue to run without
fainting to the end, that shall obtain the Crown. Men are exceeding apt to
deceive themselves with an imagination, that some warm fits of Devotion, the
doing now and then a work of Charity, and the abstaining from Sin for some
time, when perhaps the Temptation is less violent than ordinary, will be looked
upon as the running the Christian Race: But let no Man deceive himself with
vain Imaginations: This is indeed running, but not so as to obtain; this is
indeed fighting, but not so as to conquer, but to be overcome. It Is not the
struggling with Sin, or the interrupting a wicked Life by some short lived
Repentance, that will entitle us to a Crown of Righteousness; but we must
overcome, and we must evidence our Victory by a steady course of Piety, or our
Labor will prove to be in vain.

3. Many there are, who upon Quidam ad mganifica^ voces excitantur, and
tr^nseunt in affectum dicentium, a^acres vultu and animo. Rapit illos
instiga^que rerum pulchritudo. -- Si^uid acriter contra mortem dictum est,
siquid contra fortunam contumaciter, juvat protinus quae audias facere.
Afficiunt^^ i^li, and sunt quales jubentur, si illa animo forma perman^at, si
non impetum insignem protinus populus honesti dissuasor excipiat. Pauci illam
quan; conceperant mentem domain perferre potuerunt. Seneca Ep. 109.
some affecting Discourse, or some remarkable Providence, or some occasional
warmth of Devotion, do please themselves with good Resolutions, do admire the
Pleasures of Virtue, and with a transporting glimpse of the Joys of Holiness,
do imagine themselves almost at the Gates of Heaven; and yet when the Fit is
over, the Cares of this World, and the Deceitfulness of Riches, and the Lusts
of other Things returning upon them, choke the Word and it becomes unfruitful;
and all their Pious Intervals serve to no other purpose, but to make their
Misery so much the more lamentable and deplorable, by how much they have come
nearer to the Kingdom of God, and have been almost upon the point of making
themselves Happy. What pity is it, that they who have had a taste of the good
Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come, should for want of being able
to withstand the Allurements of some trifling Pleasure, or for want of
Resolution to encounter some short and temporal Hardship, forfeit all their
glorious Hopes of Happiness, and lose the Crown of Immortality! Yet that they
must do so if their Love wax cold, and they be offended at the appearance of
any Temptation, the Scripture every where most expressly assures us.

4. He that endures to the end, says our blessed Savior, the same shall be
saved, Matthew. 24. 13. But if any one draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure
in him, Heb. 10. 38. For no Man having put his hand to the Plough, and looking
back, is meet for the Kingdom God, Luke 9. 62. Not every one that says unto
him, Lord, Lord; not every one that embraces his Religion, and makes Profession
of it; nay, not every one that receives his Word with gladness, and obeys it
for a time, even with Sincerity; but he that with an unwearied constancy
maintains his Resolutions, and in the midst of all Temptations preserves his
Integrity to the end; he only has a certain Title to our Savior's Promise.

5. And to the same purpose the Apostle St. Paul, Romans 2. 7. assures the
Promise of Eternal Life, not to those who shall begin to do well, or to those
who shall by fits, and at certain times, do some works of Righteousness; but to
those only, who shall persevere in a steady course of Piety; to them who by
patient continuance in welldoing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality.
And again, Heb. 3. 14. he tells us, that we are made partakers of Christ, if we
hold the beginning of our Confidence steadfast unto the end. The Hebrews to whom
this Epistle was written, were certainly sincere Christians; they had been
enlightened by Baptism and the preaching of the Word; they had tasted of the
heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost; they had tasted the
good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come; and yet the Apostle
tells them, that all this would not make them partakers of Christ; i. e. would
not entitle them to the Promises which the Gospel makes to Obedience, unless
they persevered in this state to the end: Nay, so far would all these glorious
Things be from ascertaining them of Happiness, that if they fell away, the
having formerly been partakers of so great Privileges would but Is quidem qui
non cognovit Dominum, si nequiter vivit, manet in eo nequitiae suae poe^a; at
qui cognovit Dominum, abstinere omnino se debet ab omni nequitia, and magis
magisque servire bonitati. Nonne ergo ille qui bonitatem sequi debet, si
nequitiae praeferat parts, plus peccare videtur, quam is qui deliquit ignorans
Dei virtutem? Ideoque hi quidem morti destinati sunt; at vero ij qui
cognoverunt Dominum, atque ejus mirabilia opera viderunt, si nequiter vivunt,
duplo amplius punientur, and ipsi morientur in aevum. Hermas 3. 9.
increase their Condemnation, and make their State more desperate.

6. Terrible are the Threatenings which the Scripture makes to those, who having
known their Duty and begun to obey it, shall again return to a course of
Wickedness. If after they have escaped the Pollutions of the World through the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they shall be again entangled
therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning: For
it had been better for them not to have known the way of Righteousness, than
after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto
them, 2 Pet. 2. 20. I will therefore put you in remembrance, though you once
knew this, how that the Lord having saved the People out of the Land of Egypt,
afterward destroyed them that believed not: And the Angels which kept not
their first estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in
everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day, Jude 5,
and 6. Lest there be any Fornicator or profane Person, as Esau, who for one
morsel of Meat sold his birthright; for ye know how that afterward, when he
would have inherited the Blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place of
Repentance though he sought it carefully with tears, Heb. 12. 16. If we sin
wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no
more Sacrifice for Sins, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and
fiery Indignation, which shall devour the Adversary, Heb. 10. 26. It is
impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly
gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word
of God, and the Powers of the World to come, if they shall fall away, to renew
them again unto Repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God
afresh, and put him to an open shame, Heb. 6. 4. The meaning of all which
Places is plainly this, not indeed that it is impossible to obtain Forgiveness,
but that there is no more Baptism, no more Baptismal Remission; and that
therefore if Men after the clear knowledge of their Duty, relapse any more into
a state of gross Wickedness, they cannot be forgiven but upon such a great and
active Repentance, as it is exceeding difficult to renew such Persons unto.

7. For this Reason our Savior warns us to watch, and to be ready always, to
have our Loins girded about and our Lights burning, and to be like Men that
wait for their Lord when he shall return from the Wedding, that when he comes
and knocks they may open unto him immediately, Luke 12. 35. And again, Take
heed to your selves, lest at any time your Hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come
upon you unawares; for as a Snare shall it come on all them that dwell upon the
face of the whole Earth: Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to
stand before the Son of Man, Luke 21. 34. And the Apostles also in their
Epistles, are perpetually warning us to watch and to be solicitous, to take
great heed (as of a thing of most extreme danger) lest at any time we fail of
the grace of God, and left any root of bitterness springing up trouble us, and
thereby we be defiled.

8. And indeed the ancient Church thought they could never carry this Point too
far. To the Converts who had newly entered into the Profession of Religion,
they always urged the necessity of Perseverance with the utmost Rigor: And
those Texts of Scripture, which seem the most severely to threaten Apostates,
that is, such as after their embracing the Truth of the Gospel, wilfully
relapsed into the Practice of any notorious Wickedness, they always interpreted
to them in the most (...) Chrysostom. in Heb. 12.
strict Sense, that by those Terrors of the Lord they might preserve them (if
possible) in their Innocence; though those who had already sinned they treated
more mildly, that they might encourage Repentance and prevent Despair.

CHAP. IX. Of Innocence and an early Piety.
1. SEcondly, Consider the inestimable Advantage of Innocence, and of an early
Piety. Innocence is a Jewel which no Man understands the value of, and no Man
knows what he does when he first parts with it. When a Man is first beaten from
his good Resolutions, and seduced by the Temptations of Sin and Folly, he is
then driven from his best strong-hold; his Strength, his Courage, his
Assistance is diminished; and when or how far he shall be able to recover them,
he cannot tell. When a Man is first enticed to sin wilfully and against
knowledge, he makes Shipwreck of a good Conscience, and parts with that Peace
of Mind, which how far he shall ever be able to recover, he cannot know. When a
Man is first vanquished by the Enemies of his Salvation, the World, the Flesh,
or the Devil; and prefers any Pleasure, or any Interest to his Duty; he then
forfeits his Title to the Crown promised to those who shall overcome; and how
far his Endeavors will afterward be accepted, he cannot tell.

2. While a Person who has entered early into the Profession of Religion, is
yet innocent and uncorrupted with Vice; he begins his Christian Warfare with
firm and unbroken Resolutions, with a free and undistracted Mind, and with the
certain Assistance of God's Holy Spirit: But when once he has forfeited this
happy Innocence, and is fallen from his first Love; his Zeal for Virtue grows
less strict, and his hatred against Vice less severe; his Resolutions become
weaker and more inconstant, his Passions stronger, and his Mind more unsettled;
and the Grace of God is proportionably withdrawn from him; so that it becomes
much more difficult to recover his first State, than it had been to preserve
it. Think not therefore, when first Temptations offer themselves, that you can
now yield to them, and afterward return to your Duty: (For if your Resolutions
when firmest are not able to resist, much less will they do it when they have
once been broken; if you cannot withstand the temptations of Vice while it is
yet at a distance, much less will you be able to do it when it has interested
your Passions and insinuated it self into your Affections; if you cannot
maintain your Ground while the Spirit of God is ready constantly to assist you,
much less will you do it when he has withdrawn himself from you:) But resolve
bravely now, while it is called to Day, while you have Time and may do it with
the greatest Advantages, to make your Religion easy, and your Happiness
secure; set out with a mighty Resolution in the Christian Race, and press
forward toward the Mark of the Prize of the high Calling: Despise all the
Temptations of the World, and the Flesh; and resist the Devil, and he will flee
from you.

3. Again, while one who has early entered into the Profession of Religion,
maintains his Integrity, and stands firm against all the Temptations of Sin and
Satan; he carries with him not only a quiet Conscience and an undisturbed Mind,
but such a full Assurance and Joy in the Holy Ghost, as inables him to perform
his Duty not only willingly but cheerfully, and to despise all the Temptations
of this present World as Vanity and Nothing: But when once he has made
Shipwreck of a good Conscience, and is overcome by the Temptations of the World
and the Devil, to sin in any gross and notorious Instances; then Fears and
Doubts, Anxieties and Scruples, must be his Portion; and though by Repentance
he may recover a well grounded Hope, and through the Mercy of God a certain
expectation of Pardon, yet not easily the assurance and joy of Innocence. Think
not therefore, when you are tempted by Sin, that you may now yield to its
Solicitations, and afterward by Repentance recover your first peace and quiet
of Conscience: (For when once the support of a good Conscience is lost,
Obedience will be much more difficult; and Peace will not return, but after
much Labor and many Fears, after great Sorrow and long Doubts: But resolve now
to resist the very first Motions of Sin; and be convinced there is no Pleasure
but in a good Conscience, nor any Joy but in the Obedience of God's Commands.

4. Lastly, While one who has entered betimes into the Profession of Religion,
continues resolutely to preserve his Innocence, and conquers all the
Temptations of Sin; he has a certain Title to that exceeding weight of Glory,
that Crown of Righteousness, which God has laid up for those who shall keep the
Faith and patiently continue in well-doing: But when once he turns from the
holy Commandment delivered unto him, and is overcome by the inticements and
allurements of Sin, he forfeits his Title to that Crown of Glory; and to what
degree his after-endeavours will restore him, he cannot tell. That Repentance
will procure him Mercy and Pardon, is certain; but to recover the Reward and
the Crown of Innocence, it must be very early and very effectual. All that a
late Penitent can hope for, is to obtain forgiveness and be admitted to Heaven:
The bright Crowns will be reserved for those, who have fought the good Fight
and overcome the World. Think not therefore, when you are assaulted by
Temptation, that you may now enjoy the Pleasures of Sin, and afterward by
Repentance attain to the Reward of Virtue also: (For though God has indeed
promised that those who are hired into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour, that
is, those who are late instructed in the Religion of Christ, or in the
knowledge of their Duty, shall have the same Reward with those who have born
the burden and heat of the Day; yet he has no where promised that those who
stand idle in the Vineyard till the 11th Hour, that is, who notwithstanding
they believe the Gospel and know their Duty, yet defer their Repentance to the
last, shall receive likewise the same Reward:) But resolve now, as a faithful
Soldier of Christ, to resist resolutely the Temptations of the Devil, to
despise the Glory and Vanity of the World, to get above the Pleasures and
Deceits of Sense; and then your Labor will be sure not to be in vain in the
Lord.

5. It Is to those who thus overcome, that those great and glorious Promises in
the New Testament are made: Rev. 21. 7. He that overcomes, shall inherit all
things; and Rev. 3 21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my
Throne; even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne:
and the like. He that overcomes; that is, He that having embraced the Gospel
of Christ, and being firmly persuaded of the Truth of his Religion, continues
steadfast in this Faith and in the Obedience thereof, in spite of all the
Temptations of Sin and Satan to the contrary. In the Primitive Times, the great
Temptation with which Christians were assaulted, was Persecution; by which they
were tempted to deny their Savior, and to renounce that Faith which they had
once embraced, by returning again to the Idolatrous worship of the Heathen
Gods: This was their peculiar Conflict and Trial; and he that in that great
Trial resisted unto Blood, choosing rather to endure the most exquisite
Torments, and to die the most cruel Death, than to deny Christ, was said in a
peculiar and more emphatical Sense to have overcome: And to those Persons we
must understand these great Promises, to be primarily and more immediately
made. But that they proportionably belong to all other Christians also, who in
the midst of any other Temptations shall keep the Works of Christ, and
victoriously persevere in their Integrity to the end, is evident: For the
Promise is not made to him that overcomes, for that reason because it is this
or that particular Temptation that he overcomes; but because he maintains his
Integritry inviolable to the last, notwithstanding the force of any Temptation
to the contrary. And perhaps if we consider the Matter closely, it is not easy
to determine which is more difficult and shows a greater constancy of Mind, to
die for the sake of Christ, or to live in the constant contempt of all the
Pleasures and Enjoyments of Life; to part actually with all our temporal Goods
for the Name of Christ, or to keep them with such indifferency as if we enjoyed
them not. Those Persons therefore who entering early into the Profession of
Religion, when their temptations to Sin were most numerous and most powerful,
continued steadfast in the Love of God and of Virtue, unmoved amidst the
perpetual Allurements of Pleasure, the dazzling Vanities of worldly Glory, and
the manifold Deceitfulness of Riches; were by the Ancients looked upon with
Quicunque permanserint sicut infantes, non (...)tes malitiam, honorati^res
erunt omnibus illis quos jam dixi. -- * Felices ergo vos, quicunque removeritis
malitiam a vobis, and indue^^tis innocentiam, quia primi videbitis Deum. --
Felices vos, quicunque innocents estis sicut infantes* quonia n pars vestra
bona est and honorata apud Dominum. Hermas 3. 9.
no less Esteem, than those who suffered for the Name of Christ; and were
thought to have a Title to as great a Reward.

6. Let those who have still the Time before them, and are so happy as not to
have been yet seduced through the deceitfulness of Sin, consider these things.
Let them consider, what a Prize they have in their Hands; and let them be
zealous that no Man take their Crown. Let them consider, that if God and Angels
rejoice at the Conversion of an old and great Sinner, much more must they be
pleased to see a young Person amidst the alluring Glories and Pleasures of the
World, bravely resisting all its Temptations. Let them consider, that That
time, which a dying Sinner would, if it were possible, give Millions of Worlds
to redeem, is now in their Hands; and they may make a glorious use of it. Let
them consider, that they are yet clothed with the white Robe of Innocence; and
if they be careful never to defile that Garment, they may attain to a Portion
among those few, who shall walk Rev. 3. 4.
with Christ in white, for they are worthy. Let them consider, that if they
zealously continue to maintain their Innocence and their good Works for a few
Years, they will soon be almost out of the danger of Temptation; they will
escape the bitter Pangs of Remorse and Repentance; they will be wholly above
that greatest of human Miseries, the dread and horror of Death; and may, not
only without Fear, but even with exceeding Joy, expect the appearance of our
Lord Jesus Christ at the Judgment of the great Day, and in the Glory of the
World to come. Lastly, let them consider, that if they hold fast the confidence
and rejoicing of their Hope firm unto the end, they shall be entitled to all
those great and inconceivable Promises, which our Savior has made to those who
shall overcome: To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the Tree of Life,
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2. 7. He that overcomes,
shall not be hurt of the second Death, ver. 11. He that overcomes, the same
shall be clothed in white Raiment, and I will not blot his Name out of the Book
of Life, but I will confess his Name before my Father, and before his Angels,
Rev. 3. 5. Him that overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God,
and he shall go no more out, and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and
the Name of the City of my God, which is New Jerusalem, ver. 12. And, To him
that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me, in my Throne, even as I also
overcame, and am sit down with my Father in his Throne, V. 21.

CHAP. X. Of making Religion the principal Business of our Lives.
1. THirdly, Resolve to make Religion the main Scope of all your Actions, and
the principal Business of your Life. One great reason, why Religion, which was
the reigning Principle that wholly governed the Lives of the Primitive
Christians, has now so little influence upon the Actions of Men; is because
those Holy Men sought first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and
relied upon the Providence of God to have all other things added unto them;
whereas now, Men make Religion not their first, but their last care; and while
their whole Hearts and Affections are set upon the things of this present
World, they think themselves sufficiently Religious if they spend but some
small Portions of their time in the outward and Ceremonious Acts of Religion.
But if Religion be the same now, that it was in the times of the Primitive
Christians; if the Happiness proposed to us, be the same for which they so
painfully contended; if our Obligations, (excepting perhaps some few particular
Cases,) be the same with theirs; this slight, careless and superficial
Religion, will not serve our turn. He that will obtain that Crown of
Immortality, which God has promised to those who Love and Obey him, must be
effectually and Substantially Religious in the main Course of his Life; and he
that will be so truly and sincerely Religious, must make that Religion his
principal and his first Care.

2. By making Religion the Principal Care and Study of our Lives, I do not mean
that Men should withdraw themselves from their Business and Employments in the
World, to spend their time anxiously in Reading, Praying, Meditating and the
like: I hese things are not the whole, nor the principal part of Religion; and
it is an Ancient and Notorious Error, to think that Men can become more truly
Religious by the continued Exercises of a private Retirement, than by living
Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily in the World. The Life and Substance of
Religion, is to have our Minds habitually possessed with the profoundest
Veneration of the Divine Majesty, and with a desire of expressing at all proper
opportunities, our Devotion to him, and our Zeal for his Honor; To endeavor
constantly in the whole Course of our Lives, to promote the good and the
happiness of all Men; and to be Temperate in the use of all earthly Enjoyments,
as those who expect their Happiness, not in this World, but in the next. This
is the Essence of true Religion; And These things a Man may make his principal,
nay, even his whole Care, without any way neglecting, or in the least
withdrawing himself from his Secular and Worldly Business. There is no
Employment, wherein a Man may not be always doing something for the honor of
God, for the good of Men, or for the Improvement of the Virtues of his own
Mind: There is no Business, wherein a Man may not make it his main Care, to act
always like a good Man and a Christian: There is no state of Life, wherein a
Man may not keep a constant Eye upon a future State; and so use the things of
this present World, as that the great and ultimate Scope of all his Actions may
always respect that which is to come.

3. And to make Religion thus far the principal Business of our Lives, is
absolutely and indispensably necessary. No Man can overcome the Temptations of
the Word; No Man can be truly and effectually Religious; unless he steadfastly
proposes to himself one great Design of his Life, and endeavors to Act always
regularly upon that Design. He must Quoties quid fugiendum sit, aut quid
petendum, voles scire; ad summum bonum, and propositum totius vitae respice.
Illi enim consentire debet, quicquid agimus: Non disponet singula, nisi cui jam
vitae suae summa proposita est. -- ideo peccamus, quia de partibus vitae omnes
deliberamus, de tota nemo deliberat. Seneca Ep. 72.
constantly keep an eye upon his main End; and in every thing he does, must be
careful always to have a respect to that. Every thing he undertakes, must be
either directly conducive to that end, or at least not contrary to, and
inconsistent with it. In a word, he must be True to himself, and to his own
happiness; and be resolute never to be tempted to do any thing, which he knows
he shall afterward wish undone. For otherwise, if a Man acts only uncertainly,
according to the present Appearances of things, and without any fixed design; it
must needs be that every violent temptation will either surprise or overpower
him, and his Religion will be as inconstant as his Resolutions: His Life will
be at best no other, than a continued Circle of sinning and repenting; and his
End will be in nothing but Uncertainties and Fears.

CHAP. XI. Of the Contempt of the World.
1. FOurthly, Endeavor to get above all the Desires of this present World.
This is the hardest Lesson in Religion, but withal the most necessary and the
most useful. All Wickedness proceeds from the immoderate desire of some
temporal Enjoyment or other; and the Love of the World is most immediately the
Root of all Evil. No Man sins, but when he is seduced by an over-fond desire of
some Honor, Profit, or Pleasure; and no Man can be sure of preserving his
Innocence, so long as he is inslaved to and under the Dominion of any of these
Desires. The way therefore to lay the Ax to the Root of the Tree, and to remove
the Foundation and first Cause of our Misery; is to get above all the Desires
of these Transitory Enjoyments, and to keep them perfectly in subjection and
under the command of Reason: We must be able to contemn these things, even
where they are Innocent; and then we may be secure that they shall never be
able, to seduce and entice us into any thing that is sinful.

2. Now the means by which the Christian Religion teaches us to do this, is not
(as I have already said) by retiring and withdrawing our selves from the World,
to neglect all Business and lay aside all Secular Cares; but by fixing our
Thoughts steadfastly upon that future State which the Gospel has clearly
discovered to us, to fill our Minds with such strong and vigorous Ideas of the
Happiness of the next World, as will in any state of Life, beget and preserve
in us a settled Contempt of all the Enjoyments of this.

3. The first and lowest degree of this Contempt of the World, is a Resolution
not to purchase any of its Enjoyments with the Commission of any great and
known sin. This is the very lowest degree of Sincerity; and the least that any
one, who pretends at all to be a Christian, can resolve with himself to do for
the sake of God and religion. He that to purchase any Honor or Profit, will
not scruple to make use of downright Fraud, or of any Means which he himself
knows and is convinced to be Unlawful; He that to gratify any sensual
Appetite, and to enjoy a present Pleasure, will venture directly to break a
positive and express Command; such a one bids open Defiance to God and Virtue,
and can hardly impose upon himself with any vain Imaginations of his being
Religious.

4. The next degree of this Contempt of the World, is a Willingness to part
with all things for the sake of Christ, when we cannot keep them together with
our Religion. This also our Savior absolutely requires of them that will be
his Disciples. If any Man come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and
Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he
cannot be my Disciple; And whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come after
me, cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 26, 27. It Is true, this is more peculiarly
adapted to those early times of the Gospel, when 'twas impossible for a Man to
embrace the Doctrine of Christ, and profess himself his Disciple, but he must
immediately forsake all that he had in the World, and become poor in the most
literal sense for Christ's sake: But certainly it thus far obliges Christians
at all times, and even when God does not call them to suffering and parting
with all for his sake, that they ought to have such an indifferency for the
things of this World, as to be always in a readiness to part with whatever
shall come in Competition with their Duty.

5. But there is yet another degree of this Contempt of the World, which though
less considered, is yet of more universal and more constant obligation: And
that is, that We be sparing and temperate in the use even of Lawful and
Innocent Enjoyments, as those who expect their Portion not in the Pleasures of
this World, but in the Happiness of the next. This is the proper and peculiar
Virtue of the Christian Religion; and indeed the only true Rule of Temperance.
To give Men a full Liberty of satisfying to the utmost all their sensual
Appetites in all instances not directly forbidden, and to set their Hearts upon
the Enjoyment of all worldly Pleasures, as far as they can possibly within the
Limits of Innocence, is to allow Men a Liberty which Experience shows they
cannot bear, and which will certainly seduce them into the Borders of sin: On
the other hand, to restrain Men from enjoying the good things of this present
World any further than is strictly necessary to preserve their Life and Health,
is to lay a snare on the Consciences of men, and to tie 'em up to what God and
Nature has not tied them. The only true measure therefore of Christian
Temperance, is that we so govern our selves with respect to the Enjoyments of
this present Life, as becomes those who profess to be followers of Christ, and
Candidates for Heaven; who look upon this World only as a State of Labor and
Trial, but expect their Portion and their Happiness in the World to come: That
is, that we so use these present good things, as to preserve our selves always
in the Disposition fittest for the Performance of our Duty; to keep the flesh
always in Subjection to the Spirit; and to maintain constantly that Temper of
Mind, which may prepare and fit us for the Enjoyment of God, and for the
Happiness of Heaven.

6. The Design of the Christian Religion is to draw off Men's Affections from
things earthly and sensible, and to fix them on Nobler and Spiritual Objects:
It gives us the most refined Precepts exemplified in the Life of our Savior,
for our Rule to walk by; and sets before us as the Reward of our Obedience, the
Happiness of that Place, where we shall be like to God, because we shall see
him as he is. The first thing therefore that our Savior requires, of them that
will be his Disciples; is so to wean themselves from this present World, as to
be always prepared for the more spiritual Happiness of that which is to come.
The first thing that the Christian Religion teaches us; is so to look beyond
this World in the main Scope of our Lives, and to have so slight an esteem for,
and be so little immersed in, all earthly Enjoyments; as to have our Hearts
fixed always there, where we expect our Treasure. It teaches us to look upon
the good things of this present World, as Talents committed to our Charge; for
the doing what good we can in the present State, and thereby purchasing to our
selves a Treasure incorruptible in the future. It teaches us to set our
Affections wholly on things above; and to have our Conversation always in
Heaven. It teaches us to love God, as the Supreme and Only Good; and to make it
the Business and the Pleasure of our Life, to Advance his Glory and to promote
his Religion.

7. This is the Disposition of Mind, which the Christian Religion requires of
all its Professors. And that this Disposition of Mind cannot otherwise be
attained and preserved, than by working our selves up to a great contempt of
the World; by being very temperate in the enjoyment of earthly Pleasures; and
by withdrawing our Affections from the desires of them; is evident. No Man who
has this Worlds Goods, can cheerfully and bountifully bestow them to the Glory
of God and to the Good of Men; so long as he retains an over-fond Affection for
the splendor of the World, and cannot deny himself in any of its Pleasures. No
Man can set his Affections on things above, while he places his Happiness in
things here below; nor have his Conversation and his Citizenship in Heaven,
while his Heart and Desires are fixed on Earth. In a word, no Man can love God
as the Supreme and only Good, and make Religion heartily the usiness of his
Life; while his Affections are fondly fastened on the Pleasures of Earth, and
the Gratifications of Sense.

8. He that notwithstanding his Belief of the Gospel, does yet retain such a
Love for the World, as that he cannot persuade himself without great regret to
part with any present Gratification; and is solicitous, not to be as Religious
and to do as much good as he can, but to live as sensually, and to enjoy as
much Pleasure, as he thinks possibly consistent with the hopes of Happiness;
such a ones divided Affections and unmortified Desires, will certainly be too
strong for the Governance of his Reason; and his unwillingness to part with the
Pleasures of this Life, will be in great danger to deprive him of the Happiness
of the next. No Servant can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the one
and love the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other; ye
cannot serve God and Mammon, Luke 16. 13. The carnal, or sensual Mind, says
St. Paul, is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be, Romans 8. 7. And in the 1st Epistle of St. John, chapter 2.
ver. 15. If any Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him. The
avoiding eternal Misery, and acquiring endless Bliss, is not so easy and
trivial a matter, as to be the Purchase of a few faint Wishes, the Work of a
Mind distracted, and as it were wholly taken up with other Cares: He that has
proposed to us this glorious Reward, has yet proposed it upon such Conditions,
as that we think it worth our caring for: He indispensably requires, that we
fix our Affections upon heavenly things; and though we may, and ought to make
use of the Blessings of this World thankfully, as Accommodations in our
Journey; yet that in the whole Course of our Lives the general Design of our
Actions be directed to this great End. If therefore we suffer other things so
to interpose, as to steal away our Hearts and Affections; we cannot possibly
keep up this Disposition. Man's Nature and Operations are finite; and what time
and attention he bestows on one thing, must necessarily be subracted from
another. If then the Vanities of this World entertain and busy us, they must
unavoidably interrupt our attendance on the one thing necessary; and when we
begin to look upon these deceitful things as our proper Happiness, our esteem
will in proportion decrease to those which really are so. Hence the Cares of
the World, the Deceitfulness of Riches, and the Pleasures of this Life, are
said to choke the Word, and it becomes unfruitful, Matthew. 13. 22. compared
with Luke 8. 14. And St Paul tells us, 1 Timothy 6. 9. That they who will be rich,
that is, they whose Desires are eagerly bent upon the good things of this
present Life, fall into Temptation and a Snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition.

9. And that this over-fond Love of the present World, this solicitous Desire
after Riches and Pleasure, is inconsistent with that Disposition of Mind which
the Christian Religion requires; seems to be the true and principal Scope of
several of our Savior's Parables to demonstrate. The Parable of the rich Man,
Luke 16. is evidently intended to this purpose. He is described to have been
clothed in Purple and fine Linen, and to have fared sumptuously every day; and
when in Hell he lift up his Eyes and saw Abraham afar off, and cried to him to
have Mercy upon him, and to send Lazarus that he might dip the tip of his
Finger in Water, and cool his Tongue; the Answer he received was this; Son,
remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise
Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. It Is not
said that he had spent his Substance in Rioting and Drunkenness; it is not said
that he had deserved this Punishment for his Cruelty and Uncharitableness: But
only that he had lived delicately, and fared sumptuously; that he had already
received his good things; (that is, that he had received a plentiful share of
the good things of this present Life, and that he had received and valued them
as his Portion and his Happiness;) and that therefore now there remained
nothing for him, but to be tormented.

10. That the design of this Parable is not merely to condemn Rioting and
Extravagancy, Drunkenness and Excess, is evident. For had that only been the
design of it, the rich Man would have been* plainly described to have been
guilty of those Vices. But since our Savior does not directly lay those things
to his Charge, neither must we do it. The Parable says, he was clothed in
Purple and fine Linen, and fared sumptuously every day: And as his Station in
the World might be, he may fairly be supposed to do so without the imputation
of Excess. As God has placed Men in different Stations in the World, and
accordingly made very different distributions of the good things of this Life
amongst them; so it cannot be denied but that these good things may be made use
of, according to every Man's Quality and Condition. It cannot therefore be
certainly collected from the rich Man's faring sumptuously, that he wasted his
Substance in riotous living, as the Prodigal is described to have done in the
foregoing Chapter; for he would certainly in this Place have been directly
accused of doing so, if the Parable had been levelled against nothing less than
Rioting and Excess.

11. Again, that the Design of this Parable is not merely to condemn
Uncharitableness and Cruelty, is also evident. For though it represents the
rich Man on the one hand clothed in Purple and fine Linen, and faring
sumptuously every day; and on the other hand the poor Man lying at his Gate
full of sores, and desiring to be fed with the Crumbs that fell from the rich
Man's Table; yet it contains only this Description of the poor Man's Condition
in Opposition to that of the rich Man, without taking any notice at all of
their Behavior one to another. Though therefore it may justly be supposed,
that our Savior designed to hint to us, that the poor Man did not meet with
that Comfort and Relief, which might reasonably be expected in a Place where
there was such plenty and abundance of all things; and that this did mightily
increase the rich Man's Condemnation; yet this is not the thing that is now
laid to his Charge, and therefore is not the main Design of the Parable.
Parables are certain familiar ways of representing things to the Capacity of
the Vulgar, by easy and continued Similitudes; and the close of the Similitude
always shows the principal Scope of the Parable; as is evident in most of our
Savior's Discourses to the Jews. Had our Savior therefore in this Parable
chiefly designed to show the evil of Uncharitableness, and the Condemnation
that attends uncharitable Men, he would (when he had represented the rich Man
crying out to Abraham to have Mercy upon him, and begging that he would send
Lazarus that he might dip the tip of his Finger in Water, and cool his Tongue,)
he would here, I say, have introduced the Patriarch charging him with his
Uncharitableness, as the cause of his being cast into that place of torment. It
would have been told him, that since when he lived in Ease and Plenty, and in
the abundant enjoyment of all the good things of this Life, he had had no
regard to the then miserable Estate of this poor Man; he had no reason to
expect, now that the Scale was turned, and himself fallen into a state of
Misery, that the poor Man should leave that place of Happiness which is figured
to us by Abraham's Bosom, to come and quench the violence of the Flame that
tormented him. He would have been told that 'twas but just, that since he had
showed no Mercy, none should be shown to him; and that he should receive no
Relief from the poor Man after Death, to whom he had given none when he was
alive. But instead of all this, we find only that short Reply; Son, remember
that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, therefore now thou art
tormented.

12. It remains therefore, that the reason for which this rich Man is
represented as condemned to that place of torment, is because he had in his
life time received his Portion of good things; that is, not because he had
received the Blessings of this World, but because he had received and used them
as his Portion and his Happiness* He had a large and plentiful Estate; and he
spent it in Jollity and Splendor. He was clothed in Purple and fine Linen;
and he fared sumptuously every day. He denied himself nothing, that tended to
the Ease and Pleasure of his own Life; or that could make him look splendid in
the Eyes of others. Hereupon he accounted himself a happy Man; and blessed
himself in the multitude of his Riches. He looked on them not as Talents
committed to him by God, to be employed for the doing good in his Generation;
but as his own Portion, that he might live in Ease and Plenty, and that his
Heart might cheer him in the days of his Life. His Treasure therefore was upon
Earth; and his Heart and Affections, were there also. He set up his Rest here;
and was so wholly taken up with the splendor and gaiety of this World, that he
had no time to think upon another; till he found by woeful Experience that he
(...) settled his Affections upon a wrong Object, and chosen those things for
his Portion and his Happiness which were not to be of equal duration with
himself. Thus the Design of this Parable seems plainly to be this; to condemn a
soft and easy, a delicate and voluptuous Life: And to show, that for those who
have a plentiful share of earthly Blessings, to make it their main Design to
live in Ease and Pleasure, in Gaiety and Splendor with them; to set their
Hearts and Affections upon them; to esteem them as their good things, and to
place their Happiness in them; is inconsistent with that temper and disposition
of Mind, which the Christian Religion requires in those, who expect their
Portion in the Spiritual Happiness of the World to come. And to this Sense we
must understand those Sayings of our Savior, Luke 6. 25. Woe unto you that are
full, for ye shall hunger; woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and
weep: And ver. 24. Woe unto you that are rich, for ye have received your
Consolation; that is, ye have received those things which ye accounted your
Portion, and wherein ye placed your Happiness.

13. In like manner, the Parable of that other rich Man, Luke 12. whose Ground
brought forth plentifully, and he thought within himself, saying, What shall I
do because I have no room where to bestow my Fruits? and he said, This will I
do, I will pull down my Barns and build greater, and there will I bestow all my
Fruits and my Goods: And I will say to my Soul, Soul thou have much Goods laid
up for many Years; take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. This Parable, I
say, seems also plainly designed against the same softness and voluptuousness
of Life. Our Savior does not describe this Man to be Covetous, and that he
would store up all his Goods to no use; but that he would take the good of them
himself, he would eat, drink and be merry: It Is the same word that we render
elsewhere, to fare sumptuously: But God said unto him, Thou Fool, this night
shall thy Soul be required of thee, and (...) whose shall those things be which
thou have provided? His Case seems to be the very same with that of the rich
Man, Luke 16. The one resolved that in his Life time he would eat, drink and be
merry; and in the midst of his Jollity his Soul was required of him: The other
was clothed in Purple and fine Linen, and fared sumptuously every day; and
when after Death he complained that he was in a place of torment, he was by
Abraham reminded that he had in his life time received his good things.

14. Lastly, the History of the young Man, Mark 10. who came running and
kneeled to our Savior, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do that I may
inherit eternal Life? is an eminent Instance of the deceitfulness of the Love
of the World. He had kept all the Commandments from his youth; and therefore
one would think was well prepared, to receive our Savior's Doctrine: Yet when
he bad him, Go thy way, sell whatsoever thou have, and give to the Poor, and
thou shall have Treasure in Heaven, and come take up thy Cross and follow me;
it is said, he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved, for he had great
possessions. It Is not said either that he was covetous on the one hand, or
prodigal on the other; much less that he spent his Substance in Revelling and
Drunkenness: But here was his Fault; his Heart was set upon his great
Possessions, and he could not persuade himself to part with them, though upon
the prospect of an extraordinary Reward. So unfit is a Mind deeply immersed in
the Love of this present World, for the reception of the Truth and Severity of
the Gospel; and so difficult for those who have a large share of the good
things of this World, not to be thus immersed in the Love of it.

15. For this reason it is, that great Riches and continual Prosperity in the
World, are all along through the New Testament described as a very dangerous
and unsafe State. Persecution has not a greater power to force Men violently
from their Duty, than Riches and great Prosperity have to supplant them
insensibly, and to entice them from it. Riches and Prosperity do by degrees
soften and debase Men's Minds; they do as it were tie Men down, and fasten their
Affections to the things of this present World; they sensualize Men's Thoughts,
and Cum omnia quae excesse^^nt modum, noc^ant; periculosissima felicitatis
intemperantia est: Movet cerebrum, in varias mentem imagines evocat, multum
inter falsum ac verum mediae caliginis fun^^it. Seneca de Divina Providentia.
divert them from taking any pleasure in the Contemplation of Spiritual and
Divine things; in a word, they ply Men so constantly with fresh Baits and
Temptations, and are so continually pressing them to satisfy their sensual
Appetites; that without a very great Measure of the Grace of God, and an
extraordinary degree of Temperance and Contempt of the World, Man's Mind is not
able to keep it self free from the Service of so enticing a Master.

16. And this I take to be the meaning of those severe Sayings of our Savior,
Matthew. 19. 23. Verily I say unto you, that a rich Man shall hardly enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. And again I say unto you, It is easier for a Camel to go
through the Eye of a Needle, than for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of
God. At which when his Disciples, taking his Words in too strict a Sense, were
astonished above measure; he answered again and said unto them, Mark 10 24.
Children, how hard is for them that trust in Riches, to enter into the Kingdom
of God! He does not say that it is absolutely impossible for a rich Man to enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven: But because it is certain that they who put their
trust in Riches, never shall; and because it is exceeding hard for them that
have Riches, not to put their trust in them; therefore he says, How hardly
shall they that have Riches, enter into the Kingdom of God! Riches and constant
Prosperity are so great a temptation, that with Men, i. e. humanly speaking, it
is not possible for one who enjoys these things, to be a good Christian: though
with God, i. e. with the Grace of God, to which all things are possible, this
Temptation may not only be overcome, but those Riches which are to most Men an
occasion of falling, may become the matter of a more extraordinary Virtue, and
the occasion of a Man's doing much more good in this World, and obtaining a
much greater degree of happiness in the next. Our Savior therefore does not
say, That a rich Man cannot possibly be saved; or that any Man shall be
miserable in the other World, for no other reason than because he has been
happy in this; but only that Riches are exceeding apt to lull Men into that
trust in and love of the World, which is inconsistent with that disposition of
Mind and Soul, which the Christian Religion requires of those who expect their
Portion in another Life.

17. And hence are those so frequent and repeated Exhortations in the New
Testament, to mortify our earthly Desires, and to deny our selves; not to love
the World, neither the things that are in the World, 1 John 2. 15. Not to lay
up for our selves treasure upon Earth, where Moth and Rust does corrupt, and
where Thieves break through and steal; but to lay up for our selves treasure in
Heaven, Matthew. 6. 19. To set our affections on things above, not on things on
the Earth, Coloss. 3. 2. And to take heed and beware of Covetousness, for that
a Man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses,
Luke 12. 15. To beware of Covetousness; that is, not of hoarding up Riches to
no use (as we generally understand the word) but of setting our Hearts upon
Riches and employing them to no other End, than living merrily and splendidly
in the World; as is most evident from the Parable of the rich Man whose Ground
brought forth plentifully, following immediately in the next words

18. It Is therefore a necessary Duty in those who believe the Gospel of Christ
and profess themselves his Disciples, if God calls them not to suffer and to
part with all for his sake, yet at least to wean themselves from the love of
this present World, and to get above the Desires of it. They must be careful to
use the good things of this Life so, as not to corrupt and soften, to
sensualize and debase their Minds, and to clog and unfit them for the
Contemplation of Spiritual and Divine Things: They must remember that they
receive this Worlds Goods not that they may live in Ease and Softness, in
Delicacy and Voluptuousness with them, but that they may thankfully employ them
to the Glory of God and to the Good of Men: In a word they must always be
careful so to behave themselves with respect to all earthly Enjoyments, as may
become those, who look upon the present Life as a state of Labor and Trial,
but expect their Happiness and their Reward in the future. This is (as I have
said) the true Measure of Christian Temperance; and this Temper of Mind, every
one who will be the Disciple of Christ, must resolve to attain.

19. If this seem hard to any one, let him consider, that as a Mind sensualized
and wedded to earthly things, is here utterly unfit for a spiritual and
heavenly Life; so it must also hereafter be as utterly incapable of the
heavenly Glory. If a Man places his Happiness in the Contemplation of God and
the Exercise of Virtue here, he shall continue to enjoy it also hereafter;
because God and Virtue continue for ever: But if he places his Happiness in the
Pleasures of this World, and in the Enjoyments of Sense; when these things are
at an end, his Happiness must be at an end also. Men's Minds are by degrees
tinctured, and transformed into the Nature of the things they are fixed upon;
and in such things as they delight to dwell upon, in such things must be their
Portion. Hence Tully, and after him some Christian Writers have thought, that
the Souls of worldly-minded Men shall carry with them into the other State such
strong Affections and Desires after the things they delighted in here, that
were a sensual Person to be admitted even into the Seat of the Blessed, yet
should he find nothing there that could make him happy.

20. But hour this be (which I shall not now nicely dispute) certain it is
that nothing is more reasonable, than that those who place their Happiness in
the Enjoyments of this Life, should come short of the Glories of the next. We
all know how short and transitory the present Life is, and the Scripture every
where tells us that we are Strangers and Sojourners in the World; we are now
only in a state of Trial, and traveling as it were through a strange Country
to our proper Home: Whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the
Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 6. And here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to
come, Heb. 13. 14. Now therefore if Men will stop in the midst of their
Journey, and make their Inn their Home; If they will place their Happiness in
those things, which God has given them only as Conveniences for their present
state; what can be more reasonable, than that God should assign them their
Portion in those things? Man's Soul is Spiritual and Immortal, and by the
nobleness of its Nature exalted above the Vanities of this present Life; and
though by being immersed in Body it be necessitated to converse with sensible
and corporeal things, yet does it thirst after more pure and refined Objects;
it can look beyond this World to its native Country, and knows that its proper
Happiness is by imitating the Life of God to be made partaker of his Glory: Now
if Men notwithstanding all this, will take up with sensual and earthly
Enjoyments; if they will clog the flight of the Soul, and stake it down to
these ignoble Objects; if they will set their Hearts and Affections on these
things, which God has given them as matter for the exercise of their Virtue;
what can be more Just than that God should suffer them to satiate themselves
with their beloved Pleasures, and deny them those nobler ones which they so
little esteemed? It Is certain the Blessings of this World are Talents committed
to our Charge, which God expects we should lay out to his Glory and the Benefit
of the World; and to whom he has committed many of them, of him he will require
the more: He expects we should do what good we can with them; which is called
in Scripture, giving out our Money to the Exchangers, that when our Lord
comes, he may receive his own with Usury: Now if instead of this, we enjoy
these things wholly our selves, and employ them only to the serving our own
worldly Designs; what can be more reasonable, than that God should suffer them
to be our Portion and Reward? The Pharisees in our Savior's time were
notoriously covetous and worldly minded, doing even their acts of Charity
merely for the praise of Men; and our Savior repeats it no less than thrice in
the Sixth of St. Matthew, that They had their Reward: The rich Jews also made
generally no other Use of their Riches, than to live in Ease and Pleasure, in
Gaiety and Splendor; and our Savior tells them, that they had received their
Consolation.

21. The Happiness of Heaven is a great and glorious Reward; and they who will
Luke 20. 35.
be accounted worthy to obtain that World, and the Resurrection from the Dead,
must be content not to live a soft and easy, a sensual and voluptuous Life;
but to labor diligently, and to work out their own Salvation with fear and
trembling: Our Savior compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a Pearl of great
price, which when a Merchant-man found, Mat. 13. 46.
he sold all that he had and bought it; and whoever has worthy Notions of the
things that God has prepared for them that love him, can never think any thing
Haec quidem difficilia videntur; sed de eo loquimur, cui calcatis omnibus
terrenis, iter in coelum paratur. Lactant. lib. 6. c. 23.
hard, to purchase so great a Treasure. St. Paul compares the Reward of Virtue
to a Crown, for which they who run in a Race, run all, but one receives 1 Cor.
9. 24.
the Prize: And if they who strive for the Mastery, to obtain a corruptible
Crown, are temperate in all things; that is, are careful to prepare their
Bodies beforehand for the Race; that they may run, not uncertainly, but so that
they may obtain; how much more ought we to bring the Body into subjection, and
by Temperance prepare it for the Christian Warfare, who are to strive for an
incorruptible and never-fading Crown?

22. The History of our Savior is an Example, as of a Life not morose and
retired from the World, so of a Life very far from being sensual and
voluptuous: He utterly despised all the Grandeur and Pleasures of the World,
and willingly endured the scorn and contempt of obstinate and malicious Men,
that he might establish the Worship and true Religion of God; He went about
doing good, making that the Acts 10. 38.
whole Business of his Life, and cheerfully submitting to undergo any hardship,
that he might instruct the Ignorant or relieve the Distressed: And if we hope
at last to be made partakers of his Glory, we must resolve now in some measure
to imitate his Life, who has left us an Example that we should follow his
steps. The Lives of all the 1 Pet. 2. 21.
Saints of God, who have gone before us, are eminent Examples, not of Ease and
Softness, but either of great Sufferings for the Cause of Religion, or of great
Zeal and Pains in it: The Patriarchs who lived before our Savior, and saw the
Promises only afar off, confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims in the
Earth, and that Heb. 11. 13.
their Hopes were fixed upon a better Country, that is, an Heavenly; and all
the Primitive Christians, who first followed our Savior, and saw the Promises
fulfilled, did either through Persecutions become naked, destitute, and
afflicted, or by their boundless Charity and Contempt of the World, did almost
make themselves so: And if we hope to have our Portion among these Servants of
the most High, in that general Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, in that
heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the living Heb. 12. 23.
God; we must in some proportion conform our selves to the imitation of their
Zeal, their Labor and their Patience; and not be wholly carried away with the
coldness and indifferency of a careless and corrupted Age. They generally
parted with all things for the sake of Christ; and certainly we are at least
bound, not to fasten our Affections so strongly upon the things of this World,
as hardly to be able to deny our selves any thing. Their Temperance, their
Abstinence, and their Contempt of the World, was almost incredible and
excessive; and assuredly we cannot with the same Hopes spend our whole Lives,
in nothing but Softness, Gallantry and Pleasure, In fine, Their Charity was
wonderful and boundless, extending it self even to (...). Clem. ad Cor. 1.
such Instances as we can hardly think credible; and can we imagine, that we
are not obliged to do at least something, and to take some Pains, for the Glory
of God and for the Good of Men?

23. Lastly, If these things seem hard, and tend to entrench too much upon the
Pleasures of Life; consider the conclusion and final upshot of things: Consider
what Opinion we shall have of things at the conclusion of our Lives, when Death
and Judgment approach; and let us view things now in the same Light, as we know
certainly we shall be forced to do then. We know we shall then lament the loss
of every opportunity of doing good, which we have omitted; and shall grutch
every minute of Folly and Vanity, which might have been employed to the
increase of the Portion of our future Happiness: We know we shall then look
upon all the past pleasures of Life, as emptiness and nothing; and be convinced
that there is no Pleasure but in true Virtue, and no Fruit in any thing but in
having done much Good: And if we do indeed know this, what can be more
miserably and more inexcusably foolish, than not to make the same Judgment of
things now, as we know assuredly we shall do afterward? The reason why Men die
full of Fears and Uncertainties, full of dark Suspicions and confused Doubts,
is because they are conscious to themselves that they have lived carelessly and
indifferently; without having taken any Pains either for the Service of God, or
for the Good of Men; and without having used any zealous Endeavors, to
overcome the present World, or to obtain the future: But if Men would consider
things in time; if they would pass true Judgments of things, and act
accordingly with Resolution and Constancy; they might then know certainly their
own State, and might live with Comfort and die with Assurance.

CHAP. XII. Of our Obligation to be particularly careful to avoid those Sins,
to which we are most in danger to be tempted.
1. FIfthly, Be particularly careful to resist and avoid those Sins, to which
either your Constitution, Company, or Employment, make you most in danger to be
tempted. This is the great Trial of every Man's Sincerity, and of his Growth in
Virtue. He that for the Love of God and the Hopes of Heaven can mortify and
deny his most darling Lusts, can quell and keep under his most natural
Passions, can resist and constantly overcome those Temptations by which he is
most in danger to be seduced into Sin; such a one has an infallible Assurance
of his own Sincerity, and is very near to the Perfection of Virtue. But if
there be any one Instance, wherein a Man habitually falls short of his Duty, or
indulges a Lust, a Passion, a sinful Desire; it is certain, whatever other
Virtues he may be endued with, that he either acts upon wrong Principles and is
not sincere; or that his Resolutions are hitherto too weak and ineffectual, to
entitle him to the Comfort of Religion here, or to the Assurance of Happiness
hereafter.

2. There is no Man whom either the Constitution of his Body or the Temper of
his Mind, the Nature of his Employment or the Humor of his Company, does not
make obnoxious to some particular sort of Temptations more than to any other:
And in this thing it is, that those who have something of Sincerity, and will
not with others run into all excess of Riot, do yet make shift to deceive and
impose upon themselves. They think they are endued with many good and virtuous
Qualities; they hate Profaneness and professed enormous Impiety; they know
themselves innocent of many great Sins, which they see others continually
commit: But something, to which they are particularly tempted, they indulge
themselves in; and the fatal Mischief is, that those Sins which they see others
commit, and to which themselves are not violently tempted, seem most absurd and
unreasonable, and easy to be avoided; but that to which they are themselves
addicted, they think to be either so small as not to be of any very evil
Consequence, or so difficult to be resisted as to be allowed for among the
unavoidable Infirmities of Nature. Thus to many who have little or no Dealings
in the World, the Sins of Fraud, Injustice, Deceit, Over reaching, and the
like, seem very heinous, base and unreasonable; while at the same time they
allow themselves in habitual Intemperances and Impurities, as either harmless
Vices or almost insuperable Weaknesses. On the other hand there is no less a
Number of those, who applaud themselves in their own Minds, that they are not
as other Men, Intemperate, Debauched, Drunkards, Revellers, and the like; while
at the same time they look upon Fraud and Deceit, Tricking and Overreaching,
as the necessary Art and Mystery of Business.

3. But this is a very great and a very fatal Cheat. No Man can have any true
and solid Peace in himself; no Man can have any just Confidence in his
Addresses to God; no Man can have any Title to the Promises and Comforts of
Religion here; much less to the Glory and Reward of it hereafter; before his
Obedience be, if not Perfect, yet at least Universal. God will not share with
any Impiety; nor ever accept of any Man's Obedience, so long as it is mixed with
the accursed thing. If there be any Sin, that we can hardly part with; if there
be any Lust, that is like a right Hand or a right Eye; this is the thing that
God has proposed to us to Conquer; this is the good (...). Epicte^.
Fight which we must fight through Faith; this is the Victory to which Heaven
is proposed. For this we must gather together all the Forces of Reason and
Religion; for this we must strengthen our selves by Prayer and Consideration:
In this Warfare we must resolve strongly, persevere obstinately, and though we
be conquered, yet resolve to overcome; always remembering, that this is the
Stake for Life or Death, Happiness or Misery, Heaven or Hell.

4. Here therefore let every Man consider with himself; and let him well
observe his own Temptations, and his own Strength. Let him consider, not how
many Sins he can easily avoid, but by what Temptations he may most easily be
seduced; and let him make it his Business to guard himself there. Let those who
are young, and not yet entered into the hurry and business of the World, not
value themselves upon their being innocent from the Sins of Fraud and
Injustice, of Covetousness and Extortion, or the like; (for that perhaps they
may be, without any Pains, and without overcoming any powerful Temptation;) but
let them try themselves, whether they be firm against the Temptations of Vanity
and Lightness, of Heat and Passion, of Intemperance and Impurity; and let them
judge of themselves by their behavior in these Instances, wherein they are
most obnoxious: Let them consider, that their peculiar Task, is to overcome the
wicked one, 1 John 2. 13. to subdue the Flesh to the Spirit; to conquer and get
above Nam qui voluptatibus indulgent, qui libidini obsequuntur, ii animam suam
corpori mancipant, morteque condemnant, quia se corpori addixerunt, in quo
habet mors potestatem. Lactant. lib. 6. c. 23:
those Pleasures, which sensualize the Soul, and inslave the Mind to the Body,
and thereby bring it under the Power of Death and Destruction: And in fine, to
strive continually to cleanse themselves from all Impurity, Men's est enim
profecto quae peccat, quae immoderatae libidinis fructum cogitatione
complectitur; in hac crimen est, in hac omne delictum; nam etsi corpus nulla
sit labe maculatum, non constat tamen pudicitiae ratio, si animas mcestus est.
Id. Ibid.
not only of Body, but even of Mind and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear
of God: Let them consider, that they are by Baptism dedicated to the Service of
God; that they are by Confirmation assured of the Assistance of the Holy
Spirit; and that their Bodies are (...). Clem. ad Cor. 2.
the Temples of the Holy Ghost; which if they keep here in Temperance and
Purity, in Sanctification and Honor, they shall hereafter appear with them in
Glory; but Atque etiam vide ne quando persuadeatur tibi interire corpus hoc,
and abutaris eo in libidine aliqua. Si enim corpus tuum maculaveris, maculabis
etiam eodem tempore and Spiritum Sanctum; and si maculaveris Spiritum Sanctum,
non vives. Hermas 3. 5.
if they abuse them by any Intimperance, or defile them with any Lust, they
drive away the Spirit whereby they are sealed unto the Day of Redemption, and
shall forfeit their Life. Again on the other hand, Those whose Age, or Temper,
or Company, or Business, places them beyond the Follies and Extravagancies of
Youth, and out of the way of those Temptations with which others are hurried
away continually; must not esteem of themselves by their not running into those
excesses of Riot, to which perhaps they have little or no Temptation; but must
examine whether they be exactly Just in the Business they are employed in,
whether they be truly Useful and Charitable according to their Ability, and
whether they be sincerely Careful to resist those Temptations, to which their
particular Circumstances, whatever they be, do more especially expose them.
This is the true Trial of every Man's Sincerity, and the most certain Rule by
which every one may judge of his own State.

CHAP. XIII. Of Growth in Grace, and of Perfection.
1. LAstly, Strive continually to grow in Grace, and press forward toward
Perfection. So long as we continue in these Houses of Clay, encompassed
perpetually with the Infirmities of the Flesh, the Allurements of the World,
and the Temptations of the Devil; we shall all offend indeed in many things,
and can never arrive at the Perfection of Virtue: Yet unless we strive and
press forward toward Perfection, we shall never make any tolerable progress.
He that has no more Zeal for Religion, than to desire just to keep within the
Borders of Virtue, and to escape the Punishment of Vice, will in all
probability be deceived in his Expectations, and find when it is too late, that
those who are lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, are but Rev. 3. 17.
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, and shall have no
Portion among them that are arraied in fine Linen, which is the Righteousness
and the good Works of the Saints. He whose Heart is inflamed with an ardent
Love of God, and a truly zealous desire of the Happiness of Heaven, will with
St. Paul never think he has already attained, or is already perfect enough; but
forgetting those ihings which are behind, Phil. 3. 1^.
and reaching forth unto those things which are before, will always press
forward toward the Mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus: He will never think himself good and holy enough; but getting
continually a more complete Victory over his Frailties and Infirmities, will go
from strength to strength in the Improvements Psalm. 84. 7*
of Virtue here, till he appear before God in the Perfection of Holiness and of
Glory hereafter.

2. Think not when you have once attained a clear knowledge of your Duty, and
framed hearty Resolutions to perform it, and begun to live according to that
Knowledge and those Resolutions; that you are presently in a perfect and
confirmed State of Virtue. You must frequently Sed hoc quod liquet firmandum,
and altius quotidiana meditatione figendum est. Plus operis est in eo, ut
proposita custodias, quam ut honesta proponas. Perseverandum est, and assiduo
studio robur addendum, donec bona men's sit quod bona voluntas est. Seneca Ep.
16.
review and meditate upon the Particulars of your Duty: You must frequently
renew and strengthen your good Resolutions: and you must always be correcting
and amending your Practice: Till that which was well resolved upon, and bravely
begun, arrive by the degrees of a diligent and perpetual Improvement, to a
confirmed Habit and settled Temper of Mind.

3. Think not when you have performed your Duty according to the common
Measures of Obedience, and the vulgarly reputed Bounds of the Obligation of the
Christian Laws; and when you are Illud praecipue impedit, quod cito nobis
placemus; si invenimus qui nos bonos viros dicat, qui prudentes, qui Sanctos,
agnoscimus. Seneca, Ep. 60.
by others looked upon, as a good and just and holy Person; that you are now
arrived at the Perfection of Virtue. For the Judgment of God is very different
from the Opinion of Men; and such a Life as is now looked upon as very good and
creditable, would in the Times of the Apostles or Primitive Christians have
been thought, if not scandalous, yet at best very cold and indifferent. He that
will be perfect, must be Nec tantum legibus publicis pareat, sed sit supra
omnes leges qui legem Dei sequitur. Lactant. lib. 6. c. 23.
above all Laws, and Customs, and Opinions; and must not limit his Purity of
Mind, his Contempt of the World, and his Desire of doing Good, to any Degrees
or Rules; but must exalt them in proportion to his love of God, and his hopes
of Happiness.

4. Further, Think not when upon a loose and general view of your Life your
Conscience does not accuse you of any scandalous and deliberate Sins, that
therefore you have attained to the highest pitch of Virtue. There are many
Sins, with which Men easily impose upon their own Minds; much indifferency in
Religion, and coldness of Devotion; many omissions of Duties, and neglects of
opportunities of doing Good; many faults of surprise, and indecencies of
Passion; much sensuality, and over-fond Love of the things of this present
World; many excesses, and small degrees of Intemperance; which are not to be
discovered and overcome, without entering into a more strict, particular, and
impartial examination of our Actions; and making repeated Resolutions and using
constant unwearied Endeavors to correct whatever upon such strict search shall
appear to be amiss.

5. Many there have been, (and some even among Faciebat hoc Sextius, ut
consummato die, cum se ad nocturnam quietem recepisset, interrogaret animum
suum, Quod hodie malum tuum sanasti? Cui vitio obstitisti? Qua part melior es?
Seneca de Ira, lib. 3. c. 36. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Pythag. Carm. Aurea.
the Heathens themselves,) who have every Night strictly examined into the
Actions of the past Day; that if they had done any thing for which they could
reprove themselves, they might resolve to be more careful in that Particular
for the future; and if they found they had in all Points performed their Duty,
they might confirm and encourage themselves to continue to perform it. Others
have done this yet more frequently, and habitually; never going about any
thing, without a short Thought how they might best act, for the Honor of God,
for the Good of Men, or for the Improvement of the Virtues of their own Mind;
and never having done any thing, without a short Reflection whether they had
acted so, as was most agreeable to these great Ends.

6. These indeed are things not to be imposed upon any Man by any particular
Rules, but such as must be wholly left to the Discretion of every Man, to be
used according to each ones Prudence or Zeal. Only in general it is certain,
That by how much the more frequently a Man examines the Actions of his Life,
and by how much the more strictly he observes his smaller Failures, and by how
much the more particularly he resolves and endeavors to correct them; by so
much the more will his Religion be Uniform, and his Obedience Perfect. He that
uses himself often to consider, and to recollect the Particulars of his Duty;
will perform many things, which others know indeed and understand in general,
but Interdum scimus, nec attendimus; non docet admonitio, sed advertit, sed
excitat, sed memoriam continet, nec patitur elabi. Pleraque ante oculos posita
transimus. Seneca Ep. 95.
through habitual careless and inconsiderateness omit: And he that often
searches strictly into the smallest Errors of his Life, and prays against them,
and resolves particularly and endeavors to amend them; will be able to avoid
and overcome many of those things, which are by others looked upon as the
unavoidable Frailties and Infirmities of Nature.

7. And in proportion as a Man arrives nearer to this perfect State of Virtue,
so will that Peace of Conscience, which is the peculiar Reward of Religion in
this World, grow up by degrees to a settled Joy and Assurance of Mind. One
whose Life is void of great and scandalous Crimes, but otherwise not strict and
diligent, will be free indeed from the Terror and Amazement of the Wicked; but
because he has taken no great Pains, nor done any thing considerable for the
Love of God and for the sake of Religion, his Mind will yet be disturbed with
many scrupulous Doubts and uncertain Fears: But when a Man has been truly
diligent to improve himself to the utmost, and has with Zeal and Earnestness
pressed forward toward Perfection; then is it that he attains to that
Tranquillity and Assurance, which wise Men have compared to a continual Feast.
The Peace and Satisfaction of Mind, which Quid ergo pulchrius hac consuetudine
excutiendi totum diem? Qualis ille somnus post recognitionem sui sequitur, quam
tranquillus, altus ac liber, cum aut laudatus est animus aut admonitus, and
speculator sui censorque secretus cognoscit de moribus suis? Seneca de Ira,
lib. 3. c. 36.
some have found upon the careful and strict examination of one past Days
Actions, has been very great: But that complete Assurance, which arises from
the Conscience of a considerable part of a Man's Life having been spent in the
Strictness and in the Purity of the Gospel, is a Pleasure infinitely surpassing
all the Enjoyments of Sense; being indeed a fore-taste of the Happiness of
Heaven, and a Rejoicing beforehand in Christ with Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory. Such a 1 Pet. 1. 8.
one as has arrived to this pitch, lives in Peace, and dies with Assurance, and
at the appearance of our Lord shall be presented fault less before the Presence
of his Glory with Jude 24.
exceeding Joy.

THE END.
Essay the Third. Of Repentance.
CHAP. I. Of Repentance in General.
1. THE plain and express Condition upon which the Gospel promises Salvation to
all Men, is Obedience or a Holy Life. The Time from which this Holy Life is to
begin, is either Baptism or Confirmation; that is, the Time when those who are
either at riper Years converted to the Christian Religion, or have from their
Infancy been brought up in the Profession of it, come to a clear and distinct
knowledge of their Duty. That from this Period every Man is obliged to
persevere in a constant Course of Holiness, that is, in a continual and
sincere, though weak and imperfect Obedience to all the Commands of God, the
Gospel plainly declares to us: And that the glorious Rewards of Heaven should
be at all promised to so small a Service, as the imperfect Obedience which
weak, sinful, degenerate Man should be able to perform; is the Purchase of the
Price of the Blood of the Son of God, and the Effect of the infinite Riches of
the Divine Mercy made known to us by Christ. Had God therefore to those who had
once been received to the Mercy of the Gospel, and had once been made partakers
of the heavenly Gift, and had tasted the good Word of Heb. 6. 6.
God and the Powers of the World to come, allowed no more Remission for wilful
and presumptuous Sins; but accepted those only, who having once washed their
Garments Rev. 1. 5, 7, 14.
in the Blood of the Lamb, should from thenceforward keep themselves in a
Gospel Sense pure and undefiled; yet had his Mercy been infinitely greater,
than sinful Man could have deserved or expected. But such is the earnestness of
God's Desire to make his Creatures Happy, and such the Abundance of the Grace
made known by the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; that even to
those who having been already admitted to the Mercy and Favor of the Gospel,
and having received the Promise of a great and glorious Reward upon the
Condition of an easy and most reasonable Obedience, and having been endued
with the Earnest of his Holy Spirit, shall notwithstanding relapse after all
this into wilful and deliberate Sins; even to these, I say, he has yet further
granted, that if by a solemn Repentance they shall again unfeignedly renew
their Obedience, and from that Period persevere in well-doing to the end, they
shall yet attain to the Reward of the Faithful; and shall be saved as
Firebrarnds plucked out of the Fire, or as Men escaping upon a Plank after
Shipwreck.

2. By Repentance therefore I would all along in this Essay be understood to
mean, not that Repentance which is the constant Duty of all Christians; (who
are indeed continually bound to repent in general of all those Slips and
Infirmities, those Defects and Surprises, which by the Condition of the
Gospel Covenant are most readily pardoned:) For this Repentance is not properly
a new Period or Beginning of a Holy Life; but a necessary and continued part of
that imperfect Obedience, which Man in this degenerate State is capable of
performing, and which God has in his Gospel declared that he will always accept
instead of perfect Innocence: But by Repentance I here understand that
Repentance, which is an entire change of Heart and Mind, a turning from
Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God; whereby those who by
wilful and deadly Sins have left their first Estate, and forfeited their Title
to the Crown of Righteousness, are to begin anew their Obedience, in order to
recover the Mercy and Favor of God: And that no one may be perplexed with vain
Scruples, and unreasonable Fears; this Repentance is such as plainly no Man is
obliged to, but those who are guilty of great and deliberate Sins; of
Blasphemy, Perjury, open Profaneness, or contempt of Religion; of Murder,
Sedition, Theft, manifest and designed Injustice, Hatred, Fraud, Wrong, or
Oppression; of Adulteries, Fornications, Uncleanness, or habitual Drunkenness
and Intemperance; or of some other Sins either maliciously wilful, or
notoriously habitual.

CHAP. II. That God allows Repentance even to the greatest of Sinners.
1. IN the Primitive Church there was Novatians.
a Sect of Men, who upon a mistaken Interpretation of some Passages of the
Epistle of St. Paul to the Hebrews, contended that there was (...) [ sc. in
Baptismo*] (...). Epiphan. ^ar. 59.
no more place of Repentance allowed to those who after Baptism should fall
into any of these wilful and deliberate Sins: They taught that in Baptism
indeed all manner of Sin and Blasphemy whatsoever, was forgiven Men absolutely,
and washed away by the Blood of Christ; but that if after that great Remission
they sinned again wilfully and presumptuously, they could no more obtain any
further Pardon, than the Death of Christ, that great Sacrifice for Sin, could
be repeated; and that therefore however they should sincerely repent, yet there
now remained nothing Heb. 10. 27.
more for them, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery
Indignation, which should devour the Adversary. But that this was a great
mistake; and that God does admit even the greatest of Sinners, upon their true
Repentance, to Forgiveness and Pardon, is evident both from the Nature of God,
and the Design of Christianity; from the Practice of the Apostles, and from the
general Sense of the Primitive Church.

2. God is a Being, as of infinite Purity and Holiness, so also of infinite
Goodness and Mercy; and as he cannot possibly be reconciled to Men, so long as
they continue wicked; so when ever they cease to be so, and return again to the
Obedience of Gods Commands, and to the imitation of his Nature, we cannot
suppose but that he will again admit them to his Pardon and Favor. Goodness
and Mercy are our most natural Notions of God; and the Discoveries which he
has made of himself by Revelation, are most exactly agreeable thereto. At the
passing by of his Glory before Moses, he proclaimed himself, The Lord, the Lord
God merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth,
forgiving Iniquities, Transgressions and Sins, Exodus 34. 6. By the Prophets he
declares and swears by himself, As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure
in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live,
Ezekiel. 33. 1^. And above all, by that stupendous Instance of Mercy, the sending
his only Son out of his Bosom to give himself a Sacrifice for the Sins of Men,
he has discovered such an earnest desire of our Reconciliation and Salvation,
as will be the everlasting subject of the Praises of Men and the Admiration of
Angels. If therefore God, when he had made a Covenant of perfect Obedience, and
had not promised Pardon at all, to great and presumptuous Sins, did yet give
Pardon, and declare also to the Jews by his Prophets that he would do so: And
if, when Men were yet Enemies to him, he was so willing that not any should
perish, but all should come to Repentance; 2 Pet. 3. 9.
yea so desirous to have all Men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
the Truth; that he not only spared not his own Son, to 1 Timothy 2. 4.
deliver him up for us all, but tells us even of Joy in Heaven at a Sinners
accepting the gracious Terms of the Gospel, and represents himself as a tender
Father running to meet his returning Prodigal, and falling uphis Neck and
kissing him: If this, I say, was the Compassion which God showed to Man, in his
first sinful and miserable State; it is very reasonable to conclude and hope,
that his Mercy is not so entirely exhausted at once, but that the same Pity may
be yet further extended even to those also, who after the knowledge of the
Truth having been seduced by the Temptations of the World and the Devil, to
depart from God and to forsake their Duty, shall again return unto him with
Sincerity and Perseverance.

3. The Design of the Gospel, is to teach Tit. 2. 12.
us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world: And certainly whenever it comes to have this
effect upon a Man, it gives him a Title to the blessed Hope, and a
well-grounded Assurance of Mercy at the glorious appearance of the great God
and our Savior Jesus Christ. The Foundation of the Christian Dispensation,
upon which the whole Sum of Affairs is now established, is Faith and
Repentance; and whenever a Man so truly repents, as to purify himself
effectually from every evil Work, and by the Spirit mortifies the deeds of the
Romans 8. 1^.
Body, he shall certainly live. Our Savior himself gives express Directions,
when a Man's Christian Brother trespasses against him, to use all possible
means to reclaim him, both by private and public Reproof, before he rejects
him utterly as a Heathen Man and a Publican: He commands us, though our Brother
sins never so often against us, yet if he turns again and repents, to forgive
him; and has promised upon this Condition, that we also shall in like manner
find forgiveness at the Hands of God: And in the Epistles sent by the Apostle
St. John to the Bishops of the Seven Churches of Asia, he exhorts them
earnestly to remember from whence they were fallen, Rev. 2. 5.
and to repent, and be zealous, and do their first works; and promises, that if
upon this Invitation any Man would hear his Voice, and open the Door; that is,
would be moved by these Exhortations to repent and amend, he would come in to
him and sup with him; that is, would again receive him Rev. 3. 20.
to his Mercy and Favor.

4. Accordingly the Writings of the Apostles, though directed to Christians,
are yet full of earnest Exhortations to Repentance; and their History contains
many Instances of those who after great falls were thereby restored to their
first state. St Peter exhorts Simon Magus, who thought the Gift of God could be
bought with Money, to repent of this his wickedness; and gives him
encouragement to hope, that he should thereupon obtain forgiveness, Acts 8. 22.
St. John tells us, That if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our Sins, 1 John 2.
2. St. James tells us, That if any one err from the Truth, and one convert him;
he that converteth the Sinner from the Error of his way, shall save a Soul from
Death, and shall hide a multitude of Sins, Jam. 5. 20. St. Jude advises us to
have compassion of some, making a difference; and to save others with fear,
pulling them out of the fire, ver. 23. St. Paul exhorts Timothy, to instruct in
meekness those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth; and that they may recover
themselves out of the Snare of the Devil, who are taken Captive by him at his
will, 2 Timothy 2. 25. He advises the Galatians, that if any Man be overtaken in a
fault, they which are spiritual should restore such a one in the Spirit of
meekness, considering themselves, lest they also be tempted, Gal. 6. 1. He
threatens the Corinthians to excommunicate those who had sinned, and had not
repented of their uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness, which they
had committed, 2 Cor. 12. 21. And even the Incestuous Person, who had been
guilty of such a Sin as was not so much as named among the Heathens themselves,
he delivers indeed to Satan for the destruction of the Flesh, but it was that
the Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5. 5. For when
the punishment which was inflicted of many, had been sufficient to reduce him
to Repentance, he writes to the Church to forgive him and comfort him, lest
perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow, 2 Cor. 2. 7.

5. And this, excepting as I have said one Sect of Men, was the constant
Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive Church. To those who were yet Innocent,
they thought indeed no Promises too great, and no Threatenings too severe,
whereby they might make them infinitely careful to preserve their Innocence:
But those who had already sinned, they encouraged to repent; and upon their
Repentance admitted them again to the Peace of the Church, and to the Assurance
of Pardon. They taught, that the (...). Epiphan. Haer. 59.
Holy Word and Church of God, always admitted of true Repentance: That Potest
enim reduci ac liberari, si eum poeniteat actorum, and ad meliora conversus
satis faciat Deo. Lactant. lib. 5. c. 24.
he that had fallen, might yet recover and escape, if he repented truly of what
was past, and for the future amended his Life, and made satisfaction to God:
That (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 2.
God not only gave full Remission of Sins in Baptism, but allowed also to
those, who should afterward sin, a further place of Repentance: That to (...).
Clem. Alex. de eo Quis Dives, etc.
every one who heartily and sincerely repents, God readily sets open a Door of
Pardon, and the Holy Spirit returns again into a Mind purified from the
pollutions of Sin: That Vade and di^ omnibus, ut poenitentiam agant, and vivent
Deo; quia motus Dominus magra sua clementia misit me ut ponitentiam omnibus
nu^ciarem, etiam eis qui non merentur propter facta sua (...) salutem; sed
patiens eri^ ^ominus, and invitationem factam pe* (...). i^m s^^m (...)
conserva^e. He^^^ 3. 8.
all Men who repent, even those who by reason of their great Sins did not
deserve to have found any more Pardon, shall be saved; because God out of his
great Compassion will be patient toward Men, and keep the Invitation which he
has made by his Son: That (...). Clem. Alex. de eo Quis Dives servandus.
God will judge every Man in the Condition he finds him; and that therefore, as
it will nothing avail a Man to have been formerly Righteous, if he at last
grows wicked; so one who has formerly lived wickedly, may afterward by
Repentance and renewed Obedience blot out his past Transgressions, and attain
to the Crown of Virtue and Immortality.

6. Thus that God admits even the greatest of Sinners to Repentance, is evident
both from the Nature of God and the Design of the Gospel, from the Practice of
the Apostles and from the constant Doctrine of the Primitive Church. But then
to make this Repentance such, as will be acceptable to God and effectually
available to obtain Pardon, there are several considerable Circumstances
required: And these I think may be reduced to these Three; First, That it must
be Early; Secondly, That it must be Great; and Thirdly, That it must be
constant and persevering in its Effects.

CHAP. III. That true Repentance must be Early.
1. FIrst, That Repentance may be true and available to obtain Pardon, it is
necessary that it be Early; that is, The Sinner must forsake his Vices so
timely, as to obtain the Habits of the contrary Virtues, and to live in them:
Otherwise he can have no security that his Repentance is hearty; or if it be,
that it will be accepted by God.

2. First, We can never have any security that a late Repentance is hearty and
sincere. A Man may very well at the amazing approach of Death and Judgment, be
extremely sorry that he has lived wickedly; he may strongly wish that he had
lived the Life of the Righteous, and resolve, if he were to live over again,
that he would do so; and yet all this may be merely the Passion, and not at all
the Duty of Repentance. The Duty of Repentance, is an entire change of Mind,
and an effectual reformation of Life: But the Passion of Sorrow and Remorse, is
such as accursed Spirits shall be for ever tormented with in vain; and such as
a dying Penitent can never be secure that this late Repentance will exceed.
Many upon a Bed of Sickness, have made all the holy Vows and pious Resolutions
that could be desired; nay, perhaps there is hardly any wicked Man, who when he
thinks he is about to die, does not desire and design to amend; yet how few are
there of these, who if they recover, do ever make good those Vows and
Resolutions? And no late Penitent can ever be sure, that this would not be his
own Case. When an habitual Sinner is in Time convinced of the evil of his ways,
and resolves and endeavors in earnest to reform, while he has Life, and
Health, and Strength to do it; yet seldom does he at the first trial work
himself up to such an effectual and prevailing Resolution against his Sin, as
to change his whole course of Life in an instant, and at once deliver himself
out of the Bondage of Corruption, into the Romans 8. 2^.
glorious Liberty of the Children of God: Usually he proceeds by degrees; and
after many Relapses and renewed Resolutions, arrives at last to a settled and
steady course of Piety. How much less then can a late Penitent, who labors
under all the contrary disadvantages, ever be secure that his Repentance will
be sincere, and his Resolutions effectual enough, to translate him at one
effort from the Power of Darkness, into the Kingdom of God?

3. For this Reason the Ancients never admitted any to the Peace and Communion
of the Church, who began not their Repentance before the time of Sickness.
Those, says Et idcirco poenitentiam non agentes, nec dolorem delictorum suorum
toto cord and manifesta lamentationis suae professione testantes, prohibendos
omnino censemus a spe Communicationis and Pacis, si in infirmitate atque in
periculo caeperint deprecari; quia rogare illos non delicti poenitentia, sed
mortis urgentis admonitio compellit; nec dignus est in morte accipere solatium,
qui se non cogitavit esse moriturum. Cyprian Ep 52.
St. Cyprian, who would not in time repent, and by public Lamentation testify
their hearty Sorrow for their Sins, we utterly reject from all hope of Peace
and Reconciliation, if in the time of Sickness and Danger they begin to
entreat; because then it is not true Repentance for their Sin, but the fear of
approaching Death, that drives them to beg for Mercy; and no one is worthy to
receive any comfort in Death, who never considered before hand that he was to
die.

4. But, Secondly, Supposing a late Repentance to be hearty and sincere, yet
have we no positive and absolute Promise, that it shall be accepted. The plain
and express Condition of the Covenant established by Christ, is a Holy Life;
that is, a constant and persevering Obedience to all the Commands of God, (in a
Gospel and Merciful Sense allowing for humane Weaknesses and Imperfections,)
from the time of our Baptism, or of our coming to the knowledge of the Truth,
until the end of our Lives: And the least that can possibly lay Claim to the
Reward promised upon this Condition, is such a Repentance as produces the
actual Obedience of at least some proportianable part of a Man's Life.

5. To say that the Original Condition of the Christian Covenant is such, that
a Man may safely live wickedly all his Life, and satisfy all his Lusts and
Appetites to the utmost, provided he does but leave off and forsake his Sins at
the last; is really to take away the necessity of a Holy Life, and to undermine
the very Foundation of all Virtue. For considering on the one hand how
prevailing the Custom of the World, how deceitful the Temptations of the Devil,
and how powerful the Assaults of Lust and Passion are; and on the other hand
how seldom sudden Death happens, and how little the Excellency of the Christian
Life is understood; it will be hard, according to this Doctrine, to find
Arguments sufficiently strong, to move Men to repent and to reform immediately:
If there be no other danger, but in sudden Death; and no greater malignity in
Sin, than what may be cured by an easy and short Repentance at last; most Men
will venture to be wicked at present, and trust to the opportunities of growing
better afterward. Though therefore God may possibly have reserves of Mercy,
which in event he may exercise toward Men in their last extremity; yet
Originally it is certain the Gospel Covenant gives no assurance of Comfort, but
either to a constant and persevering Holiness, or to a Repentance evidenced by
actually renewed Obedience.

6. At Baptism indeed, or when ever we first come to the knowledge of the
Truth, all past sins are so entirely forgiven and washed away by the Blood of
Christ, that Repentance, though it has no time to evidence it self in the
Fruits of Righteousness, is without all Controversy available to Salvation:
But when Men who have by Baptism Covenanted solemnly with God for a Holy Life,
and confirmed that Covenant by other repeated Promises and Resolutions, shall
yet wilfully live in Sin; and notwithstanding the express Threatenings of our
Savior and his Apostles, that they who do so shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God; notwithstanding the earnest Exhortations and Warnings of God's Ministers;
and notwithstanding the perpetual Reproaches of their own Consciences, continue
obstinately to do so; such Persons have no reason in the World to expect, that
God will at last accept their late, unactive, and ineffectual Repentance. The
penitent Thief was received by our Savior, as any other Infidel undoubtedly
may be, who toward the end of his Life is convinced of the Truth of the
Christian Religion, and heartily embraces it; but there is nothing like a
Promise in Scripture, that the unactive Repentance of a Christian, who has
lived all his Life in notorious Wickedness, shall be accepted at the Hour of
Death: The Laborers who were hired into the Vineyard at the eleventh Hour,
received indeed the same Wages with them that had born the burden and heat of
the Day; but our Savior has no where promised, that baptized and professed
Christians, who are hired into the Vineyard in the Morning, if they riot away
all the Day in Idleness and Wickedness, shall at Night be accepted for their
professing their Sorrow that they have not wrought.

7. Let those Men consider these things, who resolve now to enjoy the Pleasures
of Sin for a season, and hope hereafter by a late Repentance to get a share
also in the eternal Rewards of Virtue. Let them consider that they may be cut
off in the midst of their Hopes; or that (...). Arrian. in Epictet. l. 4. c. 12.
they may be as unwilling to repent hereafter, as they are at present: But
above all let them consider, That though they should live to that time, when
they shall be willing to leave their Sins, because the strength of their
Temptations will cease; yet they cannot be sure, that God will then accept
them. The express Condition of the Gospel is, that we seek first the Kingdom of
God, that we deny our selves, and that we overcome the World: How slender
therefore must be the hopes of those, who spend their Life and Strength in the
enjoyments of this World, and make Religion not their first but their last
Refuge? Are the Glories of Heaven so inconsiderable? Or, is the Duty we owe to
God so small, that he should accept our coldest and most unwilling Service?
Offer the Blind for Sacrifice; offer the Lame and Sick; Mal. 1. 7.
offer it now unto thy Governor; will he be pleased with thee? How much less
will God accept us, when we are Non pudet te relicuias vitae tibi reservare,
and id solum tempus bonae menti destinare, quod in nullam rem conferri possi^?
Quam s^r^m est tunc videre incipere, cum desinendum est? Quae ^am stul^a
mortalitatis oblivio, in quinquagesimum and s^^ ^gesimum annum dir^erre sana
Consilia; and inde velle vitam inchoare, q^o pa^ci perduserunt? Seneca de vitae
brevitate c. 4.
least fit to serve him, and in those Days wherein we our selves have no
Pleasure?

8. Terrible are the Threatenings which the Scripture denounces against those,
who refuse to hear the Voice of God when he calls, and to seek him whilst he
may be found. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my
hand and no Man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would
have none of my Reproof: I also will laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when
your Fear comes. When your Fear comes as Desolation, and your Destruction
comes as a Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish comes upon you: Then shall
they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they
shall not find me: For that they hated Knowledge, and did not choose the Fear of
the Lord, Prove. 1. 24, etc. When the Jews whom God had saved out of the Land of
Egypt, and was grieved with them forty Years in the Wilderness, and had brought
them to the Borders of the promised Canaan, despised that good Land, and
refused to enter therein; he swear unto them in his Wrath that they should not
enter into his Rest: And when afterward they resolved to go up and possess it,
he suffered them not. Esau in like manner for one morsel of Bread sold Heb. 12.
17.
his birthright: And afterward, when he would have inherited the Blessing, the
Scripture tells us that he was rejected; for he found no place of Repentance,
though he sought it carefully with tears. All which things the Apostle declares
plainly to be written for our Example; Lest there be any Fornicator, or profane
Person among us, as Esau was; and lest any among us tempt God, as the Jews also
tempted, and fall after the same Example of Unbelief.

9. Let those therefore who have yet the Time before them, consider what they
have to do: Let them be careful to hearken unto the Voice of God to Day, whilst
it is called to Day: Let them be zealous to improve that Time and those Talents
wherewith God has blessed them; that when their Master comes he may find them
so doing, and bid them, as having been good and faithful Servants, to enter
into the Joy of their Lord.

10. The Sum of this Point is this. When a Christian has lived wickedly all
his Life, and comes at his last extremity to be convinced of his Folly, and to
desire to Amend; how far the Mercy of God may possibly extend it self, we
cannot tell; and therefore such a one is not to be absolutely swallowed up in
complete Despair: But to all those, who have yet any space and opportunity
left, it ought to be strongly and perpetually inculcated, that the Gospel
Covenant allows not the least hopes to any other Repentance, than such as has
time to evidence it self in the actual and persevering Obedience of a Holy Life.

CHAP. IV. That true Repentance must be Great: And of Penance.
1. SEcondly, True Repentance ought to be very Great; that is, he that repents
ought to affect his Mind with such a deep Sorrow and hatred of Sin, as will put
him upon those afflictive Duties of Fasting, Watching, Praying, Humiliation,
Liberal Alms, and the like.

2. And the Reason of this is; First, Because in many Cases Repentance cannot
otherwise be evidenced to be real and sincere. True Repentance is an effectual
change of Mind, and an actual amendment of Life: And as a bare change of Mind
is not an acceptable Repentance, unless it produces an actual amendment of
Life; so neither is a bare amendment of Life, unless it proceeds from a real
change of Mind. There are many Cases, wherein a Man may leave off committing an
habitual Sin, and yet not truly repent of it: Some accidental change of the
Circumstances of his Life, some present worldly and temporal Interest, or some
other like Cause, may restrain a Man from continuing in a customary Sin; and
yet he may retain such an affection to it, such a readiness to return to it in
his former Circumstances, or at least may have so little Hatred and Resolution
against it, as may make him very far from a true Penitent. In all such Cases
therefore, where a Man may break off a Sin upon any other Consideration, than
the Love of God and a true Sense of Religion; it is necessary for the evidencing
the Truth of his Repentance, and for the preserving him from imposing upon his
own Mind, that he testify his Sincerity and the Reality of his change of Mind,
by some such afflictive, laborious, or expensive Duties, as will prove him to
have indeed attained such a religious temper of Mind, as would be sufficient to
preserve him in the like Circumstances from returning again to the same, or to
any other the like wilful Sin. Were this rightly considered, Men would not so
easily sin on securely at present, and impose upon themselves with vain hopes
of growing better afterward with less Pains, when some particular alteration of
their Circumstances of Life, or perhaps Age and Sickness, shall have removed
their Temptations.

3. But Secondly, When amendment of Life does alone sufficiently evidence the
sincerity of Repentance, (as generally and in most Cases it does,) yet ought
those who have sinned to do something to testify their Sorrow for past
Offenses, and to judge themselves, that they may not be 1 Cor. 11. 31.
judged of the Lord. They ought to take (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 2.
Shame to themselves, that after having received the knowledge of the Truth,
and having been made partakers of the heavenly Gift, and having tasted the good
Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come they should again have
returned to Sin and Folly: They ought to consider with Confusion of Face the
Ingratitude of having again committed those things, which are so hateful to God
that he has threatened to punish the continuance in them with everlasting
Destruction, and would not once pardon them under a less Ransom than the Blood
of his only Son: And these Considerations ought to work in them that
Carefulness, that Indignation, that Fear, that vehement Desire, that Zeal, and
2 Cor. 7. 10.
that Revenge; of which (St. Paul tells us) consists that godly Sorrow, which
works Repentance to Salvation not to be repented of.

4. Thus when St. Peter had thrice denied his Master, the Consideration of the
Shamefulness and Ingratitude of the thing, made him, when he thought thereon,
weep bitterly. Thus when David had committed those crying Sins of Adultery and
Murder, the Consideration of the foulness and baseness of the Fact, made him
every night wash his Bed and water his Couch with his Tears; and extorted from
him those bitter Complaints, of which the greatest part of his Penitential
Psalms are made up. And all the Saints, who ever fell into any notorious Sin,
were very Omne tempus in exomologesi consummavit, plangens and lamentans, etc.
Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 9.
severe in their Humiliation, earnestly desiring that God would give them their
Punishment in this World, that their Spirit might be saved in the Day of the
Lord Jesus.

5. For this Reason St. James advises those who had sinned, to be afflicted,
and mourn, and weep; to let their Laughter be turned to Mourning, and their Joy
to Heaviness; and to humble themselves in the sight of the Lord, that he might
lift them up. And the Primitive Church always taught, That (...). Clem.
Alexandrin. (...). Idem Strom. 4. (...). Chrysostom. Homil. in Pentecost.
Sins committed wilfully after the knowledge and belief of the Truth, were to
be done away with Labor and Sorrow: That such Sins Nunquid ergo protinus putas
aboleri delicta eorum, qui agunt poenitentiam? Non proinde continuo. Sed
oportet eum qui agit poenitentiam, affligere animam suam, and humilem animo se
praestare in omni negotio, and vexationes multas variasque perferre. Hermas
Lib. 3. Simil 7.
were not immediately forgiven upon a Man's beginning to repent, but after he
had afflicted his Soul, and humbled himself deeply, and undergone many
Troubles: That the Quam magna deliquimus, tam granditer defleamus; alto vulneri
diligens and longa medicima non de^it; poenitentia crimine minor non fit. --
Orare oportet impensius and rogare, diem luctu tranfigere, vigiliis noctes ac
flectibus ducere, tempus omne lachrymosis lamentationibus occupare, stratos
solo adhaerere cineri, in cilicio and sordibus volutari. -- Incunctanter and
largiter fiat operatio; census omnis in medelam vulneris erogetur. Cyprian.
Sermon. de Lapsis.
afflictive Duties of Repentance ought to bear some proportion to the greatness
of the Sin: That the Penitent ought to spend much time in Watching, Fasting,
Praying, and giving much Alms: And that In quantum non peperceris tibi, in
tantum tibi Deus, creed, parcet. Tertul. de Poenit.
by how much the more severely he judged himself here, by so much the more
might he hope God would spare him, and be merciful to him hereafter.

6. It Is true, the Sin which the Ancients particularly respected, when they
preached up the necessity of this severe Repentance, was no less than that of
denying our Savior. But if we consider the Matter impartially, what great
difference is there between renouncing Christianity, and living in an open and
profane contempt of Religion; in the Practice of manifest Injustice, Fraud and
Oppression; or in notorious and habitual Intemperance? Only Quae justior venia
in omnibus causis, quam Voluntarius an quam Invitus peccator implorat? Nemo
volens negare [ Christum] compellitur, nemo nolens fornicatur. Tertull. de Pud.
they who denied Christ, did it being compelled by great and long Torments; but
these other Vices are committed wilfully and of choice.

7. Very great Reason therefore there is, why those who have been guilty of
great and wilful Sins, should enjoin themselves a great and remarkable
Repentance. But yet because after all, the End and Design, the whole Sum and
Life of Repentance, is Reformation; therefore no Man ought to impose upon
himself any other Penitential Severities, than such as are directly conducive
to this main End. Ridiculous and foolish were the Penances enjoined Men in the
dark and more ignorant Ages of the Church; because they neither tended to
improve the Virtues of Men's own Minds, nor to make Men more Useful and
Beneficial to others: But such Penitential Exercises, as directly mortify Men's
Lusts and Passions, or lead them to be more Charitable and do more Good in the
World; in these, by how much the Penitent is more strict and constant, by so
much is he more secure of the Sincerity of his Repentance, and of the Fullness
of his Pardon.

8. The best therefore, and the greatest, and the most effectual Repentance,
that a Man can possibly exercise; is to endeavor to be so much the more
careful in mortifying his Vices, and so much the more zealous in improving all
Opportunities of doing Good, by how much he has formerly been more faulty in
any Particular: And to resolve, by how much the more he hopes to have forgiven
him, to Love so much the more. Let him, if he has been vanquished by any
Temptation, Repetet certamen suum miles, iterabit aciem, provocabit hostem, and
quidem factus ad praelium fortior per dolorem. Qui sic Deo satisfecerit, qui
poenitentia facti sui, qui pudore delicti plus virtutis and fidei de ipso
lapsus sui dolor conceperit, exauditus and adjutus a Domino, quam
contristaverat nuper, laetam faciet Ecclesiam; nec jam solam Dei veniam
merebitur, sed coronam. Cyprian. Sermon. de Lapsis.
resolve to strengthen himself so much the more against it, and to become for
the future the more heroically Virtuous: He that thus endeavors to appease
God, and by the Repentance, and Shame, and Sorrow of his past Faults is spurred
on to exercise greater Faith, and Virtue, and Courage; such a one by the
assistance of God may become a Joy to the Church, which he before made
sorrowful; and shall obtain not only the Pardon of his Sins, but also the Crown
of Righteousness.

9. Particularly, a Penitent ought above all things to endeavor after a great
and fervent Charity. This is a Duty which (...). Clem. Alex. de eo quis dives,
etc. (...). Clem. Constitut. lib. c. 13.
all wise and holy Men have in all Ages thought to have an especial Efficacy to
procure Pardon of Sin: And very great are the Promises which are made to it in
Scripture: Alms, says the Son of Sirach, make an atonement for Sins, Ecclus.
3. 30. And Charity, says St. Peter, shall cover a multitude of Sins, 1 Pet. 4.
8. And the merciful, says our Savior himself, shall obtain Mercy, Matthew. 5.
7. Only Men must not hope by this or any other means to obtain Nec tamen quia
peccata largitione tolluntur, dari tibi licentiam peccandi putes: Abolentur
enim, si Deo largiare quia peccaveras; si fiducia largiendi pecces, non
abolentur. Lactant. lib. 6. cap. 13.
a Liberty of continuing in Sin: For Charity shall procure forgiveness of Sins
past, repented of, and forsaken; but not of Sins committed upon presumption of
their being expiated thereby.

CHAP. V. That true Repentance must be Constant and Persevering in its Effects:
And of the One Repentance of the Ancients.
1. THirdly and Lastly, True Repentance must be Constant and Persevering in its
Effects; that is, it must put a Man into such a state, as Hoc enim dico,
poenitentiam quae per Dei gratiam ostensa and indicta nobis, in gratiam nos
Domino revocat, semel cognitam atque susceptam, nunquam posthac iteratione
delicti resignari oportere. Tertullian. de Poenit.
that he will not any more return wilfully unto Sin. Till it arrive to this
Pitch* Repentance is not true, and (however Men may deceive themselves with
vain Imaginations about it,) can never be effectual to Salvation. The Condition
that our Savior expressly requires in his Gospel, is a continued Holy Life from
the time of our knowing and embracing the Truth: But certainly he will never
accept of any thing less, than a Life of Holiness and Persevering Obedience
from some Period of Reformation and Repentance.

2. He therefore that repents, ought to be infinitely fearful of relapsing into
Sin, (...). Clemens Alexandrinus, de eo, Quis Dives, etc.
as one that is recovering out of a dangerous and almost mortal Sickness. When
ever he wilfully relapses, he makes his Case worse than it was at first, and
his Disease more in danger of being mortal: It becomes much harder for him to
renew himself unto Repentance, and much more difficult to procure Pardon.

3. It Is true, evil Habits are not to be rooted out at once, and vicious
Customs to be overcome in a moment. So long therefore as a Man does not return
wilfully and deliberately into the habit of Sin, many Surprises and
Interruptions in the struggle with a customary Vice may be consistent with the
Progress of Repentance: But it is then only that it becomes complete and
effectual, when (...). Id. Ibid. (...). Id. Ibid.
the evil habit is so entirely rooted out, that the Man from thenceforward
obeys the Commandments of God without looking back, and returns no more to the
Sins he has condemned.

4. Let no Man therefore think, that he has truly repented of any deadly Sin,
so long as he continues to practice and repeat it. He that washes himself
after the touching of a dead Body, if he touch it again, what avails his
washing? So is it with a Man that fasteth for his Sins, and goes again and
does the same; who will hear his Prayer? Or what does his humbling profit him?
Ecclus. 34. 25. He may fast, and pray, and lament, and use all the apparent
signs of Repentance imaginable; but Cum vidisset Dominus bonam atque puram
poenitentiam eorum, and posse eos in ea permanere, jussit eorum peccata deleri.
Hermas 3. 9.
God will never esteem his Repentance true, nor accept it as available to the
forgiveness of Sin, till he sees it Pure, and Constant, and Persevering.
Hortare homines ut poenitentiam agant, and poenitentia eorum munda siat
reliquis diebus vitae eorum. Id. 2. 12.
(...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 2.


5. And this I understand to be the Reason, why the Ancient Church never
allowed but one Repentance after Baptism. They taught that Post vocationem
illam magnam and sanctam siquis tentatus fuerit a Diabolo and peccaverit, unam
poenitentiam habet: Si autem subinde peccet and poenitentiam agat, non proderit
homini tali agenti; difficile enim vivet Deo. Hermas 2. 4.
if any one after that great and holy Calling should be tempted by the Devil
and Sin, he had one space of Repentance; but if he should often Sin and Repent,
it would not profit him; for he should hardly live unto God: They taught, That
Man covenanted with God in Baptism for a Holy Life; but God foreseeing the
Weakness of Man, and the Subtilty of the Devil, made Provision, (...). Clem.
Alex. Strom. 2. Vide and Tertulliani librum de Poenitentia integr^m.
that if any one, after that great and solemn Covenant, should either by the
violence or deceitfulness of Temptation be drawn into gross and deadly Sin, he
should still have another place of Repentance; but if after this he continued
to go on in a Circle of Sinning and Repenting, that then he was to be looked
upon as no other than a Heathen and an Infidel, only as he differed in the
wilfulness and in the guilt of his Sin: And according to this Doctrine did they
constantly deal with their Penitents; always admitting those that repented to
the Peace and Communion of the Church once; but if afterward they sinned
oftener, and pretended to Repent, excluding them utterly.

6. Now by this it is plain they did not mean, that if any one sinned and
repented, and after that sinned again, that such a one was utterly lost, and
absolutely excluded from all hope of finding further Mercy and Pardon with God:
For Quamvis enim caute and salubriter provisum sit, ut locus illius humillimae
poenitentiae semel in Ecclesia concedatur, ne medicina vilis minus utilis esset
aegrotis, quae tanto magis utilis est quanto minus contemptibilis fuerit; quis
tamen audeat Deo dicere, quare huic homini, qui post poenitentiam primam rursus
se laqueis iniquitatis obstrinxit, iterum parcis? Augustinus.
though the Church wisely appointed, that a place of public Repentance for
great and scandalous Sins should be allowed but once, lest the Remedy by being
made too easy should grow useless and contemptible; (as afterward by
Experience it was found to do;) yet no Man presumed to set Limits to the Mercy
and Forgiveness of God. And therefore they always exhorted and encouraged Men
to Repent so long as they had Life and Health. Let us Repent, says (...)
Clemens ad Cor. 2.
St. Clement, whilst we are yet upon the Earth: For we are as Clay in the Hand
of the Potter. For as the Potter if he make a Vessel, and it be mishaped in his
Hands or broken, forms it anew; but if he has gone so far as to throw it into
the Furnace of Fire, he can no more remedy it: So we while we are in this
World, let us repent with our whole Heart of all the Evil we have done in the
Flesh, that we may be saved by the Lord. For, after we shall have departed out
of this World, we shall have no Place to confess our Sins or to repent any more.

7. The Primitive Church therefore, I say, by allowing but One Repentance for
great Crimes committed after Baptism, did not mean that true Repentance would
at any time be in vain or unacceptable in the sight of God: But because
Repentance (...) Clem. Alexand. Strom. 2.
never is true and effectual, till it restore a Man to such a state of new
Obedience, that he will not wilfully fall into gross and scandalous Sins any
more; and because he that having once done long and public Penance for a gross
and scandalous Crime, did yet afterward fall into the same or the like again,
could not possibly give any greater Evidence of the sincerity of his Repentance
to the Church, than he had done before; therefore they did Placuit his ulterius
non esse dandam communionem, ne lusisse de dominica communione videantur.
Council. Elib. Can. 2.
not think fit to admit such relapsed Criminals to the Peace and Communion of
the Church any more, lest they should again give occasion to blaspheme the Name
of Christ and his Holy Religion.

8. Thus infinitely solicitous were those holy Men, not to give Men the least
possible encouragement to continue in Sin, and yet very careful at the same
time not to drive any Man to Despair. Let us consider these things; and while
we rightly maintain that true Repentance cannot at any time be in vain or
ineffectual to procure Pardon, let us be careful not to entertain any such
Notions of Repentance, as will take away the Necessity of a Holy Life, and that
Persevering Obedience, which is the express and indispensable Condition of the
Gospel Covenant.

THE END.

