THE LIFE OF Tamerlane THE GREAT, WITH His Wars against the great Duke of Moso,
the King of China, Bajazet the great Turk, the Sultan of Egypt, the King of
Persia, and some others, carried on with a continued Series of success from the
first to the last.

WHEREIN Are Rare Examples of Heathenish Piety, Prudence, Magnanimity, Mercy,
Liberality, Humility, Justice, Temperance, and Valor.

When the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in
the Law: these having not the Law are a Law unto themselves, which show the
work of the Law written in their hearts, Romans 2. 14, 15. London Printed by T.
R. and E. M. for Tho: Under hill, at the sign of the Bible in Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-door, 1653.

The Life of TAMERLANE THE GREAT, Who flourished Anno Christi 1400.
TAmerlane was born at Samercand, the chief City His Parentage.
of the Zagatajan Tartars; his father was called Zain-Cham, or, as others will*
Og, Prince of the Zagatajans, of the Country Sachithay (sometimes part of the
famous Kingdom of Parthia) third in descent from Zingis the great, and
successful Captain of the Tartars, which Og being a Prince of a peaceable
nature (accounting it no less honor quietly to keep the Countries left him by
his father, then His fathers peaceable disposition.
with much trouble and no less hazard to seek how to enlarge the same) long
lived in most happy peace with his Subjects, no less happy therein then
himself; not so much seeking after the hoording up of gold and silver (things
of that Nation not regarded nor valued) as contenting himself with the increase
and profit of his sheep and herds of cattle, then, and yet also the principal
revenues of the Tartar Kings and Princes; which happily gave occasion to some
ignorant, of the manner and customs of those Northern Nations and Countries, to
account them all for shepherds and herdsmen, and so also to have reported of
this mighty Prince, as if he had been a shepherds son, or herdsman himself;
vainly measuring his Nobility by the homely course of life of his people and
Subjects, and not by the honor of his house, and heroical virtues, hardly to
be parallelled by any Prince of that or the former ages.

His peaceable father now well stricken in years, and weary of He resignes his
Kingdom to his son.
the world, delivered up his Kingdom to this his son (not yet past fifteen
years old) joining unto him two of his most faithful Counselors, Odmar and
Ally, to assist him in the government of his State, whom Tamerlane dearly loved
whilst they lived, and much honored the remembrance of them being dead.

The first proof of his Fortune and valor, was against the great Tamerlanes
war against the Muscovites.
Duke of Mosco, or Emperor of Russia, for spoiling of a City which had put it
self under his protection, and for entering his country, and proclaiming war
against him: whom he in a great battle overthrew, having slain twenty seven
thousand of the His victory.
Muscovites footmen, and between fifteen and sixteen thousand horsemen, with
the loss of scarce eight thousand horsemen, and four thousand footmen of his
own. After which battle Tamerlane beholding so many thousands of men lying dead
upon the ground, was so far from rejoicing thereat, that turning himself His
merciful disposition.
to one of his familiar friends, he lamented the condition of such as command
over great Armies, commending his Fathers quiet course of life, accounting him
happy in seeking for rest, and such most unhappy, which by the destruction of
their own kind, sought to procure their own glory, protesting himself even from
his heart to be grieved to see such sad tokens of his victory. Alhacen in his
Arabic History of Tamerlane makes this Narrative of the battle. The Muscovite
(says he) had a great Army, which His battle with the Muscovites
he had gathered together out of sundry Nations: and Tamberlane intending not
to put up such wrongs and indignities, assembled all his forces, and those of
his allies. The Muscovites forces were such as had been well trained up in the
wars; for having lately concluded a peace with the King of Poland, he had from
thence ten thousand very good horsemen: There were also with him many Hungarian
Gentlemen, under the conduct of one Uladislaus, who brought with him more then
eight thousand horse; so that he had in his Army above eighty thousand horse,
and one hundred thousand foot. Tamerlane had in his Army about one hundred and
twenty thousand horse, and one hundred and fifty thousand foot, but not so good
soldiers as the Muscovites; for his Subjects had been long trained up in peace
under his peaceable Father; and though they had sometimes been exercised, yet
they wanted the practical part of war. Tamerlanes order in his march was this,
He caused all his Army to be divided into squadrons, each consisting of six
thousand horse save his own, which consisted of ten thousand; so that he made
eighteen squadrons besides his own. The Avanguard was conducted by Odmar, who
led eight squadrons which were flanked by forty thousand footmen, divided on
the right and left sides, who shot an infinite number of Arrows. The battle was
conducted by Tamerlane, who with his own led ten squadrons, and fifty thousand
footmen, the best and choicest soldiers of his whole Army. The Prince of
Thanais, his kinsman, led the arereward with six squadrons of horse, and forty
thousand foot; his forlorn Hope consisted of some three thousand horse,
adventurers. The Muscovites fought by double Ranks with Lances, and they seemed
to be a greater number then Tamerlanes, making a great noise: but Tamerlanes
skill and multitude His victory.
at length overcame the force and valor of the Muscovites, the victory bending
to the Parthians side which they pursued hotly. In this battle Tamerlane was
hurt on the side of the left eye, and He is wounded in the Battle.
had two horses slain under him: and indeed that day Odmar was the safeguard of
the Prince, but he lost Ally, who was slain with an arrow. The Battle being
ended, Tamerlane returned thanks Ally slain. Tamerlanes Piety.
to God publicly for his victory, and the next day reviewing his Army, he
found that he had lost between seven and eight thousand horsemen, and between
three and four thousand footmen. The Muscovites lost about twenty seven
thousand foot, and fifteen or sixteen thousand horse. The Prince slacked no
time after so great a victory, but marching on, came into the borders of the
Muscovites, whom he enforced to this agreement. That they should The Articles*
of Peace.
become his Tributaries, paying yearly one hundred thousand Ducats: That he
should defray all the charges of the wars, amounting to three hundred thousand
Ducats: That he should withdraw his Army, and send back all the Prisoners; and
that for the performance hereof, he should give pledges, which should be
changed every year: All which being agreed to, he returned with great content
and glory to his Father.

Shortly after, the great Cham of Tartary (his fathers brother) being grown
old, and out of hope of having any more children; moved with the fame of his
Nephew after this victory, sent him diverse presents; and with all, offering
him his only daughter in marriage, sent him word that he would proclaim him
heir apparent to his Empire, as in right he was being his brothers son, and the
daughters not using to succeed in those Empires: which so great an offer
Tamerlane gladly accepted, and so the marriage was afterward with great
triumph at the old Emperors Court solemnized, His marriage to the great Chams
daughter.
and consummated, and our Tamerlane according to promise, and his right was
proclaimed heir apparent of that great Empire.

Thus was Tamerlane indeed made great being ever after this marriage by the old
Emperor his Uncle, and now his father in Law, so long as he lived, notably
supported, and after his death succeeded him in that so vast, and mighty an
Empire. Before his marriage he would needs be crowned, to the intent that none
should think that the Crown came to him by the right of his wife His Prudence.
but by his own; and during his abode in the City of Quavicai, where the old
Emperor was, he was entertained with all kind of triumphs, wherein he always
carried away the Bell, whether in shooting in the bow, in changing of horses
in the midst of their His agility and strength.
courses, in Tiltings, and in all other exercises which required agility or
strength; and so after two months returned with his wife to Samarcand, in
which City he delighted exceedingly to remain, because the situation thereof
was fair, and being watered with a great River, was a place of great Traffic,
whereby it was made richer then any in that Country: And whenever he received
intelligence from the Emperor his Uncle, he still imparted the same to Odmar,
whom he used as his right hand in all his great affairs: There was also in his
Court a Christian whom he loved much, and every on greatly respected, called
Axalla a Genovois by birth, brought up from his youth about his person, for he
countenanced all that worshipped one only God that was the Creator of all His
Piety.
things. And about this time the old Emperor sent to him to stir him up to war
against the great King of China, who styled himself, Lord of the world, and Son
of the Sun, who had exceed his bounds, and incroached upon the Tartarian
Empire: This was no small enterprise, and before he would begin the same, he
sent Ambassadors to the King of China to demand restitution of his lands, and
the passages of a River called Tachii, which were His Justice.
within the Tartarian border, and on this side that stupendous wall builded on
purpose by the Kings of China for the defense of their Country against the
incursions of the Tartars: and whilst he attended for the return of his
Ambassadors, expecting a Negative, His preparations against the King of China
he caused his forces to be assembled together from all parts, appointing their
rendevouz to be in the Horda of Baschir: The old Emperor also assembled for his
aid two hundred thousand fighting men, wherein were all the brave men of his
Court who were accustomed to the wars: for this Emperor had greatly increased
his limits, and conquered a great Country, so as all these men were well
trained up in the wars, and had been accustomed to travel and pains; These
were to join with Tamerlanes Army in the Deserts of Ergimul at a certain day.
In the mean time the Ambassadors which were sent, return and inform the Prince
that this proud King of China wondered how any durst denounce war The King of
China's pride.
against him, making this lofty answer: That Tamerlane should content himself
with that which he had left him, which also he might have taken from him, etc.

This answer being heard, our Prince marched directly to his Army, gave orders
for conveiance of victuals from all parts, sent to hasten forwards his
confederates, imparted the answer to the old Emperor, caused the insolence of
the King of China to be published, that all the world might know the justness
of his cause; yet before his departure he went to take leave of his own His
Piety toward his Father.
father, who endued with a singular and Fatherly affection, kissed him a
thousand times, made solmne prayers for his prosperity, drew of his Imperial
Ring, and gave it him, telling him that he should never see him again, for
that he was hasting to his last rest, and calling Odmar, bad him farewell,
requiring his faithfulness to his son. The Prince having performed this duty,
returned to Samercand, where the Empress his wife remained, whom he took along
with him in this journey, as the manner of that Country is, and so presently
departed, committing the charge and care of his Kingdom in his absence to one
Samay, a man well practiced in Affairs, who also had had the charge of our
Prince in his youth. These things being dispatched, he marched forwards in the
midest of his Army, which consisted of fifty thousand horse, and a hundred
thousand footmen, relying principally on the Forces of the great Cham his
Uncle: yet he left order that the rest of his Forces should be ready to advance
upon the first command, as soon as he should be joined with his Uncles Army. In
His sickness.
his march he was stayed by the way in regard of some distemper of his body
contracted by reason of his change of the air yet the forces which Catiles,
Captain of the Army of the great Cham conducted, went daily forwards. Now the
news of his distemprature was bruted abroad in all places, yet did he not
neglect to His Policy.
send to the great Cham, and often to advertise him of the state of his health,
to the end that the same should not cause any alteration which might arise in
that great Empire whereunto he was lately advanced: for he was very suspicious
of a great Lord, named Calix who was disconted therewith, and had not yet
acknowledged him as all others his subjects had: and indeed it was not without
cause that he suspected him, for Calix being informed The Rebellion of Calix.
that the forces of the great Cham were advanced beyond the mountains, having
passed the River of Meau, and were encamped at Bouprou, and that Tamerlane was
sick, he thought it a fit time for his enterprise, and thereupon assembling the
greatest part of his most faithful followers, he told them that now was the
time for them to shake off the yoke of the Parthians, who otherwise would
enslave them; and seeing that now their Prince was so badly minded as to
translate the Empire to Tamerlane of his own mind without calling them to
Council which had interest in the election, that this was the only means to
assure their liberty, which otherwise was like to be lost: He caused also a
rumor to be spread, that Tamerlane was very sick, the Emperor old and crazy,
and that his forces were far separated from him; yet like cunning Traitors,
they dispatched away a messenger to the great The Rebels subtilty.
Cham, to assure him that they bended not their forces against him, but were
his faithful and obedient Subjects; and they only Armed them selves because
they would not be governed by the Parthians, their ancient enemies.

As soon as our Prince was advertised of the pretenses of Calix, he marched one
days journey forward, to the end that he might approach unto Calibes, who, what
face soever he set on the matter, yet hearkened what would become of Calix,
that he might likewise make some commotion. This Calibes was by Tamerlane made
Commander of his Avanguard, which consisted of Parthians* Tamerlanes Prudence.
yet had joined with him the Prince of Thanais, without whom he could not do
any thing. Tamerlane also gave special commandment, that the passages (which
were not many) should be diligently guarded, to the end that the King of China
should not be advertised of these tumults: and so giving to Odmar the leading
His march against Calix.
of his Avanguard, he hasted forwards; And surely it was high time for him so
to do, or else all had been revolted; for Calix having assembled a hundred
thousand fighting men, presented himself before the great City of Cambalu,
chief of the Province of Cathai, the inhabitants whereof came out to meet him,
receiving him with all the joy that might be.

Tamerlane in his march went to Caindu, and from thence to Calatia, where he
expected to meet with the forces of his native Country of Sachetai, yet did he
not neglect to send forward his Army toward Cambalu, which caused the
inhabitants, to their great terror, to think that all his forces were already
on their Calix leaves Cambalu.
neck. Calix perceiving that the Citizens begun already to repent his
entertainment, thought it not safe to remain amongst them, and therefore
withdrawing himself, he sent for his forces from all parts, resolving to meet
Tamerlane in the field, and to put all upon the event and hazard of a battle.
He drew out of Cambalu fifty thousand men, whereof twenty thousand were
Citizens, the other thirty thousand were the Garison-souldiers placed there by
the old Emperor, Calix having corrupted their Leaders, and so The number of
Calix Army
procured them to join with him in this revolt. In short, having assembled all
his forces, his Army consisted of fourscore thousand horse, and one hundred
thousand footmen, which he gathered from all parts.

In the mean time Tamerlane's Army marching forward, his Scouts which were two
thousand horse, had news of the Army of Calix, which came forward directly
toward them, of which they speedily advertised the Emperor, who thereupon
presently sent two thousand horse more, to the end that they should keep
Tamerlanes Prudence.
the passages of a certain River called Brore, by which River victuals were
conveyed to his Army: as also to win time, the Prince well knowing that the
motions of a civil war are furious at the beginning, and that therefore its
best to resist slowly, always drawing them out at length, if it be possible,
For when means, money and victuals fail, the people use to be sensible of their
faults, and to return home.

The old Emperor sent to him to adventure all upon a battle, delivering up into
his hands the safety of his life and estate, that thereby he might end his
days in peace: By this means forces came to Tamerlane on all hands, whose Army
daily increased, whereas on the contrary the enemies Army was then in its
chiefest force, and began to feel the want of victuals.

Calix was about forty years old, a Captain renouned with the great Cham, and
one of the chiefest in dignity and place about him, so that many of the Tartars
had always respected him as a person most worthy of the Empire, if the glory
of Tamerlane and his reputation had not so far exceeded.

The Armies began to be in view one of another about eight a clock in the
morning, and many skirmishes began betwixt them The Battle between Tamerlane
and Calix.
before they came to the maine battle. The place wherein they met at that time,
was a great Plain, with like advantage on either part. Odmar led the Avanguard,
wherein were forty thousand horse, and eighty thousand foot, which he divided
into three squadrons; the first whereof he sent before him to begin the battle.
Tamerlane marched in the same order, but his squadrons were much stronger. The
footmen of both made the right and left wings. Tamerlane had drawn out six
thousand Parthian horsemen, and two thousand Tartarian for his Areareguard,
which he committed to his faithful servant Axalla; a man of a great judgment,
quick of conceit, and in great esteem amongst the soldiers, although he being
a Christian, worshipped God in an other manner then they; and he had many other
Christians with him, whom he had drawn from the Georgians, and the Euxine Sea,
who fought with great agility.

Calix on the other side, who was a well spoken man, was exhorting, and
encouraging his soldiers to fight for his Fortune, and the liberty of their
Nation; he divided his Army into three maine Battles, himself remaining in the
midst encompassed with his footmen, and so the Battles joined, where, after
Calix beaten and taken prisoner.
a terrible fight, Calix fell into Axalla's hands, being taken fighting
valiantly, which Axalla caused to be presently* proclaimed through the Army, to
the overthrow of the courage of all the adversaries* who hereupon immediately
fled. Calix was kept till the next day, and then by a Council of War was
adjudged to death; whereupon Tamberlane caused his head to be stricken off, the
which he sent Calix condemned and executed.
as a present to the inhabitants of Cambalu: The like he caused to be done to
all the chief Leaders, not out of a cruel disposition, but enforced thereto by
necessity, knowing very well that the way to cut off the foot of Civil War, is
to punish the heads of the same, which as Hydra's grow up too fast.

After this Tamerlane with his Army marched into the Kingdom Tamerlanes march
into Cathai.
of Cathay, a Country rich in grass, and all kind of pastures, abounding with
great quantity of beasts, and people, which knew not what war meant; and the
Prince gave command that they should not be used as enemies, but as his good
Subjects, and whereas diverse Cities had adheared to Calix, they came now and
humbled themselves before him, craving pardon, which he gave them, enjoining
them only to provide victuals for his Army, which also they willingly did. This
example of lenity was of no small importance for the appeasing of others, which
had put all their hope in extremity, resolving to sell their lives deer, and
especially the inhabitants of Cambulu had taken this resolution, but being
informed of the Emperors clemency, they changed their purpose: yet as the Army
daily approached nearer, their fears increased, Cambalu yielded to him.
but Tamerlane was daily informed by his friends in the City, that the
inhabitants resolved to obey the Conqueror; and therefore leaving his Army at
Gonsa, he only sent thirty thousand to the City, which was the ordinary
Garrison, and within two hours after entered the City himself, where he was
received with great magnificence: yet would he not pronounce their pardon, but
referred all to the old Emperor, and to the ordinary course of justice: For
which end he sent one of his favorites to the old Emperor to certify him of
his victory, of the death of Calix, and that the chief of his faction remained
prisoners with him; as also to know what justice he would appoint to be
inflicted upon those Citizens which were the authors of the revolt of this
City, and so after eight days he departed, and not many days after he had His
departure from Cambalu. His policy.
intelligence that the great Cham, his Uncle, had caused justice to be done on
the chief movers of Sedition in Cambalu, so that the people complained of the
old Emperors cruelty, but commended the mercy of Tamerlane.

When he came back to his Army, he was received of all his soldiers with loud
acclamations, calling him, Most great Emperor, and most victorious. Amongst his
Captains he discoursed of the beauty and greatness of the City of Cambalu, and
afterward asked Odmars advise whether it were not best for him to visit the
old Emperor; and so with his Emperess to spend the winter Odmars good council.
with him at Quinsay? Odmar remembering the honor which he had received there,
easily perceived his inclination to that journey, yet by all means dissuaded him
from it; to which Tamerlane answered, that he had always found his fidelity
and love to him, which he was sorry that he could not recompense to the full;
but (says he) whereas I had thought to give my self some ease: I perceive that
instead of the delicacies, and pleasures of Quinsay, I must make the deserts of
Cipribit my resting place after my travelles in this new victory: yet a rumor
being spread that the Prince intended to visit the Emperor, every man began to
desire to return into his own Country, hoping to enjoy the sweetness of his
native soil: which Tamerlane being informed of, calling his Army Tamerlanes
speech to his Army.
to a Rendevouz, he thus spoke unto them, We have (my faithful soldiers) begun
an enterprise against the King of China, who has of late repulsed even beyond
the mountains the Tartarian name, but were hindered to our great grief by the
foolish rashness of Calix, and were driven to turn the bridle to punish him,
wherein you have all assisted me. It grieves me that I cannot as well boast of
the fresh spoils of a stranger, as I may (by the means of your weapons) of
those of our unfaithful Subjects, and as in times past of the fierce
Muscovites, against whom with your assistance I made trial of my first Arms:
but for this last victory being against our own Subjects, I cannot speak of it
without shedding tears, desiring to bury such victories in oblivion, together
with all the glory and honor gotten thereby. Neither do I recount these things
to you, but to show that I forget not your faithfulness, and the great travel
you have endured for my sake: We must not therefore be weary, but must turn our
weapons against those which imagine us to be full of troubles, whereas we are
indeed victorious: Our companions, and all our ammunition is advanced near to
our enemy already; we must in that place (my soldiers, and friendly followers)
pass over the rest of Winter; Our Companions look for us; our enemies are
secure, and look not for us at this season of the year, and know that our Army
that is already there, is not sufficient for offense, but only for defense. You
shall receive double pay, the better to furnish you against the injury of cold;
and as we shall be apparelled with double garments, so I hope we shall be
clothed with double glory.

Having thus spoken, his soldiers all cried, One God in Heaven, and one
Emperor on earth, showing their willingness to obey his commands.

The Prince after this remained there eight days longer, sending back Zamai
with twenty five thousand horse, and fifty thousand His Piety.
foot to Sachethay, for the safety of his estate in those parts: and so after
solemn and public prayers, the Army began to march forwards: He forgot not
likewise to dispatch away a messenger to the great Cham to acquaint him with
all his purposes, which he approved very well of: By the same messenger he also
beseeched him in the spring to send him fifty thousand men to recruit his Army,
and some moneys for the payment of his soldiers, which also he granted;
sending also good store of warlike munition, and plenty of victuals, knowing
how much the success of the war would advance the Tartarian greatness and
profit.

The Army being upon their march, in thirty eight days came to Cipribit, yet
met with many inconveniences by the way. There His march toward China.
they had news of Calibes, who was glad to hear how businesses had passed, and
came to visit the Prince, who entertained him very courteously, acquainting him
with his purpose, and understood by him how all things passed in the Kingdom
of China. The next day the Prince came to Pazanfou, where Calibes forces were,
who had often fought with, and tried the valor of the Chinois, but found it
much inferior to their own: There the Prince took a general Muster of all his
Army, caused them to be paid, took notice of their countenance, whilst they
all cried out, God save the victorious and invincible Emperor, according to
their custom.

The Prince of Thanais, who commanded the Army with Calibes had diligently
viewed the wall, and the ways by which he might forcibly enter into China, and
had sent many Spies by certain ways through the mountains into that Country,
by whom he was advertised of all their proceedings: He had also gained by his
courtesy a Lord of those mountains, called the Lord of Vauchefu, who commanded
over a great Country, who being desirous of a new Master, and to submit to
Tamerlane, had told the Prince of Thanais, that he was able to do the Emperor
good service, and to help him much in his wars against the Chinois: This the
Prince of Thanais discovered to Tamerlane, who was very desirous to speak with
this Lord; whereupon a day was appointed, A Chinois Lord comes to Tamerlane.
and Tamerlane without moving of his Army, went to the tents of the Prince of
Thanais where this foresaid Lord meet him; and the Emperor having heaped upon
him many gifts of fair horses, and rich furs, and other rare things; this Lord
spoke thus unto him, Know, my Lord, that it is but lost labor for you to think
that with your Armies you shall be able to force this wall made His speech to
Tamerlane.
by the Chinois to hinder the incursions of your Subjects: the Defendants have
too much advantage therein; I doubt not of your soldiers valor and courage, I
know you have conquered many Nations with them, and that whatsoever you command
them they will effect it or die in the enterprise: I know that you have great
and wise Captains with you, and that you of all persons in the world, are most
worthy to command them: But all this will be but in vain against the wall of
the Chinois, where I assare you are fifty thousand men to keep it; neither can
you stay there so short a time, but there will come fifty thousand more to
assist them, led by one Xianxi who has already received such a commandment:
The King of China will himself follow, who will give you battle with two
hundred thousand horsemen, and as many foot; and though happily your Fortune,
and valor may carry away the victory, yet I believe it will cost you dear: But
to show you how much the reputation and courtesies of your servants have
prevailed with me, I will direct you in a way whereby fifty thousand of your
men may go into China, whom I my self will conduct, and they shall come upon
those which guard the wall in a manner before they be discovered. In the mean
time you shall lead your Army to a place which I will direct you to, where you
may win easily a mountain which will give you great advantage against the
Chinois. For I assure my self, that when they shall perceive your men to be
passed; they will lose their courage, so that you may easily win the passage to
assist your Army, which shall be led by me amongst them; and to assure you of
my fidelity, I will deliver into your hands my wife, my only son, and two
little daughters. I have also one brother who, I assure my self will follow me
to do you service.

The Emperor having heard this, much rejoiced at it, hoping that his affairs
would succeed happily, and kept this very secret, not revealing it to the
Prince of Thanais himself, none being present at the discourse, but the Lord
and his Interpreter, and so heaping new favors upon him, he was conducted back
by the Prince of Thanais with all the honor that might be.

So the Emperor returned to his quarters, and the next day imparted the whole
matter unto Odmar; and then calling Calibes, he asked what he had learnt
concerning China during his abode there: To which Calibes made this answer,
Know, my Calibes speech to Tamerlane.
Lord, that I am your slave to obey you; but seeing you command me to give an
account of all that I know concerning the Kingdom of China, for that I have
remained these six months upon the borders: I can assure you that the King of
China who now reigns, is of great reputation, and has increased the limits
of his Kingdom, more then any of his predecessors: His strength consists in
this wall opposed against us, which he has made to prevent the inrodes of our
Nation: I believe there are above fifty thousand to defend it, and that of his
best trained soldiers, and I know no good means to force this wall without
much hazard and great loss of your men.

To this Tamerlane answered, I hope that the great God, whose honor I will
defend against those Idolaters, will find out means Tamerlanes confidence of
success.
to effect it; and so dismising Calibes, he appointed his Army to remove to a
certain place, where he meant to choose out fifty thousand men, whom he would
deliver to the Prince of Thanais, and Axalla; which accordingly he did, and
directed them to follow this Chinois Lord, who was now again come to him, and
to do as they should be directed by him: In the mean time himself with all the
rest of his Army approached the wall directly over against Qauguifois.

The Army led by the Prince of Thanais having marched ten Forces sent into
China.
leagues by the conduct of the Chinois Lord, entered without resistance, and
after a short repast, they marched directly toward those that guarded the
wall, who suspected no such matter, but only had an eye to those which came to
force the wall. But it fell out far otherwise, for just as Tamerlane with his
Army came to the wall, they saw Axalla with twenty thousand* who was followed
by the Prince of Thanais with thirty thousand choice The wall forced. His first
victory in China.
soldiers, who without any words fell upon the Chinois; and Odmar, who gave
the first assault upon the wall, easily in that distraction brake through, and
so the Chinois were cut off between the two Armies: and Axalla before the
Prince of Thanais came up to him, had routed them; Great riches were gotten
that day, and the King of China's cozen was taken prisoner, much gold was found
as well on their Arms, as on their horses furniture, they showed no great
valor.

The news of this overthrow being carried to the King of China, who was now at
Quantifou, it brought great astonishment to The King of China's fear.
him, for that he judged it impossible to have been effected, so that every one
was filled with tears, fears, and lamentations for their friends. Yet the King
gathers forces from all parts, calling The King of China's superstition.
also the Priests, and such as had the charge of his unholy holies to come unto
him, commanding them to offer sacrifices to their gods, whereof the Sun is the
principal, requiring the same to be observed through all the Cities* and then
that every one that was able to bear Arms, should mount on horsback, and
speedily repair to the King at Paguinfou, whither he suspected that Tamerlane
would march, for that it was one of the Cities nearest to the borders. In the
mean time Tamerlane beat down the wall, the better to The wall beaten down.
assure his return, as also the Fortresses upon all the passages, all which
upon his victory were easily surrendered to him. He showed himself very
courteous to the people upon the mountains, and gave to the Lord that had
conducted his Army, a Country which bordered upon his, wherein were seven or
eight good Towns, Tame lanes courtesy.
who came and delivered up the Keys to him: he gave him also the Government of
the Frontier-Province of Xianxi, showing himself to be a Prince of his word,
and reserved the rewarding of Hisgratitude.
his brother till he had farther opportunity.

Whilst he was thus employed, news was brought him that the King of China had
assembled his forces, and was marching forward, himself being there in person;
as also that he had strengthened the Garrisons in all his Cities which of
themselves were well fortified. Upon this intelligence Tamerlane called a
Council of War, and having heard the opinions of all his Captains, heresolved
to take in some famous City, that thereby his Army might His Po^^^.
be better provided for, and then to give the King of China battle in the
field. For the effecting of the first, he resolved to assault Paguinfou, which
was a great City strongly fortified, and well replenished with people; and for
this end he sent Odmar with forty thousand horse to summon it, and to prevent
the farther victualling of it, and the driving away of the cattle out of the
champion-Country about it, which might nourish his Army* He He besieges
Paguinfou.
also caused the Lord Axalla (whom now he had made Lieutenant General of all
his foot) to follow Odmar with all his foot, which were near a hundred and
fifty thousand men well trained, and expert in war, himself marching
immediately after with all his horsemen, Artillery, Ensigns, and other
munitions belonging to the war, directly to Paguinfou.

Odmar made such haste that he arrived unexpected by the Citizens, who rather
looked for their King, then for an enemy: and having taken much cattle,
wherewith that Country abounded, he pitched his tents on the farther side of
the City: there he continued two or three days, giving the City many Alarms,
till the Infantry led by that brave Christian Genuois showed themselves, in the
plain of Paguinfou: Then was the City summoned, but they returned answer, That
they were resolved to live and die in the Formerly taken from the Tartars.
service of their Prince. By the way you must understand, that about forty
years before, the Father of this present King of China had conquered this City
and Country from the Tartars, and had so planted the same with new Colonies,
that but few of the Tartarians remained: but only in the flat Country, and
some small walled Towns, who all came with their keys, and willingly submitted
to Tamerlane, whereby he had great plenty of victuals in his Army, which made
him hope for good success, there being nothing that does sooner overthrow great
Armies, then the want thereof.

Thus was Paguinfou besieged round, the footmen lying within a slight-shoot of
the walls, the Citizens and soldiers using their best endeavors for their
defense, and Tamerlane doing the like for their offense.

Axalla having viewed a great Suburb, which was in length almost half a league,
supposed that the Citizens kept no watch there, and therefore acquainting the
Emperor with his purpose, in the first watch of the night, his men being all
ready with sealing ladders, A Suburb taken by storm.
he assaulted the same in sundry places, and after a great fight entered and cut
in pieces at least eight thousand men which were within the same: yet on one
side where they expected to be assaulted, he lost many of his men. The tkaing
of this Suburb did greatly astonish the Citizens, who observing the valor of
the Tartarians began to suspect their own safety: by this Suburb there ran a
river, which being now under the command of Axalla, he stopped all provision from
going to the City.

In the mean time the King of China's Army approached, which was very great;
whereupon the Emperor determined to go in person, and meet him with the
greatest part of his horsemen, but to leave most of his foot to continue the
siege, being very desirous to take the City; for the accelerating whereof, he
caused his Engines for battery to approach, as Rams, and such like; so that the
City was assaulted on two sides very courageously, and in the end, through the
valor of Axalla, who gave an assault with twenty The wall won.
thousand of his best soldiers, he won the wall, and at the command of the
Emperor lodged there, who desired rather to have the City by Treaty then
storm, the City being great and rich, and the enemy but thirty leagues from
thence, and therefore he feared Tamerlanes Prudence.
lest his Army should be found in disorder, and knowing also that rich
soldiers never fight well. Besides, he intended to draw out of that wealthy
City such things as he stood in need of, and to make it his magazine for the
time to come. Yet though the wall was won, the enemies wanted not heart to
defend themselves valiantly, hearing that their King was coming for their
relief: but it so happened that an Engine shooting a bullet, slew the
governor; whereupon the Citizens were so discouraged, that they resolved The
City surrendered.
to yield, saving their lives, and the soldiers to march away with horse and
arms. The conditions were admitted, and there came out of the City eighteen
thousand soldiers, almost all the inhabitants remaining behind: This siege had
lasted two months, and the City had in it at first thirty thousand soldiers.
Axalla had the honor of winning this City, and therefore was made Governor
Axalla's modesty.
of it, and all the Country belonging to it; but he beseeched the Emperor to
bestow it upon some other person, reserving for himself the hope of his Master,
in whose fortune he would take part: This gave great content to Tamerlane, who
much desired the service of Axalla; and upon this refusal the charge was
conferred upon the Prince of Thanais, with the title of Viceroy: Then did
Tamerlane give notice of his affairs to the old Emperor, and having paid his
soldiers, and settled all things in the best manner he could, he marched
forward; and taking a general Muster of his whole Army, Horse and Foot, he
found them to be diminished ten thousand men only. And so with his Army he
spent one whole day in prayer, calling upon the immortal, invisible, and
Tamerlane's Piety.
invincible, and incomprehensible God, and then went directly to meet the
enemy, who was at Sintehu with all his own and the forces of his allies, and as
soon as he received news that Tamerlane's Army was advanced over the River of
Chulifu, the King of China marched directly to them with great magnificence:
there was nothing to be seen in his Army, but Gold and precious stones: He
himself The riches of the Chinois.
usually rode in a Chariot whereof every part shone with Gold, Pearls, Rubies,
and Diamonds. He was of the age of about three and thirty, and had been brought
up in pleasures, not under the bloody Ensign of Mars: So that he was very
insolent in threatenings, bravadoes, and defying to the battle: He often
accused Tamerlane for surprising him before he was ready, not giving him
warning, etc.

The rumor of his riches sired the spirits of the Tartarians, that they longed
to be at the battle: and so both sides hasted forwards, and in the way there
was a City called Tunichevoy, surrendered to Tamerlane, which afforded him much
refreshing for his Army: and thus the two Armies drawing near together,
Tamerlane made choice of a place in his judgment most advantageous Tamerlane
prepares for the Battle.
for the battle; and having set down to Odmar the order which he would have to
be observed, he longed to see his enemy; then did he send before him five or
six thousand horse as Scouts under Calibes, and himself went with them, and
having viewed the great confused Army of his enemies, which came continually
forward, he commanded Calibes to retire himself so soon as they drew near to
him, And bring (says he) this great cloud to me, which I hope soon to
disperse: and so retiring to his Army, he encouraged them, assuring them of the
victory. He placed all his footmen, which were about a hundred and twenty
thousand, along a mountain, planting great store of Artillery for their guard;
many of his foot-souldiers were armed after the Christian manner, who were all
commanded by Axalla: His horsemen were in Battalia in a great plain, who upon
any disadvantage could retire to the assistance of the Footmen: the horsemen
were eighty thousand; Calibes with the Scythians were in the Avantguard, being
thirty thousand horse, who were to receive Odmar when he should retreat from
the enemy, as he was commanded; thirty thousand more were appointed for Odmar,
and Tamerlane himself remained in the Areare at one of the wings of his
footmen: His purpose was to let that sixty five thousand horse under two such
gallant Captains, to break the force of the enemy, hoping after them to have a
good market, causing his foot to march forward, and reserving with himself
twenty thousand of his best horse, who of themselves were able to make a new
Battle if any mischance should befall the former: For he understood that it was
the custom of the Kings of China to enclose themselves in the midst of their
Chariots with their footmen, and not to hazard their persons, but upon
extremity. The Chinois failed not to march directly unto Calibes the whole Army
following and setting The Battle begins.
upon him: Calibes with his six thousand Scythian horse, after their usual
manner, in retreating gave many charges, giving and receiving hurt. The King of
China marched with much gallantry with his Army, which seemed to be twice so
big as that of Tamerlane's: He had very many armed Chariots, wherein he put his
principal trust; they had much Gold and Silver, as well in the trappings of
their horses, as one their Armor, which glistered exceedingly against the Sun,
to the admiration of the Tartars. Tamerlane, who with a troop of horse beheld
the Chinois marching after Calibes, commended greatly the drawing forth of
their men to compel Calibes to fight, endeavoring to discover and note with
his eye the place where-abouts the Kings person was, having by him the Chinois
Lord to instruct him, who knew well the manner of their fight. They had no
Avantguard, but were all in a gross commanded by the King enclosed with his
Chariots, which being showed to Tamerlane by this Lord, he turned to those
Captains that were near him, and said, Yet must we disperse this gilded
cloud, and the King of China and my self must make a partition thereof.

Thus having sufficiently viewed the enemy, and observed their manner of
marching, he thought it not convenient to suffer them to take breath, nor to
rally, being something disordered in their march, whereupon he sent to Calibes,
to will him to begin the fight; and when those that were with him should be
weary, to retreat to him: But as soon as his Scythians heard this word Fight,
they required the The Scythians charge the Chinois.
first charge with a young Lord that commanded over them called (...), making
it to appear to the Chinois, to what end their former flight was charging very
furiously upon the foremost of the enemies, which occasioned the first beginning
of the Battle: And indeed there could not be seen a more gallant onset, wherein
the Scythians desired to manifest the valor of their Nation, and to procure
honor to their Prince. This sight endured a long hour before they had
overthrown Calibes: Tamerlane beheld all patiently, saying, that the great
multitude (how disorderly soever Tamerlanes constancy.
they were) would at length carry it away from the order and valor of his
soldiers; yet could there not be discerned any alteration of his countenance,
adversity and prosperity being both alike so indifferent to him.

Calibes being wounded retired himself near to the Emperor, Calibes wounded
(...).
having with him two thousand horse that were rallied again, many more flocking
to him: The Emperor viewed his wound, causing him to be conducted behind his
footmen, and care to be taken for the dressing of his wound, and of such others
as were wounded with him. Calibes with his thirty thousand Scythians was not
able to charge through the Chinois, but when they retreated, Odmar with his
Parthian horsemen advanced forward, and used them more roughly, for he ran
clean through them, and returned The Parthians charge through
by the right wing of the Army, where he fought most valiantly and having
beaten them even within the Kings chariots, he thought he should not do wisely
to attempt the breaking of such forces.

The King of China coming forwards, and the horsemen that had been broken by
Odmar, joining themselves to him, Odmar sent to Tamerlane, desiring him that
the Footmen and Artillery might advance forward sending him word that he might
assure himself of the victory. Hereupon Tamerlane commanded Axalla to advance
with fifty thousand foot, and part of the Artillery The foot charge.
requiring him to set upon the Chariots, and to make an entrance. The Artillery
marching in the first place did greatly astonish the enemy; for the Governors
of the horses belonging to the Kings Chariots could not rule them: it made also
a great spoil. Axalla perceiving the disorder, hasted forwards till they came
to handblows. The King of China had yet about his person a hundred and fifty
thousand men: Yet Axalla full of courage, fought so valiantly, that they never
beheld any man to do more bravely. Axalla's valor
During this fight, Odmar again charged the horsemen that were retired to the
Kings aid, and put them to flight. Then did Tamerlane himself march forward
with the rest of the Footmen Tamerlane charge.
for the aid of Axalla, and brake through, even to the person of the King of
China, who as yet was enclosed within a second rank of Chariots with about
thirty or forty thousand men, and after he had fought two or three hours, the
horse assisting the foot, and they principally whom the Prince had kept as a
reserve, the King at length remained wounded in the power of Tamerlane, the
battle The King of China beaten.
being won, and the enemies Camp forced. The fight endured eight hours, and the
night coming on, saved the lives of many of the Chinois. There were slain two
Kings, Allies to the King of China. Inestimable riches were gotten in golden
vessels, preecious stones, and as fair, and rich Chariots as could possibly be
seen.

The Emperor would not see the Captive King, till the next day: but being
mounted on hoseback he rode about the field to stay the slaughter, and to rally
his men, that the accustomed watch might be kept, whereof he gave the charge
unto Axalla, commanding him also to keep the King of China in the midst of
his soldiers, who was dressed of the wound which he had received in his right
arm. It was a strange sight to see the diversity of the enemies weapons, and
the variety of their Streamers and Ensigns, which seemed afar off as beautiful
as the diversity of colors plentiful. The King of China's Army was very great,
consisting of a hundred and fifty thousand horse, and two hundred thousand
footmen: but the greatest part of them were rude and barbarous people, far
inferior to Tamerlane's in valor, who suffered themselves to be slain one
upon another, not marking their advantages, and having little skill in warlike
affairs.

Tamerlane continued on horseback, till about two a clock in the Tamerlane's
temperance.
morning, when as they brought him a Tart, and his water, for he never drank
wine, and then lying down upon a Carpet, he passed the rest of the night until
morning. After this so great a victory, there was never the least boasting, or
vauntiug heard to proceed out of his mouth. The next day after the burial of
His humility and modesty. His Piety.
the dead he publikly gave thanks to God for his victory. Then caused the
wounded to be cured, and amongst others Calibes, who more through the
distemperature of the air, then from the danger of the wound, found himself
very ill, yet would he not omit his duty in commanding the Van, which was very
grateful to Tamerlane, for that he being a Scythian, was greatly beloved of his
Nation.

These things being dispatched, he sent unto Axalla to bring forth his prisoner
the King of China; and when he approached, the The King of China brought before
him.
Emperor issued out of his Tent, and went to receive him. This King came with a
very proud and haughty countenance, and approaching near to the Emperor, he by
his Interpreter, asked of Axalla which was he? and being showed him, he spoke
in an haughty language after this manner: The gods whom I worship, The King of
China's proud speech.
being provoked against my Nation and people, have conspired against my good
fortune, and made me this day thy prisoner: But for as much as it is reported
over all the world, that Tamerlane makes war for the honor of his Nation,
thou should be content with this glory, that the Lord of the world, and
child of the Sun is in thy power to receive such laws as thou please to
prescribe unto him. This he spoke in a brave manner, without any other humbling
of himself: Tamerlane's courtesy.
The Emperor on the other side saluting him very courteously, led him into his
Tent.

This King of China was a great Prince, having two hundred famous Cities within
his Kingdom; which also is a fruitful and plentiful Country, wherein are Mines
of Gold and Silver, much The riches of China.
Musk and Rhubarb: It abounds in Fish and Fowl, and has much Silk and
Porclane, with Cotton and Linen, etc.

Then did Tamerlane assemble his Captains to consult about the disposal of the
King; and how the victory should be best improved. At the same time he received
news by Odmar, that the Kings brother, who escaped out of the battle, was at
Quantou, which he had strongly sortified, and that great store of forces began
to adjoyn themselves to him: Hereupon he commanded two thousand Parthian horse
to convey the King to Paguinfou, and from thence to Burda, where he was to be
kept carefully. Then did he resolve upon the besieging of Quantou, and if it
were possible to shut up the Kings brother therein, it being one of the
principal seats that belonged to the King of China. It was forty leagues from
the place where the battle was fought. Thither therefore he sent a good party
of his Army under Odmar, who Quantou besieged.
pitched his Tents about the City: But the Kings brother was gone. The Emperor
in the mean time summoned, and took in many lesser Cities, which yielded wholly
to his mercy, making great lamentation for their Captive King, yet the
gentleness of the Conqueror made them to take all their losses with patience,
and the rather because they heard that he used their King courteously. The
Kings brother also sent Ambassadors to Tamerlane, craving leave to see the
King, and to know of his health, which the Emperor willingly assented to.

Now the Kings brother hearing of the estate of the besieged in Quantou, he
resolved either to relieve it, or to fight a battle, for which end he advanced
strait unto Porchio, making a bridge of Odmars (...).
boats to pass over the River: But Odmar being informed when about fifty
thousand of his men were come over, suddenly set upon them, being out of order,
and not informed of their enemies approach; also to prevent the coming over of
the rest to their assistance, he sent a fir-boat down the stream against their
bridge of boats, which brake it in sunder, and where it was resisted, set all
on fire; and so in a great battle overthrew them; the King of Cauchin-China,
who was amongst them, fighting valiantly, was slain. The Kings brother who was
on the other side The King of China's brother overthrown.
of the River (not yet come over) saw his men slain and drowned, and could not
relieve them. This second overthrow was of no small importance, though it was
but the third part of the Kings brothers Army. For the Citizens of Quantou
hearing of it, and despairing of relief, sent out some proposals for their
surrender.

Axalla which received them, presently dispatched away a faithful messenger to
the Emperor to know his pleasure therein: This was more welcome news to him
then the overthrow of his enemies, wherefore he referred all to the
sufficiency, and fidelity of Axalla: So that upon treaty the City was
surrendered to Axalla, Quantou surrendered.
who caused the Garrison to come out, and received the Inhabitants into the
Emperors protection, and all that would might continue in it unarmed:
afterward he entered into it, and was received with great signs of joy by the
inhabitants, who resolved to entertain the Emperor with all the solemnity that
might be. Axalla put thirty thousand men into it for a Garrison, injoyning the
Citizens to pay the Emperors Army four hundred and fifty thousand Crowns:
Presently after he received a command from the Emperor to stay in the City
himself, and to send all the rest of his foot men unto him, which he commanded
the rather, because he Tamerlanes Policy.
understood that Ambassadors were coming to him from the Kings brother to treat
of peace, and he presumed the sight of all his Army together ready to march,
would strike such a terror into them, as would cause them the readilier to
assent to good terms.

The Ambassadors sent by the Kings brother were of their chiefest men, whom
Tamerlane entertained with all humanity, causing his greatness to appear to
them, as also the activity of his horsemen whereby they might discern that it
would tend to the destruction of their Country if they agreed not with him:
Then did the Ambassadors deliver their message, which consisted of two
branches: One was for the delivery of their King, the other for The Ambassadors
proposals.
the preservation of their Country: The Emperor answered, that they should
deliver their message in writing, and he would give a speedy answer: Their
Propositions were to leave Paguinfou, and all the Country beyond it, with all
the Fortresses of the mountains in Tamerlanes possession: That they would pay
all the charges of his Army from that day forward: And that they would give two
millions of gold for the ransom of their King: To this the Emperor answered,
that he would keep that which he had Tamerlane's proposals.
conquered within the Country, being his own as taken by his Arms. That he
would have the River by which his Army was now encamped, and so along to the
Sea, to be his Frontiers: That the King of China should pay him yearly two
hundred thousand Crowns, which should be delivered at Paguinfou for
acknowledgement of his submission to his Empire: That he should pay five
hundred thousand Crowns in ready money for the charge of his Army: That the
King of China should be delivered, and that all the other Chinois prisoners
should pay ransomes to particular men that took them, except those which
carried the names of Kings, who should pay ten thousand Crowns for their
liberty and peace: And that no Chinois should be kept for a slave, nor sold for
such hereafter, being under the Emperors obedience: That Traffic, and
intercourse of Merchants should be free between both the Nations: That the King
of China should deliver his brother, and two other called Kings, with twelve
principal men of the Country for Peace conclud ed.
Hostages to secure the peace: These conditions, after they had consulted
together, were accepted of, hoping that time would restore again their ancient
liberty, and in the mean time they must bear the yoke of the Conqueror. Then
did Tamerlane lend two thousand horse to fetch the King of China, that being at
liberty The King of China delivered.
he might solemnly swear to the peace; which accordingly he did, delivered the
Hostages, and so went into his Kingdom to perform the other Articles, where
he was almost worshipped as a god, and received with all the joy that might be.

Thus Tamerlane having settled his affairs, and provided for the assurance of
his new conquest, left Odmar to govern the same, Odmar made Governor.
leaving with him thirty thousand horse, and fifty thousand foot to furnish all
the Fortresses and strong places, giving him in charge to make his chief
residence at Quantifou, to fortify well the passages and to build a new Fort
at Dermio, the better to strengthen his borders: He left him all necessaries,
and commended the Lord of the mountains, who had been so serviceable to him;
Tamerlanes gratitude.
his brother he took with him, giving him large preferment in Zachethay: He
also carried along with him many of the new conquered people, to plant them in
his own Country, sending other Colonies in their stead, which he did, because
he found them a light His Prudence.
people, and such as affected novelties.

Tamerlane sent to acquaint the old Emperor with all these things, having two
of the greatest and fairest Cities in all China in his possession, and an
hundred leagues of Land, extending his His possessions in China.
borders to a River, by which he might go to the enemy, but they could not come
to him without passing over the same: He desired also above all things, that
all the Idols which were within his conquest should be beaten down, and
commanded the worshipping of one God.

Then did his Army, wherein was much sickness, begin to march, and Tamerlane
hearing of more forces that were coming toward His return into Tartary.
him out of Tartary, he sent to stop them, commanding them to march to Cambalu,
whither himself also was going, hearing that the old Emperor intended to meet
him, and to entertain him with great magnificence in the City.

Odmar being thus severed from Tamerlane's side, all his favor was turned to
Axalla, of whose prudence, valor, and fidelity he had such large experience in
these wars, so as the report of his valor did fly through all the Empire*
Calibes led the Avantguard, and Axalla was in the Battle near to the Emperor,
who bestowed upon him two hundred thousand Crowns yearly to maintain his
ordinary expenses. And thus after certain days journey, His liberality.
news was brought of the old Emperors arrival at Cambalu: wherefore Tamerlane
leaving his Army to winter in a fair and fertile Country, and dismissing many
of his soldiers, he hasted thitherwards, and when he was arrived within four
leagues of His entertainment at Cambalu.
Cambalu, all the Princes of the Emperors Court came to receive him there,
together with all the chiefest Citizens to congratulate his admirable success:
The Prince having received every one according to his wonted courtesy, yet
retaining convenient Majesty, he was beheld by all with great contentment: He
had with him the Emperess his wife, who had not left him in all this journey:
And the next day the old Emperor honored him so much as to come to meet him
with all the magnificence that might be. Tamerlane His presents to the old
Emperor.
presented him with all the richest Chariots, and fairest horses that he had
won: and the old Emperor being very desirous to see his daughter, her Chariot
was uncovered, and he caused her to enter into his own: But the Prince remained
on horseback, whom the eyes of all the people could not be satisfied with
admiring. Tamerlane also presented Calibes to the Emperor, making a recital of
all his faithfulness; whereupon the Emperor gave him an hundred thousand Crowns
for the increase of his pension: He also presented Axalla to the Emperor, who
being informed of his valor, gave unto him a hundred thousand Tartarirs of
Gold in a Principality, that he might declare how much he esteemed his fidelity.

During Tamerlanes abode at Cambalu this winter, complaints He is stirred up
against Bajazet.
came to him that Bajazet the great Turk had attempted to join the Empire of
Greece to his own, resolving also upon the siege of Constantinople, whereupon
the Emperor of Greece sent to him to crave his aid. Axalla who was of kin to
this Emperor Paleologus, being desirous to maintain the Christian Religion in
Greece, stirred He sends Ambassadors to him.
him up much unto this war: whereupon he sent Ambassadors to Bajazet, to warn
him in his name not to molest the Greek Emperor, who was his confederate: But
Bajazet answered them very proudly, asking them what their Master had to do
therewith, and Bajazets proud answer.
that he should content himself with injoyning Laws to his own Subjects, and
not to meddle with him who was none of them.

This answer being returned, by Axalla's means, was very ill taken, so that
Tamerlane resolved to hinder this enterprise of the Ottomans: for which end he
obtained of the Emperor his Uncle, Tamerlane's preparations against him.
an hundred thousand footmen, and eighty thousand horsemen, hoping to have as
many from his own Country of Sachetay, besides the Lords who would accompany
him to win glory, from whom he made account of fifty thousand men more that
they would bring along with them. Thus he departed from Cambalu, taking his
leave of the old Emperor his father in Law, and of the Princess his wife (then
left behind him for the comfort of her aged father) and departed toward
Samercand, the place of his birth and seat of his Empire, leaving the forces
granted him by the Emperor to come after him to Ozara, where he had appointed
the general rendezous of his Army. This his departure was very grievous to the
old Emperor, but more grievous of the Princes part toward his wife, who had
never left him since they were first married: But nothing could withhold this
brave Prince where honor was to be purchased, or where he might be profitable
to his oppressed friends; For he would often say, That he was born to this end,
and that all his other employments were but by the By, God Tamerlane's speech.
having appointed, and called him to punish the pride of Tyrants. He was
accompanied with Calibes, and made the Prince of Thanais Colonel of all his
footmen, which place Axalla had left, whom now he made Lieutenant General of
all his Army, with command to lead his Avantguard, and Calibes the Arereward.
Forces came to him from all parts: And the Chinois Lord being licensed by
Odmar, marched toward him with twenty thousand men of his Subjects newly
conquered, being desirous to show his forwardness to the Emperor, as also to
learn the manners, and fashions of strange Countries. When Tamerlane came near
Samercand, Zamay His entertainment at Samercand.
went to meet him, and near a million of people blessing and and praising him
with all manner of songs: There he remained about a month: In which space
Axalla had rendevozed his Army at Ozara, from which also he advertised
Tamerlane of the proceedings of Bajazet. Then did Tamerlane send for him to
Samarcand to confer with him about seting forward of his Army. For although he
was still accompanied with renowned Princes and famous Captains; yet were they
no body in comparison of Axalla, whose sound judgment and counsel had won him
such credit with his Lord and Master, as by his advise he did althings, and
without him nothing, which his so great authority and favor Envy attends virtue.
with his Prince, wanted not the envy of the Court; but that his great virtues,
and rare-found courtesy (in so great fortune) together with so many great
services as he had done, supported him against the malice of the same. He upon
this command from Tamerlane, leaving the charge of the Army at Ozara with the
Prince of Thanais, came to Samercand, and there discoursed with him at large
concerning the estate and order of his Army: and so shortly after they all
departed to Ozara, where a new consultation was held by which way he should
conduct his Army: as whether it was better to lead them by the coast of the
Muscovite directly toward Capha, or on the other side of the Caspian Sea, by
the skirts of Persia; and after much discourse, and sundry opinions with their
reasons delivered, it was resolved (although the way were the longer) to pass
by the Muscovite, so to come to the Georgians, and to Trepizond, and from
thence to enter into the Ottomans Kingdom.

This being resolved on, they marched forward till at length they came to
Maranis, where they stayed three days, looking His march toward Bajazet.
for the China forces, whereof they received news: there also Tamerlane
mustered, and paid his Army: He had also news of fifteen thousand horsemen sent
him by the Muscovite, with a sum of money, with leave for him to pass through so
much of his territories His Auxiliaries.
as should be necessary, being glad that he set upon others, rather then on
himself; and that such great preparations should fall upon them, whose
greatness was as dreadful and dangerous to him as any other.

Tamerlane caused a great quantity of victuals, and most part of His Prudence.
the furniture of his Army to be sent along the Caspian Sea, which was a great
ease and commodity to his men, which marching by Land, was of necessity to pass
some twenty leagues through places destitute both of victuals and water: Himself
all the way coasting along the Sea shore, passed his time in Hunting and
Hawking, to make the journey less tedious, his Army not coming near him by ten
leagues, which was so great that it extended it self full twenty leagues.

Coming to the River Edel he stayed at Zarazich, whilst his Army passed the
River at Mechet, and two other bridges that he had caused to be made of boats
for that purpose. Now that Circassians, and Georgians hearing of the approach
of Tamerlane with his huge army, by their Ambassadors offered him all the help
and assistance The Georgians assist him.
they could in his journey, as he passed that way. These Georgians were, and yet
were Christians, a great and warlike people, of long time tributaries to the
Greek Emperors; and afterward sometime tributaries, and sometimes confederates
to the Persians: but always enemies to the Turk, and therefore glad they were
of Tamerlanes coming against them: of these warlike people Axalla drew great
numbers to the service of his Prince, who not a little esteemed of them, being
all tall men, very beautiful, of great strength and courage, and withal, most
expert soldiers, as having many times resisted the power of the Ottoman Kings,
by reason of the advantage of their Country, which was rough, mountainous, and
hard to come to. These people every where kindly entertained Tamerlane, and
plentifully relieved his Army with all necessaries. In passing through which,
and other Countries, he His strict discipline.
took such order with his soldiers, that none of the people by whom they
passed were any whit injured by them, insomuch that if a soldier had taken but
an Apple or any other trifle, he died for it. And one of his soldiers having
taken a little Milk from a Country-woman, and she thereof complaining, he
caused him presently to be hanged, and his stomach to be ripped, where the Milk
that he had lately drunk being found, he paid the woman for it, who had
otherwise without mercy dyed for her false accusation: Which his great severity
was indeed the preservation of his Army, being so great as that it was thought
impossible to provide it with victuals, whereof yet there was not want, nor of
any other thing necessary for the relief of man: his Camp being still as a most
populous and well-governed City, stored with all manner of things, whereunto
both Artificers and Merchants resorted from far Countries with their
commodities as to some famous Mart: and the Country People from every place
without fear brought in their Country-commodities, for which they received
present money, and so departed in peace.

So marching on, he at length came to Bachichich, where he stood to refresh his
Army eight days, and there again took a general muster of them, finding, as
some write, four hundred thousand horse and six hundred thousand foot; but
others that His huge Army.
were present with him say, three hundred thousand horse, and five hundred
thousand footmen of all Nations: There also he generally paid them, and as his
manner was, made an oration to them, informing them of such orders as he would
have observed, with much other military discipline, whereof he was very curious
with his Captains.

In the mean time Bajazet would not believe that Tamerlane durst once look
toward him, yea so exceeding barbarous was he, Bajazets Pride.
that he would not so much as suffer any man to speak of him, or his Army to
him, by reason of his pride. He also strictly forbade all the bordering people
to make any vows or prayers for Tamerlanes prosperity: But he was soon after
awakened out of this Lethargy as we shall presently hear. Indeed Tamerlane
could hardly be persuaded that Bajazet having subdued the greatest part of
Grecia, and much distressed the Greek Emperor, and having so great means to
recover whatsoever he should lose in Asia, would be so adventurous as to come
over the streits out of Europe to try the Fortune of a battle with him: but
rather warily to protract the time, to weary him with wants, that in a strange
Country drew such a world of people after him: wherein yet he found himself
much deceived, for when he had passed the Georgian Country, and was come to
Buisabuich; Axalla (whom he had not seen in eight days before, because he
commanded the Avantguard of the Army) came to him with such news as he knew
would be most grateful to him: which was, that Bajazet had raised his besiegers
at Bajazet advanced toward him.
Constantinople to come and defend his new conquests in Asia, and that he was
certainly resolved to come to a pitched Battle with him, not so much trusting
to the multitude of his men, as to the experience and valor of his soldiers,
being long trained up in the wars. At which unexpected news Tamerlane greatly
rejoiced, yet without insolency and vaunting, but rather with the countenance
of such an one as judged the event of Battles to be always doubtful;
Tamerlanes moderation.
saying some times, That a small number well conducted, did carry away the
victory from the confused multitude. Three days after he stayed at Buisabuick,
causing his soldiers continually to march forward, which at two places passed
over the river Euphrates, which, he did the rather to maintain his Army upon
the He passes the River Euphrates.
spoil of the enemies Country, choosing rather there to attend his coming then
amongst his friends and allies. All the Cities that yielded to him in the way
as he marched, he favorably received; the other that refused to submit
themselves to his obedience, he used with all extremity, especially the great
and strong City of Sebastia, where certain of the forerunners of his Army,
were by the Turks that kept Garrison in it, cut off and slain, and to despite
Turkish pride.
him the more, the City gates were set open in contempt of him: whereupon being
justly offended, he sent out certain Tartarian horsemen, charging them upon
pain of his displeasure so to behave themselves against their enemies that at
his coming up to them he might find either the City taken, or at least the
gates shut up against him: and he had his men at so great command, that no
danger was unto them more dreadful then his displeasure, neither did he punish
any thing so severely as cowardice. Now the Turks in Sebastia seeing these
Tartarian horsemen marching toward the City, making little account of them,
because their number was not great, issued out to meet them, where they were so
furiously charged by these few horsemen, that they were glad to retire, and for
have to shut the gates against some of their own men, lest the enemy should
have entered pell mell with Turks beaten.
them, which Turks were there slain at the gates of the City. Shortly after
came Tamerlane with all the rest of his Army, and sat down before the City,
where he lay still seven days not making any show of violence at all. The
defendants because the City was of great strength, thought that his purpose was
by a long siege to distress the same: But about the eight day, the Towers, and
walls being undermined in sundry places, suddenly fell down, leaving large
breaches for the enemy to enter; wherewith the Turks being dismayed surrendered
the City to Tamerlane in hope so to have saved their lives, but he caused them
all to be buried quick, Sebastia taker.
and the City utterly to he razed: and then calling the Governor, whose life
he had spared for that end, he bade him go and tell his Master what had
happened to his strong City of Sebastia, and what himself had seen there; of
which Tragical action, when the Governor had made report to Bajazet, he
demanded of him whither of the two Armies he thought bigger or stronger; for he
had now assembled a mighty Army of three hundred thousand horse, and two
hundred thousand footmen: whereunto the Governor having first craved pardon,
answered: That it could not be in reason, but that Tamerlane had the greater
Army, for that he commanded over far greater Countries: wherewith proud Bajazet
being offended, replied in great Choler. Out of doubt Bajazet's arrogance.
the sight of the Tartarian has so affrighted this coward, that he thinks
every enemy to be two. As Bajazet marched forward he heard a Country-Shepherd
merrily pleasing himself with his homely pipe as he sat on the side of a
mountain feeding his small flock whereupon he stood still, and listened to him
to the admiration of many, and at last brake forth into these words, O happy
shepherd, Note.
which hadest no Sebastia to lose! bewraying therein his own coffeehouse,
and yet withal showing that worldly bliss consists not so much in possessing
of much, subject unto danger, as in enjoying content in a little devoid of
fears.

The rest of the Cities as Tamerlane marched forwards, warned by the
destruction of Sebastia, yielded to him, the Citizens whereof he used
courteously, especially the Christians, whom he set at Tamerlanes favor to the
Christians.
liberty for the Greek Emperors sake, whom he sought therein to gratify.

But Tamerlane had not gone far in the Turks dominions before Bajazet's
approach.
he was certainly informed that Bajazet was coming against him with a mighty
Army, and was now within thirty leagues of him, which caused him from thence
forward to march with his Army more close together. Axalla leading the Van,
sent forth Chianson Prince of Ciarchan with four thousand Parthian horsemen, to
get knowledge of the Turkish Army, and where Bajazet lay, as also what manner
of Country it was beyond Sennas, and if he could learn any thing thereof, to
make relation of it to him. This Prince of Ciarchan was Tamerlanes near
kinsman, a man of great reputation, and next to Axalla, in whose absence he had
the command of the Avantguard, who also sent before him an other Parthian
Captain with five hundred horsemen: who having advanced about ten leagues, and
surprised Sennas, was certainly Sennas surprised by Tamerlane.
informed there of the state of Bajazets Army, which was now at Tataia, and so
marching forward; which Tamerlane being informed of, commanded him not to
retire from that place till he saw the arrival of the enemy, and thereof to
give him advertisement every hour, resolving himself to pass on no farther,
being encamped in a fair large plain, which was very advantageous for him,
his Army being bigger then Bajazet's which made him make choice of those large
plains. His Army also being compounded His Policy.
of sundry Nations, he considered that he was not to fight against the Chinois,
a soft effeminate people, as of late; but against the Turks, a most warlike
Nation and well acquainted with all manner of sights and warlick stratagems,
and therefore he judged it necessary to proceed warily against them. Upon this
consideration he presently sent for Axalla, with him to view the said place,
and to have his opinion whether it would be advantageous for him to stay there
or no? Axalla not misliking his choice of the place, yet withal advised him to
keep Sennas as long as possibly he could: and accordingly he sent word to them
at Sennas, that when they could keep the place no longer, they should set fire
of it, and so retreat, and this he did that the enemy should have no desire to
encamp there, but to march forwards to those places where Tamerlane desired to
fight, the rather because he was stronger in horse then Bajazet.

Accordingly the Prince of Ciarchan sent out a hundred horse toward the Turks,
then divided the rest of his forces into two parts, commanding the former that
as soon as they perceived the enemy to pursue the hundred horse, whom he had
commanded to fly disorderly before them, that they should receive them into
their squadrons, and so retire altogether: He in the mean time with the An
Ambush.
other part stood close in a valley near unto a wood-side, wholly unseen; where
having suffered two thousand of the enemies horse (the vant-curriers of the
Turks army) to pass by him, he following them in the tail, charged them home,
the other also which before retired, Two thousand Turks overthrown.
now turned again upon them; so that the Turks seeing themselves thus beset,
and hardly laid to both before and behind, as men discouraged, fled: but in
their flight were most of them slain, the rest of them taken prisoners. This
was the first encounter between the Turks and the Parthians. All the prisoners
taken were by the Prince sent as a present to Tamerlane, and amongst the rest
the Bassa of Natolia, who led those Troops; of whom The Bassa Natolia taken.
Tamerlane earnestly demanded what caused his Master Bajazet so little to
esteem him as to show so great contempt of his Army: Which (says he) he shall
find strong enough to abate his pride? To this the Bassa answered: That his
Lord was the Sun upon earth, which could not endure any corival: And that he
rather was astonished His speech to Tamerlane.
to see how he from so far a Country had undertaken so dangerous a journey to
hinder the fortune of his Lord, in whose favor the heavens (as he said) did
bend themselves to further his greatness, and unto whom all the world subjected
it self; and that he committed great folly in going about to resist the same.
Unto this proud speech Tamerlane replied, That he was sent from Tamerlanes
reply.
Heaven to punish his insolency, and to teach him that the proud are hated of
God, whose promise is to pull down the mighty, and to advance the lowly. As for
thy self (said he) thou have already felt (though I pity thy mishap) what the
valor of my Parthian horse is against thy Turkish: and I have already caused
thy Master to raise his siege before Constantinople, and to look to his
affairs here in Asia. He also asked him whether his Master did come resolved
to give him battle? Assure your self (said he) that there is nothing that he
more desires, and would to God that I might His release.
acknowledge your greatness in giving me leave to assist my Lord in that
battle. Good leave have thou (said Tamerlane) go thy ways, and tell thy Lord
that thou have seen me, and that in the battle he shall find me on horseback,
there where he shall see a green Ensign displayed. The Bassa thanked him, and
swore that next unto his Lord, he vowed unto him his service. And so returning
he related unto Bajazet how he had seen Tamerlane, and reported to him truly
all that he had willed him to say, not forgetting He commends Tamerlane.
above all to praise his courtesy and bounty: who besides that he had frankly
set him at liberty, had also given him a very fair horse, well furnished,
although he well knew that he was to serve against himself: To this Bajazet
answered no more but that he would shortly make trial of him, and that he
doubted not but before he had done with him, he should make him acknowledge his
folly.

The next day the two Armies drew near together, and encamped within a league
the one of the other, where all the night long you might have heard such noise
of horses which filled the heavens Preparations for the battle.
with their neighings, and the air with sounds; and every man thought the
night long that they might come to the trial of their valors, and the gaining
of their desires. The Scythians (a people no less greedy, then needy) talked of
nothing but the spoil; the proud Parthians of attaining honor; the poor
Christians of their deliverance from an insulting adversary; all to be gained
by the next days victory; Every man during the nightime speaking according
to his humor. All which Tamerlane (walking privately up and down in the Camp)
heard, and much rejoiced to see the hope which his soldiers had already
conceived of the victory: and so after the second watch, returning into his
Pavilion, and there casting himself upon a carpet, he purposed to sleep a
while: but his cares not suffering him so to do, he then (as his manner was)
called for a book, wherein was contained Tamerlanes prudent practice.
the Lives of his Fathers and Ancestors and of other valiant worthies, which he
used ordinarily to read in, as then also he did: not vainly to deceive the
time, but to make use of it, by imitating that which by them was worthily done,
and declining such dangers as they by their rashness, or oversight fell into.
After having slumbered a little, he commanded Axalla to be sent for to him, who
presently came, accompanied with diverse other great Lords and Captains of the
Army, with whom after he had consulted a while about the order of the battle,
himself presently mounted on horseback, and sent each of them to their charge
to see their orders put in execution: At which very instant he received
intelligence that the enemy was marching forwards, and come to choose his ground
for the battle, whose order of marching Tamerlane was very desirous to see,
that so he might marshal his own Army accordingly. For (said he) I do not so
much trust to His prudent speech.
the Lions skin wherein I wrap mine arm, but that withal I will make use of
the Foxes, therein to wrap mine head, which my grandfather neglected to his
overthrow in a battle against the Persians: for being in a place of advantage,
he went out of it to seek his enemy that was lodged strongly, contrary to the
advice of all his Captains, which proved his ruin.

Then did he cause three thousand horsemen to advance forward with charge to
begin the skirmish, himself following after to lodge every part of his forces
in such places as he had foreseen to be fittest for his advantage: And seeing
the Turkish Janissaries marching in a square battle in the midst of the Army,
and upon the two Fronts two great squadrons of horsemen, which seemed to be
about thirty thousand, and another which advanced before, and covered the
Battalion of the Janissaries, he thought* this their order to be very good and
hard to be broken, and therefore turning himself to Axalla, he said, I had
thought this day to have fought on foot, but I see that it behooves me now to
fight on horseback to encourage my soldiers to open that great Battalion of
the enemies. His directions for the battle.
And my will is that my men come forwards to me so soon as may be; for I will
advance forward with a hundred thousand footmen, fifty thousand upon each of my
two wings, and in the midest of them forty thousand of my best horsemen: And
my pleasure is that after I have tried the force of these men that they come
unto my Avantguard, of whom I will dispose, and fifty thousand horsemen more in
three bodies, whom thou shall command, which I will assist with eighty thousand
horse, wherein shall be mine own person, having a hundred thousand footmen
behind me, who shall march in two squadrons: and for my Arereward I appoint
forty thousand horse, and fifty thousand footmen, who shall not march but to
my aid: And I will make choice of ten thousand of my best horse, whom I will
send into every place where I shall think needful within my Army, for to impart
my commands.

Over the first forty thousand horse the Prince of Ciarchan commanded, over
the foremost footmen was the Lord Synopes, a Genovois, kinsman to Axalla, and
his Lieutenant over the footmen, a Captain of great estimation: The Prince
Axalla's charge consisted of five squadrons of horsemen: Bajazet's Army also
being fair and great, came bravely still on forwards toward their enemies,
who stirred not a whit from the place which they had chosen The Battle begins.
for the battle, except certain lighthorsemen. Scythians, Parthians, and
Muscovites, who sent out as loose men, hotly skirmished between the two Armies.
Tamerlane was informed by a Spy that Bajazet was on foot in the midest of
thirty thousand Janissaries, his principal men of war, and greatest strength,
wherein he meant that day to fight, and in whom he had reposed his greatest
hope. His battle of horse was very fair, amounting to the number of one
hundred and forty thousand, all old soldiers: The Sultan of Egypt having also
sent to his aid thirty thousand Mamelukes, all Bajazet's great Army.
excellent good horsemen, with thirty thousand footmen; so that his Army
marching all in a front, in the form of an half Moon, seemed almost as great as
Tamerlane's: These Turks with infinite number of horrible cries still advanced
forwards, Tamerlanes soldiers all the while standing still with very great
silence. Never was there a more furious charge then the Turks gave upon the
Prince of Ciarchan, who was commanded not to fight till the enemy came unto
him: neither could there have been chosen a fairer plain, and where the
skilful choice of place gave less advantage either to the one or to other, only
Tamerlane had a River of the left side of the Army, serving him to some small
advantage. Now this young Prince of Ciarchan with his forty thousand horse,
was in the first encounter almost wholly overthrown; yet having fought right
valiantly, and entered even into the midst of the Janissaries (where the person
of Bajazet was) putting them into disorder, was himself there slain. About
which time Axalla set The Prince of Ciarchan slain.
upon them with his squadrons, but not with the like danger: for having
overthrown one of the enemies wings, and cut it all to pieces, and his footmen
coming to join with him as was appointed, he faced the Battalion of the
Janissaries, who right valiantly behaved themselves for the safety of their
Prince. This furious A furious battle.
fight continued an hour, and yet you could not have seen any scattered, but
the one still resolutely fighting against the other. You might there have seen
the horsemen like mountains rushing together, and infinite numbers of men
dying, crying, lamenting, and threatening all at the same instant. Tamerlane
had patience all this while to see the event of this so mortal a fight: but
perceiving his men at last to begin to give ground, he sent ten thousand of his
horse to join with the ten thousand appointed for the Rereward commanding them
to assist him when they saw that he had need, and so himself gave a furious
charge, and made them to Tamerlane himself charge.
give him room, causing the footmen also to charge, over whom the Prince of
Thanais commanded, who gave a gallant charge upon the Battalion of Janissaries,
wherein was yet the person of Bajazet, who before had sustained a great burden.
Now Bajazet had in his Army a great number of Mercinary Tartars called
Destenses, with many thousands of other soldiers taken up in the Countries of
the poor exiled Mohammedan Princes, in whose just quarrel, and the Greek
Emperors, Tamerlane had chiefly undertaken that war. These Tartarians and other
soldiers, seeing, Many revelt to Tamerlane.
some their friends, and other some their natural and loving Princes in
Tamerlanes Army, stricken with the terror of disloyalty, and abhorring the
cruelty of the proud Tyrant, in the heat of the battle; revolted from Bajazet
to their own Princes, which much weakened Bajazet's forces: who never the less
with his own men of war, especially the Janissaries, and the help of the
Christian soldiers brought to his aid from Servia, and other places of
Europe, with great courage maintained the fight: But the multitude rather then
true valor prevailed; for as much as might be done by valiant and courageous
men, was by the Janissaries, the Mameluks, and the rest performed, both for the
preservation of their Prince, The Turks overthrown.
and for gaining the victory: But in the end the horsemen with whom Tamerlane
himself was, giving a fresh charge, and his Avantguard being rallied, and
joining with him, he with much ado obtained the victory.

Bajazet himself being wounded, when he saw all desperate, Bajazet wounded.
mounted on horseback, thinking to have escaped: but falling into Axalla's
hands, he yielded himself to him, supposing him to have been Tamerlane, neither
did Axalla for a while know him, but took Bajazet taken.
him for some great Commander in the Turks Army. Musa surnamed Zelabi, or the
Noble, one of Bajazet's sons, with diverse others of his great Captains, were
there taken also; and amongst the rest Georg Despot of Servia, who
notwithstanding his misfortune had that day by his valor gained the reputation
of a great and valiant Captain; inso much as Tamerlane in the very heat of the
battle marvelled to see him and his Servians, and the other Christians The
valor of the Christians.
that he had brought to the aid of Bajazet, to fight so valiantly; whereupon
turning to some of his Captains that were near him, he said, See how valiantly
these Religious fight, supposing them by their strange attire to have been some
of the Turks superstitious votaries. But the Despot being now taken, and
afterward brought to Tamerlane, he was by him courteously entertained; but
withal reproved for that he had assisted Bajazet against him, who was come in
favor to the Christian Emperor, and the other poor oppressed Princes such as
the Despot himself was: who thereupon boldly answered, That indeed it was not
according to his profession, The Despot of Servia's speech
but according to the prosterity of Bajazet, unto whom it seemed that all the
world should bend, and that he did it for his own safety: Whereupon Tamerlane
excused him, and without any more ado gave him Tamerlane releaseth him.
liberty at his own pleasure to depart.

Bajazet himself being afterward brought to Tamerlane as a prisoner, was by
him courteously entertained, who never showed any token of submission at all,
but according to his proud nature, without respect of his present state,
answered him presumptuously to what ever he demanded of him: wherewith
Tamerlane being Bajazets proud behavior.
somewhat moved, told him that it was in his power to take his life from him;
whereto he answered no more, but Do it, for that loss will be my greatest
happiness: Then Tamerlane demanded of him, what made him so proud as to
enterprise to bring so noble a Prince as the Greek Emperor into his subjection?
He answered, Even the same cause which moved thee to invade me, namely the
desire of glory and sovereignty. But wherefore then (said Tamerlane) do thou
use such cruelty toward them that thou overcomest without respect of age or
sex? That did I (said he) to strike the greater terror into mine enemies.

Then did Tamerlane ask him if he had ever given thanks to God for making him
so great an Emperor? No, (said he) I never so Leoncla. in edit Anual. Turk.
much as thought upon any such thing. Then said Tamerlane, Its no wonder that
so ungrateful a man should be made a spectacle of Note.
misery. For you (says he) being blind of an eye, and I lame of a leg, was
there any worth in us, that God should set us over two such great Empires to
command so many men far more worthy then our selves? But, said Tamerlane, what
would thou have done with me if it had been my lot to have fallen into thy
hands, as thou art now in mine? I would (said Bajazet) have enclosed thee in
Lex Talionis.
a Cage of Iron, and so have carried thee up and down in Triumph through my
Kingdom. Even so (said Tamerlane) shall thou be served: And so causing him to
be taken out of his presence, turning to his followers, he said, Behold, a
proud and cruel man, who deserves to be chastised accordingly, and to be made
an example to all the proud and cruel of the world of the just wrath of God
against them. I acknowledge that God this day has delivered into my hands a
great enemy, to whom therefore we must return thanks, which he caused publikly
to be performed the same Tamerlanes Piety.
day; for the battle was ended about four a clock, and there were diverse hours
yet of daylight. The next day he caused the dead to be buried, where amongst
the rest was found the body of the prince of Ciarchan dead in the midst of
the Janissaries, where he lay enclosed with their dead bodies, showing that he
dyed not unrevenged, whose untimely death Tamerlane much lamented, causing his
dead body to be Enbalmed, and with two thousand horse, and diverse Turkish
prisoners chained together, to be conveyed to Samercand until his coming
thither. All other dead bodies were The dead buried.
with all honor that might be, buried at Sennas.

This great bloody battle was fought in the year of our Lord, 1397. not far
from mount Stella (where formerly the great king Mithridates was by Pompey the
great in a great battle overthrown.) It continued from seven a clock in the
morning till four in the afternoon; victory as it were all the while hovering
with doubtful wings over both Armies, as uncertain where to light, until at
Tamerlanes Policy.
length the fortune of Tamerlane prevailed: whose wisdom, next unto God, gave
him that days victory; for that the politic tiring of the strong forces of
Bajazet, was the safeguard of his own: whereas if he had gone unto the battle
in one front, assuredly the multitude finding such strong opposition, had put
it self into confusion, whereas this successive manner of aiding his men made
them all unto him profitable. The number of the slain is variously reported.
The Turks themselves say, that Bajazet lost there his noble son Mustapha, with
two hundred thousand of his men, and Tamerlane not many fewer: Others say, that
the Turks lost The number of the slain.
about sixty thousand, and Tamerlane not past twenty thousand. But likely it is
that the carnage was very great in so long a fight between two such Armies as
probably never before met a in field together.

By this days event is plainly seen the uncertainty of worldly The uncertainty
of worldly greatness.
things, and what small assurance even the greatest have in them. Behold,
Bajazet the terror of the world, and (as he thought) superior to fortune, in an
instant by the event of one battle thrown into the bottom of misery and
despair, and that at such time as he thought least of it, even in the midst
of his greatest strength. It was three days before he could be pacified, but
as a desperate man still seeking after death, and calling for it. Neither did
Tamerlane after he had once spoken with him, at all afterward use him
courteously, but as of a proud and insolent man, made small account of him. And
to manifest that he knew how to curb the haughty, made him to be shackled in
fetters and chains of Gold, and so to be shut up in an Iron Cage, made like a
grate, Bajazet kept in a Cage.
that he might be seen on every side, and so carried him up and down as he
passed through Asia, to be made a scorn and derision to his own people, over
whom he had before Tyrannized. And to his further disgrace, upon festival days
he used him for a footstool to tread upon when he mounted on horseback, and at
other times scornfully fed him like a dog with fragments that fell from his
table. A rare example of the uncertainty of worldly honors and greatness, that
he unto whose ambitious mind Asia and Europe, two great parts of the world,
were too little, should now be carried up and down, cooped up in a little Iron
Cage, like a dangerous wild beast: How might he have taken up that speech of
Hecuba in Seneca? Quicunque Regno fidit, and magna potens dominatur in aula, me
videat. -- Non unquam tulit Documenta Fors majora quam fragili loco starent
superbi.

Tamerlane used this severity, not so much out of hatred to the Pride goes
before destruction.
man, as to manifest the just judgment of God against the arrogant folly of
the proud. And when on a time he was requested by one of his Nobles to remit
some part of this rigor to so great a man, he answered, I do not use this
rigor against him as a King, Tamerlane prosecutes his victory.
but rather to punish him as a proud ambitious Tyrant, polluted with the blood
of his own brother and many other innocents.

This so great an overthrow brought such a fear upon all the Countries
possessed by Bajazet in Asia, that Axalla being sent before Tamerlane with
forty thousand horse, and a hundred thousand foot, without carriages to
prosecute the victory, came without resistance to Prusa, whither all the
remainder of Bajazet's Army was retired with Bassa Mustapha: all places as he
marched along still yielding to him: Yea the great Bassa with the rest The
Turks fly.
hearing of his coming, and not thinking themselves in safety in Asia, fled
over the streit of Hellespont to Callipolis, and so to Hadrianople.

Axalla coming to Prusa, had the City without resistance yielded to him, which
by his Army was plundered and there with other of Prusa taken.
Bajazet's wives and concubines, he took prisoner the fair Despina, Bajazet's
best beloved wife, to the doubling of his grief.

Emmanuel Paleologus now hearing of Tamerlanes coming to Prusa* sent honorable
Ambassadors thither before to Axalla, by The Greek Emperor sends Ambassadors.
who^ they were entertained till the coming of Tamerlane, who received them
with all the honor that might be, showing them all his magnificence, and the
order of his Camp to their great admiration: For it resembled a most populous
and well governed City by reason of the order that was therein, which brought
it plenty of victuals, and of all manner of Merchandise as well for delight as
necessity. By these Ambassadors the Greek Emperor yielded his Empire, together
with his person unto Tamerlane as his most The Greek Empire yielded to
Tamerlane.
faithful subject and vassal: which (as he said) he was bound to do, for that
he was by him delivered from the most cruel Tyrant of the world; as also for
the long journey he had undertaken for his sake, and the discommodities he had
endured with the hazard of his person and loss of his subjects, which could not
be otherwise compensated, but with the offer of his own and his subjects lives
to him, which for ever he therefore dedicated to his service, with all the
fidelity and loyalty that so great a benefit might deserve: besides, that his
so many virtues, and rare endowments which made him famous through the world,
did oblige him the more hereunto, and that therefore he would attend him in his
chief City, to deliver it into his hands as his own, together with all the
Empire of Greece.

Now these Ambassadors expected no less then to fall into the bondage of
Tamerlane, judging that which they offered to be so great and delicate a
morsel, as that it would not be refused, especially of such a victorious Prince
as was Tamerlane; and that the acceptance thereof in knindness and friendship
was the best bargain they could make therein. But they received an answer from
this worthy Prince far beyond their expectation: For he with a mild countenance
beholding them, answered thus, That he was not come from so far a Country, nor
undertook such pains Its refused by him.
for the enlargement of his dominions, big enough already (too base a thing for
him to put himself into so great danger, and hazard for) but rather to win
honor, and to make his name famous to future posterities: And that he would
make it appear to the world that he came to assist their Master as his friend
and ally at his request: and that his upright intentions therein were the
greatest cause that God from above had favored him, and made him instrumental
to bruile the head of the greatest and fiercest enemy of mankind that was under
heaven; and therefore to get him an immortal name, his purpose was to make free
so great and flourishing a City as was Constantinople, governed by so noble and
ancient an house as the Emperors. That he had always joined faith to his
courage, which should never suffer him to make so great a breach Tamerlanes
fidelity*
into his reputation, as that it should be reported of him, that in the color
of a friend he should come to invade the dominions of his ally. That he desired
no more, but that the service he had done for the Greek Emperor might remain
for ever engraven in the memory of his posterity, to the end they might for
ever wish well to him and his successors by the remembering the good he had done
for them: That he wished that long might the noble Emperor live, happily to
govern his estate, and that before his return, he would so well consider for
the establishing of the same, as that he should not lightly fall into the same
jeopardy.

Easy it is to judge what joy the Ambassadors did conceive upon hearing this
so gracious an answer from the mouth of Tamerlane who rather then he would
break his Faith, refused an Empire offered him, together with one of the
stateliest, and magnificentest Cities in the world. After the testification of
their joy and thankfulness these Ambassadors were by the command of Tamerlane
royally feasted by Axalla, having all the honor done to them that might be.
And one of them being sent back to carry this The Ambassadors dismissed.
unexpected news to the Emperor, filled both him and all the City of
Constantinople with exceeding joy and gladness, which both he, and all his
subjects testified by making of Bonefires, and other signs of joy and
pleasure. And the Emperor the more to show his gratitude by the advice of his
Counselors, passed over the streit into The Greek Emperor comes to him.
Asia, to see Tamerlane in Prusa, and in person himself to give him thanks; who
hearing of his coming, and being glad thereof, presently sent Prince Axalla to
meet him, and to certify him of the joy he conceived to have the good hap to
see him, as also to conduct him to Prusa, where those two great Princes with
the greatest magnificence that might be, met, and so spent one whole day in
conversing together: and the Greek Emperor the next day taking his leave, was
by Tamerlane with match honor conducted out of the City.

Now had Tamerlane himself conceived a great desire to see the famous City of
Constantinople, from which he was not now far, yet would he not go thither as a
Conqueror, but as a private person: Tamerlane goes to Constantinople.
which by the means of Axalla was accomplished, and he thereinto by the Greek
Emperor privately received, and with all familiarity possible entertained: the
Emperor showing unto him all the rare and excellent things that were contained
therein; and the other Greek Princes devising all the means they could to do
him pleasure, and them that were with him, who were all in a manner clothed
after the Greek fashion. The Greek Emperor was curious to show him all the
beautiful Gardens along the Sea-cost, and so privately conducting him about,
spent five or six days with all the mirth that mighty be: Tamerlane by the
way, often saying, that he had never seen a fairer City; He highly commended it.
and that of all others, considering the situation of it, it was right worthy
to command all the world. He wondered at the costly buildings of the Temples,
the fair engraven pillars, the high Pyramides, and the excellent gardens;
afterward saying often that it nothing repented him to have undertaken so long
and dangerous a journey, if it had been only to preserve so notable a City from
fire and sword. In the Greek Emperor he greatly commended his mild nature and
courtesy, who knowing that above all things he took pleasure in fair
serviceable horses* gave unto him thirty of the fairest, strongest, and
reddiest that were possibly to be gotten, all most richly furnished: He sent
likewise great presents to all the Princes, and great Commanders of the Army,
and bountifully caused to be delivered to them all things which he thought
necessary for the army: So after these great kindnesses, and a strict bond of
friendship made, and by solemn Oath confirmed by these two great Princes,
Tamerlane with great contentment took leave of the Emperor, and returned to his
Army at Prusa, wherewith now at pleasure he spoiled and wasted all the
dominions of Bajazet in Asia, no man daring to make head against him.

The winter now drawing on, Tamerlane dispersed his Army into He sends his Army
to their winter quarters.
diverse Provinces of the lesser Asia, expecting daily when some of Bajazet's
sons, or great friends should make suite to him for his deliverance; but none
came, most fearing the fierce nature of Bajazet, who if he had been delivered,
was like enough to have taken severe revenge upon all that forsook him in the
battle, and therefore they never interceded for him. Whereupon Tamerlane one
day passing by him, said, I marvel that none of thy sons, nor friends either
come to see thee, or to entreat for thee; it must needs be that thou have evil
deserved of them, as thou have of others. But what think thou, if I should
set thee at liberty, would they receive thee again as their Lord and
Sovereigne, or not? To whom Bajazet stoutly answered, Were I at liberty thou
should Bajazet's Pride.
quickly see that I neither want courage nor means to revenge all my wrongs,
and to make the disobedient to know their duties better. This proud answer made
Tamerlane keep a stricter hand over him.

In this great war the Sultan of Egypt (as we said before) had aided Bajazet,
which Tamerlane took in so evil part that he resolved Tamerlanes Justice.
revenge: for as to his friends he was most kind and courteous, so to his
enemies most terrible and dreadful. Yet before his departure he restored to the
poor Mohammedan Princes that had fled to him for refuge, all their ancient
inheritance, with something more out of his bounty; as also* he did diverse
Cities and Countries of Natolia to the Greek Emperor for the yearly tribute of
four hundred thousand Ducats of gold, and eight hundred thousand Franks of
silver. And so having enriched He marches toward Egypt.
his Army with the spoils of the Ottoman Empire, he turned his forces against
the Egyptian Sultan, and so passing through Caramania, he entered into Syria,
then part of the Sultans Kingdom; where near unto Aleppo (before yielded to
him) there was fought betwixt them a great and mortal battle, the Sultan having
in his Army a hundred thousand foot, and seventy four thousand horse; whereof
there were thirty thousand Mameluks, accounted the best horsemen in the world.
In which battle Axalla with the Avantguard of Tamerlane's Army was hardly
distressed, and Axalla himself taken, but presently rescued by Tamerlane, who
had he not by his coming on with fresh forces speedily restored His battle with
the Sultan.
the battle, that day was like enough to have put a period to his fortunes: But
victory after a long and cruel fight (wherein were eighty thousand of both
sides slain) inclining to Tamerlane, the Sultan sled, Tamerlane pursuing him
for the space of three leagues. After this victory Tamerlane dividing his Army,
sent Axalla with The Sultan beaten, flies.
forty thousand horse, and fifty thousand foot to pursue the Sultan along the
Seacoast of Arabia; who making diverse Alts with four thousand horse to have
stopped Axalla, who having the smallest forces, followed him the nearest,
whilst Tamerlane with sixty thousand horse, and two hundred thousand foot
marched along the Seacoast, having all the Cities as he went surren dred to
him: only the strong City of Damasco refused to receive him, whereinto the
Sultan had put the Prince Zamudzen with a strong Garrison, who did what might
be to defend the same, but all in vain: For Tamerlane having by battery
overthrown a great part of the wall, took the City by storm, only the Castle
yet remained which was accounted impregnable: Damasco taken by storm.
but yet at the taking of the City such a multitude pressed into it, as was not
possible for them long to subsist; therefore in a short time being pinched with
hunger, and many already dead, the rest upon promise of their lives offered to
yield; But Tamerlane would not receive them to mercy to make them sensible what
it was to hold out against him: So that most of them dying of famine, the rest
yielded at pleasure, and were most of them put to the sword for their
obstinancy; which severity of his caused all the Cities within the space of
thirty leagues to bring their keys to him in token of their submission, whom
he no way molested, otherwise then in Tamerlane goes to Jerusalem.
contributing to the charge of his Army. From thence he turned directly toward
Jerusalem, at which time they of the City had turned out the Sultans Garrison,
as had almost all they of Judea, submiting themselves unto Tamerlane: At
Chorazin was a Garrison of six thousand, who at first pretended to defend the
place: but when they perceived that Tamerlane was resolved to have it, they
submitted, and found mercy. There Tamerlane left a Garrison of his own to
repress the Mameluks, who with frequent incursions His Piety.
troubled his Army. Himself with some of his horsemen rode to Jerusalem to
visit the Sepulcher so much reverenced of all Nations: by the inhabitants he
was joyfully received, and having sought out all the antiquities of that
ancient City, he would be conducted to all the places where Christ had
preached, and coming to the Sepulcher, he gave there many rich gifts, to the
great content of all, only the Jews much blamed him for so doing, but he
reguarded them not, calling them the accursed of God: There had he news that
the Sultan having gathered together all his forces, was fortifying his Cities
in Egypt, especially Alexandria, and the Grand Caier; whereupon Tamerlane
commanded his Army to march toward Egypt to Damietta, which strong City he
thought not good to leave behind him, though by some he was persuaded so to
do, for that it was thought impregnable both by reason of the strong Castle,
and great Garrison placed therein He marches into Egypt.
by the Sultan: But he whose fortune nothing could hinder, would needs go
thither: And having commanded Axalla to attempt it, followed himself after with
the rest of his Army.

Now Axalla having summoned the City, declared to the inhabitants (who were
most of them Christians) the mildness, and courtesy of Tamerlane, as also who
himself, and of what Religione he was; causing many of his Greek Captains to
speak to them, and to tell them what misery they endured under the Moors and
Mameluks, which so far prevailed with them that they resolved to adventure
their lives to put the Mameluks out of the City; And the night after taking
Arms, made themselves Damiettataken.
Masters of one quarter of the City, opening one of the gates to Axalla,
whereby he entering, put all the Mameluks to the sword, or took them prisoners,
and so became Master of that strong City: Whereof Tamerlane hearing, hoped by
so prosperous a beginning to find an happy end of his wars in Egypt. For he
knew that the haven of Damietta might furnish him with victuals out of all
parts of Greece, as the Emperor Emmanuel had promised him, and wherein he
nothing failed him. Then did Tamerlane enter the City, leaving therein a
Garrison of two thousand of the Emperor of Greece his soldiers, with a
Governor, of whom he took an oath for their obedience. And having staid a while
at Damietta, he Tamerlane marches to Caire.
caused his Avantguard to march toward Alexandria, and having passed over the
River, he suddenly turned directly toward Grand Caire, to the great
astonishment of the Sultan, who provided for the defense of Alexandria as
nearest to the enemy: But understanding this news, used such diligence that he
entered into Caire with forty thousand horse, and sixty thousand foot, even as
Tamerlanes Army approached to it. By this unexpected coming of that Sultan, the
great City that before was ready to have revolted, was again confirmed in his
obedience to the great prejudice of Tamerlanes affairs: For to remain long
before it was impossible through want of victuals for so great an Army in an
enemies Country. Yet this discouraged not Tamerlane from approaching to it, and
with all his Army to encamp near unto the same, having caused a great trench to
be made for the security of Caire besieged.
his horsemen, and therein to lodge his Army more safely: during which time he
caused diverse attempts to be made, as well to try the enemies confidence, as
to see how the people of the City, especially the slaves (which in that
populous City are in great numbers) were affected toward him, who indeed were
glad to see the state of his Army, and the proud Mameluks still put to the
worst, but farther stirred not. During this siege, he thought good one day to
draw forth his Army before the City, to try whether the enemy had any mind
to come to a battle; as also to view his own forces, and so indeed to seek
occasion to fight, hoping that if the Sultan should come forth with his Army,
some revolt might happen at the same time in the City, as well by the slaves,
unto whom by secret Spies, he had promised liberty, as by the Citizens
Tamerlanes Policy.
themselves, who were much discontented with the insolency of the Mamelukes,
and to whom Tamerlane by the same Spies had made it known that he came not to
hurt them, but to deliver them from the tyranny of his, and their enemies: But
standing thus in battle array, none stirred out of the City, neither was there
any tumult raised within, according as he expected: For the Sultan being
plentifully provided with all things in that rich City, resolved to weary out
Tamerlane by lying still, and not to put all to the hazard of a Battle.
Tamerlane perceiving his design, yet resolved not to depart till he was
victorious; whereupon he thought fit also to attempt him in his greatest
strength, and in the heart of his greatest City, though it could not be done
without great hazard, such confidence had he in the valor, and multitude of
his Army. Now his purpose was first to take one of the Cities (for Caire is
divided into three) and therein encamping himself by little and little to
advance forwards as he could find opportunity. Upon this resolution he Cair
stormed.
commanded a strong assault to be given, and having conducted his footmen to
the place chosen by him for the onset (for the City was not walled, but only
fortified with ditches and trenches) he commanded the Prince of Thanais with
fifty thousand men to begin the assault even in the face of the enemy, which
he most valiantly performed, which occasioned a great and terrible fight Axalla
in the mean time deeming (as the truth was) that the Sultan had drawn the
greatest part of his forces to that place, fetched a compass about, and in
another part of the City, with small resistance passed the trenches, where he
presently left thirty thousand men to fill up the ditches, thereby to make way
for the Horsemens entrance, himself with the rest, advancing Axalla enters.
forwards against twenty thousand sent by the Sultan to oppose his farther
passage, the Prince of Thanais being at the same time almost beaten back by the
Mamelukes: But the ditches being presently levelled, ten thousand horsemen
entered, who charged upon the backs of the Mameluks, where the Sultan himself
was; they were likewise seconded by ten thousand more sent in in by Tamerlane,
himself following after with all his power: Caire taken.
Hereupon the Sultan retreated into a second strength which he had made in the
next City.

This fight endured full seven hours, wherein were slain of the Sultans men,
above sixteen thousand, and of Tamerlane's between seven and eight thousand.
Tamerlane being well contented that he had dislodged his enemy, and gained one
of the Cities, caused a retreat to be sounded, hoping the next day to win all
the rest, as indeed he did. For the next morning the Prince of Thanais storming
the trenches in one part, as Axalla did in an other; the Sultan after a great
fight finding himself hardly pressed The Sultan flies.
by the obstinate enemy, and unable longer to hold out, retreated, abandoning
the City, and encamping himself along the River Nilus, resolving to retire to
the City of Alexandria his second strength, and only refuge, which Tamerlane
suspecting, followed after him with his Horsemen, (who only were in order) and
Tamerlane pursues.
some few foot hardly drawn from the City, which their fellows were in
plundering, Tamerlane promising them both to regard, and reward their good
service. Against these the Sultan upon a narrow cawse way, had opposed twelve
or fifteen thousand men to favor his passage, who being of his best Soldiers,
maintained their ground stoutly, the place being much for their advantage; yet
at length their enemies still increasing, and pressing hard upon them, they
were forced to cast themselves into A brave retreat of the Mameluks.
the great River, and made a most honorable retreat* every man having his
weapon in one hand, and swimming with the other hand to the farther bank. The
Sultan flying with about eighteen thousand Horse (the rest being either
drowned, or dispersed) is said to have comforted his flying men, by telling
them, they were not men, but gods that had vanquished them.

Diverse of the Mameluks that were taken prisoners, being Fidelity rewarded.
brought before Tamerlane were by him courteously used, and asked if they would
be content to serve him, seeing their Master was sled and gone? This they all
utterly refused, whom notwithstanding for their fidelity, Tamerlane set at
liberty to go again to their Master, being no less desirous to be admired by
his enemies for his goodness and bounty, then to be feared for his force and
valor.

The wonderful wealth of this so great, and famous a City, Caire plundered.
became a prey to his Soldiers, who for the space of twenty four hours had
the spoil thereof: At the end whereof every man was straightly charged by open
Proclamation to retire to his quarters. Tamerlane would not suffer any of the
Citizens to be taken Prisoners, and such as were, he released, and so leaving
ten thousand good Soldiers, with many others that followed his Camp, for the
guard of the City, and taking with him all such persons, as he thought might
hurt him, he caused his Army Tamerlane goes to Alexandria.
to pass over the River, and to follow the Sultan to Alexandria, that so his
victory might be completed.

Axalla hasting before with the Avantguard to hinder the Sultan from gathering
up his forces together: The rest of the Army was conducted by the Prince of
Thanais. Tamerlane himself with an infinite number of Boats, and many Soldiers
to attend him, went by water, greatly delighting to behold that fair River of
Nilus, sometimes running with a swift course; other sometimes very calm, and
scarce moved. The Citizens of Alexandria hearing of his coming, and fearing the
issue, besought the Sultan to compassionate their condition, and to withdraw
himself into Lybia; whither Tamerlane could not follow him by reason of the
barrenesse of the Country: Resolving for their parts to submit to fortune, and
to do as the time required; yet promising in heart to remain his, and to make
the same to appear to him, so soon as occasion should be offered. Hereupon the
The Sultan flies.
Sultan, seeing all things desperate, determined to retire, yet hoping that
time might bring a change, for that Tamerlane's numerous Army could not long
remain there: And so departing out of Alexandria with tears standing in his
eyes, he often said, that God was angry with him and his people, so that he
must of necessity suffer the fatal overthrow of his estate: yet for his own
part he had done as much as in him lay, according to the duty of his place,
and to satisfy the expectation that the world had of him, for the upholding of
the same, yet he hoped to return again, and to deliver his people from that
bondage, which for the present they were necessitated to submit to.

Tamerlane coming to Alexandria (before yielded to Axalla) staid there a great
while, sending Axalla to pursue the Sultan; Axalla pursues him.
being much grieved that he could not get him into his hands, and therefore he
still feared that some Innovation would be raised by him after his departure,
which made him to deal the more hardly with them he suspected to favor him.
Now the bruit of these victories having with Axalla passed into Lybia, brought
such a fear, not only upon the Countries adjoining to these Conquests, but
also upon all Africa, supposing (that Tamerlane followed with his Army) that
twenty two of the Moorish Many Kings submit to Tamerlane.
Kings sent their Ambassadors to offer their subjection and obedience: Of the
nearest of which Kings Tamerlane took Hostages, but for such as were more
remote, he contented himself with their faith given, and with other Testimonies
of their good wills. Axalla having long followed the Sultan, who like a man
forsaken of fortune, still fled before him, seeing all his labor Tamerlane
desires to return home.
lost, returned to Alexandria. And Tamerlane after his long travel and pains
taken, was now more desirous then ever to return into his own Country; The
rather being moved thereunto by the earnest request of his Wife, much longing
for his return: He had news also of the sickness of the old Emperor of
Tartarie, his father in law; and besides age it self began to bring unto him a
desire of rest. With his did the desires of the Soldiers also well agree, who
were now weary of running so many and diverse adventures. His only stay was,
that he expected the coming of Calibes, an old and faithful servant of his, He
secures his new conquests.
whom for his good desert he made choice of to govern all these his new
conquests in Egypt and Syria: A great honor indeed it was, but not too great
for him that had so well deserved. And indeed Tamerlane was always so mindful
of the good deserts of his faithful servants, that he needed not by others to
be put in remembrance of them, were they never so far off, as now was
Calibes, who at this time was with a third part of the Army making way for him
along the River Euphrates, for the conquest of Mesopotamia and Persia, whose
coming was longed for with great devotion by the whole Army, which was now
very desirous to return; but this expectation of theirs was not long delayed,
for Calibes being sent for, came speedily to Alexandria, where the whole Army
was by Tamerlane's command now rendevouzed.

Upon the coming of Calibes, Tamerlane made the Prince of Zamalzan (a man of
great reputation) Governor of that Calibes made Governor.
place, as Lieutenant General under Calibes, whom Tamerlane (as was said
before) had made his Viceroy over all Egypt and Syria, together with the
Countries newly conquered in Lybia and Barbary: He gave him also six thousand
Horse, and ten thousand foot to assist him therein: And so leaving Alexandria,
he took Calibes along with him to the great City of Caire, there taking the
best order he could for the securing of his new conquests: He left with him
forty thousand Horse, and fifty thousand foot: And having sufficiently
instructed him, how he would have those Kingdoms governed, dismissed him, not
like a servant, but a companion, being very sorry to leave him destitute of his
presence: So setting forwards with his Army, conducted by the Prince Tamerlane
goes to Jerulem.
of Thanais, Tamerlane with a few of his train, turned again aside to
Jerusalem, where he daily visited the Sepulcher of Christ (whom he called the
God of the Christians) viewing the ruins of Solomon's Temple, which he much
admired, and at Jerusalem the seat of David's Kingdom, and of that great
Solomon, grieving that he could not see them in their former beauty: and to
show his devotion and favor to this City, he commanded it to be free from all
Garrisons and Subsidies, and so giving great gifts to the Monasteries, he
departed from thence to Damasco; which great City, for that it was infected
with the opinions of Iezides (accounted an Arch-Heretick amongst the
Mussulmen*) as also evill-affected to his proceedings, he caused it to be
rased, and the bones of Iezides the false Prophet to be dug up and burnt,
and his Sepulcher which before by his Disciples was much honored) to be filled
with dung; and so marching on, and blasting the world before him, being
victorious which way so ever he turned, he at last passed over the River
Eupbrates, where he conquered Mesopotamia, with the great City of Babylon, and
all the Kingdom of Persia, and so at last laden with the spoils of the world,
and eternized for ever in his fame, he returned to Samercand, the famous place
of his birth, and glorious seat of his Empire.

Now had Bajazet (a little before one of the greatest Princes on earth, and now
the scorn of Fortune, and byword to the world)* with great impatiency lien two
years in most miserable thraldom, for the most part shut up in an iron Cage,
like a dangerous wild beast: and having no better means to end his loathed
life, violently dashed out his brains against the bars of the iron grate
wherein he was enclosed, and so dyed about the year of our Lord 1399. His dead
body at the request of his son Mahomet, was by Tamerlane sent to Asprapolis,
from which it was conveyed to Prusa, and there lies buried in a Chapel, built
for the purpose without the City Eastward: where also are interred the bodies
of his best beloved wife Despina, and of his eldest son Erthogrul, and in
another little Chapel hard by, lies Bajazet's Character.
buried his brother Iacup, whom he had murdered in the beginning of his
reign. This Bajazet had some virtues, which were much obscured by his
choleric and waiward nature, which made him to exceed in cruelty and pride: He
was also very covetous; which qualities made him indeed much feared, but little
beloved of his soldiers and men of war, by whom therefore in his greatest need
he was forsaken. He used commonly to say, That his treasures were his childrens
meat, and not his soldiers pay; which by way of reproach was by a common
soldier cast in his teeth, when he raged to see himself by them forsaken in
that great battle against Tamerlane, telling him as he fled, That he ran not
away, but went to seek his pay, wherewith to provide his children bread.

Tamerlane, as we said before, having conquered Persia, used his victory so
mildly, that as long as he lived the people of that Country were always much
affected to him; which served him greatly, as well for the keeping of Syria, as
the Sultan of Egypts Empire: In his own Country he was received with all
Triumphs, and expressions of joy that might be; the chiefest prisoners marching
before him, and wheresoever he passed, the people assembled themselves by
thousands, praising and singing his victories. The Emperor having spent a
month or two in Feasts and Triumphs Tamerlane's devotion.
according to his accustomed devotion, he vowed a Church and Hospital unto God,
the most magnificent that might be devised: and to beautify his City of
Samercand, he searched out all sorts of Handicrafts-men, intending to make it
as large again as it was, and one of the stateliest Cities in the world: he
peopled He enlarges Samercand.
it also with so many several Nations as he had brought along with him, unto
whom he gave liberty to build houses, distributing money unto them to do the
same, giving them also all kind of privileges, and immunities for their
encouragement therein: He caused also the streets to be plotted out, and in one
corner of it he built his Church and Hospital. His next care was to preserve
the good will and love of his famous soldiers, whose names he caused to be
Registered in a general Muster-Role, which he kept by him, and daily conferred
honors and rewards His love to his soldiers.
upon them (they not thinking of it) in recompense of their former good
services: thinking that day lost wherein he did not some good. Then did he
declare the death of the old Emperor to his Council (of which he had received
private intelligence) and forgot no Ceremony due unto his honor, publicly
expressing the He goes toward Quinsay.
grief he had conceived for his death, Then did he with his ordinary Court
consisting of forty thousand horse, and sixty thousand foot, set forwards
toward Quinsay, where his Emperess was. And when he came to Cambalu, he had
intelligence of a battle fought by Odmar against the King of China's Captain
General, and how he had pursued his victory, having taken three or four great
and Odmars victory in China.
rich Cities, and that the Chinois did again desire peace Hereupon he sent them
these Articles; That the King of China should pay all the areares of his
Tribute; That he should come in person to do his homage, acknowledging himself
a Vassal of his Empire; That he should deliever up to him all his Cities saving
three such as the Emperor should nominate: That he should pay all the charges
of the war, because he had broken the peace; which Tamerlane gives him his
sister in marriage.
performed, things should be restored to the same state they were in before the
war. And to gratify Odmar, he sent to him with all magnificence one of his
sisters to be his wife.

When he first entered into Cambalu, he was received with all the expressions of
joy that might be, whereupon he restored to them their privileges which he had
taken from them for their Rebellion with Calix. The Emperess being informed of
his being there (leaving Prince Axalla to govern at Quinsay) came to him: So
that he remained there near two months, giving order for all his affairs, the
rather because it was near to mount Althay, where the Scythian Emperors use to
be buried: and so causing The old Emperor buried.
the body of the old Emperor to be brought thither, himself conducted it with
all pomp, honoring not only the body, but all that he had loved in the world;
and though it was not the custom for women to assist at Funerals, yet he took
his Emperess along with him, who went near unto the Corpse, till they came to
the place where it was interred amongst his predecessor. After these Ceremonies
finished, he returned to Cambalu, where he spent the winter in Tilts,
Tournaments, Hunting, and such like recreations: The rather because this place
was near to China, whereby he had the fitter opportunity to hear how affairs
passed there, purposing to go thither in person the next winter, if Odmar that
summer did not make an end of the wars: and if the King of China did not submit
himself to his obedience. The mark he shot at now being only to keep that which
by his valor he had won, desiring to spend the rest of his life in reaping the
fruits of his hard travels, and former labors.

Now Prince Axalla governed at Quinsay, as well to the great contentment of the
soldiery, as of the inhabitants, who out of their abundant love to the
Emperor, requested Prince Axalla to write importunately to him, that his son
might be brought up amongst them, which at Axalla's request he consented to,
making him in the absence of his son, the Governor of Quinsay, from His son
brought up at Quinsay.
Cambalu even to the Sea, which Country contained in it about three hundred
Cities, besides an infinite number of villages: all which was formerly under
the government of the old Emperor: He delivered also into his charge the
Government of his son.

Shortly after the King of China came to his Court, according The King of China
comes to him.
to the Covenants offered to him, where he once again swore obedience to the
Emperor, who showed him his greatness, the more to make him stand in awe: for
he knew that this Barbarian would keep no promise longer then it should stand
with his own interest. This King of China was astonished to behold so many
soldiers, and the Country so well replenished with people: and above all, that
they used so little curiosity and riches in their apparel, especially wondering
that the Emperor himself was appareled in mean cloth of one color, without
curiosity.

Shortly after Tamerlane went to Quinsay, and by the way Tameilane's plain
apparel.
was met by Prince Axalla, and all the chief Lords and Citizens, who
entertained him with all the magnificence that might be. This City of Quinsay
was the fairest, and one of the richest in the world, and of the most wonderful
situation, being divided by Quinsai described. It was one hundred miles in
compass.
many channels of water, upon which are framed wonderful and stately buildings,
having also an infinite number of Bridges: It abounds with all kind of Spices,
and Merchandises in great quantity. The Citizens presented the Emperor with
many rare things, judged to be worth two millions in gold, with great variety
of strange and excellent things. Then did the Emperor call for his son that was
there educated, who was now seven years old. He forbade that thence forward
they should suffer him to His directions about the breeding of his son.
wear any thing on his head, and hung a bough about his neck, saying, That they
which from their birth were called to Sovereignty, should be used both to cold,
and heat, and should be exercised to arms betimes, and not be brought up idly,
and delicatly: reprehending those which brought him up for using him so
tenderly, asking them if they meant to make a woman of of his son? They
replying that he was tender. If he be not born (said he) to be strong and
valiant, he will not be worthy to succeed me, for he must not be an effeminate
Prince that must preserve the Parthian Empire. About this time his Emperess His
second son born.
was brought to bed of another son at Samarcand, for joy whereof he made
Feasts, with Tiltings and pastimes fifteen days Recreations rightly used*
together. Then did he visit all the Sea-Townsineer to Quinsay, hunting all
manner of Games: yet saying often, That the recreations which he used, were
only helps to ease him in the pains of his public affairs which God had
called him to. And when Prince Axalla told him that that City was a fit place
for his abode. His prudence,
O my friend (said he) it is not so: For its a Maxim, that the Lord of this
great City must not come to it above once in ten years, and when he is here, he
must temper his actions, as if he were upon a stage, with gravity and a good
grace before the people, who are apt to receive good or evil impressions
according as their Prince deporteth himself.

Having settled his affairs in that part of his Empire, he returned His return
to Samarcand. His Justice.
to Samercand, where three times a week he administered Justice publicly unto
the meanest of his subjects as well as to the greatest, which made him much
beloved of all over whom he did command. On other days he gave secret
audience, and disposed of the affairs of his estate which were concluded daily
in his presence. In his counsel he used such severity that none durst deal
untruly, or passionately in his presence. Yet showed he such courteousness in
his conversation that he was both beloved and feared of his people. He never
changed his servants except they committed some great faults against him. All
the servants of the His love to his servants.
late Emperor his Uncle, he never changed one of them, but increased their
pensions, making them sencible of his liberality in that change: The like
bounty he used to strangers, thereby to oblige His bounty.
them to him. He drew great store of money yearly from the Muscovite by way of
tribute, which yet he distributed in the same Country to maintain his
authority there, winning those to him, who otherwise might have hurt him. He
had great care of his revenues, wherein he was so expedite that in one hours
space he could see his estate from three months to three months, together
with his ordinary and extraordinary expenses, they were presented His frugality.
to him so well digested.

But after all his public affairs so well managed, and his private
businesses so well ordered, sickness arrested, and death conquered this great
Conqueror, leaving his Empire to Sautochio His death.
his eldest son now ninteen years old, who was proclaimed Emperor within two
hours after his fathers death.

Tamerlane from his childhood was well instructed in the Arabian His Character.
learning, wherein he was very studious, insomuch as when they thought him to
be in the Bathes, wherein they are very curious in that Country, being their
chiefest delight, he was retired to the contemplation and study of heavenly
things. He had within his eyes such a Divine beauty, and radiancy full of
majesty, that one could hardly endure the sight of them without closing of his
eyes, so that some that talked with him, and beheld him were stricken dumb for
the present, which caused him with a comely modesty to abstain from looking
upon them that talked with him. All the rest of his visage was courteous, and
well proportioned: He had but little hair on his chin: He wore his hair long
and curled, contrary to the custom of his Country men, who used to shave their
heads: He went almost always bareheaded, saying, that his mother came of the
race of Sampson, who therefore advised him to honor long hair. His hair was
of a dusky color inclining somewhat to a Violet, the most beautiful that any
eye could behold. His stature was of a middle sort, somewhat narrow in his
shoulders: He had a fair and strong leg: his bodily strength and agility was
such as none did surpass, and often on Festival days, he made trial of them
with the strongest; yet did he it with such a grace, mixed with humanity, that
he whom he overcame held himself therein most happy, though it was a great
disgrace amongst the Tartarians to be thrown to the ground in wrestling.

In the time of his Wars against the Turks, a Soldier of his Note.
found buried in the ground a great pot of Gold, which he brought to Tamerlane,
who asked him if it had his Fathers stamp upon it; But when he saw that it had
the stamp of the Romans, he would not own, nor meddle with it.

FINIS.
The Errata.
PAge 15. line 16. read Engines for Ensines, p. 21. l. 27. r. famous, p. 24. l.
21. r. to him the Lord, etc. p. 24. l. ult. r. that for the, p. 25. l. 29. r.
Tartarines, p. 28. l. 6. r. the for that, l. 10. r. are for were, l. 33. r. no
for not, p. 29. l. 29. r. siege for besiegers, p. 29. l. 2. r. stayed for stood.


