A DESCRIPTION OF THE Seaventeen PROVINCES Commonly called The Low Countries, (
The Present Stage of Action) AS ALSO OF The Rivers, Cities, Commodities, Strong
Towns, Forts, and other things remarkable therein.

LONDON, Printed for William Birch at the Blew-Bible at the Corner of the
Poultrey, at the lower end of Cheapside 1672.

A Table of the seventeen Provinces, Cities, and Chief Towns which are
Described in this Book.
A general Description of the Low Countries Page 1. Of their Commodities p. 2.
Of their Rivers and Fish p. 3. Of their Channels, and other Waters p. 4. Of
their Forests and Woods p. 6. Of their Fowl and Birdsp. p. 6. The quallities
of the peoplep. p. 6. Of their Arts and Industry p. 7. The Province of Brabant
p. 8. The chief Rivers therein p. 8. The Cities and Towns p. 8. The City of
Lovain described. p. 9. The City of Bruxels. p. 10. Bolduc described. p. 11.
Mastrick described. p. 13. The Province of Lemburg described. p. 15 The
Province of Guelders described. p. 17. Ruermond described. p. 18. Zutphen
described. p. 19. Arnhem described. p. 19. The Province of Over-Issel. p. 22.
Deventer described. p. 23. Swol described. p. 23. Campen described. p. 23.
Vullenhove, described p. 24. The Province of Frisland. p. 24. The Province of
Gromingen. p. 25. 29. Leewarden described. p. 28. The I Will of Schellink. p. 28.
The Province of Holland p. 32. 59, etc. Holland and Zealand. p. 33. Cities and
Towns in Holland. p. 42. Dordrect or Dort described p. 43. Harlem described. p.
43. Delfe described p. 45. Leyden described p. 46. Goud described p. 47.
Amsterdam described p. 48. Einchusen described p. 49. Hoorn described p. 49.
Alcmair described p. 50. Purmerenden described. p. 51. Edam described. p. 51.
Rotterdam Described. p. 54. St. Gertrudenburg. Described. p. 54. Hague
described p. 56 Other Villages in Holland p. 56 Isles belonging to Holland p.
58. Of Voorn, Goerde, Somersdike, Gorendike described p. 58, 59. The Province
and City of Utrecht described p. 61, 62. The Towns belonging to it p. 63. The
Province of Zealand described p. 63. Isles belonging to Zealand p. 64. The
Walled Towns in it p. 65. The Isle of Scowve described p. 66. The other Isles
described ib. Middlebourg described. ib. Veer or Canfeer described p. 67.
Flushing p. 67. Romerswald described p. 68. Ter-Goes described p. 68. The City
of Antwerp described p. 69. The Province of Flanders p. 72. Walled Towns in
Flanders p. 73. Other Towns p. 74. Flanders Flamigant described p. 75. The City
of Gaunt described p. 76. Bruges described p. 78. The City of Ipre described p.
80. Scluse described p. 81. Ostend described p. 82. Neuport described and
Dunkirk p. 84. Berg St. Winnock p. 85. Dam described p. 85. Dixmund described
p. 86. Wern Described p. 86. Bourburg Described p. 86. Gravling Described p.
86. Cassel Described p. 86. Courtray Described p. 86. Oudenard Described p. 87.
Ardenbourg Described p. 87. Middlebourg Described p. 88. Wervick Described p.
88. Merim Described p. 88. Comines Described p. 88. Flanders Gallicant
described p. 89. Lisle described p. 89. Doway described p. 90. Orchies
Described p. 91. Lanoy Described p. 91. Espeney Described p. 91. Armentiers
Described p. 91. Tournay described p. 92. Mortaign described p. 93. St. Amond
Described ib. Flanders Imperial described. ib. Alost Described. p. 94. Country
of Waes. Described. p. 94. Hulst Described. p. 94. Denremond Described. p. 94.
Mount Gerrard Described. p. 94. Bornhem Described. p. 94. Ruplemond described.
p. 95. The Province of Artois described p. 95. Arras described p. 96. St. Omers
described p. 97. Beteene Described p. 98. Air Described p. 98. Bapaulm
Described p. 98. Renty described. p. 99. Heldin described ib: St. Pol described
ib. Perue described ib. Lillers described ib. Lens described ib. Cambray
described p. 100. The Province of Hanault described p. 102 Mons described p.
104. Valenciennes described p. 106. Bouchain described p. 109. Quesnoy
described ib. Conde described ib. Landrecy described ib. Avesnes described ib.
Chimay described ib. Mariembourg described p. 110. Philipvil described ib.
Beaumont described ib. Mauberg described ib. Bavays Vallone ib. Bins described
ib. Reux described ib. Sogny described p. 111. Breinle Comte described ib.
Enguien described ib. Halle described ib. Lesny described ib. Cheur described
ib: Ath Described ib. St. Guislem described ib. Leuse Described ib. The
Province of Luxenburg described. p. 112. Laxenbourg described p. 114. Arlon
described ib. Rodemark described ib. Theonville described ib. Graumackren
described ib. Coning^-Mackren described ib. Bastonack described ib. Mommedi
described p. 115. Neuscastle described ib. Danvillers described ib. Marvil
described ib. St. Vit^ described ib. S^^me described ib. Ivoy described ib.
C^imay described ib. The Province of Namor described. p. 116.
BELGIA: OR THE LOW COUNTRIES. DESCRIBED.
THE Low Countries are seated very comodiously for all the Provinces of Europe.
For Northward it is but 5 or 6 days journey by Sea from Denmark. Southward it
consineth with France, and Lorrain. Eastward with Almain, or Germany. Westward
with England, and Scotland. It Is also commodious for Norway, and Sweden: for a
Ship went from Holland to Norway in 46 hours. From Lisbon its scarce 10 days
Voyage.

The circuit of the Country is about a Thousand Italian Miles, or 34 Flemish
Leagues. In that part of the Low Countries that formerly belonged to the King
of Spain, are contained 208 walled Towns: An hundred and fifty Towns
privileged, as walled Towns: Six thousand three hundred Villages with Parish
Churches, besides a great number of other Villages, and Hamlets.

The Beeves of Frisland and Holland, are very great, and weigh some of them
sixteen hundred pounds. Yea, one there was presented to the Earl of Hockstrait
which weighed two thousand five hundred twenty eight pounds of the Country
weight.

The Ewes in Holland, Frisland, and part of Flanders bring forth 3 or 4 Lambs
at a time, and the Kine often two Calves. The Country brings forth much Mather,
wherewith a great part of Europe is furnished? Wood, and Hemp, and Flaxin great
abundance.

Five principal Rivers are in these Countries: The Rhine, the Meuse, the
Scheld, Haa, and Emms, besides diverse smaller. The Muse affords abundance of
Sturgeons, so big, that some of them weigh 400, and some 420 pounds, and are 12
Foot long of Antwerp measure.

The Muse yeildeth also great store of Salmons, and Salmon Trouts, Lamprayes,
Shads, Congers, Mullets, and diverse other sorts of Fishes, which coming into
fresh Water, become fat, and excellent good.

The Scheld, by reason of the vicinity it has with the mouth of the Meuse,
has diverse sorts of Fishes that come out of the Sea, as Sturgeons, Salmons,
Salmon Trouts, Lamprayes, Turbots, Congers, Shads, Mullets, Soles, etc. besides
which, such an infinite number of fry come out of the Sea, and are taken in
this River, that multitudes of People are relieved therewith.

Besides these Rivers, diverse Channels are cut out, and made navigable by man's
hand, the principal whereof are at Bruxells, Gant, Bruges, and Middlebourg. The
Country has not many Fountains of running water, save in the mountainous part:
But Lakes, Pools, and Marshes many, which both fortify the Country, and furnish
it with Fish.

The Sea arises at Calais in Flanders, in Zealand, and Holland 18 Foot: but
where its pressed into a Straight, as at Bristow, it rises 66 Foot: At St Malo,
and Mount St. Michael in Normandy 80 Foot. The depth of the Sea between Calais
and Dover is 24 Fathom (every fathom 6 foot) Between England and Ireland 23.
Between Wight, and Normandy 28. Near to Sylly 60: and so the nearer the Main
the deeper.

Herrings come out of the Northern Seas in incredible multitudes into our Seas
in August, September, and mid November: But the best are taken from mid-
September, 'till the end of October. The sooner the cold begins, the sooner
they come, and in the greater number. They once compass our Isle of Great
Britain, and so pass into the Northern Ocean. Their course is hard by the
Shore, and they swim gazing where they see any Light, Fire, or humane Creatures.

They have Kings among them, as Bees have, marked on the Head like a Crown, and
are somewhat ruddy, especially upon the Head. The Kings go before them, and
they are followed with an infinite number, which in the Night afar off seem
like Lightning, by reason that their eyes are bright like fire. They feed upon
water only, and dye as soon as they are taken out.

Many Cods are taken in the same Months with the Herrings; and some of them are
above 50 pound weight. Of these two kinds of Fishes they yearly make vast
sums. Salmons are taken at all times of the year in Holland, and Zealand.
These 3 kinds of Fish, yield yearly to them (the Salt deducted) six hundred
thousand pound Sterling.

They have diverse Forests, and Woods, well stored with Red and Fallow Deer,
Goats, Wild Boars, Hares, Conies, Badgers, Wolves, Foxes, etc. whcth yield good
Furrs.

The Fowl in this Country are Partridge, Feasants, Turtle Doves, Quails,
Black-birds, and in brief, all kinds of Fowl, and Birds that be in England,
both Water, and Land Fowl, especially water Fowl in Holland.

The People are valiant, and very skilful Seamen: their Hoyes are excellent
good to brook the Seas, by reason whereof they dispatch their Voyages sooner
than other Nations. They are good Linguists, and very skilful in Merchandise.
They excel in making Woollen cloth, Tapestry, Fustians, Silks, Velvets, etc.
They invented the Art of Painting, and the making of Woollen, and Linen Cloth,
and of Dying.

The Women govern all, both within doors, and without, and make all bargains,
which makes them too too injurious and troublesome. The eldest Daughter is of
the greatest reputation, yet has no larger a Portion than the rest. They marry
Noble with ignoble, young with old, Master and Servant, into strange Towns, and
Foreign Countries.

There are 17 Provinces, Brabant, Lemburg, Luxenburg, Guilders, which are
Dutchies; Flanders, Artois, Heynalt, Holland, Zealand, Namur, and Zutphen,
which are Earldoms; The Marquisat of the sacred Empire, Frisland, Malines,
Utrecht, Over-Issel, and Groningham, which are Seniories. Lothier is a bare
Title, for the Land remains in Lorrain.

The Province of Brabant described.
Brabant is bounded on the North with the Meuse, which severeth it from
Guilderland, and Holland: South with Haynalt, Namurs, and Lieg: East with the
Meuse, which severs it from another part of Guelderland: West, with the Scheld,
which severs it from Flanders, and the Principality of Alost. The air is good,
and most of the Soil fruitful. The length of it from South to North, from
Gemblours to St. Gertrudenbers is *22 Leagues; The breadth from East to West,
from Helmont to Berghes is 20 Leagues. The circuit eighty.

The principal Rivers of Brabant are the Meuse, and the Scheld. Towns walled
are 26, whereof Lovain, Bruxells, Antwerp, and Bosleduc are the chief.
Tilmond, Leewe, and Nevelle are but small. The rest are Arshcot, Bergh, Meghen,
Breda, Die, Maestricht, Steenberg, Lire, Vilvorden, Gemblours, Joudaign,
Hannut, Lamden, Halem, Sichenen, Herentalis, Eindoven, Helmont, and Grave.

Smaller Towns unwalled, yet Market Towns, fair built, and enjoying the
Privileges of Market Towns, are eighteen. Villages with Parish Churches are
seven Hundred.

The City of Lovain described.
Lovain stands by the River of Dele: The air is so temperate that Vines prosper
both within, and without the Town. Its 4 miles compass within the Walls, and
six without. The buildings are beautiful: the Temples, Monasteries, the Church
of St. Peter, and the Public Palace, are sumptuously built. Its of a round
Figure, and has many goodly Gardens, Vallyes, Mountains, Meddows, and Springs
within it. The University was founded Anno Christi 1426. In it are about 20
Colleges, the principal whereof are Lilium, Castrum, Porcus, Falco, and
Trilingue. It has many lesser Towns under the Jurisdiction of it.

The City of Bruxells Described.
Bruxells stands upon the little River Sin: Its of the same bigness with
Lovain. It has 2 Walls about it, between which, toward the East, the Court is
resident. It Is excellently seated for all kind of Commodities, both for
Pleasure, and Profit. There is a goodly Channel made by Art from Bruxells into
the River of Dele, and thence into the Scheld. There are also 5 notable Scluses
for the back Water. In it there are 7 Gates, 7 Churches, 7 Noble Houses: And
the buildings in general are very sumptuous. Here is made great store of Armor,
and excellent Arras, both of Silk, Gold, and Silver. There are in it 52
Occupations, divided into 9 Members, called the 9 Nations. It has under its
jurisdiction Nivelle, and Vilvorden.

Bolduc described.
Bolduc stands upon the River of Deese, but 2 Leagues from the Meuse. It Is a
great Town, strong, well Peopled, rich, and well built. The Cathedral Church is
dedicated to St. John, which is a goodly one, and has a very beautiful Dial
upon it. It Is the fourth principal Town of Brabant. Under the Jurisdiction of
it are 4 Countries, called the four Members, wherein are contained these Towns,
Helmont, Eindovers, Meghen, Ravestein, Grave, and diverse other Villages.

The three small Capital Towns of Brabant are,
Telmont that stands upon the little River Geet; but the Town is now decayed.

Leewe, that stands upon the little Brook Gheef: It Is strong, being a Frontier
against Lieg.

Nevelle, It stands in a fruitful soil, and is full of Quarries of excellent
Stone.

Besides these, there are in Brabant

Arshcot, which stands upon the little River Demere, made a Duchy.

Bergen op Zoom, seated upon a little Hill, by the River Zoom, which passes
through the Town, and half a League thence falls into the Scheld. It Is near to
the Seas, and has a reasonable good Haven, not far from Antwerp.

Hoochstrate, not environed with any Wail, Erected into an Earldom by Charles
the Fifth.

Meghen, stands upon the River of Meuse, An ancient Earldom.

Breda, stands upon the River Merck: Its a good, and a pleasant Town, and in it
is a sumptuous Castle, with double Ditches full of Water: It belongs to the
Prince of Orange.

Die stands upon the River Demere: A good Town, and has two Colleges of
Canons in it.

The City of Mastrick described.
Mastrick is cut through, not in the midst, but on one side by the Meuse. There
is a goodly Bridge of Stone built over the River. The lesser Part of it makes,
as it were, an Angle, which is called by the Name of Vich: This part belongs to
the Principality of Liege: But the chief Body of the Town is under the
Low Countries. It Is a very fair and strong Town, and has two Colleges of
Canons in it, and in one of them the Duke of Brabant is a Canon. The whole
compass thereof is about 4 English miles. Round about the Walls runs a deep
Ditch: The Earth about it is loose, and maniable: yet is it not peopled
answerable to the compass of the Walls, but a great part of it is void ground,
especially toward the Walls, which notwithstanding are well provided with
Platforms.

Steenbergh, is now decayed, but was sometime a Town of great power and
importance, with a goodly Haven.

Lire stands upon the little River Nethe. It Is a strong Town, both by Nature
and Art.

Vilvorden stands upon the River Sin: The Town is strong, and has a Castle
in it.

Gemblours, has an Abbey in it, and a famous Library.

There are also Jondoign, Hannut, Landen, Halen, which stands upon the little
River of Geet: Sichenen* upon the River Demere; Hentalls upon the River Nethe:
Eindoven upon the Brook Dommele. Helmont upon the River Ade: And Grave upon the
River Meuze: all walled Towns: other Villages are omitted.

Ravestien stands on the left side of the River of Maze. Its a good little
Town, with a Castle in it.

The Province of Lembourg Described.
Lembourg stands upon the River of Weser beyond the Meuze, in which is found
the Stone called Coperas, which being incorporated with Brass makes Latin.
There is also much Iron, and some Lead.

Walkenbourg is a reasonable Town, having a large Territory and Jurisdiction:
It Is 2 Leagues from Mastrick.

Dalem is a little Town with a Castle.

Rode-le-duc is a little ancient Town with an old Castle.

Carpen is a great Village with a Collegiate Church, and a strong Castle near
it.

Malins stands upon the River of Dele, which passes through the Town, and ebbs
and flows a League above it. It is a goodly Strong Town, because it may be
drowned almost on all sides. In it are 7 Parish Churches, and a Monastery of
about 16 hundred Nuns.

Heyst stands on an Hill, and has 7 Boroughs at the foot of the Hill, all
pertaining to this Village.

Horn is a Castle near to the Meuse, not far from Ruermond, and has a goodly
Jurisdiction near unto the Castle gives Name: And Wiert is a Town belonging to
it, beautified with a goodly Castle.

The Province of Guelders described.
Guelders is bounded on the North with Friesland, and the Zuiderzee: South with
the Meuse (which divides it from Brabant) and with Gulirland: East with the
Rhine, and Cleavland: and West with Holland, and the Bishopric of Utrecht. The
Country is flat, having but few Hills, but many pleasant Woods, and store of
Corn, and Cattle.

It has two and twenty walled Towns, whereof the chief are Nimegue, Ruermond,
Zutphen, and Arnem. The other walled Towns are, Hatten, Elburch, Harderwick,
Wagheningen, Tiel, Bomel, Bronchorst, Doesburg, Doetecum, Isheerenberg, Lochem,
Grol, Bredervoerde, Ghelder, Stralen, Venloo, Wachtendonck, and Erkelens.

Towns unwalled, yet privileged as walled Towns are, Kepple, Burg, Ghent,
Batemburg, Montfort, and Echt. In it are above three hundred Villages with
Parish Churches.

Nimegue stands upon that branch of the Rhine that is called Whael, where its
larg, and deep. Its a fair Town, strong, rich, and well peopled. It has a very
fair, and ancient Castle, with an excellent Prospect round about.

Ruermond described.
Ruermond stands upon the very point of the River Ruer, where it, and the Maze
meet. Its a beautiful, strong, and well-peopled City: The country about it is
very fruitful. Under the jurisdiction of it are these Towns; Venloo, a strong
Town, Guelder, Stralen, Watchtendonck, and Erkelens, which are all Walled
Towns; Montfort, Echt, and Niewerstat, Buroughs built like Towns; as also
Kessel, Midler, and Criekenbeeck* A League from Rucrmond is the fair Village
Kessel, with a strong Castle in it.

Zutphen described.
Zutphen is situate upon that branch of the Rhine that is called Issel, and the
River Berkel runs through it, which there empties it self into Issel: Its well
built. Its the third principal Town in Guelderland. Under its jurisdiction are
Doesbourg, Doeterum, Lochem, Grol, Bredervoerd, and Bronkhurst, all walled
Towns. Zutphen has a great Fort on the side opposite to the River, and two
lesser ones for the better defense of it.

The City of Arnem described.
Arnem stands upon the Rhine. Its a well built Town, fair, and larg. Its chief
Town of Guelders, and the Veluwe, which is but a little Country, but exceeding
fruitful, especially abounding with Fish, being compassed about with
Zuiderzee, Rhine, and Issel. It abounds also with all kinds of Venison. Under
its jurisdiction are Wagheninghen: Hattem which is a strong town; Hardwick, and
Elbourg, all walled Towns, with diverse Villages.

Other walled Towns are these. Hattem which stands upon Issel, a great, and
strong Town. Elbourg which stands upon Zuiderzee. Hurderwick, which also stands
upon Zuiderzee: Wagheninghen, which stands upon the Rhine: Tiel, which is a
strong Town, and stands upon Whaal: Bomel, which also stands upon Whaal, and is
a fair, and strong place: Bronchorst which stands upon Issel; Doesbourgh, which
stands at the entry of Fossa Brusiana into the River Issel, a good Town and
well peopled: Doetecum, which stands upon the old Issel: Tserenberg, a good
Town: Locchem which stands upon Berkel: Groel, etc.

Verloo stands upon the Meuze, Its a good, and a strong Town: Wachtendonk
stands upon the River Niers: Erkelens is a reasonable good Town. All these are
walled, and stand in Guelderland. Towns unwalled are, Keppel, and Bourk, both
which stand upon the old Issel: Ghend, which is near to the Whaal: Battenbourg
which stands upon the Meuze: Montfort, a very strong Castle: Echt, near to the
pleasant Wood Echterwalt: Culembourg, a good Town standing upon the Leck: Buren
is in the midst of Guelderland, has a strong Castle in it, and under the
jurisdiction of it, a great Country, and many Villages; It stands near to the
River Liugh.

The Province of Overissel described.
Overissel is bounded on the North with West-Frise, and Groninghen: South with
the Country of Zutpheu; East with Westphalia; and West with the Zuiderzee, and
the River Issel. The Country is very plain, and without Hills, very fruitful,
and abounding with Grain. The River Vidre, or Vecht, runs through it. It has
eight walled Towns, namely. Deventer, Swol, Cumpen, Vallenhove, Steenwick,
Hasselt, Oetmarse, and Oldezeel. Other Towns of importance, though unwalled,
are, Meppel, Theelmuyden, Coevorden, Hardemberg, Omme, Almeloe* Goer,
Diepnehem, Delden, and Enseede. There are in it about a hundred Villages.

Deventer described.
Deventer stands upon the River Issel: Its a very strong, and well fortified
place, larg, fair, well built, and well peopled. Its the Metropolitan of the
whole Country.

Swol described.
Swol stands upon a little River that runs into the Vidre. Its a very strong
Town, fortified with a double Ditch, and strong Rampers.

Cumpen described.
Cumpen stands at the entrance of Issel into Zuiderzee, and is comprehended in
the Country of Overissel: Its a very fair, and a larg Town.

Vallenhove described.
Vallenhove stands upon the Zuiderzee: Its a good Town, and served very well
with all sorts of Victuals. The other Towns and Villages are not worth naming,
save only Ghelmuyden, which stands upon the very mouth of the Vidre, and has a
strong Castle in it.

The Province of Frise-land described.
The River Embs divides East-Friesland, which belongs to Upper Germany, from
West-Friesland, which appertains to the Lower: And as it grows nearer to the
Sea, so it enlarges it self, that the Mouth thereof makes a Gulf. Here is the
City of Embden seated, one of the most considerable Towns of all the Maritine
Parts, by reason of the frequency of People, and opportunity of Commerce, which
is much helped by the Haven thereof, being held to be one of the most
commodious in all the North.

The Flemish-Friesland makes two Provinces. That which joins upon Germany is
called Groninghen, from the City of the same Name. A City very well Peopled,
and suspiciously seated, being the chiefest Key of those Confines. It is seated
very low, as is its sister Province, which retains the Name of Friesland. In
Winter the Fields stand full of Water, and there is no coming to their
Habitations but by their Banks. In Summer the Land lies dry, and yields great
store of Pasturage. You would say, that in those parts, the Sea is
interchangably turned into the Land, and the Land into the Sea. By reason of
the low Situation, and great humidity there are no Woods in the Country, nor
almost any sort of Trees that may serve for firing: But where Nature is therein
wanting, the Inhabitants make it good by their Industry. For they make use of
Turfs cut out of the Earth and dried in the Sun, instead of Wood: These are the
Woods of Friesland, and the usual fire of the Inhabitants. In diverse other
parts of Flanders they suffer the same wants, and with the same industry
provide against them.

Frise anciently was a Kingdom, and reached from the Mouth of the Rhine into
Denmark: but that which we here describe is VVest-Friesland: The other toward
the River Visurgis, is called East-Friese.

VVest-Friese has North and West the Ocean Sea: South, Zuiderzee, and the
Country of Overissel: East it has East-Friseland. Under its Signiory are many
Isles adjoining unto it, the principal whereof are Schelnick, and Ameland, in
which are diverse Villages.

There are no Rivers in this Country save only Ems, and Lauwers, but Issel, and
Vidre are near to it: There are very many great Channels throughout the
Country, made as well for transportation, as for draning of the waters, which
otherwise would overflow all. For its a Marish Country, flat, and full of
Waters: the River Ems severs it from Westphalia. They have small store of
Grain, but numbers of Cattle, and Turfe is their fuel: but the poorer People
burn Cow Dung dried in the Sun. Many of their Kine bring two Calves a piece,
and their Ewes two or three Lambs, yea, sometimes four at a fall. They have
also store of good Horses.

This Country is divided into three principal Counties: The County of Ostergoe,
the County of VVestergoe, and the County of the seven Forests. All of them
contain Walled Towns, and others enjoying the like privileges, being Rampered
with Trenches and Ditches, eleven namely, Leewarden, Doccum, Franiker,
Bolswaerd, Sneck, Ilst, Slotem, Harlinghen with a Castle, VVorkum, Hindelopen,
and Straveren. There are in it four hundred and ninety Villages.

Leewarden described.
Leewarden is seated two Leagues from Doccum: Its a good, and a great Town,
having a strong Castle in it. Franiker is a good Town, and a University: Of the
rest there is nothing remarkable.

The Isle of Schellinck described.
In this Island are some Villages abounding with excellent good Pastures, great
plenty of Cattle, and very good Fish, especially Dog-fish, which are taken in
this strange manner. The men disguise themselves like Beasts, and so go to the
Seaside, at such times as they know the Fishes use to come forth to refresh
themselves with the air upon the shore. Then these disguised men fall a dancing
and leaping; with which sport, the Fishes are so greatly delighted, that
thereby they are drawn far from the Sea, while, in the mean time Nets are
pitched between the Sea and them, which being done, the Dancers throw off their
disguised Apparel, and discover themselves, whereupon the Fishes retire toward
the Sea, and are taken in the Nets.

The Province of Groeninghen described with the City.
Its a very great, rich, and wellbuilt City, under the Diocese of the Bishop of
Munster. It has a great and larg Jurisdiction; and through the City pass
diverse Rivers, in diverse Channels, some made by Art, and some by Nature, which
make the Town very strong.

Groninghen lies upon the utmost bounds of that consine which joins together
the upper and the lower Germany. There is not in that part of the Low Countries
a more Noble City than this, either for the number of Inhabitants, for the
quallity of the Buildings, or for the frequency of Commerce. It forms the Body
of a Province which lies about this City, and which takes the Name, and almost
the whole Government from thence. Its seated low, well provided of a Wall, and
Ditch. It has some works within the Circuit thereof of the Modern fashion; and
the rest, for the most part, are of the ancient. It enjoyes very large
Privileges.

The Province of Holland described.
Holland is as much to say, a hollow Land, because the very foundation of it
stands upon the Water; so that if you go, or ride, the ground will tremble
under you. Its bounded North and West with the Sea: South with the Meuse, and
Brabant: East with the Zuiderzee, and Guelderland. Through it run many arms of
the Rhine, and Meuse, besides a number of Channels made by Art, almost between
every Village of moment.

It has in it a number of Islands made by the Sea, the Rhine, and the Meuse,
of diverse Names, yet all comprehended under the name of Holland. The ground is
so low that they are fain to Fence it, with Dikes, and Rampers, as well against
the Sea, as against almost all the Rivers and Channels into which the Sea Ebbs
and Flows; so that in many places you shall see the Sea above the Land, yet
kept back by these Banks.

This Country has few Trees in it, because the ground is so spungy, that it is
not able to bear the weight of a Tree; and yet less quantity of Fruit and
Grain grows in it for the same reason. Yet have they such plenty of Grain from
the Easterlings, and Denmark, as is not only sufficient for their own use, but
liberally to impart to other Countries. And they have such plenty of Rhenish
Wine from Germany that they spend more than in the Country where it grows. Flax
they have none growing, and yet make more Linen Cloth than any Country in the
World. Wool also they have none of their own, and yet make an infinite number
of Cloths. They have no Timber, and yet spend more in building of Ships, and
Fencing their Dikes then any other Country does.

Their principal home-commodities consists in breeding of Horses, the Kine in
their fat Pastures, and Meddows, and Turfe, whereof they sell an infinite
quantity to other Countries. The Butter and Cheese made in a year in Holland
amounts to above a Million of Crowns. But their greatest commodity comes by
Fishing, and Navigation.

Holland and Zealand described more fully.
Both these Provinces lie on the North and West side of Flanders. In Holland,
the Rhine, and the Meuse; and in Zealand, the Scheld, fall into the Sea, in
such larg Channels, as loosing the condition of Rivers, they seem to carry new
Seas into the Sea. On the contrary, the Ocean first washing the said two
Provinces for a long tract of ground, and turning then (as it were) from a Sea
to a River, it penetrates into each of them by diverse Channels, and hides it
self there in sundry Gulphs. From hence, joining with the Rivers, and together
with them cutting Zealand thorough in many places, it makes thereof many
Islands, and reduces Holland into a Peninsula. And together with these three
aforenamed Rivers, which are the chiefest of all Flanders, there are in Holland
diverse other lesser ones: And, as if Art would contend with Nature, there are
added thereunto an infinite number of Channels cut out by man's hand, which are
made for the greater accommodation of the Country.

There are within Holland also a great number of Lakes, and standing waters; so
as the situation of both these Provinces being well considered, it is to be
questioned whether the space of ground be greater which by the water is won
from the Earth, or from the Water by the Earth. Nor is it less disputable,
whether their Country do more abound with, or be more wanting of those
commodities which men enjoy in other places. For through the condition of their
situation they want both Corn, Wine, Oil, Wool, Wood, Hemp, Flax, and almost
all other commodities and delights which are used in more temperate and dry
Climates: And yet again, there is no Country, not only in the Northern nook,
even not in any part of Europe, which abounds so much as Holland and Zealand in
almost all the forenamed commodities, yea, even of those which are less
necessary for the maintenance of humane life: So great is the advantage which
these two Provinces receive by the Sea, and Rivers, whereby their commerce with
all other Countries is made so easy, which since they have introduced, and
made so familiar in both the Indies, it cannot be said how much both
Merchandises, and Merchants are increased in both of them.

Hence it is that they abound so much with People, and that their Cities,
Towns, and Villages are so well inhabited. Yet the Sea likewise is as full of
Ships, and other Bottoms, and all their watery places with other sorts of Boats,
which all of them serve for habitations, especially to Mariners, and Fishers.
Great is the number of People that apply themselves to these two Vocaitons in
Holland, and in Zealand. They make houses of their Ships, and of their Houses
Schools: Here they are born: Here they are bred up: and here they learn their
Professions. And the Mariners especially, who practicing their Callings, in
running so often, and so boldly from the one Pole to the other, and wheresoever
the Sun communicates it self to Mortals, grow so expert therein, as though they
may be equalled, yet they cannot be outdone in this Seafairing Mystery, by any
Nation whatsoever. In brief, these People are generally given to Traffic,
and are extraordinary industrious in Manual, and Mechanical Arts.

Their greatest delight lies in their meat, and in their Feasts, by which they
temper the melancholy of their tedious Winters, which are rather long than
sharp, the Country abounding much more in Rain than in Frosts. They are
generally well shaped in Body; and as candid in nature as in countenance:
Pleasant in their leisure times; but fierce in their Wars, and much better in
fighting at Sea than by Land: they feed most upon Fish, and are Whitmeats,
wherein their Country does infinitely abound. They have always been inclined
to a free Government, and have ever tenaciously held their ancient Customs.

Holland is full of Great Cities, good Towns, and infinite in Villages. But by
reason of the frequency of Foreigners, and multitudes of Natives, Amsterdam
has always been the chiefest City of this Province. Even whilst commerce
flourished in Antwerp, great was the concourse of Foreigners to Amsterdam: But
Commerce failing in that City, by reason of the Wars with Spain, it is so
mightily increased in this other, as Amsterdam is at this hour the place of
greatest Merchandising, not only in Holland, but in all the North. In Zealand
Middlebourg is the Town best peopled, and of greatest Traffic; yet cannot that
Province come any thing near Holland, neither in circuit, people, nor plenty.
Its almost impossible to enter either of these Provinces by force: Because not
only the chief places but even the commonest Towns are environed, either by the
Sea, Rivers, Lakes, or by Earth, than which there can be none more low, nor
more miery: So as it is no wonder if these People, being thus favored by
Nature, were both so sierce in taking up Arms against Spain at first, and with
the like animosity maintained them till they had procured their own peace.
Bentivog: Hist: of Fland: Page 73.

Zealand. Where the Scheld falls from the more inward parts of the Land,
gliding for a good space along the Confines of Brabant and Flanders, it comes
at once out of both those Provinces; and at the coming out, divides it self
into two large Branches: the one bends toward the North, and retains the name
of Scheld; the other runs toward the West, and is called Honte. Here, both of
them growing greater, as they draw nearer the Ocean, before they fall
thereinto, they join together in diverse spacious Gulphs; among which the
Islands of Zealand are rather buried than raised up; so low are they seated,
and so often does the Sea do mischief there. This low situation is
notwithstanding endeavored to be remedied by the Inhabitants with exceeding
high, and firm Banks. But this remedy does not always give them security, of
which the Island of Zuitbevolant has had sad experience, it having in former
time been one of the greatest, and best peopled of all the Zealand Islands. In
the year 1532, the Sea arose with one of the most terrible Tempests that was
ever seen in those Parts, and rending the Banks asunder, and bearing down
whatsoever withstood it, it overflowed from the one side to the other, and did
actually drown a great part of the Island, to the utter and most horrible
destruction both of man and Beast, and a great number of entire Villages, which
were miserably swallowed up by that Deluge. This fell out on that side that
lies nearest to Brabant and Flanders; this being the first Island that the
Scheld, in forming its abovesaid Branches, cuts off, and divides from the
Continent: Yet that Angle which lies nearest to the firm land, remained still
unprejudiced, and is yet inhabited.

On the West, this Island looks toward Flanders: on the North toward Brabant:
and in it stands Tergoes, a small Town, better fortified by Nature than by Art,
being fenced on the one side by the Scheld, upon whose Banks it is situated: It
is environed on an other part with certain Marish Grounds: and its fortified by
Art on the weakest side, which lies toward the firm land.

Holland is not above 60 Leagues in circuit, and where its broadest a man may
ride over it in 6 hours; yet are there in it nine and twenty Walled Towns:
namely, Dordrecht, Harlem, Delft, Leyden, Goud, Amsterdam, Einchusen, Horn,
Alkmur, Purmerenden, Eadam, Monichedam, Wesp, Naerden, Woerden, Oudewater,
Schoonhoven, Helstien, Vianen, Leerdam, Asperen, Hueckelem, Gorichom, Workum,
Huesden, Rotterdam, Schiedam, St Gertrudenberg, and Sevenbergen.

Besides these there are diverse little Towns, which have been Walled, and enjoy
the Privileges of Walled Towns: namely, Medemblick, Beverwick, Muiden,
Neuport, Ulaerdingen, and Gravisand.

There are besides above four hundred Villages, some of which are large, and
have great immunities.

Holland has also under it diverse Isl^s: the chief are Vielandt, Texele,
Weringham, Urak, and Ens, wherein are some Villages: as also Voorn, Goerode,
Sommersaike, Corendike, and Pierskille.

Dordrecht described.
Dordrecht stands upon the Merune, which River is compounded of the Rhine, the
Meuse, and the Ling. Its a great, Rich, mighty, and well-peopled Town.

The City of Harlem Described.
Harlem lies in a large Plain, divided every where into lovely Meddows; the
ground in Holland being usually fitter for Pasture than for Tillage. On the one
side it has a Wood nigh at hand, which is but very little, and serves rather
for pleasure than for fireing. On the other side the River Sparen runs within
the Walls, which, washing the Walls on the outside, with an other Branch, that
presently joins with the former, makes of that part of the City, an Island.
Toward the South this River communicates with a great Lake called, Harlem
Mere; and toward the West, with a larg Gulf, called Tie, which, entering into
other greater* Gulphs, falls not into, but is rather enclosed by the Ocean. The
City is provided of a good Ditch, and good Walls, not flanked according to the
Modern fashion, but with great Towers, after the ancient Mode. The circuit of
the Walls is great, and the City is very well peopled; and to the number of the
Inhabitants, as well in private as in public, does the condition of the
Buildings answer. Near this City, almost at an equal distance, within half a
days journey, lie two of the chiefest Towns in Holland, Amsterdam on the East,
and Leyden on the South.

Its a Town very well built, and beautified with goodly Meddows both within and
without, but especially with a most pleasant Forest, and environed with many
goodly Villages, and Fortresses, and is seated in a most wholesome air. Its the
greatest Town in all Holland. Here Printing was first invented, and after
perfected at Mentz, whence some attribute the invention of it to that place.

Delfe Described.
Its a goodly larg Town well built throughout with broad and pleasant Streets,
and beautified with sumptuous and stately Churches. It lies upon a River which
joins upon the Mause.

Leyden Described.
Its one of the six Capital Towns of Holland, and chief of Rhineland. It has
under it nine and forty Buroughs, and Villages. It abounds with all sorts of
Provisions, and with Seafish, and fresh water fish, and of water Foul. Its
strengthened with an ancient Castle.

Leyden is situate in a flat and low Country, full of Ditches, and Channels,
and is beautified with pleasant Meddows, Gardens, Arbors, and Walks round about
it; within it are enclosed one and thirty Islands, from one of which to the
other men go in Boats: And over and above these there are nine or ten other
Islands, from the one of which to the other, Bridges are built to pass over, so
that in that Town are one hundred forty five Bridges, whereof one hundred and
four are of Stone, the rest of Wood. In this Town are yearly made above twelve
thousand Clothes. The Town is well peopled; Her streets are large: Her
Buildings well polished: Its well flanked round about: Her Ditches are every
where deep, and in sine, she is a very complete City. The Women are very fair,
and the air wholesome.

Goud Described.
Goud is also one of the six Capital Towns of Holland. It stands upon the River
Issel, not that Issel before mentioned, but another different from that. For
this Issel arises at Isselstein in Holland, and passing by Montfort,
Oudewater, and Goud: at Isselmond it enters into the Leek, holding his course
from his rising to his fall between the old Rhine that comes from Utrecht, and
the said River of Leek; and being, as it were hemmed in between these two
Rivers, it is a strong, rich, and well fortified Town.

Amsterdam described.
Amsterdam stands upon the Goulph Tie. Its one of the goodliest Havens in the
World; for you have sometimes at once five hundred sail of Ships riding in the
Port. The Town is so rich, that though a fleet of three hundred Sail, laden
with all kind of Merchandise arrive there, the Citizens within five or six
Days will buy up all their Wares. In this Town are built yearly many Ships,
and above twelve thousand Cloths made.

Amstordam is built upon Piles under the ground, as Venice is, so that the
buildings of these Towns are more chargeable under the ground than above,
though the Houses are very sumptuous, and fair. This Town is very strong, and
held to be impregnable, by reason that it may be environed at pleasure with
Water, and is almost in all points like unto Venice, and little inferior to it
in any thing. For its the greatest Town in all these parts of the World.

Einchuysin Described.
It stands upon the very point of the Gulf Zuidersee, that fronteth
Frisland, from whence it is distant not above two Leagues. It Is a good Town,
and in it are many Ships Built.

Hoorn Described.
Hoorn stands upon the Zuiderzee. It Is a fair, rich, and a reasonable great
Town, and has a good Haven, and is of so great strength, by reason of the
multitude of Channels round about it, that it seems almost impregnable. In this
Town there is kept yearly a Mart of Butter, and Cheese, whereunto there is
brought so great a quantity, as furnishes, not only these Countries, but Spain
and Portugal also.

Alcmair Described.
Alcmair is a very rich Town, by reason that the Country round about it yields
more plenty of Butter and Cheese than any other place in Holland. It Is not
strong, save only by situation, lying (as do all other Towns in that Country of
Waterlant) drowned amidst Water and Mud. It Is within five hours journey of
Harlem, and may be said to be the Gate whereby to enter by Land into Waterlant.
For that side of the Province, being shut up on one part by the Sea, on an
other by the Gulf of Zuiderzee, and almost all the rest by other waters, and
Channels; and making the shape of a Peninsula, it leaves but a very narrow
space of entrance by Land; and there, a little within stands Alcmair.

Purmerenden Described.
Purmerenden is a Town with a good Castle appertaining to the Counts of Egmont.

Edan Described.
Edan stands near to the Zuiderzee. It Is famous for the great number of Ships
of all burdens that are built in it, and the innumerable multitude of excellent
good Cheeses that are made in the Country round about it.

Moni^kdam, and Wesp, are two good little Towns, with great store of good
Meddows, and Pastures about them for feeding of Cattle, and likewise they have
a great deal of Fish.

Woerden has a strong Castle in it.

Oudewater stands upon the Issel. Near hereabouts grows great plenty of Hemp,
of the which almost all the Cables, Cords, and Nets that the Fishermen, and
Mariners of Holland, and Zealand use, are made, by which many of the
Inhabitants grow very rich.

Schoonhoven stands upon the Leek. Its a fair Town, and has a commodious
Haven, and here so great abundance, and plenty of Salmonds are taken* that the
Staple of Salmonds is kept here.

Iselst^in: about this Town is great controversy whether it belong to Holland,
or to Utrecht.

Vianen stands upon the River Leek.

Leardam stands upon the River Ling.

Asperen stands also upon the River Ling, which runs through it with a pleasant
murmuring noise.

Hueclelen stands likewise upon the River Ling, and has an ancient Castle in
it.

Gorichom stands upon the Whaal where it meets with the Ling. Its a good Town,
and has in it a strong Castle. From the Church steeple of this Town, you may
see two and twenty walled Towns, and an infinite number of Villages, which is a
most pleasant sight to behold. Every day there is a Market in this Town of
Butter, Cheese, and other Victuals of an incredible quantity brought into this
Haven, and from thence transported into other Countries, and places, which
makes the Inhabitants here to become very rich.

Workum stands upon the Whaal.

Huesden has a fair Castle, and many Villages are under its Jurisdiction.

Rotterdam stands upon the Channel of Rotter, near to the Meuse. Its a strong,
a fair, and a populous Town.

St Gertrudenberg is for situation very strong: It has the Meuse on the one
side with its Name turned into Merwe, and of such a breadth, that it being
there ready to fall into the Ocean, the Channel thereof seems to be a Sea
rather than a River. There falls also into the Merwe upon another side, another
little River of but a short course, called Donge, and it ends its course near
unto the Walls of this Town; yet is the bed thereof also so broad and deep, as
its capable of any Vessel whatsoever. The places thereabout are so low as men
walk more upon the tops of Banks, than upon plain ground. The artificial
Fortifications are answerable to the situation of it.

Sevenbergen stands also upon the Merwe: Its a good Town.

Unwalled Towns in Holland, and yet enjoying the Privileges of Walled Towns,
are Medemblick, which stands upon the North Sea of Holland, and in the best
Country of all Holland for feeding of Cattle. It has in it a strong Castle.

Muyden, which stands by the Gulf Zuiderzee, upon the little River of Weight.
Its a good Town, with a strong Castle on the contrary side of the River, and a
Bridge to pass between the Castle and the Town.

Nieuport, Ulaerding, which stands near to the Mouth of the Meuse, a very
ancient Town.

Principal Villages in Holland are
Hague: Or Haghen: or Lettay stands near to the West Sea. It is the fairest,
the richest, and the greatest Village of Europe, containing two thousand
Houses, and among them, diverse that are very sumptuous ones, especially the
beautiful and large Royal Palace, built like a Castle, and environed with
strong and larg Ditches. In this Palace is a College of Cannons, with a very
beautiful Chapel in it, and a gallant Library. They will by no means Wall this
Village, accounting it more honor to inhabit the fairest, and mightiest
Village of Europe, than a City, which being walled, would be inferior to many.

At the Hague is a goodly Wood stored with all kind of Venison, and beautified
with many Antiquities, and Medals graven in fine Marble, and worthy to be
remembered. Its not watered, nor cut through with any River.

Half a League from the Hague is the Abbey of Losdune, in which is the Tomb of
Margaret Countess of Hennenberg, with an Epitaph thereon, whereby it is said,
that she brought forth as many Children at one burden, as there are days in
the year.

Schaghen is situate in the utmost Northern part of Holland. Its a fair, and
large Village with a goodly Castle.

Iselmont stands upon the River of Merwe. Its a good Village with a fair Castle.

Eghemont stands near to the West Sea. Its a brave Village with a goodly
Monastery.

Brederode is a Castle whereof the Noble Family of Brederode bears the Name.

Walkenbourg is a small Borough, where every September a notable Fair of
Horses is kept.

Catwiik stands on the Sea, where the ancient Mouth of the Rhine that came
from Utrecht then fell into the Sea.

Britania is a Fort that was built by the Romans, since swallowed up by the Sea.

Petten stands in the utmost of the North part of Holland, upon the Downs.

The Isle that belongs to the Jurisdiction of Holland described.
In the Isle of Voorn is the Briel, which is a good and strong Town, and after
it Ulissinghen.

In the I Will of Voorn is also the Town Gerulit, which has diverse Villages under
its Jurisdiction. The Soil of this Island is very fat, and fruitful, and
brings forth abundance of diverse sorts of Grain, as also of the Herb called
Hellem, like to Broom, the great Roots whereof are the principal strength of
the Sea banks, and Dikes of Holland and Zeland, which otherwise, being but
sandy, would easily be born away with the wind.

The second Isle is Goerede. In it is a Town of the same Name, being fair, and
great.

Somersdike is a third Island, called also Voorn, because it lies directly
against Holland. In it are diverse Villages, but the chief is called Somersdike.

Gorendike the fourth, and Pierschelle the fifth Isle. The Soil of both these
is excellent good, and they have diverse Villages in them.

This Country of Holland is exceeding populous: The People are tall, well
proportioned, cheerful, and valiant, very courteous, and civil. Their Towns are
well built, their Houses wonderfully well furnished, and their furniture
exceeding fine, and neat above all the Countries in the World.

Their Shops, Buildings, Ships, Dikes, Rampars, Channels, divises to maintain
their Banks, and to preserve their Meddowes, and Pastures, by passing the water
from one Channel to another, and so into the Sea, and all other works that they
take in Hand, are so excellently, and skilfully done, that its wonderful to
behold them.

The Women in Holland are very fair, wise, painful, and so practiced in Worldly
affairs, that they employ themselves in most kind of men's exercises, especially
in Merchandise.

By the Peoples industry in Merchandising, breeding of sheep, and Cattle,
Shipping, Fishing etc. this little Province is wonderful Rich; and there is no
one foot of it, but yields some profit: Yea, the very Downs, being nothing but
Sand-Hills, breed great abundance of Conies: and the very Sea-Rocks afford them
great store of Eggs, and infinite number of Fowl, which they sell into diverse
Countries, both raw and baked, fresh and salt, which turns to their great
commodity.

To conclude, considering the great Wealth that grows in this Country by
Cheese, Butter, Flesh, Fish, Foul, Chickens, Eggs, Linen, and Woolen Cloth,
Turfe, and Shipping, it may be called a Treasury of all good this.

The Province of Utrecht Described.
Utrecht has on the North, West, and South Holland, and on the East
Guelderland. It contains the City it self of Utrecht, and four other Walled
Towns: namely, Wick at Duerstede, Rhenen, Amersfort, and Montfort: and under
the Jurisdiction thereof are about seventy Villages. The Country is dryer than
Holland, and so very fruitful of Grain.

Utrecht stands upon the Ancient stream of the Rhine, which before it brake
into the River Leek, had its course this way into the Sea. Its seated in a
Country so miraculously well inhabited, that in one Day you may go from Utrecht
to fifty Walled Towns, standing from thence in an equal distance. You may also
go from Utrecht in a morning, and dine at whether you please of six and twenty
walled Towns, and return again to Supper at Utrecht in your own House.

The Town is larg, mighty, and very stately, and sumptuously built, and full of
goodly Cellars, and Caves, vaulted, with wonderful Art and skill. In it are
many goodly Churches, whereof five are the Principal.

Towns of the Jurisdiction of Utrecht, are

First, Week at Duersteed, which is a Town well built, standing upon the Leek,
with a good Castle in it.

2. Rhenen stands also upon the Leek. About it is excellent good ground for
Turfe.

3. Amesfort stands upon the little River of Eem: Its a fair Town, and well
peopled.

4. Montfort, which stands upon the Issel: Its a pleasant, and a strong place.

The Province of Zealand described.
Zeland is as much as to say, A Land won out of the Sea; under which Name are
contained fifteen or sixteen Islands, which being united together, make one
Body, and have the Title of a County.

Zeland is parted Southward from Flanders with the left Arm of the Scheld,
called Hont; Eastward from Brabant, with the right Arm of the Scheld, which
retains the ancient Name of Scheld; North, it is severed from Holland with a
Goulph of the Sea called Flack: West it has the Sea toward England.

The Principal Islands of Zealand are seven, which are (by an Arm of the
Scheld) near to the entrance thereof into the Sea) divided into the Oriental,
and Occidental. The Oriental Isles are, Schouwe, Dueland, and Tolen. The
Occidental are, Walkaren, Zuidheveland, Northewland, and Wolfersdike. Toward
the Sea these Islands are defended with Hills of Sands, called the Downs,
thrown up by the surges of the Sea.

Toward the South they are defended with Rampars, and Banks made, and with
great pains and charge maintained by the People, being ten Flemish Else high,
and twenty five thick at the bottom. They are made of the hardest clay that can
be gotten: within they are thick built with Wood, and Stone, and covered
without with Mats strongly wrought.

Zealand is a very fruitful Country, and produces excellent pure and bright
Corn; great quantities of Coriander, and Bay Trees that bring forth ripe
Berries, which grow not in any Province of the Low Countries besides: It
produces also abundance of good Madder, and diverse other simples. As also of
Turfe. It has great abundance of excellent good Pasturage for the Cattle, and
no less plenty of Fish.

In this Country are eight Walled Towns: namely, Middlebourg, Sirixee, Cunfere,
Ulissenghen, Tollai, St Martins-Dike, Romersvale, and Goses: There are diverse
other small places unwalled, and one hundred and two Villages.

The Isle of Schouwe described.
This Isle has been much encroached upon by the Sea, yet its seven Leagues in
Circuit. In it are these Towns: Sirixzee, the ancienst Town in all Zealand,
their Traffic is Salt, and Mather, whereof there is great abundance in this
Isle.

The Isle of Duveland has its Name of the great abundance of Doves that breed
therein. Its in Circuit four Leagues. In it are many Villages, and Gentlemen's
Farms.

In the Isle of Tolen is the Town of Tolen, which gives Name to the whole Isle;
and St. Martins Dike, with diverse small Villages.

The Occidental Isles are: Walkeren, which is ten Leagues in Circuit. Its a
strong and fruitful Island, full of People, and of great wealth. In it are
seven good Towns: as First, Middlebourg, so named, because it stands in the
midst of the Isle. Its a very strong Town, well Fortified, Walled, and Diked.
The Streets are large, the Houses, Churches, and Monasteries very fair Built.
Its a great Town of Traffic of all kinds of Merchandise. It stands not upon
the Sea, but upon two Channels, one whereof called the New-Channel, is as
strait as a Line, and is made so wide and deep, that a Ship of a hundred Tun
may come from the Port of Rumue, even up to the very Town of Middlebourg.

The second Walled Town is Veere, or Canfer, standing upon the North Coast. In
it is a goodly Arsenal, wherein all furniture for War by Sea is used to be
kept.

Ulussenghen is the third Walled Town. Its the Key of the Sea of these
Low Countries, because all ships that go up to Antwerp must of necessity pass
by this Town. The chief Villages of Walkeren are, VVestcapelle, Dombourg,
Ramekins, where stands the Fort of Zeerbourg to secure the entrance into the
River on that side. And Ramue, or Armuyden, which has the goodliest Haven in
all Christendom. Sudbourg: and diverse other good Villages are in this Isle.

The next of these Isles is Zuidbes^veland, which is the greatest of all the
Isles of Zealand. Much of it was swallowed up by the Sea, Anno Christi 1532.
Romerswald is the principal Town in it, seated upon the East toward Berghen.
Goes, or Tergoes is an other Town that stands upon the North coast: Besides
there are many good Villages in this Island: with pleasant Woods, and Thickets,
well stored with Fowl, and Wild Beasts, for Hauking and Hunting.

Northbeveland is almost wholly swallowed up by the Sea. VVolfersdike is the
least of all these Islands having only two Villages in it.

The City of Antwerp described.
Antwerp lies on the right side of the Scheld, and extending its Walls for a
long space on that side which looks toward the River, it afterward makes a
great compass toward the other which commands the Fields. That River cannot be
mastered by a more Noble City, nor that City be watered by a more noble River.
It flourishes exceedingly in the number of Inhabitants, in beautiful
Buildings, and in Merchandising, which is chiefliest occasioned by the
commodiousness of the Scheld, it being a River of so great breadth and depth,
and ebbing, and flowing so far into the Sea, as that it is there capable of the
greatest Vessels which Sail upon the Sea.

Toward the Field side, the City is environed with one of the statelyest Walls
that can be seen, as well for the breadth of the Platform within, as for the
Noble Bastions without; and the Ditch is every where answerable. On the other
side toward the River, the River it self serves for a defense, and therefore
on that side, there is only a single Wall. The Platform of the Wall toward the
Fields is of such a breadth as many Rows of Trees stand round about it, so as
it serves no less for delight than for defense.

Antwerp is in, or rather joins upon Brabant, of it self making one of the
seventeen ancient Provinces, by the name of The Marquisat of the Sacred Empire.
The Province of Flanders joins upon the contrary side of the River, which place
partakes thereby of all the advantages afforded, both by so large a River, and
of a City of such Merchandising.

The Citadel of Antwerp stands upon the Banks of the Scheld, upon the South
side of the City. It is a Pentagon, composed of five Royal Bastions. Of all
other modern Fortifications, it has been esteemed so famous, as it has served
for a Pattern to almost as many Citadels as have been built in any Country
since. Some of her Flanks lie toward the City, and the rest lean toward the
Champian; respect being here had (as in all other Castles) to be able on one
side to command the City, and on the other, to receive necessary succor upon
all occasions from without. There lies a good space of ground between the
Citadel and the City.

The Noble Province of Flanders Described.
Flanders is now bounded on the North with the Sea, and the branch of the
Scheld that is called Hont: South with Artois, Hainault, and Vermandois. East
with the ancient Scheld, and part of Haynault: West partly with the Sea toward
England, and partly with the River Au, and part of Artois that borders upon
Callice, and Boloign. The length of it from Antwerp to the New-Foss is thirty
three Leagues; The breadth from Ninoven to Graveling thirty Leagues.

The air is very wholesome, especially Southward: The Country flat: The Soil
fruitful, especially toward the Sea, and toward France. They breed great
store of Cattle, especially of good Horses..

Flanders has diverse Rivers running through it: namely, Scheld, Lis, and
Tender, and many other small streams: the rest is supplied with Channels made
by hand to receive in the Sea, It has many pleasant Hills, especially Flanders
Gallicant.

There are in Flanders 28 Walled Towns: The three Capital are Gant, Bruges,
and Ipre: the others are Lisle, Douay, Tournay, Courtray, Oudenard, Alost,
Hulst, Termond, Bieruliet, Neuport, Scluse, Dunkirk, Graveling, Bourbourg,
Damme, Dixmude, Uvern, Ardembourg, Ninove, Berg de St Winoc, Montgerard or
Grammont, Gassel, Denise, Orchies, and Lanoy.

Towns unwalled, yet rich, fair, and populous, are about thirty, the chief are
Ostend (now fortified with Rampars and Ditches) Oudembourg, Messine, Belle,
Poperinge, Toroue, Ostbour, Axsele, Middlebourg, Loo, Werwick, Blonchberg,
Houck, Rosselar, Tielt, Ghistell, Eeclo, Lombartside, Steechem, Houscot,
Munchereed, Mardike, Meeren, Hallewin, Wastene, Steegberg, Mergen, Haesbrook,
and Armentiers. Besides these there are one thousand one hundred fifty four
Villages, many of them as great, rich, and populous as any in Europe. As also
many Castles, Fortresses, and Noblemens, and Gentlemen's Houses, very beautiful
to behold. What great alterations the King of France has made of late, I
cannot give an account.

This country is divided into three parts, namely, Flanders Flamigeant, so
called, because the Flemish Language is used in it: This is the chief part of
the Country. The second is Flanders Gallican, so styled, because the Walloon
Language (which is a bastard French) is used therein. The third is Flanders
Imperial, because it was long under the obedience of the Empire. The first lies
toward the Sea, the second toward the Walloon Countries.

Flanders Flamingunt described.
Its bounded North with the Sea, South with the River Lie, and Flanders
Gallican; East with the Scheld, and the Imperial Flanders; West with the New
Fosse, and with Artoys. The Soil is all Sand, and naught for Wheat, but
produces plenty of Oats, Beans, Pease, Vetches, Flax, Hemp, and very good
Fruits of diverse sorts.

In this part of Flanders are the three Capital Towns, namely, Gaunt, Bruges,
and Ipre, and Le Franc, which makes a fourth. In it also are the four Parts of
the Sea, with Berg de St Winnoc, and many Towns walled and unwalled.

The City of Gaunt described.
Gaunt stands about four Leagues from the Sea upon the Rivers, Scheld, Lis,
Lieve, besides which, there are a number of Brooks and fine Fountains which
come into the City, some by natural course, and some by Art, all which at their
issue out of the Town, being received into great Ditches made by hand, pass
into the Sea by a great Channel, carried by infinite pains, and charges for the
space of four great Leagues into the Sea of Zealand near to the Gulf called
Sass. Not long since also they have opened a certain little Island, which
before stopped the course of their Ships, so that a reasonable Boat may pass
from the Sea to Gaunt, to the inestimable profit of Town and the Country
thereabouts.

Gaunt is very strong both by Nature and Art, very beautiful, and one of the
greatest Cities in Christendom. The Walls within are seven miles in Circuit,
and without more then ten miles, but it has many wast places within it. There
is a Citadel in it built by Charles 5th 1540. and the buildings in general are
very stately and magnificent.

Within the Walls of Gaunt are six and twenty Isles, made by the Rivers and
Channels above mentioned; and there are ninety eight Great Bridges, and an
infinite number of smaller, under which great Boats pass with Victuals, and
Merchandise. There are six Principal Water Mills, and above one hundred Wind
Mills, and of hand and Horse-mills an infinite number.

Churches great and small, Monasteries, and Hospitals etc. fifty five, as also
many goodly Libraries, and its divided into seven Parishes. There are also
diverse Schools for the bringing up of poor Children at the Town charges. The
Trade of Weavers is of the greatest estimation, by reason of the Linen and
Woollen Cloths, Serges, Tapestry, Fustians, Bucherams, Wosted, and such other
stuff, made in this Town and Province.

The City of Bruges described.
Bruges is so called of the multitude of goodly Bridges about the Town, and
stands in a pleasant Plain, three Leagues from the Sea. It has no River but a
Channel made by Art called the Reye, so large and deep that it seems to be a
great River. It Is divided into diverse Branches, which being navigable, pass to
many parts of the Town; and where they issue out, being all united together,
they pass to Dam, and from thence to Scluse, where they discharge themselves
into the Sea. But since by infinite charge, and marveilous industry they have
cut a larger and deeper Channel, by which a Ship of a Hundred Tun may pass
from the Sea up to the very Town.

Bruges is a rich, fair, and a mighty Town: the Circuit of the Walls within is
four Italian miles and a quarter. It Is wonderfully peopled, and the buildings
are passing sumptuous, the Streets large, and strait, and it has in it many
goodly places, especially the Market place, from the which the six principal
Streets pass strait to the six Principal Gates, which is very pleasant to
behold.

In Bruges are above 60 Churches, the chief whereof is St. Donate. The City is
divided into sixty quarters, and into nine Parishes. There is a goodly place in
the City called the lodging of the Water, wherein is a wonderful Engine turned
by a Horse that draws up water, and disperses it by Pipes all the Town over.
Here are made much Fustian, Serges, Says, Buckrams, Woollen Cloth, Tapestry,
and Silk, the Citizens are civil and courteous. The Women fair, gracious, and
sober in their behavior.

The City of Ipre described.
It takes its Name of the Brook Hypre which runs through the midst of the Town.
Its strongly seated, and hardly can be besieged. Its much fortified by Art, and
made almost impregnable. Its a fair and reasonable rich Town, and well built,
though the houses are most of Timber. In it are such multitudes of Leaden Pipes
to convey Water from the River and Channels into every private House, that its
commonly said, That the Foundation of Ipre is all Lead. The Hall for the sale
of Cloths is ancient and admirable. Here are made many Cloths, Serges, Says,
etc. The Jurisdiction of Ipre is very great, and extends over the Country round
about it. The Inhabitants are very Civil and peaceable.

Scluse described.
Scluse is one of the goodliest Havens in Europe, being able to contain five
hundred Ships. The Town is strong, being double-Ditched. It has a strong
Castle, but severd from the Town.

Scluse does not lie altogether upon the Seaside, as does Ostend, but a little
more within Land. Yet there runs a Channel on the right hand of it, whereinto
the Sea enters, and is large enough to receive any Vessel whatsoever. On the
other side thereof, some lesser Channels join with this greater, so as there is
but little mannageable Earth, unless it be upon one side which is toward
Brugus, an Island of about two Leagues about, lies almost over against Sluice,
between the bigger Channel, and some others on that part, all which fall into
the Sea, and its called Cassante: And Ostend lies upon the same Seacoast upon
the West, about sive Leagues from Sluice: And Flushing lies much upon the same
distance toward the East.

Ostend described.
Ostend stands upon the Sea-shoar, in the midst of a Marish ground, and of
diverse Channels which come from the Continent: But chiefly its environed almost
on all sides by two of the greatest of those Channels by which the Sea enters
into the Land, and grows so high, when it is full Sea, as that you would rather
think the Town was buried than situate in the Sea. Formerly it was an open
Town, and was rather an habitation for Shepherds than for Soldiers. But the
opportunity of the Seat being afterward considered, the Houses were enclosed
with a Platform instead of a Wall; and from time to time, the Line was so
flankt round about, as it proved to be one of the strongest Towns in all
Flanders. Its divided into two parts, called The Old Town, and The new Town.
The former, which is the less, stands toward the Sea: The latter, and
greater, lies toward the Land. The old Town is fenced from the fury of the Sea
by great Piles of Wood driven into the ground, and joined together for the
defense of that Part, and there the Waves sufficiently supply the office of a
Ditch. The Channels may be said to do the like on the sides, especially at full
Sea, when, of Channels, they become Havens, being then capable of any kind of
Vessel; and by them, at all times, Barks of a middle size enter into the
Ditches, and by them into diverse parts of the Town it self: The Town is but of
a small compass, and is ennobled rather by its situations and fortifications,
than by any splendour of the Inhabitants, or Buildings.

Nieuport described.
Nieuport is a good little Town with a Castle in it. The Haven is good and well
frequented. A League and a half from the Town is the fair and famous Abbey of
St. Bernard, that has an excellent Library of all sorts of Books belonging to
it.

Dunkirk described.
Dunkirk has a Haven that is reasonable good, and commodious. Besides the
former Fortifications of this Town, our English lately, when they had taken it,
strengthened it very much, and since then the French King has much enlarged
and Fortified it.

Berg St. Winoc described.
This Town was so named from a goodly rich Abbey, built upon an Hill, together
with the Town, to the honor of St Winoc an Englishman, of a Holy Life. It has
a number of good Villages under it. The Country about it is very fruitful. In
this Town are made many Cloths, and an infinite number of Serges, the best and
finest in all Flanders.

Damme describe.
Damme was sometimes an Haven Town, by reason that the Sea flowed to the Walls
thereof, and thereby made it mighty and rich, but now its in a very poor
estate. Here in May is a great horse Fair kept.

Dixmund described.
Dixmund is a pretty fine little Town, in which every year in July is a Fair of
Horses, and other Merchandise.

Wern is a good fair Town, and has the Title of a Viscounty.

Bourbourg is a fine and a strong little Town appertaining to the Kings of
France.

Graveling stands upon the River of Aa near to the Sea: Since the recovery of
Calais by the French, its made the strongest Fort of the Low Countries, having
five Bulwarks. It appertains to the King of France.

Cassel was sometime a mighty and a famous Town. Now its in a reasonable good
estate, but its a very small Town.

Courtray stands upon the River Lis, which passes through the midst of it. Its
one one of the ancientest Towns in Flanders: Its a good Town, and well built,
and has a strong Castle. Its so fortified that its made almost impregnable. In
it are made great quantities of Woolen Cloth, and of very fine Linen.

Oudenard is one of the best esteemed Towns in Flanders, both for its
situation, Traffic, and people. It lies upon the Scheld, almost in the
midway, between Turnay and Gaunt. Its begirt with a good Wall, and the Wall
with a large Ditch, within the Wall its furnished with good Platforms. It has
on one side an eminent rising ground which commands the Town. In it is made
great store of Tapestry and Linen.

Ardenbourg, formerly called R^dembourg, was once a chief Town in Flanders.
Its now a good little Town; their Church is one of the fairest in Flanders:
These are all walled Towns.

The Unwalled Towns are
Middlebourg is environed with Trenches, Banks, and Rampars.

Comines stands upon the River Lis, where is a fair Castle, and a rare Library.

VVervick also stands upon the River Lis, and has a very fair Church in it. In
this place, not many years since was born Martin Chastelin, who,
notwithstanding he was born Blind, yet made all sorts of Tools and Instruments
of Music, and played well on them, and that without any Master, or Instructor.

Merim stands upon the River Lis. Its a good Town, well Ditched, with a
Draw-bridg, and is made a very strong Fort. The other Towns have little
observable in them, and I pass them over.

Flanders Gallicant described.
It has on the North Flanders Flamingant: On the South the Country of
Cambresy. On the East the Scheld; and on the West the River Lis, and the
Earldom of Artoys. Its a small Country, but the Soil thereof is very fat and
fruitful of all things, especially of Wheat. It produces also Mather, and
excellent good Oade. In it are great plenty of excellent Pastures for Cattle.
In it are contained the fair Towns of Leisle, Dovay, and Orchies: The great
Signiory of Tournay, and the Country of Tournesy, etc.

The City of Lisle described.
Its so called, because formerly the Country about it was nothing but Ponds,
Pools, and Marshes, though now by Art, and industry, they are dried up, and
made firm Land. Round about the walls of the town, and of the Castle, passes a
small Brook, which, at the Village of Duellesmont, falls into the Lis. In it is
a very strong Castle: Its a very good, and ancient Town, well built, and well
inhabited by Gentlemen, and Merchants, and Curious Artificers. It has under it
a goodly Signiory, and is the chief Town in this Flanders.

Dovay Described.
Dovay is the 2d Town of this Country: It stands upon the River Scarp. Its a
good, and a strong Town, having many Fountains, fair Buildings, and a great
number of Churches. It has Jurisdiction over a great Country, and is a place
of great Traffic, and a University.

Orchies described.
Orchies is a good and a pleasant Town, wherein are made many Serges, and such
like Stuffs.

Lanoy is a strong place, where is made much Linen and Velvet.

Espency is a fair and a famous Village, having the Title of a Principality.

Armentiers is so mighty and rich a Village, and so well peopled, that its
privileged as a Walled Town.

Between Armentiers and Steegheers is a fruitful and pleasant Country, called
La Love, having in it four great Villages, whereof the chief is Leventis, being
privileged as a Walled Town.

The City of Tourney described.
The City of Tournay, together with the Country of Tournesis, has a particular
Government of its own. It lies in the Gallican Flanders, and may be numbered
among the Noblest Cities of all Flanders, as well for its ancient Foundation,
as for being amply furnished, both with People, Traffic, and Buildings. Its
on all sides surrounded with fair and fruitful Fields, and through the midst of
it (under diverse Bridges) runs the Scheld, a River which begins here to ennoble
it self; not being well Navigable before. The English in King Henry the
eighth's time, while they held it, built a good Castle therein, which in that
Age was esteemed strong, but not to be compared to the later Royal
Fortifications. Its only flanked with Towers after the old fashion. On the
lower side of the Scheld joins the Ditch, which on the upperside is wholly dry.
Its a fair, rich, great, and mighty Town. The Houses are beautifully built: The
Monasteries, Churches, and Convents are very stately and Magnificent.

Mortaign stands in the Country of Tournesis, and upon the River of Scheld. It
was once a strong Town, but now is a Village of small account.

St. Amond is also in the Country of Tournesis. Its a goodly Village standing
upon the Scarpe with Gates and Ditches like a City. In it is one of the
chiefest Abbyes in Flanders.

Flanders Imperial described.
This Country is very small, being contained between the Rivers of Scheld and
Dender, all along upon the Frontires of Brabant. Its now called the County of
Alost, of the Principal Town thereof.

Alost stands upon the Dender. Its a good, and a very strong Town, and has
yearly a great Fair of Hops.

To this County of Alost is also annexed the little Country of Waes, and diverse
Villages: As

Hulst, which is Walled. Axele, Bouchout, and Assenede, which four Towns have
diverse Villages under their Jurisdiction. Under it also are two Principalities,
namely, Steenhuyse, which is a very good Village, and Gaur, with a strong
Castle in it.

Tenremond stands upon the Mouth of the River Denre, where it enters into the
Scheld. Its a rich Town, and strong both by Nature and Art, and a place of
great Trading.

Montgerhard, in French Grandmont stands upon the Denre. A pretty fine and
pleasant Town.

Bornhem is a good Village with a strong Castle in it, and has diverse other
subject to it.

Rupelmond stands upon the Mouth of the River Rupel, where it enters into the
Scheld. The Soil through all Flanders Imperial is excellent good and fruitful:
Especially it produces much excellent good Madder.

The Province of Artoys described.
Artoys is bordered North with the River Lis, and the New Channel which
seperates it from Flanders: South with Dourlans, which is the Frontire of
Picardy: East with Flanders Gallicant, and the Country of Cambresis: West,
toward Monstrueil upon the Sea, it borders again upon Picardy. The Soil is
very fruitful, the air wholesome, the Country wants no commodity, but only Wine:
It yields much Corn wherewith it furnishes its Neighbors.

In Artoys are twelve Walled Towns, and eight hundred fifty four Villages, and
many Abbeys, Convents, and Monasteries. The chief Towns are, Arras, St. Omers,
Betune, Air, Bapaumes. The lesser are Hedinsfort, Renty, St. Pol, Perue,
Lillers, La Bassee, and Lens.

The City of Arras described.
Arras stands within a Bow shot of the Scarpe. Its a very great Town, but
divided into two parts, each part having a several Wall; the one named the
City, and appertains to the Bishop; the other The Town, and belongs to the
Prince. The City is little, but fair, and very well Fortified. In it is the
sumptuous Church of the Virgin Mary, in which is a rare Library. The Town is
very large and wonderful strong, both by Nature and Art. The Streets are fair
and broad, and the Market place scarcely to be matched. In the Town are many
Cellars and Vaults, very artificially made, and paved, to withdraw their
Families into, in case of a Siege. It has a great Jurisdiction over many
places about it; and in it are made many excellent Serges.

St. Omer Described.
It has its name of one St. Omer, who first built a Church of that Name, and
stately Abbyes of great Revenues.

St. Omer is a Frontire Town against France, and stands upon the River Aa. Its
a very strong Town, and well peopled, and has a Country of very great
importance under it, and Jurisdiction over many Villages. Near unto it is a
goodly Lake of fresh Water, in which are many little Islands (yet not so little
but you may put a good number of Cattle to feed in many of them) the which are
moveable, and may be drawn with a Cord, fastened to the Rushes that grow in
them, which way you will; and under them are multitudes of Fishes, that defend
themselves there from ^ll Weathers.

Betune described.
Betune is a good, and a strong Town, where is made great plenty of excellent
good Cheese that is sold into diverse Countries.

Air described.
Air stands upon the River Lis. Its a good, and a strong Town, with a Castle
of great Antiquity. The houses in this Town are very well and orderly built.

Bapaulm described.
Bapaulm is a little, but a strong Town, because it cannot be besieged for want
of fresh Water, which is not to be had within three Leagues thereof. It has
also a very strong Castle, and a large Country, and a good Jurisdiction under
it.

Renty is but a Castle with a good Village standing upon a little Brook; yet
its a very strong place.

Hesdinfert is marvelously well seated upon the River Canch. Its one of the
most strong and defensible places in all the Low Countries, and has many large
Privileges; It Is a fair Town, and well Peopled, and is now called Hesdin.

St. Pol has of a long time been honored with the Title of an Earldom, and
has a goodly Jurisdiction over a large Country, and a great Revenue.

Perue is under the Jurisdiction of St. Pol, and is a place of good importance.

Lilliers is a reasonable passable Town.

Lens is but a little Town, yet has a large Territory, and Jurisdiction.

The Villages of Artoys, that be of any importance, having the Privileges of
Markets, and Fairs, are Avennes le Comte, Aschicourt, St Venaut, Courriers,
Blangis, Ligny, and Pas.

The City of Cambray described.
Cambray stands upon the Scheld which runs through the midst of it. Its seated
upon the edg of the Frontiers made by the two Provinces of Henault and Artoys,
on Flanders side, toward France, opposite to Piccardy. It enjoyes a free
Government under the Spiritual and Temporal Dominion of its Archbishopric. It
is endowed with very large Privileges: Full of Noble Churches, whereof the
Cathedral is such as has not the like in any of the neighboring Cities. Its
sufficiently provided also of other Edifices both for use and Ornament. Yet the
Inhabitants are not answerable in number to the Houses; many of which being
Ecclesiastics, Foreign Commerce and Merchandising does rather languish than
flourish there: Neither does the Scheld yield commodity for it. For the River
has its Head but a little above the City, and therefore is hardly Navigable
hereabout.

The City of Cambray is about a League in Compass, and is environed with an
Ancient Wall, flankt for the most part after the ancient Mode, but with many
Bulwarks also, after the Modern Way of Fortification. It has a Ditch which is
very broad and deep on one side, whereinto (for the most part) the Scheld runs:
The rest by reason of its height, is dry, but so much the deeper. On the East
stands a Citadel with four Royal Bulworks, having a great Half Moon between two
of them which are next to the Fields, and diverse other defenses, for the
Custody of the Ditch. Here is made much sine Linen called Cambrick.

Cambray has under it a goodly Signiory and Jurisdiction, called Cambresis, in
which are diverse Villages, and places of importance, and among others, the
Castle of Cambresy, six Leagues from the City, in which the Peace between the
chief Princes of Christendom was concluded, Anno Christi 1559.

The Province of Haynault Described.
Haynault is so named of the River Hayne which runs through it. Its bordered
North with Brabant, and Flanders; South with Champaign and Picardy; East with
the County of Namur, and part of the County of Lieg; West with the Scheld, and
part of Flanders Gallicane. Its twenty Leagues long, and sixteen Broad: The
Air is wholesome, and the Soil excellent good by reason that the Country is
watered with many Rivers, namely, the Scheld, the Sambre, the Tender, and many
other small Rivolets. There are also in it many Lakes, Marshes, Ponds, Pools,
Fountains, goodly Woods, and pleasant Forests.

Haynault abounds with fragrant and fair Pastures, and Meddows for all kinds
of Cattle; with good fruits, and profitable Trees, especially with great plenty
of good Corn. In diverse parts of it are Iron Mines, Lead, and quarries of Stone
for all kinds of Building, yea, of the Touchstone. There is also great store
of excellent white Lime and Sea-Cole.

In Haynault there are twenty four Walled towns, namely, Montz, Valenciennes,
Bouchain, Quesnoy, Conat, Lan dresy, Anesnes, Chimay, Mariembourg, Phillips
Ville, Beamount, Mauberg, Bovais, Bins, Reux, Segny, Brain le Comte, Eughien,
Halle, Lessme, Cheure, Ath, St Guisline, and Leuze. There are also in it nine
hundred and fifty Villages, with many Castles and Signiories: Many of these
Villages are great, and fair, and have Titles of Honor annexed unto them, as
Pequicourt, Fontayn, Laling, Montigny, Antonig, Barlamon, Barbanson, Aimeries,
and many others.

The City of Montz described.
The City of Mons receives its Name from its situation, which in their Language
signifies a Mountain or Hill. But the rise of the Earth there is so gentle, as
it cannot be said to be Mountainous. Its a very Noble City, as well for the
concourse of People, as for Commerce. It has many good Houses in it, and there
the King of Spains Counsel used to sit, which administered justice to all the
Country. All which Prerogatives gave it the precedence over all other Cities in
the Province of Henault. It commands large and spacious Fields round about it,
which may be questioned, whether they abound more in Pasture or in Tillage: Nor
is the Territory there of less rich in Woods, nor generally indeed all the rest
of that Province of Henault. This City is stronger by its natural situation
than by manual industry. It is cut through on the lower side by a little
Rivolet called Trulla, which as soon as it goes out of it, falls into another,
somewhat bigger called Hain, which crossing through the Province before it be
gotten quite out, falls likewise into the Scheld. This Province of Henault
looks toward the South of Campania and Picardy in France.

Mons (says another) is a Noble City for situation, Inhabitants, and
Buildings. Its a very strong Town both by Nature and Art, and may be environed
with Water at pleasure. The City Wall is very strong, and besides its fortified
with three large and deep Ditches, and with an ancient Castle. The Town is
great and fair, and beautified with sumptuous Buildings, both public, and
private, with very clear Fountains, and with Rich Citizens, and Artists.

The City of Valenciennes described.
Valenciennes stands upon the Scheld, and the little River Rovelle, the which,
besides that they make many goodly, and strong Isles in the City, pass almost
under every particular man's House, to the great beauty and commodity of the
place. The seat of this Town is so strong (besides the Fortifications made by
Art) that it may at pleasure be drowned upon one side with water; and its so
defended by Hills on the other side, that it can hardly be besieged but by two
Camps, and therefore is almost impregnable. In the City is a Storehouse, where
great store of Artillery, and Ammunition is kept for the defense of the place.

Its a very goodly, large, and beautiful City, as well for private, as for
public Buildings, namely, Churches, Monasteries, etc. Especially our Lady
Church is very fair, being built after the ancient Mode, with three Vaults,
sumptuous Arches, and goodly Pillars of Marble, and Porphyrie. St. John's
Church also is a stately building; but the Town House, called La Hall, is the
stateliest of all the rest, being built all of square Stone curiously wrought,
and of such greatness and magnitude, that it alone were a sufficient Ornament
to the whole City.

On the left side of this Hall there is an excellent Building of a great
height, in which is a Clock and a Dial, showing not only the Hours of the day
and night, but also the course of the Moon, and of all the Planets, and
likewise of the Months, and diverse other things. Under this Clock-House, and so
under Covert, is the Corn-Market, being great and large; and above in the Hall
is a place to sell Wool and Cloth: There are also in it Fencing Schools, and
places for all Public Courts, Magistrates, and Officers of the Town: A Gaol,
or common Prison: So that in this one Building is compact together all Offices,
serving for the commodity and glory of the Town.

In this City also are diverse Monasteries, Hospitals, and other Religious
places endowed with good Revenues. There is also in it a fair College, and many
Schools, for the Education of Orphans, and poor Children, wherein they are
taught diverse Arts and Occupations. And in it are Cloths, Woosted, Linen, as
fine as Cambrick, changeable Taffaties, and almost all sorts of Mercery Wares,
etc. It has a great Jurisdiction, and enjoyes great Privileges, and
Franchises, more than any other Town of the Low Countries. Its very well
peopled. Its the most Merchantlike Town in all these parts.

Bouchain stands upon the River Scheld. The Town is Strong, and the Castle is
counted impregnable. Its the Principal County of Osternand.

Quesnoy is a strong Townin, which are made Woosteds, and great store of
Linen, by which means there is great Traffic in this Town.

Conde also stands upon the Scheld. Its a good little Town.

Landrecy stands upon the River Sambre: The Town is little, but very strong.

Avesnes stands upon the River Hypre. Its a good and a strong Town.

Chimay stands in a Forest upon the little River Blanch. Its well built, with
a fair Palace for the Prince, a goodly garden, and a Labyrinth.

Mariembourg stands between the Rivers Blanch and Noire. It Is a very strong
Town having four great Bulwarks.

Philipvill is so fortified, that it is held to be impregnable.

Beaumont is a fine little Town standing upon the knapp of a goodly Hill,
whereof it bears the Name.

Maubeug stands upon the River Sambre which passes through it. It Is a good
Town of Merchandise.

Bavays Vallone is a very small Town.

Bins, or Binch stands upon a branch of the River Hayn, and is a good and
pleasant Town.

Reux is a little Town, but stands very pleasantly in a fruitful Soil, and
has many Villages under its Jurisdiction.

Soigny stands upon the little River Sein.

Breine le Comte is a very ancient Town.

Enghien is a good little Town wherein great store of Tapestry of all sorts of
prizes is made.

Halle stands upon the River Sein which runs through it.

Lessny: Through it passes the Denre; and here great store of Linen Cloth is
made.

Cheure stands upon the Little River Hunell: It Is a pleasant little Town.

Ath has the Denre running through it. It Is a little, but a fair, pleasant,
and rich Town, because great plenty of Linen is made in it.

St. Guislem takes its Name from the Abbey that stands in it, which is the
chiefest Abbey in all Haynault.

Leuse is a good Town.

Among the Villages in Haynault, many of them have strong Castles in them, and
though unwalled, enjoy the Privileges of Walled Towns. There is nothing else
memorable in them.

The Province of Luxembourg Described.
Luxembourg is a Duchy. It bears the Name from the principal Town thereof.
Its bounded North with the Countries of Lieg, and Namur: South with Lorrain:
East with the River Moselle, and the Bishopric of Trevir: And West with part
of the Forest of Ardenne.

Its replenished with Mountains, and Forests, and contains the greatest part
of the Forest of Ardenne: Its divided into two Parts; the one called Famenne,
which is fruitful of Corn, and many other good things, and has some Mines, and
diverse sorts of good Stone, of some of which, excellent good Lime is made. It
yields also some Wine. The other part is called Ardenne, which is barren, and
produces little Corn; but has store of Red and Fallow Deer, Goats, Hares,
Conies, and exceeding great plenty of Foul: As also wild Hens of two Sorts,
one as large as Turkey Cocks, called Limoges, the other as big as our common
Hens, called Bruiers. Many Rivers run through this Country, especially the
Moselle.

Luxenbourg contains in circuit about seventy Leagues, and in it are twenty
Walled Towns: namely, Luxembourg, Arlon, Rodemark, Theonvil, Gravemakre,
Coningmakre, Dickrich, Vireton, Estewerck, Vandalen, Bastonac, Mommedi,
Neuschasteau, Danvillers, Marvil, La Roch en Ardenenne, Durby, St. Vite, March
and Salme. Diverse Castles there are in this Country very ancient and Noble,
like to little Towns. There are likewise in this Duchy one thousand one
hundred sixty nine Villages, diverse of which are fair, and great, as La
Rochotte, Avio, and St. Hubert.

The City of Luxembourg Described.
Luxembourg has the River Elze passing through it. Its large, and a very
strongly seated City, yet but reasonably built, having been often destroyed by
the Wars.

Arlon has suffered much by the Wars.

Rodemark is a good little Town with a strong Castle.

Theonville stands upon the Moselle, having a goodly Bridge over the River. Its
a marvelous strong Town.

Gravemackren, and Coninkmackren stand both upon the Moselle.

Bastonack is a good little Town, and is commonly called Paris en Ardenne.

Mommedi stands: upon an high Hill, at the foot whereof runs the River Cluirs.
Its a strong Town.

Neuscastle is also a strong Town.

Danvilliers, is a fair and a strong Town.

Marvil stands upon the Chiers.

St Vite is a little, but a very pleasant and fine Town.

Salme is a good and a rich Town.

Ivoy, Chimy, and some other Towns have been so often destroyed in the Wars
between France and Spain that there is nothing remarkable in them.

No Province in all the Low Countries, is so replenished with Nobility as this
Duchy of Luxembourg, who govern their Subjects and Tenants like to the
Peasants of France, or rather like Slaves, contrary to the liberty of the rest
of the Provinces of the Low Countries. Here they hate Laws and Lawyers, and end
their controversies among themselves without any Process.

The Province of Namur Described.
Namur is bounden with Brabant, Haynault, Luxembourg, and Lieg. Its a small
Country, and yet abounds with Riches, and many good things. Its stored with
People, and those very industrious, and faithful to their Prince. The Nobles
are valiant and well used in Military Discipline. The air is very wholesome, the
Country is well watered with many Rivers and Brooks, especially the Mouse, and
the Sambre, which besides the benefit of Portage, furnishes the Country with
abundance of Fish.

Its well replenished with Woods, and Forests, the greatest whereof is called
Marlaign, which abounds with all sorts of Venison, and Fowl. The Valleys
produce abundance of Corn and Grain: The Hills are full of goodly Woods,
excellent clear Fountains, rich Mines of Iron, and some of Lead, Quarries of
fine Stone for Building, as Marble of all sorts and Colors, Black, White,
Tawny, and Porphiry, or Jasper, which is red streaked with White, Blew Marble,
but mingled with White, which perfects the beauty of it. Besides diverse other
sorts of fine Stone. They have also excellent Lime, and Sea-coal: Much
Saltpeter is also made in this Country. But especially the Forges of Iron are
so many that the whole Country seems to be Vulcans Forge.

In the Country of Namur are four Walled Towns; Namely, Namur, which gives name
to the whole Country, Bovines, Charlemont, and Valencourt. And there are beside
in it one hundred eighty two Villages, and many fair and Rich Abbeys.

The City of Namur described.
It stands between two Hills, upon the River Meuse, and through it passes the
Sambre, which there falls into the Meuse. Its a fair and a rich Town with a
strong Castle in it.

Bovines stands upon the Meuse, and is a reasonable good Town.

Charlemont is a Town wonderful strong, and of exquisite fortifications, though
but small.

Valencourt stands in a very fruitful Country, and is a good little Town.

The Principal Villages in this Country of Namur are
Dave, which is a goodly Village, with a strong Castle standing upon the Meuse.
It has also a great jurisdiction, and is honored with the Title of a Vicounty.

Other Villages of note are Floren, Vascy, and Sanson.

These are all the Low Country Provinces: Yet because the Bishopric of Lieg,
and the Town of Aquisgrane, are Neighbors, Friends, and in League with them,
take this brief Description of them.

The Bishopric of Liege described.
This Country North and West is bordered with Brabant: East with the Meuse and
Namur, and South with Luxembourg. The air is very wholesome, the Country
pleasant, and abounding with all kind of Grain* and Fruits. As for Flesh, Fish,
Venison, and Fowl of all sorts* there is great abundance, and of taste excellent
good.

Mines there are also of Iron, and some of Lead, and veins of Brimstone, and a
few of Gold that is very fine. Quarries there are also of Stone excellent good,
as of Alablaster mingled with black; Marble of all sorts, as in Namur; great
plenty of Pit-Cole, dug so deep, that sometimes they go under the very
Chanel of the Meuse. The Cole of this Country is much sweeter, and casts a
far greater heat than that of Haynault, or Namur. The Turfe also far suppasseth
that of Holland and Brabant, for which cause the Ligeoys, boast, that they have
in their Country three things passing all other Countries, namely, Bread better
than Bread, Iron harder than Iron, and Fire hotter than Fire. This Cole is
kindled with Water, and quenched with Oil.

In this Country also is made great abundance of Saltpeter. In brief, this
Country is so pleasantly seated, the Air so wholesome, the Soil so fruitful of
all things serving for the use and delight of Man, to which add the great
freedom which the People live in there, that it is not unfitly called, The
Paradise of Priests.

Under this Bishopric of Lieg is contained a very large Jurisdiction, of
Towns, Castles, Bourgs, and Villages; namely, the Duchy of Buillon, the
Marquisat of Francymont: The County of Lotz and Hasbain: Two and fifty
Baronies, and many rich Abbeys.

There are under its Jurisdiction (besides the half of Mastrieke) twenty four
walled Towns, namely, Legi, Buillon, Francimont, Lotz, Borkworm, Tongres, Hoey,
Asselt, Dinant, Masiek, Stochem, Bilson, St. Truiden, Tuin, Viset, Varem,
Beringh, Herke, Bree, Per, Hamont, Siney, Fosse, and Covines, besides one
thousand and eight hundred Parishes with Churches; besides Hamlets, Castles,
and Baronies of Noble men.

The City of Liege described.
Liege stands in a Pleasant Valley upon the River Meuse, being environed with
Hills on all sides. The Meuse enters into it with two Branches, and makes
many pleasant Isles within the Town. The Rivers that pass through this City
are; First, the Meuse, then the little River Lieg, and lastly three little
Brooks, Ute, Vese, and Ambluar, all three being stored with excellent good
Fish, especially Ute has one sort of excellent delicate Fish above all the
rest called Utins.

There are also within this City many clear Springs and Fountains, and that in
such abundance, that some Houses have two or three of them. It Is a very great
and a large City, containing many Hills, Valleys, Rivers, and Vine grounds,
being about four Italian Miles in Circuit. The buildings are very Fair, being
all of Stone; And above all, the Bishops Palace is most stately and
Magnificent.

But in number of Churches, and beauty and riches of them, in Monasteries and
Convents, this Town passes all the Towns in Lower Germany, yea, of France
also. For there are in it eight Collegiate Churches, with Canons, who are very
Rich, especially the Canon of St. Lambert, the Patron of the Town.

In this City of St. Lambert, among diverse old Rich Jewels and Relics, is a
great Image of St. Georg on Horsback, all of pure Gold, which Charles Duke of
Burgundy gave, to make amends for his hard usage of this City when he took it
by Storm.

There are also in it four Rich Abbeys, having in each of them a goodly
Library. There are also three Nunneries, and all the Four Orders of Friars,
some of which have two Convents. There are also thirty two Parish Churches; and
so many other Churches, Monasteries, and Hospitals, within and without the
Town, that the Churches are accounted in all above a Hundred. This City is well
replenished with People, many of which live very idely, their Language is
French. Its an Imperial City, but they are only bound to furnish the Emperor
with a few men in his War against the Turks.

Hubert Thomas writes, that at one time there were students in this City, nine
Kings Children, twenty four Dukes Children, twenty nine Earls Children, besides
a number of Barons, and Gentlemen's Children, the greatest part of which were
Canons of the Rich College of St. Lambert aforementioned.

Buillon is a great Castle, stanstanding very artificially upon the Point of a
Hill, with a great Bourg under it. The Castle is larg, and well Fortified, and
very strong both by Art and Nature. It has the Title of a Duchy, and has
under it a great Country, and a large Jurisdiction.

Francimont was sometimes a Walled Town; its now but a Village, yet has it a
strong Fort in it. Near to this place is a Village called Thou, where are many
good Lead Mines, and Quarries of excellent black Marble.

Lootz, or Borchloon is a Country with a large Territory, and Jurisdiction
under it. Its a pretty little Town.

Brockworm stands upon the Jecker. Its a pretty Town and well peopled.

Tongres stands also upon the Jecker, which at Mastrick enters into the Meuse.
Here is a marvelous way formerly all paved with goodly Stone, raised up of
wondrous height between two Walls, which reached from Tongres to Paris, which
is above two hundred Italian Miles, some parts whereof remain unto this Day.
Certainly it was an ancient Work of the Romans, who usually employed their
Armies and Subjects in such stupendous works, to keep them from idleness,
which is the Mother of Sedition and Civil-Warres.

Eight Leagues from Tongres, and five from Lieg, is the Village of Spa, or
Spaw, within half a League whereof is the Fountain, so famous for the virtue
that it has to cure the Tertian Ague, the Dropsy, the Stone, the exulceration
of the Lungs, the Sciatique, and all diseases of the Stomach, and the Liver.
This Village of Spaw stands in a fair Wood, which is part of the Forest of
Ardenne, and the Fountain most commanded is called La Fountain de Savenier, the
water whereof tastes of Iron, there being many Iron Mines thereabout. The
Water is of most virtue in July, when the Weather is hottest.

Hoey was sometimes a famous City, bearing the Name of a furious River that
here falls into the Meuse. The Meuse runs through the midst of this Town, over
which is built a very stately Bridge. Its now a reasonable good Town, with a
strong Fortress in it. The Country about it abounds with Iron Mines and Cattle.

Hasselt stands upon the River Demere. Its an indifferent good Town and well
Built.

Dinan stands upon the Meuse, and is seated in a very good Country abounding
with Black Marble, with Mines of Iron, and Quarries of other very good Stones
to build with. It has a Castle in it.

Maiseeck is a reasonable good Town, standing upon the Meuse.

Stockhem is a fine little Town, standing also upon the Meuse. Bilsen is but a
little Town.

St. Truden, or Centron is a fair Town, and their Language is Flemish.

Tuin, or Tovin stands in Haynault, but is subject to the Bishop of Lieg. Its
an indifferent good Town.

The other Towns are Reasonanable good, and of some account. As for the
Villages there is not much remarkable in them, and therefore I pass them over.

An account of the great difference that is between the Country and People of
Lieg, and the Country and Citizens of Aix, though they be but six Leagues
asunder, and both in the same Climate.
Lieg is in subjection, Aix in liberty, but both under the protection of the
Empire. At Lieg they speak French, at Aix Dutch. The Liegeoys are pleasant, and
sociable: They of Aix unsociable, and Melancholy. Yea, the very Air and Soil
retain the same difference: For its Summer at Lieg when its Winter at Aix: Yea,
often its Snow and Ice at Aix, when its warm at Liege.

The City of Aix, or Aquisgrane described.
Aix is situated between the Duchy of Brabant, Limbourg, Juliers, and the
Bishopric of Liege. Charle-Main was the Founder of this City, who ordained it
to be the chief City of the Empire, and that the King of the Romans should
receive the Iron Crown at Aix by the Archbishop of Colen, who is the
Metropolitan thereof; The Silver Crown at Millan, and the Imperial Crown of
Gold at Rome. Here he dyed, and was buried Anno Christi 813.

Aix is a goodly City, and the Country about it is very pleasant and fruitful,
but the Buildings of the Town do not answer the fame of the Place, saving the
hot Baths, which are very fairly built, and are very wholesome for many Diseases.

Aix is an Imperial City, but pays only a small Tribute to the Emperor;
otherwise it enjoyes freedom, and has the Duke of Cleves for Protector, next
Neighbor and perpetual Confederate.

FINIS.

