THE LIFE and DEATH OF POMPEY the Great. With all his Glorious Victories and
Triumphs. AS ALSO The LIFE and DEATH OF ARTAXERXES MNEMON, One of the Great
PERSIAN EMPERORS.

By Sa. Clarke sometime Pastor in St. Bennet Finck London.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door. 1665

THE LIFE and DEATH OF POMPEY THE GREAT.
STrabo, the Father of Pompey was much hated by the People of Rome, His
Parentage.
who feared his greatness obtained by Arms (for he was a Noble Captain) and
to show their distaste, when he was slain by a Thunderbolt, as his Body was
carrying to burial, the People seized upon it, and did great despite unto it:
But on the contrary, never any other Roman, besides Pompey, had the love of the
People so soon, nor that continued constante^, both in prosperity, and
adversity, than it did to him: And that which procured their love, and good
liking, was his temperance in life, aptness to Arms, Eloquence of speech,
Faithfulness of his word, His towardlynesse.
and Courtesy in his behavior. He gave without disdain, and received with
great Honor: Being but a child, he had a certain grace in his look, that wan
men's good wills before he spoke. His countenance was amiable mixed with
gravity; and when he come to man's estate, there apppeared in his gesture, and
behavior, a grave, and Princly Majesty. His hair stood a little upright, and
the sweet cast, and motion of his eyes made him very graceful. He was sober,
and temperate in his Diet, contenting himself with common meats; and when once
in his sickness, his Physician advised him to eat a Thrush, and none could be
gotten, a Friend told him, that Lucullus (a certain great man) kept them all
the year, where he should be sure not to fail; he replied, What then? If
Lucullus were not, His abstinence.
should not Pompey live? and therewithal, letting his Physicians counsel
alone, he bad them dress him such meat as was easy to be had.

Pompey being a young man, and in the Field with his Father, who was in Arms
against Cinna, there lay with him in his Tent a Companion of his, called Lucius
Terentius, who being corrupted with money, promised Cinna to slay Pompey, and
other of his Confederates had promised to set their Generals Tent on fire. This
conspiracy was discovered to Pompey as he sat at supper, which nothing amazed
him, but he drank freely, and was merrier with Terentus than ordinary: His
cou^rage and Prudence.
But when it was bedtime, he stole out of his own Tent, and went into his
Fathers. In the night Terentius went into Pompey's Tent, and with his Sword
gave many a thrust into the Matteres^e: Presently also the whole Camp was in an
uprore, and the Soldiers, out of hatred to their General, would needs in all
have have gone, and submitted to the Enemy: and Strabo du^st not go out of his
Tent to speak to them, but Pompey ran amongst these Mutineers, and with tears
in his eyes besought them (...) their General* He went also and threw himself
flat on the Ground athwart the Gate of the Camp, and told them that they should
march over him if they had such a desire to be gone: whereupon, the Soldiers
being ashamed of their treachery, returned to their lodgings.

Presently after his Fathers death, He is accused.
Pompey being his heir, he was accused for robbing the common Treasury, and in
particular for taking certain toiles, and cords of Hunters nets: He confessed
the having of them, and that his Father gave him them when the City of Asculum
was taken; but that he had since lost them, when Cinna came to Rome with his
Army, at which time the unruly Soldiers, breaking into his House, plundered him
of all that he had. This matter had many days of hearing before it was
determined, in which time Pompey showed so much courage, and Prudence in
managing of it, that he wan such credit, and favor by it, that Antistius, who
at that time was Praetor, and Judge of the cause, fell into such a liking of
him, that secretly he offered him his Daughter in marriage, and Pompey liked so
well of the match, that the parties were privately made sure each to other: And
cleared.
And not long after, through the care, and pains of Antistius, when the Judges
came to pass Sentence, Pompey was cleared.

This business being over, Pompey married Antisti^: after which going into
Cinna's Camp, His marriage.
he was wrongfully accused of some misdemeanors; whereupon, being afraid of
the Tyrant, he secretly stole away* and when he could not be found in Cinna's
Camp* there went a rumor abroad that Cinna had murdered him, which so
irritated some, who of a long time had hated Cinna* that upon this occasion,
they rose up against him: But he thinking to save himself by flight, was
pursued by a Captain with a drawn Sword; Cinna seeing him, fell down on his
knees to him, and proffered him his Signet Ring, which was of great price to
spare his life: Tush (said the Cap^ain) I come not to seal any Covenant, but to
be revenged upon a Villain, and cruel Tyrant, and withal ran him through and
slew him. Cinna slain.


Cinna being thus dispatched, Carbo took upon him the Government, a more cruel
Tyrant than the former: And after him, Carbo succeeds.
Syll^ succeeded; and at this time the Romans, being grievously oppressed by
one Tyrant after an other, thought themselves happy in the change of
Governors. For their City was brought into such misery, as hoping no more to
see Rome recover her lost liberty, they desired yet a more tolerable bondage.

In Sylla's time Pompey was at a place in Italy called Picenum, And Sylla.
in the Marches of Ancona, where he had certain Lands, but much more the love
and favor of the Citizens for his Fathers sake. He seeing that the most Noble
men of Rome forsook their Houses, and estates to repair to the camp of Sylla,
as unto a place of safety, he also resolved to go thither, yet not in a base
manner, like a Fugitive, but purposed to raise an Army, and to go in an
Honorable manner as one that could do Sylla good service. So he made trial
of the good will of the Picentines, who readily joined with him, and whereas
there was amongst them one Vindius, who opposed Pompey, saying, That a Boy that
came from School but the other day, must now in have be a Captain, the rest of
the Citizens were so incensed against him, that they ran upon him and slew him.

Thus Pompey being but twenty three years old, not tarrying for Commission from
any man, took upon himself Authority, and causing a Tribunal to be set up in
the midst of the market place of Auximum, a great, and Populous City, he
commanded the two Brethren, called the Ventidians (the chiefest men of the
City, but his enemies) presently to avoid the City: Then began he to leavy men
to constitute Captains, Leiutenants, Sergeants, and such other Officers as
appertain to an Army. And from thence he went to the other neighboring Cities,
where he did the like, so that in a short space he had gotten three complete
Legions together, as also Ammunition, Carts, and all other necessaries, Pompey
raised an Army,
for them.

In this sort did Pompey advance toward Sylla; not in have, He goes toward
Sylya.
as a man that was afraid to be met with by the way, but by small Journeyes,
lodging still where he might have the best advantage against an enemy, causing
the Cities wheresoever he came to declare against Carbo, and for Sylla. Yet
three Captains who adhered to Carbo, Carinna, Caelius, and Brutus, did in three
several places compass him in on every side, thinking to have destroyed him.
Pompey was nothing amazed hereat, but marshalling his Army, he first set upon
Brutus, having placed his Horsemen (amongst whom himself was in Person) before
the Battle of his Footmen, His danger by the way.
and when the men at Arms of his enemy (who were Gauls) came to charge upon
him, he singled out the chiefest amongst them, and ran him through with his
Spear, and slew him. The other Gauls seeing their Champion slain, His
Victories.
turned their backs, and in their flight, over ran their own Footmen; so that
at last they all fled for their lives.

Then the Cities round about, being terrified with this overthrow, came in and
yielded themselves to Pompey: Afterward Scipio also the Consul, coming against
Pompey to fight him, when the Battles were ready to join, before they threw
their Darts, Scipio's Soldiers saluted Pompey, and went over to his side,
whereupon Scipio was faign to fly. And lastly Carbo himself sending diverse
Troops of Horse against him by the River Arsis, Pompey charged them so
furiously, and drove them into such a place of disadvantage, that being neither
able to fight nor fly, they delivered up themselves with their Horses, Arms,
and all to his mercy.

Sylla all this while heard nothing of these overthrows which Pompey had given
to his enemies, but understanding his danger, being environed with so many
Arms, fearing lest he should miscarry, he made have, and marched to his relief.

Pompey being informed of Sylla's approach, commanded his Captains to Arm
themselves and to set their Army in good array, that their General Sylla might
see how bravely they were appointed. For he expected that Sylla would do him
great honor, He meets Sylla.
as indeed he did, even beyond his expectation: For when Sylla saw him afar
off, coming toward him, and his Army marshalled in such good order of Battle,
and his men so bravely advancing themselves, being elated with their late
Victories, he alighted from his Horse; and when Pompey came to do his duty to
him, and called him Emperor, or Sovereign Prince, Sylla resaluted him with
the same Title, which made all that were present to wonder that he would give
so honorable a name to so young a man as Pompey was, Sylla honors him.
who as yet was not made a Sanator: Considering also that Sylla himself did now
contend for that Title, and Dignity with Marius, and Scipio. The intertainment
also that Sylla gave him afterward, was every way answerable to the first
kindness that he showed him. For when Pompey at any time came to him, he would
rise up, and put off his Cap to him, which he did not to any other Noble man
that was about him: Yet was not Pompey puffed up with all this, nor the prouder
for it.

Shortly after Sylla would have sent Pompey into Gaul (now France) because that
Metellus, the Roman General there, was thought to have done no exploit worthy
of so great an Army as he had with him: But Pompey answered, that there was no
reason to displace an ancient Captain that was of greater fame, and experience
then himself, His modesty.
Yet (said he) if Metellus himself be contented, and will desire it of me, I
will willingly go, and help him to end this War. Metellus being informed
hereof, wrote for him to come.

Pompey then entering Gaul, did of himself wonderful explots, and so revived
the courage, and valor of old Metellus, that the War prospered exceedingly in
their hands: His acts ni Gaul.
But these were but Pompey's first beginnings, and were wholly obscured by the
luster of those many Wars, and great Battles which he fought afterward.

When Sylla had over come all Italy, and was proclaimed Dictator, he rewarded
all the great Captains, and Leiutenants that had taken his part, and advanced
them to honorable places, and Dignities in the Commonwealth, freely granting
whatsoever they requested of him; But for Pompey, highly esteeming him for his
Valor, and thinking that he would be a great support to him in all his Wars,
he sought by some means to ally him to himself, Metella, his Wife being also
of the same opinion, His second marriage.
they both persuaded him to put away his Wife Antistia, and to marry Aemilia,
who was Daughter to Metella by a former Husband, though she was married to an
other, and now with child by him. These marriages were wicked, and Tyrannical,
Tyrannical proceedings
fitter for Sylla's time, than agreeable to Pompey's nature, and condition. And
truly it was a shameful thing for Pompey to forsake his Wife Antistia, who for
his sak?, a little before had lost her Father, that was murdered in the very
Senate House upon suspicion that he took part with Sylla for his Son Pompey's
sake: and to take Aemilia from her lawful Husband, by whom she was great with
child, and to whom she had been married not long before: which also caused the
Mother of Antistia to lay violent hands upon her self, seeing her Daughter to
receive such open and notorious wrong. But God who hates such Injustice, and
cruelty, followed Pompey with this Judgment, that his Wife Aemilia died
miserably presently after in childbirth in his House.

About this time news was brought to Sylla, that Perpenna was gotten into
Sicilie, and had brought all that Island into subjection to him, where he might
safely intertain all Sylla's enemies: That Carbo also kept the Seas thereabouts
with a certain number of (...) was gone into Africa, to whom resorted many
other Noblemen who were escaped from the proscriptions and outlaries of Sylla.

Against all these was Pompey sent by his Father in Law with a great Army, He
is sent into Sicily.
who no sooner was arrived in Sicily but Perpe^na fled, and left the Island to
him. Then did Pompey deal friendly and favorably with all the Cities which
before had endured great troubles and misery, and set them again at liberty,
the Mamertines only excepted, who dwelt in Messina: they despising his
juridiction and Government, And conquers it*
pleaded the ancient privileges of the Romans which had been formerly granted
unto them. But Pompey answered them angerly, What do you pr^ting to us of your
Law that have our Swords by our sides? His cruelty.
He dealt also too cruelly with Carbo in his misery; for he might have killed
him in hot blood when he first fell into his hands with less blame: But
Pompey, when he was taken, caused him to be brought before him, though he had
been thrice Consul, and to be publicly examined, sitting himself in his
Tribunal, and condemned him to die in the presence of them all, to the great
distaste, and offense of all that were present: Yet he bad them take him away to
execution, which was done accordingly.

Pompey dealt as cruelly also with Quintus Valerius, a man of rare parts, and
excellent Learning, who being brought to Pompey, he took him aside, and walked
a few turns with him, and when he had learned what he could of him, he
commanded his Guard to take him away and dispatch him. Pompey indeed was
compelled to make away all Sylla's enemies that fell into his hands: But for
the rest, all that he could suffer secertly to steal away, he willingly
connived at it, and would not take notice of it, yea, himself did help many to
save themselves by flight.

Pompey had determined to have taken sharp revenge of the City of the
Himerians, who had stoutly taken the (...) one of the Governors of the City,
craving audience of Pompey, told him boldly, that he should do great injustice
if he should pardon him, who was the only offender, and destroy them who were
not guilty. Pompey then asking him who he was that durst take upon himself the
offense of them all? Sthenis answered, That it was himself who had persuaded
his Friends, and compelled his enemies to do what was done: Pompey being much
pleased to hear the frank speech, and boldness of the man, he forgave both
him, and all the Citizens.

After this Pompey being informed that his Soldiers did kill diverse in the
highways, His Prudence.
he caused all their Swords to be sealed up, and whose s^al soever was broken,
he punished them soundly for it.

Pompey being busy about these matters in Sicily, he received instructions, and
a Commission from Sylla, and the Senate at Rome, to depart thence immediately
into Africa, with all his power to make War against Domitius, who had a very
great Army. Pompey accordingly speedily prepared to take the Seas, leaving
Memmiu^* his Sisters Husband, to Govern Sicily, He passes into Africa.
and so imbarking in sixscore Galleys and eight hundred other Ships, wherein he
transported his Victuals, Ammunition, Money, Engines for Battery, and all other
his Warlike provision, he hoised Sail, and landed one part of his Army at
V^i^a, and the other at Carthage, and presently after his landing, there came
to him seven thousand Soldiers from his enemies to take his part, besides
seven whole Legions that he brought with him.

Against him came Domitius with his Army in Battle array; but before him there
was a Quagmire, His great Victories there.
that ran with a very swift stream, very hard to get over; Besides, it had
rained exceedingly all that morning, so that Domitius judging it impossible
then to fight, bad his men to trusse up and be gone. Pompey on the other side,
spying this advantage, caused his men to advance, and coming upon the enemy,
who was now out of order, had a cheap Victory over them, wherein he slew about
seventeen thousand of them, whereupon he was by his Soldiers saluted with the
name Impera^or, or Emperor, but he told them he would not accept of that
honorable Title, so long as he saw his enemies Camp yet standing, whereupon
they ran presently and assaulted it, and took it by force, and slew Domitius
therein.

After this overthrow, all the Cities in that Country, came and submitted to
Pompey, and those that refused were taken by force. They took also King J^rbas,
who had sided with Domitius, and gave his Kingdom to Hiempsal* ^ut Pompey being
desirous further to employ his Army, he went many days ^ourny into the maine
Land, conquering all wheresoever he came, making the power of the Romans
dreadful to those Barbarous Nations, who before made small acount of them. He
caused also the Wild Beasts of Africa to feel his force, bestowing some days
in hunting of Lions, and Elephants: And in forty days he conquered his
enemies, subdued Africa, and settled the affairs of the Kings, and Kingdoms of
that part of the Country, being then but twenty four years old.

Pompey being returned to Vtica, he received Letters from Sylla, willing him to
discharge his Army, and to retain only one Legion with himself till the coming
of another Captain that was to succeed him in the Government of that Country.
He is commanded to disband his Army.
This grieved him not a little, though he made no show of it at all: But the
Soldiers were much offended at it, and when Pompy prayed them to depart, they
gave out broad speeches against Sylla, and told him directly that they were
resolved not to leave him whatsoever became of them, and that they would not
leave him to trust to a Tyrant. Pompey, seeing that he could not prevail with
them, His Soldiers love to him.
rose out of his seat, and went into his Tent weeping: But the Soldiers
followed him, and brought him again to his Chair of State, entreating him to
remain there, and command them, and he desired them to obey Sylla, and to
leave their mutinies. In fine, he seeing they were resolved to press him,
swore that he would kill himself rather then they should compel him, yet scarce
did they leave him thus.

Hereupon it was reported to Sylla that Pompey was rebelled against him; which
when he heard, he said to his Friends, Well, I see then that it is my destiny
in my old age to fight with children. This he said, because of Marius the
younger, who had done him much mischief, and had greatly endangered him. But
afterward, understanding the truth, His return into Italy.
and hearing that all generally in Rome would go to meet Pompey, and receive
him with all the honor they could, he resolved to go beyond them all in show
of good will: wherefore going out of his House to meet him, he embraced him
with great affection, and welcomed him home, calling him M^g^us that is Great,
and commanded all that were present to give him that Name also. Sylla honors
him.


After this Pompey required the honor of a Triumph, which Sylla opposed,
affirming that this honor should be granted to none but to such as had been
Consuls, or at least Praetors: He told him also, that if he should stand for it
he would oppose him. Pompey was not discouraged herewith, but boldly told him,
That all men did honor, not the setting, but the rising Sun. Sylla heard not
well what he said, and therefore enquired, and when it was told him, he wondered
at the Confidence of so young a man, and cried out twice, Let him then Triumph
on Gods Name. Yet many were offended at it, His first Triumph.
but Pompey to anger them more, would be brought in his Triumphant Chariot
drawn by four Elephants, many of which Beasts he had taken from the Kings, and
Princes whom he had subdued: Howbeit the City Gates being too narrow for them,
he was faign to leave his Elephants, and to be drawn in with Horses.

Now his Soldiers that had not all they looked for, nor that was promised to
them, sought to hinder his Triumph, which being reported to him, he said, T^a^
he would rather lose all his preparations, than be forced to flatter them: He
might have been made a Senator if he had sought after it, but in that he did
not, being so young, it pleased the People exceedingly, especially when after
his Triumph they saw him still amongst the Roman Knights: Sylla envies him.
On the other side Sylla was much vexed to see him come so fast forward, and so
soon to rise to so great credit: yet being ashamed to hinder him, he suppressed
it, till Pompey, contrary to his mind, brought in Lepidus to be Consul, through
the good will of the People that furthered his desire* The People love him.
Hereupon Sylla seeing Pompey returning cross the Market place after the
election, with a great train of followers, he said to him, O young man! I see
thou art glad of this Victory, and so thou have cause: for questionless its a
brave thing that through the favor of the People thou have brought in Lepidus
(the vilest person of all other) to be Consul, before Catulus the honestest man
in the City: But let me advise thee to look well to thy self, for thou have
advanced one that will be a dangerous enemy to thee.

Sylla also discovered his ill will to Pompey, in that when he made his Will,
he gave Legacies to every one of his Friends, and left Pompey wholly out: yet
did Pompey take it well enough, and whereas Lipidus, with some others, Sylla's
Death.
after Sylla's Death, would have kept his Body from being buried in the field
of M^rs, and from Funeral solemnities, Pompey prevailed to bury him honorably.

Shortly after Sylla's Death* his Prophesy to Pompey concerning Lepidus proved
true; For Lepidus openly usurping the power which Sylla had, raised an Army of
those of Marius his faction, whom Sylla had hitherto suppressed, which put
Pompey upon his best skill, and experience; For which end he presently took
part with the Nobility, Pompeys Wars with Lepodus.
and the honester part of the People, by whom he was employed to raise an Army
against Lepidus, who had already the greatest part of Italy, and by the help of
Brutus, kept Gaul on this side the Mountains: the rest, Pompey easily
subjected to himself, only he was somewhat long i^ besieging Brutus in Modena.
During which time, Lepidus brought his Army to the Gates of Rome, demanding his
second Consulship, which much affrighted the People: But they were soon
comforted by a Letter which Pompey sent, wherein he informed them that he had
ended his Wars without bloodshed. For Brutus had yielded himself to Pompey who
had slain him.

Shortly after, Lepidus was driven out of Italy into Sardinia, where he fell
sick, and died. At this time Sertorius was in Spain, who kept the Romans in
great aw^, being a valiant Captain* and one to whom all the Fu^gitives
resorted. He had already overthrown many inferior Captains, and was now
grapling with Metellus Pius, who in his youth had been a Noble Soldier, but
now being old, and too wary, he neglected many opportunities, which Sertorius,
by his dexterity took out of his hands.

Hereupon Pompey keeping his Army together, endeavored, by the help of his
Friends, to be sent into Spain, as an assistant to Metellus: and at last, by
the endeavor of Lucius Philippicus, he obtained the Government of that Country.

When Pompey was arrived in Spain, Sertorius gave out bitter j^ers against him,
saying, That he would use no other weapons against that young Boy but Rods: and
that, He gos into Spain.
if he were not afraid of the old woman, meaning Metellus, much less was he
afraid of him. Yet for all these brags, he stood better upon his guard, and
went stronger to fight than he did before, being afraid of Pompey. In this War
the success was very various, yet nothing grieved Pompey more than Sertorius
his winning the City La^ron. His Wa^s there.
Yet shortly after in a set Battle, near the City of Valentia, he slew
Herennius, and Perpena, both gallant Soldiers, and Leiutenants to Sertorius,
with ten thousand of their men. This Victory so encouraged Pompey, that he
hasted to fight with Sertorius himself before Metullus came to him, that he
might have the sole Glory of the Conquest. So they both met by the River of
Sueron in the evening* both fearing the coming of Metellus, the one that he
might fight alone, the other that he miget fight with one alone. But when it
came to trial, the Victory fell out doubtful, for either of their wings had
the upper hand: Sertorius wan great honor in this Battle, bearing all before
him wheresoever he went: and Pompey encountering a great man at Arms, cut off
one of his hands, yet he escaped by turning up his Horse with very rich
caparisons amongst Pompey's followers, and whilst they were contending about
the Horse, he escaped.

The next morning very early, both the Generals brought their Armies again into
the Field, to confirm the Victory, which either of them supposed that he had
gotten: But Metellus, coming to Pompey at that present, Sertorius retreated,
and dispersed his Army. Pompey going to meet Metellus* when they came near, he
commanded his Sergeants, and Officers to put down their bundles of Rods, and
Axes which they carried before him, to honor Metellus the more, being a better
man than himself: But Metellus would not suffer it, but in every thing made
Pompey his equal, only when they Camped together, Metellus gave the watch word
to all the Army.

Sertorius with a running Army, cut them short of Victuals, spoiling the
Country, and keeping the Seaside, so that they were foced to divide themselves
and to go into other places for provision. Pompey in the mean time having
spent most of his estate in this War, sent to Rome for money to pay his
Soldiers, threatening that if they would send him no money, he would return
with his Army into Italy. Lucullus being now Consul, though he was Pompey's
enemy, yet procured the money for him, that himself might the better prevail
to be sent against King Methridates: for he feared that if Pompey returned into
Italy, he would procure to have that employment.

In the mean time Sertorius died, and Perpenna, who was* the chiefest man about
him, supplied his room. But though he had the same Army, the same means, and
the same power, yet had he not the same wit, and skill to use it. Pompey
therefore marching directly against him, quickly discovered his insufficiency,
and said a bait for him, sending ten Troops to prey in the fields, commanding
them to disperse themselves abroad, which accordingly they did, and Perpenna,
took the opportunity, and charged upon them, and had them in chase, but Pompey
tarrying for them at a Foord, was ready with his Army in good order, gave them
battle, His Victory.
and obtained the victory, and thus ended all the War: For most of the
Captains were slain, and Perpenna himself taken Prisoner, whom he presently
put to Death. Perpenna showed to Pompey Letters from the greatest Noblemen of
Rome, who were desirous of change of Government, willing him to return into
Italy. But Pompey fearing that they might occasion great commotions in Rome,
His Prudence.
put Perpenna presently to Death, and burned all the writings, not so much as
reading any one of them.

Pompey after this, His return into Italy.
remained in Spain till he had pacified all tumults, and then went with his
Army back into Italy, and arrived just when the War of the Bondmen and Eencers,
led by Spartacus, was in the greatest fury. Upon Pompey's coming, Crassus
being sent General against them, made haste to give them battle, wherein he
overcame them and slew twelve thousand and three hundred of these fugitive
slaves. Yet Fortune intending to give Pompey some part of the honor, His
victory over the Fencers.
five thousand of these Bondmen, who escaped from the battle, fell into his
hands, whom he overcame, and wrote to the Senate at Rome, that Perpenna had
overcome the Fencers in battle, and that he had plucked up this War by the
roots. The Romans receiving these Letters, were very glad of the news for the
love which they bore to him. Yet for all the great honor and love they did
bear to him, they suspected, and were afraid of him, because he did not disband
his Army, fearing that he would follow Sylla's steps, and rule over them by
force: Hereupon as many went forth to meet him out of fear, as out of good
will* But when he told them, that he would disband his Army so soon as he had
Tryumphed, then his ill-willers could blame him for nothing, but that he
inclined more to the People than to the Nobles; and because he desired to
restore the Tribuneship to the People, which Sylla had pu^ down.

Indeed the common People at Rome never longed for any thing more than they did
to see the Office of the Tribunes set up again: His favor with the People.
and Pompey was very glad that he had such an oppo^tunity, thereby to
ingratiate himself with them, and to requi^e the love which they had showed to
him. This was the second Triumph, and the first Consulship which the Senate
decreed to Pompey, which made him neither the greater, nor the better man. Yet
was it such an Honor, as Crassus (the richest, greatest, and eloquentest man
in Rome) durst not demand before he had requested Pompey's good will therein:
And truly Pompey was very glad of the request, having of a long time sought an
opportunity whereby to gratify him, and therefore he made earnest suit to the
People for him, assuring them that he would as much thank them for making
Crassus his fellow-Consul, and Colleague, as he would for making himself Consul.

Yet when Pompey had obtained his request, and they were both created Consuls,
they were in all things contrary one to the other, and never agreed in any one
thing whilst they ruled together: Crassus had the more authority with the
Senate, and Pompey with the People: for he restored to them the Office of
Tribunes, and passed by Edict, that the Knights of Rome should have power again
to Judge in Causes both Civil and Criminal. This wonderfully pleased the
people, when himself came in Person to the Censors, and prayed that he might be
dispensed with for going to the Wars.

At this time Gellius and Lentulus were the Censors, who being honorably set
in their Tribunal seats, taking a view of all the Roman Knights that mustered
before them, they marvelled when they saw Pompey coming, with all the Ensigns
of a Consul borne before him, and himself (as other Knights did) leading his
Horse by the bridle: and when he came near, he commanded the Sergeants that
carried the Axes before him, to make room for him to pass by the Bars with his
Horse, His Humility^
where the Censors sat. This made the People to flock about him, wondering and
rejoicing with great silence: the Censors themselves also were mavelous glad
to see him so obedient to the Law, and did him great reverence. Then did the
elder of the Censors examine him thus; Pompey the Great, I pray thee tell me,
if thou did serve so long in the war as the Law does appoint? Pompey answered
aloud, Yes verily have I done, and that under no Captain but my self. The
People hearing this, shouted aloud for joy, and the Censors themselves came
down from their seats, and accompanied Pompey to his House, to please the great
multitude that followed him, clapping their hands for joy.

At the end of their Consulship, grudges growing higher between Crassus, and
Pompey, there was one Gaius Aurelius, a Knight, who till then had never spoken
in the public Assembly: He getting up into the Pulpit for Orations, told the
People openly, that that night Jupiter had appeared to him, and commanded him
to tell both the Consuls from him, that they should not leave their Office
before they were reconciled together: Yet for all this Pompey stirred not: But
Crassus took him by the hand, and spoke thus before the People; My Lords! I
think it no dishonor to me to give place to Pompey, since you your selves have
thought him worthy to be called the Great, before he had any hair on his face,
and to whom you granted the honor of two Tryumphs before he came to be a
Senator. Having thus spoken, they were reconciled together, and so gave up
their Office.

Crassus after this, retired to his former manner of life, and Pompey, as much
as he could, avoided pleading men's causes in public, and by degrees withdrew
himself from frequenting the Marketplace, and came seldom abroad, but when he
did, he had always a great train following him. His pride.
It was a rare thing to see him to be familiar with any one, or to come abroad
but with a great company of attendants.

The power of the Pirates upon the Seas began in Ci^ieia, The power of the
^irates.
of which at first there was no great account made, till they grew bold and
venturous in King Methridates Wars, being hired to serve him: and when the
Romans engaged in Civil Wars at home, they neglected looking after them, which
made them more audacious. For they did not only rob and spoil all Merchants by
Sea, but plundered Islands, and Cities upon the Seacoast, insomuch as men of
great Nobility, and Wealth joined with them, and they set up storehouses in
diverse places, and had Beacons to give warning by fire all along the
Seacoasts, which were well watched: they had also great Fleets of Ships well
furnished, with excellent Galliots, skillful Pilots, and Mariners: their Ships
were swift of Sail, and Pinnaces for discovery. All the Seacoast over there
was Music, singing, and rioting amongst them: Prizes were daily brought in,
Persons of quallity taken prisoners, and put to great ransom. Their Ships were
a Thousand in number, and they had taken four hundred Towns. They had Spoiled
and destroyed many Temples that had never been pro^ained before. They had many
strange Sacrifizes and Ceremonies of Religion amongst them, and besides all
other insolences and injuries which they did the Romans by Sea, they often went
on Land, and plundered and destroyed their Country Houses; and once they took
two Roman Praetors in their purple Robes, with their Sergeants and Officers,
and carried them quite away. At another time they surprised the Daughter of
Antonius (a man that had the honor of a Triumph) as as she was walking in the
Fields, and put her to a great Ransom. And further to dispite the Romans, when
they had taken any of them, and they told them that they were Citizens of Rome,
they would cloth them like Romans, and putting out the Shipladder they would
bid them be gone to Rome, and if they refused they would throw them overboard,
and drown them.

These Pirates had all the Mediterranean Seas at their command, that a Merchant
durst scarce look out, or traffic any whether. This moved the Romans (^earing
a famine by their means) to send Pompey to recover the Dominion of the Seas
from them. The first man that moved that Pompey might not only be made Admiral
at Sea, Pompey sent against them.
but have absolute power to command all Persons whatsoever without giving any
account of his doings, was Gabinius, Pompey's Friend: which was done
accordingly, and absolute authority was given unto him, not only of the Seas,
but for the space of four hundred Furlongs from the Sea, within which compass
were many great Nations, and mighty Kings. It gave him power also to choose out
of the Senate fifteen Leiutenants, His large Commission,
and to give to every of them several Provinces in charge, and also to take
money out of the Treasury to defray the charges of a Fleet of two hundred
Sail, with full power besides to leavy what men of War he thought good, and as
many Galliots, and Mariners as he pleased.

This Law was confirmed by the People. Yet the Nobility, and chief Senators
thought that this authority did exceed, not only all envy, but that it gave
them apparent cause of fear to give such unlimited power to a single Person:
whereupon they were all against it but Caesar, who promoted it, not so much to
favor Pompey, as to ingratiate himself with the People. But the Noblemen fell
out with Pompey, and one of the Consuls was very hot with him, told him that he
sought to follow Romulus his steps, but peradventure he would come short of
that end he made: This so provoked the People that they had thought to have
killed him: But Catulus, a worthy man, spoke also against this Edict, yet spoke
much in the praise of Pompey, and in conclusion, avised the People not to
adventure a man of so great account in such dangerous Wars; For (said he) if
you chance to lose him, whom have ye then to put in his place? The People cried
out, Your self. After this, seeing how the People were bent, he spoke no more.

Next after him Rosoius would have preswaded them to have sent an other with
Pompey as his Colleague, but the People made such an outcry against him, that a
Crow flying over the Market place fell to the Ground. His Policy.
Upon the day when the Decree was to be fully passed, Pompey went forth of the
City, and when he understood that it was confirmed, he returned the same night
privately, to avoid the envy they would have borne him if the People should
have flocked in multitudes to have waited on him home.

The next morning he came abroad, and Sacrificed to the Gods, and audience
being given him in a public meeting, he so handled the matter that they much
enlarged his power, almost doubling the preparations, which were at first
Decreed to him. For it was ordained that he should have five hundred Ships, one
hundred and twenty thousand Footmen, and five thousand Horsemen. He chose also
twenty four Senators, all of them having been Generals of Armies, and two
General Treasurers. Whilst these things were preparing, the price of Victuals
fell, which rejoiced the People much, and they said openly, that the very Name
of Pompey had almost ended the War already.

Pompey divided all the Sea into thirteen Divisions, and in each of them he
appointed a certain number of Ships, and a Leiutenant over each of them: His
Victories over the Pirates.
and by thus dispersing his Navy all abroad, he brought all the Pirates Ships
that were in a Fleet within his danger, and when he had taken them, he brought
them all into an Harbor. But such of them as could escape, fled into Cilicia,
as the surest place of retreat: These Pompey would needs follow in his own
person with sixty of his best Ships: Yet went he not till he had scowred the
Tus^an Seas* with the coast of Libia, Sardinia, Sicily, and Corsica, o^ all
those Thieves that had wont to keep thereabouts, and this he did within the
space of forty Days, taking infinite pains, both himself and his Lieutenants.

Pis^, one of the Consuls, did all he could to hinder Pompey's preparations,
and supplies of Oar men, out of envy to his prosperity. Pompey being informed
of it, sent his Ships to Brundusium, He comes privately to Rome.
himself in the mean time passing through Tuscany came to Rome; where so soon
as his coming was known, the People ran out to meet him, as if he had been a
long time absent; and that which made them more joyful was, that now Victuals
came in freely out of all parts, the Seas being cleared from Pirates. Pompey
could have had Piso put out of his Consulship, but would not. So having settled
all things in quiet according to his desire, he hasted to his Navy at
Brundus^^m, and hoising Sale, passed to Athens, where he landed and Sacrificed
to the Gods, His return to his Navy.
and so returned to his Ships. At his going out of the City there were two
writings in his Praise affixed to the Gate. That within was this, The humbler
that thou do thy self as man behave,
The more thou do deserve the Name of God to have.


That on the outside of the Gate was this, We wished for thee, we wait for the,
We worship thee, we wait on thee.


Now Pompey having taken many of these Pirates, upon their submission spared
their lives, which so encouraged the rest, that flying from his Captains, and
Leiutenants, His Clemency, and wisdom.
they came and delivered up themselves with their Wives and children into his
hands. Pompey pardoned all that thus came to him, and by that means came to
have knowledge of the rest, whom he pursued, and in the end took. The most and
richest of them had conveied their Wives, children and goods into strong
Castles and Towns upon Mount Taurus, and they that were fit for service,
embarked, and lay before a City of Corasesium, where they tarried for Pompey,
and gave him Battle by Sea, and after endured a Siege by land: Yet after a
while, they besought him to receive them to mercy, yiedling themselves, their
Towns, and Islands, which they had strongly fortified, into his hands. Thus was
this War ended, and all the Pirates, within less than three months space,
driven out of the Seas.

Pompey won also a great number of Ships, and ninety Galleys armed with Copper
Spurs. As for those whom he had taken* (who were in number about twenty
thousand lusty men and good Soldiers) he would not put them to Death, but
planted them in inland Countries in certain small Towns of the Cilicians, that
were scarce inhabited, who were very glad of them and gave them Lands to
maintain them: and whereas the City of the S^lians had not long before been
destroyed by Tygranes, King of Armenia, he replenished it again by placing many
of them there. He bestowed others of them in the City of Dyma in the Country of
Achaia, which lacked Inhabitants, and had great store of good Land belonging to
it, though many of his enemies greatly blamed him for it.

Before Pompey was chosen General against the Pirates, young Metellus was sent
Praetor into Creet, who finding it to be a den of these Thieves, he took many
of them, and put them to Death: the rest that escaped, being straightly
besieged by him, sent unto Pompey, craving pardon, and desiring him to receive
them to mercy: Pompey accordingly pardoned them, and wrote to Metellus,
requiring him to give over that War, commanding the Cities also that they
should not obey Metellus. He sent also Lucius Octavius, one of his Leiutenants,
who entered into the Towns besieged by Metellus, and fought against him in the
behalf of the Pirates. This act of Pompey procured him much ill will, for that
he fought for the common enemies of the world, His envy.
who had neither God nor Law, and that only to deprive a Roman Praetor of his
Triumph, who had done such good service against them. Yet Metellus lest not off
his Wars for Pompey's Letters, but having taken the Pirates, he put them to
Death.

When the news came to Rome that the piratick War was ended, and that Pompey
had no more to do, but ^o go from City to City to visit them, one Manlius a
Tribune of the People, brought in another Law, His Commission much enlarged*
that Pompe^, taking the Army from Lucullus, and all the Provinces under his
Government, with all Bythinia, which G^abrio kept, should go and War upon
Tygranes* and Methridates, and yet reserve in his hands all his jurisdiction,
and Army by Sea in as royal a manner as he had it before, which was to make
him an absolute Monarch over all the Roman Empire. The Senate stuck not so much
at the injury offered to Lucullus, depriving him of the honor of his doings,
and giving it to another, but that which most grived them was, to see Pompey's
power established into a plain Tyranny: Hereupon they encouraged one another to
oppose it to the uttermost: yet when the day came for the passing of this Law,
they all drew back for fear of angring the People, and none durst oppose it:
Only Catulus inveied against it a long time together: But say what he could,
the Decree passed by the voices of the Tribes. And thus was P^mpey in his
absence, made Lord of all that which Sylla, with much effusion of blood had
attained to with great difficulty.

When Pompey by Letters from Rome was informed what Law the People had past in
his behalf, he seemed to be much grieved that such great Offices, and charges
should be laid upon him one in the neck of another, and clapping his hand on
his thigh he said, O Gods! shall I never see an end of these troubles? His
Dissimulation.
Had it not beeen better for me to have been a mean man, and unknown, than
thus continually to be engaged in War? What! shall I never see the time, that
breaking the neck of spite, and envy against me, I may yet once in my life live
quietly at home* in my Country with my Wife and Children. His Friends that were
about him were much displeased with this his deep dissimulation, knowing that
his ambitious desire to rule, made him mad at heart to be thus employed, the
rather because ^^nds contention between him and Lucullus, which his deeds forth
with discovered.

Hereupon he sent forth his Precepts into all quarters, requiring all Soldiers
immediately to repair to him, His Pride.
and caused all the Kings, and Princes within his jurisdiction to attend him,
and so, going through all the Countries, he changed all that Lucullus had
before established. He also released the penalties that were imposed upon them,
and took from them, all the favors that Lucullus had granted them.

Lucullus finding himself so hardly dealt with, Friends on both sides mediated
a meeting betwixt them, that they might talk together, and accordingly they met
in Galatia, having their Sergeants, and Officers with Rods wreathed about with
Laurel carried before them, which showed that Pompey came to take Lucullus's
honor from him. Indeed Lucullus had been Consul before Pompey, and was the
older man, yet Pompey exceeded him in Dignity, having Triumphed twice. At their
first meeting they discoursed very courteously, each commending the others
deeds, and each rejoicing at the others good success: but at parting they fell
to hot words; Pompey upbrading Lucullus's covetousness, and Lucullus Pompey's
ambition, so that their Friends had much ado to part them.

Lucullus when he was gone, divided the Lands in Galatia which he had
conquered, He crosses Lucullus.
and bestowed other gifts upon them. Pompey on the other side, Camping hard by
him, commanded the People every where not to obey him: He took his Soldiers
also from him, leaving him only sixteen hundred, choosing out such as he
thought would do him small service. He blemished his Glory also, telling every
one that Lucullus had fought only with the shadow and pomp of those two Kings,
and that he had left him to fight with all their force, and power. Lucullus on
the other side said, that Pompey went only to fight with such as himself had
subdued, and that he sought the honor of Triumph over Armenia, and Pontus, as
he had formerly practiced to Triumph for overcoming a few Slaves and fugitives.

Lucullus being now gone, Pompey sent strong Garrisons into all the Sea coast
from Phoenicia to the Bosphorus, and then marched toward Methridates, who had
in his Camp thirty thousand Footmen* and two thousand Horsemen, yet durst he
not fight, but encamped upon an high Mountain till he was forced to leave it
for lack of Water. His* Wars with Met^^ida^^s.
He was no sooner gone but Pompey seized upon the place, and setting his
Soldiers to dig, he found Water enough for all his Army. Then he encamped
round about Methridates besieging him in his own Camp: Methridates endured it
foutty five days, and then slaying all the sick and impotent in his Camp, with
the choice of his Army he escaped by night.

Another time Pompey found him by the River Euphrates, and lodged hard by him:
Methridates prepared, suspecting that Pompey would that night storm his Camp;
but Pompey thought it not sa^e to fight in the dark, and therefore resolved
rather to encompasse him that he might not fly, and to fight him in the
morning: but Pompey's old Captains would needs fight presently, which Pompey at
last consented to, and the Romans r^n upon them with great cries, which so
affrighted their enemies, that they presently turned their backs and fled, so
that the Romans slew ten thousand of them, and took their Camp. Methridates
himself with eight hundred Horsemen, made a lane through the Romans and so
escaped: Yet as soon as they were passed, his men dispersed, some one way, some
an other; that himself was le^t but with three Persons only, whereof
Hyp^icr^te^, a manlike woman was one, who never left him, but always looked to
his Horse, being armed after the Persian manner, till he came to a strong
Castle called Inora, where was store of Gold, and Silver, and the Kings
chiefest Treasure. Here Methridates divided all his richest Apparel amongst
his Friends, and to each of them a mortal poison to carry about them, whereby
they might prevent falling into their enemies hands alive.

Pompey built a City in the place where he gained this Victory betwixt the
Rivers of Euphrates, and Araxes, situate in Armenia the Less, He builds a City.
which he called Nicopolis. This City he gave by the consent of his Soldiers,
to such of them as were old, lame, sick, wounded, or disbanded: to whom many of
the Neighbors afterward repairing, the Nicopolitans lived after the manner of
the Cappad^cians.

From hence Methridates had intended to have gone into Armenia, but King
Tigranes prohibited it, and promised an hundred Tallents to him that could kill
him: Methridates flight.
Passing therefore by the head of Euphrates, he fled through the Country of
C^lchide: In the mean time Pompey invaded Armenia, being solicited thereto by
Tigranes the younger, who rebelled against his Father, and met Pompey at the
River of Araxes, which falls into the Caspian Sea. Then did Pompey and he
march forward, taking in such Towns as yielded unto them. Tigranes, who had
been much weakened by Lucullus, understanding that Pompey was of a mild and
gentle nature, he put his Soldiers into Garrisons, and himself with his
Friends, and Kinsmen went to meet Pompey. When he came near his Camp, being on
Horsebak, there came two Sergeants to him commanding him to alight, which he
did accordingly, and put off his sword and gave it them, and when he came
before Pompey he shamfully fell upon the ground, Base flattery.
and embraced his knees; but Pompey took him by the hand, raised him up, and
made him sit down by him on the one side, and his Son on the other, saying to
them both, As for your former losses you may thank Lucullus for them, who has
taken from you Syria, Phoenicia, Cilicia, Galatia, and Sophena, but for what
you have left till my coming, you shall enjoy it, paying to the Romans six
thousand Tallents, for the wrong you have done them: Provided also that your
Son shall have Sophena for his part.

Tigranes accepted of the Conditions, whereupon the Romans saluted him King,
and he gave great sums of money amongst the Army: But his Son was much
discontented, and when Pompey sent for him to come to Suppe with him, he
refused, wherefore Pompey imprisoned him, and kept him to be led in his Triumph
at Rome.

Shortly after Phraates, King of Parthia, sent Ambassadors to desire this young
Prince who was his Son in Law, and to tell Pompey that Euphrates must be the
uttermost bounds of his Conquest. Pompey answered, that Tygranes had more right
to his Son than Phraates, and as for limiting his borders, he would do it with
justice. So leaving Afranius to keep Armenia, he passed by other Nations that
inhabited about the Mountain of Caucasus, having Methridates in chase. Two of
the chiefest of these Nations were the Iberians, and the Albani^ns, near to
the Caspian Sea. These, upon his request, suffered him to Pass through their
Countries. But Winter hasting on apace, these Barberous People raised an Army
of forty thousand fighting men, and passed over the River of Cyrnus. Pompey
could have hindered their passage, but yet let them come over, and then fought
with them, His War with the Al^anians
and overcame them, and slew multitudes of them in the Field, whereupon they
submitted, and made peace with him.

Then Pompey went against the Iberians, who took part with Methridates. And
Illyrians.
They were more and better Soldiers than the Albanians: they were never
subject to the Medes, and Persians, nor to Alexander the Great. These Pompey
overcame also in a bloody fight, and slew nine thousand of them, and took ten
th^^sand Prisoners. From thence he went into the Country of C^lchide, where
Servilius met him by the River of Phasis, with his Fleet with which he kept the
Pontick Sea: He found it a hard work to pursue Methridates any further, who had
hid himself amongst a People that bordred upon the Lake of Maeot^s. He heard
also that the Albanians had rebelled, wherefore he went back to be revenged on
them, passing over the River of Cyrnus again, yet with much difficulty, because
the Barbarous People had made a defense on the further side, by felling, and
laying many Trees across all along the Banck of the River: and when he was got
over, he was to travel through a dry Country a great way before he came to any
Water, whereupon he caused ten thousand Goats skins to be filled with water,
and so marched over it. At the River Abas he met with his enemies, who had now
an Army of one hundred and twenty thousand Foot men, and ten thousand Horsemen,
but Armed only in Beasts skins. Their General was Cosis, the Kings Brother. In
the Battle this Cosis flew upon Pompey, and throwing a Dart at him, wounded him
in the flanck; but Pompey ran him through with a L^nce, and slew him. Some say
that some Amazons assisted this People against Pompey. His Valor.


After this Battle Pompey going back to invade the Country of Hyrcania, as far
as the Caspian Sea, was forced to retreat by reason of an infinite number of
deadly Serpents that he met withal, Serpents drive him back.
wherefore he went back into Armenia the les^e, to which place he had many rich
presents sent him from the Kings of the Elymians, and the Medes, to whom he
returned courteous answers. Yet he sent Afranius with part of his Army, against
the King of Parthia, who had much harrased and plundered the Country of
Tygranes, and he drove him out.

At this time the Concubines of Methridates were brought to him, His Chastity.
but he would not touch any one of them, but sent them all home again to their
Parents, and Friends, being most of them the Daughters of Princes, and other
Noble Captains, Only Stratonice whom Methridates loved above all the rest, with
whom he had left the custody of his Castle where lay all his Treasures of Gold
and Silver, was but a Singers Daughter. She delivered the Castle into Pompey's
hands, and besides, His self-denial.
offered him rich and goodly presents, all which he refused, saveing such as
might serve to adorn the Temples of the Gods, and that might beautify his
Triumph, leaving the rest to Stratonice to dispose of as she pleased. The King
also of the Iberians sent him a Bedstead, Table, and Chair, all of pure Gold,
praying him to accept it as a token of his love, he delivered them into the
Treasurers hands to be accountable for them to the State.

From hence Pompey went to the City of Amisus, where he did such things as he
had before condemned in Lucullus, taking upon him to establish Laws, to give
gifts, and to distribute such honors, as Victorius Generals used to do when
they had ended all their Wars. And this he did to gratify twelve Barbarous
Kings, and Princes, and Captains that came to him thither. Writing also to the
King of Parthia, he gave him not that Title which others used to do, who styled
him King of Kings. He had also a wonderful desire to win Syria, His Ambition.
and to pass through Arabia even to the Red Sea, that he might enlarge his
Victories every way, even to the Great Ocean. As he did when he conquered
Lybia, and in Spain had enlarged the Roman Empire to the Atlantic Sea; and in
pursuit of the Albanians he went almost to the Hyrcani^n Sea.

As he passed on toward the Red Sea, he commanded his Soldiers, with a
sufficient number of Ships to to wait for the Merchants that sailed to
Bosphorus, and to seize upon the Victuals, and other M^rchandize that they
carried thither: and so passing on with the greatest part of his Army, he came
to the place where he found the Bodies of the Romans that were slain by
Methrida^es under their Captain Trierius, His Charity.
which he caused to be honorably bu^ied, which thing Lucullus had neglected to
do, which made his Soldiers hate him.

Pompey having now by Afranius conquered the Albanians dwelling about Mount
Amanus, he marched into Syria, and conquered it, making it a Roman Province: He
conquered also all Judaea, His acts in Syria, and Judaea.
where he took King Aristobulus: He built certain Cities there, and delivered
others from bondage, sharply punishing the Tyrants in them. He also spent much
of his time there, in deciding controversies, and in pacefying the contentions
which fell out betwixt free Cities, Princes, and Kings. And truly if Pompey's
^ame, and renown was great, so was his Virtue, Justice, and Liberality, which
covered many faults which his familier Friends about him did commit. For he was
of such a gentle nature, that he could neither keep them from offending, nor
punish them when they had offended.

Whilst Pompey was in Judaea, being angry with Aristobulus, Pompey's acts in
Judaea.
he marched against him, Hyrcanus (the Brother of Aristobulus, who contended
with him for the Kingdom) provoking him thereunto. Pompey understanding that
Aristobulus was fled into Alexandrion, a strong and stately ^astle, seated upon
a high Hill, he sent and summoned him to come unto him, and Aristobu^us being
advised not to make War against the Romans, he came to Pompey: and after he had
debated his Title to the Kingdom, with his Brother Hyrcanus, by Pompey's
permission he retired into the Castle again This he d^d two or three times,
always flattering Pompey out of hope to prevail in hi^ suit. Yet Pompey
required that he should deliver up his Castles into his hands* which he was
^aine to do, though he was much discontent^d at it, and therefore he went to
Jerusalem with a purpose to prepare for War.

Pompey not thinking it fit to give him any time for preparation, followed him
immediately, and first encamped at Jericho, where were most excellent Dates, He
comes to Jericho.
and Balsome, the most precious of all other Ointments, and from thence he
marched toward Jerusalem. Aristobulus repenting what he had done, came and met
him, promising him money, and that he would yield up, both himself and the City
in a peacable way. Pompey pardoned him, and sent Gabinius with a party of
Soldiers to receive the money: Yet were they faigne to return without it: for
Aristobulus's Soldiers would not stand to what he had promised. Pompey being
much provoked hereby committed Aristobulus into custody, He marches to Jerusalem.
and presently marched against Jerusalem.

The Citizens being at this time divided amongst themselves, they that stood
for Hyrcanus were willing to open the Gates to Pompey: But the faction of
Aristobulus refused, and prepared for War, because Pompey kept their King
Prisoner: and accordingly they seized upon the Temple, and cut down the Bridge
which led into the City. Hyrcanus and his Friends, let in the Army, and
delivered over to them, both the City, and the Kings Palace, the custody of
both which, Pompey committed to Pis^, who fortified the Houses and buildings
that were near the Temple, first offering to the Besieged conditions of of
Peace, and when they refused, he prepared to give a General assault, being
assisted by Hyrcanus with all things needful.

On the North side of the City Pompey encamped, which was the easiest to be
assaulted: yet were there high Towers, and a deep ditch made with hands, The
Temple besieged.
besides a deep valley which begirt the Temple, and toward the City, the place
was very steep when the Bridge was taken away. To overcome these difficulties,
the Romans raised Mounts, cuting down Trees round about, and filling up the
Trench with materials which the Soldiers brought. This work proved very
difficult, considering the vast depth of the Trench, and the resistance of the
Jews, made from above. But when Pompey observed that the Jews rested every
seventh Day (for though they would defend themselves from an assailing enemy,
yet they held it unlawful on that day to hinder any work that the enemy did)
he chose those Days especially wherein to carry on his work: So that in time
the Trench was filled, and the Tower fitted upon the Moun^, and the Engines
planted which shot huge stones wherewith they battered the Temple, yet was it
long before those strong and stately Towers yielded to the assaults of the
besiegers.

The Romans being much tired, Pompey wondered at the obstinacy of the Jews,
especially considering that all this while they never intermitted their daily
Sacrifices, which the Priests every morning and evening ^ffered upon the Altar,
not omitting the same in their greatest extremities. In the third month of the
Siege, the greatest Tower, being shaken by the battering Rams, at last fell,
and brake down a great piece of the Wall, at which breach many of the Romans
rushed into the Temple. These running up and down, while some of the Jews
sought to hide themselves* and others made small resistance, The T^mp^e taken.
slew them all. Many of the Priests, though they saw the enemies rushing in
with their drawn Swords, yet being nothing at all dismayed, continued their
Sacrifices and were slain at the very Altar, prefering the duty which they
owed to their Religion before their own lives.

All places were full of slaughters* some of the Jews were slain by the
Romans, others by their own Countrymen that were of the contrary faction. Many
threw themselves down headlong from the Rocks: others setting their Houses on
fire, The Jews (...).
burnt themselves, not enduring to behold those things that were done by the
enemy. Here ^ell twelve Thousand of the Jew^^, whereas of the Romans there were
but few slain, though many wounded. Amongst the Captives that were taken, was
Absol^n, the Uncle and Father in Law of Aristobulus, the Son of John Hyrcanus.

Upon the same day and in the same month was the Temple taken by Pompey, as it
had been taken by Nebuchadnezzar five hundred and forty three years before:
Note the (...) when the ^emple was taken.
and it fell out also to be on their Sabbath, about the twenty eight day of our
December. Pompey, entered into the Temple, and many others with him, and there
beheld those things which were not lawful to be seen by any, but the High
Priests only. And whereas there were in the Temple, the Table and Candlesticks
with the Lamps, all vessels for Sacrifice, and the Censers all of pure Gold,
and a huge heap of Spices, and in the Treasuries of sacred money above two
thousand Talents, yet Pompey meddled not with any of these, but the next day he
commanded them which had the charge of the Temple, to purify, and cleanse it,
and to offer their solemn Sacrifizes unto God.

Pompey then restored the High Priesthood to Hyrcanus, both because he had
showed himself so forward all the time of the Siege, Hyrcanus made Prince and
Priest.
as also for that he hindered the Jews that were in all the Country, from
joining with Aristobulus: and together with the Priesthood he gave him the
Principality also, only forbiding him to wear a Crown. Then did he put to death
those that were the chiefest cause of the War, and made the Jews Tributaries
to the Romans, and the Cities which they had formerly conquered in Caelosyria,
he took from them, commanding them to obey their own Governors: and the whole
Nation of the Jews, formerly advanced through prosperity, he contracted within
their ancient bounds.

The King of the Arabians that dwelt at the Castle of Petra, that never before
made any account of the Romans, was now greatly afraid, and wrote to Pompey
that he was at his devotion to do what he commanded. Pompey to try him,
brought his Army before his Castle of Petra, and lodged them for that day, and
fell to riding* and mannaging his Horse up and down the Camp: (...) the mean
time Posts came riding from the Realm of Pontus with Letters of good news, as
appeared by their Javlins wreathed about with Laurel: the Soldiers seeing
that, flocked about the place to hear the news, bur Pompey would make an end
of his riding before he would read the Letters, whereupon many cried to him to
a light, which he did: But then he wanted a high place to stand upon, and the
Soldiers were so impatient to hear the news that they would not stay to make
one, they heaped saddles one upon an other, and Pompey geting up upon them,
told them, that Methridates was dead, having killed himself because his Son
Pharnaces rebelled against him, Methridates Death.
and had wan all which his Father possessed, writing to him that he kept if for
himself and the Romans. Upon this news all the Camp rejoiced wonderfully, and
Sacrifized to the Gods with great mirth.

Pompey finding this troublesome War to be so easily ended, presently left
Arabia, and by speedy marches he came to the City of Amisus. There he met with
great Presents which were sent him from Pharnaces, and many dead Bodies of the
Kings kindred, and the Body of Methridates himself, who was known by certain
scars in his face. His policy.
Pompey would by no means see him, but to avoid envy he sent him away to the
City of Sinope. He much wondered at his rich Apparel, and Weapons: The
Scabbard of his Sword cost four hundred Talents: His Hatt also was of wondrous
workmanship. Pompey having here ordered all things according to his mind, he
went homewards with great pomp, and Glory. Coming to Mytylene, he eased the
City of all Taxes for Theophanes his sake, and was present at certain Plays,
the subjects whereof were the great acts of Pompey He so liked the Theater
where these Plays were made, that he drew a moddle of it to make a statlier
than it in Rome. As he passed by the City of Rhodes, he heard the Rhetoricians
dispute, His Liberality.
and gave each of them a Talent. The like he did at Athens unto the
Philosophers there, and toward the beautifying of the City he gave them fifty
Talents.

At his return into Italy he expected to have been received very honorably,
and longed to see his Wife, He returns into Italy.
and Children, thinking also that they longed as much to see him: But God so
ordered it, that in his own House he met with occasion of sorrow: For his Wife
Mutia in his absence had played the Harlot. Yet whilst he was a far off, he
made no account of the reports which were made to him of her: But when he drew
near to to Italy, he was more attentive to them, He divorceth his Wife.
whereupon he sent her word he would own he no more for his Wife. There were
also rumors spread abroad in Rome which much troubled him; it being given out
that he would bring his Army strait to Rome, and make himself absolute Lord of
the Empire. Crassus hereupon, to give more credit to the report, and to procure
the greater envy against Pompey, conveied himself, Family, and Goods out of
Rome.

But when Pompey came to Italy, calling his Soldiers together, He disbands his
Army.
he made an Oration to them as the time and occasion required, and then
commanded them to disband, and every one to return to his own home, and to
follow his business till the time of his Triumph. As he passed, such was the
love of the People to him, The People honor him.
that multituds of them accompanied him to Rome whether he would or no, and
that with a greater power than he brought with him into Italy, so that if he
had been disposed to have made Innovation, he needed not the assistance of his
Army therein.

At this time there was a Law that no man should enter into Rome before his
Triumph, wherefore Pompey sent to the Senate, requesting them to defer the
choice of Consuls for a few days, that he might further Piso, who sued for the
Consulship that year: But through Catoes means they denied his request. Pompey
marvelling to hear of his boldness and free speech, was very desirous to make
him his Friend. So Cato having two Neeces, he desired to marry one himself, and
to have the other for his Son; He seeks to win Cato.
but Cato flatly denied him, though his Wife, and Sister were angry that he
refused to make alliance with Pompey the Great.

After this, Pompey being desirous to prefer Afranius to be Consul, he caused
money to be given to the Tribes of the People which being reported abroad, made
every man speak evil of him, as having put the Consulship to sale for money,
whereas himself had Purchased it by his Noble and valiant deeds.

The time for his Triumph being come, the stateliness, and magnificence was
such, that though he had two days to show it, His second Triumph^
yet lacked he time to produce all. For there were many things prepared for the
show which were not seen, and would have set forth another Triumph. First the
Tables were carried wherein were written the names of the Nations for which he
Triumphed: as the Kingdoms of Pontus, Armenia, Cappadocia, Paphlagmia, Medi^,
Colchis, Iberia, Albania, Syria, Cilicia, and Mesapotomia: As also the People
that dwell in Phoenicia, Palestina, Judaea, and Arabia: And all the Pirates
that he had overcome by Sea, and Land. In all these Countries he had taken a
thousand Castles, and near nine hundred Towns, and Cities. Of Pirates Ships
eight hundred. Moreover he had replenished with Inhabitants thirty nine
desolate Towns. These Tables also declared, that the Revenue of Rome, before
these his Conquests, arose but to five thousand Myriads, but now he had
improved them to eight thousand, and five hundred Myriads. Besides, he now
brought into the Treasury to the value of twenty thousand Talents in Silver,
Gold, Plate, and Jewels, besides what had been distributed already amongst the
Souldier^, of which he that had least, had fifteen hundred Drams for his
share.

The Prisoners that were led in this Triumph, were the Son of Tygranes, King of
Armenia, with his Wife, and Daughter: The Wife of King Tygranes himself, called
Zozime: Aristobulus King of Judaea. The Sister of M^thridates, with her five
Sons: And some Ladies of Scythia. The Hostages of the Iberians and Albanians,
as also the Kings of the Commagenians: Besides a great number of Marks of
Triumph which himself and his Leiutenants had won in several Battles. But the
greatest honor that ever he wan, and which no other of the Consuls ever
attained to, was, that his three Triumphs were of the three Parts of the World,
to wit, his first of A^rick: His second of Europe: And his third of Asia; and
all this before he was forty years old. But from this time forward Pompey
began to decline, till (with his Life) he had lost all his Honor.

Lucullus at his return out of Asia, was well received by the Senate, and much
more after Pompey was come to Rome. For the Senate encouraged him to deal in
affairs of State, being of himself slow, and much given to his ease and
pleasure, because of his great Riches. So when Pompey was come, he began to
speak against him, and through Catoes assistance, gat all things confirmed
which he had done in Asia, and which had been undone by Pompey. Pompey, having
such an afront put upon him by the Senate, had recourse to the Tribunes of the
People, the viles^ of whom was Clodius, who closed with him, and had Pompey
ever at his el^ow* ready to second what motion soever he had to make to the
People: He also desired Pompey to forsake Cicero, his ancient Friend, but
Clodius his utter enemy. By this means Cicero was brought into danger, and
when he required Pompey's assistance, Cice^o leaves (...).
he shut the door against him, and went out at a back-doore; whereupon Cicero
was forced to forsake Rome*

At this time Julius Caesar returning from his Praetorship out of Spain, (...)
policy.
laid such a plot a^ quickly brought himself into favou^, but tended to the
ruin of Pompey. He was now to sue for his first Consulship, and considering
the enmity between Pompey and Crassus, he considered that if he joyne^ with
one, he made the other his enemy, he therefore mad^ them Fr^ends, which indeed
undid the Commonwealth. For by this means Caesar was chosen Consul, who strait
fell to flattering of the People, He flatters the People.
and made Laws for their advantage, distributing to them Lands, which embased
the Majesty of the chief Majestrate, and made a Consulship no better then the
Tribunship of the People. Bibulus, his fellow Consul, opposed him what he
could, and Cato also, till Caesar brought Pompey into the Pulpit for Orations,
where he asked him whether he consented to the Decree which he had set forth?
Pompey answered That he did: and that he would defend it with the Sword. This
gat him much ill will.

Not many days after, Pompey married Julia the Daughter of Caesar, Pompey
marries Caesar's Daughter.
formerly betrothed to Servilius Caepio: and to pacify Caepio, Pompey gave him
his own Daughter in marriage, whom yet he had promised to Faustus, the Son of
Sylla. Caesar also married Calphurnia, the Daughter of Piso. Afterward Pompey
filling Rome with Soldiers, carried all by force. For as Bibulus came to the
Market place accompanied with Cato and Lucullus, they were basely abused, and
many were wounded, and when they were driven away, they passed the Act for
dividing of the Lands as they pleased. The People being encouraged hereby,
never stuck at any matter that Pompey and Caesar would have done. And by this
means all Pompey's former Acts were confirmed, though Lucullus opposed what he
could. Caesar also was appointed to the Government of both Gauls with four
whole Legions.

Then were chosen Consuls, Piso, Father in Law to Caesar, and Gabinius,
Pompey's great flatterer. Pompey now so doted on his young Wife, He dotes on
his young Wife.
that he suffered himself wholly to be ruled by her, and leaving all public
affairs, he went with her to Country Houses, and places of pleasure, which
encouraged Clodius, a Tribune of the People to despise him, and to enter into
seditious attempts. For when he had driven Cicero out of Rom^, and sent away
C^to to make War in Cyprus, and Caesar was occupied in Gaul, finding that the
People were at his beck, because he flattered them, he then attempted to (...)
things that Pompey had established. Amongst others he took young Tigranes out
of Prison, and carried him up and down with him, and continually picked
quarrels against Pompey's Friends. Pompey coming abroad one day to hear how a
matter of his was handled, this ^lodiu^ having gotten a company of desperate
Ruffians about him* gat up into a high place, and asked aloud, Who is the most
licentious Captain in all the City? They answered, Pompey. Pompey disgraced.
And Who (said he) is he that scratcheth his head with one finger? They again
answered, Pompey, claping their hands with great scorn. This went to Pompey's
heart, who never used to be thus abused, and he was yet more vexed, when he saw
that the Senate was well pleased with this his disgrace, because he had
forsaken, and betrayed Cicero. Upon this a great uprore was made in the Market
place, and many were hurt, whereupon Pompey would come no more abroad whilst
Clodius was Tribune, but advised with his Friends how he might ingratiare
himself with the Senate: they advised him to put away his Wife Julia, to
renounce Caesar's Friendship, and to stick again to the Senate. Some of these
things he disliked, yet was content to call home Cicero, who was Clodius his
mortal enemy, and in great favor with the Senate*

Hereupon Pompey brought Cicero's Brother into the Market place to move the
matter to the People, with many men about him, and they fell to blows, Cicero
recalled.
so that many were slain, yet he overcome Clodius, and Cicero was called home
by the Decree of the People, who also brought Pompey into favor with the
Senate, and caused a Law to be made whereby to enable Pompey to bring Corn to
Rome: and thus by Cecero's means Pompey had once again power given him both by
Sea and Land over all the Roman Teritories. For all the Havens, Marts, and
Fairs, and all Storehouses, and Marchandizes, yea, and Tillage came into his
hand.

For this Clodius acused him, saying, that the Senate* had made this Law, not
because of a dea^^h of Victuals, but that they made a dearth that so the Law
might pass for restoring Pompey's power, which was almost come to nothing.
Pompey having now full Authority ^o cause Corn to be brought to Rome, Pompey
(...) Corn.
he sent his Friends, and Lieu^enants abroad, and himself went into (...); and
when he was ready to return again, there arose such a storm, that the
Mariners feared to weigh their Anchors; N^te.
but he commanded them to do it, saying, Its necessary that the People should
have Corn, but its not necessary that I should live. Thus by his prudence and
courage he filled all the Markets with Corn, and the Seas with Ships, and so
great plenty of Provision was brought in, as fully furnished, not only Rome,
but all Italy.

About this time Caesar's great conquests in Gaul wan him much credit. But
whilst they thought him to be Warring afar off, Caesar ^ comes privately to
Rome.
he appeared in the midst of the People at Rome, and much apposed Pompey in
the weightiest matters of the Commonwealth. For he had the power of an Army
which he hardened with pains, and continual exercise, not only to fight
against the Barbarous People, but to make himself invincible, and dreadful to
the world. Moreover, by that infinite quantity of Gold, and Silver, and other
Treasures that he gat from the enemy, he purchased many Friends to himself,
sending great Presents to Rome, to the Aediles, Praetors, Consuls, and their
Wives; therefore when he was come back over the Alps, He bribes the O^ficers.
and Wintered in the City of Luca, multitudes of the People, yea, two hundred
of the Senate themselves, amongst whom were Crassus, and Pompey, went out of
Rome unto him. All these Caesar returned back again, some with store of money,
others with good Words: But with Pompey and Crassus he agreed, that they two
should sue to be Consuls, and that himself would send them good store of voices
upon the day of Election: and that if they were chosen they should get a Decree
of the People, that they should have some new Provinces, and Armies assigned to
them, and with all, that they should procure his Government to continue for
five years longer. This Plot being discovered, and spread abroad, gave great
distaste to honest men, and many who had intended to sue for the Consulship,
gave it over. Only Lucius Domitius, being encouraged by Cato, stood for it. For
(^^id he) Thou do not contend for the Consulship, but to defend the liberty
of thy Country against two Tyrants. Pompey fearing Catoes faction, thought it
not safe to let Domitius come into the Market place: He sent therefore armed
men against him, who slew the Torch bearer that came before him, and made all
the rest to fly, amongst whom Cato was the last man that retired, who, whilst
he defended Dimitius, was wounded in the elbow.

Thus Pompey and Crassus came to be Consuls, wherein they carried themselves
very dishonestly. For the People being about to choose Cato, Praetor, Pompey
chosen Consul.
Pompey perceiving of it, brake up the Assembly, falsely alleging that he had
certain ill signs, and afterward, corrupting the the Tribes with money, they
chose Antias, and Vatinias, Praetors, and then by Trebonius, a Tribune of the
People, they published an Edict that Caesar should hold his Government five
years longer: Provincis divided.
Unto Crassus they appointed the Province of Syria, and to make War against the
Parthians. Unto Pompey they allotted Africa and both the Spaines, with four
whole Legions, of the which, at Caesar's request, he sent him two, to assist him
in his Wars in Gaul.

Crassus, at the going out of his Consulship, departed into Syria, and Pompey
remained in Rome to dedicate the Theater which he had built, Pompey's Theater
dedicated.
where he caused many goodly Plays to be made, and caused Wild Beasts to be
baited, and hunted, amongst which, five hundred Lions were killed: but the most
terrible fight of all, was amongst his Elephants. This he did to gratify the
People, though to his very great cost, and he procured much love to himself
thereby. But he gat more envy from others by commiting the Government of his
provinces, and Legions, unto his Leiutenants, whilst himself with his wife took
their pleasure up and down Italy.

At an Election of the Aediles, on a sudden there was a great hurlyburly,
Swords were drawn and many were slain about Pompey, so that he was faigne to
send home his Garments that were ^prinkled with their blood, and to fetch
others. His young Wife that was great with child, seeing his clothes bloody,
was so frighted that she fell into a swound, that they had much ado to recover
her. At an other time, being with child again, she fell in labor, and dyed in
childbirth: and as Pompey was carrying her into the Country to bury her near
unto the City of Alba at his Country House, ^ulia dies.
the People took her corpse, and carrying it into the Field of Mars, buried it
their: and this they did more for Caesar, than for Pompey's sake.

This alliance between Pompey and Caesar being thus broken, Pompey and Caesar
quarrel.
which rather covered than bridled their ambition to Rule, there arose a new
stir in Rome, and every man's mouth was full of seditious words: About which
time ^ew^s came that Crassus was overcome and slain in Parthia, who was the
only bar to hinder these two from Civil War: for they both feared him, and
therefore kept themselves quiet. Yet they thought the Empire of Rome was too
little for them. Pompey thinking that Caesar would not disband his Army, sought
to strengthen himself against him by procuring Offices in the City: and when he
could not procure them, the People being bribed by Caesar, he left the City
without a Magistrate, so that there were none to Command, or whom the People
might obey. Hereupon a rumor was spread that a Dictator must be chosen, and
that Pompey must be the man: This Cato opposed with all his power: But when
Pompey's Friends excused him, saying, that he neither sought, nor would accept
of it, then Cato highly commended him, and prayed him to see good order kept in
the Commonwealth, which accordingly he undertook*

Then were Domitius and Massala chosen Consuls, but after awhile one of them
died, whereupon many were earnestly bent to have a Dictator, and Cato fearing
great disorders, was willing that Pompey should have some Office to keep him
from that which was more Tyranicall. Bibulus a chief man in the Senate, and
Pompey's enemy, was the first man that moved that Pompey might be chosen Consul
alone: For (said he) by this means the Commonwealth shall be rid of present*
trouble, or it shall be in bondage to an honest man. It was expected that Cato
would have opposed this motion; but rising up, he told them, that he would not
first have made this motion, but seeing it was propounded by an other, he
thought it meet, and reasonable to be followed. For (said he) Its better to
have an Officer to command, whatsoever he be, than to have none at all, and
that there was none so fit to command* in so troublesome a time as Pompey.

All the Senate consented hereto, and ordained that Pompey only should be
Consul, and that if he saw it needful to have the assistance of an other,
Pompey made Consul.
he ^ight ^ame whom he saw good, yet not till two months were past, Pompey
being thus made Consul alone, he carried it very friendly unto Cato, and
thanked him for the honor he had done him, entreating his assistance in the
execution of his Office. Cato replied that he had no reason to thank him; for
what he had done, he had not done it for his sake, but out of his respect to
the public good: and that if he asked his counsel in any thing, he would give
it him privately, if not, that he would openly speak that which he thought best.

Pompey then married Cornelia, He marries Cornelia.
the Daughter of Metellus Scipio* the la^e Wife of young Publius Crassus,
slain with his Father in Parthia. This Lady was of excellent beauty, and
gifts, well learned, skillful in Music, Geometry, and Philosophy* she was
modest, and sober, free from brawling, or follish curiosity. Her Father was
Noble both by Birth, and deportment. Yet many disliked Pompey's marrying so
(...) and giving himself to Feasting and (...) he should have looked to his
Consulship in so troubl^some a time.

Pompey proceeded sharply against those that by Bribery, and indirect means
came to their Offices. He made Laws, His justice.
and Ordinances for the administration of justice, and himself dealt uprightly
in all things, and took order that Judgment should be administered with
silence, safety, and gravity. But when his Father in Law was accused, he sent
for three hundred and sixty Judges home to his House, praying them to help him,
which the accuser of Scipio understanding, let fall his suit. Plancus also
being accused, Pompey (contrary to the Law) spoke in his commendation;
whereupon Cato, And injustice.
who was one of the Judges, stopped his ears, saying, that he would not hear an
offender praised, being contrary to the Law: Plancus was condemned by all the
Judges to the great shame of Pompey. Yet otherwise he set all things in good
order, and chose his Father Scipio for his fellow Consul for the five last
months. Then he caused the Government of his Provinces to be assigned to him
for four years more, with commission to take out of the Treasury a Thousand
Talents yearly, for to defray the charges of his Wars.

Caesar's Friends seeing this, moved that some consideration might be had of him
also, who made great Wars for the Commonwealth, and by his good service had
deserved either to be chosen Consul again, or else that they should prolong his
charge, and Government, that no other successor might reap the fruit of his
labors; Much stir arose about this matter: But Pompey said, that he had
received Letters from Caesar, by which he requested a successor, and to be
discharged of this War: adding, that he thought it fit they should grant him
the privilege to demand the second Consulship though he was absent. This Cato
stoutly withstood, saying, that leaving his Army he must return home as a
privat^ (...) and in his own Person crave recompense of his Country. Pompey
replying nothing hereto, made many think he bore no great good will to Caesar;
the rather because he had sent to him for the two Legions which he had lent him
under color of his War against the Parthians. Though Caesar smelt his design,
He sends to Caesar for his two Legions.
yet he sent his Soldiers, and rewarded them liberally.

About this time Pompey fell dangerously sick at Naples, whereof he yet
recovered again, His sickness, and recovery.
and the Neapolitans sacrifized to the Gods, for his recovery; the like also
did their Neighbors round about, and it ran so generally through Italy, The
People honor him.
that there was no City or Town wherein they did not make open Feasting, and
rejoiced for many days together. The infinite number of people also which went
to meet him out of all places was such, that there was not room enough for
them all, but the highwayes, Cities, Towns, and Ports were full of People,
Feasting and sacrifizing to the Gods for his recovery. Diverse also went to
meet him that were Crowned with Garlands, casting Nosegays, and Flowers upon
him. Yet some thought that this was the cause of the Civil Wars that ensued.
For hereupon he grew so proud to see himself thus honored, Pompey's Prid^e
that forgetting his former Government, he began to despise Caesar, thinking
that he could easily overcome him when he pleased. Besides, Appius that brought
him his two Legions from Caesar out of Gaul, reproached much his doings there,
and gave out many foul words against Caesar. For he said that Pompey knew not
his own strength, who might overcome Caesar with his own Legions, for that when
they saw Pompey, they would forsake Caesar and turn to him.

These flattering speeches made Pompey so secure, that he laughed them to
scorn who were afraid of War; and such as said that if Caesar came to Rome,
they knew not how his power could be resisted, he smilingly bad them take no
thought, for if he did but (...) ground, he could fill Italy with Armies (...)
and Foot out of all places. Note.
In the (...) increased his Army, and drew near to Italy, (...) some of his
Soldiers daily to Rome to be present at the election of Magistrates, and many
of those that were in Office he wan with money: amongst whom was Paul^^* one of
the Consuls, whom he drew to his side by giving him fifteen hundred Talents.
The like he did to Curio* a Tribune of the People by paying his vast debts, and
he gained thereby Mark Anthony, who was engaged for a great part of Curio's
debt. A Captain alse sent from C^sar, being at the Senate door, and
understanding that they would not prolong Caesar's Government as he desired,
claping his hand on his Sword, he said, Well! this shall give it him. The
miseries of War.


Curio tequested in the behalf of Caesar, that they would either cause Pompey
to disband his Army, or else license Caesar to have his Army as well as he. For
(said he) being private men they will either agree between themselves, or both
being of like strength, neither will seek any alteration for fear of the other.
But Marcellus the Consul, opposed this hotly, calling Caesar Thief, and saying
that he would proclaim him an open enemy to Rome if he did not disperse his
Army. Yet Curio, Anthony, and Piso procured that the Senate should decide the
matter, saying, All they that would have Caesar disband his Army, and Pompey to
keep his, let them go to the one side of the House, and such as would have them
both to disband, let them stand on the other: by this means it was carried
against Pompey. Curio much rejoiced at the Victory, and going into the Market
place, he was there received by his faction with shouts of joy, and clapping of
hands, and nosegays of Flowers thrown upon him.

Pompey was not present to see the good will of the Senators to him; but
Marcellus stood up and said, that he he would not stand trifling, and hearing
Orations, when he knew that ten Legions were already passed over the Alps,
intending to come in Arms against them, and that he would send a man that
should defend their Country well enough. And so going through the Market place
unto Pompey, being followed by all the Senators, he said openly: Pompey, I
commnad thee to help thy Country with that Army thou have already, Pompey made
General against Caesar's
and also to leavy more to aid thee. Lentulus also used the same speech to him,
who was chosen for the year following.

When Pompey went to leavy Soldiers in Rome, some would not obey him, and
others went very unwillingly, the most part of them crying out Peace, Peace.
Anthony also, against the Senators minds, read a Letter to the People sent from
Caesar, The fruits of division.
wherein he seemed to make reasonable requests to draw the affections of the
Common People to him. For he moved that both Pompey and he should resign their
Governments, and dismiss their Armies, referring themselves wholly to the
Judgments of the People, and to deliver up unto them an account of their
doings. Cicero, who was lately returned from Cilicia, endeavored to bring them
to an agreement, propounding that Caesar that should leave the Government of
Gaul, and his Army, reserving only two Legions, and the Government of Illyria,
attending his second Consulship.

Pompey liked not this motion, and so all treaty of Peace was cut off. In the
mean time news came to Rome that Caesar had won Ariminum, a large and strong
City in Italy, Wars between Pompey and Caesar.
and that he came directly to Rome with a great power: But the truth was he
came but with three thousand Horse, and five thousand Foot and would not stay
for the rest of hi^ Army that was not yet come over the Alps, but hasted rather
to surprise his enemies on the sudden, who were all in a hurlyburly, not
expecting him so soon, than to stay till they were fully ready to fight with
him. When he came to the River of Rubicon (which was the utmost bound of the
Province which he had the charge of in Italy) he made an Alt, pondring with
himself the great enterprise he took in hand: At last he cried out to them that
were by, Jacta est alea, let the Die be cast. Coesar passes R^bicon.
Or let us put all to the hazard, and so passed on with his Army.

News hereof coming to Rome, never was there such a consternation and fear
seen amongst them. For all the Senate ran immediately to Pompey, together with
all the rest of the City Magistrates, and Tullus asked him, what power he had
in readiness to resist Caesar? He answered (but something faulteringly) that
he had his two Legions that came from Caesar, and with those that he had levied
in have, he thought he should make up thirty thousand fighting men. Then Tullus
cried out, Ah! thou have mocked us Pompey; and thereupon ordered Ambassadors to
be sent to Caesar. Pompey repoached.
Phaonius also, a bold man, said, Stamp now with thy foot upon the ground,
Pompey, and make those Armies come which thou have promised. Pompey patiently
bore this mock. Then Cato thought good that they should make Pompey Leiutenant
General of Rome, with full and absolute Power to command all, saying, They
that knew how to do the greatest mischief, know best how to remedy the same.
And so immediately he departed to his Government in Sicily. Also all the other
Senators went to the Provinces whereunto they were appointed.

Thus all Italy being in Arms, no man knew what was best to be done: For such
as were out of Rome came flying thither out of all parts, and such as were in
Rome, fled out as fast, where all things were in disorder. They which were
willing to obey were very few, The confusion in Italy.
and they who by disobedience did hurt, were too many, neither ^would they
suffer Pompey to order things as he would, because every one followed his own
fancy, yea, in one day they were in diverse minds. All this while Pompey could
hear no certainty of his enemies, the reports being so various; and when he saw
the tumult, and confussion so great at Rome that there was no possibility of
pacifying it, Pompey leaves Rome.
he commanded all the Senators to follow him, declaring all such as staid behind
to be Caesar's Friends. The two Consuls fled also without Sacrifizing to the
Gods, as their manner was when they went to make War: And Pompey in his
greatest danger and trouble had great cause to think himself happy, because he
had every man's good will*

Shortly after Pompey was gone out of the City, Caesar came into it, Caesar
enters Rome.
who spoke very friendly to all whom he found there, laboring to quiet their
fears: Only he threatened Metellus, one of the Tribunes, because he would not
suffer him to take any of the Treasure of the Commonwealth, saying, That it was
not so hard a thing for him to kill him as to speak it. Thus having put by
Metellus, and taken what he pleased out of the Treasury, he prepared to follow
Pompey, intending to drive him out of Italy before his Army should come to him,
out of Spain.

Pompey in the mean time took Brundusium, and having gotten some Ships
together, he caused the two Consuls presently to embark, Pompey at Brundusium.
with thirty Companies of Footmen, which he sent before to Dyrrachium. He sent
also his Father in Law Scipio, and his Son Cneius Pompeyus into Syria to
provide him Ships. Then did he fortify Brundusium, and guarded the Walls with
Soldiers, commanding the Citizens not to stir out of their Houses. He cast up
Trenches also within the City at the end of all the streets, saving those two
which led to the Haven, and filled those Trenches with sharp-pointed stakes,
and when at leisure he had embarked all the rest of his Soldiers, he by a
sign, called off those which guarded the Walls, and having received them into
his Ships, He leaves Italy.
he hoisted Sails and departed.

Caesar finding the Walls of Brundusium unguarded, presently suspected that
Pompey was fled, and rushing into the City, he had certainly fallen into the
pits, Caesar pursues him.
but that the Brundusians gave him warning of them, whereupon he fetched a
compass about to go to the Haven, and coming thither, he found all the Ships
under sail save two, wherein were a few Soldiers. Some judged this departure
of Pompeys the best Stratagem of War that ever he used: But Caesar marvelled
that being in so strong a City, and expecting his Army out of Spain, and being
Master of the Seas besides, he would so easily forsake Italy. Thus Caesar
within threescore days became Lord of all Italy without bloodshed. He was very
desirous speedily to have followed Pompey, but having no Ships ready, he was
forced to stay. Then did he hasten into Spain to join Pompey's Army with his
own.

Pompey in the mean space had gotten a mavelous great power together both by
Sea, Pompey's power by Sea.
and Land. By Sea he had five hundred good Ships of War, besides multitudes of
Galliots, Foists, and Pinnaces. By Land he had all the flower of the Horsemen
of Rome, and of all Italy to the number of seven thousand, Valiant men, and of
great Houses: But his Footmen were raw and untrained Soldiers, whom Pompey
continually exercised at the City of Beraea, taking as much pains therein as
if he had been in his youth. It was great encouragement to others to see
Pompey, being fifty eight years old, fighting on foot completely Armed, His
industry, and activity.
and then speedily to mount on Horseback, and in his full Career to draw, and
put up his Sword, to cast his Dart with as much agility and strength, and point
blank, that few young men could do the like.

To Pompey there came diverse Kings, Princes, and Lords of great Countries: and
of Roman Captains, who had born Office, to the number of a whole Senate.
Amongst these, Many came to him.
there came also Labienus, who formerly had been Caesar's great Friend, and an
assistant to him in his Wars in Gaul. There came also to him Brutus, a very
Valiant man, who had never before spoken unto Pompey, because he thought him
guilty of his Fathers Murder, but now he willingly joined with him as a
defender of the Roman Liberties. Cicero himself also, who had written, and
given counsel for Peace, thought it a shame not to be amongst the number of
those who would hazard their lives in the defense of their Country. There came
also Didius Sextus, though he was an old man, and lame of one of his legs, whom
when Pompey saw coming (though others laughed him to scorn, yet) he rose up
and went to meet him, judging it a sign of much love when such old men chose
rather to accompany him in danger, than to remain at home in safety.

The chief of Pompey's Army, sitting in Counsel, decreed that no Citizen of
Rome should be put to death, but such as ^ell in Battle: That no City subject
to the Empire of Rome should be sacked, which made Pompey's part liked the
better: And most judged those, enemies both to the Gods, and men, that did not
wish him the Victory. Caesar also showed himself very courteous, Caesar's
curtesy, and mildness.
and merciful; for having taken all Pompey's Army in Spain, he set all the
Captains at liberty, and only reserved the Soldiers to himself: Then coming
over the Alps again, he passed through all Italy, and came to Brundusium in the
Winter time, and from thence, passing over the Sea he came to the City of
Oricum: and having Vibius, one of Pompey's familiar Friends: with him, whom he
had taken Prisoner, he sent him to Pompey again to desire that they might meet,
and both of them disband their Armies within three days, and being reconciled,
and having given their Faith each to other, to return into Italy like good
Friends together. But Pompey durst not trust to these fair words, judging them
but snares to entrap him. He therefore suddenly removed to the Sea coast, and
took all the places of strength near to the Sea side, safely to lodge his Camp
in, and all the Ports, Harbors, and Creeks, fit for Ships to lie in, so that
whatsoever Wind blew, it served his turn to bring him either men, Victuals, or
money.

Caesar, on the other hand was so distressed both by Sea and Land, Caesar wants
Victuals.
that he was driven to hasten to a Battle, and to assail Pompey even in his
own strength, to force him to fight with him, and for the most part he always
had the better in most skirmishes, saving one, wherein he was in danger to have
lost all his Army. For Pompey had valiantly repulsed all his men, Caesar beaten.
and made them fly, and had slain two thousand of them in the field, but he
durst not enter pell mell with them into their Camp when they fled: which made
Caesar say to his Friends, That his enemy had won the Victory that day if ^e
had known how to overcome. This Victory did so encourage Pompeys men, that they
would needs hazard a Battle. But Pompey, though he wrote to many of his Friends
and Confederates as if he had already beaten Caesar, yet was he not willing to
adventure all upon a Battle, thinking it better, by protracting time and
cutting his enemy short of Victuals, to overcome him.

For this end Pompey preswaded his men to be quiet, and not to stir: But when
Caesar, after this last bickering, being scanted of Victuals, raised his Camp,
and departed to go into Thessaly, through the Country of the Atham^neans, then
he could no longer bridle their courage, who cried out, Caesar is fled, let us
follow him: And others said, let us return home into Italy. And some sent
their Friends, Imprupence.
and servants to Rome to hire them Houses near the Market place, intending at
their return, to sue for Offices. Some in a jollity would needs sail to
Lesbos, where Pompey had left his Wife Cornelia, to carry her the good news
that the War was ended.

Pompey calling a Council, Affricanus thought it best to go into Italy, and to
win that, as being the chiefest mark they shot at in this War: For whosoever
had that, was sure of all Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, Spain, and Gaul: He said
also, that it was a dishonor to Pompey (who should be very tender of his
credit) to suffer their Country to be in such bondage, and subjection to
slaves, and base flatterers of a Tyrant when as it offered it self as it were,
into their hands. But Pompey thought it dishonorable for him to fly from
Caesar, and to make him follow him, since he now had him in chase, nor lawful
before the Gods now to forsake his Father in Law Scipio, and many others, who
had been Consuls, and who were dispersed up and down Greece, and Thessaly, who
by this means would certainly fall into Caesar's hands, together with their
Riches, and Armies. He said also, that they had care enough for the City of
Rome by drawing their Armies farthest from it, so as they remaining safe and
quiet at home, not feeling the miseries of War, might joyfully welcome him home
that remained Conqueror.

With this determination he followed Caesar, not intending to give him Battle,
but to besiege him and so to cut him short of Victuals: But whilst he pursued
him fair and softly, his men cried out of him, that he intended not to War
against Caesar, but against his own Country, that he might still keep the
authority in his hand. Phaonius also mocked him, and went crying up and down,
My Masters, I give you notice that you are like to eat no Tusculan Figs this
year. With these and many others such lewd speeches, Folly.
they compelled Pompey to submit to their rash and giddy desires, contrary to
his more Prudent purpose, and determination, which yet a General over so many
Nations, and Armies, should not have done. These little considered that he with
whom he was to fight, was Caesar, who had taken a thousand Towns, and Cities
by assault, had subdued above three hundred several Nations, Caesar's great
Victories.
had won infinite Battles of the Germans and Gauls, and was never overcome: Had
also taken a Million of men Prisoners, and had slain as many in diverse
Battles. Yet Pompeys men still vexing him with their importunity, when they
were come into the Fields of Pharsalia, caused him to call a Counsel. There
Labienus the General of the Horsemen, swore before them all, that he would not
rerurne from the Battle till he had driven his enemies out of the Field: and
the like Oath did all the rest of the Commanders take.

The night before the fatal Battle there were heard sudden and fearful noises
in Pompeys Camp, which awaked all the Soldiers. At the changing of the fourth
Watch, Prodigies.
there was seen a great light over Caesar's Camp, like unto a burning Torch
which came and fell in Pompeys Camp. In the morning Caesar intending to raise
his Camp, and to remove to the City of (...), whilst his Soldiers were busy in
sending away their Bag, and Baggage, some brought Caesar word that they saw
much Armor, and many weapons carried too and fro in their Enemies Camp, and
heard a great noise and bustling, as of men that were preparing to fight. His
Scouts also brought him word that Pompeys Van was already set in Battle array.
Caesar much rejoiced when he heard this, saying, Now the day is come that we
shall no longer fight with hunger, and want, but with men, and thereupon gave
order that they should presently put out the red coat of Arms upon his Tent,
which was the sign used amongst the Romans when they were to fight. The
Soldiers when they saw that, left their Tents, Carriages and all, and with
great Shouts of joy, ran to arm themselves, and so without noise or tumult
they were by their Captains put into Battle array.

Pompey himself led the right wing of his Battle against Anthony. The middle
Battle he gave to Scipio his Father in Law which was right against Domitius
Calvinus: The Battle of Pharsalia.
His left Wing was led by Lucius Domitius Aenobarbus, which was guarded by the
men at Arms; for all the Horsemen were placed there, to distress Caesar if
possibly they could, and to overthrow the tenth Legion, which contained the
valiantest Soldiers that Caesar had; and amongst whom himself always used to
fight in Person. Caesar seeing the left Wing of his enemies so strong with the
guard of Horsemen, brought six Companys of Foot for a reserve, and placed them
behind the tenth Legion, commanding them to stand close, that they might not be
discovered by the enemy: and commanded them when the Horsemen should charge
upon them, that they should not throw their darts strait forward but upward at
their faces: For (said he) These brave Fellows and fine Dancers, will not
endure to have their faces marred.

Pompey being an Horseback rode up and down to observe how both Armies were
marshalled, and perceiving that his enemies stood still in their ranks,
expecting the signal of Battle, and that his own Battle waved up and down
disorderly, as men unskillfull in the Wars, he feared that they would fly
before they were charged. Therefore he commanded his Van to stand sleadily in
their ranks, and to defend themselves in a close fight when they enemy should
assault them. But Caesar disliked this devise: for thereby (said he) the force
of their blows was lessened, and by withholding them from giving the charge,
that courage was taken away which the assailant carries with him when he comes
on with fury, it made them also more fainthearted in receiving the enemies
charge. In Caesar's Army there were about twenty two thousand fighting men, and
in Pompeys above twice so many.

When the signal of Battle was given on either side, and the Trumpets sounded
an Alarm, every man began to look to himself: But a few of the chiefest of the
Romans, and some Grecians that were amongst them, that yet were not entered into
the Battle, perceiving the imminent danger, began to bethink themselves to
what a sad pass the ambition, and contention between these two great Persons
had brought the State of Rome unto, where were kinsmen against kinsmen, and
Brethren against Brethren imbrewing their hands each in others blood. Whereas,
if they could have been contented quietly to Govern what they had conquered,
the Roman Empire was big enough for them both. Or if that could not have
quenched their insatiable desires and thirst after Glory, they had occasion
enough offered them against the Germans, and Parthians: Or else they might have
proceeded to Conquer Scythia, and India,. For what Scythian Horsemen, or
Parthian Arrows, or Indian Riches, could have withstood the power of seventy
thousand Roman Soldiers, especially being led by two such Captains as were
Pompey and Caesar, whose Names were famous through the World.

Now when the Fields of Pharsalia, were covered (...) with Horse and men in
Arms, after the Signal was given, the first man of Caesar's Army that advanced
forward to give the charge, was Caius Crassinius, a Captain of one hundred
twenty and five men: and this he did to make good his promise to Caesar, who
having asked him that morning what he thought of the event of the Battle? he
said, Oh Caesar! Thine is the Victory, and this day thou shall commend me
either alive or dead. Thereupon he brake out of his rank (many others also
following him) and ran into the midst of his enemies, Valor.
making a great slaughter; but as he still pressed forward, one ran him through
the neck and slew him.

Pompey did not make his left wing to advance over suddenly, but staid to see
what his Horsemen would do, who had already divided themselves, intending to
compass in Caesar, and to force his Horsemen (who were fewer in number) to
give back upon his squadron of Foot men, and thereby to disorder them. But on
the other side, Caesar's Horsemen gave back a little, and the six Companies of
Footmen that he had placed secretly behind them (being three thousand in
number) ran suddenly to charge the enemy in the flank and coming near to
Pompeys Horsemen, they threw their Darts (as Caesar had appointed them) full in
their faces. The young Gentlemen, being raw Soldiers, and little expecting
such a manner of fight, had not the hearts to defend themselves, nor could
abide to be hurt in their faces, but turning their heads, and clapping their
hands on their faces, they fled shamfully. They being thus routed, Caesar's men
made no account to follow them* but went presently and charged his Infantry,
and especally where they had no guard of Horsemen, by which means they might
be the easiler compassed about. Thus they being charged by these in the Flank
and in the Van also by the tenth Legion, finding themselves (contrary to their
expectation) compassed about by their enemies, whereas they thought to have
environed them, they could no longer make resistance, but were put to the rout
also.

When Pompey saw the dust flying up in the air, and thereby conjectured the
flight o^ his Horsemen, Pompey beaten.
he was like a man amazed, and at (...) end, forgeting that he was Pompey the
Great, (...) retiring into his Camp, he sat silent for a good (...) ^uch time
as his enemies entered (...) together with his men that fled: and th^n he (...)
no more, but, What! Into our Camp? And so rising up, he pu^ on a gown fit for
his sad condition and secretly stole ou^ of the Camp: His other Legions also
fled, and Caesar's men made a huge slaughter of the Tent keepers, and of their
servants that guarded the Camp: there were slain about six thousand. But at
the taking of the Camp Caesar's Soldiers plainly saw the madness and folly of
Pompey's men: For their Pavillions and Tents were full of Nosegayes, and
Garlands of Myrtle, and their ^ouches covered with Flowers, their Tables full
of Bowls of Wine, as men prepared to sacrifize for joy, rather than to arm
themselves to fight

When Pomp^y was gone a little way from his Camp, He ^li^s.
he forsook his Horse, having very few with him, and perceiving that none
pursued him* he walked fair and softly on foot, having his head full of
thoughts. For he, for thirty four years together used always to be Victorious,
and therefore now it was stran^e to him to fly: Vanity of all ea^thly
enjoyments.
He now saw how in one hours space, he had lost all that Glory and Riches*
which he had purchased by so many great Victories. He, that not long before was
followed and obeyed by so many thousand men of War, by so many Nations, and
Horsemen; by such a great Fleet upon the Sea, was now fallen into a low and poor
estate, with so small a train, that his very enemies, who sought him knew him
not.

When he had thus passed the City of Larissa, he came into the Valley of Tempe,
where being a thirst he fell down on his belly, and drank of the River, then
rising up, he went, and came to the Sea side, and lay all night in a Fishers
Cottage. The next morning by break a day he went into a little Boat upon the
River, having some freemen with him, and as for his slaves he dismissed them,
and bad them go boldly unto Caesar, and not to be afraid. Thus rowing up and
down the shore side in this little Boat, he espied a great Ship in the Sea
lying at Anchor, which was ready to sail away: The Master of the Ship was one
Peticius, a Roman, who, though he was not acquinted with Pompey, yet he knew
him well by sight. Some of the Mariners told Peti^ius that they saw a little
Boat coming toward them, wherein were some men that held up their hands, and
made signs to them: Peticius looking, knew Pompey, and commanded his Mariners
to let down the Boat, wherewith giving Pompey his hand, he received him into
the Ship, and those that were with him, and then hoised Sail. With Pompey their
were both the Lentuli, and Faomius. Presently after they espied King Dejotarus
coming in a Boat toward them, and making signs to be taken in, which
accordingly they did. At Supper time* the Master made ready such meat as he had
aboard. And Faonius seeing Pompey for want of attendants, washing himself, he
ran to him, and anointed him, and ever after waited upon him, doing such
Offices as servants do to their masters, Humility.
washing his feet, and preparing his food for him.

Pompey then passing by the City of Amphipolis, sailed to the Isle of L^sbos to
fetch his Wife Cornelia, and his Son, who were at Mitilene, and having there
cast Anchor in the Rode, Pomp^y goes to his Wife.
he sent a servant into the City to his Wife, whose Message did not answer her
expectation. For she had still been put in hope by Letters, of her Husbands
good success, and that the War was well ended: The messenger finding her thus
confident, thought not fit to salute her, but rather by his tears discovered
the great misfortune of Pompey; and at last told her, that she must dispatch
quickly if she would see her Husband, with one Ship only, and that not his
own, but borrowed: The young Lady hearing this, fell down in a sown'd before
him, but after she was come to her self, remembering that it was now no time to
weep and lament, she went speedily through the City to the Sea side. There
Pompey meeting her, took her in his Arms and embraced her: But she sinking
under him, fell down, and at last said: Out alas? Their Speeches each to other.
Woe worth my hard Fortune, not thine, good Husband, who now see thee with one
poor Ship, who before thou marriedst me the Unfortunate Cornelia, was wont to
sail in these Seas attended with five hundred. Alas! Why art thou come to see
me, and did not rathar leave me to my accursed destiny, seeing my self am
the cause of all this thy evil? Alas! How happy had I been if I had died before
I heard of the death of my first Husband Publius Cras^us, slain in the
Parthian War? And how wise had I been, if (according to my determination) I
then had slain my self, whereas I yet live to bring this misfortune upon
Pompey the Great? To this Pompey answered: Peradventure (my Cornelia) thou have
known a better fortune which has also deceived thee, because she has
continued longer with me than her manner is. But since we are borne men, we
must patiently bear these troubles, and once more try what she will do. For
it is not impossible for us again to change this adversity f^r prosperity, no
more than it was to fall from our late prosperity into this Calamity.

When Cornelia heard him say so, she sent into the City for her household
stuff; and Famely: The Metylenians also came to salute Pompey, praying him to
come and refresh himself in their City: But Pompey refused, and advised them to
obey the Conqueror; for (said he) Caesar is of a just, and Courteous nature.
Then Pompey turning to Cratippus the Philosopher, He r^asons about Providence.
who came, amongst the Citizens to visit him, made his complaint to him, and
reasoned a little with him about Divine Providence. Then taking his Wife and
Friends he hoised sail and departed, staying no where but to take in fresh
provision and water.

The first City that he touched at, was Atallia in the Country of Pamphylia.
Thither came to him some Galleys out of Cilicia, and many of his Friends and
Soldiers, insomuch as he had now sixty Senators in his Company. Then
understanding that his Army by Sea was yet whole, and that Cato had gathered
together a great number of his Soldiers after the overthrow, whom he had
transported with him into Africa, he complained to his Friends for that they
had compelled him to fight by Land, and not suffered him to make use of his
Fleet, wherein he was the stronger, and that he kept not his Army near to the
Sea, that in case he miscarried at Land, he might presently have repaired to
his Fleet at Sea, and thereby have resisted his enemy.

Thus Pompey being driven to atempt somewhat according to his small ability, to
some Cities he sent Ambassadors, to others he went himself to gather money,
wherewith he armed and manned some Ships. But fearing the sudden approach of
his enemy, before he could be in readiness to resist him, he bethought himself
to what place he might retire for his better safety, and resolved that there
was never a Province of the Romans that was able to secure him, and for other
strange Nations, he thought none safer for him to retire into than Parthia,
which was able to aid and help him. Some advised him to go into Africa unto
King Juba. But Theophanes the Lesbian said, that it was great ^olly to decline
Egypt that was but three days sail from thence, and where Ptolemey was, who was
lately come to man's estate, and was infinitely bound to Pompey for the late
favors which he showed to his Father, and not put himself into the hands of
the Parthians, the most unfaithful Nation in the world. He thought it also an
ill part for him to carry his young Wife of the Noble Family of Scipio. amongst
such barbarous People, who care not how basely they abuse any strangers. Pompey
flies into Egypt.
This Speech altered Pompey's mind, and made him resolve to fly into Egypt:
and so with his wife Cornelia, he departed from Cyprus in a Galley of Seleucia.
The rest of his Train, embarked also, some in Galleys, others in Merchants
Ships, and so passed the Sea without danger.

When Pompey heard that King Ptol^my was in the City of Pelusium with his Army,
warring against his Sister, He sends to King Ptolomy.
he steared that way, and sent a messenger before to the King, to certify him
of his arrival; and to entreat him to give him entertainment: King Ptolomey
was at this time but a young man, and under him, the whole Realm was governed
by one Photinus. He therefore assembled a Council of the chiefest, A Council
about Pompey.
and wisest of his Court, and when they were met, Photinus in the Kings name
commanded every man to declare his Judgment about the reception of Pompey
whether they should intertain him or not; and truly it was a sad thing that
Photinus an Eunuch, and Theodotus of Chio, who was the Kings Schoolmaster for
Rhetoric* and Achillas an Egyptian, should consult amongst themselves what
they should do with Pompey the Great.

All this while Pompey rode at Anchour near to the shore, expecting the
resolution of this Council, amongst whom their opinions were various, some
were for, others against his reception; But Theodotus the Rhetorician, to show
his eloquence, persuaded them that neither the one, nor the other was to be
done. For (said he) if we receive him, we shall make Caesar our (...)* and
Pompey our Lord: Base treachery and ingratitude.
If we receive him no^, Pompey will blame us, and Caesar also for not keeping
him* Our safest way therefore is to kill him: for thereby we shall win the good
will of the one, and not fear the displeasure of the other* Adding that Mortui
non mordent, A dead man bites not. This they all resolved upon, and accordingly
gave Achillas Commission to do it.

This being concluded, Achillas took with him Septimius (who had sometimes
served under Pompey) and Salvius a Centurion, and two or three other Soldiers,
and so made toward Pompey's Galley, about whom there were at this time the
chiefest of his Train to see what would be the issue of this matter. But when
they saw what intertainment he was like to have, and that they came not in that
Princely manner, answerable to the hopes that Theophanes had put them in,
seeing so few men coming toward him in a Fisherboat, they began to mistrust
the sequel, and advised Pompey to turn back, and to launch again into the
sea, whilst he was yet out of the reach of their Darts. In the mean time the
Fisher boat drew near, and Sep^inius rose up and saluted Pompey in the Roman
Tongue by the name of Imperator, or Emperor. Achillas also spoke to him in
Greek, wishing him to come into his Boat, the shore being full of mudde, and
sand banks, so that his Galley could no carry him to the shore.

At this time they saw afar off diverse of the Kings Galleys which were
arming with all speed possible, and all the shore was full of Soldiers, so
that though Pompey and his Friends would have altered their minds, yet they
could not tell how to escape, and if they had discovered their mistrust of
them, they had given the mutherers a cloak for their cruelty. Pompey takes his
leave of his Wife and Son.
Pompey therefore taking his leave of his Wife Cornelia, who lamented his Death
before his end, he commanded two of his Centurions to go down before him into
the Boat, and took with him only Philip, one of his Slaves enfranchised, with
another Slave called Scynes. When Achilles reaching out his hand to receive
Pompey into his boat, he turned him to his Wife, and Son, and repeated these
verses of Sophcoles: The man that into Court comes free,
Must there in state of bondage be.


These were the last words which he spoke to them. The Land being far off, when
he saw never a man in the boat speak friendly to him, he said unto Septimius,
Me thinks, my Friend, I should know thee, for thou have served under me
heretofore: the other nodded with his head, but gave him no answer. Pompey
observing these things, took a little Book into his hand, wherein he had
written an Oration that he meant to make to King Ptolomy, and began to read it.
As they approached to the shore, Cornelia, with her Friends about her, stood up
in great fear, to see what would become of Pompey, and she hoped well when she
saw many of the Kings People on the shore, coming toward Pompey, as it were
to receive, and honor him at his landing. But even as Pompey took Philip by
the hand to rise more easily, Septimius came behind him, and thrust him through
with his Sword: Salvius, and Achillas also made at him with their Swords.
Pompey did no more but took up his gown, with which he covered his face, and
took the wounds in a manly manner, only sighing a little. Pompey is slain.
Thus ended he his Life the very next day after his Birth, being fifty nine
years old,

They which rode at Anchor in their Ships, when they saw him thus murdered,
gave such a fearful cry that it was heard to the shore: And weighing their
Anchors with speed, they hoised Sail and departed, having a lusty gale of Wind
to help them. The Egyptians had thought to pursue them, but when they, saw
they were past their reach, they let them go. Then striking off Pompeys Head
they threw his Body overboard, where it was a miserable spectacle to all that
desired to behold it. Philip, his infranchesed Bondsman, stirred not from it
till the Egyptians had glutted themselves with looking upon it. Then having
washed it with Salt water, and wrapped it up in an old shirt of his own, he
sought about the sands, and at last found a piece of an old Fisher-boat, scarce
enough to burn all the Body: and as he was gathering the pieces of this Boat
together, there came to him an old Roman, who in his youth had served under
Pompey, saying, O Friend, what art thou that preparest the Funerals of Pompey
the Great? Philip answered, that he was a Bondsman of his infranchised. Well
(said he) thou shall not have all this honor alone, Pray thee let me accompany
thee in this devout deed, that I may not altogether repent me that I have dwelt
so long in a strange Country, where I have endured much misery; but to
recompense me, let me have this good hap to touch Pompeys Body, and to help
to bury this most famous Captain of the Romans.

The next day Lucius Lentulus, not knowing what had happened, coming out of
Cyprus, sailed by the shore side, and perceiving a Funeral fire, and Philip
standing by it, he asked him whose Funeral it was? But straight fetching a
great sigh, alas (said he) perhaps it is Pompeys the Great. Then he landed a
little, and was presently slain. This was the deplorable end of Pompey the
Great.

Caesar not long after came into Egypt, where there were great Wars, at which
time Pompeys Head was presented to him, but he turned aside and would not see
it, abhorring him that brought it as a detestable murderer. The murders
justly punished.
Then looking on his Signet Ring where on was engraven a Lion holding a Sword,
he burst out a weeping. Achillas and Photinus he put to death. King Potolomy
bing over thrown in Battle by the River Nilus, vanished away and was never
after heard of. Theodotus escaped Caesar's hands, and wondered up and down Egypt
in great misery, despised of every man. And afterward Marcus Brutus (who slew
Caesar) when he conquered Asia, met with this Theodotus by chance, and putting
him to all the torments he could possibly devise, he at last slew him. The
ashes of Pompeys Body were afterward brought to his Wife Cornelia, His Burial.
who buried them in a Town of hers near the City of Alba.

FINIS.

