All that thou sees't and read is Div^^^ Learning thus used is water turned
to win^ Well may we then despair to draw his (...) View here the case; ith
Book the Jewel fin^ P* V. A. (...)



THE LIFE and DEATH OF ALEXANDER the Great, The first Founder of the GRECIAN
EMPIRE Represented by the Brazen belly of that Image; Dan. 2. 32. and by a
Leopard with four wings, Dan. 7. 6. and by a He-Goat, with a great horn between
his eyes, Dan. 8. 5. AS ALSO The LIFE and DEATH of CHARLES the GREAT, Commonly
called CHARLEMAGNE, The first Founder of the FRENCH EMPIRE.

By SA. CLARKE, sometime Minister in St Bennet Fink, London.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's Churchyard,
near the little North Door. 1665.

Licensed to be Printed,

Roger L'Estrange.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF ALEXANDER the Great, The first Founder of the GRECIAN
EMPIRE Represented by the Brazen belly of that Image; Dan. 2. 32. and by a
Leopard with four wings, Dan. 7. 6. and by a He-Goat, with a great horn between
his eyes, Dan. 8. 5.

By Sa. Clarke, sometime Minister in St Bennet Fink, London.

Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South;
But God is the Judge; He puts down one, and sets up another, Psalm. 75. 6,
7. LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door. 1665.

THE LIFE, and DEATH OF ALEXANDER the Great, KING OF MACEDONIA.
ALEXANDER, His Parentage.
surnamed the Great was the Son of Philip, King of Macedonia, and of his Queen
Olympias. He was born on the sixth day of our June, called by the Macedonians,
Lous. Upon the very same day that the Temple of Diana in Ephesus was burned
down; whereupon the Priests, Magicians, and South-sayers ran about the City,
crying, that some great Plague and mischief to Asia was surely born that day.
Three messengers came to King Philip, presently after he had won the City of
Potidaea, upon the same day, who brought him great News, the first, that
Parmenio his General, had won a notable Battle of the Illyrians: the second
that his Horse had won the prize at the Olympian Games: and the third, that his
wife Olympias had brought him a Son, His Birth.
that was named Alexander, born at Pella in Macedonia.

Philip being mavelous glad to hear these newses, the Southsayers much added
to his joy; assuring him, that his Son that was thus born, should be
invincible. He had naturally a very fair white color, mingled with red, which
chiefly appeared in his face and breast: His skin had a mavelous sweet
savor, and his breath was very sweet, which showed his excellent constitution.
He was naturally hot and Choleric, which made him to be addicted to drink, and
hasty, and yet was chaste withal. His Father was very careful of his
Education, and therefore gat for him excellent Tutors, as Leonidas, which had
the chiefest Government of him. Then Lysimachus, an Acarnanian: His Education.
and Aristotle, the Best Philosopher of his time, to whom Philip allowed a very
Honorable stipend.

He delighted much in hunting diverse kinds of wild Beasts, and playing at the
Staff. On a time while he was young, Ambassadors were sent to his Father from
the King of Persia, and it fell out that Philip was in some journey out of his
Kingdom. Alexander therefore entertained them familiarly, not using any
childish questions to them, nor enquiring about trifling, and trivial matters,
but what distance it was from one place to another, and which way they went
into the higher places of Asia; His early wisdom.
Also about the King of Persia himself, how he behaved himself toward his
enemies, and what power he had, etc. insomuch as they were ravished with
delight to hear him, judging him to be of great Courage, and of a Noble mind,
and one that was like to attempt great enterprises. When at any time news was
brought him that his Father had taken some famous City, or had won some great
Battle, he was no whit glad to hear it, but would say to his play-fellows:
Sirs, My Father will do all, I shall have nothing left me to Conquer with you
that will be ought worth.

Upon a time Philonicus, B^cephalus broken by Alexander.
a Thessalian brought a brave Horse, called Bucephalus, to sell unto King
Philip, demanding thirteen Talents for him, and they went into the Field to try
him: But the Horse was found to be so unruly, and churlish, that they which
should have ridden him, said, that he would never be made serviceable: For he
would let no man get upon his Back, nor abide any of the Gentlemen's voices that
were about Philip, but would yerk at them with his heels; whereupon Philip,
being afraid, bad them take him away as a wild, untamable, and unprofitable
Beast: which they had done accordingly, had not Alexander, that stood by, said,
O Gods! what a Horse do they turn away for lack of skill, and courage to handle
and break him? Philip heard what he said, but held his peace. Alexander often
repeating those words, and seeming sorry that the Horse should be sent back,
Philip said, Why do thou control them that have more skill and experience
than thy self; and that know better how to handle a Horse than thou do;
Alexander answered, and yet methinks I could handle him better than all they
have done. But if thou can do no more than they (replied Philip) what will thou forfeit for thy folly? I am content (said Alexander) to forfeit the price
of the Horse. Every one laughed to hear his answer, and the match was made
between the Father and the Son. Then ran Alexander to the Horse, and took him
by the Bridle, and turned him toward the Sun. It seems he had observed how mad
the Horse was to see his own shadow, which was before, always before his eyes
as he stirred too and fro. Then Alexander speaking gently to the Horse, and
clapping him on the back with his hand, till he had left his fury and s^orting,
softly let fall his Cloak from him, and lightly leaped on his back, and so gat
up without any danger, and holding the reins of the Bridle hard, without
striking or stirring the Horse, made him to be gentle enough. And when he
perceived that the fury of the Horse was calmed, he put him forward, and began
to Gallop; Then he put him to his full carrier, spurring, and switching him.
Philip at first, seeing his sons confidence, began to fear lest he should catch
any hurt: But when he saw him readily to turn the Horse at the end of his
carrier, and showing bravery for what he had done, all the Spectators gave a
great shoot for joy: and the Father fell a weeping for joy: and when Alexander
was allighted from the Horse, his Father went and kissed him, saying, O Son!
thou must have a Kingdom that is meet for thee; for Macedonia is not sufficient
for thee: Considering also that he was not to be rigorously dealt with, and
that by gentle means and persuasions he could make him do what he would, he
ever sought rather to persuade than to Command him what he would have done.

Alexander in these his younger days was very mild, His mildness.
and of a patient disposition, insomuch as being told that some of his Friends
used in secret, to speak against him, he said, Regium est male audire cum
benefeceris. Its a Kingly thing to hear ill, when one does well.

King Philip being dead, He comes to his Kingdom.
his son Alexander succeeded, being a Prince no less Valiant by Nature than by
Education, being well instructed, and enriched with all sorts of Learning. He
began his Reign in Macedonia, four hundred and seventeen years after Rome was
built, being himself about twenty years old.

Upon this change of the King the neighbor Nations, whom Philip had oppressed,
adventured to endeavor the recovery of their former liberty by force of Arms,
the young years of Alexander giving some hope of prevailing, and his suspected
severity increasing the courage of others, who could easilier resolve to die,
than to live in slavery: But Alexander gave no respite to these discontented
humors; He slays his Fathers murderers.
For after revenge taken upon the Conspiratours against his Father, whom he
slew upon his Tomb, and the celebration of his Funerals, he first engaged his
Macedonians to him by freeing them from all exactions, and bodily slavery,
other than his service in the Wars, and to others that contemned his youth, he
used such an sterity, and such clemency to the rest; that having calmed these
nearer discontents, he presently went into Peloponnesus, and so insinuated
himself amongst them, that by the Council of the States of Greece, he was
chosen Captain General to manage the War against the Persians, as his Father
had been before him, who was so intent upon that War, that he had sent over
into Asia part of his Army under the Conduct of Parmenio, and Attalus, with
order to take in some place which might secure the descent of the rest.

Upon this enterprise against the Persians was Alexander wholly busied, He
in-tends war against Persia.
his restless thoughts both sleeping and waking, presenting to him the Riches,
Honor, and large Dominions which he hoped to attain thereby. Yet was he again
crossed, and retarded by the Athenians, Thebans, and Lacedaemonians, who had
united themselves against him, hoping by the assistance of the Persians, to
recover their former liberty; and they were to this, encouraged by
Demosthennes, whom the Persian Gold had bribed thereunto. This unexpected rub,
and loss of time was very grievous to Alexander, who was troubled that he
should turn his Sword from the base and effeminate Persians, against the manly,
and famous Grecians, of whose assistance in his intended Wars he had assured
himself; He therefore made such expedition against them, He subdues the
Grecians.
that himself, with his Army at his heels, brought them the first news of his
preparations. This celerity of his made them begin to stagger, and the
Athenians, as they were the first that moved, so were they the first that
fainted, and by their Ambassadors sought to pacify him. Alexander was not
long in resolving, but admitted their excuses, and made peace.

Having now quieted his Borderers on the South, he resolved also to assure
himself of those Nations which lay on the North of Macedonia, And other Nations.
viz. the Thracians, Triballes, Poones, Getes, Agrians, and others, who by
their frequent incursions had much molested his Father; and withal those,
after he had given them diverse overthrows, he made peace, or brought them into
his Subjection: and yet could he not find the way out of Europe.

The Thebans, which had one thousand Macedonians in Garrison in their Citadel,
being impatient of slavery, endeavored to force it; which Alexander being
informed of, hastened to their succor with thirty thousand Foot, all old
Soldiers, and three thousand Horse, and presenting himself before their City,
he gave the Thebans time to resolve whether they would have peace or War, only
demanding that they should deliver up to him the two chief Incendiaries,
Phaenix, and Prothytes, which they took in such scorn, that they demand
Philotas, and Antipater, two of his chief Captains. And the Thebans.
This so incensed Alexander, that whilst he assailed the City before, the
Macedonian Garrison did the like behind, and so breaking into the City, he slew
ninty thousand of them, and sold thirty thousand more for slaves, and this he
did for a terror to the other Grecians.

Many Arguments were used by Cleadas (one of the Prisoners) to dissuade him
from destroying the City, of Thebes but all proved fruitless; for he razed the
City, only out of his respect to learning, he pardoned all of the race of
Pindarus the Poet, and set at liberty Timoclea, the sister of Theagines, who
died in the defense of the liberty of Greece against his Father Philip. This
Noble Woman, being taken by a Thracian, and ravished, he threatened to kill her
unless she would discover her Treasure to him: She led him to a Well, A brave
Example.
and told him that she had cast it therein, and when he stooped to look into
the well, she thrust him in, and stoned him to Death.

Alexander shortly after at a Common Council of Greece, being chosen General a
second time against the Persians, went to visit Diogenes the Philosopher,
there. Then returned into Macedonia, where, in a Town called Dios, as he was
wholly taken up with thoughts of subduing Asia, there appeared to him in his
Sleep the resemblance of the High Priest of Jerusalem, His vision.
who bad him be courageous and bold, and speedily with his Army to put over
into Asia, promising that he would be his Conducter in the Conquest of the
Persian Empire, as Alexander himself reported.

All being now quieted at home, He goes into Asia.
Alexander leaving the Government of Macedon, and Greece to Antipater, in the
beginning of the Spring he passed the Hellespont, and being ready to
dis-imbark, he threw a Dart toward the Asian shore, as a token of defiance,
commanding his Soldiers not to wast, and destroy the Country, or to burn those
buildings which themselves were presently, and in future to possess. Then
landed he his Army consisting of thirty two thousand foot, and five thousand
Horse, all old Soldiers, near unto Troy, where he offered a Sacrifice upon the
Tomb of Achilles, his Maternall Ancestor.

But before he left his own Country, His cruelty.
he put to death, without any offense given him, all his Mother in Laws
Kinsmen, whom his Father had greatly advanced, not sparing such of his own as
he suspected, thinking by unjust cruelty to secure himself for the present, and
future: Yet the end fell out contrary to the Policy which his Ambition taught
him, Gods Justice.
though well agreeing with the Justice of God: For within a few years all that
he had planted was rooted up; those whom he most trusted were most Traitorous:
His Mother, Friends and Children fell by such another merciless Sword as his
own, and all manner of confusion followed his dead Body to the Grave, and left
him there.

When Darius, Darius his Pride.
the King of Persia, was informed that Alexander was landed in Asia, he so much
scorned the Macedonian Army, and contemned Alexander himself, that writing to
him, he styled him his Servant, and reprehended him for his presumption, and
disloyalty (For Darius Entitled himself King of Kings, and kinsman of the Gods)
and withal, he wrote to his Leiutenants in the Lesser Asia, that they should
take Alexander alive, whip him with Rods, and then convey him to his presence;
that they should sink his Ships, and send his Macedonians prisoners beyond the
Red Sea.

Notwithstanding these brags Alexander soon discovered what manner of men the
Persians were: For two of Darius his Generals [Spithredates, and Rhaesaces] at
the River of Granick (which severs the Territories of Troy from Propontis) with
a huge Army both of Horse and Foot, sought to stop his passage, taking the
higher ground, and the bank of the River to defend, which Alexander was forced
to climb up unto from out of the Channel, His victory at Granick.
yet was his victory so easily, that the Persians flying, he slew twenty
thousand of the Foot, and two thousand five hundred Horsemen, with the loss of
twelve of his own Foot, and two and twenty of his Horsemen, which shows that
the Persians were rather killed in their backs whilst they ran away, than hurt
in their bosoms by resisting.

It was wisely done of Alexander to pass this River of Granick in the face of
the enemy, without seeking any other place, or means to convey his men over.
For having beaten the Asiaticks upon their own ground, he did thereby cut off
no less of their reputation, than of their strength, leaving the partakers of
such cowards without hope of Succor.

Presently after this victory, He wins many Cities, and Countries
he recovered Sardis, Ephesus, and the City of the Trallians, and Magnesia, all
which were soon rendered to him, the Inhabitants he received with great grace,
suffering them to be Governed by their own Laws: and about the same time, by
Parmenio, he wan Miletus, and by force took in Halicarnassens, which because it
resisted obstinately, he razed it to the ground. From thence he went into
Caria, were Ada, the Queen, who had been cast out of all that she held (except
the City of Alinda) by Darius his Leiutenants, The Queen of Caria Adopts him.
presented her self to him, and adopted him for her Son, and Successor, which
Alexander took so kindly that he left the whole Kingdom to her disposal. Then
entered he into Lycia, and Pamphilia, and assured to him all the Seacoasts, and
subjecting to him Pisidia, he steared his course toward Darius, who (as he was
informed) was marching toward him with a mavelous great Army) by the way of
Phrygia, and this he might the easilier do, for that his first victory had laid
under his feet all the Provinces of Asia the less, which bordered upon the
Seacoast.

Then gave he order for the se^l^ng and Government of Lycia, and Pamphilia, and
so marching toward the North, he entered Celenas, seated on the River Maeander,
which was abandoned to him, only the Castle held out, which yet after forty
days, was surrendered to him also: for so long time he gave them to attend
succout from Darius. From Celenas, he passed on through Phrygia toward the
Euxine Sea, till he came to the City of Gordium, sometimes the Regal City of
King Midas, where he found the Gordian Knot, He Cuts the Gordian knot.
which when he knew not how to undo, he cut it assunder with his Sword: For
there was an old Prophecy which promised him that could unty it, the Lordship
of all Asia: whereupon Alexander, not respecting the manner so it were done,
assumed to himself the fulfilling of the Prophecy by hewing it in pieces.

Now before he left this part of Asia to go to the East, he took care to clear
the Seacoast on his back, and to thrust the Persians out of the Islands of
Lesbos, He Conquers the Islands.
Chio, and Coos, the charge whereof he committed to two of his Captains, giving
them such directions as he judged most meet for that service, and delivering to
them fifty Talents for defraying the charges thereof: and withal, out of the
spoil gotten by his first victory, he sent sixty Talents more to Antipater,
whom he had left for the Government of Macedonia and Greece. From Celenas he
went to Ancira, standing on the same River of Sanguarius, which runs through
Gordium: there he mustered his Army, and so entered into Paphlagonia, whose
Inhabitants submitted themselves to him, and thereby obtained freedom from
Tribute. There he left Catus Governor, with one Regiment of Macedonians newly
come to him.

Here he heard of the Death of Memnon, Memnon dies.
Darius's Leiutenant, which much encouraged him to pass on toward him: For of
this one Commander he had more respect than of all the multitude assembled by
Darius, and of all the Captains he had besides. Then did he travel hastily
toward Cilicia, with a desire to recover the Streights thereof before Darius
should arrive there. The Governor of Cilicia hearing of Alexanders hasty
march, left some Companies to keep the Streights, which were indeed very
defensible, and now (though too late) began to prize, Good Counsel neglected.
and put in Execution the advice of Memnon, who in the beginning of the Wars,
had counseled to wast all the provisions both for Man, and Horse that could
not be conveyed into strong holds, and always to give ground to the Invader,
till he found some such notable advantage as might secure to him the victory.
For the fury of an invading army is best broken by delays, change of diet, and
want, and other inconveniences bringing, and breeding many diseases upon all
Nations out of their own Country. And had Darius kept the Macedonians but a
while without meat, and sleep, refusing to give or take Battle, and had wearied
them with his light Horsemen (as the Parthians afterward did the Romans) in
all probability he might have saved both his life, and Estate. For it was one
of the greatest encouragements given by Alexander to his Macedonians before the
third, and last fatal Battle, that they were now to fight with all the
strength of Persi^ at once.

But where God has a purpose to destroy, wise men are taken away, and the
charge of things is committed unto such as either cannot see what is for their
good, or that know not how to put in execution any sound advice; the course
which Memnon had propounded, must in all liklyhood have brought the Macedonians
into great straits, and stopped them at those narrow passages of Cilicia. For had
Cappadocia, and Paphlegonia been wasted when Alexander was far off, and the
Streights of Cilicia been defended by Arsenes with his best Soldiers, hunger
would not have suffered the enemy to stay the trial of all means for the
forcing of that passage: Or if the place could not have been defended, yet
might Cilieia at leisure have been thoroughly spoiled, that the heart of
Alexanders Army should have been broken, whilst they sought out miseries by
painful travel.

But Arsenes leaving a small number to defend the Streights, took the best of
his Army with him to wast and spoil the Country; or rather, as it seemed, to
make himself some work, under which pretense he might with honesty run the
further from Alexander; And in truth he so handled the matter, that he gave
cause to the Cicilians to wish for Alexanders coming, and as great cause to the
Keepers of the Passage not to hinder it. For cowards are wise in apprehending
all forms of danger. These Guardians of the Streights, hearing that Arsenes
hasted to join himself with Darius, burning down all as he went, as one
despairing to defend it, began to think, that surely their General (who gave
for lost the Country behind their backs) had exposed themselves to certain
ruin, as men that were fit only to dull the swords of the Macedonians;
Wherefore, not being ambitious to die for their Prince and Country (which
honor they saw that Arsenes himself could well forbear) they presently
followed the footsteps of their General, gleaning what he had left. And thus
Alexander without hazard, got, both the entrance into Cilicia, The Streights of
Cilicia taken.
abandoned by the cowardliness of his enemies, and also that whole Province
whose minds were now alienated from the Persians through the imprudent carriage
of Arsenes.

When Alexander with great speed was come to Tarsus, taking pleasure in the
River Cydnus, which ran through the City, all hot as he was, he threw off his
Armor, and leaped into the cold water, whereupon he grew instantly so benumbd
in all the Nerves of his Body, that he lost the use of his Tongue; and so far
was he from hope of recovery, that nothing was expected but present Death: But
one Philip a Physician, gave him a Potion, which he took, and it cured him out
of hand, though Parmenio had forewarned him, that this Philip was set on work
to poison him.

In the mean time Darius approached, Darius his Army.
having gathered together an Army of two hundred and ninty thousand men out of
diverse Nations (says Q. Curtius) or of three hundred thousand Foot, and one
hundred thousand Horse, (as Justine numbers them) Or of six hundred thousand,
as Plutarch relates.

The manner of his coming was rather like a Masker, The manner of his march.
than a man of War; and like one that took more care to show his Glory and
Riches, than to provide for his own safety. For before his Army there was
carried the holy Fire, which the Persians worshipped for their God; attended by
their Priests, and after them three hundred sixty and five young men, answering
to the days of the year, clothed in Skarlet. Then the Chariot of Jupiter, drawn
with white Horses, with their Riders clothed in white, and carrying Rods of
Gold in their hands. Next after them came the Horse of the Sun, and after him
ten sumptuous Chariots Inlay'd and garnished with God and Silver: His Pride and
Folly.
and then the Vaunt Guard of their Horse, compounded of twelve several
Nations, which, the better to avoid confusion, did hardly understand one
another Language, and these, marshalled in the head of the rest, being beaten,
might serve very fitly to disorder all that followed them. In the tail of
these, marched the Regiment of foot styled by the Persians, Immortal, because
if any died, their place was presently supplied by others; and these were armed
with chains of Gold, and their coats embroidered with the same, having their
sleeves garnished with Pearl: Baits fit either to entice the poor Macedonians,
or to persuade them that it were great incivillity to cut or deface such goodly
Garments.

Then marched after them fifteen thousand, more rich and glittering than the
former, but apparelled like Women, and these were honored with the title of
the Kings Kinsmen. Then came Darius himself with the Gentlemen of his
Guard-robe, riding before his Chariot, which was supported by the Gods of his
Nation, cast and cut in pure Gold: the head of this Chariot was set with
precious Stones, with two Golden Idols, covered with an open winged Eagle of
the same metal. The hinder part being raised high, whereon Darius sat, had a
covering of inestimable value.

This Chariot of the Kings was followed with ten thousand Horsemen, having
lances plated with Silver, and their heads guilt. He had for the proper Guard
of his own Person, two hundred of the blood Royal: blood too Royal, and
precious to be spilt in any Noble adventure, and these were backed with thirty
thousand Footmen, after whom again were led four hundred spare Horses for the
Kings own use. Then followed the Rereward, being led by Sisygambis, the Kings
Mother, and by his Wife, drawn in glorious, and glittering Chariots, followed
by a great train of Ladies on Horseback, with fifteen rich Wagons of the Kings
children, and the Wives of the Nobility, waited upon by two hundred and fifty
Concubines, and a World of Nurses, and Eunuchs most sumptuously apparrelled:
Between these, and a Company of slight Armed Slaves, was the Kings Treasure,
laden on six hundred Mules and three hundred Camels.

In this sort came this May Game King into the field, encombred with a most
unnecessary train of Sumpters, attended with Troops of diverse Nations, speaking
diverse Languages, impossible to be well Marshalled by reason of their numbers,
and for the most part so effeminate, and so rich in Gold and costly Garments,
as the same could not but have encouraged the Nakedst Nation against them.

When Alexander met with these effeminate Asiaticks, Alexander beats Darius.
it may easily be guessed what a cheap Victory he had over them. Some say that
he slew in this Battle sixty thousand Footmen, and ten thousand Horsemen. Q.
Curtius says, an hundred thousand Foot, with as many Horsemen, and took forty
thousand Prisoners, whilst of Alexanders Army there miscarried but two hundred
and eighty of all sorts, of which number some Historians cut off almost one
half. He took Prisoners also Darius his Mother, Wife, Daughters, and other the
Kings Children. Darius by this time found it true, that Charidemus, a banished
Grecian of Athens, had told him when he made a view of his Army about Babylon,
to wit, That the multitude which he had assembled of diverse Nations, richly
attired but poorly Armed, would be found more terrible to the Countries through
which they should pass, than to the Macedonians whom they meant to assail, who
being all old, and Well-disciplined Soldiers, imbattelled in gross Squadrons,
which they called their Phalanx, well covered with Armor for defense, and
furnished with advantageous Weapons for offense, would make so little account
of his delicate Persians, ill Armed, and worse Disciplined, that except he
would (having such abundance of Treasure) entertain a sufficient number of the
same Grecians, and so encounter the Macedonians with men of equal courage, he
would repent overlate, as taught by the miserable success like to follow.

But so unpleasing was this discourse to Darius, (who used to hear nothing but
his own praises) that he caused this poor Grecian to be presently slain, Darius
his cruelty,
who whilst he was under the Tormentors hand, said, to the King, that
Alexander, against whom he had given this good counsel, should certainly
revenge his Death, and deservedly punish Darius for refusing this advise. and
Folly.
Darius likewise slighted the counsel given him by the Grecian Soldiers that
served under him, who entreated him not to fight in those straight places where
Alexander could bring as many hands to fight as Darius could: and these old
blades, when Darius was overthrown with all his cowardly, and confused Rabble,
under their Captain Amyntas, held firm, and made a brave retreat in despite of
the vanquishers.

These Grecians also after their retreat, advised Darius to draw back his Army
into the plains of Mesopotamia, where he might have environed the Macedonians
on all sides with his multitudes; they counseled him also to divide his huge
Army into parts, and not to cast his Empire upon one Battle, etc. But this
advise was so contrary to the cowardly spirits of the Persians, that they
persuaded Darius to environ these Greeks with his Army, and to cut them in
pieces as Traitors. But Darius was so infatuated that he would needs fight with
Alexander in such a straight place, near unto the City of Issus, where he could
bring no more hands to fight than Alexander could (who by the advice of
Parmeni^ staid there as in a place of advantage) whereby he was utterly
overthrown, his Treasure lost, his Wife, Mother, and Children (whom the
Grecians had persuaded him to leave in Babylon) taken prisoners, and all their
train of Ladies spoiled of their rich Garments, Jewels, and Honor. Indeed the
Queen, with her Daughters, who had the good hap to be brought to Alexanders
presence, were entertained with all respect due unto them, their Honors
preserved, and their Jewels, and rich Garments restored; and though the Queen
was a most beautiful Lady; and her Daughters of excellent features, Alexanders
Chastity.
yet Alexander mastered his affections toward them all: Only he embraced the
Wife of the Valiant Memnon, who was lately dead, she being taken by Parmenio,
as she fled from Damascus, at which time the Daughters of Ochus, who reigned
before Darius, and the Wives and Children of almost all the Nobility of Persia,
fell into Captivity, together with the Treasure of Darius (not taken at Issus)
was seized upon, amounting to six thousand and two hundred Talents in ready
Coin, and in Bullion, five hundred Talents, with a world of Riches besides.

Parmenio also in his Letter to Alexander sent him word, that amongst other
things, he had taken at Damascus three hundred twenty nine of the Kings Women,
which were Skillful in Music; forty six Weavers, or Knitters of Crowns; Pastry
Women two hundred seventy seven; Cook Maids twenty nine; White-meat-makers
thirteen; Makers of drinking Cups seventeen; Wine-cellar men seventy;
Apothecaries, and Confectioners forty. Thirty thousand Men, and seven thousand
Camels.

Darius himself leaving his Brother dead (casting the Crown from his head) with
diverse others of his Chief Captains, Darius flies.
hardly escaped by flight.

After this overthrow given to Darius, all Phoenicia (the City of Tire
excepted) yielded unto Alexander, who made Parmenio Governor of it. Also
Aradus, Zidon, and Biblos, which were Maritine Cities of great importance, of
which one Strato was King (but hated of his People) submitted unto Alexander:
Alexanders great success.
Yea, good success attended him every where. For Antigonus, who was his
Lieutenant in Asia the Less, overthrew the Cappadocians, Paphlagonians, and
others lately revolted. Aristodemus also, who was Darius his Admiral, had his
Fleet partly taken, and partly drowned by the Macedonians. Likewise the
Lacedaemonians, who rose up against Antipater, were beaten: and four thousand of
those Greeks, that made so brave a retreat at the last Battle, being led by
Amyntas into Egypt, intending to hold it for themselves, were there slain: for
the time to divide Kingdoms was not yet come.

Alexander to honor his beloved Ephestion, gave him power to dispose of the
Kingdom of Zidon, and Ephestion, to show his gratitude, offered to bestow it
upon his Host with whom he quartered; A notable Example.
But the Man, not being of the Kingly Race, refused it, saying, It is not our
Country-fashion, that any should be King, but such as are of the Kingly Line.
And such an one (says he) lives hard by, a good, and a wise man, but very
poor, and one that lives by his hard labor. Then did Ephestion (taking Kingly
apparel along with him) go to this poor Man, and saluted him King, bidding
him, wash off his dirt, and put off his rags, and put on that Royal Apparel;
The poor Man's name was Abdolominus, who thought he had been in a dream, but
being by the standers by, washed, and adorned, Ephestion led him into the
Palace, saying, When thou sit on thy Throne, and have power over the lives
of all thy Subjects, forget not thy former condition. Alexander hearing of it,
sent for him, and asked him, with what patience, he, being of so Noble an
Extraction, could bear his former poverty? To whom Abdolominus answered; I pray
God that I may bear the Kingdom with the same mind. For (said he) these hands
have provided for my necessities, and as I had nothing, so I wanted nothing.

While Alexander staid in those parts, Darius desires peace, which Alexander
rejected.
he received a Letter from Darius, wherein he desired to ransom his Wife,
Mother, and Children, with some other conditions of peace, but such as rather
became a Conqueror, than one who had been so shamefully beaten, not
vouchsafeing in the Endorsment to give Alexander the title of King. Alexander
disdained his offers, and sent him word, that he was not only a King, but the
King of Darius himself.

When Alexander came near the City of Tire, he received from them the present
of a Golden Crown, and great store of Victuals, with some other things, which
he took very thankfully, sending them word, that he desired to offer a
Sacrifice to Hercules, the Protector of their City, from whom he was descended.
The Tyrians, not liking his presence within their walls, returned answer, that
the Temple of Hercules, was seated where the old City stood; Tire attempted,
but Alexander was resolved to enter Tire by force, though in most men's
Judgments the City was impregnable; for the Island whereon it was built, was
eight hundred furlongs from the land, yet with the labor of many hands, having
great store of stone from old Tire, and Timber sufficient from Libanus, he
stopped up the passage between the Island and the Main, being more than once
carried away by Storms, and sometimes fired by the Tyrians, yet with the help
of his Navy, he overcame all difficulties, and taken.
and prevailed, having spent seven months in that attempt. The Tyrians in the
beginning of the Siege, hard barbarously drowned some messengers sent by
Alexander to persuade them to yield, in respect whereof, and of his great loss
of time and men, he put eight thousand to the sword, and caused two thousand of
those that had escaped the first fury, Alexanders rigor.
to be hanged on Crosses upon the Seashore, and reserved for slaves thirteen
thousand, some say thirty thousand, and many more of them had died, if the
Zidonians, that served Alexander, had not conveyed great numbers of them by
shipping to their own City. Alexander gave the Government of this Territory to
Philotas, the Son of Parmenio. Ephestion had the charge of the Fleet, and was
commanded to meet Alexander at Gaza in the way to Egypt.

Whilst Alexander lay at the Siege of Tyrus, he sent to Jaddus, the High Priest
at Jerusalem, demanding of him supplies, and provisions for his Army; and
withal, such Tribute as they formerly paid to Darius: But when Jaddus
answered, that he was tied by a former Oath of Allegiance to Darius, from which
he could not be free so long as Darius lived: Alexander growing wroth at this
answer, swore, that as soon as he had taken Tyrus, he would march against
Jerusalem.

At the same time also came Sanballat, the Cuthaean to Alexander; who, having
forsaken Darius, brought with him eight thousand men: Him did Alexander receive
very graciously; Whereupon he asked leave of him to build a Temple upon his own
Land, and to make High Priest thereof, his Son in Law, Manasses, who was
Brother to Jaddus, the High Priest at Jerusalem; and having obtained leave,
because he now grew old, he fell presently to work, and built a Temple, and
made Manasses High Priest of it, thinking hereby to leave a great Honor to the
Posterity of his Daughter.

In the mean while Darius sends again to Alexander, Darius his second message.
setting before him all difficulties he should meet with in his passing on to
the East, laying the loss of the late Battle to the streightness of the place:
He bids him to consider how impossible it was for him to pass the Rivers of
Euphrates, Tygris, Araxes, etc. with all such other dreadful things as he
thought might discourage him. Moreover he proffered to him all the Kingdoms
which lay between the River Halis, and the Hellespont, as a Dower with his
beloved Daughter: Rejected by Alexander.
But Alexander rejected all, saying, That he proferred him nothing but what
already was his own, and what Victory, and his Virtue had possessed him of.
That he was in a capacity to give conditions, and not to receive any: and that
having passed the Sea it self, he disdained to think of resistance in
transporting his Army over Rivers. Indeed Parmenio, who was now old, and full
of Honor and Riches, told the King, that if he were Alexander he would embrace
the offers of Darius; to which Alexander answered, that so would he if he were
Parmenio.

Then did Alexander march on toward Egypt, and when he came to Gaza, Gaza
besieged,
Getes the Governor, a faithful servant to Darius, shut the Gates against
him, and defended the Town with a Noble Resolution, at the siege whereof
Alexander received a wound in the shoulder which was dangerous, and a blow on
his leg with a stone. He found better men in this place than he had done in the
former Battles: For he left so many of his Macedonians buried in the sands of
Gaza, that he was fain to send for a new supply into Greece. Here it was that
Alexander began to show his cruelty: For after he had taken Gaza by assault,
and taken. Alexanders cruelty.
and Getis the Governor, who was weakened with diverse wounds, and who never
gave ground to the Assailants, Alexander caused holes to be bored through his
feet, and himself to be dragged about the streets whilst he was yet alive, who
being as valiant a man as himself, scorned to ask him either for life, or the
mitigation of his Torments.

From Gaza Alexander led his Army toward Jerusalem, He goes to Jerusalem,
a City for the Antiquity, and great fame thereof, well known unto him; while
he lay before Tire, he had sent for some supplies thither, which Jaddus the
High Priest, being Subject, and Sworn to Darius, had refused him. The Jews
therefore fearing revenge, and unable to resist, committed the care of their
Lives and Estates to Jaddus, who had recourse to God by supplications and
Sacrifices for the Common safety; and was by him warned in a Dream that he
should make Holy Day in the City, and set the Gates wide open, and that he and
the rest of the Priests, every one in his Priestly Raiment, and the People all
clothed in white, should go forth and meet Alexander; and accordingly, he
Issued out of the City, arrayed in his Pontifical Robes, to wit, an upper
garment of Purple, Embroidered with Gold, with his Mitre, and the Plate of
Gold, wherein was engraved the Name of God, the Priests and Levites also in
their rich Ornaments, and the People in White Garments, in a manner so
unusual, stately, and grave, as Alexander greatly admired it; and when he came
near to the High Priest, and worships the High Priest.
he fell to the ground before him, as reverencing the Name of God, and when
Parmenio reproved him for it, Alexander told him, that in Dios, a City of
Macedonia, his mind being busied about the Conquest of Asia, His vision.
he saw in his sleep such a person as Jaddus, and so apparelled, by whom he was
encouraged to pursue his purpose, with assurance of Victory; and now beholding
with his bodily eyes him who before was only represented to his fancy, he was
so exceedingly pleased, and encouraged, as (contrary to the expectation of the
Phaenicians, who hoped to have sacked, and destroyed Jerusalem) he gave the Jews
all, His favor to the Jews.
and more than all that they desired; During his abode there, Jaddus showed him
the Prophecy of Daniel, wherein he saw himself; and his Conquest of Persia so
directly pointed at, as that nothing from thenceforth could either affright, or
discourage him therein.

The next day Alexander assembled the People, and bad them ask what they would
of him: But they asked nothing but that they might live according to the Laws
of their own Country, and that every seventh year (wherein they were to have no
harvest) they might be exempted from paying any Tribute, all which he granted.
And when they asked further, that he would suffer the Jews, which dwelt in the
Countries of Babylon, and Media, to live according to their own Rites and Laws,
he answered, that he would satisfy their desires in that point also, so soon
as he should get those Countries into his power. And when he told them, that if
any of them would follow him in his Wars, they should use their own Rites
wheresoever they came, many listed themselves to serve him.

From Jerusalem Alexander turned again toward Egypt, Egypt delivered to him.
and entering into it, Astaces, who was Darius's Lieutenant, received him, and
delivered into his hands, Memphis, with eight hundred Talents of Treasure, and
all other the Kings Riches; and when Alexander had set things in order in
Egypt, he began to affect a Deity, His journey to Jupiter Hammon.
at the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, so foolish had prosperity made him. He was to
pass over dangerous and dry Sands, where, when the water which he brought on
his Cammels backs was spent, he must need have perished, had not an
extraordinary shower of Rain fallen, just when his Army was in extreme despair.
Zach. 14. 18.
Indeed it never Rains in Egypt; but the purposes of Almighty God are secret,
and he brings to pass whatsoever pleases him. Its said also that when he had
lost his way in those vast Deserts, a flight of Crows flew before his Army,
making sometimes more, sometimes less have, till they had guided him over those
pathless sands to Jupiters Temple.

When Alexander came near the place, His Pride.
he sent some of his Parasites to corrupt the Priests attending the Oracle,
that their answer might be given in all things according to his mad ambition,
who affected to be accounted the Son of Jupiter: and accordingly, he was
saluted Jupiters Son, by the Devils Prophet, for which he was richly rewarded,
and presently a rumor was spread abroad, that Jupiter had owned him for his
Child: and the better to confirm his followers in the belief of his Deity, he
suborned the Priests to give answer to such as consulted with the Oracle, that
it would be very pleasing to Jupiter to Honor Alexander as his Son. But this
is certain, and very observable, The power of the Gospel.
that at Christ's coming, and the first preaching of the Gospel, the Devil in
this, and in all other his Oracles, became speechless.

From the Temple of Hammon, Alexander returned to Memphis, where, among many
other learned men, he heard the Philosopher Psammones, who understanding that
he affected the title of Jupiters Son, told him, that God was the Father King
of all men: and, refining the pride of this haughty King, he brought him to
acknowledge, that God was the Father of all mortal men, but that he
acknowledges none for his children, save good men.

The charge of the several Provinces of Egypt, Alexander gave to several
Governors, following thereing therein the Rules of his Master Aristotle, that
a great Dominion should not be continued in the hands of any one man;
Alaxandria built.
Then gave he order for the building of Alexandria upon the most Westernly
branch of Nilus; and thus having settled (as he could) the State of Egypt, with
the Kingdoms of the Lesser Asia, Phoenicia, and Syria, he Conducted his Army
toward Euphrates, He passes Euphrates.
which passage (though the same was committed to Mazeus to be defended by him)
yet did he abandon it, and Alexander without resistance, passed it. From thence
he marched toward Tygris, a River, for the swiftness thereof, called by the
Persians, The Arrow: Here might Darius easily have repelled him; for the
violent course of the stream was such, as it drove before it many weighty
stones, and those that moved not, but lay in the bottom, were so round, and
smooth by continual rolling, that no man was able to fight upon so slippery a
standing: Nor were the Macedonian Footmen able to wade through the River,
otherwise than by joining their hands, and interlacing their Arms each in
others, making thereby one entire, and weighty Body to resist the impetuousness
of the stream: and besides this, the Channel was so deep toward the Eastern
shore, And Tygris.
where Darius should have opposed him, that the Footmen were enforced to lift
their Bows, Arrows, and Darts over their Heads to keep them from being made
unservicable by the water. Indeed it cannot be denied, that as all Estates of
the World, by the surfeit of misgovernment, have been subject to many grievous,
and sometimes, mortal diseases: So had the Empire of Persia at this time
brought it self into a burning Feavour, and thereby became frantic, and
without understanding, foreshewing manifestly the death, and dissolution
thereof.

But Alexander had now recovered the Eastern shore of Tygris without any
opposition but what the Nature of the River made, were Mazeus, who had the
charge to defend the banks, both of Euphrates, and it, presented himself to the
Macedonians, being attended with certain Troops of Horsemen, as if with uneven
forces, he durst have charged them upon even ground, when as, with a multitude
far exceeding them, he forsook those advantages which no valor of the enemy
could easily have overcome. But its commonly seen that timorous and cowardly
persons do ever follow those ways, Base cowardice.
and counsels, whereof the opportunity is already lost.

Its true, that he set all provisions on fire wherewith the Macedonians might
be assisted in their passage over Tygris, thinking thereby greatly to have
distrested them: but the execution of good counsel is fruitless, when
unseasonable. For now was Alexander so well furnished with carriages, that no
conveniences were wanting to the Army which he conducted. Those things also
which Mazeus now sought to destroy, Alexander being in sight, Darius his new
Army.
by his Horsemen, saved and recovered them. This Mazeus might have done some
days before at good leisure; yea, at this time he might have done it with so
great a strength of Horsemen, as the Mecedonians might not have dared to pursue,
leaving the Body of their Foot out of sight, and so far behind.

Darius, upon Alexanders first return out of Egypt, had assembled all those
Forces which the Countries next to him could afford; and now also were the
Arians, Scythians, Indians, and other Nations come to him. Nations (says
Curtius) that rather served to make up a number, than to make resistance. Some
reckon them to amount to the number of ten hundred thousand Foot, and four
hundred thousand Horse, besides armed Chariots, and some few Elephants. Crutius
numbers them but two hundred thousand Foot, and about fifty thousand Horse,
which is more probable: And yet seeing Darius had more confidence in the
number, then in the Valor of his Soldiers, probably he had brought together
some three or four hundred thousand of all sorts, with which, he hoped in those
fair plains of Assyria, to have overborn the small number of the invading Army.
But its most true, That in every Battle skill and practice do more to wards
attaining the victory, than multitudes, and rude audacity.

Whilst Alexander rested, An Eclipse frightens the Macedonians.
and refreshed his Army after their heard passage over Tygris, there happened
an Eclipse of the Moon, at which the Macedonians (being ignorant of the cause,
and reason of it) were much troubled; taking it as a certain presage of their
ruin and destruction, insomuch as they began not only to murmur, but to speak
boldly, that to satisfy the ambition of one man, and of such an one as
disdained Philip for his Father, and would needs be called the Son of Jupiter,
they should all perish: For he enforced them, not only to War against a world
of enemies, but against Rivers, Mountains, and the Heavens themselves.

Hereupon Alaxander, who was now ready to advance, made an halt, and to quiet
the minds of the multitude, he called before him the Egyptian Astrologers,
that by them the Soldiers might be assured that this Eclipse of the Moon, was
a sure persage of his good success. But they never informed them that it came
to pass by natural causes, but reserved that as a secret fit to be kept
amongst themselves. These Astrologers gave no other reason for it than this,
That the Grecians were under the Aspect of the Sun, and the Persians under that
of the Moon, and therefore the Moon losing her light, did foreshew that the
state of Persia was now in danger of falling, and their Glory of being
obscured. This being noised through all the Army, every man was satisfied, and
quieted, and their courage redoubled.

As Alexander drew near the Persian Army, certain Letters were intercepted,
written by Darius to the Grecians, proffering and promising them a great sum
of money, if they would either kill, or betray Alexander. But these, by the
advice of Parmonio, were suppressed.

About this time also Darius his beautiful Wife, Darius his Wife died.
being oppressed with sorrow, and wearied with travel, died: which accident
Alexander seemed to bewail no less than Darius. who, upon the first report of
it, suspected, that some dishonorable violence had been offered to her; but
being satisfied by an Eunuch of his own that attended her, of Alexanders kind,
and Kingly respect toward her from the very time of her being taken, he prayed
the immortal Gods, that if they had decreed to set a new Master over the
Persian Empire, that then it would please them to confer it on so just and
chaste an enemy as was Alexander, to whom, once more before the last trial by
Battle, he offered these conditions of peace.

That if he would marry his Daughter, Proposals to Alexander.
he would deliver, and resign up to him all Asia the less, with Egypt, and
all those Kingdoms between the Phaenician Sea and the River Euphrates. That he
would pay him for the Ransom of his Mother, and other Daughters, thirty
thousand Talents, and that for performance thereof he would leave his Son Ochus
in Hostage; and they sought by sundry Arguments to persuade Alexander to accept
hereof. Alexander causing the Ambassadors to withdraw, advised with his
Council, yet heard no man speak but Parmenio, who was the very right hand of
his good Fortune, and he persuaded him to accept of such fair conditions: He
told him, that the Empire between Euphrates and the Hellespont, was a large
addition to Macedonia: That the retaining of those Persian prisoners was a
great cumber to him; and that the Treasure offered for them was of far better
use than their persons, with diverse other Arguments, yet Alexander, rejected
all; though it was very probable, that if he had followed his advice, and set
bounds to his ambition within those limits, he might have been as famous for
his virtue, as he was for his great successes, and might have left a successor
of fit age to have enjoyed his estate, which afterward, indeed he much
enlarged, rather to the greatning of others than himself, who to assure
themselves of what they had Usurped, left not one of his issue alive within a
few years after. Besides, Alexander by going so far into the East, left behind
him the reputation which he brought with him out of Macedonia, of a just and
prudent Prince: A Prince temperate, advised, and grateful; and learned by
abundance of prosperity, to be a lover of wine, of Flatterers, and of extreme
cruelty.

But the Persian Ambassadors waited for their answer, Alexanders answer.
which was to this effect: that what courtesies soever he had bestowed upon the
Wife, and Children of Darius, proceeded from his own natural clemency, and
magnanimity, without all respect to their Master, but thanks to an enemy was
improper: That he made no Wars against adversity, but against those that
resisted him: Not against Women, and Children, but against armed enemies: And
also that by the reiterated practices of Darius, to corrupt his Soldiers, and
by great sums of money, to debauch his Friends to attempt something against
his Person, he had reason to doubt whether the peace offered were really
intended, yet could he not (were it true and faithful) resolve in have to
accept of it, seeing Darius had Warred against him, not as a King, with Royal
and overt forces, but as a Traitor, by secret, and base practices. Besides, the
Territories which he offered him were already his own; and if Darius, could
beat him back again over Euphrates, he would then believe that he offered him
something that was in his power to give: Otherwise he propounded to himself, as
a reward of his enterprises, all those Kingdoms which Darius as yet had in his
possession; wherein, whether he was abused by his own hopes or no, the Battle
which he meant to fight the day following, should determine. And in conclusion,
he told them, that he came into Asia, to give Kingdoms, and not to rer^ive
them: That the Heavens could not hold two Suns, and therefore if Darius could
be content to acknowledge Alexander his Superior, His ambition.
he might perchance be persuaded to give him condition fit for a second person,
and an Inferior.

The Ambassadors being returned with this answer, Darius prepares to fight, and
sent Mazeus to defend a Pass, which yet he never dared so much as to hazard.
Alexander consulting with his Captains, Parmeni^, persuaded him to force the
Camp of Darius by night, that the multitudes of his enemies might not affright
his Macedonians, being comparitivly but a few. But Alexander replied, that he
s^orned to steal a victory, and resolved to bring with him Daylight to witness
his Valor. His Valor.
Indeed the success commended Alexanders resolution, though the Counsel given
by Parmenio was more sound. Yet when he came to view the multitude of his
enemies, he began to stagger, and entrenched himself upon a Ground of
advantage, which foolishly the Persians had abandoned. And when as Darius, for
fear of a Camizado, had stood with his men in A^mour all the day, and forborne
all sleep in the night; Alexander on the contrary, gave his men rest, and store
of food, knowing, that Soldiers do better stand to it in fight, if they have
their bellies full of meat and drink: for hunger within, fights more eagerly
than steel without.

The numbers which Alexander had, They prepare to fight.
were about forty thousand Foot, and seven thousand Horse, which were of the
Europaean Army: And besides these, he had E^yptians, Syrians, Judaeans, and
Arabi^ns which followed him out of those Countries. He used but a short speech
to his Soldiers to encourage them, neither need he; For one victory begets
another, and puts courage into the Conquerours, and takes away spirits from
those that have been beaten.

Some make large descriptions of this Battle, A Battle.
fought at Gaugamela, but in conclusion they tell us but of three hundred of
Alexanders men that were slain, and some say less; but of the Persians there
fell forty thousand: But what can we judge of this great encounter, other than
(as in the two form Battles at Granick, and in Cilicia) that the Persians,
upon the first charge, ran away, and that the Macedonians pursued them. For if
that every man whom Darius brought into the field, had but cast a Dart, or a
stone, the Macedonians could not have bought the Empire of the East at so eas^y
a rate, as six or seven hundred in three such notorious Battles. Certainly if
Darius had fought with Alexander upon the banks of Euphrates, and had Armed but
fifty or sixty thousand of this great multitude, only with Spades (for most of
his men were fit for no other weapon) it had been impossible for Alexander to
have passed that River so easily, much less the River of Tygris. But as a man,
Darius beaten,
whose Empire God was putting a Period to, he abandoned all places of
advantage, and suffered Alexander to enter so far into the bowels of his
Kingdom, as all hope and possibility of escaping by retreat being taken from
the Macedonians, they were put to the choice, either to die or Conquer, to
which Election Darius could no way constrain his men, seeing they had many
large Regions to run into from their invaders.

Darius, and flies.
after the rout of his Army, fled to Arbela that night, better attended in his
flight than in the fight, and to them that fled with him, he propounded his
purpose of retreating into Media, persuading them that the Ma^edonians, who
were greedy of spoil and riches, would rather attempt Babylon, Susa, and other
Cities filled with Treasure, than to pursue the vanquished. This miserable
resolution his Nobility rather obeyed, than approved.

Soon after the departure of Darius, Arbela taken and much Treasure.
came Alexander to Arbela, which, with a great mass of Treasure, and many
Princely Ornaments, was surrendered to him. For the fear which accompanied
Darius, took nothing with it but shame, and dishonor. He that had been twice
beaten before, should have sent his Treasure into Media rather than to have
brought it to Arbela, so near the place where he intended to wait the coming of
his enemy. If he had been victorious, he might have brought it back at leisure:
But being overcome, he knew it impossible to drive Mules and Camels laden with
Gold, from the pursuing Enemy, seeing himself, at the overthrow which he had in
Cilicia, cast the Crown from his head, to run away the lighter: But its easier
to reprehend, than to amend what is past.

From Arbela, Babylon taken.
Alexander marched toward Babylon, where Maz^u^, in whom Darius had most
confidence, rendered to him, himself, his Children, and the City. Also the
Captain of the Castle where the Treasure was kept; strewed the streets with
Flowers, burnt Frankincense upon the Silver Altars, as Alexander passed by, and
delivered to him whatsoever was committed to his trust. The Magi also, who were
the Chaldean Astrologers, followed this Captain to entertain their new King:
After these, came the Babylonian Horsemen, infinitely* rich in attire, but
exceeding poor in Warlike furniture. Between these and himself, Alexander
caused his Macedonian footmen to march. When he entered the Castle he admired
the Glory thereof, and the abundance of Treasure which he found therein,
amounting to fifty thousand Talents of Silver uncoined. In this City, rich in
all things, but most of all in voluptuous pleasures, the King rested himself
and his whole Army thirty four days, spending that time in Banqueting, and in
all sorts of effeminate exercises, which so much softened the minds of the
Macedonians, not acquainted till now with such delicacies, as the severe
Discipline of War, which taught them to endure hunger and thirst, painful
travel, and hard lodging, began rather to be forgotten than neglected.
Alexander, as he was rowed upon a Lake near Babylon in his Gally, a sudden
tempest arising blew off his Hat, and Crown fastened upon it, into the Lake,
whereupon one of the Mariners, leaping into the water, swam, and fetched it to
him, and to keep it the drier, he put it upon his own head. Alexander rewarded
him with a Talent for saving his Crown; but withal, caused his Head to be cut
off, Base cruelty.
for presuming to put his Crown upon it.

During his abode here, Alexander instituted those Regiments consisting of a
thousand Soldiers, appointing Colonels over them, who thereupon were called
Chiliarks. This new order Alexander brought in, was to honor those Captains,
which were found by certain select Judges, to have deserved best in the late
War.

While Alexander was yet at Babylon, there came to him a great supply out of
Europe. For Antipater sent him six thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse out of
Macedonia; and of the Thracians three thousand Foot, and as many Horse, and out
of Greece four thousand, and four hundred Horse, by which his Army was greatly
strengthened. For those that were infected with the pleasures of Babylon, could
hardly be brought again to change their soft beds for hard boards, and the cold
ground.

Alexander left the City and Castle of Babylon, with the Territories adjoining,
in charge with three of his own Captains, Aga^hon, Minetus, and Appolidorus,
leaving a thousand Talents to supply their wants: But to grace Maz^us, who
delivered up the City to him, he gave him the title of his Lieutenant General,
and took along with him Bagistines, who surrended the Castle to him; and having
distributed to every Soldier a part of the Treasure, he left Babylon and
entered into the Province of Satrapene, marching from thence toward Susa in
Persia, situated on the River Euleus, which City was sometime Governed by the
Prophet Diniel. Susa taken
Here Abulites, the Governor of this famous City, gave it up to the
Conqueror, with fifty thousand Talents of Silver in Bullion, and twelve
Elephants for the War, with all other the Treasure of Darius there; such as the
Persian Kings had for a long time, heaped up together, leaving it from Father
to Son; all which in one hour came into his hands who had never cared for it.
In this sort did those Vassals of Fortune; those lovers of the Kings
prosperity, not of his Person, purchase their own peace, and safety with their
Masters Treasure; and herein was Alexander well advised, that whatsoever titles
he gave to the Persians, yet he left all places of importance in trust with his
own Captains, as Babylon, Susa, Persepolis, with other Cities, and Provinces
that were Conquered by him: for had Darius but beaten the Macedonians in one
Battle, all the Persian Nobility would have turned again to their natural Lord.

Whilst Alexander was ransacking Arbela, Gross folly.
Mazeus might have furnished Darius from Babylon; and whilst he stayed those
thirty four days at Babylon, Abulites might have helped him from Susa: and
whilst he was Feasting, and Frolicking there; Teridates from Persepolis might
fully have supplied him: for the chiefest bulk of his Treasure was laid up in
that City: But benefits bind not the ambitious but the honest; for those that
are selfish, do in all changes, consult only the conservation of their own
greatness.

The Government of Susa, with the Castle and treasure, Alexander committed to
his own Macedonians, making Abulites, who rendered it to him, his Lieutenant, as
he had done Mazeus before, giving them Honorable Titles, but neither trust nor
power. For he left three thousand old Soldiers to Garrison that City, and with
them, the Mother, and Children of Darius to repose themselves there.

From Susa Alexander marched with his Army toward Persepolis; Alexandor beaten.
but when he sought to pass those Mountains that ^under Susiana and Persia, he
was soundly beaten by Ariobarzanes, who defended those Streights* against him,
called Pylae Persidis, and after the loss of many of his Macedonians, he was
forced to save himself by retreat, causing his Foot to march close together,
and to cover themselves with their Targets from the Stones that were tumbled
upon them from the Mountain-tops. Yet in the end, he found out another passage,
which was discovered to him by a Lycian that lived in that Country, and
thereby, coming suddenly upon Ariobarzanes, who now was enforced to fight upon
even ground, he overthrew him, who from thence fled to Persepolis: But the
Citizens refusing to admit him, he returned and gave a second charge upon the
Macedodonians, in which he was slain.

Many Greeks (for Authors agree not upon their number) having been taken
Prisoners by the Persians, Barbarous cruelty.
presented themselves here to Alexander. These had the Barbarians so maimed, by
cuting off their Hands, Ears, Noses, and other Members, as that they could not
have been known to their own Country men, but by there Language. To each of
these Alexander gave three hundred Crowns, with new Garments, and such Lands as
they liked to live upon.

Tiridates, one of Darius his falshearted Grandees, hearing of Alexanders
approach to Persepolis, made him know that Persepolis was ready to receive him,
and entreated him to double his pace, because there was a determination amongst
the People to Plunder the Kings Treasury. This City was forsaken by many of her
Inhabitants upon Alexanders arrival, Persepolis taken.
and they that staid, followed the worst Counsel. For the City was given up to
the Liberty of the Soldiers t2o spoil, and kill at their pleasure. There was
no place in the world at that time, which, if it had been lain in the Balance
with Persepolis, would have weighed it down, Indeed, Babylon, and Susa were
very rich; but in Persepolis lay the bulk, and greatest store of the riches of
Persia. For after the spoil that had been made, of money, curious Plate,
Bullion, Images of Gold, and Silver, and other jewels, there remained to
Alexander himself one hundred and twenty thousand Talents, and as much other
Treasure as twenty thousand Mules, and ten thousand Camels could carry away,
much whereof had been reserved there from the days of Cyrus. Here it was that
Alexander, setting himself down upon Darius his Throne, it was so high that his
feet could not reach the ground, whereupon one of his attendants brought him a
little Table, and set it under his feet. One of Darius's Eunuchs standing by,
sighed, and wept grievously, which Alexander taking notice of, asked him the
reason of it? the Eunuch answered, I weep to see a Table that was so highly
prized by my Master Darius, now to be made thy footstool. Here he left the same
number of three thousand Macedonians, in Persepolis, as he had done in Susa,
and gave the same formal honor to the Traitor Tiridates, as he had done to
Abulites; but he committed the charge of the place to Nicarides, a Creature of
his own.

The Body of his Army he left here for thirty days, under the care of
Parmenio, and Craterus, and with a thousand Horse, A foolish enterprise.
and certain chosen Bands of Foot, he would needs view in the winter time,
those parts of Persia which now were covered with Snow: A fruitless and foolish
enterprise. Some speak it in his praise, that when his Soldiers cried out
against him, because of the extreme Frost and Snow, through which they could
not make way but with great difficulty, that Alexander forsook his Horse, and
marched on foot before them: But what can be more ridiculous than for a man to
bring other men into extremity, thereby to show how well him self can endure
it; Being his walking on foot did no otherwise take off their weariness that
followed him, than his sometime forbearing to drink, did quench their thirst
that could less endure it.

Alexander being returned to Persopolis, Alexander turns Drunkard.
those Historians that were most enamored of his virtues, complain, that the
opinion of his Valor, of his Liberality, of his Clemency toward the
vanquished, and all other his Noble conditions, were drowned in Drink. That he
smothered in his carousing cups all the reputation of his former actions, and
that by descending as it were, from the awful Throne of the greatest King,
into the company, and familiarity of the bastest Harlots, he began to be
despised both of his own, and of all other Nations. For when he was enflamed
with Wine, and being persuaded by the infamous Strumpet Thais, he caused the
most sumtuous, Persopolis burnt.
and goodly Castle and City of Persepolis to be consumed with fire,
notwithstanding all the Arguments that Parmenio could use to the contrary, who
told him, that it was a dishonor to destroy those things by the persuasion of
others, which by his proper virtue, and force, he obtained: and that it would
be a certain evidence to the Asiaticks, to think hardly of him, and thereby
alienate their hearts from him. For they might well believe, that he which
demolished the goodliest Ornaments they had, meant nothing less, than after
such vastations, to hold the possession of them.

About this time Alexander received another supply of Soldiers out of Cilica,
Darius his last Army.
and advanced to find out Darius in Media. Darius had there formed his fourth,
and last Army, which he meant to have increased in Bactria, had he not heard of
Alexanders coming on, with whom (trusting to his present numbers, which yet
were but thirty or forty thousand) he intended once again to try what he might
do against him. He therefore called together his Captains, and Commanders, and
propounded his resolution to them, who desparing of good success, stood for a
while silent: But at last Artabazus one of his eldest men of War, who had
sometime lived with King Philip the Father of Alexander, brake the silence,
protesting that he could never be beaten by any adversity of the Kings, from
the faith that he had ever ought him, with firm confidence that all the rest
were of the same mind, whereof they likewise assured Darius, by the like
protestation, and so they approved of the Kings resolution. Two only, and they
the greatest, to wit, Naburzanes, The Treason of Bessus.
and Bessus, who was Governor of Bactria, had conspired against their Master,
and therefore advised the King to lay a new foundation for the War, and to
pursue it for the present by some such person against whom neither the Gods,
nor Fortune had in all things declared themselves to be an enemy.

This preamble Naburzanes used, and in conclusion advised the Election of his
fellow Traitor Bessus, with promise that when the War should be ended, the
Empire should be again restored to Darius. The King, swollen with disdain,
pressed toward Naburzanes to have slain him; but Bessus, and the Bactrians,
whom he commanded, being more in number than the rest, with held him. Hereupon
Nahurzanes withdrew himself and Bessus followed him, making their Quarters
apart from the rest of the Army. Artabazus, the the Kings faithful servant,
persuaded him to be advised, and to comply for the time, the rather because
Alexander was at hand, and that he would at lest make show of forgeting the
offense: which the King (being of a gentle disposition) easily yielded to. Then
came Bessus to the King and made his submission: But Patron, who commanded a
Brigade of four thousand Greeks, The fidelity of the Greeks.
which had in all the former Battles served Darius faithfully, and had always
made their retreat in despit of the Macedonians, offered himself to Darius to
guard his Person, protesting against the Treason of Bessus. (But God had
otherwise determined of the Empire, and therefore so far was the King
infatuated, that he ever rejected their Counsel from the beginning of the War,
who were most faithful to him.) And now hearkened to Bessus, who told him,
that the Greeks, with Patron their Captain, were corrupted by Alexander and
practiced the division of his faithful servants: Yet, even this while, Bessus
had corrupted, and drawn to himself thirty thousand of the Army, promising them
all those things by which, the lovers of the world and themselves, are wont to
be allured, to wit, Riches, honor, and Safety.

Now the day following Darius plainly discovered the purposes of Bessus, Dariu^
discharges his Attendants.
and being overcome with passion, as judging himself unable to make head
against these ungrateful and unnatural Traitors, he prayed Artabazus, his
faithful servant, to depart from him, and to provide for his own safty. In
like manor he discharged the rest of his attendants, all save a few of his
Eunuchs. For his Gaurds had voluntarily abandoned him. His Persians, being most
base cowards, durst not undertake his defense against the Bactrians, though
they had four thousand Greeks to assist them, who of themselves were able to
beat both the Parties. But its most true, That him that forsakes himself, will
no man follow. It had been far more manlike, and Kinglike to have died in the
head of those four thousand Greeks, who offered him the disposal of their
lives, (to which Artabazus also persuaded him) than to have lain upon the
ground bewailing himself, and suffering himself to be bound like a slave, by
those ambitious Monsters that laid violent hands on him; Darius made a Prisoner
and abused.
whom neither the consideration of his former great estate, nor the Honor he
had conferred upon them, nor the trust he had reposed in them, nor the world of
benefits he had bestowed on them, could move to pity: No, nor his present
adversity, which above all things should have prevailed with them, could pierce
their viperous, and ungrateful hearts.

Darius, thus forsaken, was bound by them, and laid in a Cart covered with
Hides of Beasts, that he might not be discovered; and to add despite, and
derision to his adversity, they bound him with Chains of Gold, and so drew him
amongst their ordinary Carriages. For Bessus, and Naburzanes persuaded
themselves that they might redeem their lives, and be settled in their Provinces
that they held, either by delivering him a Prisoner to Alexander, or if that
hope failed, to make themselves Kings by his murder, and then to defend
themselves by force of Arms. But their expectations were frustrate in both.
Gods Justice.
For it was against the Nature of God, who is most just, to suffer such villainy
to go unpunished, yea, though against an Heathen King, and an Idolator.

Alexander hearing that Darius was retreated toward Bactria, Alexander pursues
him.
not daring to abide his coming, hastened after him by a violent march, and
because he would not force his Footmen beyond their strength, he mounted on
Horseback certain select Companies of them, and those which were best Armed,
and with six thousand other Horse, he rather ran than marched after Darius. Now
such as hated the Treason of Bessus, secretly forsook him, and gave
intelligence to Alexander of all that had happened, informing him of the way
that Bessus took, and how near he was unto him. Hereupon Alaxander again
doubled his pace, and his Vantguard being come within sight of Bessus his
Rear, Bessus brought a Horse to the Cart where Darius lay bound, persuading
him to mount thereon, and to save himself by flight. But the unfortunate King
refusing to follow those that had betrayed him, they cast Darts at him, Darius
is wounded.
and gave him some mortal wounds: they wounded also the Beasts that drew him,
and slew two poor servants that attended his Person. This done, they all fled
that could, and left the rest to the mercy of the Macedonians.

Polystratus, a Macedonian, in his pursuit after Bessus, being extreme thirsty,
as he was refreshing himself, with some water that he had found out, espied a
Cart drawn by wounded Beasts, that were now scarce able to go, whereupon he
searched it, and there found Darius bathed in his own blood: and by a Persian
Captain that Polystratus had, he understood that it was Darius, and was
informed of that Barbarous Tragedy. Darius also seemed greatly comforted (if
dying men, ignorant of the living God can be comforted) that he vented not his
last sorrows unheard, but that by this Macedonian, Alexander might be informed
of the truth, and take vengeance on those Traitors, who had dealt no less
unworthily; than cruelly with him, recommending the revenge thereof to
Alexander by this messenger, His last words.
beseeching him to pursue the Traitors, not for Darius, his sake, but for his
own Honor, and for the safety of all that did, or should hereafter wear
Crowns. He also having nothing else to present to Alexander, rendered him thanks
for his Kingly Grace, and favor used to his Wife Mother and Children, desiring
the immortal Gods to subject to him the Kingdom of the whole World. As he was
thus speaking, importunate Death pressing out his few remaining spirits, he
desired a little water, which Polystratus presented unto him, after which he
lived but to tell him, that of all the good things which of late he was Master
of, he had nothing remaining but his last breath, wherewith to desire the Gods
to reward his compassion.

The Macedonians began now to hope that their travels were near an end: and
therefore every man was preparing for his return, whereof when Alexander was
informed, he was much troubled at it. For the bounded Earth suffized not for
his boundless ambition. Alexanders Ambition.
Many Arguments he therefore used to draw on his Army farther into the East:
But that which prevailed most was, that Bessus, a base Traitor to his Master
Darius, having at his devotion the Hyrcanians, and Bactrians, would in a short
time, if the Macedonians should now return, make himself Lord of the Persian
Empire, and reap the fruit of all their former travels. In conclusion,
Alexander wan their consents to go on: Which done, leaving Craterus with
certain Regiments of Foot, and Amyntas with six thousand Horse, He goes into
Hyrcania.
in Parthia, he entered (not without some opposition) into Hyrcania. For the
Mardons, and other Barbarous Nations, defended certain passages for a while.
But at last prevailing, he passed the River of Zioberis, which, taking its rise
in Parthia, empties it self into the Caspian Sea. It runs under the ledg of
Mountains which bound Parthia, and Hyrcania, where, hiding it self under ground
for three hundred furlongs, it then rises again, and follows its former course
as is said before. In Zadracarta the Metropolis of Hyrcania, Alexander rested
fifteen days, Banqueting, and Feasting therein.

About this time Phataphernes, one of Darius his greatest Commanders, Diverse
submit to him.
with some others of his followers submitted themselves to Alexander, and were
restored to to their places, and Government. But above all other, he Graced
Artabazus most highly, for his approved and constant Faith and Loyalty to his
Master Darius. Artabazus brought along with him ten thousand and five hundred
Greeks, the remainder of all those that had served Darius. He treated with
Alexander for their pardon before they came; but in the end, they rendered
themselves simply without promise or composition: Alexander pardoned all but
the Lacedaemonians, whom he imprisoned, their Captain having slain himself: He
was also prevailed with (though to his great dishonor) to pardon Nabarzanes,
that had joined with Bessus in the murder of Darius.

Here (as some write) Thalestris, Queen of the Amazons comes to him.
Queen of the Amazons came to visit him, and her suit was (which she easily
obtained) that she might accompany him, till she proved with child by him:
which done she refused to go along with him into India, but returned into her
own Country.

Now as Alexander had begun to change his conditions after the taking of
Persepolis: So at this time Prosperity had so much corrupted his virtue, that
he accounted clemency to be but baseness, and the temperance, which all his
life before he had used, to be but a poor, and abject humor, rather becoming
the instructers of his youth, than the condition, and state of so mighty a
King, as the World could not equal. For he persuaded himself that he now
represented the greatness of the Gods; and he was pleased when those that came
before him, He affects a Deity.
would fall on the ground and adore him. He wore the Garments, and Robes of the
Persians, and commanded his Nobles to do the like. He entertained into his
Court, and Camp, the same shameless Rabble of Curtizans, and Catamite,^ as
Darius had done, whom he imitated in all the proud, voluptuous, and detested
manners of the Persians, whom he had vanquished, and became a more foul and
fearful monster than Darius, from whose Tyranny, he vaunted, to have delivered
so many Nations; Insomuch as they that were nearest and dearest to him, began
to be ashamed of him, entertaining each other with this, or the like scornful
discourse. For which he is scorned of his Friends.
That Alexander of Macedonia was become one of Darius licentious Courtiers:
That by his Example, the Macedonians, after so many, and tedious travels, were
more impoverished in their virtues, than enriched by their victories, and that
it was hard now to judge, whether the Conqueres, or Conquered were the baser
slaves. Neither were these things so whispered in corners, but that they came
to Alexanders ears: He therefore with great Gifts sought to stop the mouths of
the better sort, and of such of whose Judgments he was most jealous.

Then did he make it known to the Army, that Bessus had assumed the title of a
King; and called himself Artaxerxes, and that he had compounded a great Army of
the Bactrians and other Nations, whereby he persuaded them to go on, to the end
that all which they had already gotten, together with themselves (so far
engaged) might not be cast away, and lost. And because they were pestered with
the plunder of so many rich Cities, that the whole Army seemed but the guard of
their carriages, he commanded that every man's Fardel should be brought into the
Market place, He burns all the Spoils.
which when it was done, he, together with his own, caused all to be consumed
with fire. This, in probability, might have proved very dangerous unto him: For
the Common Soldiers had more interest in that which they had purchased with
their painful travel, and with their blood, than in the Kings Ambition; had
not his happy temerity overcome all difficulties.

As he was upon his march, Rebellion against him.
news was brought that Satribarzanes, whom he had established in his former
Government over the Arians, was revolted; Whereupon, leaving the way of
Bactria, he sought the Traitor out: But the Rebel hearing of his coming, fled
with two thousand Horse to Bessus: Then marched Alexander on against Bessus,
and by setting a great Pile of Wood on fire, with the advantage of a strong
wind, he won a passage over an high, and unaccessible Rock, which was desended
against him by thirty thousand Foot, the extremity of the fire, and smoke,
forcing them to quit the place, which otherwise had been invincible: After
which, he found no resistance till he came into Aria, on the East of Bactria,
where ye chief City of that Province, called Artacoana, was a while defended
against him, by the revolt of Satribarzanes; but in the end, he received the
Inhabitants to mercy. At this place his Army was recruited with a new supply of
five thousand, and five hundred Foot, and near five hundred Horse out of
Greece, Thessaly, and other places.

At this time it was that the Treason of Dimnus was discovered, Treason against
him.
of which Philotas, the Son of Parmenio, was accused, at least as accessory if
not principal. This Dimnus, with some others, having conspired against the
life of Alexander, went about to draw Nicomacus, a young man whom he loved,
into the conspiracy; The youth, although he was first bound by Oath to secrecy,
when he heard so foul a matter uttered, began to protest against it so
vehemently, that his Friend was like to have slain him, to secure his own life;
and so, constrained by fear, he made show as if he had been won by persuasion,
and by seeming at length, to like well of the business, he was told more at
large who they were that had undertaken it. There were nine or ten of them, all
men of rank, whose Names Dimnus (the better to countenance the enterprise)
reckoned up to him. Nicomacbus had no sooner freed himself from the company of
this Traitor Dimnus, than he acquainted his own Brother, C^ballinus, with the
whole design, whereupon it was agreed between them, that Ceballinus (who might
do it with the least suspicion) should go to the Court, and utter all.
Ceballinus meeting with Philotas, told him the whole business, requesting him
to acquaint the King with it, which he promised to do, but yet did not.

Two days passed, and Philotas never brake with the King about the matter, but
still excused himself to Ceballinus by the Kings want of leisure. This his
coldness bred suspicion, and caused Ceballinus to apply himself to one Metron,
Keeper of the Kings Armory, who forthwith brought him to Alexanders presence.
Its discovered to Alexander
Alexander finding by examination what had passed between Ceballinus, and
Philotas, fully persuaded himself that this concealment of the Treason argued
Philotas to have a hand in it; when Dimnus therefore was brought before him, he
asked him only this Question; Wherein have I so offended thee, that thou
should think Philotas more worthy to be King than my self? Dimnus, when he
was first apprehended, perceiving how the matter was like to go, had so wounded
himself, that he lived no longer than to give his last groan in the Kings
presence.

Then was Philotas sent for, and charged with the suspicion which his silence
might justly breed. His answer was, that when the Treason was revealed to him
by Nicomachus, he judged it to be but frivolous, and therefore forbore to
acquaint Alexander with ir, till he could procure better information. This
error of his (if it were but an Error) though Alexander, for the notable
services done by his Father Parmenio, and his Brother Nicanor, lately dead, and
by Philotas himself, had freely pardoned him, and given him his hand for
assurance: Yet, by the instigation of Craterus, he falsified his Princely
promise, Philotus accused.
and made the Enemies of Philotas his Judges. Craterus indeed persuaded
himself, that he could never find a better occasion to oppress his private
enemy, than by pretending Piety, and Duty to his Prince. Whence a Poet says,
See how these Great men clothe their private hate,
In these fair colors of the Public good;
And to effect their ends, pretend the State,
As if the State by their affection stood:
And Armed with Power, and Princes Jealousies,
Will put the least conceit of discontent
Into the greatest rank of Treacheries,
That no one action shall seem innocent.
Yea, Valor, Honor, Bounty shall be made
As accessaries unto ends unjust:
And even the service of the State must lade
The needful'st undertaking with distrust,
So that base vileness, idle Luxury
Seem safer far than to do worthily.


Now the King, following the advice of Craterus, had resolved the next day to
put Philotas to the Torment, Alexanders dissimulation.
yet in the very evening of the same night in which he was apprehended, he
called him to a Banquet, and discoursed as familiarly with him as at any other
time. But when in the dead of the night, Philotas was taken in his lodging, and
that they which hated him began to bind him, he cried out upon the King in
these words: O Alexander, the malice of mine enemies has surmounted thy mercy,
and their hatred is far more constant than the Word of a King. Many
circumstances were urged against him by Alexander himself; and this was not the
least (not the least offense indeed against the Kings humor, who desired to be
adored as a God) that when Alexander wrote unto him concerning the title given
him by Jupiter Hammon, he answered, That he could not but rejoice that he was
admitted into the Sacred fellowship of the Gods, and yet he could not but
withal grieve for those which should live under such a one as would exceed the
nature of man. This, said Alexander, assured me that his heart was estranged,
and that he despised my Glory.

Philotas was brought before the multitude to hear the King^ Oration against
him. Philatas accused by the King.
He was brought forth in vile Garments, and bound like a Thief, where he heard
himself, and his absent Father, the greatest Captain in the World, accused, and
also his two other Brothers, Hector, and Nicanor, who had lost their lives in
these Wars; wherewith he was so overcome with grief, that, for a while, he
could utter nothing for tears, and sorrow had so wasted his Spirits, that he
sank between those that led him. In the end, the King asked him in what
Language he would make his defense? He answered, In the same wherein it had
pleased the King to accuse him: which accordingly he did, to the end that the
Persians, as well as the Macedonians, might understand him. But here of the
King made this advantage, persuading the Assembly that he disdained the
language of his own Country, and so, withdrawing himself, he left him to his
merciless enemies.

This proceeding of the Kings, Philotas greatly lamented, seeing the King, who
had so sharply invieghed against him, would not vouchsafe to hear his answer.
For hereby his enemies were emboldned against him, and all the rest, having
discovered the Kings mind, and resolution, contended amongst themselves, which
of them should show the greatest hatred toward him. Amongst many Arguments
which he brought for his own defense, this was not the least, that when
Nicomachus desired to know of Dimnus, of what quality, and power his partners
in the conspiracy were, seeming unwilling to adventure himself amongst mean,
and base Companions, Dimnus named unto him, Demetrius, of the Kings
Bedchamber, Nicanor, Amyntas, and some others, but spoke not a word of
Philotas, who, being Master of the Horse, would greatly have graced the cause,
and encouraged Nichomacus. And to make it more clear that he knew nothing of
their intents, there was not any one of the Conspirators, that in their
torments, would accuse him. Yet at the last, Philotus condemned, and tortured
to death.
himself being put to extreme torments by the devise of his professed enemies*
Craterus, Cenus, Ephestion, and others, Philotas accused himself, hoping that
they would have slain him immediately: But he failed even in that miserable
hope, and suffering all that could be inflicted on flesh and blood, he was
forced to confess, not what was true, but what might best please them, who were
far more merciless than Death it self. Cruelty is not a humane vice: It is
unworthy of man: Its even a beastly rage to delight in blood and wounds, and
casting away the nature of man, to become a savage Monster.

Now whilst Alexanders hands were yet died in blood, Alexanders cruelty.
he commanded that Lyncestes, Son in Law to Antipater, who had been three years
in Prison, should be slain. The same dispatch had all those that were accused
by Nicomachus. But Parmenio was yet living. Parmenio, who had served with great
fidelity, as well Philip the Kings Father, as himself. Parmenio that first
opened Alexanders way into Asia: That had cast down Attalus, the Kings enemy:
That had always, and in all hazards the leading of the Kings Vaunt-gard: That
was no less Prudent in Counsel, then successful in all his enterprises. A
man, beloved of the men of War, and to say the truth, he that had purchased for
the King the Empire of the East, and of all the Glory and fame which he had
attained to. That he might not therefore revenge the Death of his Son, though
not upon the King (for it was unlikely that he would have stained his fidelity
in his ^^^^ge, having now lived seventy years) yet upon th^^, who by base
Flattery had possessed themselves of the Kings affection, It was resolved that
he should die also: and Polydamus was employed in this business, a man whom of
all others Parmenio trusted most, and loved best. Who (to be short) finding him
in Media, and having Cleander, and other Murtheres with him, Parmenio murdered.
slew him as he was walking in his Garden, and reading the Kings letters. This
was the end of Parmenio (says Curtius) who had performed many notable things
without the King; but the King without him did never effect any thing worthy of
Praise.

These things being ended, Alexander marches forward.
Alexander marched on with his Army, and subdued the Araspitans, and made
Amenides (sometime Secretary to Darius) their Governor. Then he Conquered the
Arachosians, and left Menon to command over them. Here the Army (that was
sometime led by Parmenio) found him, which consisted of twelve thousand
Macedonians and Greeks, with whom (though with much difficulty) he passed
through some cold Regions. At length he came to the foot of ye Mountain Taurus,
toward the East, where he built a City, which he honored with his own Name,
and peopled it with seven thousand of his old Macedonians, Builds a City.
worn out with age, and the travels of War. The Arians, who since he left them
were revolted, he again subdued, by the industry, and valor of Caranus, and
Erigius: and now he resolved to find out the new King Bessus in Bactria, who
hearing of his coming, prepared to pass over the great River of Oxus, which
divides Bactria from Sogdiana. Bessus having now abandoned Bactria, Alexander
made Artabazus Governor of it, and himself marching forward with his Army,
Wants water.
they suffered great want of water, insomuch as when they came to the River
Oxus, there died more of them by immoderate drinking, than Alexander had lost
in any one Battle against the Persians. He found upon the Banks of this great
River no manner of Timber, or other materials wherewith to make Bridges, or
Boats, or Rafts* but was forced to sew together Hides that covered his
Carriages, and stuffing them with straw, he was six days in passing over his
Army after that manner, which Bessus might easily have distressed, if he had
dared but to look the Macedonians in the face. He had formerly complained of
Darius for neglecting to defend the Banks of Tygris, and other Passes, and yet
now, when this Traitorous slave had styled himself a King, he durst not perform
anything worthy of a slave: and therefore they that were nearest to him, and
whom he most trusted, to wit, Spitamenes, Dataphernes, Catanes, and others, the
Commanders of his Army, moved, both by the care of their own safety, and the
remembrance of Bessus his Treason and cruelty against Darius, Bessus taken.
bound him as he had done his Master, only his chain was closed about his neck,
like a Mastiff Dog, and so they dragged him a long to present him to Alexander.

In the mean time Alexander was arrived at a certain Town inhabited by Greeks
of Miletum, brought thither by Xerxes, when long before he returned out of
Greece, whose children had now almost forgoten their Country Language.
Alexanders cruelty.
These entertained him with great joy: but he most cruelly put them all to the
Sword, and destroyed their City. At this Place he received Bessus, and having
rewarded Spitamenes, Bessus slain.
and his Associates, he delivered the Traitor into the hands of Oxatre, Brother
to Darius, to be tormented by him.

But now when he thought himself most secure, and out of danger, some twenty
thousand Mountainers assaulted his Camp, in repelling whom, he received a shot
in his leg, He is wounded.
the Arrow head sticking in the flesh, so that he was faign to be carried in a
Horslitter for some time after.

Shortly after he came unto Maracanda, judged by some to be the same with
Samarcand, the Imperial City of the Great Tamerlan, which was in compass
seventy furlongs. Here he received the Ambassadors of the Seythians (called
Avians) who offered to serve him

Presently after, the Bactrians, with the S^gdians, were again stirred up to
Rebellion by the seem Spitamenes, and Catanes, who had lately delivered Bessus
into Alexanders hands. Many Cities were stoutly defended against him, all
which, after he had subdued them, he utterly defaced, He is wounded. (...).
killing all therein. At the Siege of one of these he received a blow in the
neck, which struck him to the ground, and disabled him from action many days
after: In the mean while Spitamenes had recovered Samareand, against whom he
sent Menedemus, with three thousand Foot, and eight hundred Horsemen.

In the heat of these affairs, Alexander marched to the River Jaxartes, that
runs between Sogdiana, and Scythia, which he pasted over while Menedemus was
employed in the recovery of Samarcand. Upon the Banks of this River he built an
other Alexandria, sixty furlongs in compass, which he beautified with Houses
seventeen days after the walls were built: But the Scythian King, persuading
himself that this City was built on purpose to keep him under, He builds a City.
made some attempts to hinder the erection of this new City; but being naked of
defensive Arms, he was easily beaten-away, Sixty of the Macedonians are said
to be slain in this conflict, and eleven hundred wounded, which might easily be
done in passing a great River defended against them by good Archers. Of the
Scythian Horses eighteen hundred were brought into the Camp, and many Prisoners.

Whilst Alexander was securing himself against those Scythians, bordering upon
Jaxartes, he received the ill news that Menedemus was slain by Spitamenes,
Menedemus slain.
his Army broken, and most of them killed, to wit, two thousand Foot, and three
hundred Horse. He therefore intending revenge upon Spitamenes, made all the
have he could, but Spitamenes fled into Bactria. Whereupon Alexander killed,
burned, and laid wast all before him, not sparing the innocent Children, and so
departed, leaving a new Governor in that Province.

To repair this loss, he received a great supply of nineteen thousand men out
of Greece, Li^ia, and Syria, with all which, and his old Army, he returned
toward the South, and passed the River of Oxus, on the Southside whereof he
built six Towns, near each to other for their mutual security. But he found a
new up-start Rebel, A Rebellion.
one Arimazes (a Sogdian) who was followed by thirty thousand Soldiers, that
defended against him a strong piece of ground on the top of an high and steep
Hill. Alexander sought (but in vain) to win him with fair words: wherefore he
made choice of three hundred young men, and promised ten Tallents to the first,
nine to the second, and so proportionably to the rest, that could find a way to
creep to the top thereof. This they performed with the loss of thirty two of
their number, and then made a sign to Alexander, that they had accomplished
his Commandment. Hereupon he sent one Cophes to persuade Arimazes to yield up
the place, who, being showed by Cophes, that the Macedonians were already
gotten up, he yielded simply to Alexanders mercy, and was, with all his
kindred, scourged, and Crucified: which punishment they well deserved for
keeping no better a watch in so dangerous a time. For the place might have been
defended against any power. Clytus slain.


After these Sogdian, and Scythian Wars, Alexander committed the Government of
Samarcand, and the Country about it, to Clytus whom yet he slew soon after, for
preferring the virtue of Philip the Father, before that of Alexander the Son,
or rather because he objected to the King the death of Parmenio, and derided
the Oracle of Hammon: for therein he touched him to the quick; his Speech being
in public, and at a drunken Banquet. Clytus, indeed, had deserved as much at
the Kings hand as any man living, having saved his life, which the King well
remembered when he came to himself, and when it was too late to repent. As
Clytus in his Cups, forgot whom he offended, So Alexander in his drunkenness
forgot whom he slew, for grief whereof, he afterward tore his Face, and
sorrowed so inordinately, that had he not been overperswaded by Calisthenes,
The effect of drunknesse.
he would have slain himself. Drunkenesse both kindles, and discovers every
vice: It removes shame which gives impediment to bad attempts. Where Wine gets
the mastery, all the evil, which before lay hidden, breaks out. Drunkenness
indeed rather discovers vices than makes them.

Soon after this, Spitamenes, who slew Bessus, and had lately revolted from
Alexander, was murdered by his own Wife, and his Head was presented to:
Alexander, Spitamenes being thus taken away, the Dabans also seized upon his
fellow conspirator, Dataphernes, and delivered him up: So that Alexander being
now freed from all these petty Rebels, and disposed of the Provinces that he
had quieted, marched on with his Army into Gabaza, Dreadful storms.
where it suffered so much Hunger, Cold, Lightning, Thunder, and such storms,
that in one of them he lost a thousand men. From hence he invaded the Sacans,
and destroyed their Country. Then came he into the Territories of Cohortanes,
who submitted himself to him, and presented him with thirty beautiful Virgins,
amongst whom, Roxane, afterward his Wife, was one; which, although all the
Macedonians stomached, yet none of them durst use any freedom of speech after
the death of Clytus. From hence he directed his course toward India, having so
increased his numbers, as amounted to one hundred and twenty Thousand Armed men.

In the mean while he would needs be honored as a God, His Ambition.
Calisthenes speaks against it.
whereunto, that he might allure his Macedonians, he employed two of his
parasites, Hagis, and Cleo, whom Calisthenes opposed. For amongst many other
honest Arguments which he used in the Assembly, he told Cleo, that he thought
that Alexander would disdain the title of a God from his Vassels: That the
opinion of Sanctity, though it did sometimes follow the Death of those, who in
their Lifetime had done the greatest things, yet it never accompanied any one
as yet living in the world: He said, that neither Hercules, nor Bacchus, were
Deified at a Banquet, and upon drink (fot this matter was propounded by Cleo at
a Carousing Feast) but for the more than manly acts preformed by them in their
Lifetime, for which they were in succeeding Ages numbered amongst the Gods.
Alexander stood behind a partitian, and heard all that was spoken, waiting but
for an opportunity to be revenged on Calisthenes, who being free of speech,
honest, Learned, and a lover of the Kings Honor, was yet shortly after
tormented to Death. For upon occasion of a conspiracy made against the King,
And is tormented to Death.
by on Hermolaus, and others, who confessed it, he caused Calisthenes, without
confession, accusation, or trial, to he torn asunder upon the Rack.

This deed, unworthy of a King, is thus censured by Seneca. This (says he) is
the eternal crime of Alexander, which no virtue, or felicity of his in War
shall ever be able to blot out. For as often as any man shall say, He slew many
thousands of Persians, it will be replied, He did so, and he slew Calisthenes
too. When it shall be said, that he wan^ all as far as to the very Ocean,
whereon also he adventured with unusual Navies, and extended his Empire from a
corner of Thrace, to the utmost bounds of the East; it shall be said withal;
But he killed Calisthenes. Let him have outgone all the ancient Examples of
Captains, and Kings, none of all his Acts make so much to his Glory as the
Death of Calisthenes to his roproach.

With the Army before mentioned, of one hundred twenty thousand Foot and Horse,
He marches into India.
Alexander entered into the Borders of India where such of the Princes as
submitted themselves to him, he entertained lovingly, the others he enforced,
killing man, woman, and child, where they resisted. He then came before Nisa,
built by Bacchus, which after a few days was rendered to him. From thence he
removed to a Hill at hand, which on the top had goodly Gardens, His Feasts to
Bacchus.
filled with delicate fruits, and Vines, dedicated to Bacchus, to whom he made
Feasts for ten days together. And when he had drank his fill, He conquers many
Countries.
went on to Dedula, and from thence to Acadera, Countries spoiled and abandoned
by the Inhabitants, by reason whereof, victuals failing, he divided his Army.
Ptolomy led one part, Cenon an other, and himself the rest. These took in many
Towns, whereof that of greatest fame was Muzage, which had in it three hundred
thousand men, but after some resistance, it was yielded to him by Cleophe the
Queen, to whom he again restored it. At the Siege of this City he received a
wound in the leg.

After this Nola was taken by Polisperchon; and a Rock of Great strength by
Alexander himself: He wan also a passage from one Eryx, who was slain by his
own men and his Head presented to Alexander: This was the sum of his Actions
in those parts, before he came to the great River Indus. And when he came
thither, he found there Ephestion, who (being sent before) had prepared Boats
for the transportation of his Army, and before Alexanders arrival, had
prevailed with Omphis, King of that part of the Country, to submit himself to
this great Conqueror. And hereupon soon after Alexanders coming, Omphis
presented himself, with all the strength of his Country, and fifty six
Elephants, unto him; offering him his service, and assistance: He told
Alexander also that he was an enemy to the two next great Kings of that part of
India, named Abiasares, and Porus, where with Alexaender was not a little
pleased, hoping by this their disunion, to make his own victory by far the more
easy.

This Omphis also presented Alexander with a Crown of Gold, the like did the
rest of his Commanders, and with all, His Prodigallity.
he gave him eight Talents of Silver coined, which Alexander not only refused,
but to show that he coveted Glory, not Gold, he gave Omphis a thousand Talents
of his own Treasure, besides other Persian rarities.

Abiasares being informed that Alexander had received his enemy Omphis into his
protection, he resolved to make his own Peace also. For, knowing that his own
strength did but equal that of Omphis, he thought it but an ill match, when
Alexander, who had already subdued all the greatest Princes of Asia, should
make himself a party, and head of the quarrel. So then now Alexander had none
to stand in his way but Porus, He sends to Porus.
to whom he sent a command, that he should attend him at the Borders of his
Kingdom, there to do him Homage: But the gallant Porus returned him this manly
answer: That he would satisfy him in the first demand, which was, to attend
him on his Borders, and that well accompanied, but for any other
acknowledgment, he was resolved to take counsel of his Sword. To be short,
Alexander resolved to pas^e over the River of Hydaspes, and to find out Porus
at his own home: But Porus saved him that labor, attending him on the farther
bank, with thirty thousand Foot, ninety Elephants, and three hundred armed
Chariots, and a great Troop of Horse. The River was half a mile broad, and
withal, deep and swift, It had in it many Islands, amongst which there was one
much overgrown with Wood, and of good capacity.

Alexander sent Ptolomy, with a good part of the Army up the River, shrowding
the rest from the sight of Porus under this Island, by this devise, Porus being
drawn from the place of his first encamping, set himself down opposite to
Ptolomy, supposing that the whole Army of Alexander was there, intending to
force their passage: But in the mean while Alexander with his men, recovered
the farther shore without resistance, and ordering his Troops, he advanced
toward Porus, who at first imagined them to be Abiasares his confederate, come
over Hydaspis to asist him: But finding it to be otherwise, he sent his Brother
Hagis, with four thousand Horse, A Battle.
and a hundred armed Chariots to entertain him. Each Chariot had in it four to
fight, and two to guide it: But they were at this time of little use, by reason
that much rain having fallen, the Fields were so soul that the Horses could
hardly trot.

In this fight the Scythians, and Dahans had Alexanders vantgard, who so galled
the Indians, with their Darts and Arrows, that the Horses brake their reins,
and overturned the Chariots, and those that were in them. Perdiccas also
charged the Indian Horsemen, who were by him forced to recoil. Then did Porus
moove forward with the Gross of his Army, that his Vantgard, who were
scattered, might retreat into his Rear. Alexander being followed by Ephestion,
Ptolomy, and Perdiccas, charged the Indian Horsemen in the left wing, commanding
Cenon to set upon the right. He directed also Antigonus, and Leonatus to charge
Porus his Battle of Foot, strengthened with Elephants, Porus himself riding upon
one of the biggest of them. By these Beasts the Macedonian Foot received the
greatest damage; but the Archers and Darters being well guarded with the long,
and strong Pikes of the Macedonians, so galled them, that the Elephants being
enraged, turned head, and ran over their own Footmen that followed them. In the
end, Porus beaten.
after a long and doubtful fight, by the advantage of weapons, and the skill
and courage of the Macedonian Captains, the victory fell to Alexander, who also
far exceeded Porus in number of men. For besides the Macedonians, and other
Eastern, and Northen Nations, Alexander was assisted by Porus his Confederates,
and Country people: Yet for his own Person, he never gave ground, otherwise
than with his Sword toward his enemies, till being weakened by many wounds, and
abandoned by his Army, He is restored to his Kingdom.
he became a Prisoner to the Conqueror, from whom again he received his
Kingdom, with a great enlargement,

I forbear to mention other petty victories which Alexander obtained after
this, in his failing down the River of Indus. The description of places about
the Head, and branches thereof, are better known to us by reason of our late
Navigations, and discoveries, than they were in former times. The magnificence
and Rights of those Indian Kings we could in no sort be persuaded to believe,
till our own experience had taught us, that there are many stranger things in
the world than we see in our own Country.

Alexander having by this time overwearied his Army, he discovered the rest of
India by fame. The Indian Kings whom he had subdued, informed him, that a King
called Aggrame^^s, ruled over many Nations beyond the River Gang^^, who was
able to bring into the Field two hundred thousand Foot, twenty thousand Horse,
three thousand Elephants, and two thousand armed Chariots. With this report,
though Alexander was more enflamed than ever, to proceed in his Discoveries and
Conquests, yet all his Oratory could not prevail with his Soldiers to
adventure over those wast Deserts beyond Indus, and Ga^ges, which were more
terrible to them, than the greatest Army that the East could gather. Yet at
last they were overcome by many persuasions to follow him toward the South, to
discover such parts of the Ocean, as were nearer at hand, unto which the River
Indus was their infallible guide.

Alexander seeing it would be no otherwise, devised a pretty trick by which he
hoped to beguil after-ages, His Policy.
and make himself seem greater than he was. For which end he enlarged his Camp,
made greater Trenches, greater Cabins for Soldiers, greater Hors-stalls, and
higher Mangers than Horses could feed in. Yea, he caused all furniture both for
Men, and Horses, to be made larger than would serve for use, and scattered
these Armors and Bridles about his Camp, to be kept as relics, and wondered at
by those Barbarous People. Proportionable unto these he raised up twelve great
Altars to be Monuments of his jorneyes end.

This done, he returned again to the banks of Asesines, and there determined to
build his Fleet, where Ausines, and Hydaspes meet; and to testify by a surer
Monument, how far he had passed toward the East, He builds two Cities.
he built by those Rivers, two Cities: the one he called Nicaea, and the other
Bucephalon, after the name of his beloved Horse Bucephalus. Here again he
received a new supply of six thousand Thracian Horsemen, seven thousand Foot,
and from his Leiutenant of Babylon, twenty five thousand Armours, garnished
with Silver, and Gold, which he distributed amongst his Soldiers.

About these Rivers he wan many Towns, His Conquests.
and committed great slaughter on those that resisted. Its said, that besieging
a City of the Oxidracans, he leaped from the top of the wall into it, and
fought long against all the Inhabitants, till his Soldiers, forcing a Gate,
came in to his rescue. Finally he passed down the River with his Fleet, at
which time news was brought him of a Rebellion in Bactria, and then of the
arrival of a hundred Ambassadors from a King in India, who submitted himself
to him. These Ambassadors he Feasted upon a hundred Beds of Gold, with all the
sumptuousness that could be devised, who soon after their dispatch, returned
again, and presented him with three hundred Horses, and one hundred and thirty
Wagons, and in each of them four Horses, a thousand Targets, with many other
things rare and rich.

Then sailed Alexander toward the South, passing through many obscure Nations,
which all yielded to him, either quietly, He builds a City.
or by force: Amongst these, he built another Alexandria. Of the many places
which he took in his passage, one was called Samus, the Inhabitants whereof
fought against him with poisoned Swords, with one of which, Ptolomy (afterward
King of Egypt) was wounded, and was cured by an Herb which Alexander dreamed he
had seen in the mouth of a Serpent.

When he came near to the outlet of Indus (being ignorant of the Tides of the
Sea) his Galleys on a sudden were shuffled one against another by the coming of
the Flood, and in the Ebb, they were left on the dry ground, and on the Sandy
banks in the River, wherewith the Macedonians were much amazed: But after he
had a few days observed the course of the Sea, he passed out of the Rivers
mouth some few miles, and then offering Sacrifice to Neptune, he returned; and
the better to inform himself, he sent Nearchus, and Onesicritus to discover the
Coast toward the mouth of Euphrates.

Near the out-lets of this River, He wants food.
he spent some part of Winter, and from thence in eighteen days march, he
recovered Gredosia, in which passage his Army suffered such misery through the
want of food, that of one hundred and twenty thousand Foot, and twelve thousand
Horse, which he carried into India, not a fourth part returned alive.

From Gredosia, Alexander led his Army into Caramania, and so drawing near to
Persia, he gave himself wholly unto Feasting and Drinking, His Debauchedness.
imitating the Tryumphs of Bacchus. And though this Swinish vice be hateful
enough in it self; Yet it always inflamed this King to cruelty For (says
Curtius) the Hangman followed the Feast: For Haspastes, one of his Provincial
Governors, he commanded to be slain; so as, neither did the excess of
Voluptuousness quallifie his Cruelty, nor his cruelty at all hinder his
Voluptuousness.

While he refreshed his Army in these parts, there came a new supply to him of
five thousand Foot; and a thousand Horse, which were conducted to him by
Cleander and his fellows, that had been impolyed in the murder of Parmenio.
Against these murderers great complaints were made by the Deputies of ye
Provinces, He Punishes his Officers.
in which they had commanded; and their offenses were proved to be so outrageous,
that Alexander was persuaded, that, had they not altogether despaired of his
return out of India, they durst not have committed them. All men were glad of
the occasion, remembering the Virtue of him whom they had slain. The end was,
that Cleander, and the other chief, together with six hundred Soldiers, who
had been the instruments of their ravages, were delivered over to the Hangman;
Every one rejoicing that the wrath of the King was at last powered out upon the
Ministers of his Anger.

Nearchus, and Onesicritus were now returned from searching the Coast, and made
report of an Island they had discovered, rich in Gold, and of other strange
things; whereupon they were commanded to make some farther discovery, after
which they should come up Euphrates, and meet the King at Babylon.

Alexander drawing near to Babylon, He visits the Sepulcher of ^^rus.
went to visit the Sepulcher of Cyrus in Pasagardes, where he was presented
with many rich gifts by Orsanes, one of the Princes of Persia, of the race of
Cyrus. But because Bagoas, an Eunuch, who was in special favor with the King,
was neglected, he suborned some loose fellows to accuse Orsanes for robbing
Cyrus his Tomb, His cruel^y.
for which he was condemned to die, and Bagoas assisted the Hangman with his
own hands to torment him. At this time also Alexander caused Phradites to be
slain, suspecting his greatness Hence (says Curtius) he began unreasonably to
shed blood, and to believe false reports. Indeed, he took the way to make all
men weary of him, and his Government, seeing tyranny is more dreadful than all
adventures that can be made against it.

About this time Calanus the Philosopher burnt himself having lived seventy
three years, Calanus burnt himself.
and Historians say, that before his Death, he foresaw, and foreshewed the
Death of Alexander, promising to meet him shortly after at Babylon.

From Pasagardes, Alexander went to Susa, His marriage, and ^easting
where he Married Statira, the Eldest Daughter of Darius, giving her younger
Sister to his beloved Ephestion, and eighty other Persian Ladies to other of
his Captains. To his wedding Feast, he invited six thousand Guests, to each of
which he gave a Cup of Gold.

Unto this place came to him three thousand young Soldiers out of his
Conquered Provinces, whereat the Macedonians greatly murmured. Harpalus, his
Treasurer in Babylon, having lavishly consumed the money in his keeping, fled
with five thousand Talents, and six thousand hired Soldiers; But when he came
into Greece, he was there slain. Harpalus slain.
Alexander much rejoiced at the fidelity of the Greeks, who would not be
corrupted with Harpalus his Bribes: Yet he sent a command to them, that they
should receive their banished men again, whereunto they all for fear, yielded,
except the Athenians, though they saw that it was a manifest preparation to
their bondage.

After this there followed a mavelous discontent in his Army, His Army
discontented.
because he had resolved to send into Macedonia all those old Souldies which
could no longer endure the travel of the War, and to keep the rest in Asia. He
made many Orations to satisfy them, but all his words were in vain during the
height of their fury; Yet when their first passions were evaporated, they
became more tractable. And with such as were licenced to depart, he sent
Craterus, to whom he gave the Lieutenantship of Macedonia, He sends for
Antipater.
Thessaly, and Thrace, which Antipater had Governed from the time of Alexanders
departure out of Europe, who (during that time) had subdued the rebellious
Greeks, discharged the trust committed to him with great fidelity, and sent him
from time to time so many strong supplies into Asia.

Certainly if Alexander had not taken counsel of his Cups, he would have cast
some better color upon this alteration, and given Antipater some stronger
reasons of his remove, than to employ him in conducting a new supply of men to
Babylon, the War being now at an end. For Antipater could make no other
construction of this remove, but that he had a purpose to send him after
Parmenio, and the rest. The truth is, the King notwithstanding his
undantedness, had no great mind to grapple with Antipater.

Alexander having thus sent for Antipater, made a journey into Media to settle
things there, Ephestion dies.
were Ephestion whom he loved, and favored above all others, died. The King
greatly lamented his loss, hanged the Physician that could not cure him, and
built him a Monument that cost twelve thousand Talents. After which he returned
to Babylon. Thither Antipater came not, but sent, and that, not to excuse, but
to free himself; And if we may believe Curtius, he suborned his Sons Cassander,
Philip, and Jolla, who were Alexanders Cup-bearers, to give him poison;
Alexander dies.
Thessalus (who was one of the conspiracy) having invited him to a
Drinking-Feast for that purpose. Others say that by his inordinate drinking, he
fell into a Feavour whereof he died.

A little before his Death, His Will.
his Friends about him, asked him to whom he would leave his Empire? He
answered, To the most worthy man. Then asked they him, when they should give
him Divine Honors? He answered, When they themselves were happy; which were the
last words that he spoke, and so he died, having lived not all out thirty three
years, nor reigned thirteen.

As soon as he was Dead, The vanity of all earthly things.
his great Captains sought to enrich themselves by his Spoils, and whilst they
were sharing the World amongst themselves, his dead Body lay many days in that
hot Country unburied, stinking above ground: A notable Emblem of the Vanity
of all earthly things. Besides this, his vast Empire was divided amongst his
great Captains; To Ptolomaeus Lagi was allotted Egypt, and Africa; The
confusions after his Death.
To Laomedon, Syria, and Phoenicia; To Python, Media; To Eumenes, Paphlagonia,
and Cappadocia; To Antigonus, Pamphilia, Lycia, and Phrygia the Greater; To
Cassander, Caria; To Menander, Lydia; To Leonatus Phrygia the Less; To
Lysimachus, Thracia, with the neighboring Countries; To Antipater, Macedonia,
and the neighboring Nations. But these men, not contented with their shares,
fell out amongst themselves, making War one upon another to their own
destruction; For Perdiccas, warring upon Egypt was slain by his own Soldiers;
Antipater died; Gods Justice.
Eumenes was betrayed by his own Soldiers, and slain by Antigonus; Olympias,
the Mother of Alexander, was slain by Cassander; Cleopatra, sister to
Alexander, was slain by the treachery of Antigonus; Antigonus himself was slain
in Battle by Cassander and Lysimachus; Roxane, the beloved Wife of Alexander,
together with her Son Alexander; and Barsine, another of his Wives, which was
Daughter to Darius, were all slain by Cassander. And presently after the whole
Family of Cassander was rooted out; Ptolomy died in Egypt; Lysimachus was slain
by Seleucus; and Seleucus himself presently after by Ptolomy. So that all the
Family of Alexander, within a few years after his Death, was wholly extirpated;
And all his Friends, and great Captains, by their Ambition, and mutual
contentions, came most of them to untimely ends.

When the dead Body of Alexander had layen seven days upon his Throne, at last
the Chaldaeans, and Egyptians were commanded from thenceforth to take the care
of it; But when they came about it, they durst not at first approach to touch
it: But anon after, saying their Prayers, that it might be no sin unto them
being but mortals, to lay their hands upon so Divine a Body, they fell to work,
and dissected it, the Golden Throne whereon he lay, being all stuffed with
Spices, and hung about with Pennants, and Banners, and other Emblems of his
high State, and Honor.

The care of his Funeral, and of providing a Chariot wherein to carry his Body
to the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, was committed to Aridaeus, who spent two whole
years in making provision for it, which made Olympias, his Mother, (seeing him
lie so long unburied) in great grief of heart to cry out, and say; O my Son!
Thou that would needs be accounted amongst the Gods, and keptest such ado
about it, can not now have that which every poor man has, a little Earth,
and Burial.

Long after when Julius Caesar had Conquered Pompey, and was idle in Egypt,
Lucan tells us, that he visited the Temples, and the Cave, wherein the Body of
Alexander the Great lay, In these verses, -- Vultu semper celante timorem,
Intrepidus Superum seeds, and Templa vetusti Numinis, etc.
Then with a look still hiding fear, goes he
The Stately Temple of the old God to see,
Which speaks the Ancient Macedonian greatness;
But there delighted with no Objects sweetness,
Nor with their Gold, nor Gods Majestic dress,
Nor lofty City Walls; with greediness
Into the Burying Vault goes Caesar down,
Where Macedonian Philips mad-brain'd Son,
The prosperous Thief, lies buried; Whom just Fate
Slew in the Worlds Revenge. --


Alexander was very Learned, His Character.
and a great Lover of Learning and Learned men, insomuch as he rewarded his
Master Aristotle with eighty Talents for his History of Living Creatures. He so
prized Homers Iliads, that in all his Wars, he carried it in his pocket, and
laid it under his Pillow anights. He loved his Master Aristotle as if he had
been his Father, and used to say, We have our being from our Parents, but our
well-being from our Schoolmasters.

His Mother Olympias was very severe and morose in her carriage; and once
Antipater, his Viceroy in Europe, wrote large Letters of complaint to him
against her; to whom he returned this answer: Know thou not that one little
tear of my Mothers, His love to his Mother.
will blot out a thousand of thy Letters of complaint; When he heard the
Philosophers conclusion concerning the unity of the world, he wept, because
there were no more worlds for him to Conquer but one. An evident note of his
great ambition: which also manifested it self hereby; His Ambition.
That when he came to the Tomb of Achilles, he fell a weeping, considering that
Achilles had a Homer to sing his praises, and to perpetuate his memory, whereas
he had no such Poet to set forth his Commendations. Also he commanded that no
man should draw his Picture, but Apelles, the most exquisite Painter in the
world, and that none should make his Statue in Brass but Lycippus, the most
excellent Workman in that kind.

Alexander used to carry his Head on one side inclining to the left, Flattery.
wherein his Court-Parasites (to ingratiate themselves with him) imitated him.
One desiring to see his Treasures, and his Jewels, he bad his Servants show
him, not his Talents of Gold, and Silver, and such other precious things, but
his Friends.

When he had overcome Darius, and gotten possession of all his Dominions, and
Treasures, he began to degenerate into the Asian Luxury. He degenerated after
his victories.
His Chastity and moderation were turned into Pride, and Lust. He judged his
Country manners, and the Discipline of the former Macedonian Kings too sordid
and mean for him. He imitated the pride of the Persian Kings, he made him a
Crown and Robs like unto Darius. He grew so proud and insolent, that he
suffered his Soldiers to fall down and worship him like a God. Yea, he
commanded his servants, and slaves to do so. He clothed his Captains and
Horsemen like unto the Persians, which though they disliked they durst not
refuse. He gat him three hundred sixty five Concubines, of the beautifullest
virgins that could be found in Asia, after the manner of the Persian Kings, one
of which lay with him every night. He had his Troops of Eunuchs, with
Musicians, Jesters, Singing women etc. He spent whole days and nights in
profuse Feasting, and Revelling All which was very offensive to his old
Captains, and Soldiers.

When he was a Boy, he took both his hands full of perfumes, and cast them into
the fire as he was Sacrificing, whereupon Leonidas, one of his Schoolmasters
said to him: O Alexander, wben thou have Conquered those Countries wherein
these odors grow, then thou may be so liberal, but in the mean time be more
sparing. Afterward, when he had Conquered Arabia Foelix, he sent to Leonidas a
hundred Tallents of Myrrh, and five hundred of Frankincense, bidding him to be
hereafter more Liberal in his service of the Gods.

He was of so bountiful a disposition, His bounty.
that it was a greater trouble to him not to be asked than not to give. He
wrote to Phocian, that he would make use of his friendship no more if he
refused his Gifts. Serapion, a young Boy that used to play at Ball with him,
gat nothing because he asked nothing; whereupon the next time he played, he
threw the Ball to all but Alexander, the King marvelling at it, asked him why
he threw not the Ball to him? Forsooth (said Serapion) because you asked it
not. Alexander laughing at the jest, sent him a liberal Gift.

As he was traveling through the Deserts of Persia, himself and his Army were
in great straits for want of water: One of his Soldiers having two Sons ready
to die of thirst, sought up and down, and at last found a little water,
wherewith he filled a leather Bottell, and was running with it to his Sons: but
meeting Alexander by the way, he filled it out into a dish, and proffered it to
him. Alexander asked him, whither he was carrying it the man told him that his
two Sons were ready to die with thirst: But (said he) pray you Sir, do you
drink it; For if my Sons die I can get more, but if you die, we shall not have
such an other King. Alexander hearing this, gave him the water again, and bid
him carry it to his Sons.

Alexander in his younger days was so moderate, His Temperance.
and temperate, that he would often open his chests, and look upon his
Garments, to see if his mother had not provided him, either delicate or
superfluous Apparel.

Also when the Queen of Caria, to show her great love to him, sent him daily
variety of Dishes and Dainties, and at last sent her Cooks, and Bakers to him,
he returned them back again, saying, That he had no need of their service; for
his Master Leonidas had provided him better Cooks, by teaching bim to dine and
sup Frugally, and sparingly. Also when he had any rare, and dainty Fruits, or
Fishes sent him from the Sea, he used to distribute them amongst his Friends,
reserving very little or none for his own use.

One craving a small gift of him, he gave him a whole City, and when the Poor
man said, That it was too much for him to receive: Yea (said Alexander) but not
for me to give.

As he was advanceing to Conquer a Kingdom in India, Taxilis, who was King
thereof, came and met him, saying, O Alexander, What need we fight, if thou
come not to take away my food and water, for which its only fit for wise men
to fight? If thou seek after Riches, if I have more than thou, I will give
thee part of mine: if thou have more than I, I will not refuse part of thine.
Alexander being much taken with his speech, said to him, Go to, I will contend
with thee in bounty, and so they mutually gave and received many Gifts. At last
Alexander gave him a Thousand Tallents, which much grieved his Friends, and
rejoiced the Barbarian.

He showed an admirable Example of his Chastity in the heat of his youth, His
Chastity.
when having taken the Mother, Wives, and Daughters of Darius, women of
admirable beauty, yet, neither by word, nor deed did he profer them the least
indignity, thinking it a greater honor to overcome himself than his
Adversaries: And when he looked upon other Captive Ladies that excelled in
stature and beauty, he merrily said, Persides oculorum dolores esse: That the
Persian women were a disease of the eyes, and yet he looked on them but as one
so many Statues. When he was informed that two of his Captains under Parmenio,
had ravished two of the Persian Ladies, he wrote to him to enquire after the
matter, and if he found it true, he should cut off their Heads, as of Beasts
born for the hurt of mankind. He also sent him word, that himself was so far
from contemplating the Beaut^ of Darius his Wife, that he would not so much as
suffer her to be commended in his presence; and that he was so careful of
their Chastity, that they lived in his Camp, shut up in their Tent, as if they
had been in a Temple.

At the Death of Ephestion, his Favorite, he did not only clipp the hair of
his Horses, and Mules, but plucked down also the Battlements of the City walls,
that they might seem to mourn for his Mi^ions Death, showing now deformity
instead of their former Beauty.

Porus, an Indian King, fighting valiently against him, received many wounds,
and at last, being overcome, and falling into his enemies hands, they brought
him to Alexander, who hearing of his coming, went forth, with some of his
Friends, to meet him, and asked him what he would have him to do for him, Porus
answered, My only desire is, that thou use me like a King: Alexander, admiring
his magnimity, replied, This I will do for my own sake: but what would thou
have me do for thine? Porus answered, That all was contained in his former
demand of Kingly usage: Alexander was so pleased with this, that he restored
him to his Kingdom, and gave him an other bigger than his own.

FINIS.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF CHARLES THE GREAT, KING of FRANCE, AND EMPEROR of
GERMANY.

By Sa. Clarke, sometime Minister in St Bennet Finck, London.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door. 1665.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF CHARLES the GREAT, King of FRANCE, and Emperor of
GERMANY.
PEPIN, surnamed The short, King Pepins Children.
the 23d. King of France (a wise and valiant Prince) had two Sons, Charles and
Caroloman, and five daughters: Birthe, who was married to Milon Earl of Man's, by
whom she had great Rowland: Hiltrude, married to Rene Earl of Genes, by whom she
had the renowned Oliver; Rohard, Adeline, Idubergue, Ode, and Alix.

Pepin being toiled out with great Wars, much broken with the care of Public
affairs, and now grown Old, that he might employ his last days in the
maintenance of Justice and Peace, the burden of War he laid upon his Eldest Son
Charles, a wise and a valiant young Prince, of whose modesty and obedience he
was well assured: And then retiring to Paris, he was not long after surprised
with sickness, in which he recommended his two Sons to the Estates of
France, Pepins death.
to give them portions at their pleasures, and so ended his days Anno Christi
768.

He was a Religious Prince, His Character.
wise, moderate, valiant, loving to his Subjects and beloved of them, happy in
his Father, and his Children, and in his Government; An excellent Pattern for
other Princes, who by his Example, hold it for an undoubted Maxim, That the
strongest Fortress, and best security for a Prince, is the love of his
Subjects, and the surest bond of his Authority, a respect gotten, and preserved
by virtue.

Pepin being dead, the Estates of France assembled together, Charles made King.
and by their joint consents, divide the Kingdom betwixt his two Sons Charles,
and Caroloman, by equal portions. Brothers these were of diverse humors, who had
certainly ruined each other by this equality of power, had not the death of
Caroloman, within three years after, divolved the Government of the whole Realm
upon Charles.

Charles was endowed with singular gifts both of Body and Mind, His Education.
which were much improved by the sedulous care of his Prudent Father,
manifested in the virtuous education of him: For which end he procured Paul of
Pisa, a learned man, to instruct him in the Greek and Latin Tongues, and one
Aymon to read to him Philosophy, and the Mathematics: Himself also trained him
up in Feats of Arms, and Warlike exercises. But above all, and as the ground
of all virtues, he was careful to have him trained up, and well instructed in
Religion, which all his life after he loved, and honored with great Reverence
the Church and Pastors thereof. He called the study of Humane Sciences his
Pastimes, and the companions of his Sword, and did sometimes recreate himself
therein. He loved Learning and Learned men by Nature. He delighted in Poesy, as
some of his writings do show; but especially in History, wherein he was
exceeding well read. Charity, Temperance, Equity, care of Justice to relieve
his Subjects, to keep his Faith and promise, both to Friend and Foe, and to use
a Victory modestly, were the notable effects of his excellent knowledge, as
remarkable in him as in any Prince that ever lived. The Universities of Paris,
and Pisa (either Founded, or endowed by him) witness the great love and honor
that he did bear to learning.

During the Life of his Father Pepin, His Valor and other virtues.
he showed how much he had profited in Arms under so good a Schoolmaster,
having great Commands under him, which he discharged with notable reputation;
and the improvement of his skill and ability after he came to his Kingdom, show
plainly, that there was never any Soldier that carried Sword with more valor,
nor great Captain that commanded with more Obedience, or that performed Noble
Actions with greater success, or that used his Victories with more mildness,
and judgment. Neither did ever King or Prince rule with more authority, nor was
more reverently obeyed by his Subjects and Soldiers then our Charles; who
therefore well deserved the name of Charlemagne, or Charles the Great, by
reason of his great virtues. He was of a lively disposition, quick, active, and
vehement: Quicquid egit, valde egit: Yet modesty, and wisdom did so season, and
moderate his vivacity, and vehemence, as gave a great luster to both, and kept
them within their due bounds: And this mixture of diverse humors so tempered
with moderation, made him as admirable for his Judgment, as venerable in his
Person and countenance.

There appeared in him a grave, His Endowments.
sweet Majesty in a goodly Personage: His Body was large and strong: He was
very patient of labor: Had a quick spirit, was clear and sound, both in
apprehension, memory, and Judgment: Resolution never failed him in
difficulties, nor a Reply in Discourses. Terrible he was to some, Amiable to
others, according to the Cause, Persons, and Occurents; which virtues purchased
him such great esteem, as that he was beloved, respected, and reverenced of all
men, which effects the story of his reign will show: For having received a
great Kingdom from his Father, he enlarged it with wonderful success; God
having raised him up to be a Bulwork to Christians against the inundation and
rage of Barbarous Nations in the decay and ruin of the Empire. And in
prosecuting the Narrative hereof, I shall first set down his actions during the
Life of his Brother Caroloman, then what he did from the time of his death,
till he was made Emperor, and lastly what his Deportment was from thence to his
Death.

Caroloman, Carolomans envy.
being Crowned King at Soissons, as Charles was at Worms, began to be extreme
jealous of his Brothers greatness, whom, with grief, he saw to be beloved,
honored, and obeyed by all the French, and that deservedly for his singular
virtues and endowments both of Body and mind. This jealousy (too ordinary a
concomitant of Princes) made him seek by all means to undermine, and overthrow
the affairs of Charlemagne, whose eyes were fixed upon Italy, as the fittest,
and most glorious Theater wherein to exercise his valor, and to maintain his
authority and power amongst Christians; and Caroloman did all that possibly he
could to cross his designs therein. But before I bring him upon that stage,
give me leave to show you what at this time was the State of Italy, and Rome.

Rome (sometimes the Head of the World) was of late become the Chaos of all
confusion, The State of Rome.
the Randevouz of all Barbarous Nations, as if they had vowed the ruin thereof
by turns, having already sacked it three times. For under the Empire of
Honorius, Anno Christi 414. The Goths, under their King Alaricus, after two
years seige, took it, and sacked it, but did not dismantle it. Forty five years
after, during the Empire of Martian, Anno Christi 459. the Vandales, under the
conduct of Genserick their King, took it again, sacked it, spoiled and disgraced
it, leading the W^ddow of the Emperor Valentinian the third, away in Triumph.
And in the time of Justinian the Emperor, the Goths, under the command of
Totila, having weakened it by a long seige, took it, sacked, and dismantled it.
Thus Rome was no more Rome, but a spectacle of horrid confusion: after so many
devastations retaining nothing of her ancient beauty, but only the traces of
her old buildings, and the punishment of her Idolatry and Tyranny; Afterward
the Longobards, or Lombards held Italy, for the space of two hundred years,
till by our Charlemagne they were subdued, and expelled.

Presently after the Death of Pepin, the Church of Rome fell into great
confusions by the practices of Didier King of Lombardy, who having corrupted
some of the Clergy, caused Constantine, Brother to Toton, Duke of Nepezo, to be
chosen Pope, Several Popes chosen.
which he persecuted with such violence, that he procured Philippicus, who was
already Canonically chosen, to be deposed: But the better party, seeing
themselves contemned by the Lombards, assembled together, and by common
consent, chose Steven the third (a Sicilian by birth) Pope; who being conscious
to his own weakness, resolved to call in the King of France, and to oppose him
against his too-powerfull enemies.

Charles being thus solicited by the Pope, sent twelve Prelates speedily to
Rome, that he might strengthen the Popes party against the other, intending in
a greater need to apply a greater remedy; and the matter succeeded according to
his desire. For a Council being assembled at Lateran, Steven confirmed.
they confirmed Steven, lawfully chosen, and deposed Constantine, who was set
up by disorder and violence. But Didier would not rest satisfied with this
affront, and seeing that force had succeeded no better, he resolved to try
Policy, intending to undermine Steven with fair pretenses: For which end he
sent to congratulate his Election, purged himself in reference to the Antipope
Constantine, Didiers Policy.
now degraded: accused both him and his Brother Toton of ambition, and
protested to live with Steven in amity; and to manifest this his good meaning,
he desired him to be pleased with his repair to Rome, that there he might
confer with him in private. The Pope (who never seeks to the French but in case
of necessity) was easily persuaded by Didier, who came to Rome, conferred with
the Pope, and made great Protestations of his Obedience to him. But these his
fair shows continued not long.

There was at this time at Rome a Governor for the Eastern Emperor, called
Paul Ephialte, him Didier corrupted, and the administration of Justice being in
his hands, he made use of him so cunningly, as that in the presence of Pope
Steven, he caused him to seize upon two of his chief Secretaries, Christopher,
The Popes Secretaries hanged.
and Sergius (whom Didier accused of some pretended crimes) and presently to
hang them in an infamous manner. Their greatest offense was, because they
favored the French. Neither did he rest here, but caused all the principal
Citizens to be banished, whom he observed to be of the French faction, that so,
having removed all hindrances, he might be Master of Rome in despite of the
Pope.

Steven was not so dull but he discovered the Lombards practice exceedingly to
tend to his prejudice: The Pope sends for K. Charles.
whereupon he sent to Charlemagne, beseeching him to prepare an Army against
Didiers force. This Charlemagne easily assented to, and fully resolved upon:
But Didier had provided a divertisment in France by the means of Caroloman, to
stop Charles his passage into Italy, making work for him in Guienne, where
there arose a perilous War upon this occasion.

Though the Country of Guienne depended upon the Crown of France, Troubles in
Guienne.
yet were there many Tumults raised by the practices of some Noblemen of the
Country, who frequently stirred up the people (mutinous enough of themselves)
to Rebellion. The cause of these Troubles was, the abuse of the former Kings
Clemency and Bounty, who suffered such people as he Conquered, to enjoy their
privileges and liberties. Eudon (a Nobleman of Guienne) began first under
Martel, Jeffery and Hunult his Children, and heirs of his discontent, had
continued it under Pepin; and Jeffery being now dead, Hunalt succeeded him with
the like hatred, which Caroloman fomented, that he might employ him against his
Brother Charles.

Guienne was a part of Charles his portion: But Hunalts design was, to withdraw
that Country wholly from the Crown of France, and for that end he pretended a
Title to the Dukedom thereof, laboring to procure the people to Elect him,
having the promise, and assistance of Caroloman to further him therein. Indeed
the countenance of Caroloman could do much; but the wisdom and courage of
Charlemagne prevailed more: For being advertised of Hunalts practice, and of
his Brothers secret designs, he armed with such speed, as that he surprised
the Towns of Poictiers, Charles subdues Hunalt.
Xante, and Angoulesm, and all the Country adjoining, Hunalt (who had reckoned
without Charles) finding himself thus prevented, fled to a Noble man of that
Country called Loup, whom he held, not only to be firm to his faction, but
also his trusty and affectionate friend.

Charlemagne being informed hereof, sent presently to Loup, requiring him to
deliver Hunalt into his hands, who was guilty of high Treason; Charles his
Policy and Clemency
and in the mean time he built a Fort in the midst of the Country, where the
Rivers of Dordonne, and Lisle do join, which he called Fronsac, the better to
secure his Country against such Invaders. Loup, not daring to refuse, delivered
up Hunalt, and all his Family into the hands of Charles, who pardoned Loup, and
all that obeyed him; thus ending a dangerous War without blows: And to
Hunalt he granted life, and liberty, and the enjoyment of his goods; leaving a
memorable example to all Princes how to carry themselves in a Civil War,
preventing a mischief by prudence, and diligence, and not to thrust their
vanquished Subjects into despair by rigor.

Caroloman seeing his practices against his Brother to succeed so ill,
undertook a journey to Rome, with an intent to cause some alterations there,
which yet he covered with a pretense of devotion. He also took his Mother
Berthe along with him, and in their passage, they were honorably entertained
by Didier King of the Lombards, where Berthe treated, and concluded a marriage
between her Son Charlemagne, and Theodora, Sister, or Daughter to this Didier,
who was one of the greatest enemies to her Sons good Fortune. Charles his
marriage.
Yet Charlemagne (to please his Mother) received his Wife, but soon after, put
her away, as neither suiting with his affects, or affairs, and so, that which
was intended as a cause of love, bred a greater hatred betwixt these two
Princes. Caroloman having effected nothing at Rome answerable to his desire,
Carolomans death.
but only discovered his foolish, and malicious jealousy, too apparent under
his feigned devotion, returned into France, and there soon after died. Anno
Christi 770. Leaving the entire Kingdom to his Brother, who had now no Corival.

Charlemagne having put away his Wife Theodora upon suspicion of incontinency,
C^arles his second marriage.
he married Hildegard, or Ildegrade, Daughter to the Duke of Sueve, his
Vassal, by whom he had Charles, Pepin, and Lewis, and three Daughters,
Rotrude, B^rthe, and Gille, who were the Nursery of his Noble Family. But
Carolomans jealousy died not with him, but survived in his Wife Berthe, who
(being impatient of her present condition, and thrust headlong with a spirit of
revenge against her Brother in Law, Charles) retired with her two Sons to
Didier, King of Lombardy, as to the most bitter, and irreconcilable enemy of
her Brother Charles. Didier entertained her and her Children very courteously,
hoping by them to promote his design: But it proved the leaven of his own
destruction. His practice (together with the Widows) was to procure the
present Pope, who (Steven being dead) was one Adrian, Pope Adrian.
a Roman Gentleman, to Crown, and confirm the Sons of Caroloman for Kings of
France, wherein the Lombard had two designs. First, by this means to bring the
Pope in disgrace with Charlemagne, that he might the easilier suppress him,
being destitute of the French aides, whereon he chiefly relied; and Secondly to
set France in a flame, by setting up new Kings in it. Didiers Policy.
Didier therefore earnestly besought the Pope to grant this favor to the Sons
of Caroloman for his sake: But Adrian (well acquainted with the Lombards
humor) was so resolute in denying his request, as that they fell into open
hatred. And Didier being much displeased with this repulse, took Arms, and
with his Forces entered into the Exarchy, being a Signory under the Popes
jurisdiction, He makes War against the Pope.
and besieged Ravenna, the chief City of the Exarchie: Whereupon the Pope sent
his Nuncio to him, to expostulate the cause of this so sudden War against his
Subjects; desiring him to restore what he had taken, and not to proceed in this
Hostile manner without any reasonable cause, and that upon the pain of
Excommunication.

At the same time there fell out a great occasion to increase the hatred
between Charlemagne and Didier: Hunalts ingratitude
For that Hunalt (who had bin before vanquished in Guienne, and to whom Charles
had showed so much favor) very ingratefully retired himself to Didier, who did
not only receive him courteously, but honored him by making him General of his
Army which he had raised against the Pope. And Didier suffered himself to be so
far abused by the insinuations, and persuasions of Hunalt, touching the means
to attempt something against the Estates of Charlemagne, that holding Italy
undoubtedly for his own, he plotted a War, and assured himself of a certain
victory in France. Thus Ambition and Covetousness hasten men's ruin. The Pope
having no other defense to secure his Estate but his Excommunication, The Pope
sends to Charles for aid.
which against Didier proved but Brutum fulmen, a mere scarecrow, he was forced
to have recourse to Charlemagne, as to his Sacred Anchor, or last Hope,
entreating speedy aid from him in this his great necessity. Charlemagne had
great reason to Arm against Didier, who had always crossed his affairs; fed
and fomented his Brothers jealousies, entertained his Widow, and Children, and
labored to have them chosen Kings of France, and all to trouble or ruin his
estate. He had also received his rebellious Subjects, and with their aid,
practiced to make a War against him.

The solicitation, Charles Arms against Didier.
and request also of the Roman Church was a great incentive to induce him to
Arm, against him, who professed himself to be an open enemy to the Christian
Religion, whereof the former Kings of France had showed themselves Protectors,
and Guardians. But that he might not attempt any thing rashly, he first sent
his Ambassadors to the Pope, to assure him of his good will, and promising not
to ^ wanting to him in his necessity: Yet withal, to tell him, that he
thought it best, first to use mildness, before he attempted force against the
Lombard. He therefore sent also his Ambassadors to Didier to summon him to
restore what he had taken from the Pope, and to suffer him to live in Peace.
Didier (who relied much upon his Policy) gave good words to the Ambassadors,
promising them to perform all that Charles required, but in effect, he would
have the Pope to accept of conditions of Peace from him, and that the Children
of Caroloman should be declared Kings of France.

These demands were judged so unreasonable, that the Treaty was broken, and the
French Ambassadors returned home: And Didier prosecutes his War against the
Church more eagerly then he did before; Didier prospers in his Wars.
and having spoiled all the Territories of Ravenna, he took Faenza, Ferrara,
Comachia, Campagnia, and Romandiola, Towns of the six Governments, or Hexarchy.
Charlemagnes Ambassadors, upon their return, inform their Master, that the War
with the Lombard could not be avoided: and they found Charles in a Posture fit
to invade Italy: For he had Levied a goodly Army to suppress the rebellious
Saxons, who (impatient of the French yoke) revolted daily from his Obedience,
which Army was now ready to be employed against the Lombard.

Yet was not Charlemagne willing to attempt any thing in a matter of such
importance without the advice of his Estates, Charles calls a Parliament.
and therefore he presently summoned a Parliament, and (being loath to lose
time) in the mean season he caused his Army to March, and to make there
Rendevouz at Geneva, (a Town under his Obedience, and in the way to Italy) and
having divided his Army into two Parts, he seized upon the Passages of Mount-
Cenis, and St. Bernard, which are the two entrances from France into Italy.

The Estates at their meeting having found the Causes of War against Didier,
Enters Italy, and beats Didier.
King of Lombardy, to be just, Charlemagne caused his Army to advance with all
speed, and to join near to Verceil. There Didier attended him and gave him
Battle: But at the first encounter he was vanquished by Charlemagne. After
which, the Lombard rallying, and reenforcing his Army, fights him again, and
was again beaten, and so shattered were his Troops, that he was enforced to
suffer his Enemy to be Master of the Field; which proved an infallible
Harbinger to his total Ruin. Thus having tumultuously trussed up what he
could in such haste, he sent his Son Aldegise to Verona, with the Widow and
Children of Caroloman: and cast himself into Pavia, which he had diligently
Fortified, as the Fortress, or Dungeon rather of his last Fortune.

Charlemagne pursues him at the heels, Charles besieges Pavia, and Verona.
and with all his Forces besieged him in Pavia, resolving to have it at what
price soever. And to make his resolution the more manifest, he sent for his
Wife and Children into Italy, to the end that the Italians (who hitherto were
doubtful to whom to adhere) might know his mind, and without attending any new
occurrents, might resolve to obey the Victor.

Having thus cooped up Didier in Pavia, and seized upon all the avenues, he
resolved to attempt Verona also, which they held to be the strongest place in
all Lombardy. So leaving his Uncle Bernard to continue the siege of Pavia, he
marched with part of his Army to Verona.

His beginnings being so succesfull, The Italians submit to him.
and this Check given to Didier, (who was now, as it were, shut up in Prison,)
gave a great alteration to the affairs of either party amongst these people of
diverse humors. The Spoletines, and Reatines, and those of Ancona, of Fermo,
and of Ossino (striving as it were, which should be first) yielded to
Charlemagne, and detested the wretched, and forlorn estate of Didier, as a
worthy reward of his Treachery, Injustice, and Violence. The Venetians (who
were Neuters, and spectators of this Tragedy, and had never dealt in any sort
with Didier) offered amity and succors to Charlemagne, who desired them to
keep the Seas quiet, lest the Emperor of Constantinople should espouse Didiers
quarrel, and cause any new disturbance.

Charlemagne staid not long about Verona before the City began to think of
yielding: and Berthe, the Widow of Caroloman, was the chief Instrument to draw
them to a surrender, the French Forces being (as she said) very formidable.
Aldegise, the Son of Didier, seeing the Citizens so unanimous in their
resolutions to open their Gates to the Conqueror, and being unable to relieve
his Father, he secretly stole away, and fled to the Emperor of Corstantinople.
Then did Verona yield to Charlemagne upon composition, Verona taken,
who received both the Inhabitants, and Berthe to mercy, keeping his agreement
punctually with them; upon Berthe and her Children, he inflicted no punishment;
but only blamed them for their uncivil rashness, and enjoined them to return
into France, there to do better, and to live more honorably. This being about
Easter, Charlemagne took the opportunity to go to Rome, where yet he stayed only
eight days to visit the most remarkable places, and to confet with Pope
Adrian. The Pope made Charles a Patrician of Rome, which was a step to mount
him to the Empire. From thence he hasted, and came to Pavia, which had now been
besieged for the space of ten months: and being pressed by War without, and
by the Famine, and Pestilence within, it at last yielded upon composition: and
Didier (who had hated Charles without cause, And Pavia.
and attempted War rashly) fell into his enemies hands, who yet showed himself
Prudent in undertaking the War, and mild and modest in his use of the Victory.

Thus Charlemagne having begun the War justly, and ended it happily, Didier
taken Prisoner.
ruined the Kingdom of the Lombards in Italy, carrying Didier prisoner with him
to Lions, or to Le^g; for Authors agree not of the certain place. This was Anno
Christi 776. A notable date to present the Tragical end of so great a Kingdom,
which had continued in Italy for the space of two hundred and four years under
Princes of diverse dispositions. But Pride, Injustice and Tyranny, had provoked
the wrath of God against them, so as whilst they thought to take from another,
they lost their own; To usurp the liberties of others, they fell into
ignominious slavery themselves; and their subtilty proved the occasion, and
hastener of their ruin. An excellent Pattern for Princes and great States not
to attempt an unjust and unnecessary War, nor to usurp upon any other man's
right, thinking to prevail over a good cause by Craft and Policy.

Charlemagne (as was said before) used his Victory with great moderation
toward the Conquered Nation, Charles his moderation
which gave great content to all the Italians, who held it a gain to have lost
their old Master, and to be rightly made free by being subject to so wise a
Lord. For he left unto them their ancient liberties, and to particular Princes
(such as were Vassalls to Didier) their Signeories. To Aragise, Son in Law to
Didier, he left the Marquisat of Beneventum. He placed French Governors in
Conquered Lombardy, whom he ordered to treat these his new Subjects with the
like mildness, as he showed to those of his ancient Patrimony left unto him by
his Predecessors.

During the Seige of Pavia, A Council at Rome.
Pope Adrian held a Council at Rome, in favor to Charlemagne, to give him
honors answerable to his merits of the Church, wherein it was declared, that
the right to give all Benefices throughout all Christendom did belong to him.

No sooner was Charlemagne returned into France, New troubles in Italy,
but Aldegise (the Son of Didier) sought to disquiet Italy, being assisted by
Constantine, the Emperor of Constantinople, and the practices of Rogand, to
whom Charlemagne had given Friul, who now revolted from his Obedience. But the
vigilance, and care of the Governors whom Charlemagne had set over his
new-conquered Subjects, soon put an end to these Rebellions: But suppressed.
and Rogand being taken, suffered according to his demerits, being beheaded by
the Kings commandment. Thus Italy remaining quiet to him, and his, (as
conquered by a just War) it was afterward incorporated into the French
Monarchy in his posterity, being given in Partage to the Children of France,
whilst the good Government of the French Kings maintained the dignity of the
Crown.

But the end of this War proved the beginning of another in Germany, Charles
his Wars with the Saxons.
whereof the Saxons were the chief promoters, drawing other People of Germany
in to their assistance. This War continued the space of thirty years, yet not
without some intermissions: The Saxons having still a mind to oppose and Cross
Charlemagne in his proceedings, especially when he was busied in other affairs
of great consequence.

These Saxons were subject to the Crown of France, especially under Martel, and
Pepin his Son. The motives of this War were diverse: The impatiency of a People
desiring their ancient liberty, The cause of it.
and not able to bear subjection to a forreigner: the hatred and jealousy of a
Potent neighbor, threatening them with servitude: A controversy about the
limits and bounds of their Lands: But the greatest, and most important cause
was, the diversity of Religion: For the Saxons were obstinate in retaining and
cleaving to their Pagan superstition, which they had received from their
Forefathers, and Charlemagne urged them to forsake their Paganism, and
Idolatry, and to make open profession of the Christian Faith; being moved with
Zeal to the general advancement of the Truth, and the private Duty of a Prince
to his subjects, to provide for their souls health. Upon this controversy
about Religion the Saxons fought eight times with Charlemagne: especially
taking advantage when they found him busied elsewhere, watching their
oportunities either to cross him in his designs, or to frustrate his attempts.
At such time as he was in Italy against Didier, they played Rex, not only in
rejecting the French command, but also in making War against those Cities in
Germany which obeyed Charlemagne. They had taken Eresbourg from the Crown of
France even upon his return, and besieged Sigisbourg, robbing, and spoiling all
the Country round about.

Charlemagne (who would never undertake any weighty matter without good advise)
assembled a Parliament at Worms, Charles calls a Parliament.
and by their Counsel and assistance, levied a great Army, to Charge the Saxons
in diverse places at once. This resolution succeeded happily: For having
vanquished the Saxons twice in one month in a pitched Field, he soon reduced
them to their ancient obedience: Using his Victories with much modesty and
discretion; desiring rather to show them the power of his authority, then the
rigor of his force. The Saxons overcome.
The chief amongst the Saxons was Widichind, and as Religion was the chief
motive of their frequent Rebellions; so Charlemagne, seeking the establishment
of the Christian Religion in Saxony with great Zeal, after much reluctance,
happily effected it. For having vanquished this Widichind, by reason and
humanity, he brought him to the knowledge of the Truth; And converted.
and by his grave and prudent conversation, he persuaded him without any
Violence, to leave and forsake his Pagan superstition, which force of Arms
could never have effected in him, nor in the Saxons. For men's souls are not be
compelled with force of Arms, but with reason. And by the means and
endeavors of this Widichine, the greatest part of the Saxons were brought to
the knowledge of the true God, and the obedience of the French Monarchy: And
the most obstinate were forced, either to submit, or to abandon their Country.
And indeed great numbers of Saxons retired themselves into diverse strange
Countries.

Thus the War with the Saxons was happily ended (which had been long and
dangerous) and the Conquered, by the Truth were the true Conquerors, by
attaining to the knowledge of the true God. Charlemagne was very careful to
have them well instructed in the Truth: For which end he appointed godly and
learned men in all places, and gave them honorable maintenance, whereby he
showed that his Piety was not inferior to his Valor, and happy success; and
for a president to Princes to make Religion the Sovereign end of their Arms
and Authorities.

This Widichind was very eminent, both for Wisdom, Valor, and Authority in
his Country; and from him are descended many famous Families: as the two
Henry's, the one called the Fowler, and the other of Bamberg; and the two
Othos, all of them Emperors: as also the Dukes of Saxony, the Marquesses of
Misnia, the Dukes of Savoy, and the famous race of Hugh Capet in France.

From this War of Saxony did spring up many others in the Northen parts, of
which we shall hear afterward; but because in the Interim their fell out great
Wars in Spain against the Sarazins, which (like a Deluge) threatened to overrun
all Christendom, I shall intermit the former, till I have spoken something of
this latter, that I may proceed with the more clearness in the remainder of
this History.

The motive of the Spanish War, Charles his Wars in Spain.
was more upon pleasure then necessity: But Zeal of Religion gave a color and
show of necessity to the Heroical designs of Charlemagne, who sought to
enlarge the limits of the French Monarchy by his Arms. But this his Spanish
War, as it was undertaken upon lighter grounds, so was it, more painful, more
dangerous, and less successful then that of Italy, whereunto necessity and
Duty had drawn Charlemagne; yet did his wise and wary proceeding in the action,
warrant him from all blame. The occasions which moved him to bend his Forces
against the Sarazins in Spain were, the assurance of good success, the quiet
and peace of his Realm, that he might have opportunity to employ his
Soldiery, the hate of the Spaniards against the Sarazins, and the general
fear of all Christians, least these Caterpillars should creep further into
Europe.

This was the estate of Spain at this time. The Sarazins had conquered a great
part of it, and were divided under diverse Commands which had the Title of
Kingdoms. Yet these diverse Kings (being apprehensive of their common danger)
resolved to unite their forces against Charlemagne, their common enemy; and
foreseeing the Tempest, they sought to prevent it, and to cross the designs of
Charlemagne: For which end, they suborned King Idnabala, a Sarazin, being a
very subtle, and crafty man, to insinuate himself into the acquaintance, and
familiarity of Charlemagne, which stratagem prevailed more then all their Power
and Forces.

Charlemagne was much quickened to this War by Alphonso, Charles circumven^ed.
surnamed the Chaste, King of Navar, and by the Asturians, and Gallizians
(Christian People of Spain) who suggested to him that the War would be easy,
profitable, and honorable, and therefore most worthy the Valor, and Fortune
of Charlemagne. This Idnabala also (under a show of friendship) labored to
hasten him to the execution of this enterprise, from which he knew well he
could not divert him, that he might the better betray him by discovering his
Counsels to the Sarazins.

Charlemagne being well-affected of himself, Charles cal^s a Parliament.
and thus excited by others, assembled a Parliament at Noyon, and there
concluded a War against the Sarazins in Spain. The army which he employed in
this action was very great, both for number of men, and Valor of Commanders,
and Cheiftaines, being the most choice and worthy Captains in all Christendom:
His great preparations.
amongst whom, these were of chiefest note, Milon Earl of Angers: Rowland the
Son of Milon, and Berthe, Sister to Charlemagne; Renald of Montaubon. The four
Sons of Aymon: Oger the Dane: Oliver, Earl of Geneva: Arnold of Belland:
Brabin, and many others. The Valor of which persons has been fabulously
related by the Writers of those dark times (who for the most part were Friars,
concerning whom the Proverb was, a Friar, a Liar,) with the addition of a
thousand ridiculous Tales, so that the truth is hardly picked out from the
midst of so much error: Yet what is most probable, and can be gathered out of
the most authentic Authors shall be here set down. They say, that Charlemagne,
to make this undertaking more honorable in show, did at this time institute
the Order of the twelve Peers of France.

Charlemagne being entered into Spain with his brave Army, His entry into Spain.
found no object for them whereon to exercise their Valor: For the Sarazins,
resolving to make a defensive, rather then an offensive War, had withdrawn
themselves into their Cities, which they had fortified strongly. The most
renowned of the Sarazin Kings at this time, were Aigoland, Bellingan, Dmises,
Marsile, and Idnabala: But this last, as was said before, made show of much
friendship to Charlemagne, and of open hatred against the other Sarazin Kings;
with whom notwithstanding he held secret and strickt intelligence to betray
Charlemagne unto them.

The first City that the French attempted was Pampelune, Pampelune taken.
in the Kingdom of Navarr, the which they took by force, but with much pains,
danger, and loss. Having sacked this City, and put all the Sarazins in it to
the sword, they marched to Saragoce, which yielded to them upon composition, as
did also many other small Towns, being terrified with the example of
Pampelune. This prosperous beginning encouraged Charlemagne to advance forward,
relying on his wonted Fortune and good success: But as he passed through the
Provinces of Spain, like a Victorious Prince, without any opposition, he
divided his Army, and gave part of it to be conducted by Milon of Angers, his
Brother in Law, who in his March near unto Bayon, was set upon by Aigoland, the
Sarazin King, who in this common danger had thrust an army into the Field,
Milon defeated.
and now assaulted Milon, and his Troops, little expecting any enemy, and took
him at such an advantage, as he defeated him.

This loss was very great: For Writers say that forty thousand of the French
here lost their lives; Milon himself being also slain for a confirmation of
the Sarazins Victory. Charlemagne was at this time afar off, and so notable by
any diligence to prevent the loss. Yet he suppressed his grief and trouble,
least he should discourage the whole Army: and so hastening thitherward, he
gathered up the remainder of those broken, and dispersed Troops, withal,
keeping the Conquered Cities, and such as were Friends in their due Obedience:
But after this there fell out another accident.

Aigoland being puffed up with Pride through his late Victory, Aigoland entered
France.
marched with his Army into Gascoine, and besieged Again, to divert Charlemagne
from his pursuit, and to draw him home to defend his own Country. Charles
returns.
So as Charlemagne, fearing least his own absence, and the Sarazins late
Victory should cause any alteration in the minds of them of Guienne, being then
Subjects of whom he had no great assurance, he returned into France. Aigoland
had now continued some months at the siege of Again, yet had prevailed little,
but only in over-runing the Country, which he did freely (without any
considerable resistance) even unto Xaintonge: the Countrymen in the mean time
retiring into the Walled Towns, expected the return of Charlemagne their King:
Aigolands Army was very great, and puffed up with the remembrance of their late
Victory: So as Charlemagne returning with his Forces from Spain well tired, he
maintained his Countries more through his authority, then by present force; yet
did he give life to the courage of his Subjects with his presence, and bridled
the proud Sarazin, who could not be ignorant with whom he had to deal, nor
where he was, being environed with the enemies on all sides, and in an enemies
Country.

Hereupon Aigoland, Aigolans Policy.
pretending an inclination unto peace, gave Charlemagne to understand that he
had been the first Invader, and that his own coming into France was only to
draw his enemy out of Spain, and to cause him to leave to the Sarazins their
conquered Countries free: and therefore (said he) the Treaty of an accord is
easy, seeing all the question is only to leave to every man his own, and to
suffer him to enjoy it quietly, the world being wide enough for us all. But to
the end this Treaty might take good effect, after many messages to and fro,
they resolve to come to a Parlee: and upon Charlemagnes Faith given, Aigoland
came to his Camp.

Charlemagne, either really moved with a Zeal for Religion, or at least, making
it the color of his Actions, gave the Sarazin to understand, that he should
have his Friendship if he would leave his Pagan Superstition, be Baptized, and
make open profession of Christianity. The Sarazin, although he had a goodly
Army, yet not willing to hazard any thing, and content with his former revenge
upon Charlemagne, desired nothing more then to return quietly into Spain. And
being now in the midst of his enemies Camp, to maintain his reputation, he
made no show at all of fear, but talking to his own advantage (as if no force,
but only reason should move him) he entered into a serious and cunning discourse
with Charlemagne, showing, That unnecessary Wars were the ruin of mankind, and
that he was grieved to see so much Blood spilt: That he had not begun, but
followed, being urged by necessity to defend himself and his Country against
the Forces of Charlemagne: That he was not yet so dejected, nor his Forces so
weak as to refuse the Battle: But for that it would be an infinite loss to
hazard the lives of so many men, he desired rather to make trial of the right
by some Troops, and they that vanquished should be deemed to have the right,
and true Religion on their side: Protesting to yield to that Religion which
should appear to be best upon this trial. This Proposal, and condition was
accepted by Charlemagne: The Combat was fought, the proof made, and the
Christian Troop vanquished that of the Sarazin.

Then did Aigoland protest openly, Aigolands dissimulation.
that he would become a Christian, but in heart he had no such meaning, and
therefore took this opportunity to fly from his promise. He gives Charlemagne a
visit, and finds him at the Table, well accompanied with his chief followers,
(for then it was the Custom of Kings not sit, and eat alone) but, casting his
eye aside, he saw twelve poor men ill apparelled, sitting upon the ground, near
to the Table of the Noblemen; and demandding what those poor, miserable
Creatures were which did there feed apart: One answered, That they were the
servants of God: He then replied, surely your God is of small account, whose
servants are so miserable, and contemptible: And thereupon takes an occasion to
retire himself, having lost nothing, but made great advantage by this Treaty:
Having hereby qualified the force of Charlemaegne, viewed his Army, made show
of his own Courage and dexterity, and all, without an Ambassador.

Charlemagne on the other side, Charles returns into Spain.
seeing himself thus deluded and affronted, was resolved to take revenge for
so notable a loss of men, and so bold an attempt of the Sarazin, so that
withal speed he raised an Army of a hundred and thirty thousand men, and being
thus fraught with Choler and indignation, he returned into Spain. His first
entry was prosperous: For in the encounter he defeated Aigolands Army near to
Pampelune, and for a Seal of his Victory, Aigoland overthrown and slain.
he carried ^^ay the head Aigoland his enemy, who was slain by the hand of
Arnold of Belange, a Noble and Valiant Knight: But the sequel was not
answerable to the beginning: For notwithstanding the overthrow of the Sarazin
Troops, all the rest in Spain were not vanquished, where there were more Kings,
and more men of War, who kept correspondence with Amurath, King of Babylon,
which place was their Nursery, and Storehouse.

Marsile and Belingand, The Sarazins Rally.
two Brethren, were the chief of the remainder of the Sarazin Army, ^ Giant
slain.
wherein there was a great Babylonian Giant, called Ferragat, of an exceeding
stature, him did Rowland slay, who was Nephew to Charlemagne; after which the
Sarazins gathered together the relicts of their brooken Troops, and made a show
of resolute men, vowing to sell their lives at a dear rate to Charl^magne,
being favored by many great, and good Towns in the Country. Charlemagne makes
a sudden stop and pursues not his Victory, God reserving to himself a Sovereign
power over all men's designs, yea, over the greatest, and in matters of
greatest consequence, to the end that all may learn to ask counsel and
success of him, and it was his will, and pleasure that the French Forces
should not conquer and possess Spain, the which he had reserved as a portion
for another Nation.

Thus Charles, A Treaty of Peace.
who should have prosecuted his late Victory vigorously, grew remiss, which
encouraged Idnabala the Sarazin (who had free access into the Camp) to make a
motion of Peace. He was a good Secretary of his own Companions minds, what show
soever he made of speaking of himself. Charlemagne (finding by his late
experience that the event of War is uncertain and doubtful, and that this
War tended to the loss of his Subjects, who employed both their lives and goods
for the purchass of an uncertain Victory, and seeing himself overburdened with
great affairs in his other Estates, to the preservation whereof reason did
summon him rather then to seek for new) he seemed not unwilling to hearken to
the motion of Idnabala, who assured him that he found the Sarazins affairs to
be so desperate, that they would be glad to embrace his friendship at
whatsoever rate they purchased it. The Treaty hereupon began, and the chief
Article was propounded, which was, that they should embrace the Christian
Religion, and this Charlemagne seemed to urge with great vehemence: but finding
the Sarazins obstinate in their refusal, he was content to grant them peace,
paying him some great sums of money, as a token that they had been vanquished
by him.

And accordingly he sent a Noble man of his Court, A Traitor.
named Ganes, to treat with them, who (being by Bribes corrupted by Marsile,
and B^llingand) undertook so to order businesses, that Charlemagne should
return into France, and by the way, should receive a notable disgrace: yet they
seemed to make such a Composition and agreement, which in show, was very
honorable for Charlemagne: to whom they promised to pay (as an Homage, and
acknowledgment for the peace he should grant them) what sums of money he would
appoint, and that thereupon he should retire with his Army into France; yet
leaving such Forces in Spain as he pleased, to see the condition which should
be agreed upon, performed. But Ganes had discovered to them, that Charlemagne
upon other accounts, was necessitated to return, and therefore desired to leave
the smallest Forces that he could in Spain.

The Agreement being thus concluded, Charles returns into France.
Charlemagne departed with his Army, attending a better opportunity to effect
what he had designed: and he left his Nephew Rowland only with twenty thousand
men, to see the conditions performed. And to make his passage into France the
more easy, he commanded him to lodge in a place of advantage, in the Pyrenean
Mountains, called Roncevaux: and so the French Army marched backwards to
France, under the conduct of Charlemagne, who little dreamed of such an affront
as he shortly after met with.

Whilst the French Army were upon their retreat, Marsile and Bellingand slept
not, but gathering together all the Forces they could, they lodged them
secretly in the hollow Caves of those Mountains, being places inaccessible,
and wholly unknown but only to the Inhabitants of those Countries. They had
intelligence given them by Ganes what number of men Charlemagne had left in
Spain, Rowland assaulted.
under the command of Rowland, to whom the reputation of his Uncle, and the
good will of the People of Spain in the Chiefest Towns, was of more use then
his twenty thousand men, although they were the choice of all the Army. Rowland
had no fear of an Enemy, when as returning to his Garrison, he was suddenly set
upon by the Sarazins, who were far more in number then the French, who seeing
themselves thus treacherously assaulted, and compassed in, defended themselves
valiantly against those miscreants: But still fresh Troops of Sarazins issued
forth of these Caves on every side in so great numbers as that in the end, the
French (tired and spent in so long and painful a conflict) were oppressed by
the multitudes, rather then overcome by the Valor of their enemies.

Rowland in so great and extreme a danger (gathering together the pieces of
his shipwreck) performed both the Duty of a good Commander, His Valor.
and of a valiant, and resolute soldier, fighting gallantly, and having beaten
^^wn a great number where the enemies were thickest; he at length came where
King Marsile was, whom he slew with his own hands. But Belingand, holding the
Victory absolutely his own, pursued the French with great violence; in so much
as Rowland (not able to hold out any longer) retired himself apart, and finding
his Death approaching, he endeavored to break his good Sword Durandall, His
Death.
but his strength failing him, he dyed of Thirst, through so long and difficult
a combat in that hot Country: and with him dyed Oliver, Oger the Dane, Renald
of Montaubon, Arnald of Belland, and other Nobles Personages, who are the
subject of many fabulous stories: Yet the Fame of their singular virtues, and
prowess is engraven in the Originals of true Histories, where it shall never be
blotted out.

Charlemagne having intelligence brought him of this great and unexpected
loss, Charles overcomes the Sarazins
returned suddenly to take his revenge upon the Sarazins, of whom he killed an
infinite number in several places: and being informed of the Treason of
Gains, he caused him to be drawn in pieces by four Horses, as the only author
of this miserable defeat. And being transported with a just disdain, and
indignation for this so base an affront, he had purposed to have passed on in
Spain to take further revenge. But the great and weighty affairs of his other
Estates called him back into France to attend upon them. And so ended his
Spanish Wars with small success, having troubled Charlemagne at diverse times,
Returns into France.
for the space of fourteen years. For God had appointed the limits of his
designs, as reserving to himself a Sovereign power over all men's enterprises,
even of the greatest.

Charlemagne made a Tomb for his Nephew Rowland, and honored the memory of
those other worthy warriers (who died in the Bed of Honor) with Monuments:
after which he was necessitated to undertake diverse other Wars, both in Italy
and Germany, in all which it pleased God to give him better success. A
Rebellion in Italy.
Italy (during Charles his Troubles in Spain) had rebelled, being provoked
thereto by Adalgise, Duke of ^^eventum, who endeavored to repossesse the Race
of Didier: but that attempt was soon suppressed by Charlemagne, to the cost of
the Lombard Rebels: yet shortly after ensued another War in Germany.

The like occasion also bred a War in Bavaria: His Wars in Bavaria
For the King Tassillon, who was Son in Law to Didier, King of Lombardy (being
eagerly pressed by his Wife, and wonderfully discontented with Charlemagne)
shaked off the yoke of subjection, and betook himself to Arms: But Charlemagne
surprised him with such celerity, that Tassillon was forced to sue for Peace;
which Charlemagne granted upon condition of his subjection, and loyalty: But
again Tassillon, not able to contain himself raised a new War in another place,
as when we stop one breach, it finds ^ent by another. He stirred up the Huns
and Avars (a neighboring People to Austria, which was one of the Estates of
the French Monarchy) against Charlemagne, who yet suppressed them with happy
success; and Tassillon himself being again vanquished by Charlemagne, and
found guilty of Rebellion and Treason, was condemned to lose his Estate
according to the Salique Law: and with him, the Kingdom of Bavaria ended, being
now wholly incorporated into the Crown of France.

The Huns and Avars (of whose names joined together, the word Hungary has been
made) were also punished by Charlemagne, and brought under the yoke of the
French Monarchy. They had formerly attempted by War to disquiet the Country of
Austria, whom Charlemagne had at diverse times opposed by his Forces, His
Victories.
so that the War, at times; had continued for the space of eight years, and the
final issue was, that all the Country obeyed him: The Danes also, the Sorabes,
and Abrodites, and the Westphalians, (who had all joined in this War of
Hungary) were also brought under the obedience of Charlemagne. The limits of
the Northen Kingdom called Austrasia, were so enlarged, that it was divided
into two Kingdoms, and the Realm of Austria which joins upon France, was
called Westriech, that is to say, the Realm of the We^^ and that which is
toward Danubius, was called Ostrie^^ (...) that is the Kingdom of the East,
Austria being then of a greater command then it is at this day. For it
contained all Hungary, Valachia, Bohemia, Transylvania, Denmark, and Poland:
Then was the French Monachy of a vast extent. But all these Nations have since,
either returned to their first beginning, or new Lords have seized upon them.

Thus the French Monarchy was greatly enlarged by the prowess and Valor of
Charlemagne: His education of his Children.
and his Children were grown up, as in age, so in knowledge and experience,
through the careful education which their prudent Father gave them; who framed
them to the management of affairs, intending them to provide that they might
first succeed him in his virtues, and afterward in his Kingdoms. But man
purposes and God disposes, France, Italy, Germany, Spain, and Hungary made
the Roman Empire in the West, and Charlemagne being Master of these goodly
Provinces, was in effect an Emperor, but only wanted the Title, and the soleme
Declaration of this dignity. And shortly after, the Providence of God that gave
him the former, ministered opportunity to him for the enjoyment of the latter,
which came thus to pass.

Leo was at this time Pope of Rome, A Sedition in Rome.
against whom there was strange sedition raised by Syluester, and Campul, men
of great credit in the Court of Rome. These men (with their adherents) upon a
solemn day of Procession, seized upon Leo before St. Laurence Church, whom they
stripped of his Pontifical Robes, cast him unto the ground trod him under their
feet, and bruised his face with their fists, and having dragged him
ignominiously through the dirt, they cast him into Prison: where yet he stayed
not long, being freed by a Groom of his Chamber called Albin: and so having
recovered St. Peter's Church, he sent to Vingise, Duke of Spoleto, entreating
him to deliver him from this miserable Captivity. Vingise failed him not, but
came to Rome, and carried the Pope along with him to Spoleto; The Pope freed
out of Prison. Flies to Charles
where yet he stayed not long, but from thence went to Charlemagne into Fra^^
whom he found full of Troubles. He complained (...) of the Romans sought to
usurp his power into their han^^, and advised the King, to exact an Oath of
Fidelity of them. Paschalis was there soon after him, and accused the Pope of
Adultery, and other gross Crimes. Charlemagne dismissed them both, and
promised to be at Rome within a few months, and accordingly prepared for his
journey.

In December Anno Christi 800. Charlemagne was received in Rome with all shows
of Honor, Charles goes to Rome.
and within eight days he went into St. Peter's Church, and in the presence of
all the people and Clergy, he asked, who had any thing to say against Pope Leo?
Paschalis, or Paschasires, and Campulus had published the Popes Crimes by Writ:
but knowing how Charlemagne stood affected toward both parties, they appeared
not; so none prosecuting these crimes against him, Clears the Pope upon his
Oath.
the Pope was absolved upon his Oath; wherein he swore by God and the four
Evangelists, that all these things were false which they laid to his Charge:
Whereupon the King declared him innocent, and condemned his accusers, and
within few days three hundred of them were beheaded in the Lateran Field for
their presumption, and affectation of liberty, on the eighteenth of December;
and shortly after, Charles was chosen Emperor: but before I speak of that, I
must represent you with a brief view of the present estate, and condition of
the Emperor of Constantinople.

The seat of the Roman Empire, The State of the Eastern Empire.
since the time of Constantine the great, remained at Constantinople, a City of
Thrace, situated in a convenient place for the guard of the Eastern Provinces:
After which, all the West being full of new Guests, who had expelled the
Romans, the name, authority and power of the Empire remained in the East,
where now the State was in a strange confusion, the mother being banded against
her Son, and the People amongst themselves.

Constantine the Son of Leo the Fourth, was Emperor at this time, who from his
Infancy was governed (together with the Empire) by his Mother Irene: But being
now come to the age of twenty years, he assumed the Government into his own
hands. Contention about Images.
There was then a great division in the East, which had been continued from
Father to Son for fourscore years together, about bringing Images into the
Churches. The Bishops would needs bring them in: But the Emperors together with
the greatest part of the People opposed themselves against them. This
contention had its beginning under Philip Bardanes, was continued under Leo
Isaurus, and from him was derived to his Son Constantine, surnamed Copronimus,
and to Leo the Fourth, Son to the said Constantine. This filled all the East
with infinite scandalls.

The same fire of contention continued in the minority of our Constantine, who
was yet governed by his Mother, a woman of a violent spirit, who had undertaken
the protect o^ of Images, A Counsel from them.
and held a Council of many Bishops for the defense thereof: But the people
growing into a mutiny, by force expelled them from Constantinople, where their
Assembly was held. But Irene, being resolved to carry on her design, assembled
another Council at Nicea, City of of Bithinia, honored for having entertained
the first general Council under Constantine the Great, the first of that name:
where it was Decreed, that Images should be placed in Churches for devotion.
But Charlemagne did not allow of this Decree, and either him^^^^ or some other
by his Command, C^arles against Images.
did write a small Treaty against this Council, the which bears this Title, A
Treatise of Charlemagne, touching Images, against the Greek Synod.

This crafty Woman made choice of the City of Nicea, that the name of the
ancient first Council held there, might honor this new invention with the
pretext of Antiquity: For there are some that confound the first Council of
Nicea with the second, and Constantine the fourth with the first.

Constantine continued in the hereditary hatred of his Father, and Grandfather
against Images, so as being of age, and in absolute possession of his Empire,
he disannulled all these new decrees, and caused the Images to be beaten down
in all places: Yet did he make all shows of respect to his Mother, yiedling
unto her a good part of his authority and command: which respect was the cause
of an horrible Tragedy. For this Woman being transported for two causes (both
by reason of her new opinion, and for despite that she had not the whole
Government in her own power) grew so unnatural, that she resolved to dispossess
her Son of the Empire, and to seize up on it herself: And indeed the authority
which her Son had left her, and the free access which she had unto his Person,
gave her opportunity for the execution of her design. An unnatural Mother.
For having corrupted such as had the chief Forces of the Empire at their
command, and won them to her with her Sons Treasure, she seized on his Person,
put out his eyes, and sent him into Exile (where, shortly after, he died of
grief) and took possession of the Empire.

These unnatural and Tragic furies were practiced in the East, whiles that
Charlemagne, by his great Valor built an Empire in the West. Irene, in her Son
Constantines life time would have married him with the eldest Daughter of
Charlemagne: but this accident crossed that design.

After the Death of Constantine, Irene sent to Charlemagne to excuse herself of
the murder, Irene treats with Charles.
disavowing it, and laying the blame upon such as had done it (as she
pretended) without her command. And to win the good liking of Charlemagne, she
caused him to be dealt withal about marr^^^^ (For at that time Festrude was
dead) with promise to consent that he should be declared Emperor of the West,
and that she also would resign unto him the Empire of the East: But Charlemagne
would not accept of her profers. The Nobility and People of the Greek Empire
did so hate Irene, as having suffered her the space of three years, in the end,
they resolved to dispossess her.

This Woman, Irene hated and deposed, Nicephorus succeeds her.
the unnatural murtheress of her own child, being thus publicly hated and
detested, Nicephorus, a great and Nobleman of Greece, assisted by the Chiefest
in the Court, and with the good liking, and consent of the People, seized upon
the Empire, and took Irene, whom yet he only banished, to give her opportunity
and means to live better then she had done: And afterward he treated, and
agreed with Charlemagne, that the Empire of the East continuing under his
command, the other of the West should remain to Charles.

By this Transaction of Nicephorus, He treats with Charles.
and the consent of the Greeks, the possession of the Empire was ratified and
confirmed to Charlemagne, and now began the Division of the Empire into the
East and West. That of the west began in Charlemagne, and continued in his
Posterity, whilst they were inheritors of their Fathers virtues: But
afterward it was translated to the Princes of Germany, who yet acknowledge
Charlemagne to have risen from a German stock, being born at Worms, Crowned at
Spire, and interred at Aix, all Cities of Germany. Hitherto we have
represented, what Charlemagne did whilst he was King of France only: Now we
are come to consider what happened to him, worthy of Memory, whilst he was
Emperor.

The deeds of Charlemagne after he came to the Empire.

The Romanists do boast that the Pope gave the Empire of the West unto
Charlemagne: But the truth is, the Popes had not yet come to that hight as to
pretend to a power of disposing of Empires and Kingdoms at their own pleasure:
But the right of Charles came another way. For before he came to Rome Anno
Christi 800. he had all France under his Government, together with Franconia,
and Austrasia: He had subdued a great part of Spain unto the River Iberus,
from the Sarazins: His large Dominions.
As also Saxony, West phalia, Dacia, Hungary, Istria, Dalmatia. He had likewise
subdued all Italy, except Magna Graecia, and therefore he was entitled, Charles
by the Grace of God King of the Frenches, Emperor of the Lombards, and
Patricius of Rome: So he styles himself in his Epistle to Alcwin: and Alcwin in
an Epistle to him styles him, The Glorious Emperor [Gallicarum] of France, and
Recto^ and Defensor Ecclesiae: Both which Epistles are in the second Part of
Alcwins Works. His Coronation was by the Decree and Prayers of the Roman
People. Sigisbert in his Chronicon, shows the time, and cause, saying: The
Romans, who in heart were long before fallen from the Emperors of
Constantinople: Taking the opportunity that Irene had picked out the eyes of her
own Son the Emperor, with one General consent they resolved to Proclaim King
Charles for their Emperor, and to Crown him by the hands of the Pope: His title
to the Empire.
So on December. 25. Anno Christi 800. they Crowned him by the hands of Pope Leo,
as the Emperors were wont to be Crowned by the Bishops of Constantinople; and
the People cried thrice, C^^olo Augusto, a Deo Coronato, Magno and Pacifico
Imperatori, Vita and Victoria, And the Pope anointed him: As also his Son
Pepin, whom Charlemagne, by a solemn Decree had made King of Italy. And the
Pope knowing the dangers which had often befaln himself and his Predecessors,
Naucler.
entreated the Emperor that he would be Protector of the Church of Rome.

Thus Charlemagne, the King of France, was advanced to the Empire, partly by
Inheritance, partly by the sword, by dedition, and the Title was given him by
the People, and the Bishop of Rome: yet nothing was proper to the Bishop, but
the Coronation and other Ceremonies, which he performed in the name of the
People, according to the Custom at Constantinople. At the same time also it was
agreed, An agreement betwixt Charles and the Pope.
that all the Chief men of the City, as well Ecclesiastical, as Secular, should
give their Oath of Fidelity unto the Emperor. Secondly, That the Emperors
Missus should reside in the Palace of St. Peter to decide Pleas amongst the
People: and that there should be allotted for his maintenance, a part of the
former Emperors Patrimony. Thirdly, That if any man's cause was perverted by the
ordinary Judges, and the wronged person should implore the aid of the Missus,
or Emperors Commissioner, for Justice; and the Missus should adjure the Judges,
saying, By the Faith ye owe unto my Lord the Emperor, I require you to do this
man Justice: Then none should dare to decline, either to the right hand or to
the left, although the wrong were done by any of the Popes kinsmen. Fourthly,
That the Mulcts which should be imposed upon any guilty person, should be
equally divided between the Emperors Missus, and the Popes Missus. Fifthly,
That if any goods fell under Escheat, they should appertain to the Church,
without an express gift of the Emperor. Continu. Eutrop. Catal. Test. Verit.

Yet all this right was not sufficient for Charlemagne, Charles is envied.
nor did he enjoy the Empire without contradiction. For he was forced to
overcome the envy of this assumed Title with great sums of money; Especially the
Emperor of Constantinople envyed it; but Charlemagne by his magnanimity
prevailed against their contumacy, wherein he excelled the Greeks: and he sent
many Ambassadors unto them: especially unto Irene, not only to treat for Peace,
but about her marriage, that thereby he might the better confirm his Title:
But before his Ambassadors came the second time to Constantinople (Irene being
sick) the People had Crowned Nicephorus on the first of November Anno Christi
802.

Yet did Nicephorus renew the League with Charlemagne, which Irene had before
made with him: but (as Sigonius says) with express condition, that Venice
should be free betwixt the two Empires. Zonar.
In the mean time Nicephorus was molested by the Sarazins, and was forced to
agree with them upon hard conditions: He was also molested by the Bulgarians,
over whom he obtained one great Victory; but when he refused all conditions of
Peace, they assembled together again to fight for their Lives and Land, in
which Battle they overthrew, Nicephorus is slain.
and killed Nicephorus, and his son Stauracius was wounded in the fight, and
fled to Adrianople, where he was afterward declared Emperor. But after three
Months Michael Rangabis, his Brother in Law, shut him up in a Monastery. Then
were mutual Ambassadors sent between the two Emperors, and a perpetual Peace
was concluded betwixt them.

Charles the Great was Crowned Emperor in the thirty-third year of his Reign,
upon the 25th of December, and in the fifty eighth year of his age. He fought
many Battles and was always victorious. He had (as was said before) Wars with
the Heathenish Saxons, which, by times, lasted thirty years: The Saxons often
rebel.
He oft-times overcame them, and granted them liberty, upon condition that they
would embrace the Christian Faith; but upon every opportunity their Duke
Wedekin, shaked off both Loyalty, and Christianity. At several times when
Charlemagne had obtained a Victory, his manner was to erect a new Bishopric:
Charles his Prudence. Crantz. in Saxon.
So that he erected seven Bishoprics in that province, to which he annexed
Princely Power, knowing well, that such fierce People might sooner be tamed by
Religion then by Arms. Bishoprics erected.
The places where these were erected, were, Breme, Verda, Minda, Paterborne,
Osnabourg, Hildesem, and Halberstad. But though he gave the Bishops power of
Governing, yet the Nobles did not altogether loose the power of administering in
Public affairs. At last, because the Saxons revolted again, he removed ten
Thousand of them, with their Wives and Children, into Brabant, and Flanders,
and sent some French to inhabit in their rooms.

Charlemagne lived fifteen years after that he had united the Roman Empire to
the French Monarchy; yet not without many troubles. For Grimoald, Duke of
Beneventum sought to disturb Italy in the behalf of the Lombards: Troubles in
Italy.
but Charles prevented it betimes, employing against him his Son Pepin, a
Worthy and a Valiant Prince: and Grimoald being vanquished, was entreated
withal mildness, and being restored to his Estate, he became afterward a
very affectionate, and obedient servant to Charlemagne, who was a Prudent
Conqueror, that knew as well how to use, as how to get a Victory.

After this it followed, that for some attempts made by the Venetians against
the Empire of Charlemagne, War with the Venetians.
in the behalf of the Emperor of Constantinople: or (as others say) upon the
false information of Fortunatus, Patriarch of Grado, that Charlemagne commanded
his son Pepin, King of Italy, to make Wars against them: which he accordingly
began with great resolution, and took the Cities and Fortresses which the
Venetians held within the main land, and at length besieged the City of Venice
it self, both by Sea and by Land, to the relief whereof the Greek Emperor sent
a Fleet: about which Authors agree not; for some say, that Pepin wholly took
Venice: Others say, that he only took some Islands thereof, and that the Plac^
(...) is called Rioalto defended it self: How ever it was, this War continued
long, Obeliers, and Becur, two great Personages, being the chief Commanders for
the Venetians. At last Peace was concluded betwixt them, and the Venetians had
liberty to live after their own Laws and customs, and the Venetians won great
reputation for being able to defend themselves against so potent and Victorious
an Enemy. Charlemagne would have the Country which he had Conquered from the
Lombards, to be called Lombardy, that by retaining their Name, he might
somewhat sweeten their servile condition, in the ruin of their Estate.

But now Charlemagne, Charles makes his Will.
finding himself old and broken, and his Children Valiant, Wise, and Obedient,
he resolved to make his last Will and Testament, wherein he divided his
Kingdoms between his three legitimate Sons, to wit, Charles his Eldest, Pepin,
and Lewis: In which he made his eldest Son Charles King of the greatest, and
best parts of France, and Germany. To Pepin he gave the Kingdom of Italy, and
Bavaria, with some other Provinces. And to Lewis he bequeathed Provence, and
that part of France which bordereth upon Spain, together with some other
Provinces. But all succeeded after an other manner then he intended, God the
Sovereign disposer of Kingdoms, having decreed otherwise to dispose thereof. He
endeavored also to reduce all his Kingdoms under one Law, making choice of the
Roman Laws above all others, both for the dignity of the Empire, and because
they seemed to him, to be most Just and equal: He gives Laws to his Subjects.
But the French, being loath to alter any thing in their customary Laws,
desired, and obtained of him that they might be governed by the same: So as
Gaul, Narbonne, (which comprehends Daulphine, Languedoc, and Provence) do use
the written Laws (as the ancient Provinces of the Romans) and the rest of
France observe their customary Laws.

It afterward happened that a great Fleet of Infidels which inhabited Spain,
with the aid, and assistance of some Africans, invaded the Isles of Sardinia,
and Corsica in the Mediterranean Sea, for the (...) whereof, the Emperor
Charlemagne sent commandment to his Son Pepin that he should send thither
against them a valiant Captain whose name was Buoaredus, Infidels beaten,
who took so good order as that he drove those Infidels out of those Islands,
and slew five thousand of them in one Battle. And with no less good success,
the Emperor undertook an other War against the Dukes of the Bohemians, And the
Bohemians, and Polanders.
and Polanders, which is a part of the ancient Sarmatia, who infested the
Countries under his Dominions, against whom he sent his Son Charles with great
Forces of Burgonias, Saxons, and Germans: And this young Charles, imitating his
Father, Warred valiantly, and with discretion against them, and coming first to
a Battle with the Bohemians, led by Leo their Duke, he overcame them, as he did
also at other times, and at last slew Leo their Duke; the like success he had
also against the Polanders, so as at length they all became his Fathers
Subjects. And for these Victories of Charlemagne he was so much feared, and
renowned through the World, that a great King of the East; and Amurath, the
greatest of all the Mahomatists, sent their Ambassadors, with rich Presents
unto him, desiring peace, and friendship: and the like did all Christian Kings.

Charlemagne thus living with honor, His War with the King of Denmark.
and in tranquillity, Godfrey King of Demark (which was a dependence of the
Realm of Germany, and part of Charles his Portion, as was hinted before) made
War against him. This Godfrey was a mighty Prince, and commanded over a large
Dominion, and with great Forces came into Friesland and Saxony, where he did
great harm. Against whom, the Emperor addressing himself (though he was now
Old, and unweildy) speedily departed with a great Army: but by the way news was
brought him that King Godfrey was dead, and that his Army was returned into
their own Country. And upon the same day news came also, Pepin dies,
that his Son Pepin (who had reigned in Italy in great prosperity) was dead in
the City of Millan, which was an occasion of great grief to the old Emperor.
Then did he return to the City of Aken, or Aix, unto which place Ambassadors
came to him from Hermigius, who succeeded Godfrey in the Kingdom of Denmark,
humbly desiring Peace. The like came also to him from the Emperor of
Constantinople, and others also from Ambulat, a King of the Moors, who reigned
in a great part of Spain; to all which he returned gracious answers, and
granted their Petitions: withal, giving hearty thanks to God for that he was
generally so well esteemed of. But after this Sunshine, an other storm
returned, as the clouds return after the rain: And Charles.
For it pleased God to take away an other of hs Sons, called Charles, who lay
on the borders of Germany for the defense thereof; so as now his whole hope
rested in his third Son Lewis.

Thus man purposes and God disposes. Thus the Sons die before the Father.
Thus we see the greatest cannot free themselves from the common calamities of
mankind. Thus both great Kings, and great Kingdoms have their Period.

Crowns have their compass; Kingdoms have their date:
Fortune her frowns: Felicity her fate.
Thus Charlemagne lost his Children, and his great Empire her best support
under God: For these two Princes (like Stars of the greater magnitude) did
shine bright by inheriting their Fathers virtues, and Valor, leaving behind
them Lewis their Brother, with large Territories, and few virtues, to Govern so
great an Estate.

After the Death of these two great Princes, New enemies rise up.
many enemies rose up against old Charlemagne, who seemed (as it were) to have
lost his two Arms: as the Sarazins in Spain, the Sclavonians, and the Normans
in the Northern Regions: But he vanquished them all, and brought them into his
obedience and subjection, old and broken as he was.

Charlemagne all his Life time held the Church in great reverence, His love to
the Church.
and had employed his Authority to beautify it, and bountifully bestowed his
Treasure to enrich it: But this great Plenty, joined with so long and happy a
Peace, made the Churchmen to live losely.

Charlemagne (being himself well instructed in Religion) knowing of what great
importance it was, to have such as should instruct others to be sound in the
Faith, and holy and exemplary in their lives, he at sundry times, called five
Councels in sundry Places of his Dominions (For as yet the Popes had not
challenged that Power to belong to them) for the Reformation and good
Government of the Church: He called five Councels.
As at Mentz: at Rheimes: at Tours: at Chaalons: and at Arles: and by the advice of these Ecclesiastical Assemblies, he made and published many Orders
for the good of the Church which were gathered together in a Book called,
Capitula Caroli Magni. A worthy President for Princes who seek true honor by
virtue, whereof the care of Piety is the chiefest Foundation.

In the Preface to this Book, he thus says, that he had appointed these
Constitutions with the Advice of his Presbyters, His Ecclesiastical
Constitutions.
and Counselors: and that herein he had followed the Example of King Josias,
who endeavored to bring the Kingdom which God had given him, to the worship of
the true God: Some of his Constitutions are these. He commanded to look to, and
to try the learning and Conversation of such as were admitted into the
Ministry. He forbad private Masses, Also the Confusion of Diocesses, requiring
that no Bishop should meddle in an others Diocese. He forbad that any Books
should be read publicly, but such as were approved by the Council of
Calcedon. He forbad the worshipping of Saints. He commanded Bishops not to
suffer Presbyters to teach the People other things then what are contained in,
or according to the holy Scriptures. And Lib. 2. Chapter 3. he says, Although the
Authority of the Ecclesiastical Ministry may seem to stand in our Person: Yet
by the Authority of God, and Ordinance of man, its known to be so divided, that
every one of you, in his own place and order, has his own power and Ministry:
Hence its manifest that I should admonish you all, and you all should further
and help us. He admonished Bishops especially, to teach both by Life and
Doctrine, both by themselves, and the Ministers that were under them, as they
would answer the Contrary in their accounts at the Great Day. He Ordained that
the Bishop of the first See should not be called the Prince of Priests, or the
highest Priest, or have any such Title, but only should be called, The Bishop
of the first See. That none can lay another foundation, then that which is
laid, which is Christ Jesus, and that they which lay Christ for their
foundation, its to be hoped that they will be careful to show their Faith, by
bringing forth good Works.

He held also a great Council in the City of Frankfort, A Council at Frankfurt
of the Bishops of France, Germany, and Italy, which himself honored with his
own presence; where, by general consent the false Synod of the Greeks (they
are the words of the Original) untruly called the seventh, was condemned, and
rejected by all the Bishops, who subscribed to the condemnation of it. This was
that Co^cel (spoken of before) called by Irene at Nice, wherein the bringing of
Images into Churches for devotion, was established. In a Word, if Charlemagnes
meddling with Italy, and his advancing the Pope, for confirming that which he
had taken, could be excused, he was unto all Princes a pattern of
magnificence, of Zeal in Religion, of learning, eloquence, temperance,
prudence, moderation, etc. Al^win says of him, Charles was a Catholic in his
Faith, a King in power, a High Priest in Preaching, a Judge in his equity, a
Philosopher in liberal studies, His Temperance.
famous in manners, and excellent in all honesty. He was so temperat, that
notwithstanding his great revenues, he was never served at the Table with above
four dishes at a meal, and those of such meat as best pleased his taste, which
he used to the same end for which God created them, which was for sustenance,
and to support his Body, not for show and pomp.

His ordinary exercise was hunting when he was at leisure, His Exercises.
in time of War: and in times of peace, he attended to such as read Histories
to him, and sometimes he heard Music, with which he was much delighted, having
good skill therein himself: He was very charitable, and a bountiful
Almesgiver, and so careful to provide for the poor Christians, that in Syria,
in Africa, and in Egypt, and in other Provinces of the infidels, His Charity.
where Christians lived, he found means to have Alms houses, and Hospitalls
erected, and endowed for those that were Poor.

But there fell out a new accident, which drew our Great Charles again to Arms
in his old age, and that was this; Alphonso, King of Navarr, surnamed the
Chaste, by reason of his singular, His last Wars.
and signal temperance in that kind, did inform, and advertise him, that there
was now a very fit opportunity, and means offered for him utterly to subdue the
Sarazins in Spain. Charlemagne (who infinitely desired to finish this work,
which he had so often attempted with no great success) gave ear to the
information and advice, whereupon he raises an Army, and marches into Spain,
relying on the Spaniards favor, and assistance, they being Christians. Indeed
Alphonso meant plainly, and sincerely, but so did not his Courtiers, and
Nobles, nor associates, who feared Charles his forces no less then they did the
Sarazins, and if Charles prevailed, the most confident of Alphonso's servants
and Officers doubted to be dispossessed of their places, and Governments by a
new Master: and therefore they labored to cross Alphonso, and to countermand
Charles; but the Lot was cast, his Army was in the Field, and he was resolved
to pass on: But when he was entered into Spain, he encountered with so many
difficulties, that being discouraged, he returned back into France, and so
concluded, and put a period to all his Warlie enterprises; embracing again the
care of the Church, and of Religion, as a fit subject for the remainder of his
days.

Charlemagne was threescore and eight years old when he left the Wars, His
preparation for Death.
after which he spent three whole years in his study, to prepare himself for
Death, in which time, he read much in the Bible, and read over also St.
Augustines works, whom he loved and preferred before all the other Doctors of
the Church: He resided also at Paris, that he might have opportunity of
conferring with learned men. There he erected a goodly University, which he
furnished with as learned me^ as those times could afford, and endowed it with
great privileges: For he had an exceeding great care to make it a Nurcery for
the holy Ministry, that from thence the Church might be supplied with able
Teachers, whence also grew so many Colleges of Chan^ons, with sufficient
revenues annexed thereunto.

Thus Charlemagne spent three years happily in the only care of his Soul,
leaving an illustrious example to all Princes, to moderate, and ennoble their
greatness with Piety, and so to enjoy their Temporal estates, as in the mean
time not to neglect their eternal concernments, and to think of their departure
out of this Life in time.

Foreseeing his Death (whereunto he prepared himself by these exercise) he made
his last Will and Testamont, He makes His Will.
leaving his Son Lewis the sole heir unto his great Kingdoms, and bequeathed to
the Church much Treasure. But all things and Persons in this World have an end:
His Testament was but the Harbinger to his Death; for presently after, he was
taken with a pain in his side, or Pluresie, and lay sick but eight days, and
so yielded up his Spirit unto God that gave it, Anno Christi 814. and of his
age seventy one, and of his Reign forty seven, including fifteen years of his
Empire: His Body was interred in a sumptuous Church which he had caused to be
built in the City of Aquisgrave, or Aix la Capelle, where he was born, and his
memory was honored with a goodly Epitaph.

He was one of the greatest Princes that ever lived: His virtues.
His virtues are a pattern to other Monarchs, and his great successes the
subject of their wishes. The greatness of his Monarchy indeed was admirable:
His large Dominions
For he quietly enjoyed all France, Germany, the greatest part of Hungary, all
Italy; and a good part of Spain. At the time of his Death he was in peace with
the other Kings of Spain, as also with the Kings of England, Denmark, Balgarie,
with the Emperor Leo of Constantinople, His Character.
and withal the Princes of that time.

This Noble Prince was endued with so many excellent virtues that we read of
very few in ancient Histories that excelled him, so that he may be justly
compared with the best of them: For in Martial Discipline, in Valor, in
Dexterity, in feats of Arms, there are none that exceeded him. He obtained as
many Victories, fought as many Battles, and subdued as many fierce and Warlike
Nations as any one we read of, and that both before, and after that he was
Emperor. He was tall of Stature, very well proportioned in all his members,
passing strong: of a fair and grave countenance, Valiant, mild, merciful, a
lover of Justice, liberal, very affable, pleasant, well read in History, a
great Friend of Arts and Sciences, and sufficiently seen into them, and a man
who above all, loved and rewarded learned men. He was very Charitable in his
Kingdoms, yea, in his very Court, he harbored and relieved many Strangers, and
Pilgrims. In matters of Faith and Religion he was very Zealous; and most of the
Wars which he made, His Zeal.
were to propagate and enlarge the Christian Faith.

He (being misled by the darkness of the times wherein he lived)
superstitiously honored, and obeyed the Church of Rome, and the Pope that was
Bishop thereof, together with other Bishops and Prelates, commanding his
Subjects also to do the like. He was also very devout, and spent much of his
time in Prayer, Hearing, and Reading. In his Diet he was very temperate, and a
great enemy to riot and excess; and though he was Rich and Mighty, yet fed he
his Body with what was necessary and wholesome, not rare, costly, and strange.

And yet his virtues were not without their blemishes (as the greatest commonly
are not without some notable vices) For in his Younger days, His blemishes.
he was much given to women, adding Concubines to his lawful Wives, by whom he
had diverse Children: But this was in the time of his youth: For afterward he
contented himself with his Wife, and for a remedy of this imperfection, though
he was three or four times a Widdower, yet he ever married again the Daughter of
some great Prince or other.

To conclude all, he was an excellent Emperor, that loved and feared God, and
dyed when he was very Old, and full of Honor, leaving Lewis (the weakest of
his Sons) the sole heir of his great Empire, but not of his virtues: So that
this great building soon declined in his posterity.

He had engraven upon his Sword Pro Deo, and Religione, For God, and Religion:
He used to set his Crown upon the Bible, as our Canutus sometime put his Crown
upon the Rood, both of them thereby intimating, that as all honor was due to
God, so true Religion was the best Basis of Government, and that Piety was the
best Policy.

The Epitaph which I spoke of, was this.
Sub hoc conditorio situm est Corpus Caroli Magni, His Epitaph.
atque Orthodoxi Imperatoris, qui Regnum Francorum nobiliter ampliavit, and per
annos Quadraginta septem foelicite tenuit. Decessit Septuagenarius, Anno Domini
814. Indictione 7. Quinto Calend. Febru.

Under this Tomb lies the body of Charles the Great, The time of his Death.
and Catholic Emperor, who most Nobly enlarged the Kingdom of the French, and
most happily ruled it for the space of forty and seven years. He died in the
seventy and one year of his age: In the year of our Lord eight hundred and
fourteen, the seventh Indiction, on the fifth Calends of February.

He had five Wives: His Wives and Children.
the first was called Galcena, the Daughter of the King of Galistria, by whom
he had no Children. The second was Theodora, the sister (or as others say) the
Daughter of D^di^r, King of Lomb^rdy; whom he kept not long, but repudiated her
for sundry reasons. The third was Hildeb anda, Daughter of the Duke of Suevia,
whom he loved exceedingly, and had by her three Sons, viz. Charles his eldest,
whom he made King of the greatest, and best part of France, and Germany: Pepin
his second, whom he made King of Italy, Bavaria, etc. Lewis his youngest, to
whom he left the Empire entire, his Brothers being both Dead, in their Fathers
Life time. This Lewis was surnamed Debonaire, or the Courteous. He had also
three Daughters; the eldest was called Rothruda: the second Birtha; and the
youngest Giselia who would never marry. His fourth Wife he had out of Germany,
called Fastrada: And his fifth and last, was also a German Lady, called
Luithgranda, of the Suevian Race, by whom he had no Children.

He showed his love to Religion by having one, His devotion.
during his Meale-times, that either read to him some part of the Holy
Scriptures: or else some part of Saint Augustines Books, especially that De
Civitate Dei: or some History. He was also a great Friend to Learning, and
therefore erected three Universities: One was Padua in Italy; another was that
at Boulognia: the third was that in Paris, whereunto he was excited by our
Countryman Al^win, who was his Tutor.

His Sons he caused to be trained up in the Study of the Liberal Arts: His
care of his Children.
and his Daughters to Learn to sow, and practice good Huswifery. He always
wore a short Sword at his Girdle, in the Pummel whereof was engraven his Coat
of Arms, with which he Sealed all his Laws, etc. And used to say, Behold the
Sword which shall defend my Laws, and that shall be drawn and employed against
those that break them. In the year eight hundred and four, The King of the
Scots entered into the first League which was between the two Kingdoms of
France, His league with Scotland.
and Scotland, which was confirmed by succeeding Kings, which occasioned one of
them to add unto their Coat of Arms a double streak of Gules with Flower de
Lisses round their Escutchion, to show that their alliance with France conduced
much to the support of their Kingdom.

FINIS.

