A PARADISICAL DIALOGUE BETWIXT FAITH and REASON: DISPUTING The high mysterious
Secrets of Eternity, the like never extant in our Revelation.

As touching God in Eternity, how he became time in flesh, and how he dyed in
the grave, and ascended to his glory again.

ALSO What the Angels are in form and nature, and how the Angel became a Devil,
and that Devil man; and that this World was prepared for the Devil, so this the
Devils Kingdom; and what the Soul is, with the place of its glory and torment.

With a brief Narration what a Commission is, and how many Commissions there
are; what the difference of their worships, and how that the Law was given to
the Devil; with a brief discourse on the Catechism, the Lords Prayer, and the
Creeds; as also, a Divine Prospect to the Elect of the Lord.

Written by Law. Claxton, the only true Bishop and faithful Messenger of
Christ Jesus, Creator of Heaven and earth.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by William Learner, at the
Blackmoor near Fleet-bridge, 1660.

INDEX.
Chap. 1. Showing whether God be a Spirit without a body, or that God is a body
of flesh and bone glorified. Chap. 2. Showing whether the Father became not a
Son, which Son was Christ, and by death became a Father to all Eternity, now in
heaven glorified. Chap. 3. Showing Christ is the only God and Father, Creator
of Heaven and earth, now it is to be revealed what God and Father that was, and
where he was, that Christ so often called upon, when he was upon earth. Chap.
4. Showing whether the Angels were the first that God created and of what he
created them, with their nature and form, and what was the cause of the Angels
fall above all the rest. Chap. 5. Showing whether this World was before the
Angels or no and whether this World was made of something, or nothing* and how
it came into form and being, and whether it shall for ever thus remain. Chap.
6. Showing of what matter Adams body was created, and what was his nature, soul
or spirit and by what means he came to lose that estate he was created in.
Chap. 7. Showing who it was that tempted Eve and Adam, whether it was the Angel
aforesaid; and if so* why is he called a Serpent, Beast, or Tree, etc. and how
and which way they were deceived and what effect it has ever since produced.
Chap. 8. Showing whether Cain was not the first Devil, and who are his seed or
children, and what Devils those were, so frequently spoken of in Scripture.
Chap. 9. Showing what the soul is, and what it is that dies, how that it is
none but the soul which is the life of the body that can dye. Chap. 10. Showing
what Heaven is, and how many heavens there are, what the nature and form
thereof. Chap. 11. Showing what Hell is, and where it is, what the form and
nature of its torment. Chap. 12. Showing what Authority a Commissioner has in
the virtue of his Commission, what the effects and operations thereof. Chap.
13. Showing what the Law is at large, and in short, and whether any can keep
the Law, and when he is said to keep the Law, and when not. Chap. 14. Showing
whether that prayer does not belong to all, and whether by prayer we may come
to the knowledge of God, and whether it is our duty to make use of the Lords
prayer? Chap. 15. Showing whether there be any truth in the faith of the Church
of England, expressed in the Creeds or Articles recorded. Chap. 16. Showing in
eighteen Propositions, the invincible mighty great Authority that is entrusted
with a Divine Commissioner: Also, an eternal whip or scourge for the Quakers,
for belying the Holy Ghost.
A PARADISTICAL DIALOGUE BETWIXT Faith and Reason:
Disputing the high Mysterious Secrets of Eternity, the like never yet extant
in our Revelation.
CHAP. 1. Showing whether God be a Spirit without a body, or that God is a body
of flesh and bone glorified.
Reason. FRiend, having such a convenient opportunity to have some conference
with you, my request is, to know your judgment as touching the true God, and
that the more in this distracted age: There are so many opinions concerning
him, That some holds him forth an Infinite Spirit, etc. others say, Though God
be a Spirit, yet there are three Persons in the Godhead, the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one God, the same in Substance, equal
in Power and Glory: Now if thou please, let me hear what thy judgment is of
God Almighty.


Faith. Notwithstanding this hodg-podg, it matters not me, what thou or all the
wise men of the world hold: For from the Spirit of Revelation I infallibly
against men and Angels affirm, That God the Creator of Heaven and earth is in
the Person and Form of a man.


Reason. How? is it possible that God the Creator of all forms, should admit of
a form of his own?


Faith. I say, unless that Divine heavenly Faith or Nature, had a Form or
Person of his own, he could not have created man after his own form, image, or
likeness.


Reason. Yea, I grant God created man after his own image in righteousness and
holiness, but no otherwise.


Faith. Ah pitiful Soul, how thy riches choaks thee, and thy wisdom blindes
thee from believing in the true God, that thou should conceive, that
righteousness or holiness can be created without a form! or did thou ever
read or hear of any holiness in any other creature but man only; so that thou
can not say this or that is holiness without a form, and that the form of man
above.


Reason. What necessity, or what ground can be shown, that God who is the
Creator of all forms, should admit of a form of his own?


Faith. It was the greatest ground of all; for if God had not a form of his
own, it had been in vain to create either Angel or man, in his form, and that
because he created them to behold his glorious person.


Reason. Why, cannot the glory of God be seen unless he admit of a Person? and
what matter of glory can be delighted only in a single Person; for I conceive
him more glorious when he is a Spirit without a bosty; for then he can fill
Heaven and Earth wi^h his glory, and every creature that he has made then
beholds i^, in that they enjoy part of it.


Faith. I say, no glory can be seen without a Personal Substance; nay, it
cannot bear the title of glory without a body; for the glorious Spirit that
ever was* if it had not a body, were nothing at all, in that a Spirit cannot be
seen, so no delight in that which is not; for what delight could man have with
his wife, if she had no person? And whereas thou say, God having a Person,
cannot fill Heaven and earth with his glory, I say, without his Person he could
fill nothing at all: As for instance, what glory can there be in a King without
a person? whose person being enthroned in his Crown and Dignity, with all
things suitable to his Majesty, is that which fills his Court and Kingdom with
renowned glory; not that the Kings person is in every place, but only in his
Court, yet the hearts of his subjects over all his Dominions, is filled with
the report of his great power and glory: so that the sound thereof, as
Solomon's, does ring of the glory and greatness of his person; so it is not the
person of God, but his powerful nature, flowing in the hearts of his people,
that supports all things created by him; neither is his person in any other
place but his Kingdom of glory only.


Reason. If God admit of a form, then God is not infinite, but finite, and so
is not in every creature he has made: And if so, how will this stand with
those sayings, In him we live, move, Acts 17. 28.
and have our being: Now from hence I conceive, God is in every creature by his
Spirit, and has no form of his own, but lives in all forms that he has made.


Faith. Did I not know thee, I should admire at thy ignorance; but however, I
shall exactly answer thy Question, that God was in the form of man, before he
became flesh in the same image and likness as now he is, though then he was not
flesh and bone, as now he is; yet as he is now, so he was then a flame of
bright burning glory, that no Crystal or Sun can stand before him; yea, his
body is softer then down, and swifter then thought; and with that body so
glorious, can ascend or descend in his Kingdom of glory; that he can be
infinite as he pleases, and yet when he will, can consine his Godhead
glorious, Majestical Person, to as narrovv a compass as any man; which if, as
thou says, God had no body, but a Spirit, and that Spirit in every creature,
then God were finite and limited indeed, that the Creator of Heaven and earth
should be imprisoned in thy mortal, corrupt, sinful body; nay, not only so,
but God was in Horses, Hoggs, Dogs, Toads, Snakes, Spiders, and all other
creatures, which if it were as thou says, God were the vvorst of all
creatures that he made: Nay, if it were so, then frommy Seed-Spring I This is
no Scripture of faith. Acts 17. 28. But a Poets judgment in reason. 2 Cor. 13.
5.
say, God is no Creator, but a deformrd, sick, weary, sinful creature like thy
self: And as for those sayings, In him we live, move, and have our being, is
thus to be understood, that a true believer, as Paul was that spoke it, does
by faith live, move, and have their being from the first word of faith that
created Adam, and not from any in-dvvelling of God in him; as it is written,
Christ in you the hope of glory; and, Know ye not, that Christ is in you,
except ye be Reprobates, is not thereby intended, that God or Christ, as he is
a person, is in you; but as Paul says, Christ dwells in our hearts by faith:
It is faith which is the nature of God of which I am partaker of, and by
which it evidenceth in my soul, where God is, and what God is, both in form
and nature.


Reason. Thou says, God has both form and nature; if so his form and nature
must be one, and if one, cannot be divided; so he that has one, must have
both, therefore it will follovv, where the nature of God is, there God must
be himself; for I conceive they cannot be separated, in that it is written,
That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, John 17. 21.
Genesis 28. 16.
that they also may be one in us, etc. and again it is written, Jacob said,
Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not; so that I conclude, God is
in all creatutes.


Faith. Though the nature be in the form, yet it is not the form; and therefore
it is written, That by these you might be pertakers 2 Pet. 1. 4.
of the Divine Nature; though not the form: As instance, the Sun shines upon
the just and unjust, yet the body is in the firmament; we feel the virtue or
nature of the body of the Sun, by its heat and light, yet we have not the Sun;
so in my Soul I have the nature of God, but not the form or body of God; and
therefore it is written, I am John. 15.
the vine, and ye are the branches, that is, I am the vine and body of faith,
and ye have the branch or nature of faith; so by my nature ye abide steadfast in
me, and I in you: As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self except it abide in
the Vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me, by that nature flowing from me;
and therefore it is written, Christ dwells verse 4.
in my heart by faith, by which Christ is in me the hope of glory: and if I
know not that Christ is thus in me, I were a repr^bate; not in me by his body,
but by his faith God or Christ is in me.


Reason. What then is God in his person in heaven above the stars, and his
nature in thee here below? then to me it is clear God and his nature is parted,
and so God loses part of himself, which to me is contrary to reason, so not
to be believed.


Faith. However it is so to thee, yet I know that God is in his glory and
nature here below in mortals, (so really parted) and yet no damage to God at
all, no more then a Fountain to cast out a Flood-gate of streams, and yet
retain its fullness in its self; so the eternal Godhead, fountain of all endless
glory can stream, yea, has streamed into all the seed of his own body, such a
Wellspring of eternal Assurance, that all that are partakers thereof, have
perfect peace and belief in God the fountain of endless Glory, and yet God all
fullness in himself, as David says, With thee is the Fountain of Life: and Col.
2. 9.
Christ said to the woman of Samaria, Whosoever drinks of the water that I
shall give him, shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall
be a Well of water springing up to everlasting life; For in him dwells all
the fullness of John 4.
the Godhead bodily, yea Christ is all in all. So that I affirm it is no more
loss to God to distribute his eternal Light into his creature, then for the Sun
to give light to the face of the earth, and yet retain its essential light in
its own body; for as Jacob in his Vision saw a Ladder upon the earth, and the
top of it reached to heaven, and behold the Angels of God ascending and
descending, and behold the Lord* stood above it, and said, I am the Lord, it is
no more but what Stephen and Paul saw by reve(...)on of their Faith; as several
times I have seen in my own Soul, as the Tide does ebb and flow into the
Ocean, so does the Revelation of Faith ascend and descend, beholding the
glorious throne of Eternity with unspeakable raptures, not utterable by pen or
tongue.


Reason. I cannot understand how God being a person, and yet a Fountain of
endless Glory, should fill heaven and earth, in that a person is finite in one
place, and heaven and earth is large, so that if Gods glory be in every place
then there his person must be also.


Faith. Do thou not see in nature that one fountain does supply many
families, how much more then can the Etetnal Fountain supply many Souls with
that heavenly divine water, and yet from his single person in heaven glorified;
and as that fountain from Ware is directed to supply the necessity of London,
and yet the head* spring keeps its place, so does the fountain of Eternal glory
retain it self in its being, and yet fills heaven and earth with its streams of
glory.


Reason. Thou say, God is only in heaven, and yet it is written, the heaven
of heavens cannot contain God, he is of such a large infinite vastness, and
spiritual bulk or bigness, that not only heaven, but earth also must be his
habitation, and therefore it is written that with a humble and contrite spirit
God will dwell: And again it is written, Heaven is his throne, and the earth
his footstool: And the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. So that I
believe God is not only in heaven, but earth also; so that from these and many
other places, I judge thou limitest the unlimited God, and so make him that
is infinite in heaven and earth* to be finite only in heaven, and that in one
single person of his own.


Faith. Thou take upon thee to prove thy reason by Scripture, when Scripture
were never written* for thee, neither does it belong to thee, as in its place
thou shall hear, and therefore have patience and I shall interpret the meaning
of those Scriptures. First thou say, the heaven of heavens cannot contain 1
Kings 8. 27.
God, and yet it is written, whom the heavens must receive till the restitution
of all things. Now when Faith comcompares Acts 3. 2^.
these two together, it knows the truth of one from the other; for when I
consider Solomon endued with thy wisdom and that he spoke those words not
experimentally but dubiously, as mind the 27 verse, and then peruse that
chapter, and thou shall find it in three several places recorded thus: And
hear thou in heaven thy dewlling place: how should heaven be Gods
dewlling place, if the heaven of heavens cannot contain him? So that in truth
those words of the Apostles who were endued with the spirit of revelation, is
to be believed when Solomon's cannot, in that he spoke not by revelation, but
from the intricate promise of God to his father David. And in the same chapter
he acknowledges Gods dewlling place to be in heaven, and not in the temple:
and where it is written, with an humble and contrite heart God will dwell, is
not there intended God will dwell in my heart by his person, but by faith, as
it is written, that Christ Ephesians. 3 1^.
may dwell in your hearts by faith etc. as mind the words of the Prophet, Thus
says the high and lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is Holy, I
dwell in the high and holy place, by my person there I dwell, and by my faith
in an humble heart; and where it is written, Heaven is my throne, and Psalm. 24.
1.
the earth is my footstool, do still confirm that God has a body, otherwise
what should he do with a throne or a footstool? But now to convince thee, that
it is not to be understood this earth, but that glorious earth above the stars,
where God, when he pleases, does stand as firm and in as narrow a compass, as
I do upon this earth: And that the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof,
is not by me denied, but that it is the Lords by creation, and not by his
personal habitation; For God by his person is not in this world, but by his Law
or powerful word of creation, therefore says David, Whom have I in heaven but
thee? So that it is no limitation, but his infiniteness to be in heaven, and
not in this earth at all.


Reason. Notwithstanding all this, I cannot understand how God should be in the
person or form of a man, but there must be some other above him that must
create God in that form.


Faith. Though thou can not understand, yet to me it is revealed, that God
without beginning had a form, and none but Divine Nature did create himself
Creator, and yet he knew not how he came to have his being.


Reason. O admiration! what shall I say of thee? that God should not know how
he came to be God: by this thou make God finite, yea ignorant of things past,
and to come.


Faith. Say what thou please, yet this I will tell thee, that it is the
nature of in^^niteness not to know it self, for that which knows things past,
present, and to come, is not infinite, but finite, in that there is an end of
any further knowledge; but the infiniteness is to know no beginning, nor no
ending: for if he had known how he came in being, then he would know his
ending, and so in process of time cease to be God Eternal.


Reason. I have read in Revelation 1. that it is written, I am Alpha Rev. 1. 8.
and Omega, the beginning and the ending, which is, which was, and which is to
come the Almighty, so that from hence I understand that God had a beginning,
and knew how he came to have his being.


Faith. Thou have read, but do not understand what thou read, as observe
it is not there intended, I am the beginning and ending of my self, but this is
the meaning: I am the beginning and end of the Creation, so that without me the
world with all creatures therein, had no beginning, nor no ending without me;
as unto this I am Alpha and Omega, and neither the beginning or ending of this
world is hid from me, for by my knowledge it came in being, and so must have
its ending; but as unto infiniteness or eternity, It is without beginning or
ending of days; and the not knowing either its beginning or ending, is that
which makes it eternal, and yet there is nothing done but what flows in the
glorious body of God.


Reason. Notwithstanding this, I am not satisfied that God admits of a Form,
but a Spirit only, for it is written, God is a Spirit, and they that worship
him, must worship him in Spirit and John 4.
Truth; and then it is written, Feel me, a spirit has not flesh and bone as ye
see me have; So that it is clear God is a Spirit without flesh and bone, so an
infinite Spirit only.


Faith. As God is a Spirit, so man is a Spirit also, and yet the Nature, Soul,
or Spirit of either God, Angel or Man, cannot be worshipped without a body, for
there is no Spirit whether immortal or mortal, celestial or terrestial, but it
has its own body, and that suitable to its own nature: as if its Spirit be an
immortal glorious Spirit, so is his body immortal glorious also, and if its
Spirit be mortal earthly, so is its body mortal earthly also; and this I say,
all bodies whether of God, Man or Beast, are invisible, and sees that which is
without, yet it self cannot be seen by any outward sight; For who sees the
Spirit of a man, save he that has it? So that I say, if God were a Spirit
without body, he could not be seen; so not worshipped, no more then a Kings
Spirit without a body could be honou^ed; and therefore God being a spiritual
body, must be worshipped in Spirit: And where thou say, Feel me, for a
Spirit has no flesh and bone, as ye see me have; I say, from those words of
the Lord Jesus, it does not in the least conclude that a Spirit is not clothed
with flesh and bone; for I affirm the Apostles, as well as others, were dark in
many things till Christ was glorified, they supposing that Spirits might be
seen without bodies, and that by the eye of nature; therefore Christ walking
upon the Sea, and appearing among them, the Doors and Windows being shut, was
the main cause of their sudden fear, supposing they had seen a Spirit; so that
for the future and clearer satisfaction, Christ tells them a Spirit has not
flesh and bone as ye see me have, though I be all Spirit, yet feel me, and
behold my wounds and the print of my nails; so that understand a Spirit without
flesh and bone cannot be seen or felt, unless a spiritual body; so that against
Angels and all thy Seed I affirm, that God, that Christ which said to the woman
of Samaria. God was a Spirit, I say that self same Spirit was not in Heaven,
but in Christ's body alone.


CHAP. 2. Showing whether the Father became not a Son, which which Son was
Christ, and by death became a Father to all Eternity, now in Heaven glorified.
Reason. THou have told me all along that God has a body in the form of a man;
and now thou say, that the Spirit of God was in Christ's body, and not in the
body of God the Father, Where then was the body of God when his Spirit was in
Christ?


Faith. I shall affirm that as the Spirit of God was in Christ, so the body of
Christ was the body of God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, not two but one, yea,
the very self-same body.


Reason. Oh Friends! this is a strange saying indeed, that the body of God the
Father should be the person of Christ, If so, how or which way came he down
from Heaven to Earth? it is so mysterious that it is beyond my reach or
understanding.


Faith. What is strange to thee is familiar with me, for thou reads and
understands not, though it is frequently written in Scripture, That Eternity
was to become time; yea, immortality was to become mortal, which is no less,
that the Father was to become a Son, as it is written, The seed of the Woman
shall Genesis 3.
bruise the head of the Serpent; and to Esaiah it was revealed these sa^ings,
For unto us a Child is born, and unto us a Esaias. 9. 6.
Son is given, and his Name shall be called wonderful Counselor, the Mighty
God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; and again it is written, In
the beginning was the Joh. 1. 1, 2
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, which Word was made
flesh* and dwelt amongst men; So that I affirm the coming down of the immortal
personal God was clouded in those sayings, The holy Ghost stall come Luke 1. 35.
upon thee, and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also
the holy thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God.


Reason. I do not deny the truth of those sayings, but do believe that Christ
was the Son of God, conceived by the holy Ghost, but how or which way God was
this Son, I cannot tell, neither do I believe that God did any more unto her
then he did unto Ad^m, when he made him a living Soul, the Scripture says, He
breathed unto him, and he became a living Soul; So in the same manner I
conceive God breathed into Mary, and by that breath she conceived the Seed of
God in her womb, and so she not knowing of man, called him the Son of God, and
not God, for God was in Heaven when he was upon Earth.


Faith. From my Seed-spring I say, that the Child that was conceived in the
womb of Mary so called a Son, Was the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, and
Prince of Peace; yea, that Babe in her womb, was the very God; For the Word
was God and became flesh, and who was the Rower of the Highest that
overshadowed Mary, but God Creator of Heaven and Earth: take notice that the
knowledge of these sayings was not to be revealed to thy Seed, for says the
Prophet, Unto us, yea unto us Pr^phets and the Messengers of the Lord, a Son is
given, and a Child is born; and therefore thou can not tell, how God the
Creator should become a Son and Savior, but imagines God as he was a Spirit
breathed into her womb as he breathed into Adam, and so by that breath she
conceived a man-child; as touching this, I tell thee, there is great difference
of a living and a dying Seed, for by that breath Adam became life, and by her
overshadovving she was not made alive, but had a conception in her living
womb; now there can be no conception without a Seed, and that Seed must
first dye before i^ quicken to life again, as it is written, Before the Wheat
grain dye it abides alone; So that against Angels above, and all their Seed
below, I affirm, as from the Scriptures before is proved, that God the Creator
in the form of a man, who is the only Power of the Highest, did descend from
his Throne and Kingdom as swift as thought, and his whole body pierced
through her secrets in a Trance, and in a moment dissolved into Seed, and there
died from an immortal Father, and quickened there to a mortal Son, of flesh,
blood and bone, so called Christ Jesus the Savior of the world.


Reason. Oh admiration! this is a report of astonishment, that for my part I
never never read, or by the hearing of the ear ever heard till now, that God in
the form of a man should as thou say, with that form descend from Heaven,
and for ought I know, of as large proportion and bigness as thy self, enter
the womb of Mary; and the greatest vvonder of all is, that God with a body as
big as thine should descend like lightning from Heaven, and pierce through her
secrets as thou say in a moment, and yet not be seen by any, nor she stand
amazed, yea trembling in fear at so sudden appearance and dissolution of this
swift motional substance into her body, for my part I cannot understand it,
neither will Scripture prove it, so cannot believe it.


Faith. Well may his dissolution into the womb cause admiration, when at his
birth, which was no strange thing, there should be such a multitude of
Heavenly Host rejoicing with such Heavenly Harmonies, that the Shepherd* were
amazed with fear, yea a vvonder it was to them that heard of it far and near,
which if there had not been a conception more than ordinary, the birth of that
conception had not caused such astonishment round about; but now God was
become a Child, yea Eternity become time, and for a season to dvvell among his
Creation; and therefore if thou knevv that the body of God v^^s of a bright,
glorious, Crystal, soft, thin, transparent substance, swifter than thought,
who at his Divine pleasure can transmute himself as high or as low, and into as
a straight a passage as can be thought on, then thou would cease reasoning,
and believe what I speak to thee, that the body of God consisting of such
Divine, Spiritual and Heavenly matter as aforesaid, could without the sight of
any descend from Heaven to Mary; And why or wherefore should she be amazed,
when she had tidings of what should be before? Neither was his dissolution any
prejudice at all to her, but raptures of joy springing up in her Soul to her
Eternal comfort.


Reason. What then was all the God that created Heaven and Earth in the womb of
Mary? and was that the very God that was born in a Manger, that was swadled,
suckled and dandled upon the knees, and carried up and down the Country in the
Arms of his Mother? was this God the Father, that created all things, that now
has life in them, that once could not go nor feed himself, but be led and fed
by its creature? As unto this, answer me plainly and really what is thy thought
on this great mysterious Mystery.


Faith. From the Spirit of Revelation I tell thee, that was the very God that
the Wise Men went to worship, and that Herod did seek to kill, was the very
Godhead, Spirit or Life of that Christ Jesus; so that Paul's Revelation told
him, The fullness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ's body, and God Col. 2. 9.
was in Christ reconciling the world, with many such places; and therefore the
words that Christ spoke was Spirit and Joh* 8. 24.
Life; and again says Christ, Exept ye believe that I am he, ye shall dye in
your sins; So that if the Eternal Godhead had not sprung up this Revelation, he
could not have uttered those sayings as his own.


Reason. However thou have quoted some certain places that confirm what thou
say, yet I cannot find but all along as I read, God and Christ is two, and
not one; so that there was a God in Heaven when Christ was upon earth; and me
thinks it is contrary to reason, that God which created all Creatures, should
walk, talk, eat and drink with them, and be affronted by them, and as it were
have his livelihood by them that he created.


Faith. Well Friend, think of it what thou please, yet this I Will assure thee,
that God and Christ is not two, but one; For what necessity was there for God
to have a Son? Surely, if it were as thou say, either God was in process of
time to dye, and so make his Son Heir, or else he wanted a Companion to keep
him Company; if not so, then the world was too great, and so got a Son to
assist him; yet however, I tell thee there never was but one God: And surely,
then he that died for us, must save us; and if Christ be our Savior, then he
must be our Creator; and yet what striving here is for two Gods, when in the
beginning of Moses and the Prophets we read but of One, as it is written,
Isaiah 4. 10, 11.
Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after, I, even I, am
the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior; and then confirms it, saying,
Neither is there Salvation in ^8s 4. 12.
any other, for there is none other Name under Heaven given among men whereby
we must saved; and yet what a flutter thy seed makes about God and Christ, so
two Gods, as though one God should Create, and the other God should Save; O for
shame leave off these things, and be silent in thy ignorance, for thy seed is
so various, that some of you will have God a Spirit, and Christ the Son a
Person, and others of you will have three persons and one God, and the rest
will have no Person at all, but an infinite formless Spirit; so that from my
Revelation I tell thee, and all thy seed with thee, as by the Prophet Isaiah is
proved, there never was no God formed before Christ, nor never shall be atfer
him; yet this I know, there is three titles, and but one person, which person
ever was, is, and shall be Christ Jesus alone; for Christ had the title of God
the Father in the Law, and the title of God the Son in the Gospel, and now God
the holy Ghost in this our last commission, to which is only revealed that
Christ Jesus is the only God.


Reason. Then tell me what was that which died in Christ when he was crucified,
and said, now it is finished, and gave up the Ghost?


Faith. That was, he gave up his Soul to death, which Soul was the Eternal
Spirit, or Godhead Father; and therefore it is written, He poured out his Soul
to death, and was offered Heb. 9 14.
through the Eternal Spirit; So died in mortality, and was buried in the grave,
which Soul, Spirit or Godhead in the twinkling of an eye, quickened to
immortality or spiritual form again.


Reason. If the Creator of Heaven and Earth was that which died in Christ; so
that the God of all life, being then become death, How came he, or by what
means could he be quickened or raised to glory again?


Faith. Yea, it was the Soul Spirit that died and was perfectly dead, that gave
life to all, and that life that died in a moment, did quicken it self by its
ever living Word of Faith spoken before his death, that raised him to life,
saying, Joh. 10. 18
I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it again; there
being no let or doubt in Faith, that could hinder it what it had purpose to do.


Reason. Was all the Power that created Heaven and Earth dead and buried at the
very same moment, and no power left without Christ, to quicken that which was
dead within the body of Christ Jesus?


Faith. No more than is in a grain of Wheat, and yet that dies, and in season
quickens again; so that there was no God, Spirit, Power or Father without the
body of Christ, to quicken that which was within the body of Christ, but lay
in its pure Seed only.


Reason. And did that pure Seed without the help of any other powerful life
without, quicken it self again?


Faith. Yea, without the assistance of any without at all for let me tell
thee, there was no such powerful life without the body of Christ, as was
dead within the body of Christ; therefore impossible that which received life
from Christ, should quicken the life of Christ, that created it; no, I say, the
power of dying and living again lay in its own nature only; so that there
was neither any infinite Spirit, God or Father, besides Christ that did
quicken the Seed of Christ, from death to life in the grave; but his ever
living Word of Faith spoken before his death, I say, that pure Heavenly Faith
is death in life, and life in death, and this was that which redeemed his
Soul from the power of the grave, as it is written, O death I will be thy
death, O grave I will be thy destruction; this Power was dead and raised it
self from Hos. 13. 14
mortality, with a spiritual body without the help of any other, to
immortality again.


Reason. Did he raise that same body that he was crucified in, and buried
with? If not, What became of that body, and with what body did he rise?


Faith. I say, Christ did rise with the very same body that he was Crucified
in, that same body was raised and no other.


Faith. How came it then from a moatal body to an immortal body, seeing it was
the same body which was capable to dye? How could that same body be made
capable to live again a life Eternal?


Faith. If the immortal body of God the Father had not died in the womb of
Mary, to a mortal Son of flesh, blood and bone, he had not been capable to live
in this world among his creatures, and upon the Cross have died again as a
mortal Son, he had not been capable to live in that immortal glory from whence
he came; so that Christ as he was God, twice passed through death, viz from
immortality to mortality, and from mortality to immortality again. Now to
Answer, how that body which was made capable to dye, was made capable to
live in glory, was thus, That which was mortal, viz. Water, Earth and Air being
dead, I say, that spark of Faith did kindle it self throughout the same form,
so raised the same body without any of the gross Elements aforesaid; so that
now it was a body without blood, only the same flesh and bone purified, yea
refined into a soft thin, bright, spiritual form, swifter then thought; so that
now having raised it self, to the same it was when it descended from Heaven to
the womb of Mary, now it was able to appear among his disciples, as it did in
the womb of a woman, their windows and doors being shut, yea able to ascend to
his kingdom of glory, from whence he came, and so sat on the right hand of his
Father, or the right hand of the Majesty on high, where now he will remain to
all eternity.


CHAP. 3. Showing Christ is the only God and Father, yea the Creator of heaven
and earth*: now it is to be revealed what God and Father that was, and where he
was, that Christ so often called upon when he was upon earth.
Reason. FRom thy last Answer thou have raised more objections, which I would
desire thou would be free to answer, and that is, if thou can reveal unto
me what God or Father that was, and where he was, that forbid Joseph in a
dream, not to turn away his Wife, saying, That which was conceived in her womb
was by the Holy Ghost; and when Christ was born, who it was that sent the angel
with the whole host of heaven, singing and praising of God. And when the wise
men went to worship Christ, that forewarned them to go into their own country
another way, and told Joseph that he should take the child with his mother,
and flee into Egypt, and when Herod was dead, commanded him to return back
again; And another time, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased;
these with many others I could relate, which I desire thou would answer,
seeing thou affirmest Christ was God the Father.


Faith. Though I tell thee, yet thou can not believe me, so that I may leave
thee excuseless, I am made free to speak unto thee, and let thee know where it
is written that Christ uttered a parable which was to this effect, viz. There
was a Mark 13. 34.
certain man took his journey into a far country, and set his house in order,
and gave authority to his servants, and bid the Porter watch; so that I affirm
this parable was concerning his hard and sad journey he was then undertaking:
now the servants he entrusted with his divine Authority was Moses and Elias,
they were his porters that were to watch over Christ Jesus the Creator of
heaven and earth; for it is written, before Christ became mortal flesh, that
there was Angels which Psalm. ^1. 11.
should have charge concerning him; which Angels were Moses and Elias, and
therefore it is written, God buried Moses, and took up Elias in a fiery
chariot, which none of the Prophets Exodus 20. 19 1 Kings 17. 2. 2 Kings cap. 1.
was so suddenly transmuted into glory as they were, and therefore it was for
some great design more then ordinary otherwise there had been no necessity of
raising them more then any other of the Prophets. And then again thou may
read, there was none so much represented the Royal Prerogative Power of a God
above, as they did here below, as at thy leisure read those Scriptures quoted
in the Margent.


Reason. Why could not God make use of some of the Angels then in glory, to be
as thou say, his Steward or Deputy-father, and to watch over his person the
time he was upon earth? they knowing him, and was always obedient to him, might
as well officiate the place of trust, and represented that authority as well as
Moses and El^as.


Faith. Why, or wherefore God was necessitated to take up Moses and Elias was,
as in these ensuing particulars will appear: First, because Elias was the Seed
of Gods own nature, and so are none of the Angels; therefore not safe for God
to trust a contrary Seed, they being but pure reason, when as the nature of
Moses and Elias was Faith; so that God knew it was impossible they should
falsify their trust committed to them. Secondly, if God had left the Angels to
take care over him, then had Christ in his infancy perished by the hands of
Herod, in that the Angels are not able to subsist one day without the
revelation of the person of Christ, therefore he being here below, they would
have brought all to confusion above; as also Christ had not been preserved his
appointed time; but the revelation of Moses and Elias being of the nature of
God, and a wellspring within their souls, was that which did not only support
themselves, but fed the Angels also, and so kept them with that glorious
Kingdom in due government, and perfect obedience, so that they had power as God
himself in all things (except creating) and therefore it was they forewarned
Joseph, and sent the Angel with a heavenly Host to the shepherds, and commanded
Joseph to flee, and said, This is my beloved Son, Luke 2. 9, 13.
in whom I am well pleased: I say they had power as God to do what you find
written.


Reason. With what bodies did they represent the Place, Throne, and Dignity of
God?


Faith. With the very same body of flesh and bone, without blood, yet this I
say in the transmutation of Elias, all the mortal gross elements were struck
out of his body, viz. water, earth, and air, and that spark of fiery life did
divert the former elements into a flame of immortal glorious purity, that the
body which formerly was of a heavy gross substance, was totally dissolved and
refined into a glorious, immortal, spiritual body, like God himself; so that
now they were no mortal creatures, but immortal glorious Saints, clearer then
Crystal, brighter then the Sun, and swifter then thought; this was the
glorious immortal creature that represented the Authority of the Eternal God.


Reason. Did Christ when he was upon earth know that he had Moses and Elias to
be his Steward, or Deputy-father? and if he did, whether Christ knew that
himself was God and Father, Creator of heaven and earth? and if so, why did he
so often, and so seriously call upon a Father in heaven, which if as thou
say, was but his creature, and so God became a Son to his servant?


Faith. I say after the immortal God and Father was become a mortal Son, [take
notice] as he lost his title, so he lost his knowledge, as touching he was
Creator of heaven and earth; for it was impossible for that which was become
time, to know it self as he did in eternity; or while it was mortal, to know
what it was in immortality; if he could have known it, he would not have denied
it, neither have been by the feed of reason suffered to breath in this world,
so that I say Christ knew no other but that Elias was his God and father, only
this as he grew in years, so his Godhead revelation grew to the greatest
height of knowledge, that ever was to be in mortality, so great that none was
able to dispute with John 7 46
him; and therefore it is written, Never man speak like this man, and his
revelation was so high that he knew none was so near related to the father as
Christ, therefore he said, Philip, have thou seen me, and not seen the father,
know John 14. 9, 10.
thou not that the father is in me, and I in him, and that I and the father am
one? etc. and yet from my seed-spring I say, Christ knew not that he was the
eternal father, for if he had as aforsaid, one time or another he would have
told it his disciples, saying, All things the father has made known to John
15. 15.
me, I have made known to you, therefore who do men say that I am? The answer
was, Some say thou art John the Baptist, Elias, Jeremias, or one of the
prophets; but whom do ye say that I am? Peter replies, Thou art Christ the Son
of the Matthew. 16. 17.
living God. Now Christ owns this and no more, saying, Peter, flesh and blood
has not revealed this to thee, and upon this rock I will build my Church, etc.
so after Christ was risen with a spiritual body, yet he knew not that he was
the father: as mind his words to Mary, Go tell my brethren and thy brethren,
John 20 17.
that I ascend to your father and my father, to your God and my God, so that
till he was glorified he knew no other but that he had a father, so that though
Christ was the very God, yet he bore the title of a Son, and though Elias was
but a glorified saint, yet for that time was he honored with the title of God
and Father.


Reason. If thou can tell me, and therein deal planly with me, what necessity
was there for God thus to lose himself both in honor and knowledge; and for
what, or wherefore was the cause that he laid down his life, or poured out his
soul or Godhead-spirit to death, and whether it be matter of salvation, to
search into these deep secrets and other things depending thereon?


Faith. If that eternal, divine, ever-living Body of Faith could in his royal
will and pleasure, been moved to any other way, there had been no necessity to
leave his glorious kingdom, by which he lost his glory and honor, both in title
and knowledge, but there was no other way, so of absolute necessity, and
therefore he declares it as his promise, that the seed of the woman should
bruise the head of the Serpent, that as he had permitted the angels seed to
deceive his own, so he would by the same way undeceive it again, to its former
state before its fall: and where it is written, John withstood him at his
baptism, Christ said, Suffer me this once to fulfill all righteousness, Mat 3.
15.
or fulfill all that the prophets have written of me; as also it is written by
Moses, and most of the prophets, of what befell him, how he should be born of a
woman, and where he should be born, and when led to death, he was as a lamb
dumb that opened not his mouth, and that he should be as one despised, forsaken
and lost, as unto title and knowledge, and suffer the shameful death of the
cross by thy seed, that so he might keep thy seed under eternal death, without
which he could not have raised his own seed to eternal life, and the seed of
the serpent to eternal misery; and I say till he had thus suffered, all power
in earth was not his own, as it was in heaven, neither had he been Judge of the
dead, but living only; so that from my seedspring I say it is the greatest
concernment of a Souls salvation, to know whether Jesus Christ, be the only
God of no, what he is both in form and nature, ^^y which the Devil is known in
his form and nature; without the knowledge of these things in one measure or
another, no soul in mortal flesh can be saved.


CHAP. 4. Showing whether the Angels were the first that God created, and of
what he created them, with their nature and form, and what was the cause of the
Angels fall above all the rest.
Reason. WHat was the first creature God made? And of what created he them? and
what was their nature and form?


Faith. I affirm that the Angels were the first sensible living Beings, formed
by the Creator, and that he created them of that dust, without or above this
visible heaven, yea I say by his word speaking, unto that spiritual dust
aforesaid, there came forth an innumerable Angelical Host in persons or forms
like men, and not bodiless spirits, as thy seed vainly affirm; and the nature
of their Angelical Spirits are pure reason only.


Reason. And was the fallen Angel created of the same matter as the other were?
and had that Angel the same form and nature as the rest of the Angels had; if
so, why did not he s^and with the rest, or the whole host of the Angels fall
with him?


Faith. I affirm that Serpent-Angel was created of the same matter, and had the
same form and nature, yet was more wise or God-like in his creation than all
the elect Angels of glory: I say, why he could not stand with the rest, was the
Creator fore-knowing that his Prerogative Royal would compel or move him to
create this Angelical Reprobate in reference to his divine justice; so that for
the manifestation of his most glorious power unto elect men and angels, his
wisdom saw it most fit to endue this angel with more piercing, rational wisdom,
and brightness of person, than all his Angelical companions, and that because
he was decreed to the greatest shame and pain; and not only so, but because
the elect Angels should admire their Creators wisdom and power, when they
should see the outcast condition of the highest created glory, and themselves
be filled with new declarations of honor, praise and glory unto the Divine
Majesty for his free electing love toward them, through which they were
ensured eternally to reign in their created purity. This, and no other was the
cause why this Angel should fall from the rest.


Reason. I have read, as it is thus written, That God spared not the 2 Pet. 2.
4.
Angels, but cast them down into hell, and delivered them into chains of
darkness, to be reserved unto judgment; so that I believe there was more then
one, in that the Scripture speaks in the plural; and not the singular, viz.
Angels, and not Angel.


Faith. I infallibly affirm, there was but only one Reprobate Angel created at
first; for know this, as there was but one man Adam cast out of his heavenly
Paradise of created purity in soul and body; as also all his seed or generation
were cast out of their spiritual peace with him; so likewise there was but one
angelical Serpent cast from his rational created purity, and that was the
Serpent-devil which deceived Eve: Now the Angels which were cast out with him,
were of his seed or generation through his union with the intrals of Eve, where
he had this world prepared for him and his generation.


Reason. And was there no other way to manifest the greatness of his glory, but
by creating a seed or generation against himself and his seed, that so he might
damn one, and save the other? or what prejudice had it been for his Divine
Majesty, to have formed all in nature like himself, as well as in form, so that
all might have enjoyed eternal happiness?


Faith. I say, there was no other way to manifest his divine excellencies unto
angel or man, but what he has done; if there had, I am confident he would
never have created any thing on purpose for eternal sufferings, and that the
more thou may think the wise Creator would never have suffered any creature
to become rebellious against himself, for the occasioning of such strange
transactions in this world, and suffering both of himself, angel, and man; I
say, if he could have possessed his infinite glory in creating of every thing
unto eternal pleasure.


Reason. Why, who was besides himself, that should let or hinder what he had a
mind to do, but he might form all of the nature of himself, as aforesaid?


Faith. It is true, though there was none besides himself, yet I say, that the
Creators Royal Will and Pleasure was that glorious wheel that moved him to
create or form any creature at all, and sure I am it was unpossible for God to
create the spirits of angels and men to be both of the nature of his own
spirit, or either of them to be of his divine nature, then would the variety of
his wisdom, power and glory, been all lost for want of distinction: Moreover,
if angels and men had been both of Gods divine nature in their creation, then
in stead of their being capable to be transmuted into a higher or lower
condition, at the divine pleasure of the Creator, would they not rather have
been unchangable Creators, then changable creatures, therefore that God might
impede all that might prevent his divine purpose, he created the bodies of the
angels spiritual, and their spirits rational, and he made the body of the man
Adam natural, and his soul spiritual, and the cause was this, that if their
spirits and bodies had both been of the divine nature, then it had been
unpossible for them to change or commit any evil, no more then the Creator
himself, where then had been all the wonderful transactions of his glorious
Majesty, or what had been formed in stead of creatures, but Creators only?


Reason. How, or which way came the angels forth living creatures, if that life
that brought forth their forms had not been in God, so came forth from God,
infused into them, as it was into Adam?


Faith. Though the angels came forth living bodies in the forms of men, yet
that life was not in God, nor of the nature of God, but only a created light
of sensible life of divine joys, proceeding from the eternal spirit, by virtue
of a word speaking through his heavenly mouth unto those elements aforesaid;
for I say, that the uncreated essence or Godheadspirit of an infinite Majesty
was utterly incapable to be conveyed unto finite created being, for
infiniteness is only capable of its own glorious center, and after the angels
were formed into living bodies, the divine Majesty and those created beings,
were become distinct in their essences for everlasting; also the angels by
apparent sight of their Creators face, might know themselves to be but
creatures, yea subject to the divine pleasure of God that made them.


Reason. I all along judged Gods nature to be pure reason, and the angels
nature the same, and if not of the nature of God, how, or by what means came
they obedient to the commands of God?


Faith. Whatever thou have judged of Gods nature, thou art altogether mistaken,
for the nature of God is all-divine, heavenly Faith, and therefore the nature
of the angels was, and are of a contrary seed, subject to mutability; for the
angels spirits are pure reason only. And what is the purest reason, is it any
thing else but all pure desires? and what is the original of the most purest
and perfects desire, is it not a want of something that is desired, or a kind
of unsatisfaction until its desire be satisfied, from something that is not
inherent in it self? and therefore from the Lord of everliving faith, I say, it
is thy ignorance that undervalues him, nay it is unpossible that there should
be the least motion of the purest desire in that nature, which is all fullness
of divine satisfaction in it self*, or how is it possible that spirit which
has desire in its nature, should enjoy fullness of content in its self;
therefore though God created that Angelical Reason of all pure desires, I say,
no spiritual man will call it the Divine Nature of God, because there can be no
kind of desire in that Nature of the immortal God, that is variety of all
glorious satisfaction in it self; but this I know from the eternal Light of
life, that the Creator by his infinite wisdom and power from a word speaking
unto that dust aforesaid, could create, yea did make diverse living creatures,
and yet not one motion of those created beings was inherent in his Heavenly
Spirit; so that I say, the Spirits of the Elect Angels are not in the least of
any part of the glorious Nature of his Spirit, but only a created rational
Spirit of all pure desires; so that I affirm the uncreated Godhead it self, is
unto the created being of Angels or men, either a Law of perfect Faith, and
pure burning love in them toward God unto life Eternal, or else a fiery Law of
unbelieving burning envy in them, against Gods Elect men and Angels unto
Eternal death; and therefore from the Lord of all Light and Life I affirm all
the Angels were equally created under one Law, the which mortal Law was written
in their Angelical Natures, motioning in them that all obedience was properly
due unto their Creator, which had made them such mavelous creatures.


Reason. But then, how or which way came this about, that this Angels nature
was pure Reason, and that as thou say in a more greater measure than the
Elect Angels? Now if their standing or falling lay in none of them, How came it
then this Angel could not keep his standing, as well as the rest?


Faith. I know that though their spirits were created perfectly pure in their
kind and measure, yet if they were not continually supplied with inspiration
from that Divine glory which gave them their beings, instead of continuing in
their Angelical brightness, their spirits would become nothing else but a
bottomless pit of imaginary confused darkness of aspiring wisdom above the
Creator; for the Elect Angels spirits being pure Reason, the very nature of
them, is to desire after the knowledge of that incomprehensible glory which
gave them their beings; and I say, it is the variety of his Divine Excellencies
flowing to their desiring natures, is that heavenly food that is prepared for
their eternal preservation; therefore I say, the continuance of the reprobate
Angels being expired, the Creator only withheld the inspirations of Divine
glory from him, and immediately for want of that spiritual meat to satisfy
that desiring nature, his God like purity became nothing else but imaginary
impurities of secret aspiring desires above the Creator; so that his former
pure Reason, was become nothing but a loathsome sink of unclean reasoning,
concerning the true knowledge of the Creator, whether he were the Creator or
no; and instead of honoring the Creator for his unsearchable wisdom, of
forming out of a little dead dust such an innumerable Host of Elect Angels, for
his personal Society; I say, this Angel at the blind bar of his lying
imaginations, he secretly arrains the wisdom of the infinite God in creation,
and condemned it as weakness it self, in comparison of his imaginary wisdom:
this Angel being lifted up with the wisdom of his spirit and glory of his
person, he beheld the Wisdom and Persons of all the Elect Angels, as simple
uncomely creatures, in comparison of him and his wisdom, and then beholding
himself with the Creator, he imagines his personal wisdom more capable of a
Divine Throne, than he that sat thereon; also he began to imagine a new
creation of his own supposing, as if he had been the Creator he could have
formed more glorious creatures than the Angels without dust or any other
matter, or if he must have matter to form things wi^hall, he imagined by his
word speaking, or thinking, he could have created as many spirits without
bodies as he saw fit; or if he saw good, he could have transformed their
spiritual bodies into any other nature or form after he had created them, and
not to continue in one nature and form always, for he thought it want of
wisdom and power in the Creator, that the bodies of the Angels might not be
transmuted into any condition at the pleasure of him that formed them;
therefore in the midst of these and such like his irrational wisdom of
imaginary impossibilities so elevated his outcast spirit, that secretly he
utterly abhorred that the Creator or any other creatures should remain in
being, unless he only might bear rule over them all.

So that when the secret pride and envy of the Angelical reprobate was at
height of unthroning the Creator, or else a dissolution of all, then the
glorious Creator revealed his spiritual cruelties unto his holy Angels, and
answerable to that he would have done for a Creators glory in the visible sight
of his Angels, God condemned him to be cast out of his personal presence, and
Heavenly Throne or Kingdom for everlasting, and immediately like unto lightning
he was thrown down into this perishing world, where his desired Kingdom of
God-like Government was prepared for him and his lineal Angels, where they are
reserved in everlasting chains of darkness and unbelief, until the Judgment of
the great day.


Reason. What advantage did the downfall of this reprobate Angel produce, to the
rest of the Angels? and wherein did any glory redound unto God? and whether was
that Angel thrown? and what became of him after his fall?


Faith. As unto the Elect Angels there was great advantage, for thereby they
were all filled with variety of new Heavenly praises in their mouths, of
Honor, Power, Praise, Glory, Majesty, Wisdom, Mercy, Meekness, Justice,
Righteousness, or any other Divine Excellencies that could be named to their
glorious Creator, for his electing free love unto them eternally, to abide in
their created purity to behold his glorious face, and for his wonderful wisdom
in creating such Angelical perfection in them, from an everlasting rejection of
desperate burning envy in utter shame, and from this it was great glory did
attend the personal Majesty of God, and the place he was thrown unto was this
earth prepared for his kingdom, where here he was in his spiritual form, only
the nature of his spirit was changed, as aforesaid.


CHAP. 5. Showing whether this world was before the Angels or no, and whether
the world was made of something or nothing, and how it came into this form and
being, and whether it shall for ever thus remain.
Reason. SEeing thou have thus far revealed thy knowledge of these secrets, let
me hear thy thoughts whether this world was in being before the Angels, because
thou say the Angel was thrown into this world.


Faith. Thou have raised that, which neither thou nor any of thy Seed can
answer, in that this and other that shall be revealed is only to the Seed of
Faith; therefore for thy conviction, and the satisfaction of the Seed of the
Woman, I against Angel and man declare, and infallibly affirm, that the
substances of earth and water in this world, and that glorious World above,
were from all Eternity in the Creators presence, uncreated, senseless, dark,
dead matter, like unto water and dust* that had no kind of life, light or
virtue in them in the least; so that I say, this world upon the account
aforesaid was before the Angels creation.


Reason. By the learning of this world we have understood, that those
substances of earth and water was not Eternal, only the Creator speaking the
word, so they came in being; also it is written, In the beginning God created
the Genesis 1.
Heaven and the Earth; so that I understand there was no earth nor water, till
it was created.


Faith. As I have said before, so I say again, this does not belong to thy seed
to know it; for it is written, Through Faith we understand the worlds were
framed by the Word of God; Heb. 11. 3.
So that by Faith I say, that earth and water was Eternal; and the word
frame or create, is to make formles^ dead water into sensible living forms,
for thou may read, That earth was without form and void, and darkness was
upon the face of the deep, etc. So that there was an earth and water, though
dead and dark, so without form. Now the word creating or framing, was to
give life and light to those substances of death and darkness; and therefore it
is written, The Spirit of God moved upon the waters, and said, Genesis 1. 2.
let there be light, and there was light; So that against Angel or man I
positively affirm, that the earth and the deep water were essentially one
Chaos of confused water, distinct from the Creator; and whereas it is said,
In the beginning God created Heaven and Earth; is thus to be understood, that
of the matter of water and earth, that was formless and void, God by a word
speaking did create a formable world, as a place of convenient residence for
such mortals as thou and I to inhabit in.


Reason. Though it be consented, that the earth and water in the beginning
was dead and dark; yet I cannot see but they were created, so not eternal;
for it is written, I create light, and I create darkness; so that it will
follovv, God Isaiah 45. 7.
created them without form and void.


Faith. In answer to this it is written, That God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all; yet it is written, Darkness was upon the deep; So that I
know from eternity, the Divine 1 John 1. 5.
Nature of the Creators Spirit was nothing but immortal fiery glory of Life
and Light; so without Controversy the dead earth and dark deep water never
proceeded all Life and Light out of his glorious mouth; and whereas thou
say, God created darkness, is not intented as thou supposest; but the
meaning is, that he created those Souls that were naturally dark, into a
mavelous light, as these Scriptures will plainly manifest, The light shines
in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not; and again, I will open
their John 1. 5.
eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, with many such places, but not one Scripture that God created or gave any
being or beginning unto dead, dark, senseless earth and water, aforesaid.


Reason. I cannot yet understand, but that God created that confused Chaos of
water and earth; and so of nothing by his word speaking, this world was made.


Faith. Though thou be the Seed of Reason, yet in this thou art unreasonable to
think that ever those dark* dead Elements of earth and water, should have their
Original from his glorious Spirit; I say, their natures being so contrary, it
is impossible they should proceed the one from the other; For alas! What is
death or darkness, is it not through the absence of life and light? and is not
life, being overcome by death, absolutely become death or darkness, or utter
silence for a moment? and if light and darkness, life and death meet together,
is there any peace between them, until one has swallowed up the other? If this
be so, as it is so, then without Controversy earth and water were uncreated
substances, eternally distinct from the God of Life, Light and Glory; and that
the more it is written, And darkness covered the face of the deep; therefore I
say, it is but a dream and a lie, to say that God created all things of
nothing, or that God created that confused Chaos of water and earth; it is all
one as if thou should say, there was no Creator at all, but earth and water,
and such like dead stuff as they are.


Reason. It is written, God made a Firmament, and divided the waters that were
under the Firmament, from the waters which were above the Firmament; Now was
this Firmament Eternal, as the rest?


Faith. I say, the Firmament that is visible, was Eternal, though it was of
that dead, dark matter, as the other was: Now the word, making (is the same,
creating) which is no other then as aforesaid, to make that which was dead and
dark, to be lively light; and therefore God made Sun, Moon and Stars, and set
them in the Firmament, to give light upon this earth; so that the Sun is the
life of the earth, the Moon the life of the waters.


Reason. What then is the Nature of the Water and the Earth above this visible
Firmament, the same with this water and earth in this world?


Faith. No, in nature they are not the same, for that above the Firmament is
immortal spiritual, when as this is mortal natural; And therefore the Angels
and all the creatures therein, being created of that matter, are spiritual
immortal bodies, when as man and all creatures herein, are natural mortal
bodies; and therefore it is written, There are Heavenly Bodies and earthly
bodies, celestiaal and terrestial; the one above durable, this below perishing;
that above suitable for such a glorious personal Majesty as the Creator is.


CHAP. 6. Showing of what matter Adams body was created, and what was his
Nature, Soul or Spirit, and by what means Adam came to lose his state he was
created in.
Reason. THen tell me of which of the two substances was the body of Adam
created, of that above, or this below?


Faith. There is no Dispute to the contrary, but that Adam was created of this
earth below, in that he is numbered among this visible creation, as in Genesis
is related, And that Adam was to be Lord, and rule over them; and the Scripture
tells thee what substance he was created of in those words, The Lord God also
made the man of the dust of the earth after his own likeness, yea in the Image
of God created he him; so that I say, he made Adam of this dust below; and
therefore it is the body of man is natural, so of a heavy gross substance, viz.
flesh, blood and bone.


Reason. How or which way was man framed in the image of God, and so completely
made in the similitude of the Creator, seeing man's body is of such gross mortal
substance, and Gods body thou say is of a bright, fiery, glorious,
crystal, immortal substance, what likeness or image can man's be like unto
God, then tell me?


Faith. In the creating of man the Lord God only spoke the word only unto the
dust of the earth, and immediately the virtue thereof brought forth a living
man of pure flesh, blood and bone, like unto God himself as near as could be;
so that I say, it was not the visiblility of their persons that differed in the
least, but the glory of them only, for this by Faith I know, God was an
infinite spiritual body in all parts perfectly holy, and Adam was a finite
natural body of perfect innocence, resembling that Divine form of God that
created him.


Reason. What then was the nature or spirit of Adam Angelical? or was it Divine?


Faith. I say, though Adams body was made of the dust, and appointed for
generation, so natural; yet this from an unerring spirit I know, that his Soul
was not natural; but supernatural or Divine, and that because it was formed
according to the invisible glory of the Eternal Spirit.


Reason. What then was not Adams nature Reason, so a reasonable creature, if
not, then Ad^m was unreasonable, so not like unto God?


Faith. From the Lord of Glory I say, that if the nature of Adam had been
rational in his creation, then it could not have been Divine, but of Angelical
desiring nature, of unsatisfaction in its self; but that Divine Soul of Adam
which was created after the likeness of the Eternal God, did consist of several
Heavenly properties in its measure, answerable unto those Divine qualifications
in the glorious Creator above all measure; for the Soul of man is not without
its several properties, and yet they are all in a Heavenly Harmony, in that the
joy of Soul that Adam did possess arose in him from one Divine Heavenly voice,
called the Spirit of Faith, which was all satisfaction in himself with his
present condition, not having the least thought of further happiness, then what
he enjoyed already; thus as the Divine nature of the Eternal Spirit, was
variety of infinite satisfaction in it self: So likewise the Soul of Adam being
composed of the same qualifications, was variety of satisfaction in it self
also, according to its measure. Now if the nature of Adams Soul had been as
thou say rational in his creation, then through want of the Divine nature of
Faith, Adam would always have been desiring after something that he wanted,
like unto the Elect Angels; for this I know, the nature of Adams Soul could not
possible have any reason in it, and that because the very nature of reason is
not only as aforesaid, but it is too serious in its consideration, whether
things be good or right that are propounded to its understanding, when on the
contrary that nature or breath of Faith which singly was entirely given to Adam
without the least consideration, perfectly knowing the excellency of a thing as
soon as ever it is presented unto it; and therefore Adams nature must needs be
Divine as Gods is, and supernatural, though clothed with pure nature only.


Reason. If it be as thou say, that Gods nature is all Divine Heavenly
Faith, without pure reason at all, and Adam was only partaker of that nature,
which thou say is so immortal pure, that it is all Divine Heavenly
satisfaction in its self; How came it then that Adam having that nature of
Divine satisfaction in his own Soul, did fall from that happy and innocent
condition wherein he was created?


Faith. From the revelation of faith in my soul I declare, that in the nature
of God there is not the least motion of the purest reason at all, that being
only the angels nature, as aforesaid; neither is it possible there should be,
in that thou have heard in that chapter treating of the angels creation, that
reason in the purest sense is but a mere desire of the enjoyment of something
that is above it, so no real satisfaction in its self; therefore if the nature
of God were pure reason, as Papists, Episcopal, Presbyter, Independent,
Anabaptist, Ranter, Quaker, and all Atheistical opinions of thy seed affirm,
then I say the Creator that gave satisfaction to another, is not satisfied in
its self, and so in thy reason would follow, there is something above God that
must give satisfaction to God, which from an unerring spirit, is cursed
blasphemy; when it is written, In him all fullness dwells, and Col, 2. 9.
he it is that fills all in all; And again it is written, There is Isai^h 43.
10.
none like him above him, or before him, or that shall be after him, for a
spiritual body of all divine heavenly faith, and therefore it is written, the
wonderful transendent virtues of faith, in so much that there is not the least
let or doubt, but whatever it believes shall come to pass, and to faith there
is nothing unpossible, that its revelation moves it to do; when on the
contrary, reason is such antiphathy, that it is a body of mere imaginary
desires, and no reality, clothed with fear, let, and doubts of faiths eternal
power.

Now though the soul of Adam through the divine purity of its nature, was
immortal and incapable of any rebellion against the glorious spirit of its
Creator, yet because its body was natural, and had its beginning of this dust
below, his immortal soul having its being in a piece of clay, was become
subject through temptation, to be transmuted from its present condition of his
created innocence, for this faith knows though the soul of Adam was of a divine
nature, yet because it was a created nature distinct to it self, it was become
a Son or Servant, yea subject to its divine God; and that through deep
temptation he was subject to be transmuted into a sinful condition, through
which both soul and body, might not only be subject to natural death, but also
full of fear of eternal death, or casting out of the spiritual presence of a
divine Majesty to bring forth his heavenly disign of a more transcendent,
eternal glory that he had prepared through suffering, to be enjoyed by his
divine image at the last day, with himself face to face.


Reason. I conceive if Adam had such divine immortal heaven life, breathed into
him which thou calls his soul, that was of the same property and nature of the
divine God, he might by that life have withstood all temptation whatsoever,
though it was in a house of clay.


Faith. Again and again, against all thy seed I affirm, that the soul of Adam
was only of the divine nature in its creation, yet because it was one essence
with a body that was taken out of dust, it was both probable and capable, to be
thought into a condition of entering dust again, and that for these ensuing
particulars:

First to fulfill these Scriptures, saying, In the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall die the death: And in the sweat of thy Genesis 3. 19.
face thou shall eat thy bread till thou return to the earth; for out of it
thou wast taken; because thou art dust, and to dust thou shall return again.

Secondly, if the body of Adam had been immortal in his Adam knew not whether
he should stand or fall from his present state or no, neither did he know what
power he was endued withal in his created purity, neither did he know any
greater glory, but what then at present he enjoyed; so that if Adam had known
that he had power in his own will, to preserve himself in his present
condition, thou may be sure if he could have kept himself in that blessed
state, he would never have lost it, for making use of all the power that was in
him, to have resisted a temptation unto rebellion, in which he knew there was a
threatening of a loss of that created glory he enjoyed, as aforesaid.


CHAP. 7. Showing who it was that tempted Adam, and who it was that tempted*
Eve, whether it was the Angel aforesaid; and if so, why he is called a Serpent,
a Tree, etc. and how and which way they were deceived, and what effects it has
ever sinee produced.
Reason. HOwever, I cannot believe whatever thou have related as touching these
things; yet tell me who it was, and by what means Adam was deceived.


Faith. I say, though* the Soul of Adam was Divine, and free from all kind of
rationality, so could not possibly have any desire in him after any carnal
copulation with his Wife; for I know, that carnal pleasures were too low for a
spiritual Soul, whose nature was variety of Divine satisfaction in it self; and
therefore the woman Eve, through the permission of God, was first guilty of the
transgression of lust, and so tempted her innocent Husband to lie with her, if
possible to cover her folly: And now from the Lord I say, that the carnal I
desire in her toward her Husband, proceeded not from her Divine purity, but
from the rational nature of the unclean* Serpent within her.


Reason. Now I understand that thou make Faith and Reason two contraries, as
fire and water; so that from hence I understand, that Seed thou call Faith
has no desire, but that all desire does only (...) from Reason al he.


Faith. Whether thou understand or ^o, yet this I shall reveal to thee, that
God is now a body of flesh and bone glorified* with all Divine spiritual*
Heavenly Faith* and no Reason as aforesaid; for ^ so, ^ God himself wo^ld be
subject to transmutation as man; and so full of unsatisfaction, that all his
transactions would be i^perfect, and (...)


Reason. Seeing thou (...) God (...) i^ him, ^^ How comes it then that God
says, Come now lets reason together, says the Lord, etc? Now if there were no
Reason in God, Isaiah 1.
How could he have reasoned with the Rulers of Israel?


Faith. Oh! that thou could but see how thy ignorance blinds thee from the true
understanding of any Scripture, as to think that God in his person should
Reason with them, when thou reads, it was none but the Prophet Isaiah, who from
the Revelation of Faith in his own Soul, reasoned the cause with them as from
the Lord; for I tell thee, and all blind Quakers Reason with thee, that if God
were not of a nature contrary to the nature of Angels and men, there could have
been nothing created nor preserved in their form and order as now they are; and
this I know, that Faith can take up the words of Reason, though not inherent in
it, as Reason to take the words of Faith, though not experienced in it.


Reason. What then was that Reason which deceived Eve, or was it an Apple or a
Serpent, for the woman said, the Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat? Now if
thou can, tell me what it was that deceived Eve.


Faith. Though I tell thee thou can not believe, yet thou may read, That
the great Dragon, the old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which deceives
the world, he was cast out into the earth; therefore it is written, Woe unto the
Inhabiters of Rev. 12. 12, 13.
the earth, for the Devil is come down among you; So that from my Seed-spring.
I say, that Angelical Serpent, which I have discoursed with thee in the 4th
Chapter, was that which deceived Eve.


Reason. I cannot find in Scripture that was an Angel which deceived Eve,
though I confess the Scripture says, there was an Angel cast down, but for
what I know not, for it is written, Thou shall not eat of the tree of knowledge
of good and evil; and in another place it is said, a Serpent beguiled her, not
in the least relating it was an Angel; so that I believe it was one of the
beasts of the field, which the Lord God had made, and the Devil was an
invisible spirit, which entered into the body of the Serpent, and spoke those
subtle expressions through his mouth, and so caused the woman to eat of the
fruit of a natural Tree. which the Lord God had forbidden, and tempting her
Husband to eat of the fruit with her, it operated that venomous evil in them
and all mankind.


Faith. Oh! the gross darkness that lodges in the spirits of the learned and
unlearned of thy seed, not knovving the Scriptures are generally expressed in
natural terms, for the manifestation of spiritual things, and yet the learned
of thy seed would persuade men exactly to understand them in the Letter,
because thou measurest the glorious things of Eternity, by thy rational
learning, when thou may read that the seed of the Devil are sometimes called
by the name of Devils, Dragons, Vipers, Serpents, fruitless Trees, and such
like; so this Angelical reprobate, by whom Eve was deceived, was called, the
Dragon, an old Serpent, the Devil, Satan, the Deceiver, or the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil, and such like names suitable to his cursed nature;
so in truth I say, that Serpent that tempted Eve, was that Angelical
Dragon-Devil aforesaid, which God from the highest Heavens cast down to this
lowest earth; and it was his seeming Divine wisdom, and Angelical person, that
bewitched Eves innocent Soul to hearken to him, and her eyes to dote upon him;
for let but moderate Reason guide thee, and thou may see it must be a person
more wise and comely than Adam to deceive her; and therefore it is written,
When the Woman Gen 3 6.
saw the Tree, it was good for food, pleasant to the eyes, and a Tree to be
desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and she did eat, and
also gave to her Husband, and he did eat.


Reason. Well then, suppose it be granted it was the Angel that deceived her by
words, What is then supposed by eating, And she saw it was good food, and did
eat? So that the words of the Angel might entice her; But what was that she did
eat?


Faith. That is when the innocent Soul of Eve was over-poured by the Serpents
subtle Language, her spirit did consent unto him, to come in to her and take
full possession of her, to be her God and guide instead of her Creator: Now by
the word eating of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil; from the Lord of
ever-living Faith I say, that the Creator called it eating.

First, Because none of thy seed should know the Lords

Secondly, The Spirit of God called it eating, because of

Thirdly, That she might beware how she hearkened to any Cain or cursed, though
ignorantly she said, that she had received a man from the Lord; just so on the
contrary the womb of the Virgin wife Mary, was honored with the Angelical God
himself, through which her polluted nature was not only cleansed while he was
in her womb, but also by the virtue of the Divine power, she was inhabited to
conceive his glorious Majesty of her Seed into a holy Babe of unspotted flesh,
blood and bone, and in his season to bring forth her first begotten Son of God,
yea, the true God and everlasting Father himself, and called his Name,
according to his Nature, Emanuel, Jesus, or Blessed, as at large is disputed in
the second Chapter.


Reason. Thou say eating was admitting the Angels person into her body, if
the Angel was of as large a compass as I am, how was it possible, and where do
we read that God cursed the Angel? and how can it be proved that Angel was the
first Devil?


Faith. As Christ said unto Nicodemus, so say I unto thee, though the body of
the Angelical Serpent in its length or breadth was as a man is, yet I know, it
was not of so gross a substance as man's is, for it was a spiritual body created
in another World; for though the bodies of the mighty Angels are in forms like
men, yet I know they shine like unto the Sun or a flame of fire, being formed
in a Region of a more higher nature than this; therefore they are of motion as
as swift as thought, and of a pure, thin, or bright fiery nature; so that with
great ease they pierce through a narrow passage at the Divine pleasure of the
Creator.


Reason. Were it so as thou savest, What harm or defilement could this be to
her Soul or body, he being a person so glorious? I conceive it should rather
endue her with more knowledge than before.


Faith. Though the Angel was glorious in person, yet his nature was corrupt in
comparison of hers, even as that blood which is defiled with the Pox or
Gangreen: Now this man to enter the body of a woman whose blood is pure and
free from any corrupt distemper; Is it not a defilement to her body? Even so
his Serpent^ne Reason dissolved it self into her pure Seed of Faith, and became
essentially one with her, through which she was Soul and body de^^ed
throughout, by which she lost her Divine satisfaction and Heavenly Peace, that
formerly she enjoyed in her own Soul.


Reason. How will this stand agreeable to Scripture, when thou say, it
was an Angel that deceived Eve, and the Letter says, it was a Serpent? And
besides it is written, God cursed not the Angel, but the Serpent; What then
do thou say, the Angel was the Serpent? And if so, what glory was there in a
Serpent? And where was the Angel or Serpent, when cursed?


Faith. Though I have told thee of this before, yet now I tell thee again, he
was called a Serpent as unto the subtility of his nature or seed, and that
Serpentine Angelical form, that by enticing words did deceive her, was wholly
dissolved into seed in her womb, when the Eternal curse was passed upon him.


Reason. If the Angelical person was in the body of Eve, when he received his
curse, How then could he be capable of understanding a Sentence denounced
against him, being in the womb, and changed from his former condition, as thou
have revealed?


Faith. The curse denounced by the Creator upon the Serpent in the womb of Eve,
was not for his satisfaction in the least, but to convince Eve of her deceived
thoughts, of possessing such God-like happiness promised to her by the Angel;
also it was to convince her of doting of her first born, but instead of
rejoicing in him at his birth, her Soul would not only loath his company, but
would also cast him out of her presence, least he should murder her as he did
his Brother Abel, for her tender compassion toward him: Furthermore it was
spoken for her Divine satisfaction, when the light of Redemption should shine
in her deceived Soul, and show her that her firstborn son was not from the
Lord, but the Angelical Serpent, cursed in her womb by the Creator.


Reason. Why should the Serpent and his generation undergo an eternal curse,
and Eve and her generation suffer but an external curse, seeing she rebelled
against a greater light than the Angel?


Faith. I know she was utterly incapable of eternal curse, for these
considerations;

First, Because her Soul proceeded from a Heavenly Nature

Secondly, Because that consent in her to evil, proceeded


Reason. Seeing the Serpent before he tempted Eve, was called, A Tree of
knowledge of good and evil; surely, then that good was not cursed, but the evil
only; and on the contrary, Eve partaking in her womb of the evil seed, must be
evil also.


Faith. Though the Angel had been a Tree in his first estate, which knew
nothing but good, before Eve or Adam had any sensible beings, yet being fallen
from his created purity, he was become a Tree of sin or evil only; So that he
was a cursed outcast Tree from the glorious presence of life Eternal, before
his visible appearing unto Eve; so that he was far from repenting of rebellion
against God, yea, altogether incapable of reproof of sin, whereby he might be
restored from his wretched estate, that he did utterly abhor both God and man,
unless he might be Ruler over them; when on the contrary, Eve through
temptation was overcome by the Serpent; yet she had some relenting light of
life left in her after her rebellion, which occasioned a secret shame and
confusion of Soul in her; so that she was capable of being made a good Tree
again, yea, a Tree of more transcendent glory than she was before.


Reason. By this I understand, that the Seed of the Woman and the seed of the
Angel were two contrary seeds, then tell me whether the Seed of the Woman was
before, or in his fall? and the Seed of the Woman blessed before, or after his
fall?


Faith. That there is two Seeds or Trees of Eternal life thou may read, A
good Tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor can a corrupt tree bring forth
good fruit; therefore, by their fruits they are known: So that the Serpent
angelical tree being reprobate to all manner of evil; therefore he and his seed
of men and women, were not only cursed in the womb of Eve, but also before
the world was; but on the contrary, innocent Eve being a good Tree in her
creation, through her proceeding from the Divine Nature of the Tree of Eternal
glory; so that it was impossible that she and Adam, or any of their Seed
should eternally peris^^, because they were Trees Elected to bring forth good
fruit unto everlasting life and glory long before the creating of this world.


Reason. Hovvever thou seems to prove that it was no natural Tree, so no
natural apple, then what do thou say to those sayings where he is called, A
Serpent, and cursed above all cattle Genesis 3.
and every beast of the field, upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall
thou eat all the days of thy life; So if it were not a natural Serpent that
tempted Eve, Why then does not Cain and all his seed, being as thou say of
the Serpentine nature, yet men and women? I say, why do not those men go upon
their belly, and lick up dust while they live in this world?


Faith. Hovvever, thou or all thy seed vainly dream of Apples pulled from
vvoodden trees, or of a natural Serpent, or an evil spirit in the body of an
ignorant horned beast, or any such like imaginary fancy concerning the
deceiving of Eve; yet I having the Spirit of Revelation, do know that the
Serpent which beguiled Eve, was that Angelical Reprobate, cast down from the
Kingdom of glory; also I know, that the Serpentine Angel deceived Eve, not
upon a natural account, but a spiritual account, in that she was ignorant of
lusting after a man, until she had obeyed the Serpents voice. Now when the
curse was denounced upon the Serpent and his seed, that Angelical Serpent was
not without, but within the womb of Eve, as aforesaid, and he was called a
Serpent, because of his exceeding subtility; Now if it had been a natural
Serpent without her, what prejudice* had the tenor of that curse been to Eve
or Adam? It was as good to him to eat of the fruit of the Tree as the choicest
things, that one being as natural to him as to the other; and also what damage
had it been to the woman, for to curse a natural serpent without her, or
suppose that curse had been denounced against an evil spirit distinct from the
soul and body of Eve, what harm would that have been to Adam and Eve, or their
generation? or who should regard a Curse upon any devil in the least, so that
he himself be not that evil spirit or devil so cursed? and who is it but that
serpentine nature the devil that goes upon their belly, and lick up the dust
of this world? is it not that unclean reason, and wicked imagination that was
in Cain, and now is in all his angels, who are the lords of this earth, or god
of this world, whose spirits wholly thirst after things that perish, and are
never in their proper center, but when they are licking, that is, feeding upon
gold and silver, riches and honor of this world, which is no more then the dust
of the earth? which the fair Ladies and rich men of the world lick up all the
days of their life?


Reason. Suppose it should be granted, that that serpent by whom Eve was
beguiled, was none of the trees of this creation, or an evil spirit in the body
of a natural serpent, as by me is believed, but it was an absolute serpent
devil, as before has been related by thee, and that it entered into Eve, and
in her womb was pronounced cursed by the Creator, and so naturally brought
forth himself a cursed Cain of her seed, what was this unto Eve, or why should
she suffer any kind of punishment for being overcome by an enemy that was too
mighty for her?


Reason. Though the soul of Eve was not only purely created in its kind like
unto other creatures, but it was also of the very same nature, of his most
glorious spirit that formed it, so that she could not be ignorant in the least,
that all obedience was most due unto her Creators command; also the Creator by
his royal will, for the manifestation of his glorious power, might give his
creature a spiritual law, yea life and light in its self, and yet reserve to
himself the prerogative power of it, so that the Creator might present unto the
view of his image, a serpent devil for the trial of his workmanship, and yet
might upon pain of death, forbid his creature for having to do with that tree,
or of harkening to it in the least, also I know the divine Creator might leave
his divine image unto his present strength, through which by a subtle enemy
she might be tempted and overcome to commit evil with the angel against its
Creators law, and yet its sin be upon its own head, and that because it
rebelled not only against its divine light, but principally because their was
no law to bind an infinite Majesty to protect Eve in her created purity; and
whether her enemy was too potent for her, that was hid from her eyes, by the
unsearchable wisdom of the Creator, so that seeing the wonderful wisdom and
ways of the Lord are past finding out, then thou would forbear reasoning
against the Creators prerogative power, and yield thy self to be damned at his
pleasure.


CHAP. 8. Showing whether Cain was not the first devil, and who are his seed or
children; and what devils those were that are so frequently spoken of in
Scripture.
Reason. WHat then do thou say that Cain was the first devil, and was there
no evil spirit before Cain; and if so, prove that Cain is called a devil.


Faith. From the divine spirit of the Lord of glory I affirm, as before is
proved, that the angels were the first sensible living forms that ever were
created, and that reprobate angel as I have said, dissolved into seed in the
womb of Eve, and there conceived into flesh, blood and bone, her firstborn
Cain, yea the first devil and father of the damned; so that against thee and
all thy seed, I say, there was no other devil before Cain, and that thou may
know Cain is called a devil, read these Scriptures, Not as Cain, which was of
that wicked one, and slew his brother: Again it is written, He that sows the
good seed, is the son of man, and the field is the world, and the good seed are
the children of the kingdom, and the tares are the children of the wicked one,
and the enemy that sows them is the devil: Again, Ye are of your father the
devil, John ^ 44
and the lusts of your father ye will do, he has been a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there was no truth in him, when
he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, for he is a liar and the father
thereof: Now then, what say thou, was not Cain the first murdering lying
man that ever was born of a woman?


Reason. I have read in Scripture that there are evil angels or devils living
in the Air, and a devil amongst them called Beelzebub the prince of devils, now
I judge the devil is of such an invisible spirit, that he is here, there, and
every where, and so can infuse evil thoughts into man, and man cannot see the
devils that tempts him.


Faith. If this be as thou say, what need any man trouble himself with the
least fear of eternal death, whatsoever wickedness is committed by him? For I
say, if any man be tempted to evil by any devil, but what is in his own nature
only, that devil or evil spirit is to be eternally damned, and the man to be
set free; and if sin issued not from man's unclean reason, or lyng imagination
within him, how is it possible that any man should be so tormented as thy seed
are with inward burnings, through a secret fear of eternal sufferings rising in
them from the guilt of former evils committed against the light of conscience:
Now if it were possible for thee to know, that the subtility of the prince of
the air that rules in the hearts of children of disobedience, was thy own
imaginary reason or evil spirit, that is, the prince of all airy disputes
concerning God, devil, angels, heaven, hell, eternal glory, or shame to come,
then thou would see the truth of what I speak.


Reason. What then do thou say there never was, is, nor shall be no other
devil but men and women; and if so, from whence comes that devilish nature in
man, and whether all have not the devilish nature in them, and if so, how shall
any man escape damnation?


Faith. As unto this thy Question, I answer as aforesaid, There never was no
devil till the angel became a man-child of flesh, blood, and bone, and that
evil nature ever since has generated in all the sons and daughters of Adam,
since his fall, both reason and faith lay hid in that seed that conceived in
the womb: So that I say, as Adam and Eve, the womb of all living had both
reason and faith in them, so of necessity it must follow that all that are
begotten or generated by them, must needs partake of both natures, so that I
affirm that all the righteous as the wicked have the devils nature in them, and
yet the seed of the woman shall escape damnation.


Reason. What then do thou say that the devils have faith in them, and yet
shall be damned, and the true believers have reason in them, and yet shall be
saved? Now there being both seeds in one as the other, how comes it that all
are not either damned or saved? certainly faith being as thou say, of the
nature of God, then that faith in the devils must return to God again.


Faith. I say Gain the father of all devils, had faith in him as all his
children have at this day, as it is written touching the four seeds speaking of
them that has the seed sown on a Luke 8 13
rock, when they hear, they receive the word with joy, and these having no
root, which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away: And it is
written, the devils believe and tremble, Jam. 2 19
so that if thou were not stone-blind thou might see that there is no other
devil but men and women, and that faith in them does cause many secret fears
of damnation, and yet that faith in them shall never return to God, nor they
themselves saved; for this I know, that faith that is in the seed of the
serpent shall die with them, and rise with them, for the devils shall rise all
reason and no faith, or shall not be capable to ascend to glory, when on the
contrary, the blessed of the Lord all their Faith in their life time out-topped
reason, by which he came to the knowledge of God; so that at his death his
reason shall dye with him, insomuch, that at the Resurrection he shall rise all
Faith and no Reason, so shall be able to ascend to glory.


Reason. What then shall become of natural fools and children, that understand
neither Faith nor Reason, shall they all be damned, if they be of the Serpents
seed?


Faith. From an unerring Spirit I speak it, there is neither child nor fool
that dies incapable of the breach of the Law, that shall be damned; so that
herein the Justice and Mercy of God appears, that as he will damn whom he will,
so he will damn none unjustly; therefore I say, let them be children or fools,
though the seed of the Serpent, yet they shall be raised to the glory their
father had before his fall; viz. the estate of the Angels.


Reason. If there be no other Devil but Cain and his generation of men and
women, What Devils were then those from these Man. 4. 1.
Scriptures, where it is written, Then was Jesus led up of the spirit into the
Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, which Devil takes him up into the holy
City, etc. again it is Mark 5. 2.
written, Satan entered into Judas, etc. and it is written, Out of Mary
Magdelen Christ cast out seven Devils* with many hundred examples more; only
one more I shall quote, which is more remarkable then those before, and then
let me heat thy answer, and that is touching the man that lived in the land of
the Gadarenes, which man had Devils Luke 8. 27
a long time, and wore no clothes, neither abode in any house but in the
tombs, and no man could bind him, no not with chains, Mark 5. 4.
neither could any man tame him, and always night and day he was in the
m^untains, and in the tombs, crying and cutting himself with stones, and all
the Devils in him besought Christ that they might go into the Herd of Swine,
which they had no sooner entered but the man was well in his right mind, and
the whole Herd of Swine ran violently down a s^eep place into the Sea: Now if
thou can make it apparent, that these were no Devils besides Cain and his
Seed, then I shall with thee believe that there is no other Devil but man and
woman.


Faith. From Christ the only Lord of Glory in the Revelation of his Eternal
Spirit, I affirm, that those Devils so tituled from the first of Matthew to the
last of the Revelation, were only the Seed of Reason, and the violent
distempers of the imagination thereof; as first mind, that the Devil that
tempted Christ, was one of the ablest Disputants* whether a Pharisee or
Sadducee, I cannot by Faith find, yet by permissions I judge him rather a
Sadducee, they being the wisest and subtilest Devil of the two; I say, the
Pharisees and Sadducees commissionate this man, which by experience they found
were best versed in Scripture, to see if he could tempt the Lord Jesus, to
Baptize them with the holy Ghost, and fire; so that I say, this Devil was a
man, of the same seed of those where it is written, Ye shall not tempt the Lord
Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
your God, as ye tempted him in Massah; again it is written, When your Fathers
tempted me, proved me, and saw my Heb. 3. 9.
works 40 years; as at large thou may read in a Book of mine, entitled, Look
about you, for the Devil that you fear is in you; so that I say, these tempters
of the Lord were the people of Israel, men and women, and no other form or
Spirit whatsoever; and again it is written, That Jam. 1. 14.
man is tempted, when he ^s drawn away of his own lusts and enticed; so that I
affirm, there is no other Devil but thy lustful Soul within thee, that does
tempt thee to commit any wickedness acted by thee; so that I say, the meaning
of that Satan entered Judas, was only this, being by Christ Jesus discovered,
that he was the man that should betray him, then forthwith nature in him
entered into a resolution to betray the Lord of Life, being then sealed up to a
reprobate mind, went out to his Brethren the Pharasaical Devils, and sold him
for thirty pieces: so that I say, there was no other Devil entered him but what
was in him, no more then would enter thee, if thou were now damned by me, only
a spirit of tormenting envy would as it did in Judas, so flame and burn, that
if possible thou would destroy me, as Judas did Christ.


Reason. Notwithstanding what thou have said as touching a Devil, tempting or
entering, seems to have some color of truth in it, But then what will thou say
of those Devils that were cast out of Mary, and many others? but especially of
those legion that was cast out into the Herd of Swine? For it is expressed,
when the Devils were cast out of the man, they went into the Herd of Swine; so
that surely this was something more than Reason; otherwise, if Reason be the
Devil, and Reason cast out, then the man had not been clothed in his right
mind, but been altogether unreasonable.


Faith. Let me speak never so plainly, thou can not understand me; yet
however, this I shall tell thee, that those Devils which by the powerful Word
of Christ Jesus, were cast out of Mary Magdalen, or out of that man or any
other creature spoke of in holy writ, were only all manner of filthy diseases,
or violent fiery distempers that hurried that man about such desperate
wickedness oftentimes increasing so powerfully, that it did not only occasion
to rend his own body, and break Iron chains, but also ready to tear any one in
pieces, as many of thy seed at this day are possessed with Devils, by such as
thou are believed to be Devils; and therefore it is that learned of thy seed
have attempted by Conjuring Physical Medicaments, to chain up that distemper,
or cast out by Vomit or Purgation, and such like deceitful means, which if thou
were not stone blind, might see that these supposed Devils, yet real
distempers, were no other but such as thou calls Lunatic frenzy, Madness,
Convulsions, or falling sickness, and such like proceeding from melancholy, is
Colerick, corrupt humors of the blood, that by these Devilish distempers many
of thy seed are chained up Prisoners in Bedlum all the days of their life,
which if they could be cast out by Faith, being Lord over those Colerick and
Melancholy distempers of the mind, then they would by the Divine knowledge
of the true God, be clothed in their right minds.


Reason. If this were as thou say, only violent distempers in that man,
and so in M^ry, what then was that which came out of the man, and entered
into the H^rd of ^vvine; and if they were only that we call diseases, why
then are they called Devils?


Faith. From life of that Divine light in my Soul, I declare, they were no
other but violent di^^empers aforesaid, which said diseases by the powerful
Godhead in Christ, was commanded at the request of the man to enter the Herd
of the Swine, which when the Swine were p^ssessed with the same
distemper, they were as mad as the man, tearing and tumbling themselves into
the Sea, by reason of that violent distemper or affliction, that the swine
became giddy in their heads, not able to preserve themselves through the
violence of the said distraction.

Now why the said distempers are called Devils, are because none should know
the true Devil, but the Heirs of glory; for thou may read the whole
transaction of Christ were revealed in Parables, and the mystery of Truth only
revealed to the true Believers of the Lord of Glory; And if thou supposest they
were Devils, what then do thou apprehend them to be? and how got they into
the Herd of Swine, and not seen?


Reason. I conceive the Devils are invisible spirits that tormented the man,
and so could convey themselves into the Swine without the sight of any, even as
the Soul or Spirit of man at the hour of death do go forth of his body to
Heaven or Hell.


Faith. Oh! thou senseless sottish Reason, now thou discovers thy ignorance in
his, as has been in the rest, as though the Devil were an invisible spirit,
and so cannot be seen by the man, how the Devil got into him, nor how this
Devil or Devils went out of him, and got into the Herd of Swine, nor what
become of those Devils in the Sea, whether drowned in the Sea, or no; but
however, so as I have said before, so I say again, that there is no Devil
without a body, that can torment another, neither can that Devil if he were not
generated in man, either come in or go out of man, but he must be seen,
otherwise he is no Devil at all; as for instance, the distemper of man cannot
be cast out, but it may be seen and felt in the foul and stinking body, that
poisoned and distempered the mind of man; And how do thou know that the Soul
of man leaves or goes out of the body at the hour of death?


CHAP. 9. Showing what the Soul is, and what it is that dies, how that the
Soul which is the life of the body can dye, and nothing else but life that
dies.
Reason. WHY? I believe the Soul cannot dye, because I conceive it a thing
impossible, the Soul being an Eternal Spirit, cannot be capable of death; and
besides Solomon says, Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and
the Spirit shall return unto God who gave it; So that it is my believe the Soul
cannot dye.


Faith. Though this Principle be fully cleared in the Prophets Book, called
joyful news from Heaven; yet I shall reveal the truth of it upon another
account, that the Soul is mortal so capable to dye, otherwise it could not live
Eternal; for as nothing but life can dye, and that life being dead, shall be
made capable to live a life Eternal.


Reason. Before thou proceed any further, let me but hear how that nothing but
life can dye, which it is conceived by all knowing men, that life which thou
call the Soul is immortal, and cannot dye: Now that natural life that runs
in the blood may dye; and therefore it is confessed when a man is murdered or
hanged, his breath is stifled, and so the natural mortal dies; yet all this
while, as Solomon says, The Soul goes to God that gave it.


Faith. Having in our former writings made it appear that Solomon was the
highest pitch of Reason that ever was, so what he spoke was only knowledge in
nature, and not by the Revelation of Faith; therefore no Scripture: For Reason
imagines things that are not, and things that cannot be understood by any
sober man, much less by a man in Revelation, as to think that an immortal Soul
or Spirit, should be limited to a mortal body, which is as possible as light
and darkness to dwell together, as an immortal Soul to live in a mortal body;
therefore I say, that the Soul and body of man are one distinct living and
dying essence, for the Soul or Spirit in the womb by degrees congeals together
into a rational fire of blood and water, and so in due time become a complete
body of flesh, blood and bone; so that the life that is in man, is not Divine
but natural only.


Reason. This is strange, that the Soul or Spirit of a child should conceive in
the womb, that being a breath or gift of God, and not generated in or by the
seed; for I read* that God breathed into Adam, and he became a living Soul; so
his Soul was not immortal, but mortal, and so is all mankind.


Faith. However it is strange to thee, yet I know it is a real truth to me,
that the Word by which God first created life in man, that Word or Breath was
immortal, which by his fall became mortal, as at large is cleared in the
seventh Chapter; and this know, God never created but male and female, and gave
life but once, and since every life in its kind has generated bearing seed in
its self; so that from my Revelation I say, that the rational Soul or Spirit of
man lies secretly hid in his seed, like unto a spark of fire; which spark does
quicken it self into a living form, like unto his nature, and so having
clothed it self with flesh, his Soul or Spirit runs invisibly through the
whole body, and so is one entire substance, being both conceived into life in
the womb togegether, and both living together upon the earth their appointed
time, and being both polluted together with sin, is it not requisite that they
should dye together, and turn to the d^st and n^n-being again, until the
general bodily Resurrection of all mankind?


Reason. I know no other, but that every man has in him a good Spirit, and a
bad spirit, as it is written, The spirit lusts Gal. 5. 17.
after the flesh, and the flesh against the Spirit, and these are contrary; So
that by the learned it is believed, that there is a natural life, and an
Eternal life in one man, otherwise the body and Soul are both one, which in
Scripture I never read, that these were both one, b^t two; one fleshly, and the
other spiritual.


Faith. Did thou know the truth of what thou have said, then would thou
know as follows, that every man in his fallen spirit has remaining a little
light, or motion in him to justify all the righteous proceedings of the
Creator in his Conscience at the last day; yet mind what I say, he has but one
Soul or Spirit in him, for that which the Apostle calls spirit in this place,
was a Divine light of life received unto the dark understanding, by virtue of a
word speaking from the eternal Spirit of the Lord of glory (and not the essence
of the holy Spirit) for I know, that those who do expect a glory to come in the
invisible Heavens do confess that the spirit of the Divine Majesty is in^^nite,
unchangeable, immortal and eternal; therefore how think thou it possible,
for men or Angels to be capable of the indwelling of the (...)nce of his
Eternal Spirit? and that which the Apostle calls flesh, was man's own Spirit
which consists of nothing but confused lying imagination, or cursed carnal
reasoning against the Heavenly light aforesaid; Now that I may answer the last
clause of thy demand, that the Soul and body is one, it is written, All the
Souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came Genesis 46.
out of his loins, were threescore and six ^ouls; again it is written, Thy
Fathers went dow^ into Egypt with seventy persons: Deuteronomy. 10.
So that it is plain man is sometimes called Soul* and sometimes is called a
body or person, or Soul, Body and Spirit, and yet man is but one living
essence, or substance. However the learned of thy seed pretend they know much
of this, when indeed they know the least of all, as to separate a mortal soul
from a mortal body, or to unite an immortal Soul to a mortal body, which is as
possible to make light and darkness, God and Devil, one.


Reason. This is strange, that none but thou should know or d^scer^ the Soul
immortal, when almost the whole world believes the Soul was never generated,
but the breathings of the Spirit of God, which are immortal, and cannot dye.


Faith. From the Revelation of Faith I say, those conceited wise men, which
through the ambition of Tongues and Languages have studied beyond all sober
sense or reason, to make all the world senseless sots, as to think when the
Seed is conceived in the womb, that then God must come and give it a Soul, be
it a Bastard or Freeborn, the child can have no Soul till God give it; so that
thou make God not only a partner, but a perfecter of man's bas^ lust in that
filthy act: But however, thy thoughts are unsealed concerning God; yet this I
know, that all Souls since the fall of Adam, are but mortal, natural, and must
dye in the body, being generated to live together must dye together, in that
they are both guilty of sin, cannot ascend but rot in the grave together, as it
is written, The Soul of man shall be cut off from the Land of the Living, and
the Soul that sins shall dye, and that the pure Soul of Christ was poured forth
unto death, and the Lord has said that Adam and Eve were but dust, and to dust
they should return again; also it is written, That David is both dead and
buried, and his Sepulcher is with us this day, for David is not ascended into
the Heavens, Acts 2.
etc. Now what should ascend, if not David's Soul? For it is written, Not this
body, but such a body as pleases God to give it; So not the body, but the Soul
thou say must ascend; then know, this Soul was in the dust, and not
ascended; for David is not ascended, as much as if it had been said, David's
Soul is not ascended, nor no Soul without a body can ascend, and there can be
no ascension, till the Soul has past through death, it can never ascend to
Eternal life.


Reason. If the Soul at the hour of death, did not ascend to glory, or descend
to misery, how comes it then that John writes, I s^w under the Altar the Souls
of them that were slain for the Rev. 6. 10.
Word of God, and for the Testimony which they held, and they cried with a loud
voice, saying, How l^ng, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the earth? So that surely John saw many Souls
in Heaven cying unto the Lord to avenge their blood on their enemies, otherwise
he had not declared it.


Faith. Thy ignorance has been great, as now it is in this, as for thee to
imagine that John saw Souls in Heaven without bodies, and their spirits without
face, mouth and tongue, should cry, How long holy, and true? etc. When a Soul
without a face and tongue cannot be seen, nor speak; therefore I tell thee,
there is a greater Mystery in those words, then thou art aware of; for from my
Seed spring I say, it is no more then the blood of Abels which cried unto the
Lord from the ground; and so does all the blood of the Saints, From the blood
^f Righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias; and so to the end of our
Commission, Do cry O Lord holy and true, why do thou not avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth? This John saw by Revelation, as Steven and Paul
in another case did see the Heavens opened: And so John saw a wonder in Heaven,
a Woman clothed Rev. 12. ^.
with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and the 12 Stars upon her head; Now
when John saw this great wonder, he was not in Heaven, neither was this wonder
done in Heaven, but upon the earth; so it was the blood of the Righteous Souls
that were murdered in their bodies, that John saw, not in glory, but upon this
earth.

Now whereas thou art almost confident, that at the hour of death the Souls go
out of the body, if so, deal plainly with thy self, and tell me wh^^ ^t is
like; for surely, the Soul must have some form ^^ s^ape and so cannot get out
but it would be seen by some th^^ st^^ds by: for if a ^oul were of that form
and fashion as White in his Chamber at Whithall showed me the picture of a soul
^^ a Book, a dark soul, and a light soul, in ^^rm like a ^cope^il^; I say, if
the soul were as such wis^ Head-pieces reports, how comes it that it cannot be
seen to g^ out of the diseased? For my part, I have been at the death of some
and yet could not discern any thing come from them but groans and phlegm; so
that if thou with all the seed were no^ stone blind, thou would clearly see
the soul dies within the body for want of evaquation with the body.


Reason. If i^ be as thou say, that all souls are dead in the dust, and so
become dust, How, or which way shall these souls be found out, or raised at the
last day?


Faith. From the Lord of glory I speak it, there is not any of thy seed that
does in the least understand how to answer this Argument; therefore that Faith
may be known to be Lord over thee and thy seed, I declare, that Christ Jesus
being a quic^ning Spirit not only as in relation to himself, but all man kind,
as it is written, The first man Adam was made a living Soul, and the second man
Adam was made a quickening Spirit; I say, his Soul being perfectly dead and
buried in the grave, yet in death he quickened himself to life without the help
of any* as in the second Chapter is clear; so as it is written* Your l^fe is
hid in Christ with God* so that when Christ who is our life shall appear, then
shall we also appear Col. 3. 3. 4.
with him in glory; therefore as he was able to q^icken his own Soul so at the
general account he is far more able by the word of his mouth, to quicken the
Seed of Faith, that now are dust to eternal glory; also to quicken the seed of
Reason to eternal misery; yea, and that from the first soul called Adam, to the
last soul dying, he can and will in the twinkling of an eye, raise all the Seed
of Faith, that has layn so long in the dust, to meet him in the Air with
bodies suitable to their natures; yea, the very appearance of Christ, who is all
life, will quicken that which is dead in the grave to hear his voice, and
immediately to come forth and meet him in the Air; as it is written, The hour
is coming John 5. 28
in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice.


Reason. That I understand is the raising of another body, and not the soul,
for it is written, it is sown a natural body, and is raised a spiritual body;
so that I conceive it is not the soul, but that body raised another, that will
be the work of the Lord at the day of Judgment.


Faith. Oh! senseless sot, that I should thus spend my time with thee, when
thou neither believes Scripture, nor can rightly interpret any Scripture, when
thou may read in the 36th and 37th verses these words, Thou fool, that which
1 Cor. 15. 36.
thou sowest is not quickened, except it dye, and that which thou sowest not,
that body that shall be but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some
other grain: Now consider, is not the life of the wheat grain in the body of
the wheat corn when it is sowed? and does it not in its season dissolve its
body with its life into dust, and there dye, yea, perfectly dead, till such
time as refreshing showers, and the heat of the Sun beams, which is the life of
the earth, quicken that life which then lay dead, to a new life, by which
virtue it clothes it self, no^ with that old body, but a new body, and so
abides not alone, but brings forth a new increase of sixty, seventy or an
hundred fold? Now let me speak freely to thee, as it is with the grain of
wheat, so it is with the soul of man, for that is buried with the body in the
earth, were both soul and body is corrupted to dust, and there lies as the
wheat grain, perfectly dead, till such time that quickening Spirit, the Lord of
all life, do appear, and quicken that mortal soul which then was become dust,
to an immortal soul, which after shall become an immortal life, by which
quickening it is clothed with a spiritual immortal body, all glorious like God
himself; so now having a body suitable to its nature, a spiritual, powerful,
swift body, like unto its Soul, is now able to ascend to meet his Redeemer in
the Air, and so return with him into glory; so that from the Lord of all power,
I say, if the soul were immortal in a mortal body, and could not dye, but
ascend to glory, then I say, there would be no need of Resurrection, in that
this body shall not rise, though the Grave and the Sea at that day shall give
up their dead, is not intended their dead bodies, but their dead souls that
has been many years drowned, or buried, that shall arise whether out of water
or earth, their souls shall arise, every seed his own body; but this I say, if
the soul were in glory already without a body, as it cannot be, then it were in
vain to raise a body out of the earth, to meet a spiritual Soul in Heaven, in
that no body can be raised without its soul, nor a soul be any thing without
its body; so that if thou were not stone blind, thou would say with me, that
to believe thy soul should go to Heaven without its body, neither God nor
Angels could see it or take notice of it, nor the soul it self know what or
where it is, and so in conclusion never be capable of glory at all.


CHAP. 10. Showing what Heaven is, and how many there are, with the nature and
form thereof.
Reason. WHat Heaven is that, or where is it that these believing souls shall
go to at the last day of Resurrection?


Faith. First I shall tell thee from an unerring Spirit, how many Heavens there
are, and which of those three, this Heaven is, that all believing souls shall
inherit eternal glory in the personal enjoyment of their God, face to face.

I find but a threefold Heaven spoken of in Seripture, whatever thy seed vainly
imagine to the contrary.

The first that I shall infallibly speak of, is the visible Firmamental I.
Heaven, which is adorned with maty majestical lights above us, and a fixed
earth beneath us, beautiful, in its season with variety of delights, which is
natures only desired Heaven, through the secret Decree of the most wise God,
to manifest the variety of his most infinite wisdom unto Elect men and Angels,
in creating such natural glory to perish, with the Angelical merciless Rulers
thereof, after they have enjoyed their momentary glory, as it is written, Thou
Lord in the beginning have established the earth, and the Heavens are the works
of thy hands, they shall perish, but thou do remain, they shall wax old, as
does a garment; this is that visible Heaven with the glory thereof.


Reason. Which is then the next Heaven by Scripture proved, that so, if
possible, I may come to know that Heaven which is Eternal, and shall never
perish.


Faith. As I do not set forth these Heavens in order, so I say, thou can no^,
nor none of thy sed have any Faith in what I have or shall say; but however,
the next Heaven I shall treat upon, is that within the bodies of men, or the
first man Adam, as it is written, The Kingdom of Heaven is within you, and
Christ in you the hope of glory, and know you not that Christ is in you, except
y^u be Reprobates? Now this Heaven is that spiritual creation in natural
bodies, and within this perishing Globe, that through its union with changable
nature, it might enter into mortality, that so after a moments tasting of
silent death, as God himself did, it might quicken again through death it self
spiritual bodies, full of Divine glories, by which all the Elect, as swift as
thought, ascend to meet their Lord in the Air, and with his Divine person of
bright burning glory, enter into that prepared Throne of Eternal pleasures, by
which such a soul has perfect peace with assurance here, that it shall enjoy
what it in this world believed.


Reason. How is it possible any creature should give a description of the
Kingdom of glory? Which I perceive thou will say, is the third and highest
Heaven, seeing it is a place that can by mortals cannot be seen, therefore not
known; I conceive no mortal flesh is able to speak of it, according to its form
and nature.


Faith. From the Lord of glory I say, what is impossible to Reason, is possible
to Faith; for by the Revelation of this Faith I can see, and do know that the
third Heaven is invisible, yet visible ravishing glories which are Eternal;
this is that vast Kingdom, where the persons of the mighty Angels, and
glorified bodies of Moses and Elias do now inhabit, beholding the Face of that
most Excellent Majesty, whose Divine nature is Crowns of unutt^rable
excellencies; this is that habitation, third Heaven, Throne, or Kingdom, that
the Pen of man is not able to write, or his Tongue to speak. However, what by
Revelation I have seen, I shall here declare, that the form of it is
non-Globical, insomuch, that there is no end of the height of it, nor
circumference thereof; insomuch, that God, his Saints and Angels, may ascend
ten thousand times ten thousand, and yet no Globe to hinder, so excellent,
glorious, swift, personal Majesty as God is; and as for the nature of this
Heaven, it is so infinite, that there is all manner of creatures, for the
contemplation of God, his elected Saints and Angels.


Reason. What do thou believe that there is all manner of other creatures in
Heaven, besides Angels and Saints, as there is here below in the same forms and
shapes, as they are here in this world? If so, How are they supported, and by
what means do they live?


Faith. From my Seed-spring within me, I affirm, that in the third and highest
Heavens, the Kingdom of glory, there is a perfect earth, and that is the Lords
footstool, which earth is immortal glorious, upon which there is all manner of
Trees, Herbs, Plants, and all manner of four-footed beasts, all manner of
Fowls; also I say, there is crystal Sea, in which are all manner of Fishes,
nay, to be short, there is nothing here but what is there, though this is to be
understood, as these are mortal, those are immortal, fiery glorious of a bright
shining nature, suitable for such a Majesty to solace himself withal, as also
his Saints and Angels; also there is Thrones, varieties of Glory, with such
Heavenly glorious Trumpetting voices, from the Divine mouth of Saints and
Angels, that the Glory of Eternity does ring again with such a sweet Divine
Harmony, that the enjoyment thereof is unutterable, and the more they daily
increase with new joys of ravishing praises and delights after all their
tedious sufferings, and that without end; Oh! the Eternity, the Eternity, is
that which makes it incomparable delightful, otherwise the Kingdom of Glory
above would little transcend the glory here, were it not Eternal and full of
variety of Divine pleasures, but in that it is so, as I know and believe;
therefore I cannot but say, as touching the third and highest Heavens, Oh! the
Glory, the top of Glory, yea, ravishing glories without end.


Reason. How do thou know this, and where by Scripture can thou prove this,
that there is such variety of immortal creatures there, as there are mortal
creatures here?


Faith. Although this by Scripture could not be proved, yet by Faith it ought
to be believed; for it is written, Faith is the Heb. 11. 1, 2.
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, for
through Faith we understand the worlds were framed by the Word of God; so that
things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear: Now if thou
could understand the truth herein contained, then thou would with me
conclude, that all things that are here seen with thy natural eye, were brought
forth after the same platform of things above, which do not here appear; so
that from my Seed-spring, I affirm, there is not the variety of things here,
but there is the same above in the same likeness, there in glory, as here in
shame* so that there is all day and no night, and that because the fiery
glorious person of God being the light thereof, in which Kingdom the glorified
of the Lord may stand, walk, talk, sit, lie, fly, yea, recreate themselves in
whatsoever their Divine Souls moves them to, and that without the least motion
of either pain, sorrow or weariness, in whatever it is intended to do, and that
because there is no end of new springing delights; and that no^ fancies of the
eye, but substantial realities that may be felt and embraced; so that I esteem
the hardship of this present world, not once to be compared to that glory that,
shall be revealed in my soul, and that Eternal without end* so as it is
written, We look not at things which are seen here, by the eye of Reason; 2
Cor. 4. 17.
but at things which cannot be seen but by the eye of Faith, In that things
which are seen, are temporal; but the things which are not seen, are Eternal;
therefore, Our affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding weight of Eternal Glory.


CHAP. 11. Showing what Hell is, where it is, with the Form and Nature of its
torment.
Reason. What is that place called Hell, and where is it, that the unbelieving
souls shall go to at the day of Resurrection?


Faith. Having at large treated about this Particular in a Book of mine
entitled, Look about you, for the Devil that you fear is in you; as touching
the place of torment, as also what Hell is, and where it is; yet now I shall
give thee a discovery of it upon a clearer and higher account, that Hell is the
body of man, and the life, spirit or soul therein, is the Devil.


Reason. How can Hell be in man? When it is written, after both Dives and
Lazarus was dead and buried, the which man being in Hell, he lift up his eyes
in his torment, and sees Luke 16. 20.
Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom, and he cried and said, Father
Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that may dip the tip of his finger
in water, and cool my tongue for I am tormented in this flame; so that from
hence I judge no man is in Hell, till after death.


Faith. In the first place thou must know, this was a parabolical speech of the
Lord of Glory, in which the nature of two Seeds, viz. Faith and Reason are
discovered; that is to say, Faith representing the poor man Lazarus, and Reason
representing the person of the rich man Dives, not that the rich man was in any
Hell without him, no more then thou art at this time; yet this I know, it is a
true description of the state and condition of Reason, being tormented in a
burning flame, with the sting of their own Conscience, and that not only as in
relation to the various doubts and fears that attends themselves; but on the
contrary, the assurance that believers enjoyes in this his present being; for
this I know, that those who are true heirs of Abraham, according to Faith, are
in his bosom, that is, in the same peace and perfect assurance as Abraham was;
for this I know, that Abraham's Soul is rotted with his body in the grave, and
can neither see, hear, speak, move or go, no more the rich Devils of this world
can, till the day of Resurrection; from my Seed-spring, I declare, that the
Souls of Righteous or Wicked goes neither to Heaven nor Hell, but both lies
incapable of either joy or sorrow in silent dust, as at large is handled in the
ninth Chapter; And whereas thou say, there is none in hell, till after
death; I say, thou believes thou knows not what, for there is not only thou,
but many of thy Seed, are now in Hell tormented, that they cry unto the Seed of
Abraham, to know what shall become of them in this their flame, crying out,
they are damned, they are damned, wishing, Oh! that I had but one drop of that
ever-living water, to quench my flame, that runs as a Wellspring in the Souls
of the Seed of Faith, by which they are freed from this unspeakable torment,
that notwithstanding all thy riches and wisdom, thy seed or generation are
plu^ged in.


Reason. However, thou would persuade me that there is no hell without man,
what then do thou* say to that place, where it is written, Tophet is ordained
of old yea, for the king it is prepared, Isaiah 30. 33.
he has made it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire, and much wood, the
breath of the Lord, like a flame of brimstone does kindle it; So that I believe
there is a hill, either in the air or under the earth reserved for the souls of
all the wicked at their death, as it is written, The wicked shall be turned
into Psalm. 9. 17.
hell, and all the nations that forget God.


Faith. Whatever thou have in this conference thought of me, yet I have not in
the least gone about to persuade thee, or any of thy seed, to credit what I
have revealed, in that the benifit of this discourse will only redound to the
seed of faith, and as for this scripture that thou have quoted, here is neither
thou nor any of thy seed can tell, what to make of it, yet for thy conviction
and confirmation of the blessed of the Lord, I shall give thee the true
interpretation thereof, which is as follows, Tophet is ordained of old, yea,
for the king it is prepared: Now I know this king is reason which is the God of
this world, as indeed there has been since king Saul but few Kings that were
of the seed of Abraham, according to faith, but only reason, yet however, the
king here intended is the seed of reason, whether moderate or immoderate, it is
Esau the elder brother, as unto the Government of this world, it is the only
king, and the situation of it is deep and large, in that there is no end of
reasons imagination, it is so deep in cogitation, that it is compared to a
bottomless pit; and therefore the prophet cries, Hell has enlarged her self,
and Isaiah.
opened her mouth without measure, as all along it has appeared by thee, so
deep and so large, that faith can neither fathom thy God or thy devil, thy
heaven or thy hell, they are so infinite and boundless, that there is no true
account of any thing thou say for a true believer to build his salvation
upon: Now whereas it is said, the pile thereof is fire and much wood, that is,
the evil motions and wicked actions which thy deep and large seed of reason
has imagined things to be that are not, and things that are real in their
being cannot be comprehended by thee, Therefore the breath of the Lord like a
stream of brimstone does kindle it; which breath is no other but the Law held
forth by his Messengers, which will kindle thy motions and actions in a
never-dying fire; for as the pile and the wood is fuel, for the external fire,
so are the wicked actions of Reason fuel for the eternal fire of the Law, that
shall burn throughout thy Soul and body, with an unquenchable flame; so that
this soul of thine is that Hell surrounded with the wicked imagination of
Reason.


Reason. What then is there no place of torment to be prepared for the wicked,
as there is a place of glory prepared for the Godly? And if there be a place,
let me hear thy judgment, where it is to be, and the nature of it.


Faith. This in a few words I shall give thee a true description thereof, that
the place where all the seed of Reason shall possess their eternal tormenting
misery, shall be on this earth; for as it is in your Law, where a man commits
his fact, there he must receive his penalty; so where a man commits his sin,
there he must receive his torment; then know, that as on this earth thy Soul
has been polluted with sin, so on this earth it shall receive its torment,
which when the Lord comes to put an end to this thy kingdom, the Sun, Moon and
Stars shall be put forth as the snuff of a Candle; and then this light,
glorious world shall return to a confused darkness, yea, a darkness that may be
felt, and the waters for want of the Moon, will become a standing stinking
Pool, and the earth for want of the Sun, will be dust or dry sand, where there
the seed of Reason shall be raised spiritual bodies, suitable to their souls,
where therein shall flame, yea, burn, and that for ever, yea, for ever, for
ever, without end.


Reason. If these that thou have here related be truth, then I say, there can
no flesh scarcely be saved; and for my part, I am no wiser in what I have heard
then what I was before; neither do I know, what to make of them, nor hereafter
shall much trouble my mind with them; but do really believe, that there is
more blasphemous lies, then real truths in them; for all the moderate wise men
of the world, do judge God a Spirit, and the Devil not man, but a spirit; and
as for the Soul, is believed to be immortal, and so either to ascend to Heaven,
or descend to Hell; and I verily believe, there is not one of 20 thousand, that
will believe any thing contained in thy discourse, so that it causes
admiration in me, that all should be deceived; but those that believes in
these things, which if I be deceived, I must be, for I can neither believe in
thee, nor thy Doctrine.


Faith. What thou have now said, is not in the least strange to my Soul, that
thou should declare thy self, as ^ow t^ou have done; for I have told thee all
along, that thou nor thy seed was not to understand this Doctrine, no more then
the Jews were to understand Christ, as it is written, Why do ye not understand
my speech because ye cannot hear my Word, for John 8. 43, 44.
ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lust of your Father ye will do? etc.
Even so I say unto thee, thou being according to birth the seed of Reason, so
of the nature of the Devil, thou judge the truth a lie, and a lie the truth,
because it is not given, to thy seed to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
Glory; therefore I say, as John said We are 1 John 5. 19.
of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness; so I infallibly know, that
almost the whole world will perish, save those few that believed in the last
spiritual Commission, and because thou have called this a blasphemous lie, by
Christ Jesus Creator of Heaven and earth, whose Revelation of Faith, the Seed
of his own body, thou have judged false, and called a blasphemous lie; I say in
the virtue of our Commission, that was given by a audable voice of words, as it
was given to Moses and Paul in theirs, I infallibly pronounce thy soul and body
damned to all Eternity.


CHAP. 12. Showing what Authority a Commissioner has in the virtue of his
Commission; what the effects and operation thereof.
Reason. WHat art thou more then I, that thou do thus assume Authority to thy
self, that only belongs to God? however, thy curse I matter not, only I
tremble to behold thy presumption for I know it is the curse of God, and not of
man, that must bring a soul under condemnation.


Faith. Whatever thy thoughts are of me, I matter not; but this thou shall
^^nde, that I have power in the Revelation of my Commission, to curse not only
thee, but any of thy seed, that shall do as thou have done, to call it a lie:
And in the Revelation of my faith, I say, That the Sentence of Blessing and
Cursing belongs only to the Prophets and Messengers of that Commission: for I
testify unto thee, That God the giver of Commissions, never damned any but the
Angelical seed in the Womb of Eve, who is the Father of thee, and all the
damned, as all along it is recorded: That in the name of the Lord, the Prophets
and Apostles pronounced Plagues, Woes and Judgments against all the despisers
of their Commission, in that they were Ambassadors and Stewards in Christ's
stead; so we the Prophets and Messengers of God, represent the Authority of our
Commission, as the Prophets and Apostles did in theirs.


Reason. If thou please, let me hear what thou intends by a Commission, and why
this is a Commission more then any other Dispensation now in being; for I
conceive, were it not ambition in them, that Quakers and all others, may assume
the Authority to bless and curse, as now thou do.


Faith. Notwithstanding, I have sufficiently unfolded our Commission in the
Quakers Downfall; yet that thou may be left excuseless, I shall in another
way infallibly lay down the truth thereof in these particulars:

1. How many Commissions there was to be in this perishing world.

2. The nature and tenor of a Commission.

3. The powerful operation of a Commission.

1. As unto the first, it is writ, There are three that bear record in heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one; and there
are three that bear witness 1 John 5. 7, 8.
on earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in one:
Now as God did consist of three titles, and not three persons, as thou and thy
seed vainly immagine; that is to say, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: So from each
of these issued forth a Commission upon this earth; for in the time that he
bore the title of Father, Moses and the Prophets was in Commission: Now when
that Father became Word, Flesh, so called Son or Christ, then the Apostles were
in Commission; after that both Father and Son became Holy Ghost, or one entire
Spiritual Body, now in Heaven glorified, the next after came forth our
Commission; so that according to the titles above, there was to be three
Commissions in this world, suitable to the three titles in Heaven.

2. As unto the nature of a Commission, it is not given in silence, but upon
record under hand and seal, to the Messenger or Messengers therein included,
with an exact charge to observe the Kings pleasure, according to the tenor and
form thereof: Now this Commission being given to thee, does not concern
another; for the names included for that Embassage, does this Commission
belong: Now for any other to counterfeit thy Commission, thou have power by
virtue thereof, to apprehend him for a Traitor against the King thy Master.

Even so it is with a Commission from God, which is not given by private
whisperings in the soul, as all counterfeits imagine, every motion, whimsey or
fancy in the mind, more then ordinary, is a call from God; not knowing, yet
daily reading, that all Commissions were given by laudable voice of words, to
the hearing of the ear, as to Moses, Paul, and now in this last to John Reeve:
Now then, what are all these seven Dispensations, but by Moses, the Apostles,
and this Commission, impeached for Traitors against Christ the Lord of Glory.

3. And thirdly, the power of a Commission is so great, that it commands, yea,
subjects the spirits of all that it has to deal with: A man in Commission,
represents the Authority of the great God of Heaven and Earth, that whatever he
binds, imprisons or condemns on earth, is so in Heaven; and whosoever he
declares blessed or happy here, are so in Heaven; so that if thou were not
stone blind, thou would then see, that there is no Teacher public nor
private now living, that has a Commission, but we; and therefore it is we have
power overall men's spirits, yea, the judge of all spiritual things, of what
sect or opinion soever.


Reason. O what a boasting do thou make, that none but your Commission has
power over men's spirits; and that only to you belongs blessing and cursing,
when I conceive there is many able, wise Teachers, that are as true
Commissioners as you, and yet dare not assume that power to themselves, as you
do.


Faith. O thou man of pretended light, yet gross darkness, bring any man now
living, except this Commission, that dares say he had a Commission by voice of
words from God, as we have, thou shall hear that I will curse them, as I have
cursed thee: And where is any of your Teachers, that has a Commission of his
own, but Moses and the Apostles, whom they have counterfeited and made
merchandise for their own gain: From the Lord of Glory, I say, not any of them,
no not the wisest or moderatest head-peice, dare or can in peace of conscience
say, that thou art damned, and another is saved: Alas poor blind leaders of
the blind, they know not what will become of their own souls, how then can
they judge another, but they will be condemned for so doing; for were I not
certain of the knowledge of the true God, and the right Devil, and all others
that are ignorant thereof, are culpable of judgment, instead of being
justified, I should be condemned; and yet what a flutter Caesar's Ministers
make, in praying to a God that is no God, and preaching delusions of their own
inventions, pretending thus and thus, says the Lord, when Christ the only God
knows them not, neither did he send them; therefore from my Seedspring, I say,
they are all Thieves and Robbers, yea Traitors against the God of Heaven for do
but bring any of them before me, and thou may take notice I have power over
their blind zeal, that if they do not for future desist in bewitching the
people to believe lies, thou shall then hear the same sentence pass upon them,
as has already passed upon thee.


Reason. Which of them will believe the sentence of thy Commission, unless thou
could show some present example either without or within, as the Prophet
Elias did, to cause fire from Heaven, and stop the rain, that it rain not: Now
if thy curse be true, how comes it that I do not find it immediately within or
without.


Faith. Thou art worse then the inhabitants of Jerusalem and Judea, Mat. 11. 11.
that believed in John that did no miracle, and yet was a Prophet, yea, I say,
more then a Prophet* for as Christ said, among them that are born of women,
there has not risen a greater then John the Baptist; and yet thou and thy
^eachers will not believe unless present vengeance fall upon thee: But know
this, though the Pharisees desired a sign from Christ, and Mat. 12. 38.
none would be given them but the sign of the Prophet Jonas; yet know this, he
was Christ the Eternal God for all that; and though Christ rebuked James and
John, in the saying, Luke 9. ^4.
Lord, will thou that we command fire from Heaven, and consume them, even as
Elias did? yet they were not for the future freed from the Eternal fire in
their souls: So let me tell thee, and yet not I, but the Revelation of the Holy
Spirit within me, though not presently, yet it shall flame within thee as fire
from Heaven, and that without end, till it consume all thy hopes of salvation,
and thou shall know and find, that this sentence of thine shall shut the
Heavens, and it shall rain no more showers of mercy or comfort in thy soul; so
that I say though thou find it not presently, thou shall as surely feel it
after death, as Christ is God the Eternal Father. And what if miracles did
belong to our Commission, as they do not, in that ours is the Commission of the
Spirit, so our sentence spiritual, thou would no more believe then thou do
now, but rather call us Conjure^s, unless the tenor of our Commission was as
the two former, to execute present vengeance; and if it were executed once or
twice, and not upon every occasion, thou would be as much seared up in
unbelief as thou art now.


Reason. If thy Commission were as real truth as Moses and the Apostles, and
such a power did attend thine, as was in theirs, then I should as truly believe
in yours, as now I do in them.


Faith. Ah blind Soul, thou do not know what is truth, and what not; for if
thou did, thou would as really believe in me as in them: But from my
Seedspring I tell thee, That thou, nor none of thy Seed, do really believe,
that the Scripture is a true Record of the Transactions of Christ; thou may
talk of it, and preach from it, but if thou were really persuaded in thy own
soul, of the truth therein contained, then thou would believe in us; for the
Apostles writ of us, as Moses and the Prophets writ of Christ to come; and
therefore if thou did believe in them, that have nothing but a dead letter to
prove them Commissioners, surely then thou would believe in us that are
living; and know this, if the Roman Authority had not established Moses and the
Apostles Writings for Scripture, then it had been believed no more then ours;
for thy Fathers, in the days of their lives, notwithstanding their miracles,
did no more believe in them, then thou do in us; and know this, the same
power that attended them upon externals, does belong to our Commission in
spirituals; and therefore as the Apostle had power in his Commission to curse
either Angel or man, that did preach any other Doctrine, so we have the same
power in ours.


Reason. What then, does not their Commission* belong to us in these days
successively, as it did to them? what then is the meaning of those Scriptures,
where it is writ, The Scriptures aforetime are written for our learning: and
again it is writ, Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded Mat. 28. 20.
you, and lo I am with you always, unto the end of the world.


Faith. From the Lord of Glory I tell thee, That neither of those Commissions
do belong to thee, or any of thy Seed, either by succession or otherwise; for
from my Seed of Faith I declare, That the Scripture was never written for the
learning of any of thy Seed, though none living now present, do make it a more
Idol for their own gain, then thy Seed does: Though I have sufficiently proved
this point in the Quakers Downfall, yet from my wellspring within me, I tell
thee, That as the Scripture was written by the revelation or inspiration of
Faith, so I know it was writ for the use of none, but the Believers of that
Faith; which neither thou nor none of thy Seed are partakers of: For as Paul
the great Commissioner, was the Penman of those sayings, so that Scripture that
he spoke of, was the writings of the first Commission; viz. Moses and the
Prophets, which were written before his time, and so for the learning of him,
and all that believed in his Doctrine, for our learning that are of the Seed of
Faith, and for none of the Seed of Reason whatsoever, but for our learning: The
word Plural includes all the Seed of Faith, with him were the Scriptures
written; so the Commissions of Moses and the Apostles were not written for the
use of any of the seven Churches, but our Commission alone; for as none
understood the Commission of Moses and the Prophets, but the Apostles, so none
now living understand either of the two former Commissions, but this our
spiritual Commission now in being; and therefore from my Seedspring I tell
thee, We only are the Judges of the Scripture, whatsoever Reason, thy cursed
Seed, pretend to the contrary, as now thou shall hear an infallible Exposition
of the other Scripture which thou have quoted, which all besides our
Commission, gives a false definition thereof; Go ye therefore and teach all M^t
23. ^0.
Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I
am with you always, even unto the end of the world: Now from hence, all the
seven Churches of thy Seed; viz. Papist, Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent,
Baptist, Ranter and Quaker, do suppose, that the extent of these words are in
force to the end of this world; and therefore the Baptists have assumed the
Apostles Commission as their own, when as if ye were not stone blind, you may
read as ye run, that this Commission was given to the twelve then living, and
not to Kiffin and Patience, or any other Teacher of the Baptists whatsoever;
for ye were not born many hundred years after, when this command was expressed,
And lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the world; with you my
beloved Disciples, and none other.


Reason. I cannot conceive from this Scripture, but there was to be a
continuance of the Apostles Commission to the end of this World; and though
there was none of the Commissioners left to give or invest the same power by
imposition of hands, yet we having the same Spirit of God in us, although not
in the same measure yet may we not lawfully follow them as our pattern, and as
the Apostle exhorts, Brethren, be followers Phil. 3. 17.
together of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an ensample;
otherwise what should all the World have done, to have known God or Christ
these many hundred years since, v^ere not the Scripture written for our
learning; and if the Scripture do not belong to all, then also the Law is
void, and belongs to none; so then none would be condemned, as it is written,
I had not known sin, but by the Law, and the Law makes sin exceeding sinful;
so that if the Scripture do not belong to us, then we are freed from the Law,
so then for all thy curse, I shall be as happy as thou.


Faith. In this last answer, I shall finish my discourse as touching the truth
and variety of these three Commissions, in that I have already so infallibly
treated of them in the first Chapter of the Quakers Downfall, I shall no longer
demur with thee upon this, but shall divide the heads of thy Question into
these particulars, and so exactly answer them as they lie in order.

1. That thou bel^eves the Apostles Commission is to continue to the and of
this World.

2. That though all the Commissioners were dead that had power to invest
another, yet thou having the same Spirit, though, as thou says, not the same
measure, yet thou believe thou may pray, preach, and baptize, from the
letter, as they did.

3. Thou say, if ye had not thus done, how should the world have come this
hundred years to have known God or Christ, Hell, Heaven, or Devil.

4. Thou say, if the Scripture do not belong to thy Seed, then the Law does
not belong to thee, and so thou concludes all shall be happy as we.

1. First, I declare, That the Apostles Commission was to continue to the end
of the World held forth in that Commission; for this I know was the condition
of thy Fathers the Jews, that did as really believe it blasphemy, for Christ or
the Apostles to p^t an end to the Ceremonial part of the Law, as now thou do
that our Commission should put an end to all Formal Worship under the Gospel:
But however, I say unto thee, as Christ said to thy Fathers, Think not that I
am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets* I am not come to destroy, but
fulfill; So I am come not to destroy the revealed transactions of the Gospel,
but to tell thee and thy Seed, that as there was to be three Commissions before
the end of this World, so I know that every Commission is a World in it self,
and to it self; and when the Commissioners dies, that commissionate World ends
with them, otherwise thou may call God a liar, to promise he would be with
them to the end of this World, and many hundred years ago they are all dead,
and yet this World remains; so that as I know the command was to none but them,
and to hold no longer then the lives of them* so I know, that the beginning of
one Commission here below, is the end of another; as thou art not ignorant what
overturnings here has been in your Kingdom, to the admiration of the
inhabitants, so are the Commissions of God, the beginning of one was the end of
another, by which the infiniteness of the Divine Revelation in the Person of
God, is the more admired, to behold the seeming contrarieties of these three
Commissions, that one puts a period to the other, as a greater light clouds the
use of the other; not but the Moon is a true light in her self, but living in
the light of the Sun, we have no need of the light of the Moon: So the Apostles
light being more glorious then that of the Law, therefore no need of the
Ceremonial part of the Law: So our light being far more glorious then that of
the Apostles, therefore no need of the formal Worship of the Gospel.

2. Secondly, seeing the beginning of one Commission was the end of another,
how then can thou plead for a succession of the formal Worship in the Gospel,
after all the Commissioners of the first or second Magnitude were put to death
by thy Fathers? Now if only the Apostles had only been p^t to death, yet if
Timothy or Titus, who were Bishops or Messengers authorized by them, had been
preserved in the continuance of that Commission, they might by the same power
have continued the Bishopric, by their imposition of hands upon another: If
so, the effects thereof would not have produced such blind Lordly Bishops with
lawn sleeves, caps, tippits, and such like fopperies, as ever since has
continued; so that if thou were not stone blind, thou might all along
discern there was no succession, considering the Divine Knowledge, and poor
mean estates of the true Bishops, and the Humane knowledge, and lordly ragi^ of
all the false Bishops ever since, as it is not many years ago since the Roman
Lordly Authority had the whole power in this Nation, as in all other places,
though now of late from that great Monster Bishop, the Whore of Babylon, there
has sprung six Sons or Generations, one from the loins of another, yet each
one refined more then his Father, as the Episcopal more then the Papist the
Presbyter more then that, and the Independent more then that, and the Baptist
more then that, and the Ranter more then that, and the Quaker more then you
all, insomuch, that the Father has disowned the child, as the child now does
the Father; and yet the refinest Son of them is but a Formal Worshipper in the
Gospel, which when the last Son was begotten, o^ as it is written, The last
Angel sounded, viz. The Quaker, then the mysierie of truth was revealed; that
is, our Commission was given by voice of words, from the mouth of the Lord
Jesus, as Moses and the Apostles were; which spiritual Commission of ours, does
abolish all formal Worship in the Gospel, as the Apostles did the Circumcision,
with the blood of Bulls and Goats, and all such traditional Ceremonies
attending the Law; and therefore as I am a Bishop or Messenger authorized in
the power of my Revelation, confirmed by the Commission of this last Witness:
so being in the height of Revelation with them, I say, That your Praying,
Preaching, Breaking of Bread or Baptism, is now of no more value then
Circumcision, or the blood of Bulls and Goats was in the Commission of the
Apostles; which circumstances was of high prize and great value in the days of
Moses, though not regarded by the Apostles; so all formal worship of the Gospel
is highly esteemed by thy seed, when by our Commission it is forbidden, and not
regarded, as before I have finished my discourse with thee, thou shall hear, so
that till then, have patience, that so I may proceed to the third.

But thirdly, thou say, What should all thy Seed have done, had it not been
for the Commission of the Apostles? As unto this I shall answer thee, As the
Disciples went all night a fishing, and caught nothing, so thou have all thy
life time been enquiring after the true God by the light of another, and so
have not the knowledge of the true God, nor right Devil; but like a sloathful
servant, has hid thy talent in the letter of the Apostles; so that when death
summons thee to give an account of thy Stewardship, then thou begins to trim up
thy lamp, and finds therein no oil, and then cries unto the wise Virgins,
that is, the wisdom of faith, Give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone out;
but then all in vain will thy doleful cries be, for the Scriptures cannot help
thee, nor we cannot help thee, and therefore thou must go to thy Prayers, thy
Preaching, and Pharisaical Righteousness, to buy thy salvation, and they can do
thee no good; so that now thou may see how thou have deluded ^hy soul with
another Commission, so that now those small hopes of comfort shall be taken
from thee, which then the Scripture will condemn thee, and our Commission keep
thee in utter darkness without end.

But as some of the high flown of thy Seed, endued with a notional light above
their fellows, have replied and said, That they will believe no report of man,
but only wait upon God for the teachings of his Spirit, supposing thereby to
find eternal satisfaction, without the revealed report of his Messenger at
all; and that because they find a saying to that purpos^, as it is written,
The Anointing which ye have received 1 John 2. 27.
of him, abides in you, and ye need not any man teach you, but as the same
Anointing teaches you of all things; and in another place, Ye shall not need
every man to teach his neighbor, for ye shall all know the Lord, from the least
to the greatest: Now there is not any of thy Seed that understande^h these
sayings were fulfilled in the days of the Apostles, as is confirmed by Peter,
saying, This was that which was o^^ 2 27, 28.
spoken by the Prophet Joel, etc. that God would send the Comforter, which did
fill them full of the Holy Ghost, as there at large is recorded; but however
thou can not believe this, yet in Revelation I tell thee, That if any such
ever find eternal happiness, it must be from the Commissioners of God, as from
the mouth of Moses they received the Law, and by the Prophets the Rulers of
Israel heard the Word of the Lord; and so in the two Commissions of the
Apostles it is written, How shall they call on him in whom they Romans 10. 14,
15, 16.
have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall they preach,
except they be sent? So that faith in the true God, comes by hearing the report
of his true Messengers, and without them, how shall we ever know or come to
God; for I infallibly declare, That the Messengers of every Commiss^on has the
word of Reconc^liation, 2 Cor 5. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 2. 14.
Salvation or Damnation, committed to them, as it is written, We are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; so that we pray
you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, for he makes manifest the
savor of his knowledge by us in every place: So that against all thy Seed I
affirm, Whoever pretends to wait upon God, without the report of his Messengers
that are sent by laudable voice of words, they know not the true God, nor shall
ever see the face of God at all; and therefore take notice, the only Messenger
of God told thee so.

Fourthly and lastly, I say, Though the Scripture does not belong to thee yet
the Law does only belong to thee, and thy Seed; for had it not been for thy
Seed of Reason, their had been no need of a Law given; but because of the
enmity of thy Seed, against the Seed of the Woman, the Law was revealed to
Moses, and by Moses given to the people of Israel, in consideration there was a
mixture of Seeds, which caused divisions and rebellion against the contrary
Seed; viz. Moses, and that Generation, therefore that obedience might be
required of them by the grand Commissioners, to that end the Law was given to
the universal body of Israel, that all Israel that was according to the flesh,
and not the Spirit, might be made subject by the Law; that so upon their
transgression, they might receive the penalty of the Law; and therefore it is
written, The Law is not made for a righteous 1 T^m. 1. 9
man, but for the lawless and diso^edient; for the ungodly and such like, which
none of the Seed of faith once called are guilty of, but it is the daily
practice of thy Seed, Reason the Devil, and therefore the Law was given to the
Devil, which thou may read in Chap. 8. recorded at large what his form and
nature is, how complete and beautiful, how learnedly wise he is in naturals,
that this is his Kingdom, and the Devil the King thereof.


CHAP. 13. Showing what the Law is at large, and in short, and whether any can
keep the Law, and when he is said to keep the Law, and when not.
Reason THou seem to affirm, That the Law was given to the Seed of Reason,
which thou all along has said is the Devil; and if there had been no such Seed
as Reason, there had been no need of a Law; by what rule then does the Seed of
Faith walk by, if the Law was not given to them as well as to our Seed, seeing
both Seeds inhabits together, and those of that Seed have been as wicked as
Reason.


Faith. As before thou have heard me prove it, so now I affirm it, That the Law
Moral, or the ten Commandments, was given to none but the Devil, that proud
majestical Seed, the God of this World; for I must tell thee, if that wise rich
Devil had not a curb to bridle them, there had been no living for the poor
Devil of thy Seed, much less for the Seed of Faith to pass quie^ly by thee in
the streers; were it not the Law does say, Thou shall not kill, thou would
murder me for declaring the truth to thee: But in that the Law makes Rom 7. 7.
sin to be sin, yea, and that exceeding sinful, not only the Gentile, but the
Jew Devils also do, yea, are afraid to execute their cruelty beyond their
bounds; though many of thy Seed do exceed it, yet the moderate Devil is fearful
of it, saying, have a care what ye do to these men; as Pila^e said, I find
M^t. 27. 19.
no fault in him, nor no cause of death; and so the Law wrought a terror in
Pilates wife, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man, etc. insomuch
that Pilate took water and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am
innocent of 2 These. 3. 2.
the blood of this just person, see ye to it; and therefore it is written, That
we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men, that live without a Law,
of which many of the Gentile Devils are guilty of, only a word and a stab;
when as the Jew Devil is subject to the Law, he is reasonable, in that he will
moderately try the innocent by the Law; so that God saw good, the Devils should
have a Law to curb them, yea, torment them, and condemn them for ever.

Now the rule that the Seed of Faith does walk by, is, not by the Law, but by
Faith, as it is written, The Law of faith has freed us from the Law of sin and
death; though most of Romans 8. 2.
thy Seed do conclude themselves believers, yet I say, that freedom only
belongs to a Commission, and the believers thereof; as the Apostle includes all
believers with him are free from the Law, and none other; For Christ is the end
of Romans 10. 4.
the Law for righteousness, to every ^one that believes: And what though I
have been a great sinner, yea so great (murder excepted) that there was few
beyond me; yet now being washed, sanctified, yea justified, that I am now no
longer under the Law, but under Grace, which none of thy ^eed shall ever attain
too, notwithstanding they seek it with tears.


Reason. What then, do all believyrs of thy Commission keep the Law, and not
any of the seven Churches keep the Law as well as thou? What then do thou say
of the Quakers, and many others, that are very moderate just men, insomuch that
none can tax them with the breach of any of the ten Commandments?


Faith. I say, in the experience of my Revelation, there is not any keeps the
Law, but those that are freed from the Law as aforesaid; and sure I am, there
is none in the perfect Law of Liberty, but the Seed of the Woman; which Seed of
Faith, does run in the line of one Commission to another; so that I can speak
for no more then I find in the public profession thereof, not denying, but
there may be here one, and there one scattered up and down, which if the report
of our Commission came but to the hearing of their ear, they would embrace it,
as the rest of our believers do: But truly, I speak it, there are so few known,
and not known, that there is not a hundred to ten millions of the contrary
Seed, that will or can believe the report of a Commissioner as touching the
true God; and therefore we may say with the Prophet, Who has believed our
report, or to whom is the Isa. 43. 1.
Arm of the Lord revealed; that is, the arm of Faith revealed: So few there was
in every Commission, that they were but a little, yea, and that a very little
flock, in comparison of the non-commissionate Churches: And whereas thou
supposes by the moderate carriage, and just dealing betwixt man and man, the
Quakers, with many other of thy Priesthood generation, may keep the Law as well
as the believer of a Commission; I shall moderately answer thee in that saying
of James, That whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and Jam 2. 10.
yet offend in one point, is guil^y of all: So that I say, though the Quake^s
of all the seven Churches, do nearest keep the Law, yet in that they offend in
the first command, they are guilty of all; for it is written, Thou shall have
no other Gods Exo. 20. 3.
but me: Now, as aforesaid, thou have heard me in the first and second
Chapters* that there is none of your seven Churches, Sons of Generations, but
you have other gods, besides Christ the one^y God, some of you saying, God is a
Spirit without form, and this Spirit God is within you; and others of you, will
have no God but Nature only; and the rest of thy B^b^lonish brood, will have
one Spirit to have three persons: So that from the knowledge of the true God I
tell you, all are guilty of the Law, though I acknowledge the Quakers exact
walking, and therefore I love them, yet in that they are ignorant of the
knowledge of the true God, which is life Eternal: I say, your Directories,
forms of Prayer, the Creed, Baptism, breaking of Bread, and set days of Fasts
and Thanksgiving, and such like stuff, are not only a breach of the first, but
second Commandment, all which have a form of godliness, but not the power: So
that I say, they are no less then Idols, and graven Images of thy own
invention, and therefore it matters not, though some of you keep all the rest
of the Commands, and not know the true God, thou art guilty of all.


Reason. Then if a man come to the knowledge of the true God, that is
sufficient, notwithstanding he break all the rest of the Commands; because thou
says, Thet keeping of all the rest is nothing, without he know that God which
thou have revealed.


Faith. However, it is thy pleasure to misconstrue me, in that thou know not
the indwelling of truth in me; yet this is the thing I said unto thee, That
though any of thy Seed keep all the Commands but the first, in that they keep
not all, they are guilty of all; for this I know, the knowledge of the true
God, leads forth a soul to keep all the Commandments of God; for in that I
know him, therefore I love him, and so keep his Commandments, as it is
written, If ye love me, keep my Commandments.


Reason. What then, do not thou sin, because thou know the true God, and
keeps his Commands? then I must say, thou art more righteous and perfect then
any man upon earth; for it is written, If we say that we have no sin, we 1
John. 8.
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, with such like places.


Faith. Let me tell thee, if I sin, I do not keep the Law, as it is written,
Whosoever commiteth sin, transgresses the 1 John 3, 4.
Law, for sin is the transgression of the Law: But in that I have known the
true God, which Seed of God remaining in me, I cannot sin, because I am
partaker of the Divine Nature of God: Now if I should say, that I have no
motion^ to sin, I should deceive my self, and the truth is not in me; for I
know there is a great difference betwixt a motion and an act; for it is to be
understood, not he that thinks a sin, but he that commits sin is of the
Devil; as all thy Seed are at a loss as touching the mystery of this secret,
not understanding a motion from an act, and therefore thousands of thy Seed
perish for want of knowledge in that saying of Christ, That whosoever looks
upon a woman, to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already in
his heart; Mat. 5. 28.
from hence concluding, that if thou do but lust after her, thou might as
well lie with her, and so too too many of thy seed do commit the act indeed;
when if thou had a discerning betwixt a thought and an act, thou had not
defiled thy soul, as it is vvri ten When lust has conceived, it brings forth
sin, and sin when it is finished, brings forth death: Now Jam. 1. 15.
while thy lust is a tempting, there comes a good motion, and frustrates that
temptation, by which means, that thou had intended, is not conceived (so no
sin) indeed lust was burning in thy heart, but in that it came not to
perfection, the law has quenched the flame; for what has the Law to do
with a heart-adultery, no, no it is no thought, but an act that breaks the
Law, and what comes not within the bounds of the Law, be it adultery, nay, be
it murder, if it lie only in the heart, and be not acted, there can no Law
condemn thee.


Reason. What is thy thoughts as touching the fourth Commandment, as being
changed from Saturday to Sunday? and what is the reason why this Command was
changed above all the rest? and vvhethe^ this Sabbath, called, The first day of
the week, is not according to the judgment of the Assembly of Divines, to
continue to the end of the World, without any alteration thereof?


Faith. It matters not me, what grounds or principles of Religion your
Assembly of Divines holds forth, as a Catechi^m to thy Seed; for this by Faith
I know, and against men and Angels affirm, That as the Commission of Moses
ended in the Commission of the Apostles, so the Jevvish Sabbath, with the
rites thereof, ended in the Sabbath, or first day of the week of the Apostles:
then know, as the Commission of the Apostles ends in ours, so we have power
as the Apostles, to erect you a Sabbath suitable to our Commission, for know
this, that one Commission is not tied in point of Revelation, to observe the
former; but each Commission, according to its title and place, has power in it
self to direct you what manner of Sabbath you are to keep; therefore observe
the Sabbath of Moses Commission was in this nature as follows; viz.

Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy, six days shall thou labor, and do
all thy work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man
servant, nor thy maid servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within
thy gate; for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that
in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath
day, and hallowed it.

Now this Sabbath thou will not own, but the First day, or Sabbath of the
Apostles, which has no such form in it, as the Sabbath of the Jews has: And
why the Sabbath of the Jews was altered, I tell thee, in that Christ the only
God, by his own power that day, had quickened death into life, as it is written,
In the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward Mat. 28. 1, 2.
the first day of the week, came Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, to see the
Sepulcher, and behold there was an earthquake; for the Angel of the Lord
descended from Heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and
sat upon it: So this being the first day of Christ's Resurrection, was a day of
joy and gladness to the Apostles, in that it brought peace and rest to their
souls, confirmed in their faith, that he was Christ the Son of God: Whereupon
the Revelation of their faith led them forth to keep the first day of their
Saviors Triumph over sin, hell and death, to be a day set apart to assemble
together, and contribute their benevolence for the refreshment of the poor
members of that faith, as it is written, And upon the first day of the week
when the Disciples Act. 20. 7.
came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the
morrow, and continued his speech until midnight; also, Upon the first day of
the week let every one of you 1 Cor. 16. 2.
lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be no gathering
when I come: Now this Command being a day set apart in point of Worship;
therefore as the Commission changed, so the Worship changed, and so of
necessity it will follow, that the day must be changed: Therefore take notice,
as this Commission was not to hold to the end of the World, no more ought that
First day; for as I said before, every Commission has power in it self in the
virtue of its Revelation, to change its Worship suitable to its Commission; so
a Commission has power to change a day for that Worship: Now our Commission
being spiritual, does hold forth no manner or forms of Worship, but the
worshipping of God in Spirit and truth: Therefore, I say, not only the Jews
Sabbath, but also the Apostles First day, in our Commission are void, and of no
effect, as it is written, He spoke on a c^rtain place of Heb. 4. 4.
the seventh day on this wise, and God did rest the seventh day from all his
works: So the blessed of the Lord believing Christ to be God the Father,
Creator of Heaven and earth, are entered into the perfect liberty of faith,
which frees them from the lusts of the flesh, and so entered into peace and
rest; by which not only the Jews Sabbath, nor the Apostles First day, but
every day is a Sabbath to the Elect of the Lord: Now Mat. 12. 1, 10.
in that the Priests of this World do know, that if the first should be as
another day, then they would lose their hearers, and so in conclusion lose
their tithes; therefore as Christ and the Apostles by the Jews were accused for
breaking their Sabbath, so the Pharisaical Teachers of thy Seed, will condemn
us for repealing the First day of the Week: But however, in the Authority of
our Commission I declare, That every soul which knows Christ in his Form and
Nature, the Devil in his Form and Nature, has entered unto his eternal Sabbath
of perfect rest without end.


Reason. Let me but hear thy judgment as touching that saying of the Lawyer to
Christ, Master, which is the great Commandment in the Law? Now Christ's answer
was, That thou should Mat. 22. 36, 37, 38.
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind: this is the first and great Commandment.


Faith. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self: on these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets: Now what
manner of love is this, with which if we love the Lord and our Neighbor as our
self, we keep the whole Law; but for my part, I know not the man that can love
his neighbor as himself, and so none can truly love God.

My judgment is, That all the ten Commandments are according to the sequel of
these words, reduced into two heads; and these two are comprehended, yea,
fulfilled in this word Love, as it is written, Owe no man any thing, but to
Romans 13. 8
love one another; for he that loves another has fulfilled the Law: And true
it is, when rightly considered, the efficacy of spiritual love, it is of so
pure and holy a nature, that it cannot possibly do any impure or unholy thing,
when it is moved to manifest it self according to its Divine Property, it
naturally produces all Heavenly excellency in the Elect of the Lord: Love
delights to Lord over none, but be servant to all, and gives every one
pre-eminence before it self; and therefore it truly Honors its Parents: Love is
so far from envy, that instead of killing of any, it lies down at envies feet
to be killed of him, yea, it stays envy by its patience and meekness; and
therefore says Paul, Our weapons are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4.
but spiritual: Not a sword of steel, but a sword of love. Oh! the Revelation
of faith teaches his to flay none, but with love; nay, love is that Divine
balsom, that it cures all wounds made by envies weapons: Love is so sincere,
That it will not do that to another, that would not another should do to it:
And therefore it will not commit adultery, nor wrong any, though it might have
many an opportunity to defraud and cozen another; it will rather want, before
it will steal: In this love there is no equivocation, it will not backbite, or
stain another reputation, as it is written, Love works no Romans 13. 9.
ill to its neighbor, and therefore would rather die then bear false witness
against either friend or enemy: Also this love is generous, full of p^ty and
mercy, That it clothes the naked, feeds the hungry, visits the sick in
prison, and out of prison: Nay this love is so pure, that it enjoys it self no
longer then it is doing good to others; and therefore it will not covet his
neighbors house, his neighbors wife, his m^n servant, or maid servant, his
ox, or his ass, or any thing that is his neighbors: so that I tell thee, there
is none of thy seed, but for want of this love, breaks the Laws (and in some
things therein confirms it by authority;) so that by this I love my neighbor as
my self: Now my neighbors are the Believers of our Commission, that has faith
in our Revelation, as it is written, Brethren, Gal. 5 13.
ye have been called unto liberty, only use not liberty for an occasion to the
flesh, but by love serve one another; for all the Law is fulfilled in one word,
even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: For love is the fruit
of the Spirit* so that all believers are neighbors, and therefore it is
written, Let brotherly love continue, love the brotherhood, love as brethren:
This loving our neighbor as our self, is life in death, as John says, We know
that we have passed from death unto life, because 1 John 3. 14.
we love our neighbors, or our brethren: Now the great Commandment is, To
love God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul: Now if thou can not love
thy neighbor that thou have seen, how then can thou love God thou never
savvest: For what I have seen and heard I declare unto thee, that without
knowledge their can be no love, and yet what vain repetitions thy Seed makes
to a God ye know not: As I said before, so I say again, Though some of thy
Seed keeps some of the Commandments, nay, if possible, keep all, yet in that
thou art ignorant of the true God, and so Worship another God, thou art guilty
of all.


CHAP. 15. Showing whether Prayer does not belong to all, and that by Prayer we
may come to the knowledge of God, and whether it is our duty to make use of the
Lords Prayer, or no.
Reason. THou seem to say in thy last. That without the knowledge of God, no
man can love God, and so all that he does is sin: What then, shall not a man
that is ignorant of God, pray unto God for knowledge of him? otherwise, how
shall a soul love God? and to that end, there are many Exhortations Mat. 6. 9
to prayer, and that especially the Lords prayer, which there we are taught the
form and manner thereof, as it is written,

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done, in earth Luke 11. 2.
as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our
debts, as we forgive our debtors, and lead us not into temptation, but deliver
us from evil, for thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory for ever.
Amen.

As I have said before concerning the Sabbath, That every Commission in its
time and place is to be considered, That according to their Revelation, so was
their Worship; but I know the Revelation of the Apostles led them forth to
prayer, and therefore in their Commission it was requisite, and their duty so
to do: Also, the form of these words was directed to the Disciples, but none of
thy Seed whatsoever, for I should blaspheme to say, That Christ uttered these
sayings for the instruction of thy Seed, when he says, your Father is the
Devil, as it is written, Ye are of your Father the Devil, Joh. 8. 44.
and the lust of your Father ye will do: so that this Prayer belongs to none
but the Disciples; After this manner therefore Gal. 4. 6.
pray ye; yea, ye the beloved of the Lord, and sons of the Father, as it is
written, Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son, by
which you cry, Abba Father: Now were this set form to be used in these days, as
I cannot find, that to them to whom it was spoken, never made use of that form
after; yet, I say, if it were, it only belongs to sons, who are believers of a
Commission; so that I say, it belonged to none but us, in that by the
Revelation of our faith, we know the Father that is in Heaven, both in form and
nature, and none but we; and therefore as we are sons, and not servants, we can
with joy and peace of conscience say, Our Father which art in Heaven; whereas
your Seed being but servants, and no sons, may take shame and confusion of
face: as for a man of quality to have another man's child in the marketplace
ask him blessing, and call him Father; What would his friends think of him?
judge thou: So* your Seed, that are bastards, and not sons, when you come in
your public Worships, what a babbling you make, thinking to be Isa. 1. 15.
heard for your much speaking, when he hears you not, nor knows you not,
neither does he in the least take notice of your fasts, nor your tears, they
are all vain repetitions, of no more account then the barking of a Dog, or the
wallowing of the Sow in the mire: From the Lord I speak it, they are not.


Reason. What then, must we not pray at all, though we use not those form of
words? Yet I believe, as occasion is offered, and as we are moved in our
hearts, so we ought to pray: To that end, the Scripture holds forth a thousand
examples, of which I shall but instance one or two, viz. Call upon me in Psa.
50. 15
the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Elias
was a man subject to like passions as we are, and Jam. 5. 17
he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth for
the space of three years and six months.


Faith. Ah blind soul! What a hodge podge thou make of Scripture, as to
think that the sayings of David, and the prophecy of El^as and the Apostles
belongs to thee, when I know thee the son of B^lial, the Seed of the Serpent;
and they the true Prophets and Messengers of the Lord, so had a command for
what they did do, but thou have no command* to declare the Statutes of the
Lord, or take his Covenant in thy mouth; for all thy prayers are abomination,
and such as thee God will not hear; and yet you cry that you are sent of the
Lord, and thus and thus says the Lord, when ye know not the Lord in his form
and nature, and yet you would have his Kingdom come, when you neither know the
nature of it, nor where it is, supposing his Kingdom is in this World, and yet
he says, My Kingdom is not of this World; then you pray, that his will may be
done on earth as it is in heaven, and yet what in you lies, you pray, that his
will may not be done; for the will of God is, that all the Seed of Reason shall
be damned, and none but the Seed of Faith saved, and yet you pray, that all may
be saved, when it is written, He will Romans 8. 13.
have mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he will damn: So
that you pray you know not for what; and then you desire God to forgive you
your trespasses, as you do forgive them that trespass against you. Oh friend,
were God as thou say, and that he should hear thee, then this I tell thee,
instead of forgiving thee, he must of necessity consume the best of you in a
moment: As do but observe the transactions of thy Seed in these days, you
pray, fast, and weep, that God would forgive you, as you forgive another; well,
according to your prayer, so it shall be, for instead of forgiving, you
backbite, persecute, imprison, and put to death, even so shall ye be dealt
withal; nay, you are of such a cursed Seed, that you will not show mercy to
them that have shown mercy to you, you will not give them liberty, that when
others had the day over you, they gave you your liberty: I speak this to the
shame of thee and all thy Seed; and then you pray and cheat, you pray and
tyrannize; you pray with your tongues, and murder with your hands; and yet
such Hypocrites as thy Seed are most professors, and supposed most believers,
and most pretended Saints, and most of you hopes to be saved; and yet, as I
have said, ye are all of the Seed of the damned, and have no knowledge of the
true God at all: So that from my Seed-spring I speak it, There is neither thou,
nor the wisest Gifted headpiece of thy Seed, that can experimentallie say,
that God ever heard any of your prayers; Isa. 1. 15.
recollect your thoughts, either in public or private, that ever God gave
thee an answer to any petition thou requested of him: It may be thou have found
in thy soul more satisfaction one time then another, insomuch, that thou have
wept for joy; but deal plainly, did thou ever hear God verbally speak with
thee, as he did to the two former Commissions, and now in this our last (sure I
am thou never did;) and therefore mind what I say, all whisperings or inward
movings of the Spirit, as thou call it, are nothing else but Reasons
imagination, that God hears thee, and answers thee; for alas, poor soul, though
I know it is the Seed of Faith at certain times springing up, ravishing joys in
believing the true God, not within me, but without me; yet this I know, God
hears me not, and sure I am, if God ever heard any, he would hear me: but when
I consider how vainly you are acted forth, to make use of an In^^nite nothing,
to do all things for you, it discovers what you are, even blind leaders of the
blind: just as a horse in a mill goes round, even so do ye, bearing the air,
as though ye had done something, when indeed ye have done nothing at all, as at
the hour of death does manifest; What praying and crying out, Lord save me,
when in your health ye pretended assurance of salvation, and now at the point
of death, ye know not what shall become of your souls; so that in truth I speak
it, you are ever praying, and yet have never perfect assurance of what you pray
for; as it is written, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth: Now though I never pray, yet my faith being in continual prayer,
I have nothing to do at death, but yield up my Soul to the power thereof for a
moment, knowing, that when he appears, I shall appear with him in endless
Glory, without the least let or doubt whatsoever; at which time, thou being in
doubts and fears calls upon a God* that is no God; neither have thou faith in
what thou say, but a mere tradition that moves thee, when thou neither
know what thou say, nor to whom thou speak; but at the very time of
prayer, thy heart is either plotting mischief, or coveting the riches, honor
and glory of this world; and so contents thy self with vain lip-labor; as it
is written, These people honor Isa. 29. 13.
me with their lips, but their hearts is far from me.


CHAP. 16. Showing whether there be any truth in the Faith of the Church of
England, expressed in the Creeds or Articles recorded.
Reason. WHat do thou conceive, or what is thy thoughts concerning the Faith
of the Church of England, expressed in their Creeds, but especially that of
Athenasius?


Faith. I shall in brief tell thee, That they are a rapsido of nonsense, yea,
that which thy Seed calls blasphemy, as shall in these ensuing words appear:
And that I may not be over tedious, I shall reduce them into three heads
verbatim as they lie, provided thou will from the first of them, show what is
thy faith in them.


Reason. My Faith is this, That we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in
Unity, neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance; for there
is one Person of the Father, another of the Son, another of the Holy Ghost, yet
the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one, the
glory equal, the majesty coeternal; such as the Father is, such is the Son,
and such is the Holy Ghost, the Father uncreate the Son uncreate, and the Holy
Ghost uncreate; the Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible, and the
Holy Ghost incomprehensible; the Father eternal, the Son eternal, and the Holy
Ghost eternal, and yet they are not three eternals, but one eternal, etc. so
the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and yet they are
not three Gods, but one God, etc. and so we are to acknowledge every Person by
himself to be God and Lord, without which no man can be saved.


Faith. Before thou proceed any further, let me give answer to what thou have
already declared, and the remarkablest confusion therein contained, I shall
pitch my discourse upon, which is, Neither confounding the Persons, nor
dividing the Substance; for thou say, there are three Persons, and but one
God, their glory equal, their majesty coeternal, all uncreate, all
incomprehensible, all eternal, and yet not three, but one eternal: Now let the
wisest head-peice of thy Seed answer me from these words, Whether thou intends
the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, as in relation to
their Persons, or their Natures; for let me tell thee, if thou believe them, as
touching their persons, then know thou have divided the Substance; as for
instance, the potter of one substance, matter or earth, makes three vessels;
now though these three be of one and the self same substance, yet they are
divided, so not one, but really three, distinct in each form the one from the
other: As thus* here is three, distinct in themselves, yet one like another,
not only in form, but nature also, in that they are all of one matter, so
cannot disagree, though three; yet let thy Reason work which way it will, thou
can not make of these three one, in which single face or person, that entire
nature that is unity in trinity; must be comprehended and contained in one
single person alone, only bearing the name of three titles, viz. Father in the
Creation, the Son in Redemption, and the Holy Ghost in Justification: Without
the true knowledge of what I have said, from my Revelation, I tell thee, thy
faith shall perish eternally.


Reason. I acknowledge every Person by himself to be God and Lord, and yet I
say there are not three Gods, and three Lords; as thus, the Father is made of
none neither created nor begotten, the Son is of the Father alone, not made nor
created but begotten, the Holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son, neither
made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding, etc. and in this Trinity, none
is before nor after another, none is greater, nor less then another; but the
whole three Persons be co eternal together, and co equal: So thus the Unity in
Trinity, and the Trinity in Unity is to be worshipped; he therefore that will
be saved, must thus think of the Trinity.


Faith. O senseless Sot! as were thy Teachers, so art thou, as to imagine that
one God should have three Persons, which is as unpossible, as for a mortal King
to have three persons, and but one King; for this I know, though a King by
generation may b^get a son, yet that child is not a father, but a son, so not
one, but two; neither is the son equal with the father, though the next heir to
the Crown: But however, this by Faith I know, the Son was the Father, neither
made, created, nor begotten, as in the second Chapter is proved at large; for
this know, if Christ was begotten, then he was created, so made; and if
begotten, tell me who begot him, and where, and by what means Christ was
begotten.


Reason. I know no otherwise, but as in the Creed I believe Christ Jesus to be
the only Son of God, begotten of his Father before all Worlds, God of God,
Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one
substance with the Father, by whom all things were made for us, and for our
salvation came down from Heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the
Virgin Mary, and was made man, and was crucified under Pontius Pilate; be
suffered, and was buried, and the third day rose again and ascended into
Heaven, and sits on the right hand of the Father; and I believe, as in the
other Creed, Christ was God of the Substance of the Father, begotten before the
Worlds; and man of the Substance of his mother ^^rn in the world, perfect God,
and perfect man, of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh, subsisting equal with
the Father, as touching his Godhead, and inferior to his Father, as touching
his Manhood; one altogether, not by confusion of substance, but by unity of
person: for as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so God and man is one
Christ, who shall come again with glory to judge both the quick and the dead,
which Kingdom shall have no end: And I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and
giver of life, which proceeds from the Father, and the Son, who with the
Father and the Son together, is worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the
Prophets, etc.


Faith. What a knotty, gouty thread has thy Seed spun, insomuch, that therewith
they have woven a web of linsey-woolsey stuff, sufficient to cloth the Devil;
as have but patience, and thou shall hear what confused blasphemy there is in
these Creeds, held forth to be the Faith of the Church of England, without
which thou say, no flesh can be saved. That thou may for the future take
notice of thy ignorance, I shall reduce them into three heads, and so answer
them directly, as I shall quote them in their order:

1. First, Thou believe as thou have expressed, That Christ was God of the
substance of the Father, begotten before the Worlds; and Man of the substance
of his mother born in this World.

If this by thee were rightly understood, I should not need verbatim as they
lie; but in that I know thou intends the Father, as he was a Person, got his
Son a Person also; therefore from the Authority of our Commission, I say, Thou
know not how the Father came in being to be God, much less then, how this
Son was begot by the Father; for the word Begotten does imply, first the Father
begetting. 2. The matter conceived. 3. The formation of this conception into a
person like his Father; for this I know, no child can be begotten, without a
dissolution of seed, which seed must first dye, before it can quicken to a new
life, which life will produce a form like its seed; now this could not be in
the Father, did thou but with me, know what the Nature and Person of the
Father was before the World, That as the Godhead was offered unto death,
through Heb. 9. 14
the Eternal Spirit; So from my Revelation of Faith, I say, The Eternal Spirit,
according to its own word and pleasure, clothed it self with a Divine.
Heavenly Substance, in the proportion and linaments of a man, whose person was
more bright and glorious then the Sun, softer then Down, and swifter then
thought: So that I say, this was the substance the Fathers person then
consisted of; and against men and Angels I affirm, that there was no person
before the world, but the Father only; neither could he beget a Son, until he
dissolved his Divine substance into seed in the womb of Mary; by which
dissolution, the Father begot or conceived himself into a Son of flesh, blood
and bone: For this by faith I know, that the person of the Father was capable
of transmutation into the form of flesh, though now he is not having taken upon
him the form of flesh, in fulfilling that promise, saying, The seed of the
woman shall bruise the head of the Serpent; Genesis 3. 15
which was no other, but the Eternal Father was to be born of a woman, with
flesh, blood and bones; so that it was not the Father begot a Son* but the
Father became a Son, as the Prophet Eliah by Revelation clearly unfolds, saying
unto us, A child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government Isa. 9 6.
shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful
Counselor* the mighty God the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace; and
then it is written, that that Word or Eternal Spirit that formed it self as
aforesaid, that Word became flesh, and dwelt among us; and says Paul, The
Godhead dwelt in Christ bodily; so that it is clear, as in the Ioh. 1. 14.
second Chapter is infallibly proved, that the Father begot no Son before the
Worlds, but the Father in time became a Son himself, and that not in two
persons, but one person alone.

But then what will thou do with these Scriptures, where it is written,


Reason. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; also it is said, We
beheld his glory, the glory as of the Psalm. 2. 7.
only begotten of the Father; and again it it said, Ioh 1. 14.
Unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee; and again, Heb. 1. 5.
No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father: He has declared him also, it is written, I will be to him
a Father, Joh. 1 17.
and he shall be ti me a Son: Now if Christ was not begotten of his Father, why
or wherefore should the Apostles Revelation declare, that Christ had a Father,
and was begotten by him?


Faith. As I have often told thee, so I say again, What have thou to do with
Scripture, our Commission being the only Interpreter thereof, thou not
believing the report therein, was damned: Yet for the further satisfaction of
the hearers that shall believe this, I shall declare, that the Apostles in
their Commission was not to know Christ any further or otherwise, then only a
Son begotten by his Father, and that for them in their time was sufficient, as
the Son himself expresses, John 15. 16.
All things that the Father has made known to me, I have made known unto you;
also Paul declares, He that confesses with his tongue, and believes with his
heart that Christ is the Son of God, shall be saved: Though now in our
Commission it is not sufficient, in that our Revelation leads us infallibly to
believe Christ was and is the Everlasting Father, Creator of Heaven and earth,
as by Scripture is confirmed, All things were made by him, and without him was
not any thing made, that was made: So that Christ as he was the Father, was the
Creator of all things* whether in Heaven or earth; as is manifest in that
intricate Revelation of Paul, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead, etc. Who can Ephesians. 1. 20.
tell but our Commission, who raised Christ from the dead, was there any other
God or Father, but what was within him, that raised him from the dead; as he
says, I have power John 10. 18.
to lay down my life, and I have power to take it again, as in the third
Chapter is showed at large: And who should set him at the right hand of the
Father, but the Godhead power within him, that enthroned him far above all
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this world, but that which is to come; insomuch, that Christ by
his death has conquered himself, to be head over all things: And what is that
which so highly promoted him above all, even his Spiritual body, the fullness in
which was that which filled all in all: So that I say, That Father which Christ
so often called upon when he was on earth. I say, if it had not been his
creature Elias commissionated in Glory, then Christ could have made nothing nor
by his own power have quickened himself to life again: Nay, I say, if Christ had
a real Father that had begotten him, then Christ could not have had the
pre-eminence in power, name, and been the chief head, in that the Father is
above the Son: But hovvever, let blind Reason think what it will, from an
infallible Spirit I say, that Elias was his Deputy-Father, and so at Christ's
ascension was to give up his Authority and Commission to Christ the Eternal
Father, from whence he received it.

2. Secondly, Thou believe God a reasonable soul, perfect God, and perfect
man, etc.

In answer to which, from the Revelation of Faith, I tell viz. Faith and
Reason: First, as in relation to their Satisfaction. Secondly, their power.

First, What Divine satisfaction could there be in God, if there were the least
spark of Reason in him. I knovving in Reason, there is no real satisfaction
whatever, it being a seed, though as pure as in the Angels, yet it is
altogether unsatisfactory in it self, as has been proved in the Reprobate
Angel, he being left to his pure Reason alone, was brought to aspiring
confusion, if possible to unthrone God, and all creatures made by him, as at
large in the fourth Chapter is proved; which if the nature of God were but
pure Reason, then might the Reprobate Angel have kept his standing, and the
rest of the Angels have had full satisfaction in themselves, without any
supply from God at all, which in the fourth Chapter thou have heard to the
contrary: And therefore if the Nature of God were pure Reason, he could have
no satisfaction in himself, but from another, and so in conclusion, there must
be some above God, to satisfy God: Therefore from that God who is a body of
living Faith, I say, Cursed is that soul, who believes God to have the least
motion of Reason in him; nay further, in the power of our Commission, I say,
there is no creature believing God a reasonable soul, that shall have true
peace here, or glory hereafter; as is confirmed in these Scriptures, Being
justified by faith, we have Romans 5 1. Hebr. 10 22. Heb. 11. 6.
peace in God; and again, Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance
of faith; and, without faith it is unpossible to please God: I say, if God had
but a reasonable soul, what matter for faith; for by reason we may have peace
in God, and in reasons belief thou may please God: But alas, poor blind
souls, for want of this precious seed of faith, thou can not know God in
form and nature, so not believe him as he is.

2. Secondly, as there is no satisfaction, so there is no power in reason, as
there is in faith; as it is written, I say unto you, Man. 17. 20.
if ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this Mounta^n,
Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove, and nothing shall be
unpossible to you: By faith God framed the Worlds, by faith Abels sacrifice was
accep^ed with God, by faith Noah was warned of God, by faith Sarah bel^eved, by
faith Abr^ham H^b: 11.
offered up his son Isaac by faith Moses refused to be called the son of
Pharaoh, by faith fire was quench^d the Lions mouths stopped, the prison doors
opened. So by faith I kno^, that Christ is the Everlasting Father; by faith I
know the soul of Christ is all faith, and no reason; by faith I know, it was
his pure Soul, or Godhead Father in Christ that dyed, and by his own power
quickened himself again by faith. I know, that God in this our last Commission,
spoke to John ^eeve, as he spoke to Moses and Paul: O what a powerful Seed is
faith! that kills sin, kills the Devil, yea, kills death nay, what a high gloss
does the Lord of glory stamp upon faith, and not so much as taking notice of
reason at all; and yet blind reason the Devil, will have God a reasonable
soul: O* if not for fear, yet for shame, desist thy damned belief, and from me
observe, the Soul of Christ is all Divine Heavenly faith, which none shall know
what God in his Form and Nature is, but he whose faith is Lord over reason in
this life.


Reason. If the Soul or Nature of God be not pure reason, how comes it then
that God says, Come now, let us reason together, Isa. 1. 18.
says the Lord? etc. which if his Nature, as thou says, were all Divine,
Heavenly faith, and not reason, I conceive God could not have reasoned the case
with them.


Faith. O the gross darkness of reason, that cannot understand, that it was not
the Lord from his own mouth that reasoned the case with them, but the Prophet
Isaiah; for this by faith I know, that God never reasoned with any, but the
Commissionate Prophets, whose Seed is of his own Nature, and in the virtue of
that Commission, are Ambassadors in Gods stead, to reason the case with them;
for this I know, that faith can take up the words of faith, though faith speaks
powerfully and infallibly, when as reason speaks but dubiously and doubtfully.


Reason. Is it not strange, that reason should be the Governor of this World,
as thou have formerly expressed, and has by its wisdom erected things in such
a glorious form and order, as now they are, and yet should not be a Seed
satisfactory in it self? How comes it then, that the Governors thereof takes
so much delight and pleasure in this World, if man were not satisfied in the
affairs of his life? surely I cannot see, but there is as much satisfaction in
reason, as in faith; for I conceive, men endued with reason, have more content
then men endued with faith.


Faith. Now thou have raised an Objection, that thy experience may silence
thee, in the various transactions of this bloody World, that the mutability
thereof flows from the nature of that Seed reason; as instance, the grand
mutations of thy Kingdom: When you had a King before, you were not therewith
satisfied, but cried out, no Bishop, no King, and through much bloodshed, you
attained reasons desire (for know this, faith will shed no blood*) and
therefore observe, it is the Seed of reason divided against it self; and then
reason hunted the King like a Patridge, till you had your desire accomplished;
and when you got victory over the Kings Army, then the Bells rung* and Bonfires
made, yea, days of thanksgiving kept for joy, and now you are unsatisfied for a
King again, and reason improved all its subtilty to attain its desire, and then
for joy of that which formerly it killed, the bells rung, the fire flamed,
oaths were sworn, and healths were drunk, till you could not stand, to the
destruction of your own souls; and therefore, I say, there is no satisfaction
in reason, let it be never so rich or great in this its Kingdom, that it is
clothed with crowns of Gold, and decked with Pearls and Diamonds, and attendee
with variety of Servants, yet in all this reason is not satisfied, but
sometimes it would enjoy more honor and joys of this World, and then it is
afraid it shall lose all its honor, pleasure and delight that it formerly
enjoyed: So that I say, there is not from the King upon his Throne, to the
Beggar in the straw, whose reason is Lord over faith, that has any true
satisfaction at all: For alas, Solomon, the greatest of all, found no real
content, but cried out, all that he had enjoyed was vanity: So that reason in
the purest sense, is compared to the bottomless pit, that has no end of its
imagination; and yet such Devils as thee, will have God a reasonable Soul, when
in my Revel^tion thou have heard, there is no durable satisfaction at all in
reason, but faith alone: for faith has a foundation, and can limit it self to
a small compass, yet be really contented without the glory of this World at
all, knowing this is but mortal, and must perish in the desire thereof; and
therefore faith is satisfied in that it lays holds on that which is Immortal,
Eternal, and shall never perish, no more then God himself: so that for all thy
Kingdom, with the glory here below, my faith will have nothing to do with thy
powers, thy trading, thy great joy and delight, in that they must all vanish as
the smoke in the air, for the delight of my soul is in that glory and riches
on the other side of death, which is eternal, and shall never perish world
without end, which neither thou nor none of thy Seed shall never see, nor in
the least measure enjoy. But then,

3. Thirdly, Thou believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life,
which proceeds from the Father, and the Son, who with the Father and the Son,
is worshipped and glorified, etc.

As unto this, I know thou have no ground in Scripture to Isa. 43. 10, 11. Luke
1 35
that the Holy Ghost was the Eternal Spirit, or invisible Soul of Christ, as it
is written, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest
shall overshadow thee; yea, that was the Holy Ghost, or invisible Soul of
Christ, which dissolved into seed, there dyed in the womb of Mary, and quickened
it self into a son of flesh, blood, and bone; yea, the Holy Ghost remained with
him, and in him all the time he was upon earth; yea, that was the Holy Ghost,
or Eternal Spirit, that dyed in the grave, for they signify both one and the
self same thing, as it is written, The Spirit of God descended upon him like a
Dove, so the Holy Ghost descended upon him like a Dove: So that take it which
way thou pleases, the Holy Ghost, or Eternal Spirit, which is the Godhead
Father, was in no Person of its own, but the Person of Christ only.


Reason. From those Scriptures thou have quoted, I understand, that the Holy
Ghost was not in the person of Christ, but in Heaven a Person of its own; as
it is clearly recorded, and the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a
Dove upon him, Luke 3. 21.
and a voice came from Heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased: And so in the rest of the Evangelists it is written, That the
Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending l^ke a
Dove, and lighting upon him: So that I do not deny but that the Spirit and the
Holy Ghost is both one, yet I cannot believe, but that the Holy Ghost is in a
form or shape of its own, and that in Heaven, when Christ was upon earth, as it
written, The Holy Ghost d^scended from Heaven upon him; And besides, it is
clear, that Christ had a Father then in Heaven, that sent the Holy Ghost, and
said, Thou art my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.


Faith. In answer to this, I shall unfold this deep secret, which none of thy
Seed can ever understand; yet that it may be recorded for the blessed seed of
faith, that shall hereafter believe in our Commission, I infallibly declare,
That there is a Holy Ghost, as also a gift of the Holy Ghost.


Reason. But before thou speak of this, I desire, if thou can, remove this
great stumbling block, What Father this was that said, Thou art my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased? and if Elias, as thou have at large treaaed with me
in the third Chapter, then tell me by what Authority could Elias call Christ
his beloved Son; and why did Christ make use of his Creature, to call his
Creator Son? surely it cannot be Elias, that should assume such a prerogative
to call Christ Son, but it must be God the Creator of all things, that did call
Christ his beloved Son, otherwise Christ would never have so seriously and
confidently h^ve called Elias his Father.


Faith. As I have formerly said, so I say again, That herein consists the
infiniteness of Eternity, tha^ he could become time, yea, so far deny and abase
himself. as to be protected by his Creature; for as it is written, In all
things he became like unto us, sin only excepted: not like unto the seed of
reason, but the seed of faith; yea, he was like unto his Prophets and
Messengers in point of Commission; for though Christ, as he was God the Father,
gave all Commissions, yet now from Elias he took a Commission himself, and for
that end and purpose, before he took his journey in the flesh, as in the third
Chapter I have declared, wherefore he took up Elias, that he might present the
very place and authority of God, as when God was there himself, Elias being the
Seed of his own body, he could trust him, when he could trust none of the
Angels, and therefore he took upon him the seed of Abraham, and not the Heb 2.
16.
nature of the Angels: Now having taken him up into glory, in that his time was
nigh that he must fulfill his promise to the seed of Adam; I say, he
commissionates Elias with Authority, Power, and Majesty like himself (creating
excepted) to take care of Christ the only God, in this his difficult journey,
by which Authority, Elias had full power to protect Christ in his infancy, and
confirm his Revelation, both in Doctrine and Miracle, and to call him his Son,
as Christ was to call Elias his God and Father, as at his death he
acknowledges, Mark 16 34, 35.
Elias, Elias, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Which some of them
that stood by, understanding his language, said, behold, he calls Elias;
which none but the true believers of our Commission can understand, and
therefore must perish for want of the true knowledge of this: So that from the
Revelation of faith, I say, herein was the infini^e wisdom of the Godhead made
manifest, in Christ's Humility, that although he was the Creator, yet he took
upon him the form of a servant, and in the place of his glory, authorized his
Creature Elias as a Father: Though the Scripture intricately prove this, yet
who but the Elect of the Lord can believe this, that Elias had power to send
down gifts of the Holy Ghost, in what form he pleased, to commissionate Christ
the giver of all Commissions, and yet the Eternal Spirit or Holy Ghost was in
the Person of Christ alone.


Reason. Let me but ask thee this once, and I shall trouble thee no longer;
that is, let me hear thee discover thy thoughts, betwixt the Holy Ghost, and
the gifts of the Holy ^host, whether it be a Person of its own, or only in the
Person of Christ alone.


Faith. As I said before, so I say again, That if the Holy Ghost had a Person
of its own, so the Lord and giver of life, then its Person must be in the form
of a man, suitable to the person of Christ, in that it is the very nature of
Christ, so every Nature has its own form, so the form of Christ; but that
which descended upon Christ, was not the Holy Ghost, but the gift of the Holy
Ghost; for, as I have said before, Christ who had the Holy Ghost in him,
invested the gift thereof upon Elias, that so Elias might protect and preserve
Christ in his nonage, as aforesaid; so that, I say, the essence of the Holy
Ghost is inherent in Christ alone, from whence the gifts or influence of the
Holy Ghost flows; for by my Revelation I know, that when Christ ascended to his
Majesty on high, he sat down on the right hand, which signifies, that Elias's
power and authority was surrendered into the Person of Christ alone; so that
after that, all the gifts or influence of the Holy Ghost came from Christ, as
it is written, when Christ was ascended to glory, then he fills the Apostles
full of the Hol^ Ghost, which then appeared in the form of a Cloven Tongue, and
not in the form of a Dove: So that it is clear, though the Holy Ghost be one
entire Divine invisible life in Christ, yet take notice, the gifts thereof are
diverse, so that the gifts of the Holy Ghost hah various forms, though the Holy
^host has no form but man, and that Christ alon^: And therefore mind the
gross darkness of all thy Seed in their Creeds, as though the Holy ^host had a
Person of its own, so the Lord and giver of life, when it is written in diverse
places, That Christ is the way, the truth, and the life: I am that bread of
life, he that believes on me, has everlasting John 4.
life; and in his saying to the woman of Samaria, But the water that I shall
give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up to everlasting life: So
that the Holy Ghost must needs be in Christ, in that Christ is the giver of
life; and yet such blind reason as thee, will have the Holy Ghost in a Person
distinct from Christ, the Lord and giver of life, when to thy shame thou
heare^t, that Christ alone John 11. 25.
is the Resurrection and the Life, insomuch, that he that believes in Christ,
though he were dead, yet shall he live: So thus much in confutation to the
authors and believers of of those Creeds: Yea, from the Revelation of my Faith
I infallibly against Angels, and all thy Seed of Reason conclude, that so many
of them so living, and so dying in the belief thereof, shall with thee perish
eternally; Yea* in the Virtue of our Commission, I say, there is no God that
can or will deliver thee or them to all Eternity.


A DIVINE PROSPECT.
FOr the Elect of the Lord, that after our departure, shall come to the belief
of this our last Commission, though ye knew us not in our life time, yet you
have the Revelation of faith left upon record, by which you will be supported,
in believing John Reeve and Lodowick Mugglton, the last Commissioners that ever
shall appear in Reasons Kingdom; as also, that I am the only Bishop or
Messenger in Revelation, bearing witness against all Gain* sayers, to the truth
of this Spiritual Commission now in being, and so to remain till time be no
more on this side of death; then, and at which day it shall be made manifest,
that we, and only we, were the last Messengers of Jesus Christ, who at the day
of Resurrection shall ascend to glory in the public view of our Enemies, as
also all other believers who credited our report, not weighing their lives unto
death: Which when we, and all that knew us, are in silent dust; then, I say,
our Revelation will be in great esteem b^ the next generation of faith
succeeding: And therefore that there may be no division among you, from the
Lord of Glory, I reminde you of these en^uing Propositions, they being a
breviate of all the chief heads that my Revelation has reduced from the
Commission:

1. You are to believe, There was to be three Commissions before the end of
this world, thus recorded, The Spirit Water* and Blood, and these are the three
that bears witness upon earth 1 John 5. 8.

2. It is to be believed, That a Commission is given forth by laudible voice of
words, to the hearing of the ear, from the mouth of the Lord Jesus in the
highest Heavens.

3. It is to be believed, That who ever pretends a Commission, not being one of
these, are real whimsies, notions, yea, lies, and no truth.

4. It is to be believed, That though a Commission consist of few words,
without increase, yet their Revelations are various, and increases daily.

5. It is to be observed, That the two last Commissions are not to offend or
defend in point of Externals, but either active or passive to yield due
obedience to King, Governor, or any other Magistrate whatsoever.

6. It is to be believed That no Commission ought to be obedient to any formal
Dispensation, but in their time or place, has power to curse either Angel or
man, that in opposition thereof shall hold forth other Doctrine.

7. It is to be believed* That neither of the two former Commissions, was to
understand what God in his Form and Nature was in the Creation, as this our
Commission does.

8. It is to be believed, That our Commission alone does understand how this
God and Father, after intelligence given to Mary by the Angel, descended from
heaven as swift as thought into the womb of Mary, and there dissolved his
immortal body into seed, and from thence quickened himself into a mortal body of
flesh, blood, and bone, so called a Son.

9. It is to be believed, That the Eternal Father, now become a Son, had the
Supreme power within him, that quickened his Godhead, being perfectly dead in
the grave, to life again, without the help of either Father, God, or Spirit,
without him whatsoever.

10. It is to be believed, That the Prophet Elias in his transmutation, that
nature of faith in him became a chariot of fire, so struck out the gross
Elements, viz. Water, Earth, and Air, and in that fiery faith of his own,
ascended to glory, to represent the Person of God, while he took his journey in
the flesh.

11. Also it is to be believed, That our Commission alone, in the Revelation
thereof, has the true knowledge of these things; as also, what the form and
nature of the Angels are, of what they were created, and wherefore created, and
what was the cause of the Angelical fall above the rest, and why, and wherefore
he was cast into this world in the presence of Adam and Eve.

12. It is to be believed, that never any but our Commission, knew that it was
that said Angel, that in his whole form entered the womb of Eve, and there
dissolved into Seed, and conceived into flesh, blood, and bone, by which Eve
was deceived, so called a Beast, Serpent, Tree of Knowledge of good and evil,
that so none of that Seed might understand, what it was, and how it was Eve was
deceived.

13. It is to be understood, That none but our Commission knows, that this
dissolution of the Angel in the womb of Eve, became Cain the first Devil, and
Father of all the damned.

14. It is to be believed, That there never was, is or shall be any other Devil
but men and women, and that for the most part he is the comeliest of all other
of that form.

15. It is to be believed, That none but our Commission knows, that the souls
of both Faith and Reason, are mortal ever since the fall of Adam, and shall dye
and rot in the grave till the day of Resurrection; and that though dead five
thousand three hundred years ago, yet at the day of our glorious Gods
appearance, each seed or soul shall arise with bodies suitable to their
natures; that soul or seed of faith that believed in our Commission, shall
ascend to meet its Savior in the air; and that soul or seed of Reason that
despised our Commission, shall arise a spiritual body upon this earth,
tormented to all Eternity.

16. It is to be believed, That the Kingdom of glory, where Christ the only
God, his Elect, Saints and Angel* does and shall inhabit to all eternity, is
non-globical, where God and his mighty Angels can at their pleasure with their
bodies, fly as swift as thought, ten thousand miles in a moment, and when he
pleases, God can stand, sit, lie, in as narrow a compass as my self, for none
but our Revelation knows, that there is an immortal Earth, Sea, Fish, Fouls,
Beasts, Herbs, Trees* yea, all things immortal, glorious there, as they are
mortal, deformed here; and all this for the contemplation of God, his Elect,
Saints and Angels, to whom let all ye that have, or shall have belief in our
Commission, so living, and so dying in the truth of our Revelation, sing
praise, glory, and honor, that ye shall see and enjoy what now ye do believe,
as touching our Commission.

17. It is to be believed, that certain men and women have, and will, seeingly
come to the belief of our Commission insomuch that they have rejoiced in it,
contended for it, yea, have said, they desired to depart this life in the
belief of it; and yet being according to birth, the seed of Reason, and not the
seed of Faith, in time of persecution, riches, glory, and honor of this world,
fell away to their eternal perdition; as I could name some, but woe, woe, for as
sure as Christ is God, they shall never see that glorious Kingdom aforesaid.

18. And lastly, it is seriously by you to be observed, That by believing the
truth of what I write, you will find great satisfaction when I am taken from
you, that as this is the last Commission, so the, the, the truth (yea, the
only truth) that shall remain to the end of this bloody, unbelieving world, to
reminde you of this one thing, that it is not to be expected many to come to
believe a Commission, as to a notional dispensation; for in the two former
Commissions, they cried out, Two of a Tribe, one of a City; so few in their
Commissions, that the Prophet El^jah said, I, even I only am left, and they
seek my life to take it a^ay; and then says Isaiah, Who has bel^eved ^ur
report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? So few, that in the time
of Christ, at his sayings, they were so hard to be understood, that there fell
away 70 at one time, nay, none stuck to him but the Apostles, and a few more:
And then in the second Commission there was so few that really believed, that
sometimes Paul had but two or three stood by him in the faith: And now in this
our last, they are so few, that they are not worth the numbering, among the
multitude of notional Churches, and therefore forget not that saying of Christ,
Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there
be that find it: But herein comfort your selves, that those few of you that
really enters in, shall feel, yea, see and behold your God face to face; yea,
sing out triumphing voices of joy, with eternal harmonies of divine music for
ever, yea for ever, in that glorious Kingdom aforesaid, prepared for Christ
your God, and you his Elect Saints, with the Elected Angels world without end;
so that ye shall sit, stand, lie, walk, go, fly, at your pleasure, having
nothing to say, but glory here, is the height of glory in the presence of our
Savior, yea, an endless glory, without end.

These twenty particulars underneath, asserted in the Quakers Downfall, by
Scripture proved, and in that Revelation infallibly confirmed that Law*
Claxton, the only Bishop, and true Messenger of our last Commission, does in
the death of his soul seal them a real truth, in confutation to the Quakers
blind Reasons imagination, which are as follows:

1. That faith shall dye in the heel, and reason in the head. 2. That the Angel
did descend into the womb of Eve. 3. That a spirit cannot live without a body,
p 28. 4. That we and our God are cursed to all eternity. p. 28. 5. That Christ
or God is above the Stars, with a body of flesh and bones. 6. That God, that
Christ said was a spirit, the meaning of his Revelation was, that his invisible
soul was that God or spirit abiding only in his person, p. ^9. 7. Tha^ ^eason
is the seed of the Serpent. 8. That by faith reason shall be kept in eternal
death. 9. That God gave Faith, ^eas^n and Sense but on^e. 10. And that Faith,
Reason and Sense have in all generated, in its kind, form and nature as in p
40. 11 That the Dev^ls Kingdom, and Reasons Kingdom are one. 12. That God does
damn as well as save and that not for any evil thing done, as he has asserted
in p. 58. 13. That we acknowledge no other God but what was within us. 14. And
that we conceive this God was an infinite nothing, and so made all things of
nothing. 15. That the light in us is darkness. 16. That an Infinite Spirit
without a body is nothing. 17. That we say God has no form. 18. That all the
time Paul was clothed with a corrupt, persecuting spirit, he was a vessel of
honor in the account of God. 19. That God is all Faith, and no Reason, and
that Reason is of the Nature of the Devil, p. 31. 20. That it was the wisdom of
the flesh that made a chief Magistrate, as in p. 36.
In the next place, I return as the Majesty of Christ, the only God, in
condemnation of your Diabolical, perj^red lies against the holy Spirit, of the
nature of the most high God, now revealed in us his last powerful, infallible
Prophets and Messengers of his eternal Majesty in the highest Heavens, brought
upon record in our Revelation, as in your Reasons libel, verbatim, are asserted
by that son of perdition J. Harwood

1. L. C. said, He would prove God to be a man, flesh and bones as we are.

Now ye the Believers of our Commission take notice, that of which of these
twelve particulars before quoted, you by my pen find silence, we own as
eternal truth; but the rest that I set my pen against, was not our words, but
Reason the Devil-lying imagination, by those aforesaid Quakers; as do but
observe, and thou may discern how I bind them hand and foot from their
supposed light, yet real darkness, as seriously mind the first forged lie.

3. L. C. said, He had nothing of God in him, and many other places, naught of
God in him.

Answ. That you the blessed of the Lord may know, this was forged by their own
lying imagination, do but read the third affirmation in p. 37. of the Quakers
Downfall, and there you shall read the nature of God in all men more or less,
etc.

5. L. C. said, The Devil was the author of this light in the world.

Answ. Now the words that was then said, were, That Reason, the Devil, was the
light within them; but in the Quakers Downfall you shall find all along* that
Christ as he was Creator of Heaven and earth, by his word of Faith created this
light now in being.

8 L. C. said, He had damned the Lord Mayor seven or eight years ago, and a
thousand within this eight years, and that he had just^fied forty or fifty.

Ans. Now ye of the seed of Faith may discern of what seed or spirit these men
are of, when it is not unknown to you, it is not above two years and a half
since I first heard of this Commission: Now indeed Lodowick Mugleton said some
of those words, that the Lord Mayor, with Recorder Steel, and the whole Jury,
with thousands more, had by them been damned.

9. He pronounced damnation to George Fox junior, and to John Harwood, and said
several times, he would speak no more to them, yet after did; and said he would
answer no question, but after did.

Ans. Had but any discerning soul been there, he might have beheld the spirit
of Cain in them, so cruel, so tempting, that they pulled us by the Coats, and
with diabolical speech said, they would ensnare us; so that I could not but
tell them, I did not think there had been such a violent spirit in them, etc.
Now after their condemnation, charging them with their blasphemy and witchcraft
carriage, this they esteemed an error or weakness in us.

12. One of them said, That a spirit has flesh, blood and bones, contrary to
Christ's words.

Answ. Now do but read their first particular, and compare it with this last,
and then judge, of what a dark* formal, hypocritical, Rabsheca nature, the
chief heads of these Quakers are of; insomuch, that I say, were it not that I
know ye are all the seed of the Serpent, so in darkness, I might admire ye
should say this or that is blasphemy when as we have told you, we only are the
Judge of the Scripture, and what we judge is blasphemy, heresy, or a lie, is
so (and no other:) For this I infallibly say, the first Commission was only
understood by the second Commission; and the first and second Commissions are
only understood by our Commission; so that the notional Churches have nothing
to do with Scripture, much less to say the two first Commissions were truth,
and the last Commission a lie: From the Lord of Glory, I say, that as theirs
were truth in their time and place, so now is ours the only commissionate
truth now in being; and therefore let me but tell you this once, that your
Pharisaical preaching and praying with your moderate, civil walking, a^e all
but as di^t, or the dunghill yea, as a menstrous cloth, not knowing the true
God: So that from the seed of Gods own body, I say, ye had better been
generated a Snake, or a Toad, then a rational, understanding man, as in the day
of an account, when it is too late, you will acknowledge, but then in vain.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 106. line 25. for that faith can take up the words of faith; read, that
faith can take up the words of reason, as reason can (...) up the words of
faith.


