Nebuchadnezzar.
portrait Cyrus.
portrait Artaxerxes.
portrait Alexander.
portrait Epaminondas.
portrait Herod.
portrait Hanibal.
portrait Pompey.
portrait Julius Caesar.
portrait Augustus
portrait Charlemain.
portrait Tamberlain.
portrait

THE LIVES and DEATHS Of most of those EMINENT PERSONS WHO By their VIRTUE and
VALOR Obtained the Sirnames of MAGNI, OR THE GREAT.

Whereof diverse of them give much Light to the Understanding of the Prophecies
in Esaias, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel, concerning the three first Monarchies.

And to other Scriptures concerning the Captivity, and Restoration of the Jews.

The Second Edition, Corrected and Enlarged.

By Samuel Clark, Minister of the Gospel.

Longum iter per pracepta, breve per Exempl.

Hierom. LONDON, Printed by J. R. for W. B. and are to be sold by Tho.
Sawbridge, at the three Flower de Luces in Little Britain, and by W. Birch, at
the Peacock at the lower end of Cheap Side. 1675.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF NEBUCHADNEZZAR THE GREAT, First Emperor of the
CHALDEANS.
NEbuchadonazar, His Parentage.
or Nebuchadnezzar, was the Son of Nebuchadonazar, or Nabopolaser of Babylon,
who was made General of the Army by Saraco King of Assyria and Chaldea, after
whose death Nabopolaser took into his hands the Kingdom of Chaldea, which he
held by the space of one and twenty years; At the same time Astyages was made
Governor of Media by Cyaxares his Father; and the better to strengthen
themselves, they entered into affinity, by Astyages his giving his Daughter
Amytis to Nebuchadnezzar, the Son of Nabopolaser, and thereupon joining their
Forces together, Ninive taken.
they took Ninive, together with Seraco, the King thereof, placing a Viceroy
in his stead.

Shortly after, the Governor of Coelosyria, and Poenicia, revolting from
Nabopolaser, he sent against him his Son Nebuchadnezzar (having first
associated him with himself in the Kingdom of Babylon) with a great Army,
Nebuchadnezzar made King.
which was in the latter end of the third, and the beginning of the fourth year
of Jehoiakim King of Juda; as appears Dan. 1. 1. compated with Jer. 25. 1.

Nebuchadnezzar was no sooner thus associated with his Father in the Kingdom,
but the things which he was to act, Prophecies of him.
were presently revealed to the Prophet Jeremy; the first whereof was the
overthrow of the Egyptians; First, at the River Euphrates; then in their own
Country, Jer. 46. The first of these came to pass presently, Pharaoh Necho's
Forces, which he had left at Carchemish, being cut off by Nebuchadnezzar in the
fourth year of Jehojakim, Jer. 46. 2. The second was not till after the taking
of Tire, in the seventeenth year of the Captivity of Jechonia. Ezekiel. 29. 17,
18, 19.

In the third year of Jehoiakim, His first action. He conquers Jehoiakim.
Nebuchadnezzar the second, his Father being yet alive, entered Iudaea with a
great Army, who, besieging, and forcing Jerusalem, made Iehoiakim his Vassal,
in despite of Pharaoh Necho, who had made him King, and took with him to
Babylon, for Pledges, Daniel, who was yet a Child, with Ananias, Misael, and
Azarias. He took also part of the Treasures belonging to the Temple; but stayed
not to stayed not to search thoroughly for all. For Necho hasted with his Army
to the relief of Iehoiakim, hoping to find Nebuchadnezzar in Judea. But this
great Babylonian had no mind to hazard himself and his Army against the
Egyptian, Iudaea being so ill affected toward him, and himself far from all
succor, or sure place of retreat. If he had (as may be supposed) any great
strength of Scythian Horsemen, it was wisely done of him to fall back out of
that rough, Mountanous, and hot Country, into places that were more even and
temperate. His Fathers death.
And besides these reasons, the Death of his Father happening at the same time,
gave him just occasion to return home, and take possession of his own Kingdom,
before he proceeded in the second care, of adding more unto it.

And this he did at reasonable good leisure. For the Egyptian was not provided
to follow him so far, and to bid him Battle, until the new year came in, which
was the fourth of Iehoiakim, the first of Nebuchadnezzar and the last of Necho.
In this year the Babylonian, lying upon the Banks of Euphrates (his own
Territories bounding it on the North-side) attended the coming of Necho: there,
He conquers Pharaoh Necho.
after a cruel Battle fought betwixt them, Necho was slain, and his Army forced
to save it self by a violent retreat, wherein it suffered great loss.

This Victory was so well pursued by Nebuchadnezzar, He conquers Syria.
that he recovered all Syria, and whatsoever the Egyptians held out of their
proper Territories toward the North. The Egyptians being thus beaten, and
altogether for the present discouraged, Iehoiakim held himself quiet, as being
in heart a Friend to the Egyptians, yet having made his peace with the
Chaldeans the year before, and Mebuchadnezzar was contented with such profit as
he could there readily make: he had forborne to lay any Tribute upon the Jews.

But this cool reservedness of Iehoiakim, was, on both sides, taken in ill
part. Whereupon the Egyptian King Psamnis, who succeeded Necho, began to think
of restoring Iehoahaz (who had been taken prisoner by his Father, and carried
into Egypt) and of setting him up, as a Domestical enemy against his ungrateful
Brother. But to anticipate all such accidents, the Iudaean had put in practice
the usual remedy, which his forefathers used: For he had made his own Son
Iechonia King with him long before; 2 chronicles. 36 9.
in the second year of his own Reign, when the Boy was but eight years old. As
for this rumor of Iehoahaz his return, the Prophet Jeremy foretold, that it
should prove a vain attempt, saying, He shall not return thither, But he shall
die in the place whither they have led him Captive, and shall see this Land no
more. Jer. 22. 11, 12.

The Egyptians, The weak estate of the Egyptians.
having lost their Mercenary Forces, and received that heavy blow at
Carchemish, had more Gold than sharp Steel remaining, which is of small force
without the others help. Besides, the Valor of Necho was not in Psamnis
Apries, who, reigning after Psamnis, did indeed once adventure to show his face
in Syria; but after a big look, he was glad to retire, without adventuring the
hazard of a Battle. Wherefore this declining Nation, fought only with brave
words, telling such frivolous tales, as men that mean to do nothing, use,
boasting of their former glorious acts against Josias and Iehoahaz. And truly
in such a time and case, it was easy for Iehoiakim to give them satisfaction,
by letting them understand the sincerity of his affections toward them, which
appeared in time following.

But Nebuchadnezzar went more roundly to work: Nebuchadnezzar lays a Tribute
upon Jehoiakim.
For he sent a peremptory message to Iehoiakim, requiring him not to stand upon
any nice points, but presently to acknowledge himself his subject, and to pay
him Tribute; Adding thereunto such terrible threatenings, as made the poor
Iudaean lay aside all thoughts of adhering unto Pharaoh; and to yield to do, as
the more powerful would have him.

Thus he continued in Obedience to Nebuchadnezzar three years: During which
time the Prophet Jeremy, cried out against the Impiety of the Jews, putting
them in mind that he had now for three and twenty years exhorted them to
Repentance: But because they had stopped their ears against him, and the rest
of the Prophets, The Captivity foretold.
he now foretold that their Captivity was at hand, and that they should bear
the Yoke of Bondage for seventy years. Jer. 25. 15, etc. Jer. 27.
The same Calamity he threatened to all the Neighboring Nations, to the
Egyptians, Moabites, Ammonites, Idumaeans, and the rest; foretelling that they
should all drink out of the Babylonian Cup the Wine of his fury, whom they had
forsaken; and that after the seventy years should be expired, the Babylonians
themselves should taste of the same Cup, and be utterly subverted by the Medes
and Persians, Jer. 25. 12, etc. And their return. Jeremy imprisoned.
by which means the Jews should be permitted to return into their own Country,
and Cities. The first Imprisonment of the Prophet Jeremy seems to have been in
the fourth year of this Jehoiakim, at which time, Baruch the Scribe, wrote all
his Prophecies from his Mouth, whom he sent to Read them unto the people, and
afterward to the Princes, who presented them to the King: But fearing the
Kings fury, they had first set Jeremy at liberty, and advised him, and Baruch,
to hide themselves, Jeremy 36. 19, etc.

Jehoiakim having heard part of it read to him, Jehoiakim burns the Roll.
and perceiving the ill News contained therein, he made no more ado, but cut
the Book in pieces, and cast it into the fire. All which, Jeremy caused to be
new written, with this Addition, That the dead Body of Jehoiakim, should be
cast out, being exposed in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost,
and that there should be none of his Seed to sit upon the Throne of David.

Time thus running on, Tire rebellet^ against Nebuchadnezzar.
Jehoiakim thought himself secure from all danger, as being Tributary to the
Babylonian, and yet withal, well thought on by the Egyptian: About which time
the mighty City of Tire, opposed it self against Nebuchadnezzar: And upon just
confidence of her own strength, despised all preparations that could be made
against her. Now for as much as the term of seventy years was prescribed for
the Desolation, as well of Tire, as of Jerusalem, and other places, and
Countries, 'its apparent that they that refer the winning of this City to the
ninteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, have good ground and warrant for it. For the
Siege thereof began in the seventh year of his Reign, and lasted thirteen years.

Here it will not be amiss to insert a brief Note concerning the beginning of
this great Princes Rule; The third year of Jehoiakim, was the last of
Nabulasser, who being freed from other cares, and businesses, took notice of
such as had revolted from him to Pharaoh Necho, and sent this Noble Prince, his
Son, with an Army into Syria to reclaim them. In this Expedition was (...)
carried to Babylon, who therefore makes mention of it, Dan. 1. 1. The year next
following, being the fourth of Jehoiakim, was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar,
which Jeremy affirms in express words, Jer. 25. 1. And from this we must
reckon all his time, and actions which follow to be spoken of. In his three and
twentieth year he conquered Egypt, and then began his great Empire, there being
none left that durst offend, or oppose him. The second from this year it was
wherein Daniel saw that Vision of the Image consisting of sundry Metals, which
prefigured the succession of great Kingdoms, that should Rule the World before
the coming of Christ. But to return to the Siege of Tire, which began in the
seventh year of his Reign.

The stately City of Tire covered all the ground of an Island, Tire besieged.
that was divided from the Continent by a deep, and broad Channel of the Sea,
The Chaldaeans had no Fleet of Ships, neither were they Seamen: The Tyrians
excelled all other Nations in multitude of goodly Ships, and skill to use them:
And every Wind, from one part or other, brought in all needful provisions to
the City: Wherefore neither force, nor Famine could greatly hurt the place:
whereof nevertheless, the Judgments of God (denounced against it by Isay, Isay
23.
Jeremy, and Ezekiel) had threatened the destruction; Jer. 25.
and the obstinate resolution of Nebuchadnezzar had fully determined to
accomplish it. Ezekiel. 26.


This hauty King, impatient of resistance, undertook a vast piece of Work, The
difficulty of the work.
which was, to fill up that part of the Sea which divided the Island from the
continent. The City of old Tire, that stood opposite to the New, upon the firm
Land, and the Mountain of Libanus near adjoining, that was laden with stately
Cedars, and abundance of other Trees, furnished him with materials to effect
it. Thirteen years were spent in this difficult, and hopeless undertaking,
which need not seem strange, if we consider, that Alexander, working upon that
Foundation which was remaining of Nebuchadnezzars Peer, and being withal,
assisted with a strong Fleet, was yet seven months e're he could make way into
the City. Wherefore, if the raging of the Sea was able to carry away that
wherewith Alexander labored to cover a Shelve, with much more violence could
it overturn, and as it were, consume the work of Nebuchadnezzar; who laid his
Foundation in the bottom of the deep; Striving, as it were, to fill the empty
Belly of this greedy Cormorant, whereas the Macedonian did only stop the throat
of it. All may know that God could easily have accomplished his own threatenings
against this place (though it had not pleased him to use, either a Miracle, or
such of his more immediate Engines, as are Earthquakes, etc.) by making at
least, the Seas calm, and adding the favorable concurrence of all second
helps. But so it pleases him ofttimes, in chastising the Pride of man, to use
the hand of man, even the hand of man, striving, as it may seem, against all
resistance of nature, and providence. So that by this excessive labor of the
Chaldeans, that Scripture was fulfilled, that every Head should be made bald,
and every Shoulder should be made bare, Ezekiel. 29. 18. Yet would not
Nebuchadnezzar give over till he was Master of the Town.

When he was entered upon his desperate undertaking, whether it were by some
losses received, or some Mutiny in his Army, or some glorious rumor of the
Egyptians strenth, his evil willers took courage to rebel against him; and
amongst them, Jehoiakim, renounced his subjection, and began to hope for the
contrary, which soon after fell out. For Nebuchadnezzar gave him no leisure to
do much hurt: But with part of his Army, Jehoiakim rebels, and is taken, and
slain. Jer. 22. 18, 19. and 36. 30.
he marched strait into Judaea; where the amazed King made so little resistance
(the Egyptians having left him, as it were in a dream) that Nebuchadnezzar
entered Jerusalem, laid hands on Jehoiakim, whom at first he bound, intending to
send him to Babylon, but his mind changing, he caused him to be slain in that
place, and gave him the Burial of an Ass, to be devoured by Beasts, and
ravinous Birds, according to the former Prophecy; Leaving in his place his
Son, Jeconias made King and imprisoned.
Jehoiakim, or Jeconias; whom yet after three months, and ten days, he deposed,
and sent him Prisoner to Babylon, together with Ezekiel, Mordecay, Jer. 29. 2.
2 Kin. 28. 16. 2 Chronicles. 36. 10. Jer. 24. 1. and 29. 1, 2. Ezekiel 17. 12.
and Josedech, the High Priest.

The Mother of Jeconias, together with his Servants, Eunuchs, and all the
ablest men, and best Artificers in the Land, were also then carried away
Captives. This Jeconias, following the Counsel of the Prophet Jeremy, made no
resistance, but submitted himself to the Kings will, wherein he both pleased
God, and did that which was most profitable for himself, though at the present
it might seem otherwise, to such as consider the evil that befell him, rather
than the greater evil that he thereby avoided. This only particular act of his
is recorded in Scripture which was good: But it seems that he was at least a
partaker in his Fathers sins, if not a provoker, which was the cause, that
though he submitted himself to Gods will, yet did he not preserve his estate:
For so it is said, That he did evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all
that his Father had done. In his stead, Nebuchadnezzar set up Mattania, his
Uncle, making him King of Iudaea, Zedekia^ is made King. Jer. 37. 1. 2 King.
24. 17.
and called him Zedechias. For like as Necho King of Egypt, had formerly
displaced Iehoahaz, after he had slain his Father Josias, and set up Iehoiakim,
the Son by another Mother: So Nebuchadnezzar slew Iehoiakim, who depended on
the Egyptians, and, carrying his Son Ieconias Prisoner to Babylon, he gave the
Kingdom to this Zedechias, who was whole Brother to that Iehoahaz, whom Necho
took with him into Egypt, and from Zedechias he required an Oath for his
loyalty, and faithful subjection, which Zedechias gave him, and called the
living God to witness in the same, that he would remain assured to the Kings of
Chaldaea, 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Ezekiel. 17. 13, 14, 18.

In the first year of Zedechias, Jeremy saw, Jer. 24. 2.
and expounded the vision of the ripe, and rotten Figs, the one signifying
those that were already carried away Captives, the other signifying those Jews
that yet remained, and were afterward destroyed, Ier. 29. 17.

In the fourth year of Zedechias, Babylons destruction foretold.
Jeremy wrote in a Book all the evil which should fall upon Babylon, which
Book, or Roll, he gave to Seraiah, when he went with King Zedechias to Babylon,
to visit Nebuchadnezzar, willing him first to read it to the Captive Jews, and
then to bind a stone to it, and cast it into Euphrates, Sundry Prophesies of
Jeremy. Jer. 51. 59.
pronouncing these words; Thus shall Babel be drowned, and shall not rise from
the evil which I will bring upon her. This journey of Zedechias to Babylon is
probably thought to be in a way of a visit, and to carry some presents to
Nebuchadnezzar; But yet it is likely he had some suit to make, which his Lordly
Master refused to grant, and sent him away discontented. For at his return, all
the bordering Princes sent Messengers to him, inciting him (as it seems) to
those unquiet courses from which the Prophet Jeremy dehorted both him and them.
Jer. 27. 8.
About which time the Prophet, by Gods appointment, made bonds and yokes, one
of which he wore about his own neck, others he sent unto the five Kings, of
Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tire, and Zidon, by those Messengers which came to visit
Zedechias, making them know, that if they, and the King of Judah continued in
subjection to Babylon, they should then possess, and enjoy their own Countries;
If not, they should assuredly perish by the Sword, by Famine and by Pestilence.

He also foretold them, that those Vessels which yet remained in Jerusalem,
should be carried after the other to Babylon, yet at length should be restored
again.

The same year Ananias, Ananias a false Prophet. Jer. 28.
the false Prophet, took off the wooden yoke which Jeremy did wear, as a sign
of the Captivity of the Jews, and brake it: Vaunting, that in like manner after
two years, God would break the strength of Babel, and the yoke which he had
laid on all Nations: and that he would restore Ieconias and all the Jews, with
the Vessels, and Riches of the Temple, and put an end to all these troubles.
But Jeremy instead of his Wooden yoke, wore a Collar of Iron; and in sign that
Ananias had given a false, and deceitful hope to the People, he foretold the
Death of this false Prophet, Jer. 28. 15.
which accordingly came to pass in the seventh Month.

After this, Zedechias rebels. Ezekiel. 17. 15, 17.
when Zedechias had wavered long between Faith and Passion, in the eighth year
of his Reign, he practiced more seriously against Nebuchadnezzar, with his
Neighbors, the Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites, Tyrians, and others, who were
promised great aids by the Egyptians, in confidence of whose assistance, he
resolved to shake off the Babylonian Yoke; whereof, when Nebuschad chadnezzar
was informed, he marched with his Army in the dead of Winter, toward
Jerusalem, Jerusalem besieged.
and besieged it. Jeremy persuaded Zedechias to render the City and himself to
him: But Zedechias, being confident of help from Egypt, and being persuaded by
his Princes and false Prophets, that it was impossible that the Kingdom of
Judah should be extirpated until the coming of Shilo, according to Jacobs
Prophecy, Jer. 32. and 34.
Genesis 49. 10. he despised the counsel of Jeremy, and imprisoned him, For Jeremy
had told the King, that the City should be taken and burnt; that the King
should not escape, but be taken Prisoner, and brought to the presence of
Nebuchadnezzar: That he should not perish by the Sword, but being carried to
Babel, should there dye a natural Death.

The following year, Jer. 44.
Jerusalem was surrounded, and more strictly besieged by Nebuchadnezzars Army;
Egypt a broken staff.
whereupon the King of Egypt, Pharaoh Hophra, entered into Iudaea with his Army,
Jer. 37. 3, 10.
to succor Zedechias, of whose revolt he had been the principal Author. But
Jeremy gave the Jews faithful counsel, willing them not to have any trust in
the succors of Egypt: for he assured them that they should return back again,
and in no sort relieve them. And it fell out accordingly. For when the
Chaldaeans removed from Jerusalem to encounter the Egyptians, these bragging
Patrons abandoned their enterprise; and taking Gaza in their way homewards,
returned into Egypt, as if they had already done enough, leaving the poor
people in Jerusalem to their destined miseries. Ier. 34. 11, 22.

In the mean while the Jews, who in the time of their extremity, had released
their Hebrew Bondmen, Lev. 25. 39, 40, etc.
and Bond-women, according to the Law, in the year of Iubile, and made them
free, thereby to encourage them to fight, did now upon the breaking up of the
Chaldean Army, repent of what they had done, and thinking that all danger had
been past, they held them by force to their former slavery. But the Chaldeans
being returned to the Siege, the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 34. Jer. 39.
when the State of Jerusalem began now to grow to extremity, counseled
Zedechias to render himself to the Babylonians, assuring him of his own life,
and of the safety of the City if he would do so. But his obstinate heart led
him on to that wretched end, which, his neglect of God, and his Infidelity and
Perjury had provided for him.

Three and twenty Months the Chaldean Army lay before Jerusalem, Jer. 39.
and held it exceeding straightly besieged; For they built Forts against it round
about, 2 King. 25. 1. or, they surrounded the City with Wooden Towers, so as
the Besieged could neither sally out, nor receive into the City any supplies of
men or Victuals. Jer. 39. 1. and 52. 4.
Josephus says, that they over-topped the Walls with their high Towers, which
they erected upon Mounts, from which, with their Engines they did so beat upon
the walls, that the Defendants were forced to forsake their stations. And
though the Besieged also raised Counter-buildings, like unto these, yet the
Great Nebuchadnezzar, who Commanded all the Regions thereabouts, and had the
Woods and Rivers at his command, found out means to disappoint and overthrow
all the Citizens endeavors, and to beat down their Towers as fast as they
raised them. For his own works were guarded by the Walls of Jerusalem, whereas
theirs within lay open to his Batteries. Besides, both Famine and Pestilence
(which commonly accompany men straightly besieged) grew fast upon them, whereby,
when the number, strength, and courage of the Jews failed, Jerusalem taken.
the Chaldeans made a breach, and forcing an entry, their Princes did seat
themselves as Lords of the Town, in the middle Gate, 2 King. 26. 2, 3, 4. Ier.
39. 2, 3. and 52, 5, etc.

Zedechias, Zedechias flies and is taken.
beholding this uncomfortable sight, and finding no other means to escape the
present danger, lost both his Courage and his Hope at once, and shifted
himself, together with his Wives, Children, Princes, and principal Servants,
out of the City, by a way underground, leaving his amazed, and now headless
Subjects, to the merciless Swords of their enraged enemies. Thus he, who when
the Prophet Jeremy persuaded him to render himself, despised both the Counsel
of God, and the Army and force of Nebuchadnezzar, used now the remedy which one
calls, A woeful, shameful, and unfortunate shift.

By this secret subterranean Vault, Zedechias stole away, and by the help of
the dark night, recovered the plains, or deserts of Jericho. But by reason of
the train that followed him and his, (every one leading with him those whom he
loved best) he was easily traced and pursued. How great soever the company was
that attended him, yet certain it is, that they, on whose fidelity he most
relied, no sooner beheld the Chaldeans to draw near, but they all abandoned his
defense, and shifted for themselves in the Deserts, as they could. For, whom
God had forsaken, no man regarded. And thus Zedechias was taken by the
Ministers of Gods vengeance, and being made a Prisoner, together with his
Children, and Princes, he was carried to Riblah, in the Tribe of Nephthalim,
where Nebuchadnezzar then lay, as a place indifferent between Jerusalem and
Tire, with both which places he had at one time to do.

Now when Nebuchadnezzar had laid before Zedechias the many Graces and Favors
which he had conferred upon him, And carried to Babylon.
together with the notable falsehood and perjury wherewith he had requited him,
Jer. 34. 3, etc, 2 King. 25. 4, 7.
he commanded his Children, Princes, Jer. 39. 4, 7. and 52. 7, 11.
and Friends, to be slain before his face. This being done, to the end that so
lamentable a spectacle should be the last that ever he should behold in this
world, he caused his eyes to be put out, and so carried him like a Slave to
Babylon, where he consumed the rest of his life in perpetual imprisonment.
Herein was that mavelous Prophecy of Ezekiel fulfilled: I will bring him to
Babylon, and he shall not see it, Ezekiel. 12. 13.

Thus, in the eleventh, and last year of Zedechias, which was the eighteenth of
Nebuchadnezzar, the Chaldeans entered into Jerusalem by force, where, sparing
neither Sex nor Age, they put all to the Sword that they found therein.

In the next year following, 2 King. 25. 8.
Nebuzaradan, the General of the Babylonish Army, burnt the Kings Palace, Jer.
52. 13. with 39. 8.
and the whole City of Jerusalem, and after the fire had lasted from the
seventh to the tenth day, The Temple and City burnt.
he also burnt the Temple of God to the ground, the richest and most
Magnificent place that ever the Sun saw, when it had stood four hundred thirty
and one years.

After this, 2 King. 25. 18.
upon a second search, Nebuzaradan (not yet satiated with blood) commanded
seventy and two others to be slain, Jer. 39. 8, 9. and 52. 14, 23.
which had hidden themselves from the first fury, 2 Chronicles. 36. 18, etc.
to wit, the chief and the second Priest, two Commanders of Zedechias his men
of war, Poor people left under Gedaliah,
five of his household Servants, and some others; carrying away to Babylon the
ablest of the People through all Iudaea, Jer. 39. 10.
and leaving the poorest laboring people, Jer. 40. 16.
with some that followed the party of Nebuchadnezzar, to till the Ground, over
whom he placed Gedaliah, the Nephew of that Saphan, whom Josias had formerly
employed in the Reformation of Religion. This Gedaliah, a Jew by Nation, left
Zedechias, as it seems, in the beginning of the War, and by Ieremies desire
to live with him, it is probable that had embraced the same advice which the
Prophet gave to Zedechias, which was, to submit himself to the Babylonian King,
who being ordained of God for them, as an instrument of his Justice, was,
therefore irresistible.

The Prophet Jeremy being left to his own choice, Jeremy goes to them.
to live where he pleased, made choice to go to Gedaliah, Jer. 40. 6.
to whom he was commended by Nebuzaradan, and he, not only entertained him
kindly, but comforted him, and all the other Jews that were left under his
charge, promising them favor and liberty, so long as they remained obedient
Subjects to Nebuchadnezzar, by whom he was established Provincial Governor
over his own Nation.

But e're the year was expired, a Prince of the late Kings Family (who, during
the Siege of Jerusalem, had sheltred himself from the storm, with Baalis, King
of the Ammonites) being attended by ten other chosen men, whilst Gedaliah
feasted them in Mitspah, Gedaliah slain. Jer. 41. 2.
the City of his residence, they traitorously slew him, 2 King. 25. 25.
together with diverse Chaldeans and Jews that accompanied him. This done, they
escaped, and in their way, encountering with eighty persons, repairing toward
Gedaliah with presents, they slew most of them, and only spared some, who
promised to discover to them some Treasures that were hidden in the Fields
during the War. They took with them also a Daughter of Zedechias, committed to
the care of Gedaliah, by Nebuchadnezzar: This treachery of Ismael had been
formerly discovered to Gedaliah by Iohanan, one of the Captains of the few
remaining Jews, but he would not believe it.

Judea being now without a Governor (for Ismael durst not take it upon him,
but fled as fast as he could to the Ammonites) the residue of the Jews, fearing
the revenge of the Chaldeans, resolved to fly into Egypt, and besought Jeremy
to ask counsel of God for them, Jeremy's counsel rejected.
who returned answer, that if they remained in Judea, Jer. 43.
God would provide for them, and show them mercy; but if they sought to save
themselves in Egypt, they should then undoubtedly perish. Notwithstanding which
advice, the Jews held their determination, and despised the Oracle of God; and
constraining Jeremy and Baruch to accompany them, He is carried into Egypt, and
stoned.
they went into Egypt, and by the permission of Pharaoh, they dwelt in Taphnes;
where, when Jeremy often reproved them for their Idolatry, foretelling the
destruction of themselves, and the Egyptians, he was, by these his own
hard-hearted and ungrateful Countrymen, stoned to death, and by the Egyptians,
who greatly reverenced him, buried near the Sepulcher of their Kings, Ier. 42.
and 43.

The nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzars Reign it was, when destroying utterly
the great and mighty City of Jerusalem, he exceedingly enriched himself with
the spoils of it and the Temple, and by that dreadful Example terrified all
those that should dare to resist him. From that time forward, he, to his three
and twentieth year, Nebuchadnezzar conquers diverse Nations.
labored in the Conquest of those adjoining Countries, which God had exposed
unto his Sword, and commanded to wear his Yoke, namely, the Edomites, Moabites,
Ammonites, Tyrians, Sidonians, and Egyptians, though some of these were already
become his followers, and served under him when Jerusalem was taken and burnt.
But the Tyrians, whose City was built upon an Island, and therefore secure from
the invasion of any Land-Army, and whose Fleet was so strong, that they needed
not to fear any enemy at Sea, were neither daunted with the fall of their
neighbor City, nor with the obstinate resolution of this mighty King,
employing all his wit and power to work their subversion.

That the City of Tire was rather well-pleased, than any way discouraged with
the destruction of Jerusalem, it appears by the Words which Ezekiel
condemns, as the common voice of Tyrus, Ezekiel. 26. 2. Aha! the Gate of the
People is broken, it is turned unto me; For seeing she is desolate, I shall be
replenished. Yet at length, that great work before mentioned, began to appear
above Water, and so to threaten them with inevitable mischief.

Nebuchadnezzar still follows his work hard, notwithstanding all
discouragements, and in the thirteenth year of the Siege, and the nineteenth of
his Reign, he had brought it to such perfection, that now the Citizens
despaired of holding out against him; whereupon all the chiefest of them
embarked themselves, their Families, Tire is taken.
and Treasures in their Fleet, and escaped to the Isle of Cyprus, but the
poorer sort were left to the fury of the enemy; who being enraged for being put
to so much pains, slew with the Sword, not only such people of Type as dwelt on
the Continent (who are called her Daughters in the Field) but the like
execution was done in the streets, into which, with excessive labor, the
Chaldeans made way for his Horses and Chariots. Thus Nebuchadnezzar made his
Army serve a great service, against Tyrus, wherein every head was made bald,
and every shoulder was made bare, yet had he no wages, nor his Army, Ezekiel. 20.
18. but was fain to rest contented with the Honor of having destroyed that
City, which in all men's Judgments had been held invincible.

The destruction of these two Great, and powerful Cities, having made the name
of the Chaldeans dreadful in the ears of all the Nations round about,
Nebuchadnezzar used this advantage of that reputation which he had obtained by
his victories already gotten, to the getting of more, and more profitable, with
less pains. The Kingdom of Egypt was the mark which he chiefly aimed at. A
Country so abounding in Riches and pleasures, that it might well have tempted
any Prince, finding himself strong enough to pick occasion of quarrel against
it. Besides, it was so far an enemy to the Crown of Babylon, that, had it been
far poorer, yet it must have been subdued, or the Conquest of Syria could not
have been secured.

Yet was it needful, that before he entered upon this business, the Countries
adjacent should be reduced into such terms, that either they should wholly
stand at his devotion, or at least, be able not to work him any displeasure.
And herein the Decree of God concurred (as in all prosperous enterprises) with
reason of State. For the people of Moab, Ammon, Edom, Damascus, Kedar, Hazor,
and other adjoining Regions, whom God for their sins had condemned to fall
under the Babylonian Yoke, were such, as regarding only their own gain, had,
some of them, like Ravens, followed the Chaldean Army, to feed upon the
carcasses that fell by the cruelty thereof. Others taking advantage of their
Neighbors miseries, occupied the Countries, which, by his Victories, belonged
to Nebuchadnezzar, all of them thinking, that when the Babylonian had satisfied
his fury, he would be forced to forsake those desolated Countries, and leave
the possession of them to those who could first seize upon them. The Jews
enemies threatened.
Particularly, the Edomites, and Philistines, had showed much malice against
the Jews when their City was taken, Ezekiel. 25. 12, 15. Whether they had done any
good service to the Chaldeans, it appears not; if they did any, its like to
have been in reference to their own advantage, wherein yet they were deceived.
The Ammonites were not contented to rejoice only at the fall of Jerusalem, but
presently they entered upon the Country of God, and took possession of it, as
if, not the Chaldeans, but they had subdued Israel, Ezekiel. 25. 3. Jer. 49. 1.
Neither can it be imagined what other design Baalis, King of the Ammonites had,
when he sent Ismael, a Prince of the Blood of Judah, to murder Gedalia, whom
the King of Babel had made Governor over those that remained in Israel, and to
carry Captive into the Ammonites Country, the People that abode in Mizpah, than
a desire of entangling Nebuchadnezzar with so many labors at once, as should
force him to retire into his own Country, and abandon those wasted Lands, to
himself, and others, for whom they lay conveniently. Such, or the like Policy,
the Moabites also did exercise, whose Pride, and Wrath were made frustrate by
God, and their dissimulation condemned, as not doing aright, Ver. 40. 14. and
41. 2. and 10. and 28, 27, etc,

All these Nations had the Art of ravening, They are destroyed by
Nebuchadnezzar.
which is familiar to such as either live in, or that border upon Deserts; and
now the time ministered occasion to them to show the uttermost cunning of their
Thievish wits. But Nebuchadnezzar made void all their devices by sharp, and
sudden War upon them, overwhelming them with unexpected ruin, as it were in one
night, Isa. 16. 14.
according to the Prophesies of Isay, Jeremy, and Ezekiel, who all foretold,
with little difference of Words, the greatness and swiftness of the misery that
should come upon them. It appears not with which of them he first began; but it
seems that Moab was the last that felt his heavy hand: For so many interpret
that Prophecy of Isay, threatening Moab with destruction after three years, as
having reference to the third year following the destruction of Jerusalem: the
next year after it, being spent in the Egyptian expedition. This is evident
that all the principal Towns in these Countries were burnt, and the people
either slain, or made captives, few excepted, who saved themselves by flight,
and had not the courage to return to their habitations too hastily, much less
to attempt any thing against Nebuchadnezzar: but lived as miserable outlaws,
until the end of the seventy years which God had appointed for the desolation
of their Countries, as well as of the Land of Judaea.

When by a long course of Victory Nebuchadnezzar had brought into Subjection
all the Nations of Syria, Egypt attempted by Nebuchadnezzar.
and the bordering Arabians in such wise, as that no enemy to himself, or
Friend to the Egyptian, was left at his back, that might either impede his
proceedings, or take advantage of any misfortune that might befall him; then
did he forthwith apply himself to the Conquest of Egypt, upon which those other
Nations had formerly been dependants. Of this expedition, and the Victorious
issue thereof, the three great Prophets, Isay, Jeremy, and Ezekiel have written
so plainly, that its altogether needless to seek after any other authority to
confirm the same. Long before it was prophesied by Isay, that the King of
Assyria, or Babylon, should lead away the Egyptians Prisoners, and the
Ethiopians Captives, young, and old, naked and barefoot, even with their
buttocks uncovered to the shame of Egypt, Isa. 20. 4.

But Ezekiel and Jeremy, as their Prophesies were nearer to the time of
execution, so they handled this Argument more plainly, and precisely. For
Esekiel tells us clearly, that Egypt should be given to Nebuchadnezzar as wages
for his great service which he had done against Tire, Ezekiel. 29. 18, 19, 20. He
recounteth also in particular all the chief Cities in Egypt, saying, that these
by name should be destroyed, and go into Captivity: yea, and that Pharaoh, and
all his Army should be slain by the Sword, Ezekiel. 30. 4, 10, etc. Chap. 32. 2,
etc. And the Prophet Jeremy, says thus, Behold I will visit the common people
of Noe, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their Gods, and their Kings, even Pharaoh
and all that trust in him; and I will deliver them into the hands of those that
seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, and into
the hands of his Servants, Jerem. 46. 25, 26. Josephus accordingly says, that
Nebuchadnezzar in three and twentieth year of his Reign, Egypt conquered.
and in the fifteenth year after the destruction of Jerusalem, did Conquer
Egypt, and kill the King thereof, appointing a Viceroy to Govern it. And it is
evident that his Victories which followed his Conquest of Syria, were such as
did more enlarge his Dominions, than all his former Wars had done. For Ezekiel
in his Thirtieth Chapter reckons up (besides the whole Country of Egypt)
Phut, and Lud, with other Nations that may seem to have reached as far as into
Mauritania, which were conquered by him, and added to his Empire, And truly it
is worth observation how Pharaoh, King of Egypt was infatuated by God, who
thought himself most safe in his own Country by reason of the well-defenced
situation thereof, and therefore very unwisely suffered his enemies to make a
clear way to his own doors by the Conquest of all his Friends, and Allies in
Syria. For as the labor of this business did more harden than weary the
Chaldean Army, so the confidence, Carnal confidence.
and vain security of the Egyptians, relying upon the difficulty of the
passages which the enemy was to make through the Arabian Deserts, and the great
advantage which the River Nilus afforded, did little avail them, when the War
came on; Yea, it did much astonish them (as may justly be thought) in the time
of execution. It being usually seen, that the hearts of men fail, when those
helps deceive them, in which they had reposed more confidence than in their own
Virtue, and Valor.

Until this time, the Kingdom of Egypt had flourished under the Rule and
Government of the Pharaohs for above the space of one thousand, four hundred,
and eighty years. But from this time forward, it remained forty years without a
King under the subjection of the Babylonians; and then at lenghth it began to
recover by little and little the former greatness: Yet so, that it was never
dreadful unto others as it had been, God having said of that people; Egypt
never recovered its strength again.
At the end of forty years I will gather the Egyptians from the People whither
they were scattered; and I will bring again the Captivity of Egypt, and will
cause them to return into the Land of Pathros, into the land of their
habitation, and they shall be yet a base Kingdom. It shall be the basest of the
Kingdoms, neither shall it exalt it self any more above the Nations; For I will
diminish them that they shall no more rule over the Nations, and it shall be no
more the confidence of the House of Israel, Ezekiel. 29. 13, 14, 15, 16. For
whereas it had been said of Pharaoh, I am the Son of the wise, the Son of
ancient Kings, Isa. 19. 11. and whereas they had Vaunted, the River is mine,
and I have made it, Ezekiel. 29. 9. The Princes of Egypt, now became fools, the
River failed them, the King himself was now taken and slain, and that ancient
Lineage was quite extinguished.

Of any Wars made by Nebuchadnezzar after such time as he returned from the
Conquest of Egypt, Ninive destroyed. See before*
we read not, except that against Ninive, the destruction whereof was foretold
by the Prophet. Ninive indeed had been taken long before by Merodoch, and
together with the rest of Assyria, made subject to Babylon. Yet was it left
under a peculiar King, who rebelling against Nebuchadnezzar, as Jehoiakim, and
Zedechias, Tributary Kings of Judah, had done, was made partaker also of the
same ruin. That the destruction of Ninive followed the Conquest of Egypt, is
clear by the comparison which Nahum the Prophet made between this City that was
to fall, and the City of Noe in Egypt which was fallen already; Nabum 3. 8,
etc. Art thou better than populous Noe, that was situate amongst the Rivers,
that had the waters round about it; whose Rampire was the Sea, and her wall was
from the Sea, Ethiopia, and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite: Put,
and Lubin were her helpers. Yet was she carried away, she went into Captivity;
Her young Children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets,
and they cast lots for her honorable men, and all her great men were bound in
chains. Thou also shall be drunken; thou shall be hid; thou also shall seek
strength because of the enemy, etc.

This Great Monarch, having thus spent his younger days in enlarging his
Dominions, he betook himself to rest, that he might reap the fruit of his
former labors; and the first thing that he applied himself to, was to
beautify his Imperial City of Babylon, Babylon beautified.
adding a new City to the Old, which he compassed about with three Walls, and
made in them stately Gates. And near the former Palace he built a New one, more
stately than it, wherein he raised stone-works, like unto Mountains, which he
planted with all manner of Trees. Pensile Gardens.
He made also Pensile Gardeus (one of the Worlds wonders) born upon Arches,
foursquare, each square being four hundred Foot long, filled above with Earth,
whereon grew all sorts of Trees, and Plants. The Arches were built one above
another in a convenient-heigth, still increasing as they ascended. The highest,
which did bear the walls on the top, were fifty Cubits high, so that they
equalized the highest Mountains. He made also Aquaeducts for the watering of
this Garden, which seemed to hang in the air. This most sumptuous frame, which
out-lasted all the remainder of the Assyrian, and all the Persian Empire, is
said to have been reared and finished in fifteen Days. Nebuchadnezzars Golden
Image.
He erected also an image of Gold in the Plain of Dura, sixty Cubits high, and
six broad, commanding all his Servants, and Subjects to fall down and Worship
it, Dan. 3. 1, etc.

But of all this, and other his Magnificence, we find little else recorded,
save that which indeed is most profitable for us to consider, to wit, his
overvalewing of his own greatness, which abased him to a condition inferior to
the poorest of men. For whereas God had honored him, not only with many great,
and glorious Victories, and much happiness in his own life; but with a rare
discovery of things that were to come after him; yea, and had manifested the
certainty of his Dreams, by the miraculous reducing of it into his Memory, Dan.
2. 31, etc.
and given him the interpretation thereof by the Prophet Daniel: He
notwithstanding became so forgetful of God, whose wonderful power he had seen,
His Pride.
and acknowledged, that he caused that Golden Image to be set up, and
Worshipped, appointing a cruel Death for them that should dare to disobey him,
which was utterly unlawful, and repugnant to the Law of him that is King of
Kings; And thus he who so lately had Worshipped Daniel, the servant of God, as
if he had been God himself: now commanded a Statue to be erected unto himself,
wherein himself might be worshipped as God: From this impiety it pleased God to
recall and reclaim him, by the wonderful and miraculous delivery of those three
blessed Saints, A Miracle. Dan. 3. 26. etc.
out of the fiery Furnace, who being thrown bound into the midst of it, for
refusing to commit that abominable Idolatry, were preserved from all hurt of
the fire, loosened from their Bonds, accompanied by an Angel, and at last
called out by the King, and restored to their former honor.

Nebuchadnezzar being amazed at the Miracle, Dan. 3. 29. He makes a Decree to
Gods Honor.
made a Decree tending to the honor of God, whom by the erection of his Image,
he had dishonored. Yet was not this devotion so rooted in him, that it could
bring forth fruit answerable to his hasty zeal: Therefore was he forewarned of
God in a Dream, of a terrible Judgment which hung over his Head, His Dream
interpreted.
which Daniel expounding, withal counseled him to break off his sin by
righteousness, and his iniquities, by showing mercy to the poor, that there
might be a lengthening of his tranquillity, Dan. 4. 27. Whence it seems, that
injustice and cruelty were his faults, for which he was thus threatened: But
neither did the Dream, nor advice of Daniel so prevail. For probably he
believed it not, but looked upon it as an idle Dream; for that it seemed
altogether unlikely that so great a Monarch should be driven from amongst men,
He dwells with the Beasts.
yea, compelled to dwell with the Beasts of the Field, and made to eat Grass as
the Oxen, this was altogether incredible in man's Judgment, and therefore giving
so little heed to it, its no marvel that he had forgotten it by the years end.

One whole year was given to this haughty Prince wherein to repent, which
respiting of the execution, may seem to have bred in him forgetfulness of Gods
sentence. For at the end of twelve months, as he was walking in his Royal
Palace in Babel, he was so overjoyed, and transported with a vain contemplation
of his own seeming happiness, that without all fear of Gods heavy Judgment
pronounced against him, he uttered these proud words: Is not this great Babylon
that I have built for the House of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and
for the Honor of my Majesty?

But his proud speeches were not fully ended, when a voice from Heaven told
him, that his Kingdom was departed from him, etc. And the same hour the thing
was fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar; And he was driven from men, and did eat
grass as Oxen, and his Body was wet with the dew of Heaven, till his hair was
grown like Eagles Feathers, and his nails like Birds Claws, Dan. 4. 33, etc.

This his punishment was singular, His Bodily shape not changed.
and unexpected. For he ran amongst Beasts in the Fields and Woods, where, for
seven years he lived, not only as a salvage man, but as a salvage Beast: for a
Beast he thought himself to be, and therefore fed himself in the same manner,
and with the same food that Beasts do. Not that he was changed in his external
shape from a man to a Beast. For as St. Jerome well expounds it, when he says,
verse. 34. that his understanding was restored unto him, he showed, that he had
not lost his humane shape, but his understanding, being stricken with a Frenzy,
or deep Melancholy, which made him think himself a Beast.

Seven years being expired, He is restored to his Kingdom. And gives Glory to
G^d.
Nebuchadnezzar was restored both to his Understanding, and to his Kingdom: and
(says he) I blessed the most High, and I praised, and honored him that lives
for ever, whose Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom is from
Generation to Generation; And all the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as
nothing, and he does according to his Will in the Army of Heaven, and amongst
the Inhabitants of the Earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What
do thou? At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the Glory of my
Kingdom, mine honor, and brightness returned unto me, and my Counselors, and
my Lords sought unto me, and I was established in my Kingdom, and excellent
Majesty was added unto me. Now therefore I Nebuchadnezzar praise, and extol,
and honor the King of Heaven, all whose works are truth, and his way is
Judgment, and those that walk in Pride he is able to abase, Dan. 4. 34, 35,
36, 37.

How long he lived after this is uncertain, but all agree that he reigned about
twenty months co-partner with his Father in the Kingdom, and about three and
forty years by himself alone.

Whilst Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon reged in Judaea, Gods Justice*
God prepared a Worm, which in due time, should eat out this spreading Tree; by
reason of the cry of his poor people, which entered into his ears: According to
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 137. 8, 9. O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be
destroyed: Happy shall he be that rewards thee, as thou have served us. Happy
shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones. For in
this very year was Cyrus, the Perso-Median born; whose Father was a Persian,
and his Mother a Mede; of whom this very Nebuchadnezzar, at the hour of his
Death, uttered this Prophecy. There shall come a Persian Mule, A Prophecy*
who shall make use of your Devils, as his Fellow Soldiers, to bring you into
Bondage. He calls Cyrus a Mule, because he was to be born of a Father and
Mother of two diverse Nations.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF CYRUS THE GREAT, The First Founder of the PERSIAN EMPIRE.
CYRUS was the Son of Cambyses, His Parentage.
King of Persia, by Mandanes the Daughter of Astyages, King of Media; He was so
named by the Prophet Isay, almost two hundred years before he was born, Isa.
45. 1, 4. Thus says the Lord unto Cyrus his anointed, etc.

Cyrus his first Education was under his Father Cambyses, His Education.
with whom he lived till he was twelve years old, and somewhat more; at which
time he was sent for, together with his Mother Mandanes, by his Grandfather
Astyages, into Media.

In Media he served Astyages, first, as one of his Halberdiers, and then as one
of his Armour-bearers, till he was called home into Persia by his Father
Cambyses, when as yet he had one year to spend at School; and when he had spent
seventeen years at School amongst Boys, he spent ten years more amongst youths.

When Cyrus was now almost sixteen years old, His first Action in War.
Evilmerodach the King of Assyria, being about to marry a Wife called Nicotris,
made an in-rode, with a great Army of Horse and Foot, into the borders of
Media, there to take his pleasure in hunting, and harrassing of the Country:
against whom, Astyages, and Cyaxares his Son, and Cyrus his Grandchild, who
then first began to bear Arms, being but about fifteen or sixteen years old,
marched out, met with him, and in a great Battle overthrew him, and drove him
out of his borders. Indeed the Death of Nebuchadnezzar, the Father of
Evilmerodach, gave courage to those that had found him a troublesome Neighbor,
to stand upon prouder terms with the Babylonians, than in his flourishing
estate they durst have used.

But Evilmerodach, being too proud to digest this loss which he had received by
the Medes, and their Allies, the Persians under Cyrus, he drew unto his party
the Lydians, and all the people of the lesser Asia, with great gifts and strong
persuasions, hoping by their assistance to overwhelm his enemies with a strong
invasion, whom in vain he had sought to weary out by a lingering War.

The issue of these great preparations made by Evilmerodach against the Medes,
was such as opened the way to the fulfilling diverse Prophesies which were many
years before uttered against Babel, by Isay and Jeremy. For the Babylonians and
their Confederates, who, trusting in their numbers, thought to have buried the
Medes and Persians under their thick showers of Arrows and Darts, were
encountered with an Army of stout and well trained men, weightily Armed for
close fight, by whom they were beaten in a great Battle, wherein Evilmerodach
was slain. Evilmerodach is slain.
After which, that great Empire that was raised and upheld by Nebuchadnezzar,
was grievously shaken and enfeibled under his unprosperous Son, and left to be
sustained by his Grandchild Belshazzar: a man more like to have overthrown it
when it was greatest and strongest, than to repair it when it was in a way of
falling.

Xenophon relates the matter thus, When the Babylonian had enlarged his Empire
with many Victories, and was become Lord of all Syria, and many other
Countries, he began to hope, that if the Medes could be brought under his
Subjection, there would not then be left any Nation adjoining able to make head
against him. The strength of Media.
For the King of the Medes was able to bring into the Field sixty thousand
Foot, and ten thousand Horse, to which the Forces of Persia being joined, made
an exceeding great Army.

Considering therefore the strength of such a neighbor, he invited Croesus,
King of Lydia, a Prince very mighty both in men and Treasure, and with him
other Lords of Asia the less, to his assistance, alleging that those Eastern
Nations were very powerful, and so firmly conjoined by League, and many
Alliances, that it would not be easy, no nor possible, for any one Nation to
resist them.

With these suggestions, backed with rich Presents, he drew to himself so many
adherents, as he compounded an Army of two hundred Thousand Foot, and sixty
thousand Horse: Of which ten thousand Horse, and forty thousand Foot were
brought by Croesus, who had great cause of enmity against the Medes, for that
they had made great Wars against his Father Allyattes. Cyrus made General of
the Army.
Whereupon Cyrus was by his Father Cambyses, and the Council of the Kingdom,
made General of the Persian Army, and sent away into Media with thirty thousand
Soldiers, and one thousand Commanders, all of equal Authority under him; and
when he came thither, he was also made by his Uncle Cyaxares, who had sent for
him, General of the Median Forces, and the management of the War against the
Babylonian, was wholly committed to him: With this Army he marched against
Evilmerodach, and his associates, and in a very bloody Battle, He overthrows
the Babylonians.
overthrew them. In which defeat, Evilmerodach, King of Babylon, being slain,
so many of his Subjects revolted, that Babylon it self could no longer be
secured, but by the help of Mercenaries, waged with great sums of money out of
Asia the less, Egypt, and other Countries, which new levied Forces were also
defeated, Cyrus his great victories.
and scattered by Cyrus, who following his advantage, possessed himself of a
great part of the lesser Asia. Those Persians which followed Cyrus, and were by
him levied, are reckoned to be thirty thousand Foot, of which, one thousand
were Armed Gentlemen; the rest of the common sort were Archers, and such as
used the Dart, or Sling.

Croesus, Croesus his Victories.
notwithstanding the men lost, and the Treasure spent in the quarrel of the
Babylonians, yet did he Conquer Aeolis, Doris, and Ionia, Provinces possessed
by the Greeks in Asia the less, adjoining to his Kingdom of Lydia. He gave Laws
also to the Phrygians, Bithynians, Carians, Mysians, Paphlagonians, and other
Nations. He also enforced the Ephesians to acknowledge him for their Lord; He
also obtained a signal Victory against the Sacaeans, a Nation of the Scythians;
All which he performed in fourteen years.

And being now confident by reason of his good successes, and withal, envious
at Cyrus his Fame and Prosperity; doubting also that his great Victories might
in the end grow perilous to himself, he consulted with the Oracle of Apollo,
whom he presented with mavelous rich gifts, what success he might hope for in
his undertakings against Cyrus; from whom he received this ambiguous answer,
The Devlls subtilty.
Croesus, Halym penetrans, magnam pervertet opum vim: Croesus passing over the
River Halys, shall dissolve a great Dominion: For the Devil being doubtful of
his success, gave him this Riddle, which might be construed either way, to the
ruin of Persia, or of his own Lydia.

Hereupon Croesus (interpreting it as he most desired) resolved to stop the
course of Cyrus his progress, Good counsel neglected.
and therefore despised all the Arguments used by Sandanes to the contrary, who
desired him to consider aforehand, that he provoked a Nation inhabiting a
barren and Mountanous Region; a People not covered with the soft silk of Worms,
but with the hard skins of Beasts; not fed with meat to their Fancies, but
content with what they found; Drinkers of Water, and not of Wine; and in a
word, a Nation Warlike, Patient, Valiant, and Prosperous, over whom, if he
became Victorious, he could thereby enrich himself in nothing but Fame, in
which he already excelled: and if by them he should be beaten and subdued, so
great would his loss appear of all things, which the world makes account of,
that the same could neither be hastily recounted, nor easily conceived.

Notwithstanding this solid, Croesus marches against Cyrus
and seasonable Counsel, Croesus having prepared a powerful Army, advanced with
the same toward Media: but in his passage he was retarded at Pterium, a City in
Cappad^cia of great strength; which whilst he attempted both by power and
policy to take and Conquer, Cyrus came on, and found the Lydians encamped
before it. Neither of these Champions were inferior to other, either in
strength or opinion. For out of doubt, Croesus, as he excelled any Prince of
that age in Riches and ability, so was he not inferior unto any in Territories
and Fame, that then lived. But Kingdoms and Commonwealths have their increase,
and Periods from Divine Ordinance. This time was the Winter of Croesus his
prosperity, the leaves of his flourishing estate being ready to fall; and that
of Cyrus but in the first Spring and Flower; the God of all Power had given a
date to the one, and a beginning of glory to the other.

When these two Armies were in view each of other, A great Battle.
after diverse skirmishes had passed between them, the Persians and Lydians
began to join together, and encounter each other in gross Bodies; and as either
of them began to retreat, fresh supplies were sent in from both their Kings.
And as the Persians had somewhat the better of the day, so when the dark vail
of night had hidden each Army from the others view, Croesus doubting what
success the rising Sun might bring with it, quitted the Field to Cyrus, and
with all speed possible, Croesus retreats.
retreated toward his own Country, and taking the next way thither, he
recovered Sardis, the first City of Lydia, and his Regal Seat, without any
pursuit made by Cyrus to retard him; where, being arrived, and nothing
suspecting Cyrus his approach, or any other War for that Winter, he dismissed
his Army, and sent the Troops of his sundry Nations to their own Provinces,
appointing them to re-assemble at the end of five Months, acquainting his
Commanders with his intent of renewing the War at the time appointed.

The morning being come, Cyrus finding that the Lydians were departed, put his
Army in order to pursue after them, yet not so hastily, Cyrus pursues him.
and at their heels, as to be discovered. But getting good intellegence of
Croesus his proceedings, he so ordered the matter, that he presented not
himself before Sardis, till such time as Croesus had disposed of his Army, (...)
and sent them to their Winter Quarters. And besieges him in Sardis.
His coming (...) altogether unlooked for, and unfeared, he had opportunity
enough to surround Sardis with his Army, wherein Croesus had no other Companies
than the Citizens, and his ordinary Guards, insomuch as after fourteen days
Siege, Sardis taken.
Cyrus took the City by Storm, and put all to the Sword that made resistance.

Croesus now having neither Arms to Fight, nor Wings to fly, in this common
calamity, he thrust himself into the heap, and multitude of his miserable
Subjects, and had undergone the same lot with the rest of the vanquished
persons, had not a Son of his, who had been dumb all his Life before (by the
extremity of Passion and Fear) cried out to a common Soldier, Croesus
preserved.
who was with a drawn Sword pursuing his Father, that he should not kill
Croesus. Hereupon he was taken and imprisoned, and despoiled of all things, but
only the expectation of Death.

Shortly after he was bound with Fetters, and Placed upon a large and high pile
of Wood, He should have been burr, but is saved.
to be burnt to ashes thereon. To which, when Fire was set, and kindled,
Croesus remembering the discourse which long before he had with Solon, the
Athenian Lawgiver, he thrice cried out, O Solon, Solon, Solon, and being
demanded what he meant by the invocation of Solon, he at first used silence:
But being urged again, he told them that now he found that true, which wise
Solon had long since told him; That many men in the race and course of their
lives might well be accounted Fortunate, but no man could discern himself to be
happy indeed till his end.

Of this his answer, Cyrus being speedily informed, and thereby being put in
mind of the mutability of Fortune, and of his own mortality, he commanded his
Ministers of Justice, speedily to withdraw the Fire, and to save Croesus, and
bring him to his presence; which being done, Cyrus demanded of him, who it was
that had persuaded him? or what reason had instigated him to invade his
Territories, and to make him, of a Friend, an Enemy. To which Croesus thus
answered: It was thy prosperous, and my unprosperous destiny (the Grecian Gods
with all, flattering my Ambition) that were the inventers, and conducters of
Croesus War against Cyrus.

Cyrus being much affected with this answer of Croesus, Cyrus Maks him his
friend*
and bewailing his estate, though he was victorious over him, did not only
spare his life, but entertained him ever after as a King, and his companion;
Thus Herodotus relates it. But Xenophon says, that Cyrus did entertain Craesus
friendly at the first sight, and makes no mention of any such cruel intent of
burning him alive; and this may seem the more probable, because Crasus was his
Grandmothers Brother, and its very likely that neerness of Alliance might
withhold Cyrus (if he had been vicious, which he was not) from so cruel a
purpose as to have burnt him alive.

When Cyrus afterward passed with his Army over Araxes into Scythia, Cyrus
invad^ Scythia.
he left Croesus to be a companion, and counselor to his Son Cambyses, whom he
made Governor over his Empire in his absence, with whom he lived all the Reign
of Cyrus, and did afterward accompany Cambyses in his Expedition into Egypt,
where he hardly escaped his Tyrannous hands. At this time the Races of three of
the greatest Kings in that part of the World came to an end; to wit, of the
Babylonians, Medians, and Lydians, in Balthazar, Xiaxares, or Darius Medus, and
Croesus.

After this Lydian War ensued the great Conquest of Babylon, which gave unto
Cyrus an Empire so large, and mighty, that he was justly reputed the greatest
Monarch then living upon the Earth. How long time the preparations for this
great action took up, is uncertain, only it seems that ten whole years did pass
between his taking of those two Cities of Sardis and Babylon; which time was
not wholly spent in providing for the Assyrian War, but much of it in settling
the Estates which he had already purchased; Ctesias also tells us, that during
this time Cyrus invaded Scythia, and being victorious over that Nation, he took
Amorges their King Prisoner; But being in a second Battle overthrown by
Sparetha, the Wife of Amorges, himself was taken Prisoner, and so one King was
released for the other. Gobrias about this time (a Nobleman, His danger.
whose only Son, the King of Babylon, in his Fathers life time, had in a
hunting match, villainously slain) together with his Friends, revolted to Cyrus.

Its very probable also, that no small part of those troubles which sprang up
in the lower Asia, grew soon after Cyrus his departure with his Victorious
Army, before the Conquest was fully established. For after Cyrus was returned
out of Asia the less, many Nations which were formerly conquered by Croesus,
and now by Cyrus, revolted from him; Against whom he employed Pactias, and then
Harpagus, who first reduced the Phocians under their former Obedience; and then
the rest of the Greeks that inhabited Asia the less, as the Jonians, Carians,
Aeolians, and Lycians, who, very resolutely (according to the strength they
had) defended themselves; But in the attempt upon Babylon it self, its not to
be questioned but Cyrus employed all his Forces, having taken order beforehand,
that nothing should be able to divert him, or to raise that Siege, or to
frustrate that work upon which he did set all his rest.

And great reason there was, The strength of Babylon.
that he should improve all his Policy and strength unto the taking of that
City, which, besides the Fame and reputation that it held, as being the Head of
an Empire, which depended thereupon, was so strongly fortified with a trebble
Wall of great height, and surrounded with the waters of Euphrates, that were
unfordable, and so plentifully Victualled for many years, that the Inhabitants
were not only free from fear, and doubt of their estate, but through their
confidence, they derided, and despised all the Projects and power of their
Besiegers.

For not long before, Babylon fortified by Nicotris.
Nicotris, the Mother of Belshazzar, a witty, and active Woman, foreseeing the
storm that was ready to fall upon Babylon from the Medes, to hinder their
passing the River by Boats into Babylon, She turned the River Euphrates, which
before ran with a strait and swift course, drawing it through many winding
Channels, which she had cut for that purpose, whereby she made it to run more
slowly than formerly it did: and then she raised a huge Dam upon each side of
the River; and up the River from the City-ward, she dug a vast Pond, which
was every way three or four hundred Furlongs wide, into which she turned the
River, thereby leaving the old Channel of the River dry; which done, she fell
to work, and fenced the Bank within the City with Brick-walls, and raised the
Water-Gates, answerable in every point to the rest of the Walls, which were
made on the farther side of the Channel, round about the City. She built also a
stately, and Magnificent Bridge of Stone in the midst of the City, which joined
to the Kings Houses, that stood on each side the River: and having finished all
her Works, and Fortifications, she turned the River out of the Pond into its
right Channel again.

And now came Cyrus to invade the Country of Babylon, Cyrus lnvades Babylon.
and appeared before the Walls of the City, and there challenged the King to a
Duel, or single Combat, but he refused it. At this time Gadatas, a Noble man of
Babylon, whom Belshazzar had gelt, upon a jealousy that he had of him with his
Wife, fell over to Cyrus, in revenge whereof the Babylonians sallied out, and
fell upon his Lands; but Cyrus set upon them, and routed them; At which time
the Cadusii, whom Cyrus had appointed to bring up the rear of his Army, unknown
to Cyrus, set upon a Country lying near to the City; but the King of Babylon
falling out upon them, cut them all off. Yet Cyrus quickly revenged the Death
of his men; and then came to an agreement with Belshazzar, to hold truce with
the Plough-men on both sides, and the War to go on between the Soldiers only.
After which, passing beyond the City, he took in three of their Forts, and so
returned into the confines of Assyria, and Media; and thither, upon his
invitation, came his Uncle Cyaxares, and was by him honorably received, and
entertained in a Pavilion, that had been the King of Assyrias: and Winter now
approaching, they entered into consultation to provide things necessary to
maintain the Siege.

The only hope of Cyrus with his Medes, Cyrus besieges it.
and Persians (who despaired of carrying by assault a City so well, and
strongly fortified, and manned) was in cutting off all supplies of victuals,
and other necessaries; Whereof, though the Town was said to be stored
sufficiently for more than twenty years, yet might it well be imagined, that
amongst such a World of People as dwelt within those Walls, one great want or
other would soon appear amongst them, and vanquish the resolution of that
unwarlike multitude. Yet in expecting that success of this course, the
Besiegers were likely to endure much hardship, and travel, and that all in
valn, if they did not keep strict watch, and sure guards upon all the Avenues,
and Quarters of it.

Which that he might the better do, he caused presently a vast trench, both for
breadth and depth to be cast round about the Walls of the City, casting the
earth ever toward his own Army, and made store of Bulworks all along upon it,
for his Guards to be upon: and then, dividing his whole Army into twelve parts,
he ordered that each of them should watch his Month, by turn.

And yet this was a very hard work, The Babylonians vain Hopes.
considering the vast circuit of those Walls which they were to gird in, having
neither men enough, nor yet sufficiently assured to their Commander; the
consideration whereof Ministered unto the Babylonians matter of good Pastime,
when they saw Lydians, Phrygians, Cappadocians, and others, quartered about
their City to keep them in, who, having been their Ancient Friends, and Allies,
were more like to join with them, if occasion were offered, than to use much
diligence on the behalf of Cyrus, who had, as it were but yesterday; laid upon
their necks the galling Yoke of servitude.

Whilst the Besieged were thus pleasing themselves with this foolish-fansie,
and vain mirth (the ordinary forerunners of sudden calamity) Cyrus, who by God
that set him on work, Cyru's stratagem.
was made strong, valiant, constant, and inventive, devised, and by the labor
of his men, dug so many Channels as were capable of receiving the Waters of
Euphrates, and so to draw the same from the Walls of Babylon, that thereby he
might make his approaches the more facile, and assured, which, when by the
labor of many hands he had performed, he waited for a fit time wherein to put
in execution, what he had designed. For he had left in each of the Trenches
toward the River, certain Banks, or Heads uncut till he saw his opportunity.

Now Belshazzar finding neither any want or weakness within the City,
Belshazzar^ Feast.
nor any possibility for his enemies without, to approach the Walls by reason
of the great River that surrounded them, he prepared an exceeding sumptuous
Feast, Public Plays, and other Pastimes, and thereto invited a Thousand of his
Princes, or Nobles, besides his Wives, Courtezans, and others of that Trade.
This he did, either to let the Besiegers know that his Provisions were
sufficient, not only for all needful uses, but even for superfluity, and
excess; Or because he hoped that his enemies by this time were discouraged, and
even broken under their manifold disasters: Or else he made this Feast in
honor of Bell, his most adored Idol: Or lastly, because it was his Birth, or
Coronation Day: Or for many, or most of these respects.

Yea, he was not contented to use, and show such Magnificence, as no Prince
else could Equal, but he lifted up himself against the God of Heaven, Dan. 5.
23. For he, his Princes, his Wives, and his Concubines, made carousing Cups of
the Golden, and Silver Vessels which his Grandfather Nebuchadnezzar had taken
out of the Temple which was at Jerusalem; and in contempt of the Lord of
Heaven, His Blasphemy.
he praised his own Puppets made of Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Iron, and
Wood, and Stone; Whilst Belshazzar was thus triumphing, and had his brains well
filled with vapors, he beheld a hand, The Writing on the Wall.
which by Divine power wrote upon the Wall that was opposite to him, certain
Words which he understood not, wherewith, so great a fear, and amazement seized
upon him, that the joints of his loins were loosed, The Kings Distraction.
and his knees smote one against another; Which Passion when he had in some
measure recovered, he cried aloud to bring in the Astrologers, the Chaldeans,
and the Southsayers, promising them great rewards, and the third place of
Honor in his Kingdom, to him that could read, and expound the Writing: But it
exceeded their Art, and Skill.

In this disturbance and astonishment the Queen, The Queen comforts him.
hearing what had passed, came in, and observing what distraction the King was
in, after Reverence done, She used this Speech; O King live for ever; Let not
thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be changed; there is a man
in thy Kingdom in whom is the Spirit of the holy Gods, and in the Days of thy
Father light, and understanding, and Wisdom like the Wisdom of the Gods was
found in him, whom the King Nebuchadnezzar thy Father, the King I say, thy
Father made Master of the Magicians, the Astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the
Southsayers; for as much as an excellent Spirit, and knowledge, and
understanding, in interpreting Dreams, and showing of hard Sentences, and
dissolving doubts were found in the same Daniel, whom the King named
Belteshazzar. Now let Daniel be called, and he will show the Interpretation.

This Queen was either the Grandmother, or the Mother of Belshazzar; For it
appears that She was not any of the Kings Wives, because She was absent from
the Feast, and in regard of her age, past banqueting, and dancing; Yet upon
the report of the Miracle, She came in to comfort, and cheer up the King; and
whereas Daniel was forgotten, and neglected by others, of younger years, and
latter times, this old Queen remembered well, what Daniel had done in the days
of Nebuchadnezzar; Grandfather to this Belshazzar, and kept in mind, both his
Religion, and Divine gifts.

When Daniel was brought into the Kings presence, Daniel brought in.
he said unto him: Art thou that Daniel, which art of the Children of the
Captivity of Judah; whom the King my Father brought out of Jewry? The Kings
Speech to him.
I have heard of thee that the Spirit of the Gods is in thee, and that light,
and understanding, and excellent Wisdom is found in thee; and now the Wise men
and the Astrologers have been brought in before me, that they should read this
Writing, and make known to me the Interpretation thereof, but they could not do
it: And I have heard of thee that thou can make Interpretations, and dissolve
doubts: Now if thou can read the Writing, and make known to me the
Interpretation thereof, thou shall be clothed with Scarlet, and have a chain of
Gold about thy neck, and shall be the third Ruler in the Kingdom.

But Daniel made answer in a far differing style from that which he had used to
his Grandfather; Daniels answer.
For the evil which he had foretold to Nebuchadnezzar he wished that it might
befall his enemies: But to this King (whose contempt of God, and vicious life he
hated) he answered in these Words; Let thy gifts be to thy self, and give thy
rewards to another: Yet I will read the writing to the King, and make known to
him the Interpretation: which yet before he did, he showed him the cause of
Gods Judgments against him, and the reason of this terrible sentence, whereof
the King and all his Wise men were utterly Ignorant, the substance whereof is
this; That Belshazzar, forgetting Gods goodness to his Father, whom all Nations
feared and obeyed, and yet for his Pride, and neglect of those benefits, as he
had deprived him of his Estate and Understanding; so upon the acknowledgement
of Gods infinite power, he restored him to both again; And thou his Son (said
he) O BelshazZar, have not humbled thy heart; though thou know all this, But
have lifted up thy self against the Lord of Heaven, and they have brought thee
Vessels of his House before thee, and thou and thy Lords, thy Wives and thy
Concubines, have drunk Wine in them, and thou have praised the Gods of silver,
and Gold, etc. and the God in whose hand thy ^reath is, and whose are all thy
ways, have thou not Glorified: Then was the part of the band sent from him, He
reads and interprets the writing.
and this writing was written, Mean, Mean, Tekel, Uphar^in, Whereof this is the
Interpretation: Mean, God has numbered thy Kingdom, and finished it: Tekel,
Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting: Peers, Thy Kingdom is
divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.

The very Evening, or Night of this Day, wherein Belshazzar thus Feasted, and
wherein these things were done, Cyrus, either by his Espcials, or being
inspired by God himself, whose Ensign he followed in these Wars, finding the
time and opportunity fit for him, even whilst the Kings Head, and and the Heads
of his Nobility, were no less distempered with the Vapors of Wine, than their
hearts were with the fear of Gods Judgments, he caused all the Banks, and Heads
of his Trenches to be opened, and cut down with all speed and diligence, Cyrus
drai^ Euphrates,
whereby that great River Euphrates was quickly drawn dry, and himself, with
his Army, passing through the Channel, which was now dry, without any
opposition, they easily made their entrance into the City, finding none to
disturb them; Invadunt urbem somno, Vinoque sepultam: All the Town lay buried
in Wine and Sleep; and such as came in the Persians way, Babylon taken.
were put to the Sword, unless they saved themselves by flight, as some did,
who ran away crying, and filled the Streets with an uncertain tumult.

Such of the Assyrian Lords as had formerly revolted from Belshazzar to Cyrus,
did now conduct a selected company to the Kings Palace, which being easily
forced by them, they rushed strait into the Chamber where the King and his
Princes were Banqueting, and there slew both him and them without mercy,
Belshazzar slain.
who strove in vain to keep those lives which God had newly threatened to take
away. Prophesies fulfilled.
Now was that Prophecy fulfilled, Jer. 51. 30, 31, 32. The mighty men of
Babylon have forborne to fight; they have remained in their holds; their might
has failed; they became as women; they have burnt their dwelling-places; Her
bars are broken. One Post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet
another, to show the King of Babylon that his City is taken at one end. And
that the passages are stopped (viz. of the River Euphrates) and the Reeds they
have burnt with fire, and the men of War are affrighted. The Prophet Isay also,
two hundred years before this subversion of Babylon, in his forty seventh
Chapter, and elsewhere, describes this destruction so feelingly and lively, as
if he had been present, both at the terrible slaughter there committed, and had
seen the great and unfeared change, and calamity of this great Empire; Yea, and
had also heard the sorrows and bewailings of every surviving Soul, thereunto
subject; which Prophecy he begins with these words; Come down, and sit in the
dust, O Virgin Daughter of Babylon, sit on the Ground; there is no Throne; O
Daughter of the Chaldeans: For thou shall no more be called tender and
delicate, etc. And though it cannot be doubted, that God used Nebuchadnezzar
and the Chaldeans, as his Instruments to punish the Idolatry and wickedness of
the Jews, yet did he not forget that in the Execution of Gods Judgments, they
had used much rigor and extremity; as we see, Isa. 47. 6. I was wroth with my
people; I have polluted mine Inheritance, and given them into thine hand; Thou
did show them no mercy; Upon the Ancient have thou very heavily laid the
yoke; And again, I will rise up against them, says the Lord of Hosts, and will
cut off from Babel the Name, and the remnant, and the Son, and the Nephew:
meaning Evilmerodach and Belshazzar. And again, Isa. 13. 15, etc. Every one
that is found shall be thrust through; and every one that is joined to them
shall be slain with the Sword; their Children also shall be dashed to pieces
before their eyes, their Houses shall be spoiled, and their Wives ravished.
Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard Silver,
and as for Gold, they shall not delight in it; their Bows also shall dash the
young men to pieces, and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the Womb;
their eye shall not spare children. And Babylon. the Glory of Kingdoms, and
beauty of the Chaldees excellency, shall be, as when God overthrew Sodom, and
Gomorrah, etc. Read also Chapter fourteenth. No Historian that was either
present at this Victory of Cyrus, or that received the report from others truly
as it was, could better describe, and leave the same to posterity after it was
acted, than Isay has done in many parts of his Prophecy, which were written
two hundred years before any of these things were attempted.

The Greatness and Magnificence of Babylon, The greatness of Babylon,
were it not by diverse grave Authors recorded, might seem altogether Fabulous;
For it is reported for truth, that one part of the City knew not that the other
was taken three days after; which is not impossible, if we consider the vast
Circumference of it. Diodorus Siculus says, that it was in compass three
hundred and sixty Furlongs, which make forty five Miles. The Walls were so
thick, that six Chariots might pass in front thereon, and they were three
hundred sixty and five Foot high, and were adorned, and beautified with one
hundred and fifty Towers. Strabo gives a greater circuit, adding twenty five
Furlongs more to the former compass, reckoning it at three hundred eighty five
Furlongs, which makes forty eight Miles and one Furlong, Herodetus finds the
compass yet to be greater, namely, four hundred and eighty Furlongs in circuit,
the thickness of the Wall he measures at fifty Cubits, and the height at two
hundred of the same Regal Cubits. For entrance, it had a hundred Gates of
Brass, with Posts and Hooks to hang them on of the same Metal; and therefore
did the Prophet Isay rightly entitle Babylon, The Princess, and Glory of
Kingdoms, Isa. 47. 5. and 13. 19.

But when Cyrus had won her, Babylons miserable Captivity.
he stripped her out of her Princely Robes, and made her a slave, dividing not
only her goodly Houses, and her whole Territory, with all the Riches therein
contained, amongst his Soldiers; but also bestowed the Inhabitants themselves
as Bondslaves, upon those that had taken possession of their goods.

Cyrus having obtained this great, and Signal Victory, the glory of which was a
reward for his service done for him who was the Author of it, and of all
goodness, and thereby translated the Empire of the Chaldeans to himself,
according to the Prophesies which went before of him; in this first year of his
Empire, Cyrus releases the Jews.
he made a Decree that the Captive Jews should return again into their own
Country of Judea, and that they should build again the House of God in
Jerusalem, having now endured, and finished the seventy years Captivity,
foretold by the Prophet Jeremy, The tenor of which Decree was thus;

Thus says Cyrus King of Persia; His Decree for it.
The Lord God of Heaven has given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and has
charged me to build him an House at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there
among you, of all his people? Let his God be with him, and let him go up to
Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the House of the Lord God of Israel (
He is God) which is at Jerusalem: And whosoever remains in any place where he
^^journeth, let the men of his place help him with Silver, and with Gold, and
with goods, and with Beasts, besides the freewill Offering for the House of God
that is in Jerusalem, Ezra. 1. 2, 3, 4. He also brought forth, and restored the
Vessels of the House of the Lord, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of
the Temple at Jerusalem, and had put them into the House of his gods; These
were brought forth and numbered unto Sheshhazzar the Prince of Judah; Or
Zorobabel. He restor^s the Vessels of the Temple*
and this is the number of them; Thirty Chargers of Gold, a thousand Chargers
of Silver, nine and twenty Knives, thirty Basins of Gold, Silver Basins of a
second sort, four hundred and ten, and of other Vessels a thousand; All the
Vessels of Gold and Silver were five thousand and four hundred.

The number of Jews that then returned out of Chaldea, The Jews come to
Jer^salem.
under their Leader Zorobabel, the Son of Salathiel, and Nephew to King
Jeconias, and Joshua the Son of Josedech, the High Priest, were about fifty
thousand: And as soon as they arrived at Jerusalem, they built an Altar to the
living God, and sacrificed thereon according to their Law, and afterward
bethought themselves how to prepare materials for the building of the Temple.

Cyrus having set all things in order at Babylon, returned, through Media, into
Persia, to his Father Cambyses, and his Mother Mandanes, who were yet living;
His Marriage.
and from thence returning again into Media, he married the only Daughter and
Heir of Cyaxares, and for Dowry, had the whole Kingdom of Media given him with
her; And when the Marriage was finished, he presently went his way, and took
her with him; and coming to Babylon, His Governors.
from thence he sent Governors into all his Dominions; Into Arabia he sent
Megabyzus; into Phrygia the greater, Artacaman; into Lydia and Ionia,
Chrysantas; into Caria, Adusius; into Phrygia Hell spontiaca, or the less,
Pharmicas; But into Cilicia and Cyprus, and Paphlagonia, he sent no Persians to
Govern them, because they voluntarily, and of their own accord, took his part
against the King of Babylon; yet he caused even them also to pay him Tribute.

Cyrus having spent one whole year with his Wife in Babylon, His great A^my and
Victories.
gathered thither his whole Army, consisting of one hundred and twenty Thousand
Horse, and two Thousand Iron Chariots, and six hundred Thousand Footmen; and
having furnished himself with all necessary provisions, he undertook that
Journey wherein he subdued all the Nations inhabiting from Syria to the Red Sea.

The time that Cyrus enjoyed in rest and pleasure after these great Victories,
Cyrus his Civil Government.
and the attainment of his Empire, is generally agreed upon by all Chronologers
to have lasted only seven years; In which time he made such Laws and
Constitutions, as differ little from the Ordinances of all wise Kings, that are
desirous to establish a Royal power to themselves and their Posterity, which
are recorded by Xenophon.

The last War, His last Wars.
and the end of this Great King Cyrus, is diversely written by Historians:
Herodotus and Justin say, That after these Conquests, Cyrus invaded the
Massagets, a very Warlike Nation of the Scythians, Governed by Tomyris, their
Queen: and that in an encounter between the Persians, and these Northern
Nomades, Tomyris lost her Army, together with her Son Spargapises, that was the
General of it. In revenge whereof, this Queen making new levies of men of War,
and prosecuting the War against Cyrus, in a second sore Battle, the Persians
were beaten, and Cyrus was taken Prisoner, and that Tomyris cut off his Head
from his Body, and threw it into a Bowl of Blood, using these words; Thou that
have all thy time thirsted for blood, now drink thy fill, and satiate thy self
with it. This War which Metasthenes calls Tomyrique, lasted about six years.

But more probably, this Scythian War was that which is mentioned before, which
Cyrus made against the Scythians, after the Conquest of Lydia, according to
Ctesias, who calls Tomyris, Sparetha, and makes the end of it otherwise, as
you may see before.

The same Ctesias also records, that the last War which Cyrus made, was
against Amarhaeus, King of the Derbitians, another Nation of the Scythians,
whom, His Death.
though he overcame in Battle, yet there he received a Wound whereof he died
three days after.

Strabo also affirms, that he was buried in his own City of Pesagardes, which
himself had built, and where his Epitaph was to be read in Strabo's time, which
he says was this;

O Vir, His Epitaph.
quicunque es, and undecunque advenis, neque enim te adventurum ignoravi: Ego
sum Cyrus, qui Persis Imperium constitui; pusillum hoc Terrae, quo meum tegitur
Corpus, mihi ne invideas. O thou man, whosoever thou art, and whenever thou
come, for I was not ignorant that thou should come: I am Cyrus that founded
the Persian Empire: Do not envy me this little Earth with which my Body is
covered.

When Alexander the Great returned from his Indian Conquests, he visited
Pesagardes, Alexander opens his Sepulcher. And honors his Tomb.
and caused this Tomb of Cyrus to be opened, either upon hope of great Treasure
supposed to have been buried with him, or upon a desire to honor his dead Body
with certain Ceremonies; when the Sepulcher was opened, there was found nothing
in it, save an old rotten Target, two Scythian Bows, and a Sword. The Coffin
wherein his Body lay, Alexander caused to be covered with his own Garment, and
a Crown of Gold to be set upon it.

Cyrus finding in himself that he could not long enjoy the World, he called
unto him his Nobility, with his two Sons, Cambyses and Smerdis, and after a
long Oration, Cyrus his last words.
wherein he assured himself, and taught others, about the Immortality of the
Soul, and of the punishments and rewards following the ill, and good deservings
of every man in this life; He exhorted his Sons, by the strongest Arguments he
had, to a perpetual Concord and Agreement, Many other things he uttered, which
makes it probable, that he received the knowledge of the true God from Daniel,
whilst he Governed Susa in Persia; and that Cyrus himself had read the
Prophecy of Isay, wherein he was expressly named, and by God pre-ordained for
the delivery of his people out of Captivity; which act of delivering the Jews,
and of restoring of the Holy Temple, and the City of Jerusalem, was in true
consideration the Noblest work that ever Cyrus performed. For in other actions
he was an Instrument of Gods power, used for the chastising of many Nations,
and the establishing of a Government in those parts of the World, which yet was
not to continue long: But herein he had the favor to be an Instrument of Gods
goodness, and a willing advancer of his Kingdom upon Earth, which must last for
ever.

Cyrus had issue two Sons, His Issue.
Cambyses and Smerdis, and three Daughters, Atossa, Meroe, and Artistona. At
his Death he bequeathed his Empire to his Eldest Son Cambyses, appointing
Smerdis, his younger Son, to be Satrapa, or Lieutenant of Media, Armenia, and
Cadusia. He reigned about one and thirty years, and died aged.

The Greek Historians wholly ascribe the Conquest of Babylon to Cyrus, because
that he commanded the Army in Chief; yet the Scriptures attribute it to Darius,
King of the Medes, whose General Cyrus was: For when Babylon was taken, and
Belshazzar slain; It Is said, Dan. 5. 31. that Darius the Median took the
Kingdom, being about sixty two years old. It was Darius also that placed
Officers over the several Provinces thereof, as we read, Dan. 6, 1, 2. It
pleased Darius to set over the Kingdom an hundred and twenty Princes, which
should be over the whole Kingdom, and over these, three Presidents, of whom
Daniel was the first, etc. And thus was it Prophesied by Isay long before;
Behold! I will stir up the Medes against them, etc. And by the Prophet Jeremy;
The Lord has raised up the Spirit of the King of the Medes: for his device is
against Babylon, etc. Jer. 55. 11. And again, verse 28. Prepare against her the
Nations, with the Kings of the Medes, the Captains thereof, and all the Rulers
thereof, and all the Land of his Dominion.

But certain it is, that the Honor of that great Victory over Babylon, was
wholly given to Cyrus, who was the Instrument pre-ordained, and forenamed by
God himself: not only for this Action; but also for the delivery of his
Church: Yet Daniel makes it plain, that himself, not only lived a great
Officer under King Darius, but that he continued in that estate to the first
year of Cyrus, which was not long after, which also was the year of Daniels
Death.

As for the Age of Cyrus, we are beholding to Tully for it; who, in his first
Book de Divinatione, Cites it out of one Dionysius, a Persian Writer, in this
manner. The Sun (says Dionysius) appeared unto Cyrus in his sleep, standing at
his feet; which, when Cyrus thrice endeavored to take in his hands, the Sun
still turned aside, and went away: and the Magi, who were the most learned men
amongst the Persians, said, that by his thrice offering to take hold of the
Sun, was portended to him that he should reign thirty years; which came to pass
accordingly: His Age.
For he lived to the Age of seventy years, and began not to reign till he was
forty.

In the first year of Belshazzar, Some useful Observations.
Daniel had the Vision showed him of the four Beasts, signifying the four
Monarchies; and of God delivering over all power and Sovereignty to the Son of
man, Dan. 7.

In the third year of Belshazzar, the Vision of the Ram and Goat, fore^^ewing
the destruction of the Persian Monarchy by Alexander the Great, and the great
misery which Antiochus should bring upon the People of God, was showed to
Daniel, living then at Susa, in the Province of Elam, upon the Bank of the
River Ulai, which environed the Castle of Susa, and parted the Provinces of
Susa and Elemais, Dan. 8. whence we may collect, that at that time the Province
of Susa was not in the hands of the Medes and Persians, but of the Babylonians,
under whom Daniel then lived.

Darius the Mede, son of Cyaxares, or Ahasuerus the Son of Astyages, took upon
him the Kingdom, which was delivered over to him by Cyrus, the Conqueror, Dan.
5. 31. and 9. 1. The Angel, in this first year of his Reign, is said to have
confirmed, and strengthened him in his Kingdom, Dan. 11. 1. After which he
reigned two years.

Toward the end of the first year of Darius the Mede, the seventy years of the
Babylonish Captivity expired, which began under Jehoiakim, in the first year of
Nebuchadnezzar, at which time God promised that they should return into their
own Country, Jer. 29. 10. Thus says the Lord, that after seventy years be
accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word toward
you, in causing you to return to this place. Upon consideration of which very
time, now so near approaching, it was, that Daniel poured out that most fervent
Prayer for the Remission of his own sins, and of his Peoples; and for that
promised deliverance out of their Captivity: Whereupon the Angel Gabriel
brought him an answer, not only concerning this, but also for the spiritual
deliverance of the Church, to be wrought at last by the Death of the Messiah,
uttering that most famous, and memorable Prophecy of the seventy Weeks, Dan.
9. 12, etc.

The Samaritans, by the means of some Courtiers about Cyrus, whom they had
bribed for that purpose, disturbed the Jews in their building of the Temple,
Ezra 4. 5. Whence proceeded that three weeks mourning of the Prophet Daniel,
which Fast he begun about the third Day of the first Month, in the third year
of Cyrus, Dan. 10. 1, 4. After which, upon the four and twentieth Day of the
first Month, that Vision of the Kings of Persia, of Alexander the Great, and
his Successors, and their Kingdoms, was showed and revealed unto Daniel, as he
stood upon the Bank of Hiddikel, or Tygris; All which is contained in the three
last Chapters of Daniel; which (as may be collected out of the close thereof)
was the last Vision that ever he had, and that but a little before his Death.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF ARTAXERXES MNEMON, One of the Great MONARCHS OF PERSIA.
THere were two Artaxerxes's that were Monarchs of Persia; the first was called
Artaxerxes Longimanus, or Long-hand, because his right hand was longer than his
left. The second (whole Life we are now setting forth) was called Artaxerxes
Mnemon, from his excellent Memory. This Artaxerxes was the Son of Darius Ochus,
His Parentage.
begotten by him on the Body of Parysatis, before he came to be King: And
Parysatis was the Daughter of the first Artaxerxes. Darius had by his Wife
Parysatis four Sons, of the which the eldest was this Ataxerxes, the second was
called Cyrus, the two younger Ostanes, and Oxathres. This Artaxerxes before he
came to the Kingdom, was called Arsaces, but after he came to the Kingdom he
assumed the name of Artaxerxes: Darius Ochus reigned Nineteen Years, and dyed
at Babylon. When he lay on his Deathbed, his Son Artaxerxes asked him by what
Wisdom and Policy he had maintained his State so long, To the end (said he)
that having learned by you, A wise saying:
I may follow your steps therein? To whom Darius answered, That he had done it,
by doing right to God and man.

Cyrus from his Childhood was of an hot stirring disposition, and Artaxerxes on
the contrary was always mild and gentle. Wherefore Parysatis always loved her
Son Cyrus more than the Elder, and therefore often urged her Husband Darius
Ochus to follow the example of Darius Hystaspes, to leave him to succeed in the
Kingdom, who was first born, after he came to be King, and not him who was born
before. This indeed did help Xerxes to the Kingdom: Wherefore she urged this
Example to induce her Husband to leave the Kingdom to Cyrus, who was born after
his Father was Crowned King, and not unto Arsaces, who was born before: Yet
could she never prevail. For Darius, by his last will, gave the Kingdom to his
eldest Son Artaxerxes, and made Cyrus Governor of Lydiae, and the King
Leiutenant General of all the lower Countries of Asia, next to the Sea side.

Shortly after the Death of Darius, He comes to the Kingdom.
the new King Artaxerxes went unto Pasargades, there to be Consecrated, and
A^ointed King by the Priests of Persia. At this place was a Temple dedicated to
Minerva, where the new Kings must be Consecrated, after this manner: When he
came into the Temple he must put off his own Gown, and put on that which the
first and great Cyrus wore before he was King Then he must eat of a certain
Tart or Fricacy made of Figs with Turpentine. Ceremonies at his Consecration.
Then he must take a Drink made with Vinegar and Milk, besides some other
secret Ceremonies, which none knew but the Priests themselves.

Now when Artaxerxes was ready to enter into the Temple, Tisaphernes came to
him, and brought him one of the Priests; who had been Schoolmaster to Cyrus in
his Youth, who informed him that Cyrus had conspired Treason against him,
Treason discovered.
and that he meant traitorously to kill him in the Temple when he should put
off his Gown. Upon this accusation Cyrus was apprehended, and condemned: But as
he was going to execution, his Mother took him in her arms, and wound the hair
of her Head about his Neck, wherewith she tied him fast to her, and withal,
she wept so bitterly, and made such pitiful moan to the King her Son, The
Traitor pardoned.
that at her intercession, he granted to Cyrus his life, and sent him again to
his Government in the lesser Asia.

Yet Cyrus was not satisfied with this, but shortly after entered into open
Rebellion against the King his Brother; Cyrus his new Treason.
for which end he kept Soldiers in pay in diverse places, not bringing them
altogether into one Army, because he desired to conceal his enterprise. He had
also Friends, and Servants that levied him men in diverse places, and under
diverse pretenses. He had his Mother always about the King that cleared all
suspicions conceived against him. Himself also whilst he made these
preparations, wrote very humbly to his Brother; one while craving something of
him, and another while accusing Tisaphernes, to delude the King, and make him
believe that he bent all his malice against the said Tisaphernes.

Artaxerxes at his first coming to the Crown, followed and imitated the
goodness, Artaxerxes his Virtues.
and courtesy of the first Artaxerxes, giving easy audience unto suitors, and
more honorably rewarding those that had deserved well of him: and he used such
moderation in punishing offenders, that he made it appear that he punished not
out of any malicious mind, or desire of revenge, nor yet out of a will to hurt
any man. When he had any thing given him he took it very thankfully, and did as
willingly and frankly give to them again: For how small a thing soever was
offered him, he took it well. One Romises upon a time presenting him with a
mavelous fair Pomgranate: By the Sun (said he) this man in a short time of a
little Town would make a great City, if he were made Governor of it. His
gratitude.
At another time a poor Labourer seeing every man give the King a present, he
having nothing to give, ran to the River side and took both his hands full of
Water, and came and offered it to the King, who took it so kindly, that in a
Cup of Massey Gold, he sent him a thousand Daricks, which were pieces of Gold
so called, because the Image of Darius was stamped upon them. And when one
Euclidas a Lacedemonian, presumed to give him bold words, His meekness.
he answered by one of his Captains, Thou may say what thou listest, and I,
as King may say and do what I list. Another time as he was hunting, Tiribazus
showed the King his Gown that was all tattered: Well (said the King) what
would thou have me do? I pray your Grace (said Tiribazus) take you another
and give me that you have on. The King did so, adding, Tiribazus, I give thee
my Gown, but I command thee not to wear it: But Tiribazus being a foolish,
lightheaded Fellow, not caring for the Kings Commandment, did strait put on
the Gown, and besides, set on many Jewels which Kings only used to wear,
whereupon every one in the Court murmured at him, because it was a presumption,
directly against the Laws of Persia: His prudence.
Yet the King did but laugh at it, saying, I give thee leave Tiribazus to wear
those Women gawds as a Woman, and the Kings Robe as a Fool.

It was the manner in Persia, that no Person sat at the Kings Table but his
Mother (which sat uppermost) and his Wife which sat lowermost, but Artaxerxes
made his two younger Brethren, Ostanes and Oxathres to sit with him, which much
pleased the Persians, but especially, because he was contented that his Wife
Statira should sit openly in her Chariot, that she might be seen and reverenced
by the other Ladies of the Court, and Country. But some that hated Peace and
desired innovations, said, that the Realm of Persia, needed such a Prince as
Cyrus, that was bountiful, given to Arms, and that liberally rewarded his
Servants.

At this time all the Cities of Jonia, except Miletus, which were under the
Government of Tisaphernes, fell from him to Cyrus: and Cyrus sent to
Artaxerxes, praying him that he would be pleased to trust him, being his
Brother, with those Cities, rather than Tisaphernes, and in this suit his
Mother also sticked hard for him: All this while the King discerned not the
Treason intended against him; but thought that Cyrus kept his Army about him to
strengthen him against Tisaphernes, and he was well content that they two
should try it out between themselves; for Cyrus did daily send the King the
Tribute of those Cities, which Tisaphernes formerly held. But in the mean time
Cyrus sent to Lacedemon, Cyrus his dissimulation*
praying them, that as he had hitherto supported them with men and money
against the Athenians, so now they would send him some men, boasting if they
sent him Foot, he would give them Horses, if Horsemen, he would give them
Coaches. If they had Lands he would give them Townships: If Towns, he would
give them Cities for their rewards: And for their wages, they should have it,
not by tale, but by weight, and paid down presently. Hereupon the Lacedaemonians
jndging his request but equal, and that this War would tend to their advantage,
they decreed him aid, and the Ephori sent presently to their Admiral at Samos,
to do whatsoever Cyrus required of him: He therefore with his Ships put over to
Ephesus, where he met with Tamos the Egyptian, who was Admiral with Cyrus, and
offered him his service, joining his Fleet to his: and so they both sailed
round about the coast of Jonia, unto Cania, whereby they prevented Syenesis
(who Governed there) that he could not stir to hinder Cyrus in his march
against his Brother.

Cyrus having now his Army in readiness, resolved to march into upper Asia,
giving out, that he went against the Pisidians, who (as he said) made often
inrodes into his Government: He sent for Clearchus of Lacedemonia, Aristippus
of Thessaly, Xenes of Arcadia, those which were banished from Miletus, and the
Army that lay before that City: Proxenus also a Booetian, with all the power he
could make, both of Grecians and others, to repair speedily to him to Sardis.
But Tisaphernes seeing greater preparations made than a bare going against the
Pisidians could require, The Treason discovered.
taking with him five hundred Horse, made all the speed that possibly he could
to Artaxerxes, informing him of his danger, who thereupon presently prepared
for the Wars.

Cyrus in the mean time left some trusty Persians, his Friends, to look to
Lydia, and Tamos, his Admital, to take care of the Cities of Jonia and Eolia in
his absence, and himself with his Army marched toward Caria, and Pisidia,
still giving it out, that some Persons in those parts were grown unruly. He had
in his Army a great number of his own, besides thirteen thousand Grecians; when
news of his approach was brought to the Court, all was strait in an uproar.
Many accused the Queen Mother as having a hand in it, and all her Servants were
vehemently suspected: But that which troubled Parysatis most, was Queen
Statyra, her Daughter in Law, who stormed exceedingly when she saw this War
begun against her Husband, and cried out on the Queen Mother for it: Parysatis
hereupon, being a cruel and malicious Woman, so hated her hence forwards, that
she sought her Death by all means.

Cyrus in the mean time came on (without resistance) even to the City of
Babylon: And whereas Artaxerxes had determined to retire into the farthest
parts of Persia, Tiribazus was the first that durst tell him that he should not
shun the fight, lerving to his enemies the Kingdoms of Media, Babylon, and
Susa, considering that he had a greater Army than Cyrus, and far more skilful
Captains: which words made the King to alter his mind, and to resolve to give
Battle so soon as he could.

Cyrus coming with his Army to the River Cayster, received money from Epiaxa,
Wife to Syenesis, the King of Cilicia, wherewith he paid his Army full four
months Wages: Policy.
and by her persuasion her Husband Syenesis gave him also a vast sum of money
toward the maintenance of his Army: and like a wise man, at the same time he
supplied Artaxerxes with necessaries for the War: and having two Sons, he sent
one of them to Cyrus, with a competent number of men for his service, and the
other he sent privily away to Artaxerxes, to let him know, that having such an
Army come upon him, he durst not but keep fair with Cyrus, nevertheless that he
continued a true Servant in heart to Artaxerxes, and would fall to him so soon
as he had opportunity.

At Tarsus the Grecians (who were eleven thousand Corselets, and two thousand
Targateers) told Cyrus plainly, that they would march no farther; but by the
wisdom of Clearchus they were persuaded to go on, and so they came to Issus,
the utmost City of Cilicia: where Cyrus's Fleet met him, bringing great
supplies to him, and the Straights of Syria being abandoned, Cyrus marched
without any stop to the place where the fight shortly after was. Cyrus, besides
the Grecians before mentioned, had in his Army one hundred thousand fighting
men, and two hundred hooked Chariots. Of Artaxerxes his part there were four
hundred thousand men, Their great Armies.
and fifteen hundred hooked Chariots: The place where the fight was, was called
Cyanaxa, five hundred furlongs from Babylon.

Cyrus his men were marvelously astonished when they saw the Army of Artaxerxes
in such excellent good order, whereas themselves were dispersed here and there,
straggling without any order, and ill armed, trusting too much to themselves and
dispising their enemies: So that Cyrus had much ado to set his men in Battle
array, and yet was it with great noise, and tumult. But of all others the
Grecians wondered most, when they saw the Kings Army march in so good order of
Battle without any noise: for they thought to have seen them in great disorder,
and confusion, and supposed that they would have made such a noise as one could
not have heard another: whereas Artaxerxes had marshalled his Army excellent
well. He had placed before his Battle his best Chariots armed with Sithes, and
drawn by the strongest and biggest Horses he had, hoping by their fierceness
and fury to disorder the ranks of his enemies.

Before the Battle began, Clearchus (General of the Grecians) advised Cyrus to
keep behind his Squadron, and not to hazard his Person amongst his own men: To
whom Cyrus answered: What say thou Clearchus? What would thou have me who
strive to be a King, to show my self unworthy to be a King? But Clearchus
himself committed as great, if not a worse fault, whenas he would not order his
men directly against the Battle of the enemy where Artaxerxes was, but pent
them up by the Rivers side, for fear least they should be compassed in behind,
whereas, if the Grecians had been set in opposition to the King, he had never
been able to endure their charge, but had either been slain or forced to fly,
wherefore if Artaxerxes would have chosen or wished a place where the Grecians
might have done him less hurt, he could not have devised a fitter place that
was so far from him, and from whence the Grecians could neither see nor hear
what was done in the place where he was, as afterward appeared.

Cyrus being mounted upon an hot, and hard mouthed Horse, the Governor of the
Province of the Caducians spyed him afar off, A (...).
and clapping spurs to his Horse, he came with a full career to him, crying
out, O Traitor and most unfaithful man! Thou dishonourest the name of Cyrus,
for that thou have brought such valiant Grecians upon so wicked an enterprise,
to spoil the Persians Goods, and to destroy thy Sovereign Lord and only
Brother, who has an infinite number of Slaves, and Servants that are honester
men than thy self, and that thou shall presently know by experience, for thou
shall die before thou see the Kings face, and therewithal he threw his Dart
at him with all his force: But the Armor of Cyrus was so good that it pierced
not, yet the blow made him stagger on his Horse back. Artagerses having given
him this blow, presently wheeled about: But Cyrus threw a Dart at him so
happily that he slew him, the head of his Dart passing quite through his Neck.
Cyrus hereupon presently slew upon those that were nearest to the Kings Person,
and came so near the King that he flew his Horse under him: But Tiribazus
presently mounted the King upon another Horse, and Cyrus, clapping spurs to his
Horse, threw another Dart at the King and hit him: But at the third charge
Artaxerxes told them about him that he could not abide this, and that he had
rather die than suffer it, and thereupon he spurred his Horse to charge Cyrus,
(who also came fiercely against him) and threw his Dart at him, Cyrus slain.
as also did all those that were about the King, and so was Cyrus slain in this
conflict.

Now after Cyrus was dead, Artasyras, one of the Kings Eunuchs, passing by,
found his dead Body, whereupon he gallopped apace to the King, and with a
smiling countenance told him the news. Artaxerxes was so joyful that he would
needs go to the place to see it: But he was advised not to go in Person; for
fear of the Grecians, who carried all before them, and were killing those that
had fled before them. Upon this advice the King stayed; and sent thirty men
with Torches in their hands to seek him out. The King was very ill, both by
reason of the great thirst he suffered; as also by reason of a wound that he
had received in his Breast by Cyrus: One of his Eunuchs therefore, called
Satribarzenes ran up and down to see if he could get any Water for him: and as
he ran here and there, he met with same poor Slaves of the Caunians, amongst
which, one had in an old ragged Goats Skin about eight glasful of stinking
naughty Water: This he presently carried to the King, who drank it up every
whit, and his Eunuch asking him afterward if that naughty Water did him no
hurt? The King swore by the Gods, that he never drank better Wine, nor sweeter
Water than that was, nor that pleased him better: and therefore (said he) I
beseech the Gods, Note.
if it be not my hap to meet with this man that gave thee this Water, to reward
him, that yet it will please them to send him good Fortune.

As the King was thus talking with the Eunuchs, the thirty men with Torches
returned, who assured him of the death of Cyrus: Multitudes also of his
Soldiers gathered about him, so that he began to be courageous and with an
infinite number of Torches and lights about him, he went to the place where the
Body of Cyrus lay, and caused his Head and right hand to be stricken off, and
taking the Head by the Hair, he showed it to his men, who were yet flying: they
taking courage hereby, so flocked about the King, that in a short time he had
seventy thousand Soldiers about him, with whom he returned again toward the
Camp of Cyrus, which he rifled, and there met with a Concubine of Cyrus,
Aspasia. taken.
a woman famous for wit and beauty: She was a Phocaean, born in Ionia: her name
at first was Mitto, but Cyrus called her Aspasia: She was brought bound to the
King, for which he was so angry, that he imprisoned those that bound her, and
ever after esteemed her above all the Harlots he kept (who were in number three
hundred and sixty, all choice beauties) and most doted on her.

The Brigade of Grecians, The Grecians valor.
not knowing what had befallen Cyrus, kept on fighting still, and had beaten
Tisaphernes and all his power. But the King coming with the main of his Army to
the relief of Tisaphernes, fell upon the Grecians Camp, and rifled it, yet when
they returned from the pursuit, they recovered it, and beat the King out again,
and lodged Supperless in it that night, as well as Dinnerless the day before.

Artaxerxes after this Battle sent rich Gifts unto the Son of Artagerses,
Artaxerxes his Gratitude.
whom Cyrus had slain with his own hands. He caused also the poor Caunian Slave
that had given him the stinking Water, to be sought out, and of a poor wretch,
and unknown before, he made him a rich Nobleman. He punished such severely as
had offended against martial Discipline. And one Arbaces a Median, who at the
first ran over to Cyrus, and after his Death he returned to Artaxerxes again,
His Justice.
for punishment, he compelled him to carry a whore on his back, stark naked all
day long about the Market place: and for one who had yielded himself to his
enemies, and yet falsely boasted that he had slain two, he caused his Tongue to
be boared through in three places.

Artaxerxes thinking that himself had slain Cyrus, His Vainglory.
and being desirous that all others should think so too, he sent Presents to
Mithridates, who had first hurt him in the forehead, commanding the Messenger
to tell him from the King, The King sends thee these Presents, because thou
did first find the Caparisons of Cyrus his Horse, and broughtest them to the
King. The Carian likewise that had cut Cyrus his hamm, which made him fall to
the ground, asked his reward also, which the King gave him, and bad the
Messenger tell him, The King gives thee this, because thou wast the second
Person that brought him the good news of the Death of Cyrus. Now Mithridates,
though he was not well pleased with the message, said nothing for the present,
but the unhappy Carian, in a foolish vain, being overjoyed with the rich
Presents, said, that he would not take them as a reward for bringing the news,
but called the Gods to witness, that he was the man, and the only man that
slew Cyrus, and that he did him great wrong to take that honor from him. The
King was so incensed hereby, that he commanded some presently to strike off his
head: Horrid Cruelty.
But Parysatis (the Queen Mother) said, Let me alone with the Villain, I will
chastise him well enough: and withal she sent Sergeants, who hung him in
chains for ten days together, then caused his eyes to be pulled out of his
head; and lastly, poured molten lead into his ears, and so killed him.

Not long after, Mithridates was invited to a Fcast, where many of the Kings
and Queen-Mothers Eunuchs were, and Mithridates fat in the Golden Gown which
the King had sent him: and after Supper, as they were drinking freely, one of
the Queen-Mothers Eunuchs said to him, Mithridates, the King has given thee a
rich Gown, Goodly chains, and Carckenets of Gold, and every Rich, so that every
one thinks thee a happy man with them. Mithridates answered; What meanest thou
by this, Sparamixes? I deserved better than these when the Battle was fought.
Why? (said Sparamixes) what so valiant an act was it to take up a Caparison of
a Horse that fell to the ground, and to carry it to the King: Mithridates being
a choleric man, and his brain heat with wine, answered: You may talk as long
as you list of a Caparison of a Horse, but I tell you plainly that Cyrus was
slain with my own hands, and with no man's else. For I hit him not in vain, as
Artagerses did, but full in the forehead, hardby the eye, which pierced through
his head, of which blow he died. The envious Eunuch at his departure told this
to Parysatis, who went presently and told it to the King. He was marvellously
angry to lose the thing that was most honorable; and that best pleased him in
his Victory. For he desired that all the world should believe, that though his
Brother hurt him, yet he slew his Brother with his own hand: He therefore
commanded that Mithridates should suffer the Death by Boats, Cruelty.
which was thus; They took two Boats of equal size, and laying the offender in
one of them upon his back, they covered him with the other, and fastened both
Boats together, that his feet, hands, and head came out at holes made on
purpose: then they gave him meat as much as he would eat, which if refused,
they thrust awls into his eyes to force him: and when he had eaten, they gave
him Honey and Milk to drink, pouring it also all over his face, and turned his
face full into the Sun, which was covered over with Flies sucking at it. In his
excrements also that came from him, Worms did breed, which devoured his Flesh:
And when they see the man is dead, they take off the upper Boat, and find all
his flesh devoured to his very intrails. Mithridates thus miserably languished
for seventeen days together, and then died, with much torment.

Now Parysatis, to satisfy her revenge, had only Mesabates to r^ak her teen
on, who was one of the Kings Eunuchs, who, at his command, had cut off Cyrus
his Head and Hand: But he was so wary, that she could get no advantage against
him, wherefore she invented this device. Subtilty of Parysatis.
She was very skilful in playing at Cards and Dice, and finding the King one
day at leisure, she enticed him to play at Dice with her for a thousand
Daricks, and was contented willingly to lose them, and paid them down. Then she
prayed him to play with her for one of his Eunuchs: the King was contented, but
they agreed that each of them should name five of the chiefest whom they would
except, and then the loser should presently deliver to the winner the choice of
all the other Eunuchs they had. Now did she play so warily and cunningly, that
she wan the Game, and then required Mesabates to be delivered to her, being
none of those whom the King excepted. Her cruelty.
And when she had him, she delivered him to the Hangman, commanding him to flea
him alive, and then to nail him to a Cross, and crucify him, and to hang his
skin by him, which was done accordingly. The King was marvellously angry when
he knew it, and was grievously offended with his Mother. But Queen Statyra
spared not to tell the Queen Mother plainly, that it was wickedly done of her
to put the Kings true and faithful Servant to so cruel a Death, for Cyrus sake.
Yet Parysatis laughed it out, saying to her Son, Indeed it becomes thee well to
be angry for an old Gelded Villain, whereas I lost a thousand Daricks, and said
never a word for it. In brief, she would never be out of her Sons sight, but as
little as might be, and would let his Wife Statyra have as little time with him
as possible, that she might Govern him as she would; because she hated her of
all Creatures living, as also for that she would bear the greatest sway and
credit about him.

Tisaphernes having deceived Clearchus, The Grecian Coptains betrayed.
and the other Captains of the Greeks, by falsifying his word and promise given
to them, he sent them bound to the King, who cast them into Prison: and though
Parysatis was an earnest suitor to the King her Son for them, yet at the
persuasion of his Wife Statyra, he put them all to death but Menon.

Parysatis had for a long time born implacable and inveterate hatred against
Statyra, for that she had more love and respect from the King than her self, so
that she determined, that either her self or her Daughter in Law must dye. Now
Statyra had a Maid called Gingis, or Gigis, who was very gracious with her,
Statyra poisoned.
and whom Parysatis made use of in poisoning Statyra. There is a little Bird in
Persia called Rhindaces, that has no excrements at all, but all her guts are
stuffed full with fat: One of these Birds, as she sat at Table with Statyra,
she (or one of her maids) took and cut in two, with a knife that was poisoned
on the one side, and so gave that half which was toward that poisoned side to
her Daughter, and did eat the other her self; shortly after which, the Queen
died in extreme torments: And the King presently suspected his Mother for it,
knowing her cruel and implacable disposition; and he caused her Servants and
Carvers to be examined, and wracked about it: But Parysatis kept Gingis a long
time in her own chamber, and though the King required her, yet would she not
give her up to Justice; till at last Gingis her self desiring to steal to her
own lodging in the night, she was apprehended, and punished as a Poysoner. As
for his Mother, the King neither did, nor said any hurt unto her: But when she
desired to retire her self to Babylon, the King gave it her, but withal, swore
to her, that while she lived, he would not come thither.

Artaxerxes, Artaxerxes his Gratitude.
for his good service in the War, gave to Tisaphernes all the Governments which
his Brother Cyrus had held, besides what he had before: he heaped also many
other large gifts and favors upon him; and above all, gave him his own
Daughter to Wife, and ever after used him as his most confident Friend and
Servant.

Now Artaxerxes having done the utmost he could to overcome those Grecians whom
his Brother Cyrus had brought into the heart of his Dominions, yet could he
never prevail against them: For though they had lost Cyrus who entertained
them, The Grecians valor.
and all their Captains that led them; yet did they choose other Captains,
whereof Xenophon was one, and made their retreat in spite of all the Power of
Persia: whereupon all the other Grecians waxed bold, and despised those
Barbarous People: and the Lacedaemonians thought it a great shame to them, if
they did not deliver the Grecians that dwelt in Asia from the slavery and
bondage of the Persians: For which end, they sent thither their King Agesilaus,
who passing into Asia with his Ships, began presently to make hot War against
the Persians, and in the first conflict he overthrew Tisaphernes, and caused
most of the Cities of the Greeks in those parts to rebel against him.

Artaxerxes being informed hereof, considered seriously how he might prevent
this mischief, and at last resolved upon this as his only course. He sent into
Greece, one Hermocrates, a Rhodian, with a very great sum of Gold and Silver,
Artaxerxes his Policy.
which he was bountifully to bestow amongst the Nobility, and chief Rulers of
the Cities of Greece, to provoke them to rise up against the Lacedaemonians.
This Hermocrates so wisely managed his business; that he made the chiefest
Cities of Greece to rebel against the Lacedaemonians; so that all Peloponnesus
being in Arms, the Ephori at Lacedaemon were enforced to send for Agesilaus
home again. Agesilaus being sorry that he lef Asia, said unto his Friends: that
the King of Persia had driven him out of his Dominions with thirty thousand
Archers: and this he said, because the Persian coin was stamped on the Reverse
with an Archer, having a Bow in his hand.

Artaxerxes also drove out the Lacedaemonians from all their jurisdiction by
Sea, by the help of Conon the Athenian Admiral, whom Pharnabazus (one of his
Lieutenants) had procured to take his part. This Conon having been overthrown
in a Battle at a place called the Goats River, kept ever after in the Isle of
Cyprus, as being the meetest place to slay in, till the Wars of Greece were
ended. He knowing that himself lacked power, and that Artaxerxes wanted a man
of Judgment to be employed, he wrote Letters to him, wherein he advised him
what to do. These Letters were delivered to Artaxerxes by Ctesias, who was
presently sent to assist Conon. And it fell out, that after Artaxerxes had,
through the conduct of Conon and Pharnebazus, won the Battle by Sea, near to
the Isle of Gnidus, and thereby had driven the Lacedaemonians from their
Lordship of the Sea, all Greece had him in mavelous great estimation, so that
he gave to the Grecians such conditions as he pleased, whereupon that famous
Peace, Peace betwixt him and the Grecians.
called Antalcid as Peace, was concluded. This Antalcidas was a Citizen of
Sparta, who, favoring the affairs of Artaxerxes, procured by this Treaty of
Peace, that the Lacedaemonians should leave to Artaxerxes all the Grecian Cities
in Asia, and all the Isles belonging thereunto, and to cause them to pay him
Tribute at his pleasure.

This Peace being concluded with the Grecians, King Artaxerxes, though he
extremely hated the Lacedaemonians, yet he loved Antalcidas very well, and
entertained him honorably, when he came to him into Persia. One day the King
took a Garland of Flowers, and wet it in the most precious and sweetest Oil of
perfume, that was prepared for the Feast, and sent it to Antalcidas: Indeed he
was a meet man to follow the vanity and curiosity of the Persians. Shortly
after, the Lacedaemonians lost the Battle at Leuctres, and therewith the
Principality which they had kept so long over all Greece. When Sparta
flourished most, and was chief of all the other Grecian Cities, so long did
Artaxerxes continue to make much of Antalcidas, and called him his Friend: But
when the Lacedaemonians had lost the Battle at Leuctres, having received so
great a blow, and wanting money, they sent Agesilaus into Egypt, and Antalcidas
into Persia, to King Artaxerxes to pray him to aid and assist the
Lacedaemonians: But he made so small account of him, and disdained him so much,
denying his request, that he returned to Sparta with shame and dishonor: And
there also, seeing that his enemies did mock him, and fearing that the Ephori
would commit him to Prison, he killed himself with Famine.

About the same time, the Thebans, having under Epaminondas won the Battle at
Leuctres, sent Ismenias and Pelopidas into Persia to King Artaxerxes, where
Pelopidas did nothing unworthy himself: But Ismenias, being commanded to kneel
to the King, let fall his Ring at his feet, and stooped to take it up, whereby
some thought that he did it to kneel to the King. At another time, Artaxerxes,
liking well a secret advertisement sent him from Timagoras the Athenian, he
gave him ten thousand Daricks by his Secretary Belluris: and because he had a
sickly Body, and was forced to drink Cows milk to restore him; the King
therefore sent him eighty milch Kine, that he might have fresh Milk every day.
He sent him also a Bed, with all things belonging thereto, and Grooms of his
Chamber to make his Bed, saying, That the Grecians knew not how to make it. He
also sent him men to carry him upon their Arms to the Seaside, because he was
sick: and whilst he was at Court, he entertained him very honorably, and
bountifully. Justice.
But the Athenians afterward condemned Timagoras to dye, because he had taken
Bribes of the King of Persia.

But Artaxerxes, though he had in many other things vexed the Grecians, yet he
did one thing that pleased them exceeding well, when he did put Tisaphernes to
Death, Malice.
who was the greatest enemy they had. Parisatis, the Kings Mother, did help to
bring this to pass; aggravating the accusations which were brought against
Tisaphernes, out of the hatred which she did bear him for her Son Cyrus his
sake: For the King did not keep his anger long against her, but sent for her
from Babylon, knowing that she had an excellent wit, and was fit to Govern a
Kingdom: Besides, there was nothing now to hinder their coming together, his
Wife being dead. And now Parysatis applied her self to feed the Kings humor in
every thing, seeming to mislike nothing that he did: By this means she grew
into so great credit with him, that he denied nothing that she asked. She
perceiving that the King was extremely in love with one of his own Daughters
called Atossa, which hitherto he had dissembled, chiefly for fear of her;
Parysatis having found out this, began to make more of his Daughter than she
did before; and in her Fathers presence, sometimes she praised her beauty,
another time her grace and good carriage, saying, Unnatural wickedness.
That she was like a Queen, and Noble Princess; so that at length she persuaded
him to marry her openly (though before he had her Maidenhead) not passing for
the Laws and opinions of the Grecians, considering that he was to establish
Laws to the Persians, to determine of right, and wrong, good and bad. Hereupon
he married Atossa, and loved her very entirely, insomuch as though she had a
grievous disease that ran all over her Body, yet he loved her not the less for
it, and prayed continually for her to the Goddess Juno, and fell on his knees
before her Image, and sent to her so many offerings, that all the way from the
Court Gates to Juno's Temple (which was sixteen furlongs off) was full of Gold,
Silver, rich Purple, Silks, and Horses, which were sent thither.

About this time, He wars against Egypt.
Artaxerxes made War against Egypt, by Pharnabazus, and Iphicrates the
Athenian; but they did no good, because they fell out betwixt themselves; And
against the Caducians.
wherefore himself went in Person against the Caducians, with three hundred
thousand Foot, and ten thousand Horse. Their Country was very rude, which he
invaded, always dark and cloudy: the earth brought forth nothing that was
sowed by man, and the Inhabitants lived upon Pears and Apples, and such like
fruit, yet the men were strong and lusty. When he was entered far into this
Country, his Army fell into great straits for want of Victuals; A Famine in his
Army.
for his Soldiers found nothing that was fit to eat, neither could they come
by Victuals from any other place, because of the naughty, and craggy ways, so
that they were forced to live upon their own Beasts, and that was sold very
dear; for an Asses head was sold for sixty Silver Drams. Yea, the Famine was so
great, that the King himself wanted food, and now there were but few Horses
left. Now Tiribazus, though he was at this time out of favor with the King,
yet he invented this Stratagem* whereby he saved the King and all his men.

In this Country, A Stratagem,
there were two Kings with their Armies in the Field, and each of them camped
apart from the other. Tiribazus, after he had imparted his Project to the King,
himself went to one of these Kings, and at the same time sent his Son to the
other, and told either of them, that the other had sent Ambassadors unto King
Artaxerxes, to make Peace with him, unwitting to his Companion: and therefore
he counseled them, if they were wise, one of them to seek to prevent the
other, with all the speed that possible he could. Both the one and the other
Kings believed these words, either of them mistrusting the other; So that
speedily the one sent his Ambassadors to Artaxerxes with Tiribazus, and the
other also his Ambassadors with his Son. But Tiribazus tarrying somewhat long
in the Journey, Artaxerxes began somewhat to suspect him: His enemies also
accused him in his absence, and the King grew angry, and was sorry that he had
trusted him so far. But at length he returned, and his Son also, and either of
them brought with him the Ambassadors of the Cadusians, and so Peace was
concluded with them both. Then was Tiribazus highly in favor again, and so
departed with the King.

Artaxerxes at this time made it evident, that cowardliness does not always
proceed from Pomp and curiosity, which some think to effeminate men's hearts,
but rather from a base and abject mind, that commonly follows evil, and the
worst counsel. For neither the Jewels of Gold, nor Kingly Robe, not other
sumptuous Ornaments which the King ever wore about him, valued at twelve
thousand Talents, did hinder him at that time to travel, and to take as much
pains as any man in all his Army. His hard travel.
For he himself marched on foot the fore-most man, carrying his knapsack in a
scarf upon his Shoulders, and his Target on his Arm, with which he traveled
over high stony Mountains, so that his Soldiers seeing the Kings courage, and
the pains that he took, they marched so nimbly, as if they had wings, about two
hundred Furlongs a day. At length the King by hard travel, came to one of his
own Houses, where were stately Arbours and Parks, with goodly Trees curiously
planted, but all the Country beside, was naked and barren, having no other
Trees near, and the weather was very cold: the King therefore suffered his
Soldiers to hew down the goodly Pines, His pity to his Soldiers*
and Cypress Trees in his Parks, and to embolden them, he himself took an Axe
in his hand, and began to hew the goodliest Tree of them all: The Soldiers
seeing that, fell every man to work, so that in a short time they had wood
enough, and the Parks were filled with fires, by which the Soldiers sat all
night.

In this expedition Artaxerxes lost many valiant men, and most of his Horses,
wherefore, thinking that his men would mock him for his miscarriage, he grew
distrustful of all, and suspected the chiefest Nobles about him, so that in a
rage he put many of them to death, His cruelty.
and yet was not satisfied therewith. For there is nothing more cruel, nor a
greater Bloud-sucker, than a cowardly Tyrant: as on the contrary, there is
nothing more courteous and less suspicious than a valiant and courageous man.

After this, King Artaxerxes being grown very old, heard that there were great
contentions between his Sons, which of them should inherit the Kingdom after
his Death, and that the same was diffused amongst his Kindred and Nobles. The
wisest of them desired, that as he himself came to the Kingdom, as his Fathers
eldest Son, so that he also should leave it to his eldest Son called Darius.
But the younger, who was called Ochus, being valiant, and of a stirring nature,
had some in the Court that took his part, and himself hoped to obtain the Crown
by the means of his Sister Atossa, whom he much loved, and promised to marry
her, and to make her Queen, if he came to the Kingdom after his Fathers Death.
Now Artaxerxes, because he would put Ochus out of all hope to succeed him, lest
his expectation might put him to go about to practice that which Cyrus did, and
by this means, his Realm should fall into factions and Civil Wars, Darius
proclaimed King.
he proclaimed his Son Darius, (who was now fifty years old) King after his
Death, and gave him leave from henceforth to wear the point of his Hat upright,
as the Persian Kings used to do.

Moreover, the custom in Persia was, that when any came to be proclaimed Heir
apparent to the Crown, that he should request a gift of him that Proclaimed him
his Successor, which the other grants whatsoever it be if it be possible. He
begs his Fathers Concubine.
Darius then asked his Father, for his Concubine Aspasia, who was first
Concubine to Cyrus, but now the King kept her for his own use. She was born in
Ionia of Free Parents, and was brought up virtuously, and amongst other
beauties, she was brought one night to Cyrus as he was at Supper; those others,
without making nice of it, sat down by him, and were glad when Cybegan to play
and be merry with them, answering him pleasantly again: But Aspasia stood on
her feet by the Table, and spoke never a word, and though Cyrus called her, yet
would she not come at him: And when one of the Grooms would have forced her to
him, The first (said she) that shall lay hands on me, shall repent it;
whereupon all that were present said, she was a foolish thing, and meanly
brought up, and knew not what belonged to Courtship: But Cyrus being glad of
it, passed it over with laughter, and said to him that brought them to him,
Do thou not see that of all those that thou have brought me, there is not an
honest woman but she? After this, Cyrus made much of, and loved her very well,
and called her Aspasia the wise. She was taken in the Camp of Cyrus, amongst
his spoils, Darius begs Aspasia.
after his overthrow; and now Darius begged her of his Father, who was very
angry in his mind for it. For the Persians, of all other things, were very
jealous of their Women, and he was to be punished with Death that durst but
speak to, or touch any Concubine of the Kings, though but in sport: yea, if
they come near them, or near their Coaches, as they went abroad.

The Kings Daughter Atossa, whom he had married against the Law, was yet
living, and besides her, he had three hundred and sixty Beautiful Concubines
and yet, when Darius asked Aspasia of him, the King answered, that she was a
Freewoman born, and if she would, he was content that he should have her, but
if she was unwilling, he would not by any means have him to force her. So
Aspasia was called, and she was asked with which of them she would choose to
be? She chooses him before his Father.
She answered, with Darius: This was contrary to the expectation of Artaxerxes,
who, both by custom and Law, was forced to let him have her. But shortly
after, he took her from him again, saying, that he would place her in a Nunnery
of Diana, in the Country of Ecbatane, there to serve the Goddess, and to live
chaste all her days. Darius took this very impatiently, either for that he was
deeply in love with her, or because he thought that his Father mocked him.

Tiribazus perceiving it, he labored to aggravate Darius his anger, and he
every day buzzed it in his ears, that it was in vain for him to wear his hat
upright, if his affairs also went not right forward, and that he deceived
himself much, if he did not know that his Brother (by means of the women he
kept) secretly aspired to the Crown: and that his Father being so inconstant as
he was, he must not expect to succeed him in the Kingdom. For (said he) he that
for a Grecian woman has broken and violated the holiest Law that was in
Persia, thou must not think he will perform promise with thee: He persuaded him
also, that it was not a like repulse to Ochus to be denied that which he looked
for, as it was for him to be turned out of all that ever he had gotten. For
(said he) if it please Ochus to live as a private man, he might do it safely,
and no man will trouble him; but for you who are already proclaimed King, you
must of necessity make your self King, or else you cannot live.

Now besides these persuasions, the largeness of the Empire, and the fear
Darius stood in of his Brother Ochus, much prevailed with him, infomuch that he
flatly conspired against his Father Artaxerxes, Darius conspires against
Artaxerxes.
together with Tiribazus, and both of them drew many Conspirators to join with
them. But one of the Kings Eunuchs smelling it out, ran presently and told the
King all, and how they had determined suddenly to assail him, and to kill him
in his Bed in the night. Artaxerxes having received this intelligence, thought
it not safe to be careless in a matter of so great importance as was his Life;
and yet that it would savor of too great lightness, so suddenly to believe the
Eunuch, without better proof of the matter: He therefore commanded the Eunuch
to keep Company still with the Conspirators, and to follow them whithersoever
they went, and in the mean time he caused the wall behind his Bed to be beaten
down, making a door in the place, and Tapestry Hangings to be put up before it.

When the time was come, as the Eunuch had advertized the King, that the
Conspirators intended to execute their Design, Artaxerxes being laid on his
bed, rose not up till he had seen every Traitor in the face that came to kill
him: But when he saw them coming toward him, with their Swords drawn, he
suddenly slip't under the Hangings into the inner Chamber, and shut the door
after him, Artaxerxes deceives them
crying Murder, Murder. The Traitors hereupon fled the same way that they
came, failing of their purpose, and bad Tiribazus save himself, because he was
known: so they dispersed themselves and fled. But Tiribazus was taken, and
after he had slain many of the Kings Guard, fighting valiantly, yet at last one
with a Dart afar off, Tiribazu^ slain.
slew him. Darius also was taken, and together with his Sons, was brought
Prisoner before the King. The King referred him to be judged by his Peers: and
withal, he commanded his Secretaries to set down all the Trial in writing,
together with the opinion and sentence of every one of the Judges, and to bring
it to him. In conclusion, they all cast him, Darius condemned.
and condemned him to dye. Then the Officers laid hold on him, and led him into
a Chamber of the Prison, where the Hangman came with a Razor in his hand, with
which he used to cut men's throats who were so condemned: But when he came into
the Chamber, he saw it was Darius; whereupon his heart so failed, that he durst
not lay hands on him, but went out again: The Judges that were without, bad him
go in and do it, unless he would have his own throat cut: Then went he in
again, And executed.
and took Darius by the hair, and made him hold down his head, and so cut his
neck with the Rasor.

Artaxerxes being informed hereof, went and worshipped the Sun, and then
turning to his Lords that were about him, he said unto them: My Lords, God be
with you, and be merry at home in your Houses, and tell them that were not
here, that the great God Oromazes has taken revenge upon those that practiced
Treason against me. Now Darius being dead, Ochus stood in good hope to be next
heir to the Crown, and the rather, through the means and assistance of his
Sister Atossa: But of his legitimate Brethren, Ochus his fears
he most feared Ariaspes, who was only left of all that were legitimate, and of
his Bastard Brethren he feared Arsames: Not for that Ariaspes was elder than
he, but because (he being of a soft and plain name) the Persians desired that
he might be their King. And for Arsames, he was wise and valiant, and Ochus saw
that his Father loved him dearly.

Now Ochus being subtle and malicious, His craft*
first showed cruelty upon Arsames, and then his Malice upon Ariaspes, his
Legitimate Brother. For knowing him to be simple and plain, he daily sent some
of the Kings Eunuchs to him, who carried him threatening messages, as from the
King, telling him, that he determined to put him to a cruel and shameful death.
These things being daily buzzed into his ears, as great secrets, did so
terrify poor Ariaspes, as that being put in despair of his life, Ariaspes
kill^ himself.
he prepared a Poison, and drank it to prevent a worse Death. King Artaxerxes
being informed of his Death, took it very heavily, and began to suspect the
cause that made him thus destroy himself, yet, being grown very old, he
neglected to search it out. But the Death of Ariaspes made him to love Arsames
the better, making it to appear that he had a better opinion of him than he had
of Ochus, and therefore made him privy to all his affairs.

Ochus seeing this, could no longer defer his revenge, and he therefore
suborned Harpaces, Arsames murdered.
the son of Tiribazus, to murder his Brother Arsames, which accordingly he
accomplished. Now Artaxerxes being almost spent with age, when he heard that
his dearly beloved Son Arsames was Murdered, was not able to bear it any
longer, but took it so to heart, that he died of grief, having lived fourscore
and fourteen years, and reigned threescore and two.

When he was dead, Artaxerxes dies.
the Persians found that he had been a good and a gracious Prince, and one that
loved his People and Subjects, especially when they came to have trial of his
Successor Ochus, that passed all men living in cruelty. For when his Father was
dead, he dealt so with the Chiliarchs and Eunuchs that were about him, that his
Death was concealed for ten Months together; in which time he dispatched away
Letters signed with the Kings Seal, into all parts of the Empire, commanding
them to receive Ochus for their King: And when all men had acknowledged him,
and sworn fealty to him, he then made known his Fathers death, and commanded a
public mourning to be made for him, after the Persian manner, and assumed his
Fathers name, Artaxerxes: And then filled, and fouled his Court with the blood
of his Kindred and Nobles, without respect of Age or Sex: amongst whom, he
caused his own Sister whose Daughter he had married, Ochus his cruelty.
to be buried alive, with her heels upward: He also caused an Uncle of his,
with above a hundred of his Children and Grandchildren descended out of his
loins; to be put into a court, and there shot to Death with Arrows.

This Artaxerxes following herein the example of Cambyses, An excellent example.
caused certain unjust Judges to be flead alive, and their skins to be hung up
over the Judgment-seats, that they which sat therein, seeing what hung over
their heads, might be the more careful to do Justice to his People. He also it
was, who intending to make War upon Egypt, that he might have the more
assistance therein from the Grecians, he sent his Ambassadors into Greece, to
induce them to make a general Peace among themselves, upon these terms, that
every City should from thenceforth live according to their own Laws, and should
have no Garrisons amongst them. This motion all the Cities of Greece embraced,
save only the Thebans, as you may see in the Life of Epaminondas.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF ALEXANDER the GREAT* KING, OF MACEDONIA.
A LEXANDER, His Parentage.
surnamed the Great was the Son of Philip, King of Macedonia, and of his Queen
Olympias. He was born on the sixth day of our June, called by the Macedonians
Lous. Upon the very same day that the Temple of Diana in Ephesus was burned
down; whereupon the Priests, Magicians, and South-sayers ran about the City,
crying, that some great Plague and mischief to Asia was surely born that day.
Three Messengers came to King Philip, presently after he had won the City of
Potidaea, upon the same day, who brought him great News, the first, that
Parmenio his General, had won a notable Battle of the Illyrians: the second
that his Horse had won the prize at the Olympian Games: and the third, that his
Wife Olympias had brought him a Son, His Birth.
that was named Alexander, born at Pella in Macedonia.

Philip being mavelous glad to hear these Newses, the South-sayers much added
to his joy; assuring him, that his Son that was thus born, should be
invincible. He had naturally a very fair white color mingled with red, which
chiefly appeared in his face and breast: His Skin had a mavelous sweet
savor, and his breath was very sweet, which shows his excellent
constitution. He was naturally hot and Choleric, which made him to be addicted
to drink, and hasty, and yet was chaste withal. His Father was very careful of
his Education, and therefote gat for him excellent Tutors, as Leonidas, which
had the chiefest Government of him. Then Lysimachus, an Acarnanian: and
Aristotle, His Education.
the Best Philosopher of his time, to whom Philip allowed a very honorable
stipend.

He delighted much in hunting diverse kind of wild Beasts, and playing at the
Staff. On a time while he was young, Ambassadors were sent to his Father from
the King of Persia, and it fell out that Philip was in some journey out of his
Kingdom. Alexander therefore entertained them familiarly, not using any
childish questions to them, nor enquiring about trifling, and trivial matters,
but what distance it was from one place to another, and which way they went
into the higher places of Asia; His early Wisdom.
Also about the King of Persia himself, how he behaved himself toward his
enemies, and what power he had, etc. insomuch as they were ravished with
delight to hear him, judging him to be of great Courage, and of a Noble mind,
and one that was like to attempt great enterprises. When at any time news was
brought him that his Father had taken some famous City, or had won some great
Battle, he was no whit glad to hear it, but would say to his Play-fellows:
Sirs, My Father will do all, I shall have nothing left me to Conquer with you
that will be ought worth.

Upon a time Philonicus, Bucephalus broken by Alexander.
a Thessalian brought a brave Horse, called Bucephalus, to sell unto king
Philip, demanding thirteen Talents for him, and they went into the Field to try
him: But the Horse was found to be so unruly, and churlish, that they which
should have ridden him, said, that he would never be made serviceable: For he
would let no man get upon his Back, nor abide any of the Gentlemen's voices that
were about Philip, but would yerk at them with his heels; whereupon Philip,
being afraid, bad them take him away as a wild, untamable, and unprofitable
Beast: which they had done accordingly, had not Alexander, that stood by, said,
O Gods! what a Horse do they turn away for lack of skill, and courage to handle
and break him? Philip heard what he said, but held his peace. Alexander often
repeating those words, and seeming sorry that the Horse should be sent back,
Philip said, Why do thou control them that have more skill and experience
than thy self; and that know better how to handle a Horse than thou do;
Alexander answered, and yet methinks I could handle him better than all they
have done. But if thou can do no more than they (replied Philip) what will thou forfet for thy folly? I am content (said Alexander) to forfeit the price
of the Horse. Every one laughed to hear his answer, and the match was made
between the Father and the Son. Then ran Alexander to the Horse, and took him
by the Bridle, and turned him toward the Sun. It seems he had observed how mad
the Horse was to see his own shadow, which was before, always before his eyes
as he sturred too and fro. Then Alexander speaking gently to the Horse, and
clapping him on the back with his hand, till he had left his fury and snorting,
softly let fall his Cloak from him, and lightly leaped on his back, and so gat
up without any danger, and holding the reins of the Bridle hard, without
striking or stirring the Horse, made him to be gentle enough. And when he
perceived that the fury of the Horse was calmed, he put him forward, and began
to Gallop; Then he put him to his full carrier, spurring, and switching him.
Philip at first, seeing his Sons confidence, began to fear lest he should catch
any hurt. But when he saw him readily to turn the Horse at the end of his
carrier, and showing bravery for what he had done, all the Spectators gave a
great shoot for joy: and the Father fell a weeping for joy: and when Alexander
was alighted from the Horse, his Father went and kissed him, saying, O Son!
thou must have a Kingdom that is meet for thee; for Macedonia is not sufficient
for thee: Considering also that he was not to be rigorously dealt with, and
that by gentle means and persuasions he could make him do what he would, he
ever sought rather to persuade than to command him what he would have done.

Alexander in these his younger days was very mild, His mildness*
and of a patient disposition, insomuch as being told that some of his Friends
used in secret, to speak against him, he said, Regium est male audire c^m
benefeceris. Its a Kingly thing to hear ill, when one does well.

King Philip being dead, He comes t^ his Kingdom.
his Son Alexander succeeded, being a Prince no less Valiant by Nature than by
Education, being well instructed, and enriched with all sorts of Learning. He
began his Reign in Macedonia, four hundred and seventeen years after Rome was
built, being himself about twenty years old.

Upon this change of the King the neighbor Nations, whom Philip had oppressed,
adventured to endeavor the recovery of their former liberty by force of Arms,
the young years of Alexander giving some hope of prevailing, and his suspected
severity increasing the courage of others, who could easilier resolve to die,
than to live in slavery: But Alexander gave no respite to these discontented
humors; He says his Fathers Murderers.
For after revenge taken upon the Conspiratours against his Father, whom he
slew upon his Tomb, and the celebration of his Funerals, he first engaged his
Macedonians to him by freeing them from all exactions, and bodily slavery,
other than his service in the Wars, and to others that contemned his youth, he
used such austerity, and such clemency to the rest; that having calmed these
nearer discontents, he presently went into Peloponnesus, and so insinuated
himself amongst them, that by the Council of the States of Greece, he was
chosen Captain General to manage the War against the Persians, as his Father
had been before him, who was so intent upon that War, that he had sent over
into Asia part of his Army under the Conduct of Parmenio, and Attalus, with
order to take in some place which might secure the descent of the rest.

Upon this enterprise against the Persians was Alexander wholly busied, He
intends War against Persia.
his restless thoughts both sleeping and waking, presenting to him the Riches,
Honor, and large Dominions which he hoped to attain thereby. Yet was he again
crossed, and retarded by the Athenians, Thebans, and Lacedaemonians, who had
united themselves against him, hoping by the assistance of the Persians, to
recover their former liberty; and they were to this, encouraged by Demosthenes,
whom the Persian Gold had bribed thereunto. This unexpected rub, and loss of
time was very grievous to Alexander, who was troubled that he should turn his
Sword from the base and effeminate Persians, against the manly, and famous
Grecians, of whose assistance in his intended Wars he had assured himself; He
subdues the Grecians*
He therefore made such expedition against them, that himself, with his Army at
his heels, brought them the first news of his preparations. This celerity of
his made them begin to stagger, and the Athenians, as they were the first that
moved, so were they the first that fainted, and by their Ambassadors sought to
pacify him. Alexander was not long in resolving, but admitted their excuses,
and made peace.

Having now quieted his Borderers on the South, he resolved also to assure
himself of those Nations which lay on the North of Macedonia, And other Nations.
viz. the Thracians, Triballes, Peones, Getes, Agrians, and others, who by
their frequent incursions had much molested his Father; and withal those, after
he had given then diverse overthrows, he made peace, or brought them into his
Subjection: and yet could he not find the way out of Europe.

The Thebans, which had one thousand Macedonians in Garrison in their Citadel,
being impatient of slavery, endeavored to force it; which Alexander being
informed of, hastened to their succor with thirty thousand Foot, all old
Soldiers, and three thousand Horse, and presenting himself before their City,
he gave the Thebans time to resolve whether they would have peace or War, only
demanding that they should deliver up to him the two chief Incendiaries,
Phoenix and Prothytes, which they took in such scorn, that they demand
Philotas, and Antipater, two of his chief Captains. This so incensed Alexander,
And the Tbebans.
that whilst he assailed the City before, the Macedonian Garrison did the like
behind, and so breaking into the City, he slew ninety thousand of them, and
sold thirty thousand more for slaves, and this he did for a terror to the
other Grecians.

Many Arguments were used by Cleadas (one of the Prisoners) to dissuade him
from destroying the City of Thebes, but all proved fruitless; for he razed the
City, only out of his respect to learning, he pardoned all of the race of
Pindarus the Poet, and set at liberty Timoclea, the Sister of Theagines, who
died in the defense of the liberty of Greece against his Father Philip. This
Noble Woman, A brave Example.
being taken by a Thracian, and ravished, he threatened to kill her unless she
would discover her Treasure to him: She led him to a Well, and told him that
she had cast it therein, and when he stooped to look into the Well, she thrust
him in, and stoned him to Death.

Alexander shortly after at a Common Council of Greece, being chosen General a
second time against the Persians, went to visit Diogenes the Philosopher,
there. Then returned into Macedonia, where, in a Town called Dios, as he was
wholly taken up with thoughts of subduing Asia, there appeared to him in his
Sleep the resemblance of the High Priest of Jerusalem, His Vision.
who bad him be courageous and bold, and speedily with his Army to put over
into Asia, promising that he would be his Conductor in the Conquest of the
Persian Empire, as Alexander himself reported.

All being now quieted at home, He goes into Asia.
Alexander leaving the Government of Macedon, and Greece to Antipater, in the
beginning of the Spring he passed the Hellespont, and being ready to
dis-imbark, he threw a Dart toward the Asian shore, as a token of defiance,
commanding his Soldiers not to wast, and destroy the Country, or to burn those
buildings which themselves were presently, and in future to possess. Then
landed he his Army consisting of thirty two thousand Foot, and five thousand
Horse, all old Soldiers, near unto Troy, where he offered a sacrifice upon the
Tomb of Achilles, his Maternal Ancestor.

But before he left his own Country, His cruelty.
he put to death, without an offense given him, all his Mother in Laws Kinsmen,
whom his Father had greatly advanced, not sparing such of his own as he
suspected, thinking by unjust cruelty to secure himself for the present, and
future: Yet the end fell out contrary to the Policy which his Ambition taught
him, though well agreeing with the Justice of God: Gods Justice.
For within a few years all that he had planted was rooted up; those whom he
most trusted were most Traitorous: His Mother, Friends and Children fell by
such another merciless Sword as his own, and all manner of confusion followed
his dead Body to the Grave, and left him there.

When Darius, Darius his Pride.
The King of Persia, was informed that Alexander was landed in Asia, he so much
scorned the Macedonian Army, and contemned Alexander himself, that writing to
him, he styled him his Servant, and reprehended him for his presumption, and
disloyalty (For Darius Entitled himself King of Kings, and Kinsman of the Gods)
and withal, he wrote to his Lieutenants in the Lesser Asia, that they should
take Alexander alive, whip him with Rods, and then convey him to his presence;
that they should sink his Ships, and send his Macedonians prisoners beyond the
Red Sea.

Notwithstanding these brags Alexander soon discovered what manner of men the
Persians were: For two of Darius his Generals [ Spithredates and Rhaesaces] at
the River of Granick (which severs the Territories of Troy from Propontis) with
a huge Army both of Horfe and Foot, sought to stop his passage, taking the
higher ground, and the bank of the River to defend, which Alexander was forced
to climb up unto from out of the Channel, His Victory at Granick.
yet was his victory so easy, that the Persians flying, he slew twenty
thousand of the Foot, and two thousand five hundred Horsemen, with the loss of
twelve of his own Foot, and two and twenty of his Horsemen, which shows that
the Persians were rather killed in their backs whilst they ran away, than hurt
in their bosoms by resisting.

It was wisely done of Alexander to pass this River of Granick in the face of
the enemy, without seeking any other place, or means to convey his men over.
For having beaten the Asiaticks upon their own ground, he did thereby cut off
no less of their reputation, than of their strength, leaving the partakers of
such Cowards without hope of Succor.

Presently after this Victory, He wins many Cities, and Countries.
he recovered Sardis; Ephesus, and the City of the Trallians, and Magnesia, all
which were soon rendered to him, the Inhabitants he received with great grace,
suffering them to be governed by their own Laws: and about the same time, by
Parmenio, he wan Miletus, and by force took in Halicarnasseus, which because it
resisted obstinately, he razed it to the ground. From thence he went into
Caria, where Ada, the Queen, who had been cast out of all that she held (except
the City of Alinda) by Darius his Leiutenants, The Queen of Caria Adopts him.
presented her self to him, and adopted him for her Son, and Successor, which
Alexander took so kindly that he left the whole Kingdom to her disposal. Then
entered he into Lycia, and Pamphilia, and assured to him all the Seacoasts, and
subjecting to him Pisidia, he steared his course toward Darius who (as he was
informed) was marching toward him with a mavelous great Army) by the way
of Phrygia, and this he might the easilier do, for that his first Victory had
laid under his feet all the Provinces of Asia the less, which bordered upon the
Seacoast.

Then gave he order for the settling and Government of Lycia, and Pamphilia, and
so marching toward the North, he entered Celenas, seated on the River Meander,
which was abandoned to him, only the Castle held out, which yet after forty
days, was surrendered to him also: for so long time he gave them to attend
succor from Darius. From Celenas, he passed on through Phrygia toward the
Euxine Sea, till he came to the City of Gordium, sometimes the Regal City of
King Midas, He cuts the Gordian Knot.
where he found the Gordian Knot, which when he knew not how to undo, he cut
it asunder with his Svvord: For there was an old Prophecy which promised
him that could unty it, the Lordship of all Asia: vvhereupon Alexander, not
respecting the manner so it were done, assumed to himself the fulfilling of
the Prophecy by hevving it in pieces.

Now before he left this part of Asia to go to the East, He Conquers the
Islands.
he took care to clear the Seacoast on his back, and to thrust the Persians
out of the Islands of Lesbos, Chio, and Coos, the charge whereof he committed
to two of his Captains, giving them such directions as he judged most meet for
that service, and delivering to them fifty Talents for defraying the charges
thereof: and vvithal, out of the spoil gotten by his first Victory, he sent
sixty Talents more to Antipater, whom he had left for the Government of
Macedonia and Greece. From Celenas he went to Ancira, standing on the same
River of Sanguarius, which runs through Gordium: there he mustered his Army,
and so entered into Paphlagonia, whose Inhabitants submitted themselves to him,
and thereby obtained freedom from Tribute. There he left Catus Governor with
one Regiment of Macedonians newly come to him.

Here he heard of the Death of Memnon, Memnon dies.
Darius's Lieutenant, which much encouraged him to pass on toward him: For of
this one Commander he had more respect than of all the multitude assembled by
Darius, and of all the Captains he had besides. Then did he travel hastily
toward Cilicia, with a desire to recover the Streights thereof before Darius
should arrive there. The Governor of Cilicia hearing of Alexanders hasty
march, left some Companies to keep the Streights, which were indeed very
defensible, and now (though too late) began to prize, and put in Execution the
advice of Memnon, Good Counsel neglected.
who in the beginning of the Wars, had counseled to wast all the provisions
both for Man, and Horse that could not be conveyed into strong holds, and
always to give ground to the Invader, till he found some such notable advantage
as might secure to him the Victory. For the fury of an invading army is best
broken by delays, change of diet, and want, and other inconveniences bringing,
and breeding many diseases upon all Nations out of their own Country. And had
Darius kept the Macedonians but a while without meat, and sleep, refusing to
give or take Battle, and had wearied them with his light Horsemen (as the
Parthians afterward did the Romans) in all probability he might have saved
both his life, and Estate. For it was one of the greatest encouragements given
by Alexander to his Macedonians before the third, and last fatal Battle, that
they were now to fight with all the strength of Persia at once.

But where God has a purpose to destroy, wise men are taken away, and the
charge of things is committed unto such as either cannot see what is for their
good, or that know not how to put in execution any sound advice; the court
which Memnon had propounded, must in all liklyhood have brought the Macedonians
into great straits, and stopped them at those narrow passages of Cilicia. For had
Cappadocia, and Paphlagonia being wasted when Alexander was far off, and the
Streights of Cilicia been defended by Arsenes with his best Soldiers, hunger
would not have suffered the enemy to stay the trial of all means for the
forcing of that passage: Or if the place could not have been defended, yet
might Cilicia at leisure have been thoroughly spoiled, that the heart of
Alexanders Army should have been broken, whilst they sought out miseries by
painful travel.

But Arsenes leaving a small number to defend the Streights, took the best of
his Army with him to wast and spoil the Country; or rather, as it seemed, to
make himself some work, under which pretense he might with honesty run the
further from Alexander; And in truth he so handled the matter, that he gave
cause to the Cicilians to wish for Alexanders coming, and as great cause to the
Keepers of the Passage not to hinder it. For Cowards are wise in apprehending
all forms of danger. These Guardians of the Streights, hearing that Arsenes
hasted to join himself with Darius, burning down all as he went, as one
despairing to defend it, began to think, that surely their General (who gave
for lost the Country behind their backs) had exposed themselves to certain
ruin, as men that were fit only to dull the Swords of the Macedonians;
Wherefore, not being ambitious to die for their Prince and Country (which
honor they saw that Arsenes himself could well forbear) they presently
followed the footsteps of their General, gleaning what he had left. And thus
Alexander without hazard, got, both the entrance into Cilicia, abandoned by the
cowardliness of his enemies, The Streights of Cilicia taken.
and also that whole Province whose minds were now alienated from the Persians
through the imprudent carriage of Arsenes.

When Alexander with great speed was come to Tarsus, taking pleasure in the
River Cydnus, which ran through the City, all hot as he was, he threw off his
Armor, and leaped into the cold water, whereupon he grew instantly so benumb
in all the Nerves of his Body, that he lost the use of his Tongue; and so far
was he from hope of recovery, that nothing was expected but present Death: But
one Philip a Physician, gave him a Potion, which he took, and it cured him out
of hand, though Parmenio had forewarned him, that this Philip was set on work
to poison him.

In the mean time Darius approached, Darius his Army.
having gathered together an Army of two hundred and ninety thousand men of
diverse Nations (says Q. Curtius) or of three hundred thousand Foot, and one
hundred thousand Horse, (as Justine numbers them,) Or of six hundred thousand,
as Plutarch relates.

The manner of his coming was rather like a Masker, The manner of his March.
than a man of War; and like one that took more care to show his Glory and
Riches, than to provide for his own safety. For before his Army there were
carried the holy Fire, which the Persians worshipped for their God; attended by
their Priests, and after them three hundred sixty and five young men, answering
to the days of the year, clothed in Skarlet. Then the Chariot of Jupiter, drawn
with white Horses, with their Riders clothed in white, and carrying Rods of
Gold in their hands. Next after them came the Horse of the Sun, and after him
ten sumptuous Chariots Inlay'd and garnished with Gold and Silver: His Pride
and Folly,
and then the Vaunt Guard of their Horse, compounded of twelve several Nations,
which, the better to avoid confusion, did hardly understand one another
Language, and these, marshelled in the head of the rest, being beaten, might
serve very fitly to disorder all that followed them. In the tail of these,
marched the Regiment of foot styled by the Persians, Immortal; because if any
died, their place was presently supplied by others; and these were armed with
chains of Gold, and theit Coats embroidered with the same, having their sleeves
garnished with Pearl: Baits fit either to entice the poor Macedonians, or to
persuade them that it were great incivility to cut or deface such goodly
Garments.

Then marched after them fifteen thousand, more rich and glittering than the
former, but apparelled like Women, and these were honored with the Title of
the Kings Kinsmen. Then came Darius himself with the Gentlemen of his
Guard-robe, riding before his Chariot, which was supported by the Gods of his
Nation, cast and cut in pure Gold: the head of this Chariot was set with
precious Stones, with two Golden Idols, covered with an open winged Eagle of
the same metal. The hinder part being raised high, whereon Darius sat, had a
covering of inestimable value.

This Chariot of the Kings was followed with ten thousand Horsemen, having
lances plated with Silver, and their heads guilt. He had for the proper Guard
of his own Person, two hundred of the blood Royal: blood too Royal, and precius
to be spilt in any Noble adventure, and these were backed with thirty thousand
Footmen, after whom again were led four hundred spare Horses for the Kings own
use. Then followed the Rereward, being led by Sisygambis, the Kings Mother, and
by his Wife, drawn in glorious, and glittering Chariots, followed by a great
train of Ladies on Horseback, with fifteen rich Wagons of the Kings Children,
and the Wives of the Nobility, waited upon by two hundred and fifty Concubines,
and a World of Nurses, and Eunuchs most sumptuously apparelled: Between these,
and a Company of slight Armed Slaves, was the Kings Treasure, laden on six
hundred Mules and three hundred Camels.

In this sort came this May Game King into the field, encumbred with a most
unnecessary train of Sumpters, attended with Troops of diverse Nations, speaking
diverse Languages, impossible to be well Marshalled by reason of their numbers,
and for the most part so effeminate, and so rich in Gold and costly Garments,
as the same could not but have encouraged the Nakedst Nation against them.

When Alexander met with these effeminate Asiaticks, Alexander beats Dartus.
it may easily be guessed what a cheap Victory he had over them. Some say that
he slew in this Battle sixty thousand Footmen, and ten thousand Horsemen., Q.
Curtius says, an hundred thousand Foot, with as many Horsemen, and took forty
thousand Prisoners, whilst of Alexanders Army there miscarried but two hundred
and eighty of all sorts, of which number some Historians cut off almost one
half. He took Prisoners also Darius his Mother, Wife, Daughters, and other the
Kings Children. Darius by this time found it true, that Charidemus, a banished
Grecian of Athens, had told him when he made a view of his Army about Babylon,
to wit, That the multitude which he had assembled of diverse Nations, richly
attired but poorly Armed, would be found more terrible to the Countries through
which they should pass, than to the Macedonians whom they went to assail, who
being all old, Well-disciplined Soldiers, imbattelled in gross Squadrons,
which they called their Phalanx, well covered with Armor for defense, and
furnished with advantageous Weapons for offense, would make so little account
of his delicate Persians, ill Armed, and worse Disciplined, that except he
would (having such abundance of Treasure) entertain a sufficient number of the
same Grecians, and so encounter the Macedonians with men of equal courage, he
would repent overlate, as taught by the miserable success like to follow.

But so unpleasing was this discourse to Darius, (who used to hear nothing but
his own praises) that he caused this poor Grecian to be presently slain, Darius
his cruelty.
who whilst he was under the Tormentors hand, said, to the King, that
Alexander, against whom he had given this good counsel, should certainly
revenge his Death, and Folly.
and deservedly punish Darius for refusing this advise. Darius likewise
slighted the counsel given him by the Grecian Soldiers that served under him,
who entreated him not to fight in those straight places where Alexander could
bring as many hands to fight as Darius could: and these old Blades, when Darius
was overthrown with all his cowardly, and confused Rabble, under their Captain
Amyntas, held firm, and made a brave retreat in despite of the vanquishers.

These Grecians also after their retreat, advised Darius to draw back his Army
into the plains of Mesopotamia, where he might have environed the Macedonians
on all sides with his multitudes; they counseled him also to divide his huge
Army into parts, and not to cast his Empire upon one Battle, etc. But this
advise was so contrary to the cowardly spirits of the Persians, that they
persuaded Darius to environ these Greeks with his Army, and to cut them in
pieces as Traitors. But Darius was so infatuated that he would needs fight with
Alexander in such a straight place, near unto the City of Issus, where he could
bring no more hands to fight than Alexander could (who by the advice of
Parmenio staid there as in a place of advantage) whereby he was utterly
overthrown, his Treasure lost, his Wife, Mother, and Children (whom the
Grecians had persuaded him to leave in Babylon) taken Prisoners, and all their
train of Ladies spoiled of their rich Garments, Jewels, and Honor. Indeed the
Queen, with her Daughters, who had the good hap to be brought to Alexanders
presence, were entertained with all respect due unto them, their Honors
preserved, and their Jewels, and rich Garments restored; and though the Queen
was a most beautiful Lady, and her Daughters of excellent features, Alexanders
Chastity.
yet Alexander mastered his affections toward them all: Only he embraced the
Wife of the Valiant Memnon, who was lately dead, she being taken by Parmenio,
as she fled from Damascus, at which time the Daughters of Ochus, who reigned
before Darius, and the Wives and Children of almost all the Nobility of Persia,
fell into Captivity, together with the Treasure of Darius (not taken at Issus)
was seized upon, amounting to six thousand and two hundred Talents in ready
Coin, and in Bullion, five hundred Talents, with a world of Riches besides.

Parmenio also in his Letter to Alexander sent him word, that amongst other
things, he had taken at Damascus three hundred twenty nine of the Kings Women,
which were Skilful in Music; forty six Weavers, or Knitters of Crowns; Pastry
Women two hundred seventy seven; Cook Maids twenty nine; White-meat-makers
thirteen; Makers of drinking Cups seventeen; Wine-cellar men seventy;
Apothecaries, and Confectioners forty. Thirty thousand Men, and seven thousand
Camels.

Darius himself leaving his Brother dead (casting the Crown from his head) with
diverse others of his chief Captains, Darius flies.
hardly escaped by flight.

After this overthrow given to Darius, all Phoenicia (the City of Tire
excepted) yielded unto Alexander, who made Permenio Governor of it. Also
Aradus, Zidon, and Biblos, which were Maritine Cities of great importance, of
which one Strato was King (but hated of his People) submitted unto Alexander:
Alexanders great success.
Yea, good success attended him every where. For Antigonus, who was his
Lieutenant in Asia the Less, overthew the Cappadocians, Paphlagonians, and
others lately revolted. Aristodemus also, who was Darius his Admiral, had his
Fleet partly taken, and partly drowned by the Macedonians. Likewise the
Lacedaemonians, who rose up against Antipater, were beaten: and four thousand of
those Greeks, that made so brave a retreat at the last Battle, being led by
Amyntas into Egypt, intending to hold it for themselves, were there slain: for
the time to divide Kingdoms was not yet come.

Alexander to honor his beloved Ephestion, gave him power to dispose of the
Kingdom of Zidon, and Ephestion, to show his gratitude, offered to bestow it
upon his Host with whom he quartered; A notable Example.
But the Man, not being of the Kingly Race, refused it, saying, It is not our
Country fashion, that any should be king, but such as are of the Kingly Line,
And such an one (says he) lives hard by, a good, and a wise man, but very
poor, and one that lives by his hard labor. Then did Ephestion (taking Kingly
apparel along with him) go to this poor Man, and saluted him King, bidding
him, wash off his dirt, and put off his rags, and put on that Royal Apparel;
The poor Man's name was Abdolominus, who thought he had been in a dream, but
being by the standers by, washed, and adorned, Ephestion led him into the
Palace, saying, When thou sit on thy Throne, and have power over the lives
of all thy Subjects, forget not thy former condition. Alexander hearing of it,
sent for him, and asked him, with what patience, he, being of so Noble an
Extraction, could bear his former poverty? To whom Abdolominus answered; I pray
God that I may bear the Kingdom with the same mind. For (said he) these hands
have provided for my necessities, and as I had nothing, so I wanted nothing.

While Alexander staid in those parts, Darius desires Peace, which Alexander
rejected.
he received a Letter from Darius, wherein he desired to ransom his Mother,
Wife, and Children, with some other conditions of Peace, but such as rather
became a Conqueror, than one who had been so shamefully beaten, not vouchsafing
in the Endorsement to give Alexander the Title of King. Alexander disdained his
offers, and sent him word, that he was not only a King, but the King of Darius
himself.

When Alexander came near the City of Tire, he received from them the present
of a Golden Crown, and great store of Victuals, with some other things, which
he took very thankfully, sending them word, that he desired to offer a
Sacrifice to Hercules, the Protector of their City, from whom he was descended.
The Tyrians, not liking his presence within their Walls, returned answer, that
the Temple of Hercules, was seated where the old City stood; Tire attempted.
but Alexander was resolved to enter Tire by force, though in most men's
Judgments the City was impregnable; for the Island whereon it was built, was
eight hundred furlongs from the Land, yet with the labor of many hands, having
great store of Stone from old Tire, and Timber sufficient from Libanus, he
stopped up the passage between the Island and the Main, being more than once
carried away by Storms, and sometimes fired by the Tyrians, and taken
yet with the help of his Navy, he overcame all difficulties, and prevailed,
having spent seven months in that attempt. The Tyrians in the beginning of the
Siege, had barbarously drowned some Messengers sent by Alexander to persuade
them to yield, in respect whereof, and of his great loss of time and men,
Alexanders rigor.
he put eight thousand to the Sword, and caused two thousand of those that had
escaped the first fury, to be hanged on Crosses upon the Seashore, and
reserved for slaves thirteen thousand, some say thirty thousand, and many more
of them had died, if the Zidonians, that served Alexander, had not conveyed
great numbers of them by shipping to their own City. Alexander gave the
Government of this Territory to Philotas, the Son of Parmenio, Ephestion had
the charge of the Fleet, and was commanded to meet Alexander at Gaza in the way
to Egypt.

Whilst Alexander lay at the Siege of Tyrus, he sent to Jaddus, the High Priest
at Jerusalem, demanding of him supplies, and provisions for his Army; and
withal, such Tribute as they formerly paid to Darius: But when Jaddus answered,
that he was tied by a former Oath of Allegiance to Darius, from which he could
not be free so long as Darius lived: Alexander growing wroth at this answer,
swore, that as soon as he had taken Tyrus, he would march against Jerusalem.

At the same time also came Sanballat, the Cuthaean to Alexander; who, haing
forsaken Darius, brought with him eight thousand men: Him did Alexander receive
very graciously; Whereupon he asked leave of him to build a Temple upon his own
Land, and to make high Priest thereof, his Son in Law, Manasses, who was
Brother to Jaddus, the High Prist at Jerusalem; and having obtained leave,
because he now grew old, he fell presently to work, and built a Temple, and
made Manasses High Priest of it, thinking hereby to leave a great Honor to the
Posterity of his Daughter.

In the mean while Darius sends again to Alexander, setting before him all
difficulties he should meet with in his passing on to the East, Darius his
second message.
laying the loss of the late Battle to the streightness of the place: He bids
him to consider how impossible it was for him to pass the Rivers of Euphrates,
Tygris, Araxes, etc. with all such other dreadful things as he thought might
discourage him. Moreover he proffered to him all the Kingdoms which lay between
the River Halis, and the Hellespont, as a Dower with his beloveed Daughter:
Rejected by Alexander.
But Alexander rejected all, saying, That he proferred him nothing but what
already was his own, and what Victory, and his Virtue had possessed him of.
That he was in a capacity to give conditions, and not to receive any: and that
having passed the Sea it self, he disdained to think of resistance in
transporting his Army over Rivers. Indeed Parmenio, who was now old, and full
of Honor and Riches, told the King, that if he were Alexander he would embrace
the offers of Darius; to which Alexander answered, that so would he if he were
Parmenio.

Then did Alexander march on toward Egypt, and when he came to Gaza, Gaza
besieged.
Getes the Governor, a faithful servant to Darius, shut the Gates against him,
and defended the Town with a Noble Resolution, at the Siege whereof Alexander
received a wound in the shoulder which was dangerous, and a blow on his Leg
with a stone. He found better men in this place than he had done in the former
Battles: For he left so many of his Macedonians buried in the Sands of Gaza,
that he was fain to send for a new supply into Greece. Here it was that
Alexander began to show his cruelty: and taken.
For after he had taken Gaza by assault, and Getes the Governor, who was
weakened with diverse wounds, and who never gave ground to the Assailants,
Alexanders cruelty.
Alexander caused holes to be bored through his feet, and himself to be dragged
about the streets whilst he was yet alive, who being as Valiant a man as
himself, scorned to ask him either for life, or the mitigation of his Torments.

From Gaza Alexander led his Army toward Jerusalem, He goes to Jerusalem.
a City for the Antiquity, and great fame thereof, well known unto him; while
he lay before Tire, he had sent for some supplies thither, which Jaddus the
High Priest, being Subject, and Sworn to Darius, had refused him. The Jews
therefore fearing revenge, and unable to resist, committed the care of their
Lives and Estates to Jaddus, who had recourse to God by Supplications and
Sacrifices for the Common safety; and was by him warned in a Dream that he
should make Holy Day in the City, and set the Gates wide open, and that he and
the rest of the Priests, every one in his Priestly Raiment, and the People all
clothed in white, should go forth and meet Alexander; and accordingly he Issued
out of the City, arrayed in his Pontifical Robes, to wit, an upper garment of
Purple, Embroidered with Gold, with his Mitre, and the Plate of Gold, wherein
was engraved the Name of God, the Priests and Levites also in their rich
Ornaments, and the People in White Garments, in a manner so unusual, stately,
and grave, as Alexander greatly admired it; and when he came near to the High
Priest, and Worships the High Priest.
he fell to the ground before him, as reverencing the Name of God, and when
Parmenio reproved him for it, Alexander told him, that in Dios, a City of
Macedonia, his mind being busied about the Conquest of Asia, His Vision.
he saw in his sleep such a Person as Jaddus, and so apparelled, by whom he was
encouraged to pursue his purpose, with assurance of Victory; and now beholding
with his bodily eyes him who before was only represented to his fancy, he was
so exceedingly pleased, and encouraged, as (contrary to the expectation of the
Phaenicians, who hoped to have sacked, His favor to the Jews.
and destroyed Jerusalem) he gave the Jews all, and more than all that they
desired; During his abode there, Jaddus showed him the Prophecy of Daniel,
wherein he saw himself; and his Conquest of Persia so directly pointed at, as
that nothing from thenceforth could either affright, or discourage him therein.

The next day Alexander assembled the People, and bad them ask what they would
of him: But they asked nothing but that they might live according to the Laws
of their own Country, and that every seventh year (wherein they were to have
no harvest) they might be exempted from paying any Tribute, all which he
granted. And when they asked further, that he would suffer the Jews, which
dwelt in the Countries of Babylon, and Media, to live according to their own
Rites and Laws, he answered that he would satisfy their desires in that point
also, so soon as he should get those Countries into his power. And when he
told them, that if any of them would follovv him in his Wars, they should use
their own Rites wheresoever they came, many listed themselves to serve him.

From Jerusalem Alexander turned again toward Egypt, Egypt delivered to him.
and entering into it, Astaces, who was Darius's Lieutenant, received him, and
delivered into his hands, Memphis, with eight hundred Talents of Treasure, and
all other the Kings Riches; and when Alexander had set things in order in
Egypt, he began to affect a Deity, at the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, so foolish
had prosperity made him. He was to pass over dangerous and dry Sands, where,
when the Water which he brought on his Camels backs was spent, he must needs
have perished, had not an extraordinary shower of Rain fallen, just when his
Army was in extreme despair. Zach. 14. 18.
Indeed it nevever Rains in Egypt; but the purposes of Almighty God are secret,
and he brings to pass whatsoever pleases him. Its said also that when he
had lost his way in those vast Deserts, a flight of Crows flew before his
Army, making sometimes more, sometimes less have, till they had guided him over
those pathless Sands to Jupiters Temple.

When Alexander came near the place, His Pride.
he sent some of his Parasites to corrupt the Priests attending the Oracle,
that their answer might be given in all things according to his mad ambition,
who affected to be accounted the Son of Jupiter: and accordingly he was
saluted Jupiters Son, by the Devils Prophet, for which he was richly rewarded,
and presently a rumor was spread abroad, that Jupiter had owned him for his
Child: and the better to confirm his followers in the belief of his Deity, he
suborned the Priests to give answer to such as consulted with the Oracle, that
it would be very pleasing to Jupiter to Honor Alexander as his Son. But this
is certain, and very observable, that at Christ's coming, and at the first
preaching of the Gospel, The power of the Gospel.
the Devil in this, and in all other his Oracles became speechless.

From the Temple of Hammon, Alexander returned to Memphis, where among many
other learned men, he heard the Philosopher Psammones, who understanding that
he affected the Title of Jupiters Son, told him, that God was the Father King
of all men: and, refining the Pride of this haughty King, he brought him to
acknowledge, that God was the Father of all mortal men, but that he
acknowledges none for his Children, save good men.

The charge of the several Provinces of Egypt, Alexander gave to several
Governors, following therein the Rules of his Master Aristotle, that a great
Dominion should not be continued in the hands of any one man; Then gave he
order for the building of Alexandria upon the most Westernly branch of Nilus;
Alexandria built.
and thus having settled (as he could) the State of Egypt, with the Kingdoms of
the Lesser Asia, Phoenicia, and Syria, he Conducted his Army toward Euphrates.
He passes Euphrates,
which passage (though the same was committed to Mazeus to be defended by him)
yet did he abandon it, and Alexander without resistance, passed it. From thence
he marched toward Tygris, a River, for the swiftness thereof, called by the
Persians, The Arrow: here might Darius easily have repelled him; for the
violent course of the stream was such, as it drove before it many weighty
stones, and those that moved not, but lay in the bottom were so round, and
smooth by continual rolling, that no man was able to fight upon so slippery a
standing: Nor were the Macedonian Footmen able to wade through the River,
otherwise than by joining their hands, and interlacing their Arms each in
others, making thereby one entire, and weighty Body to resist the impetuousness
of the stream; and besides this; the Channel was so deep toward the Eastern
Shore, And Tygris.
where Darius should have opposed him, that the Footmen were enforced to lift
their Bows, Arrows, and Darts over their Heads to keep them from being made
unserviceable by the Water. Indeed it cannot be denied, that as all Estates of
the World, by the surfeit of misgovernment, have been subject to many grievous,
and sometimes, mortal diseases: So had the Empire of Persia at this time
brought it self into a burning Feavour, and thereby became frantic, and
without understanding, foreshewing manifestly the death, and dissolution
thereof.

But Alexander had now recovered the Eastern Shore of Tygris without any
opposition but what the Nature of the River made, where Mazeus, who had the
charge to defend the banks, both of Euphrates, and it, presented himself to the
Macedonians, being attended with certain Troops of Horsemen, as if with uneven
forces, he durst have charged them upon even ground, when as with a multitude
far exceeding them he forsook those advantages which no valor of the enemy
could easily have overcome. But its commonly seen that timorous and cowardly
Persons do ever follow those ways, Base cowardice.
and counsels, whereof the opportunity is already lost.

Its true, that he sets all provisions on fire wherewith the Macedonians might
be assisted in their passage over Tygris, thinking thereby greatly to have
distressed them: but the execution of good counsel is fruitless, when
unseasonable. For now was Alexander so well furnished with carriages, that no
conveniences were wanting to the Army which he conducted. Those things also
which Mazeus now sought to destroy, Alexander being in sight, Darius his new
Army.
by his Horsemen, saved and recovered them. This Mazeus might have done some
days before at good leisure; yea, at this time he might have done it with so
great a strength of Horsemen, as the Macedonians might not have dared to
pursue, leaving the Body of their Foot out of sight, and so far behind.

Darius upon Alexanders first return out of Egypt, had assembled all those
Forces which the Countries next to him could afford; and now also were the
Arians, Scythians, Indians, and other Nations come to him. Nations (says
Curtius) that rather served to make up a number, than to make resistance. Some
reckon them to amount to the number of ten hundred thousand Foot, and four
hundred thousand Horse, besides armed Chariots, and some few Elephants. Curtius
numbers them but two hundred thousand Foot, and about fifty thousand Horse,
which is more probable: And yet seeing Darius had more confidence in the
number, than in the Valor of his Soldiers, probably he had brought together
some three or four hundred thousand of all sorts, with which, he hoped in those
fair plains of Assyria, to have overborn the small number of the invading Army.
But its most true, That in every Battle skill and practice do more toward
attaining the Victory, than multitudes, and rude audacity.

Whilst Alexander rested, An Eclipse frightens the Macedonians.
and refreshed his Army after their hard passage over Tygris, their happened an
Eclipse of the Moon, at which the Macedonians (being ignorant of the cause, and
reason of it) were much troubled; taking it as a certain presage of their ruin
and destruction, insomuch as they began not only to murmur, but to speak
boldly, that to satisfy the ambition of one man, and of such a one as
disdained Philip for his Father, and would needs be called the Son of Jupiter,
they should all perish: For he enforced them, not only to War against a world
of enemies, but against Rivers, Mountains, and the Heavens themselves.

Hereupon Alexander, who was now ready to advance, made an halt, and to quiet
the minds of the multitude, he led before him the Egyptian Astrologers, that
by them the Soldiers might be assured that this Eclipse of the Moon, was a
sure presage of his good success. But they never informed them that it came to
pass by natural causes, but reserved that as a secret fit to be kept among
themselves. These Astrologers gave no other reason for it than this, That the
Grecians were under the Aspect of the Sun, and the Persians under that of the
Moon, and therefore the Moon losing her light, did foreshew that the state of
Persia was now in danger of falling, and their Glory of being obscured. This
being noised through all the Army, every man was satisfied, and quieted, and
their courage redoubled.

As Alexander drew near the Persian Army, certain Letters were intercepted,
written by Darius to the Grecians, proffering and promising them a great sum of
money, if they would either kill or betray Alexander. But these, by the advice
of Parmenio, were suppressed.

About this time also Darius his beautiful Wife, Darius his Wife died.
being oppressed with sorrow, and wearied with travel, died: which accident
Alexander seemed to bewail no less then Darius: who, upon the first report of
it, suspected, that some dishonorable violence had been offered to her; but
being satisfied by an Eunuch of his own that attended her, of Alexanders kind,
and Kingly respect toward her from the very time of her being taken, he prayed
the immortal Gods, that if they had decreed to set a new Master over the
Persian Empire, that then it would please them to confer it on so just and
chaste an enemy as was Alexander, to whom, once more before the last trial by
Battle, he offered these conditions of peace.

That if he would marry his Daughter, Proposals to Alexander.
he would deliver, and resign up to him all Asia the less, with Egypt, and all
those Kingdoms between the Phaenician Sea and the River Euphrates. That he
would pay him for the Ransom of his Mother, and other Daughters, thirty
thousand Talents, and that for performance thereof he would leave his Son Ochus
in Hostage; and they sought by sundry Arguments to persuade Alexander to accept
hereof. Alexander causing the Ambassadors to withdraw, advised with his
Council, yet heard no man speak but Parmenio, who was the very right hand of
his good Fortune, and he persuaded him to accept of such fair conditions: He
told him, that the Empire between Euphrates and the Hellespont, was a large
addition to Macedonia: That the retaining of those Persian Prisoners was a
great cumber to him; and that the Treasure offered for them was of far better
use than their Persons, with diverse other Arguments, yet Alexander, rejected
all; though it was very probable, that if he had followed his advice, and set
bounds to his ambition within those limits, he might have been as famous for
his virtue, as he was for his great successes, and might have left a successor
of fit age to have enjoyed his estate, which afterward, indeed he much
enlarged, rather to the greatning of others than himself, who to assure
themselves of what they had Usurped, left not one of his issue alive within a
few years after. Besides, Alexander by going so far into the East, left behind
him the reputation which he brought with him out of Macedonia, of a just and
prudent Prince: A Prince temperate, advised, and grateful; and learned by
abundance of prosperity, to be a lover of Wine, of Flatterers, and of extreme
cruelty.

But the Persian Ambassadors waited for their answer, Alexanders. answer.
which was to this effect: that what courtesies soever he had bestowed upon the
Wife, and Children of Darius, proceeded from his own natural clemency, and
magnanimity, without all respect to their Master, but thanks to an enemy was
improper: That he made no Wars against adversity, but against those that
resisted him: Not against Women, and Children, but against armed enemies: And
also that by the reiterated practices of Darius, to corrupt his Soldiers, and
by great sums of money, to debauch his Friends to attempt something against his
Person, he had reason to doubt whether the peace offered were really intended,
yet could he not (were it true and faithful) resolve in have to accept of it,
seeing Darius had Warred against him, not as a King, with Royal and over
forces, but as a Traitor, by secret, and base practices. Besides, the
Territories which he offered him were already his own; and if Darius, could
beat him back again over Euphrates, he would then believe that he offered him
something that was in his power to give: Otherwise he propounded to himself, as
a reward of his enterprises, all those Kingdoms which Darius as yet had in his
possession; wherein, whether he was abused by his own hopes or no, the Battle
which he meant to fight the day following, should determine. And in
conclusion, he told them, that he came into Asia, to give Kingdoms, and not to
receive them: That the Heavens could not hold two Suns, and therefore if Darius
could be content to acknowledge Alexander his Superior, he might perchance be
persuaded to give him condition fit for a second Person, His Ambition.
and an Inferior.

The Ambassaders being returned with this answer, Darius prepares to fight, and
sent Mazeus to defend a Pass, which yet he never dared so much as to hazard.
Alexander consulting with his Captains, Parmenio, persuaded him to force the
Camp of Darius by night, that the multitudes of his enemies might not affright
his Macedonians, being comparatively but a few. But Alexander replied, that he
scorned to steal a Victory, His Valor.
and resolved to bring with him Daylight to witness his Valor. Indeed the
success commended Alexanders resolution, though the Counsel given by Parmenio
was more sound. Yet when he came to view the multitude of his enemies, he began
to stagger, and entrenched himself upon a Ground of advantage, which foolishly
the Persians had abandoned. And when as Darius, for fear of a Camizado, had
stood with his men in Armor all the day, and forborne all sleep in the Night;
Alexander on the contrary, gave his men rest, and store of food, knowing, that
Soldiers do better stand to it in fight, if they have their bellies full of
meat and drink: for hunger within, fights more eagerly than steel without.

The numbers which Alexander had, They prepare to fight.
were about forty thousand Foot, and seven thousand Horse, which were of the
Europaean Army: And besides these, he had Egyptians, Syrians, Judaeans, and
Arabians which followed him out of those Countries. He used but a short speech
to his Soldiers to encourage them, neither need he; For one Victory begets
another, and puts courage into the Conquerors, and takes away spirits from
those that have been beaten.

Some make large descriptions of this Battle, A Battle.
fought at Gaugamela, but in conclusion they tell us but of three hundred of
Alexanders men that were slain, and some say less; but of the Persians there
fell forty thousand: But what can we judge of this great encounter, other than
(as in the two former Battles at Granick, and in Cilicia) that the Persians,
upon the first charge, ran away, and that the Macedonians pursued them. For if
that every man whom Darius brought into the Field, had but cast a Dart, or a
Stone, the Macedonians could not have bought the Empire of the East at so easy
a rate, as six or seven hundred in three such notorious Battles. Certainly if
Darius had fought with Alexander upon the Banks of Euphrates, and had Armed but
fifty or sixty thousand of this great multitude, only with Spades (for most of
his men were fit for no other Weapon) it had been impossible for Alexander to
have passed that River so easily, much less the River of Tygris. Darius beaten.
But as a man, whose Empire God was putting a Period to, he abandoned all
places of advantage, and suffered Alexander to enter so far into the bowels of
his Kingdom, as all hope and possibility of escaping by retreat being taken
from the Macedonians, they were put to the choice, either to Die or Conquer, to
which Election Darius could no way constrain his men, seeing they had many
large Regions to run into from their Invaders.

Darius, and flies.
after the rout of his Army, fled to Arbela that Night, better attended in his
flight than in the fight, and to them that fled with him, he propounded his
purpose of retreating into Media, persuading them that the Macedonians, who
were greedy of spoil and riches, would rather attempt Babylon, Susa, and other
Cities filled with Treasure, than to pursue the vanquished. This miserable
resolution his Nobility rather obeyed, than approved.

Soon after the departure of Darius, Arbela taken and much Treasure.
came Alexander to Arbela, which, with a great mass of Treasure, and many
Princely Ornaments, was surrendered to him. For the fear which accompanied
Darius, took nothing with it but shame, and dishonor. He that had been twice
beaten before, should have sent his Treasure into Media rather than to have
brought it to Arbela, so near the place where he intended to wait the coming of
his enemy. If he had been victorious, he might have brought it back at leisure:
But being overcome, he knew it impossible to drive Mules and Camels laden with
Gold, from the pursuing Enemy, seeing himself, at the overthrow which he had in
Cilicia, cast the Crown from his head, to run away the lighter: But its easier
to reprehend, than to amend what is past.

From Arbela, Babylon taken.
Alexander marched toward Babylon, where Mazeus, in whom Darius had most
confidence, rendered to him, himself, his Children, and the City. Also the
Captain of the Castle where the Treasure was kept; strewed the Streets with
Flowers, burnt Frankincense upon the Silver Altars, as Alexander passed by, and
delivered to him whatsoever was committed to his trust. The Magi also, who were
the Chaldean Astrologers, followed this Captain to entertain their new King:
After these, came the Babylonian Horsemen, infinitely rich in attire, but
exceeding poor in Warlike furniture. Between these and himself, Alexander
caused his Macedonian Footmen to march. When he entered the Castle he admired
the Glory thereof, and the abundance of Treasure which he found therein,
amounting to fifty thousand Talents of Silver uncoined. In this City, rich in
all things, but most of all in voluptuous pleasures, the King rested himself
and his whole Army thirty four days, spending that time in Banqueting, and in
all sorts of effeminate exercises, which so much softened the minds of the
Macedonians, not acquainted till now with such delicacies, as the severe
Discipline of War, which taught them to endure hunger and thirst, painful
travel, and hard lodging, began rather to be forgotten than neglected.
Alexander, as he was rowed upon a Lake near Babylon in his Gally, a sudden
tempest arising blew off his Hat, and Crown fastened upon it, into the Lake,
whereupon one of the Mariners, leaping into the water, swam, and fetched it
to him, and to keep it the drier, he put it upon his own head. Alexander
rewarded him with a Talent for saving his Crown; Base cruelty.
but vvithal, caused his Head to be cut off, for presuming to put his Crown
upon it.

During his abode here, Alexander instituted those Regiments consisting of a
thousand Soldiers, appointing Colonels over them, who thereupon were called
Chiliarks. This new order Alexander brought in, was to honor those Captains,
which were found by certain Judges, to have deserved best in the late War.

While Alexander was yet at Babylon, there came to him a great supply out of
Europe. For Antipater sent him six thousand Foot, and five hundred Hoar out of
Macedonia; and of the Thracians three thousand Foot, and as many Horse, and out
of Greece four thousand, and four hundred Horse, by which his Army was
greatly strengthened. For those that were infected with the pleasures of
Babylon, could hardly be brought again to change their soft beds for hard
boards, and the cold ground.

Alexander left the City and Castle of Babylon, with the Territories adjoining,
in charge with three of his own Captains, Agathon, Minetus, and Apolidorus,
leaving a thousand Talents to supply their wants: But to grace Mazeus, who
delivered up the City to him, he gave him the Title of his Lieutenant General,
and took along with him Bagistines, who surrendered the Castle to him; and
having distributed to every Soldier a part of the Treasure, he left Babylon
and entered into the Province of Satrapene, marching from thence toward Susa in
Persia, situated on the River Euleus, which City was sometime Governed by the
Prophet Daniel. Here Abulites, Susa taken.
the Governor of this famous City, gave it up to the Conqueror, with fifty
thousand Talents of Silver in Bullion, and twelve Elephants for the War, with
all other the Treasure of Darius there; such as the Persian Kings had for a
long time heaped up together, leaving it from Father to Son; all which in one
hour came into his hands who never cared for it. In this sort did those Vassals
of Fortune; those lovers of the Kings prosperity, not of his Person, purchase
their own peace, and safety with their Masters Treasure; and herein was
Alexander well advised, that whatsoever Titles he gave to the Persians, yet he
left all places of importance in trust with his own Captains, as Babylon,
Susa, Persepolis, with other Cities, and Provinces that were Conquered by him:
for had Darius but beaten the Macedonians in one Battle, all the Persian
Nobility would have turned again to their natural Lord.

Whilst Alexander was ransacking Arbela, Gross folly.
Mazeus might have furnished Darius from Babylon; and whilst he stayed those
thirty four days at Babylon, Abulites might have helped him from Susa: and
whilst he was Feasting, and Frolicking there; Teridates from Persepolis might
fully have supplied him: for the chiefest bulk of his Treasure was laid up in
that City: But benefits bind not the ambitious but the honest; for those that
are selfish, do in all changes, consult only the conservation of their own
greatness.

The Government of Susa, with the Castle and treasure, Alexander committed to
his own Macedonians, making Abulites, who rendered it to him, his Lieutenant, as
he had done Mazeus before, giving them Honorable Titles, but neither trust nor
power. For he left three thousand old Soldiers to Garrison that City, and with
them, the Mother and Children of Darius to repose themselves there.

From Susa Alexander marched with his Army toward Persepolis; Alexander beaten.
but when he sought to pass those Mountains that sunder Susiana and Persia, he
was soundly beaten by Ariobarzanes, who defended those Streights against him,
called Pilae Persidis, and after the loss of many of his Macedonians, he was
forced to save himself by retreat, causing his Foot to march close together,
and to cover themselves with their Targets, from the Stones that were tumbled
upon them from the Mountain-tops. Yet in the end, he found out another passage,
which was discovered to him by a Lycian that lived in that Country, and
thereby, coming suddenly upon Ariobarzanes, who now was enforced to fight upon
even ground, he overthrew him, who from thence fled to Persepolis: But the
Citizens refusing to admit him, he returned, and gave a second charge upon the
Macedonians, in which he was slain.

Many Greeks (for Authors agree not upon their number) having been taken
Prisoners by the Persians, presented themselves here to Alexander. Barbarons
cruelty.
These had the Barbarians so maimed, by cutting off their Hands, Ears, Noses,
and other Members, as that they could not have been known to their own Country
men, but by their Language. To each of these Alexander gave three hundred
Crowns, with new Garments, and such Lands as they liked to live upon.

Tiridates, one of Darius his false hearted Grandees, hearing of Alexander's
approach to Persepolis, made him know that Persepolis was ready to receive him,
and entreated him to double his pace, because there was a determination amongst
the People to Plunder the Kings Treasury. Persepolis taken.
This City was forsaken by many of her Inhabitants upon Alexanders arrival, and
they that staid, followed the worst Counsel. For the City was given up to the
Liberty of the Soldiers, to spoil and kill at their pleasure. There was no
place in the world at that time, which, if it had been lain in the balance with
Persepolis, would have weighed it down. Indeed, Babylon and Susa were very
rich, but in Persepolis lay the bulk, and greatest store of the riches of
Persia. For after the spoil that had been made, of money, curious Plate,
Bullion, Images of Gold and Silver, and other Jewels, there remained to
Alexander himself, one hundred and twenty thousand Talents, and as much other
Treasure as twenty thousand Mules, and ten thousand Camels could carry away;
much whereof had been reserved there from the days of Cyrus. Here it was that
Alexander, setting himself down upon Darius his Throne, it was so high that his
feet could not reach the ground; whereupon one of his Attendants brought him a
little Table, and set it under his feet. One of Darius's Eunuchs standing by,
sighed, and wept grievously, which Alexander taking notice of, asked him the
reason of it? the Eunuch answered, I weep to see a Table that was so highly
prized by my Master Darius, now to be made thy footstool. Here he left the
same number of three thousand Macedonians, in Persepolis, as he had done in
Susa, and gave the same formal honor to the Traitor Tiridates, as he had done
to Abulites; but he committed the charge of the place to Nicarides, a Creature
of his own.

The Body of his Army he left there for thirty days, A foolish enterprise.
and the care of Parmenio and Craterus, and with a thousand Horse, and certain
chosen Bands of Foot, he would needs view in the Winter time, those parts of
Persia which now were covered with Snow: a fruitless and foolish enterprise.
Some speak it in his praise, that when his Soldiers cried out against him,
because of the extrem Frost and Snow, through which they could not make way but
with great difficulty, that Alexander forsook his Horse, and marched on foot
before them: But what can be more ridiculous, than for a man to bring other men
into extremity, thereby to show how well himself can endure it; being his
walking on foot did no oherwise take off their weariness that followed him,
than his sometime forbearing to drink, did quench their thirst that could less
endure it.

Alexander being returned to Persepolis, Alexander turns Drunkard.
those Historians that were most enamoured of his Virtues, complain, that the
opinion of his Valor, of his Liberality, of his Clemency toward the
vanquished, and all other his Noble conditions, were drowned in Drink. That he
smothered in his carousing cups all the reputation of his former actions, and
that by descending as it were frow the awful Throne of the greatest King, into
the company and familiarity of the basest Harlots; He began to be despised both
of his own, and of all other Nations. For when he was enflamed with Wine, and
being persuaded by the infamous Strumpet Thais, he caused the most sumptuous,
and goodly Castle and City of Persepolis to be consumed with fire, Persepolis
burnt.
notwithstanding all the Arguments that Parmenio could use to the contrary, who
told him, that it was a dishonor to destroy those things by the persuasion of
others, which by his proper virtue and force he obtained: and that it would be
a certain evidence to the Asiaticks, to think hardly of him, and thereby
alienate their hearts from him. For they might well believe, that he which
demolished the goodliest Ornaments they had, meant nothing less, than after
such vastations, to hold the possession of them.

About this time Alexander received another supply of Soldiers out of Cilica,
Darius his last Army.
and advanced to find out Darius in Media. Darius had there formed his fourth,
and last Army, which he meant to have increased in Bactria, had he not heard of
Alexander's coming on, with whom (trusting to his present numbers, which yet
were but thirty or forty thousand) he intended once again to try what he might
do against him. He therefore called together his Captains and Commanders, and
propounded his resolution to them, who, despairing of good success, stood for a
while silent: But at last Artabazus, one of his eldest men of War, who had
sometime lived with King Philip the Father of Alexander, brake the silence,
protesting that he could never be beaten by any adversity of the Kings, from
the Faith that he had ever ought him, with firm confidence that all the rest
were of the same mind, whereof they likewise assured Darius, by the like
protestation, and so they approved of the Kings resolution. The Treason of
Bessus.
Two only, and they the greatest, to wit, Naburzanes, and Bessus, who was
Governor of Bactria, had conspired against their Master, and therefore advised
the King to lay a new foundation for the War, and to pursue it for the present
by some such person against whom, neither the Gods, nor Fortune had in all
things declared themselves to be an enemy.

This preamble Naburzanes used, and in conclusion, advised the election of his
fellow Traitor Bessus, with promise that when the War should be ended, the
Empire should be again restored to Darius. The King, swollen with disdain,
pressed toward Naburzanes, to have slain him; but Bessus and the Bactrians,
whom he commanded, being more in number than the rest, withheld him. Hereupon
Naburzanes withdrew himself, and Bessus followed him, making their Quarters
apart from the rest of the Army. Artabazus, the Kings faithful Servant,
persuaded him to be advised, and to comply for the time, the rather because
Alexander was at hand, and that he would at least make show of forgetting the
offense: which the King (being of a gentle Disposition) easily yielded to. Then
came Bessus to the King, and made his submission: But Patron, The fidelity of
the Greeks.
who commanded a Brigade of four thousand Greeks, which had in all the former
Battles served Darius faithfully, and had always made their retreat in despite
of the Macedonians, offered himself to Darius, to guard his Person, protesting
against the Treason of Bessus, (But God had otherwise determined of the Empire,
and therefore so sar was the King infatuated, that be ever rejected their
Counsel from the beginning of the War, who were most faithful to him.) And now
hearkened to Bessus, who told him, that the Greeks, with Patron their Captain,
were corrupted by Alexander, and practiced the division of his faithful
servants: Yet, even this while, Bessus had corrupted, and drawn to himself
thirty thousand of the Army, promising them all those things by which, the
lovers of the world and themselves, are wont to be allured, to wit, Riches,
Honor, and Safety.

Now the day following, Darius Discharges his Attendants.
Darius plainly discovered the purposes of Bessus, and being overcome with
passion, as judging himself unable to make head against these ungrateful and
unnatural Traitors, he prayed Artabazus, his faithful Servant, to depart from
him, and to provide for his own safety. In like manner he discharged the rest
of his Attendants, all save a few of his Eunuchs. For his Guards had
voluntarily abandoned him. His Persians, being most base cowards, durst not
undertake his defense against the Bactrians, though they had four thousand
Greeks to assist them, who of themselves were able to beat both the Parties.
But it is most true, That him that forsakes himself, will no man follow. It had
been far more man-like, and King-like, to have dyed in the head of those four
thousand Greeks, who offered him the disposal of their Lives, (to which
Artabazus also persuaded him) than to have lain upon the ground bewailing
himself, and suffering himself to be bound like a Slave, Darius made a Prisoner
and abused.
by those Ambitious Monsters that laid violent hands on him; whom, neither the
consideration of his former great estate, nor the Honor he had conferred upon
them, nor the trust he had reposed in them, nor the world of benefits he had
bestowed on them, could move to pity: No, nor his present adversity, which
above all things should have prevailed with them, could pierce their viperous
and ungrateful hearts.

Darius, thus forsaken, was bound by them, and laid in a Cart covered with
Hides of Beasts, that he might not be discovered; and to add despite and
derision to his adversity, they bound him with Chains of Gold, and so drew him
amongst their ordinary Carriages. For Bessus and Naburzanes persuaded
themselves that they might redeem their lives, and be settled in their Provinces
that they held, either by delivering him Prisoner to Alexander, of if that hope
failed, to make themselves Kings by his murder, and then to defend themselves
by force of Arms. But their expectations were frustrate in both. For it was
against the Nature of God, Gods Justice.
who is most just, to suffer such villainy to go unpunsihed, yea, though against
an Heathen King, and an Idolator.

Alexander hearing that Darius was retreated toward Bactria, Alexander pursues
him.
not daring to abide his coming, hastened after him by a violent march, and
because he would not force his Footmen beyond their strength, he mounted on
Horseback certain select Companies of them, and those which were best Armed,
and with six thousand other Horse, he rather ran than marched after Darius. Now
such as hated the Treason of Bessus, secretly forsook him, and gave
intelligence to Alexander of all that had happened, informing him of the way
that Bessus took, and how near he was unto him. Hereupon Alexander again
doubled his pace, and his Vant-guard being come within sight of Bessus his
Rear, Bessus brought a Horse to the Cart where Darius lay bound, persuading him
to mount thereon, and to save himself by flight. But the unfortunate King
refusing to follow those that had betrayed him, they cast Darts at him, Darius
is wounded.
and gave him some mortal wounds: they wounded also the Beasts that drew him,
and slew two poor servants that attended his person. This done, they all fled
that could, and left the rest to the mercy of the Macedonians.

Polystratus, a Macedonian, in his pursuit after Bessus, being extreme thirsty,
as he was refreshing himself with some water that he had found out, espied a
Cart drawn by wounded Beasts, that were now scarce able to go, whereupon he
searched it, and there found Darius bathed in his own blood: and by a Persian
Captain that Polystratus had, he understood that it was Darius, and was
informed of that barbarous Tragedy. Darius also seemed greatly comforted (if
dying men, ignorant of the living God can be comforted) that he vented not his
last sorrows unheard; but that by this Macedonian, Alexander might be informed
of the truth, and take vengeance on those Traitors, who had dealt no less
unworthily, than cruelly with him, recommending the revenge thereof to
Alexander by this messenger, His last words.
beseeching him to pursue the Traitors, not for Darius his sake, but for his
own Honor, and for the safety of all that did, or should hereafter wear
Crowns. He also having nothing else to present to Alexander, rendered him thanks
for his Kingly Grace and Favor used to his Wife, Mother, and Children;
desiring the immortal Gods to subject to him the Kingdom of the whole World. As
he was thus speaking, importunate Death pressing out his few remaining spirits,
he desired a little Water, which Polystratus presented unto him; after which,
he lived but to tell him, that of all the good things which of late he was
Master of, he had nothing remaining but his last breath, wherewith to desire
the Gods to reward his compassion.

The Macedonians began now to hope that their Travels were near an end; and
therefore every man was preparing for his return: whereof, when Alexander was
informed, Alexanders Ambition.
he was much troubled at it. For the bounded Earth sufficed not for his
boundless Ambition. Many Arguments he therefore used to draw on his Army
farther into the East: But that which prevailed most was, that Bessus, a base
Traitor to his Master Darius, having at his Devotion the Hircanians and
Bactrians, would in a short time, if the Macedonians should now return, make
himself Lord of the Persian Empire, and reap the fruit of all their former
Travels. In conclusion, Alexander won their consents to go on: Which done,
leaving Craterus with certain Regiments of Foot, and Amyntas with six thousand
Horse in Parthia, He goes into Hircania.
he entered (not without some opposition) into Hyrcania. For the Mardons and
other barbarous Nations, defended certain passages for a while. But at last
prevailing, he passed the River of Zioberis, which, taking its rise in Parthia,
empties it self into the Caspian Sea. It runs under the ledge of Mountains
which bound Parthia and Hyrcania, where, hiding it self under ground for three
hundred furlongs, it then rises again, and follows its former course, as is
said before. In Zadracarta, the Metropolis of Hircania, Alexander rested
fifteen days, Banqueting, and Feasting therein.

About this time Pataphernes, one of Darius his greatest Commanders, with some
others of his followers, Diverse submit to him.
submitted themselves to Alexander, and were restored to their places and
Government. But above all other, he Graced Artabazus most highly, for his
approved and constant Faith and Loyalty to his Master Darius. Artabazus brought
along with him ten thousand and five hundred Greeks, the remainder of all those
that had served Darius. He treated with Alexander for their pardon before they
came; but in the end, they rendered themselves simply without promise or
compostion: Alexander pardoned all but the Lacedaemonians, whom he imprisoned,
their Captain having slain himself. He was also prevailed with (though to his
great dishonor) to pardon Nabarzanes, that had joined with Bessus in the
Murder of Darius.

Here (as some write) Thalestris, Queen of the Amazons comes to him.
Queen of the Amazons come to visit him, and her suit was, (which she easily
obtained) that she might accompany him, till she proved with child by him:
which done, she refused to go along with him into India, but returned into her
own Country.

Now as Alexander had begun to change his conditions after the taking of
Persepolis; so at this time Prosperity had so much corrupted his Virtue, that
he accounted Clemency to be but baseness, and the Temperance, which all his
life before he had used, to be but a poor and abject humor, rather becoming
the instructers of his youth, than the condition and state of so mighty a King
as the World could not equal. For he persuaded himself, that he now represented
the greatness of the Gods; He affects a Deity.
and he was pleased when those that came before him, would fall down on the
ground and adore him. He wore the Garments and Robes of the Persians, and
commanded his Nobles to do the like. He entertained into his Court and Camp the
same shameless Rabble of Curtizans and Catamites, as Darius had done, whom he
imitated, in all the proud, voluptuous, and detested manners of the Persians,
whom he had vanquished, and became a more foul and fearful Monster than Darius,
from whose Tyranny, he vaunted, to have delivered so many Nations; Insomuch as
they that were nearest and dearest to him, began to be ashamed of him,
entertaining each other with this, or the like scornful discourse; That
Alexander of Macedonia was become one of Darius's licentious Courtiers: For
which he is scorned of his Friends.
That by his Example, the Macedonians, after so many, and tedious travels, were
more impoverished in their Virtues, than enriched by their Victories; and that
it was hard now to judge, whether the Conquerors or conquered were the baser
slaves. Neither were these things so whispered in corners, but that they came
to Alexanders ears: He therefore with great Gifts sought to stop the mouths of
the better sort, and of such, of whose judgments he was most jealous.

Then did he make it known to the Army, that Bessus had assumed the title of a
King, and called himself Artaxerxes; and that he had compounded a great Army of
the Bactrians and other Nations, whereby he persuaded them to go on; to the
end, that all which they had already gotten, together with themselves (so far
engaged) might not be cast away and lost. And because they were pestered with
the plunder of so many rich Cities, that the whole Army seemed but the guard of
their Carriages, he commanded that every man's Fardel should be brought into the
Market place; which, when it was done, he, together with his own, He burns all
the spoils.
caused all to be consumed with fire. This, in probability, might have proved
very dangerous unto him: For the Common Soldiers had more interest in that
which they had purchased with their painful travel, and with their blood, than
in the Kings Ambition; had not this happy temerity overcome all difficulties.

As he was upon his march, news was brought that Satribarzanes, whom he had
established in his former Government over the Arians, Rebellion against him.
was revolted; Whereupon, leaving the way of Bactria, he sought the Traitor
out: But the Rebel hearing of his coming, fled with two thousand Horse to
Bessus. Then marched Alexander on against Bessus, and by setting a great Pile
of wood on fire, with the advantage of a strong wind, he won a passage over an
high an unaccessible Rock, which was defended against him by thirty thousand
Foot, the extremity of the fire and smoke forcing them to quit the place, which
otherwise had been invincible: After which, he found no resistance, till he
came into Aria, on the East of Bactria, where the chief City of that Province,
called Artacoana, was a while defended against him, by the revolt of
Satribarzanes; but in the end, he received the Inhabitants to mercy. At this
place his Army was recruited with a new supply of five thousand, and five
hundred Foot, and near five hundred Horse, out of Greece, Thessaly, and other
places.

At this time it was, that the Treason of Dimnus was discovered, of which,
Philotas the Son of Parmenio was accused, Treason against him.
at least as accessory, if not principal. This Dimnus, with some others, having
conspired against the life of Alexander, went about to draw Nicomacus, a young
man whom he loved, into the conspiracy: The youth, although he was first bound
by Oath to secrecy, when he heard so foul a matter uttered, began to protest
against it so vehemently, that his Friend was like to have slain him, to secure
his own life; and so constrained by fear, he made show as if he had been won by
persuasion, and by seeming at length to like well of the business, he was told
more at large who they were that had undertaken it. There were nine or ten of
them, all men of rank, whose Names Dimnus (the better to countenance the
enterprise) reckoned up to him, Nicomachus had no sooner freed himself from the
company of this Traitor Dimnus, than he acquainted his own Brother, Ceballinus,
with the whole design; whereupon it was agreed between them, that Ceballinus,
(who might do it with the least suspicion) should go to the Court, and utter
all. Ceballinus meeting with Philotas, told him the whole business, requesting
him to acquaint the King with it, which he promised to do, but yet did not.

Two days passed, and Philotas never brake with the King about the matter, but
still excused himself to Ceballinus, by the Kings want of leisure. This his
coldness bred suspicion, and caused Ceballinus to apply himself to one Metron,
Keeper of the Kings Armory, who forthwith brought him to Alexanders presence.
Alexander finding by examination what had passed between Ceballinus and
Philotas, It Is discovered to Alexander.
fully persuaded himself, that this concealment of the Treason argued Philotas
to have a hand in it; When Dimnus therefore was brought before him, he asked
him only this Question; Wherein have I so offended thee, that thou should
think Philotas more worthy to be King than my self? Dimnus, when he was first
apprehended, perceiving how the matter was like to go, had so wounded himself,
that he lived no longer than to give his last groan in the Kings presence.

Then was Philotas sent for, and charged with the suspicion which his silence
might justly breed. His answer was, that when the Treason was revealed to him
by Nicomachus, he judged it to be but frivolous, and therefore forbore to
acquaint Alexander with it, till he could procure better information. This
error of his (if it were but an error) though Alexander, for the notable
services done by his Father Parmenio, and his Brother Nicanor, lately dead, and
by Philotas himself, had freely pardoned him, and given him his hand for
assurance: Yet, by the instigation of Craterus, he falsified his Princely
promise, and made the Enemies of Philotas his Judges. Philotas accused.
Craterus indeed persuaded himself, that he could never find a better occasion
to oppress his private enemy, than by pretending Piety, and Duty to his Prince.
Whence a Poet says, See how these Great men cloth their private hate
In these fair colors of the public good;
And to effect their ends, pretend the State,
As if the State by their affection stood:
And Armed with Power, and Princes Jealousies,
Will put the least conceit of discontent
Into the greatest rank of Treacheries,
That no one action shall seem innocent.
Uea, Valor, Honor, Bounty shall be made
As accessaries unto ends unjust:
And even the service of the State must lade
The needful'st undertaking with distrust,
So that base vileness, idle Luxury,
Seem safer far than to do worthily.


Now the King, following the advice of Craterus, Alexander's dissimulation.
had resolved the next day to put Philotas to the Torment, yet in the very
evening of the same night, in which he was apprehended, he called him to a
Banquet, and discoursed as familiarly with him as at any other time. But, when
in the dead of the night, Philotas was taken in his lodging, and that they
which hated him, began to bind him, he cried out upon the King, in these words:
O Alexander, the malice of mine enemies has surmounted thy mercy, and their
hatred is far more constant than the word of a King. Many circumstances were
urged against him by Alexander himself; and this was not the least (not the
least offense indeed against the Kings humor, who desired to be adored as a
God) that when Alexander wrote unto him concerning the Title given him by
Jupiter Hammon, he answered, That he could not but rejoice that he was admitted
into the Sacred fellowship of the Gods, and yet he could not but withal grieve
for those which should live under such a one as would exceed the nature of man.
This, said Alexander, assured me that his heart was estranged, and that he
despised my Glory.

Philotas was brought before the multitude, Philotas accused by the King.
to hear the Kings Oration against him. He was brought forth in vile Garments,
and bound like a Thief, where he heard himself, and his absent Father, the
greatest Captain in the World, accused, and also his two other Brothers, Hector
and Nicanor, who had lost their lives in these Wars; wherewith he was so
overcome with grief, that, for a while, he could utter nothing for tears; and
sorrow had so wasted his Spirits, that he sank between those that led him. In
the end, the King asked him, in what Language he would make his defense? He
answered, In the same wherein it had pleased the King to accuse him: which
accordingly he did, to the end that the Persians as well as the Macedonians
might understand him. But hereof the King made this advantage, persuading the
Assembly, that he disdained the Language of his own Country, and so
withdrawing himself, he left him to his merciless enemies.

This proceeding of the Kings, Philotas greatly lamented, seeing the King, who
had so sharply inveighed against him, would not vouchsafe to hear his answer.
For hereby his enemies were emboldned against him, and all the rest, having
discovered the Kings mind and resolution, contended amongst themselves, which
of them should show the greatest hatred toward him. Amongst many Arguments
which he brought for his own defense, this was not the least, that when
Nicomachus desired to know of Dimnus, of what quality and power his partners in
the Conspiracy were, seeming unwilling to adventure himself amongst mean and
base Companions, Dimnus named unto him Demetrius, of the Kings Bedchamber,
Nicanor, Amyntas, and some others, but spoke not a word of Philotas, who, being
Master of the Horse, would greatly have graced the cause, and encouraged
Nicomachus. And to make it more clear that he knew nothing of their intents,
there was not any one of the Conspirators that in their torments would accuse
him. Yet at the last, himself being put to extreme torments, Philotas condemned
and tortured to death.
by the device of his professed enemies, Craterus, Cenus, Ephestion, and
others, Philotas accused himself, hoping that they would have slain him
immediately: But he failed even in that miserable hope, and suffering all that
could be inflicted on flesh and blood, he was forced to confess, not what was
true, but what might best please them, who were far more merciless than Death
it self. Cruelty is not a humane vice: It is unworthy of man: It Is even a
boasting rage to delight in blood and wounds, and casting away the nature of
man, to become a savage Monster.

Now whilst Alexanders hands were yet died in blood, Alexanders cruelty.
he commanded that Lyncestes, Son in Law to Antipater, who had been three years
in Prison, should be slain. The same dispatch had all those that were accused
by Nicomachus. But Parmenio was yet living. Parmenio, who had served with great
fidelity, as well Philip, the Kings Father, as himself. Parmenio that first
opened Alexanders way into Asia: That had cast down Attalus the Kings enemy:
That had always, and in all hazards, the leading of the Kings Vaunt-guard:
That was no less prudent in Counsel, than successful in all his enterprises. A
man, beloved of the men of War, and to say the truth, he that had purchased for
the King the Empire of the East, and of all the Glory and Fame which he had
attained to. That he might not therefore revenge the Death of his Son, though
not upon the King (for it was unlikely that he would have stained his fidelity
in his old age, having now lived seventy years) yet upon those who by base
Flattery had possessed themselves of the Kings affection; It was resolved that
he should dye also: and Polydamus was employed in this business, a man, whom of
all others, Parmenio trusted most, and loved best. Who (to be short) finding
him in Media, Parmenio mutthered.
and having Cleander, and other Murderers with him, slew him as he was walking
in his Garden, and reading the Kings letters. This was the end of Parmenio
(says Curtius) who had performed many notable things without the King; but the
King without him did never effect any thing worthy of Praise.

These things being ended, Alexander marched on with his Army, Alexander
marches forward.
and subdued the Araspitans, and made Amenides (sometime secretary to Darius)
their Governor. Then he Conquered the Arachosians, and left Menon to command
over them. Here the Army (that was sometime led by Parmenio) found him, which
consisted of twelve thousand Macedonians and Greeks, with whom (though with
much difficulty) he passed through some cold Regions. At length, he came to the
foot of the Mountain Taurus, toward the East, Builds a City.
where he built a city, which he honored with his own Name, and peopled it
with seven thousand of his old Macedonians, worn out with age, and the travels
of War. The Arians, who since he left them, were revolted, he again subdued, by
the industry and valor of Caranus and Erigius: and now he resolved to find out
the new King Bessus in Bactria; who hearing of his coming, prepared to pass
over the great River of Oxus, which divides Bactria from Sogdiana. Bessus
having now abandoned Bactria, Alexander made Artabazus Governor of it, and
himself marching forward with his Army, Wants water.
they suffered great want of water, insomuch as when they came to the River
Oxus, there died more of them by immoderate drinking, than Alexander had lost
in any one Battle against the Persians. He found upon the Banks of this great
River, no manner of Timber, or other materials wherewith to make Bridges, or
Boats, or Rafts, but was forced to sew together Hides that covered his
Carriages, and stuffing them with straw, he was six days in passing over his
Army after that manner, which Bessus might easily have distressed, if he had
dared but to look the Macedonians in the face. He had formerly complained of
Darius for neglecting to defend the Banks of Tigris, and other Passes; and yet
now, when this Traitorous slave had styled himself a King, he durst not perform
any thing worthy of a slave: and therefore they that were nearest to him, and
whom he most trusted, to wit, Spicamenes, Dataphernes, Cantanes, and others,
the Commanders of his Army, moved, both by the care of their own safety, and
the remembrance of Bessus his Treason and cruelty against Darius, Bessus taken.
bound him, as he had done his Master, only his chain was closed about his
neck, like a Mastiff Dog, and so they dragged him along to present him to
Alexander.

In the mean time, Alexander was arrived at a certain Town inhabited by Greeks
of Miletum, brought thither by Xerxes, when long before he returned out of
Greece, whose children had now almost forgotten their Country Language. These
entertained him with great joy: but he most cruelly put them all to the Sword,
Alexanders (...).
and destroyed their City. At this place he received Bessus, and having
rewarded Spitamenes, and his Associates, he delivered the Traitor into the
hands of Oxatre, Bessus slain.
Brother to Darius, to be tormented by him.

But now when he thought himself most secure, and out of danger, some twenty
thousand Mountainers assaulted his Camp, in repelling whom, he received a shot
in his leg, the Arrow head sticking in the flesh, He is wounded.
so that he was fain to be carried in a Horse-Litter for some time after.

Shortly after he came unto Maracanda, judged by some to be the same with
Samarcand, the Imperial City of the Great Tamerlain, which was in compass
seventy furlongs. Here he received the Ambassadors of the Scythians (called
Avians) who offered to serve him.

Presently after, the Bactrians, with the Sogdians, were again stirred up to
Rebellion, by the same Spitamenes, and Catanes, who had lately delivered Bessus
into Alexanders hands. Many Cities were stoutly defended against him, all
which, after he had subdued them, he utterly defaced, killing all therein. He
is wounded again.
At the Siege of one of these he received a blow in the neck, which struck him
to the ground, and disabled him from action many days after: In the mean
while, Spitamenes had recovered Samarcand, against whom he sent Menedemus, with
three thousand Foot, and eight hundred Horsemen.

In the heat of these affairs, Alexander marched to the River Jaxartes, that
runs between Sogdiana and Scythia, which he passed over, while Menedemus was
employed in the recovery of Samarcand. Upon the Banks of this River he built
another Alexandria, sixty furlongs in compass, which he beautified with Houses
seventeen days after the walls were built: But the Scythian King, He builds a
City.
persuading himself that this City was built on purpose to keep him under, made
some attempts to hinder the erection of this new City; but being naked of
defensive Arms, he was easily beaten away. Sixty of the Macedonians are said to
be slain in this conflict, and eleven hundred wounded, which might easily be
done in passing a great River, defended against them by good Archer. Of the
Scythian Horses, eighteen hundred were brought into the Camp, and many
Prisoners.

Whilst Alexander was securing himself against those Scythians, bordering upon
Jaxartes, Menedemus slain.
he received the ill news that Menedemus was slain by Spitamenes, his Army
broken, and most of them killed; to wit, two thousand Foot, and three hundred
Horse. He therefore, intending revenge upon Spitamenes, made all the haste he
could, but Spitamenes fled into Bactria. Whereupon Alexander killed, burned,
and laid waste all before him, not sparing the innocent Children, and so
departed, leaving a new Governor in that Province.

To repair this loss, he received a great supply of nineteen thousand men out
of Greece, Lycia, and Syria, with all which, and his old Army, he returned
toward the South, and passed the River of Oxus on the Southside whereof he
built six Towns, near each to other, for their mutual security. But he found a
new upstart Rebel, A Rebellion.
one Arimazes, (a Sogdian) who was followed by thirty thousand Soldiers, that
defended against him a strong piece of ground on the top of an High and steep
Hill. Alexander sought (but in vain) to win him with fair words: wherefore he
made choice of three hundred young men, and promised ten Talents to the first,
nine to the second, and so proportionably to the rest, that could find a way to
creep to the top thereof. This they performed with the loss of thirty two of
their number, and then made a sign to Alexander that they had accomplished his
Commandment. Hereupon he sent one Cophes to persuade Arimazes to yield up the
place; who, being showed (...) Cophes that the Macedonians were already gotten
up, he yielded simply to Alexanders mercy, and was, with all his Kindred,
scourged, and crucified: which punishment they well deserved, for keeping no
better a watch in so dangerous a time. For the place might have been defended
against any power.

After these Sogdian and Scythian Wars, Alexander committed the Government of
Samarcand, and the Country about it, to Clytus, whom yet he slew soon after,
Clytus slain.
for preferring the Virtue of Philip the Father, before that of Alexander the
Son; or rather, because he objected to the King the Death of Parmenio, and
derided the Oracle of Hammon: for therein he touched him to the quick; his
Speech being in public, and at a drunken Banquet. Clytus, indeed, had deserved
as much at the Kings hand as any man living, having saved his life; which the
King well remembered, when he came to himself, and when it was too late to
repent. As Clytus in his Cups, forgot whom he offended, so Alexander in his
drunkenness forgot whom he slew; for grief whereof, he afterward tore his Face,
and sorrowed so inordinately, that had he not been over-perswaded by
Calisthenes, he would have slain himself. The effect of Drunkenness.
Drunkenness both kindles and discovers every vice: It removes shame, which
gives impediment to bad attempts. Where Wine gets the Mastery, all the evil
which before lay hidden, breaks out. Drunkenness indeed rather discovers vices
than makes them.

Soon after this, Spitamenes, who slew Bessus, and had lately revolted from
Alexander, was murdered by his own Wife, and his Head was presented to
Alexander. Spitamenes being thus taken away, the Dahans also seized upon his
fellow Conspirator, Dataphernes, and delivered him up: So that Alexander being
now freed from all those petty Rebels, and disposed of the Provinces that he
had quieted, marched on with his Army into Gabaza, where it suffered so much
Hunger, Cold, Lightning, Thunder, and such Storms, Deadful storms.
that in one of them he lost a thousand men. From hence he invaded the Sacans,
and destroyed their Country. Then came he into the Territories of Cohortanes,
who submitted himself to him, and presented him with thirty beautiful Virgins;
amongst whom, Roxane, afterward his Wife, was one; which, although all the
Macedonians stomached, yet none of them durst use any freedom of speech after
the death of Clytus. From hence he directed his course toward India, having so
increased his numbers, as amounted to one hundred and twenty thousand Armed men.

In the mean while, he would needs be honored as a God, whereunto, that he
might allure his Macedonians, His Ambition. Calisthenes speaks against it.
he employed two of his Parasites, Hagis and Cleo, whom Calisthenes opposed. For
amongst many other honest Arguments which he used in the Assembly, he told
Cleo, that he thought that Alexander would disdain the Title of a God from his
Vassals: That the opinion of Sanctity, though it did sometimes follow the Death
of those, who in their Lifetime had done the greatest things, yet it never
accompanied any one as yet living in the world: He said, that neither Hercules,
nor Bacchus, were Deified at a Banquet, and upon drink, (for this matter was
propounded by Cleo at a carousing Feast) but for the more than manly acts
performed by them in their Lifetime, for which they were in succeeding Ages
numbered amongst the Gods. Alexander stood behind a partition, and heard all
that was spoken, waiting but for an opportunity to be revenged on Calisthenes,
who, being free of speech, Honest, Learned, and a Lover of the Kings Honor,
was yet shortly after tormented to Death. For upon occasion of a Conspiracy
made against the King, And is tormented to Death.
by one Hermelaus, and others, who confessed it, he caused Calisthenes, without
confession, accusation, or trial to be torn asunder upon the Rack.

This deed, unworthy of a King, is thus censured by Seneca. Thus (says he) is
the eternal crime of Alexander, which no Virtue, or felicity of his in War,
shall ever be able to blot out. For as often as any man shall say, He slew many
thousands of Persians, it will be replied, He did so, and he slew Calisthenes
too. When it shall be said that he won all as far as to the very Ocean, whereon
also he adventured with unusual Navies, and extended his Empire from a corner
of Thrace, to the utmost bounds of the East; it shall be said withal; But he
killed Calisthenes. Let him have out-gone all the ancient Examples of Captains
and Kings, none of all his Acts make so much to his Glory, as the Death of
Calisthenes to his reproach.

With the Army before mentioned, He marches into India.
of one hundred and twenty thousand Foot and Horse, Alexander entered into the
borders of India, where, such of the Princes as submitted themselves to him, he
entertained lovingly, the others he enforced, killing man, woman, and child,
where they resisted. He then came before Nisa, built by Bacchus, which, after a
^ew days, was rendered to him. From thence he removed to a Hill at hand, which
on the top had goodly Gardens, filled with delicate fruits and Vines, dedicated
to Bacchus, to whom he made Feasts for ten days together. And when he had
drank his fill, His Feasts to Bacchus.
went on to Dedula, and from thence to Acadera, Countries spoiled, and
abandoned by the Inhabitants; by reason whereof, Victuals failing, He conquers
many Countries.
he divided his Army. Ptolomy led one part, Cenon another, and himself the
rest. These took in many Towns, whereof, that of greatest fame was Muzage,
which had in it three hundred thousand men, but after some resistance, it was
yielded to him by Cleophe the Queen, to whom he again restored it. At the Siege
of this City he received a wound in the leg.

After this, Nola was taken by Polisperchon; and a Rock of great strength by
Alexander himself: He won also a passage from one Eryx, who was slain by his
own men, and his Head presented to Alexander: This was the sum of his Actions
in those parts, before he came to the great River Indus. And when he came
thither, he found there Ephestion, who (being sent before) had prepared Boats
for the transportation of his Army, and before Alexanders arrival, had
prevailed with Omphis, King of that part of the Country, to submit himself to
this great Conqueror. And hereupon, soon after Alexanders coming, Omphis
presented himself, with all the strength of his Country, and fifty six
Elephants, unto him; offering him his service and assistance: He told Alexander
also, that he was an enemy to the two next great Kings of that part of India,
named Abiasares, and Porus; wherewith Alexander was not a little pleased,
hoping by this their disunion, to make his own Victory be the far more easy.

This Omphis also presented Alexander with a Crown of Gold, the like did the
rest of his Commanders; and withal he gave him eight Talents of Silver,
coined; which Alexander not only refused, but to show that he coveted Glory,
His Pro^ligality.
not Gold, he gave Omphis a thousand Talents of his own Treasure, besides other
Persian rarities.

Abiasares being informed that Alexander had received his enemy Omphis into his
protection, he resolved to make his own peace also. For, knowing that his own
strength did but equal that of Omphis, he thought it but an ill match, when
Alexander, who had already subdued all the greatest Princes of Asia, should
make himself a party, and head of the quarrel. So then now Alexander had none
to stand in his way, but Porus, to whom he sent a command, that he should
attend him at the Borders of his Kingdom, He sends to Porus.
there to do him Homage: But the gallant Porus returned him this manly answer:
That he would satisfy him in the first demand, which was, to attend him on his
Borders, and that well accompanied; but for any other acknowledgment, he was
resolved to take counsel of his Sword. To be short, Alexander resolved to pass
over the River of Hydaspes, and to find out Porus at his own home: But Porus
saved him that labor, attending him on the farther bank, with thirty thousand
Foot, ninety Elephants, and three hundred armed Chariots, and a great Troop of
Horse. The River was half a mile broad, and withal, deep and swift. It had in
it many Islands, amongst which there was one much overgrown with Wood, and of
good capacity.

Alexander sent Ptolomy, with a good part of the Army up the River, shrowding
the rest from the sight of Porus under this Island, by this devise, Porus being
drawn from the place of his first encamping, set himself down opposite to
Ptolomy, supposing that the whole Army of Alexander was there, intending to
force their passage: But in the mean while Alexander with his men, recovered
the the farther shore without resistance, and ordering his Troops, he advanced
toward Porus, who at first imagined them to be Abiasares his confederate, come
over Hydaspis to assist him: But finding it to be otherwise, he sent his
Brother Hagis with four thousand Horse, and a hundred armed Chariots to
entertain him. Each Chariot had in it four to ^ight, A Battle.
and two to guide it: But they were at this time of little use, by reason that
much rain having fallen, the fields were so foul that the Horses could hardly
trot.

In this fight the Scythians and Dahans had Alexanders Vantguard, who so galled
the Indians with their Darts and Arrows, that the Horses brake their reins, and
overturned the Chariots, and those that were in them. Perdiccas also charged
the Indian Horsemen, who were by him forced to recoil. Then did Porus move
forward with the Gross of his Army, that his Vantguard, who were scattered,
might retreat into his Rear. Alexander, being followed by Ephestion, Ptolomy,
and Perdiccas, charged the Indian Horsemen in the left wing, commanding Cenon
to set upon the right. He directed also Antigonus and Leonatus to charge Porus
his Battle of Foot, strengthened with Elephants, Porus himself riding upon one
of the biggest of them. By these Beasts the Macedonian Foot received the
greatest damage; but the Archers and Darters being well guarded with the long
and strong Pikes of the Macedonians, so galled them, that the Elephants being
enraged, turned Head, and ran over their own Footmen that followed them. In the
end, after a long and doubtful fight, by the advantage of weapons, Porus beaten.
and the skill and courage of the Macedonian Captains, the Victory fell to
Alexander, who also far exceeded Porus in number of men. For, besides the
Macedonians, and other Eastern and Northern Nations, Alexander was assisted by
Porus his Confederates, and Country people: Yet, for his own person, he never
gave ground, otherwise than with his Sword toward his enemies, till, being
weakened by many wounds, and abandoned by his Army, he became a Prisoner to the
Conqueror, from whom again he received his Kingdom, He is restored to his
Kingdom.
with a great enlargement.

I forbear to mention other petty Victories which Alexander obtained after
this, in his sailing down the River of Indus. The description of places about
the Head, and branches thereof, are better known to us by reason of our late
Navigations and Discoveries, than they were in former times. The magnificence
and Rights of those Indian Kings, we could in no sort be persuaded to believe,
till our own experience had taught us, that there are many stranger things in
the world than we see in our own Country.

Alexander, having by this time over-wearied his Army, he discovered the rest
of India by Fame. The Indian Kings whom he had subdued, informed him, that a
King called Aggramenes, ruled over many Nations beyond the River Ganges, who
was able to bring into the Field two hundred thousand Foot, twenty thousand
Horse, three thousand Elephants, and two thousand armed Chariots. With this
report, though Alexander was more enflamed than ever, to proceed in his
Discoveries and Conquests, yet all his Oratory could not prevail with his
Soldiers to adventure over those waste Deserts beyond Indus and Ganges, which
were more terrible to them, than the greatest Army that the East could gather.
Yet at last they were overcome by many persuasions to follow him toward the
South, to discover such parts of the Ocean as were nearer at hand, unto which
the River Indus was their infallible guide.

Alexander seeing it would be no otherwise, devised a pretty trick, by which he
hoped to beguile after-ages, His Policy.
and make himself seem greater than he was. For which end, he enlarged his
Camp, made greater Trenches, greater Cabins for Soldiers, greater
Horse-stalls, and higher Mangers than Horses could seed in. Yea, he caused all
furniture both for Men and Horses, to be made larger than would serve for use,
and scattered these Armours and Bridles about his Camp, to be kept as Relics,
and wondered at by those barbarous People. Proportionable unto these, he raised
up twelve great Altars, to be Monuments of his Journeys end.

This done, he returned again to the Banks of Asesines, and there determined to
build his Fleet, where Ausines and Hydaspes meet; and to testify by a surer
Monument, how far he had passed toward the East, he built by those Rivers two
Cities: the one he called Nicaea, and the other Bucephalon, He builds two
Cities.
after the name of his beloved Horse Bucephalus. Here again he received a new
supply of six thousand Thracian Horsemen, seven thousand Foot, and from his
Lieutenant of Babylon, twenty five thousand Armours, garnished with Silver and
Gold, which he distributed amongst his Soldiers.

About these Rivers he won many Towns, and committed great slaughter on those
that resisted. His Conquest*
It Is said, that besieging a City of the Oxidracans, he leaped from the top of
the wall into it, and fought long against all the Inhabitants, till his
Soldiers, forcing a Gate, came in to his rescue. Finally, he passed down the
River with his Fleet, at which time news was brought him of a Rebellion in
Bactria, and then of the arrival of a hundred Ambassadors from a King in
India, who submitted himself to him. These Ambassadors he Feasted upon a
hundred Beds of Gold, with all the sumptuousness that could be devised; who,
soon after their dispatch, returned again, and presented him with three hundred
Horses, and one hundred and thirty Wagons, and in each of them four Horses, a
thousand Targets, with many other things rare and rich.

Then sailed Alexander toward the South, He builds a City.
passing through many obscure Nations, which all yielded to him, either
quietly, or by force: Amongst these, he built another Alexandria. Of the many
places which he took in his passage, one was called Samus, the Inhabitants
whereof fought against him with poisoned Swords; with one of which, Ptolomy
(afterward King of Egypt,) was wounded, and was cured by an Herb which
Alexander dreamed he had seen in the mouth of a Serpent.

When he came near to the outlet of Indus, (being ignorant of the Tides of the
Sea) his Galleys on a sudden were shuffled one against another, by the coming
of the Flood, and in the Ebb, they were left on the dry ground, and on the
Sandy banks in the River, wherewith the Macedonians were much amazed: But after
he had a few days observed the course of the Sea, he passed out of the Rivers
mouth some few miles, and then offering Sacrifice to Neptune, he returned; and
the better to inform himself, he sent Nearchus and Onesicritus to discover the
Coast toward the mouth of Euphrates.

Near the out-lets of this River, He wants food.
he spent some part of Winter, and from thence, in eighteen days march, he
recovered Gredosia, in which passage his Army suffered such misery through the
want of food, that of one hundred and twenty thousand Foot, and twelve thousand
Horse, which he carried into India, not a fourth part returned alive.

From Gredosia, Alexander led his Army into Caramania, and so drawing near to
Persia, His debauchedness.
he gave himself wholly unto Feasting and Drinking, imitating the Triumphs of
Bacchus. And though this Swinish Vice be hateful enough in it self; Yet it
always inflamed this King to cruelty. For (says Curtius) the Hangman followed
the Feast: For Haspastes, one of his Provincial Governors, he commanded to be
slain; so as, Neither did the excess of Voluptuousness qualify his Cruelty,
nor his Cruelty at all hinder his Voluptuousness.

While he refreshed his Army in these parts, there came a new supply to him of
five thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse, which were conducted to him by
Cleander and his Fellows, that had been employed in the murder of Parmenio. He
punishes his Officers.
Against these murderers great complaints were made by the Deputies of the
Provinces, in which they had commanded; and their offenses were proved to be so
outrageous, that Alexander was persuaded, that, had they not altogether
despaired of his return out of India, they durst not have committed them. All
men were glad of the occasion, remembering the Virtue of him whom they had
slain. The end was, that Cleander and the other chief, together with six
hundred Soldiers, who had been the instruments of their ravages, were
delivered over to the Hangman; every one rejoicing that the wrath of the King
was at last poured out upon the Ministers of his Anger.

Nearchus and Onesicritus were now returned from searching the Coast, and made
report of an Island they had discovered, rich in Gold, and of other strange
things; whereupon they were commanded to make some farther discovery, after
which they should come up Euphrates, and meet the King at Babylon.

Alexander drawing near to Babylon, He visits the Sepulcher of Cyrus.
went to visit the Sepulcher of Cyrus in Pesagardes, where he was presented
with many rich Gifts by Orsanes, one of the Princes of Persia, of the race of
Cyrus. But because Bagoas, an Eunuch, who was in special favor with the King,
was neglected, he suborned some loose fellows to accuse Orsanes for robbing
Cyrus his Tomb; for which he was condemned to dye, His cruelty.
and Bagoas assisted the Hangman with his own hands to torment him. At this
time also Alexander caused Phradites to be slain, suspecting his greatness.
Hence (says Curtius) he began unreasonably to shed blood, and to believe false
reports. Indeed he took the way to make all men weary of him, and his
Government, seeing Tyranny is more dreadful than all adventures that can be
made against it.

About this time, Calanus burnt himself.
Calanus the Philosopher burnt himself, having lived seventy three years; and
Historians say, that before his Death he foresaw, and foreshewed the Death of
Alexander, promising to meet him shortly after at Babylon.

From Pesagardes, His Marriage and Feasting.
Alexander went to Susa, where he married Statyra, the Eldest Daughter of
Darius, giving her younger Sister to his beloved Ephestion, and eighty other
Persian Ladies to other of his Captains. To his Wedding Feast he invited six
thousand Guests, to each of which he gave a Cup of Gold.

Unto this place came to him three thousand young Soldiers out of his
Conquered Provinces, whereat the Macedonians greatly murmured. Harpalus, his
Treasurer in Babylon, having lavishly consumed the money in his keeping, fled
with five thousand Talents, and six thousand hired Soldiers; but when he came
into Greece, he was there slain. Harpalus slain.
Alexander much rejoiced at the fidelity of the Greeks, who would not be
corrupted with Harpalus his Bribes: Yet he sent a command to them, that they
should receive their banished men again; whereunto they all for fear yielded,
except the Athenians, though they saw that it was a manifest preparation to
their bondage.

After this, His Army discontented.
there followed a mavelous discontent in his Army, because he had resolved to
send into Macedonia all those old Soldiers which could no longer endure the
travel of the War, and to keep the rest in Asia. He made many Orations to
satisfy them, but all his words were in vain, during the height of their fury;
Yet, when their first passions were evaporated, they became more tractable. And
with such as were licenced to depart, he sent Craterus, He sends for Antipater.
to whom he gave the Lieutenantship of Macedonia, Thessaly, and Thrace, which
Antipater had Governed from the time of Alexanders departure out of Europe, who
(during that time) had subdued the rebellious Greeks, discharged the trust
committed to him with great fidelity, and sent him from time to time so many
strong supplies into Asia.

Certainly, if Alexander had not taken counsel of his Cups, he would have cast
some better color upon this alteration, and given Antipater some stronger
reasons of his remove, than to employ him in conducting a new supply of men to
Babylon, the War being now at an end. For Antipater could make no other
construction of this remove, but that he had a purpose to send him after
Parmenio, and the rest. The truth is, the King, notwithstanding his
undauntedness, had no great mind to grapple with Antipater.

Alexander having thus sent for Antipater, Ephestion dies.
made a journey into Media, to settle things there, where Ephestion, whom he
loved and favored above all others, died. The King greatly lamented his loss,
hanged the Physician that could not cure him, and built him a Monument that
cost twelve thousand Talents. After which he returned to Babylon. Thither
Antipater came not, but sent, and that, not to excuse, but to free himself; And
if we may believe Curtius, he suborned his Sons, Cassander, Philip, and Jolla,
who were Alexander Cup-bearers, Alexander dies.
to give him poison; Thessalus (who was one of the conspiracy) having invited
him to a Drinking-Feast for that purpose. Others say, that by his inordinate
drinking he fell into a Fever, whereof he died.

A little before his Death, His Will.
his Friends about him asked him, to whom he would leave his Empire? He
answered, To the most worthy man. Then asked they him, when they should give
him Divine Honors? He answered, When they themselves were happy; which were
the last words that he spoke, and so he died, having lived not all out thirty
three years, nor reigned thirteen.

As soon as he was Dead, The vanity of all earthly things.
his great Captains sought to enrich themselves by his Spoils, and whilst they
were sharing the World amongst themselves, his dead Body lay many days in that
hot Country unburied, stinking above ground: A notable emblem of the Vanity of
all Earthly things. Besides this, his vast Empire was divided amongst his great
Captains; The confusions after his death.
To Ptolomaeus Lagi was allotted Egypt and Africa; To Laomedon, Syria and
Phoenicia; To Python, Media; To Eumenes, Paphlagonia and Cappadocia; To
Antigonus, Pamphilia, Lycia, and Phrygia the Greater; To Cassander, Caria; To
Menander, Lydia; To Leonatus, Phrygia the less; To Lysimachus, Thracia, with
the neighboring Countries; To Antipater, Macedonia, and the neighboring
Nations. But these men, not contented with their shares, fell out amongst
themselves, making War one upon another to their own destruction; For, Gods
Justice.
Perdiccas, warring upon Egypt, was slain by his own Soldiers; Antipater died;
Eumenes was betrayed by his own Soldiers, and slain by Antigonus; Olympias,
the Mother of Alexander, was slain by Cassander; Cleopatra, Sister to
Alexander, was slain by the treachery of Antigonus; Antigonus himself was slain
in Battle by Cassander and Lysimachus; Roxane, the beloved Wife of Alexander,
together with her Son Alexander, and Barsine, another of his Wives, which was
Daughter to Darius, were all slain by Cassander. And presently after, the whole
Family of Cassander was rooted out; Ptolomy died in Egypt; Lysimachus was slain
by Seleuchus; and Seleuchus himself presently after by Ptolomy. So that all the
Family of Alexander, within a few years after his Death, was wholly extirpated;
and all his Friends and great Captains, by their Ambition and mutual
contentions, came most of them to untimely ends.

When the dead body of Alexander had lain seven days upon his Throne, at last
the Chaldeans and Egyptians were commanded from thenceforth to take the care of
it; But when they came about it, they durst not at first approach to touch it:
But anon after, saying their Prayers, that it might be no sin unto them, being
but mortals, to lay their hands upon so Divine a Body, they fell to work, and
dissected it; the Golden Throne whereon he lay, being all stuffed with Spices,
and hung about with Pendants and Banners, and other Emblems of his high State
and Honor.

The care of his Funeral, and of providing a Chariot wherein to carry his Body
to the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, was committed to Aridaeus, who spent two whole
years in making provision for it; which made Olympias, his Mother, (seeing him
lie so long unburied) in great grief of heart to cry out, and say, O my Son!
Thou that would needs be accounted amongst the Gods, and keptest such ado
about it, can not now have that which every poor man has, a little Earth,
and Burial.

Long after, when Julius Caesar had Conquered Pompey, and was idle in Egypt,
Lucan tells us, that he visited the Temples, and the Cave wherein the Body of
Alexander the Great lay, In these Verses; -- Vultu semper celante timorem,
Intrepidus Superum seeds, and Templa vetusti
Numinis, etc.
Then with a look still hiding fear, goes he
The Stately Temple of the old God to see,
Which speaks the Ancient Macedonian greatness;
But there delighted with no Objects sweetness,
Nor with their Gold, nor Gods Majestic dress,
Nor lofty City Walls; with greediness
Into the burying Vault goes Coesar down,
Where Macedonian Philip's mad-brain'd Son,
The prosperous Thief, lies buried; Whom just Fate
Slew in the Worlds Revenge. --


Alexander was very Learned, His character.
and a great Lover of Learning, and Learned men, insomuch as he rewarded his
Master Aristotle with eighty Talents, for his History of Living Creatures. He
so prized Homers Iliads, that in all his Wars he carried it in his Pocket, and
laid it under his Pillow a nights. He loved his Master Aristotle as if he had
been his Father, and used to say, We have our being from our Parents, but our
well-being from our Schoolmasters.

His Mother Olympias was very severe and morose in her carriage; and once
Antipater, his Viceroy in Europe, wrote large Letters of complaint to him,
against her; His love to his Mother.
to whom he returned this answer: Know thou not that one little tear of my
Mothers, will blot out a thousand of thy Letters of complaint? When he heard
the Philosophers conclusion concerning the unity of the World, he wept, because
there were no more Worlds for him to Conquer but one. An evident note of his
great Ambition: which also manifested it self hereby; His Ambition.
That when he came to the Tomb of Achilles, he fell as weeping, considering
that Achilles had a Homer to sing his Praises, and to perpetuate his memory,
whereas he had no such Poet to set forth his Commendations. Also he commanded,
that no man should draw his Picture, but Apelles, the most exquisite Painter in
the World, and that none should make his Statue in Brass but Lycippus, the most
excellent Workman in that kind.

Alexander used to carry his Head on one side, inclining to the left, Flattery.
wherein his Court-Parasites (to ingratiate themselves with him) imitated him.
One desiring to see his Treasures, and his Jewels, he bad his Servants show
him, not his Talents of Gold and Silver, and such other precious things, but
his Friends.

When he had overcome Darius, and gotten possession of all his Dominions and
Treasures, He degenerated after his victories.
he began to degenerate into the Asian Luxury. His Chastity and Moderation were
turned into Pride and Lust. He judged his Country manners, and the Discipline
of the former Macedonian Kings, too sordid and mean for him. He imitated the
Pride of the Persian Kings, he made him a Crown, and Robes like unto Darius. He
grew so proud and insolent, that he suffered his Soldiers to fall down and
worship him like a God. Yea, he commanded his Servants, and Slaves to do so. He
clothed his Captains and Horsemen like unto the Persians, which though they
disliked they durst not refuse. He gat him three hundred sixty five Concubines,
of the beautifullest Virgins that could be found in Asia, after the manner of
the Persian Kings, one of which lay with him every night. He had his Troops of
Eunuchs, with Musicians, Jesters, Singing women, etc. He spent whole days and
nights in profuse Feasting, and Revelling. All which was very offensive to his
old Captains, and Soldiers.

When he was a Boy, he took both his hands full of perfumes, and cast them into
the fire as he was Sacrificing, whereupon Leonidas, one of his Schoolmasters
said to him: O Alexander, when thou have Conquered those Countries wherein
these odors grow, then thou may be so liberal, but in the mean time be more
sparing. Afterward, when he had conquered Arabia Foelix, he sent to Leonidas a
hundred Tallents of Myrrh, and five hundred of Frankincense, bidding him to be
hereafter more liberal in his service of the Gods.

He was of so bountiful a disposition, His bounty.
that it was a greater trouble to him not to be asked than not to give. He
wrote to Phocian, that he would make use of his friendship no more if he
refused his Gifts. Serapion, a young Boy that used to play at Ball with him,
gat nothing because he asked nothing; whereupon the next time he played, he
threw the Ball to all but Alexander, the King marvelling at it, asked him why
he threw not the Ball to him? Forsooth (said Serapion) because you asked it
not. Alexander laughing at the jest, sent him a liberal Gift.

As he was traveling through the Deserts of Persia, himself and his Army were
in great straits for want of water: One of his Soldiers having two Sons ready
to dye of thirst, sought up and down, and at last found a little water,
wherewith he filled a leather Bottel, and was running with it to his Sons: but
meeting Alexander by the way, he filled it out into a dish, and proffered it to
him. Alexander asked him, whither he was carrying it? the man told him that his
two Sons were ready to die with thirst: But (said he) pray you Sir, do you
drink it; For if my Sons die I can get more, but if you die we shall not have
such an other King. Alexander hearing this, gave him the water again, and bid
him carry it to his Sons.

Alexander in his younger days was so moderate, His Temperance.
and temperate, that he would often open his chests, and look upon his
Garments, to see if his Mother had not provided him, either delicate or
superfluous Apparel.

Also when the Queen of Caria, to show her great love to him, sent him daily
variety of Dishes and Dainties, and at last sent her Cooks, and Bakers to him,
he returned them back again, saying, That he had no need of their service; for
his Master Leonidas had provided him better Cooks, by teaching him to dine and
sup Frugally, and sparingly. Also when he had any rare, and Dainty Fruits, or
Fishes sent him from the Sea, he used to distribute them amongst his Friends,
reserving very little or none for his own use.

One craving a small gift of him, he gave him a whole City, and when the Poor
man said, That it was too much for him to receive: Yea (said Alexander) but not
for me to give.

As he was advanceing to conquer a Kingdom in India, Taxilis, who was King
thereof, came and met him, saying, O Alexander, What need we fight, if thou
come not to take away my food and water, for which its only fit for wise men
to ^ight? If thou seek after Riches, if I have more than thou, I will give
thee part of mine: if thou have more than I, I will not refuse part of thine.
Alexander being much taken with his speech, said to him, Go to, I will contend
with thee in bounty, and so they mutually gave and received many Gifts. At last
Alexander gave him a thousand Tallents, which much grieved his Friends, and
rejoiced the Barbarian.

He showed an admirable Example of his Chastity in the heat of his youth, His
Chastity.
when having taken the Mother, Wives, and Daughters of Darius, women of
admirable beauty, yet, neither by word, nor deed did he profer them the least
indignity, thinking it a greater honor to overcome himself than his
Adversaries: And when he looked upon other Captive Ladies that excelled in
stature and beauty, he merrily said, Persides oculorum dolores esse: That the
Persian women were a disease of the eyes, and yet he looked on them but as on
so many Statues. When he was informed that two of his Captains under Permenio,
had ravished two of the Persian Ladies, he wrote to him to enquire after the
matter, and if he found it true, he should cut off their Heads, as of Beasts
born for the hurt of mankind. He also sent him word, that himself was so far
from contemplating the Beauty of Darius his Wife, that he would not so much as
suffer her to be commended in his presence; and that he was so careful of their
Chastity, that they lived in his Camp, shut up in their Tent, as if they had
been in a Temple.

At the Death of Ephestion, his Favorite, he did not only clip the Hair of his
Horses, and Mules, but plucked down also the Battlements of the City walls,
that they might seem to mourn for his Minions Death, showing now deformity
instead of their former Beauty.

Porus, an Indian King, fighting valiantly against him, receiving many wounds,
and at last, being overcome, and falling into his enemies hands, they brought
him to Alexander, who hearing of his coming, went forth, with some of his
Friends, to meet him, and asked him what he would have him to do for him, Porus
answered, My only desire is, that thou use me like a King: Alexander, admiring
his magnanimity, replied, This I will do for my own sake: but what would
thou have me do for thine? Porus answered, That all was contained in his former
demand of Kingly usage: Alexander was so pleased with this, that he restored
him to his Kingdom, and gave him another bigger than his own.

Alexander the Great (says Plutarch) built seventy Cities, He brought many
barbarous Nations to civility. He taught the People Hircani the use of
Marriage: and the Arachosians, Tillage and Husbandry: The Sogdians, that they
should nourish and cherish their aged Parents, and not kill them: The Persians,
to honor their Mothers, and not to use them for their Wives: The Scythians,
that they should not eat their Dead, but bury them in the Earth. etc.

His Clemency to those whom he conquered, was very exemplary. The same day that
he took, he restored again the Kingdom to Porus King of India. Darius his
Mother he entertained honorably, as a Queen. Darius his Wife, and beautiful
Daughters, he would not so much as see, as careful to preserve their Chastity.

His Liberality and Magnificence exceeded all his other Virtues. He gave at one
time three and twenty thousand Talents among his Soldiers, to pay their Debts.
At his Marriage, he invited ten thousand Guests, and gave to every one of them
a Cup of Gold. To one that asked something of him, he gave a City; and when the
Party would have refufed it, as too great a Gift for him, Alexander said, Non
quaero quid te decet accipere, sed quid me decet dare: I regard not what is
meet for thee to take, but what is meet for me to give. Whereupon Plutarch
says, that those Virtues for the which severally sundry worthy men have been
commended, did all concur and meet in him: As the Valor of Achilles: the
Chastity of Agamemnon: the Piety of Diomedes: the Courage of Cyrus: the Policy
of Themistocles: the Boldness of Brassida: And the Prudence of his Father
Philip.

His Military Virt^es were remarkable: As, his Courage, in that with thirty
thousand Footmen, and five thousand Horsemen (for he had no more when he first
passed over into Asia) he durst bid defiance to all the World. His Patience, in
enduring Hunger and Thirst, Heat and Cold. His dexterity, and celerity, in
omitting no opportunity of advantage to his affairs, so that in seven years he
accomplished all his great Conquests: And to these may be added, his singular
success; For he never besieged any City, but he took it.

But after he had glutted himself with the Pleasures of Asia, the Vices that he
fell into were not inferior to his aforementioned Virtues. Among the rest, these
four notable Vices were apparent in him. First, Drunkenness: for he would drink
so excessively, that he would lie two or three days senseless, till he had
slept out his Drink. Secondly, In his Drunkenness he was cruel and outrageous:
In one of those fits he slew his dear Friend Clitus, whose loss he greatly
bewailed afterward. Thirdly, He was much given to Wantonness, and Fleshly
Lusts. Fourthly, At length he grew so intolerably Proud, that he would needs be
accounted the Son of Jupiter, and commanded Calisthenes (one of his great
Commanders,) to be slain, because he would not worship him.

He accounted Achilles happy, because he had such a man as Homer to set forth
his Praises: But himself had many worthy men to Register his Acts; As Ptolomy,
King of Egypt: Hecataeus: Aristobulus: Calisthenes: Onesicratus: Diodorus
Siculus: Trogus Pompeius: Justin: Quintus Curtius: with diverse others.

Lycippus the Painter, made Alexanders Picture looking up to Heaven, with this
Motto, Jupiter, asserui Terram mihi, tu assere Coelum.

O Jupiter, I have taken the Earth to my self; Take thou Heaven: with which
Alexander was so well pleased, that he published a Proclamation, that none
should draw his Picture but Lycippus.

Apelles drew Alexander's Picture with a Thunderbolt in his hand, to show his
admirable celerity, and unresistableness in his Conquests.

This bloody man lived not out half his Days, and not long after his Death all
his Posterity was rooted out.

His Posterity and Kindred that he left behind him, were; his Mother Olymtias;
his Uncle Pyrrhus, King of Epirus: His Brother Arideus, and his Sister
Cleopatra: His two Wives, with their two Sons; Roxane with Alexander, and
Bursines with Hercules* Olympias caused Arideus to be Killed: Cassander
thereupon took occasion to put Olympias to death, being almost fourscore years
old: and then he poisoned both Alexanders Sons, [ Alexander and Hercules] with
Roxane Alexanders Wife. Cleopatra, Alexanders Sister, the Governor of the
Sardians, who was base Brother to Philip, Alexanders Father, procured her to be
killed, therein thinking to gratify Antigonus: And last of all, Pyrrhus was
vanquished by Antigonus, the Son of Demetrius, by whom his Head was cut off.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF EPAMINONDAS, THE GREAT CAPTAIN OF THE THEBANS.
THE Father of Epaminondas was Polymnis, His Parentage. Education.
who was descended of one of the most ancient, and renowned Families amongst
the Thebans, the most part of which Noble lineage had upon their Bodies for a
natural Birth-mark, the resemblance of a Snake. This Polymnis had two only
Sons, Caphisias, and Epaminondas, whom he educated very carefully, and had them
very carefully, and had them very well instructed in all the liberal Arts, and
honest Sciences: especially Epaminondas, His Parts*
who had the more stayed wit, and was most inclined to Virtue, desirous to
learn, humble, obedient, and wonderful docible: and of one Dyonisius he learned
to be very skilful in Singing, and Music. And for Philosophy it happened well
for him that he fell into an excellent Masters hands by this means.

The Colleges of the Pythagorian Philosophers that were dispersed through the
Cities of Italy, were banished by the faction of the Cylonians, yet such as
still kept together, met in a Council at Metapont to consider of their affairs:
But some seditious Persons rose up against them, and set the House wherein they
were on fire, and burnt them all; only Phylolaus and Lysis, being lusty young
men, escaped through the fire. Phylolaus fled into the Country of the
Lucanians, and resided there with his Friends: But Lysis got to Thebes, where
Polymnis entertained him, entreating him to undertake the Tuition of his Son,
Epaminondas, who, though he was but a young Boy, yet was he of good capacity,
and of very good Hopes, This Philosopher accordingly applied himself to manure
this noble and quick wit of Epaminondas, and in a short time made him perfect
in all Sciences and Virtue, so that it was hard to find a more wise, grave, and
virtuous Person than he was.

When he was but fifteen years of age, He exercises and studies.
he gave himself to all manner of exercises of the Body, as to run, wrestle,
use his Weapons, and all feats of Arms: and having quickly attained to skill in
these, he applied himself to his Book, He was naturally silent, fearful to
speak, but never a weary to hear and learn; whereupon Spintharus, the
Tarentine, being familiarly acquainted with him in Thebes, used to say, that he
never knew any man that knew so much, and spoke so little as Epaminondas, If he
fell into any company that discoursed of Philosophy, or of State matters, he
would never leave them, till the matter propounded was at an end. He was of a
pleasant disposition, and so witty that he could break a jest as well as any
man.

Lysis after he had lived long in Thebes, His Discourse with a Philosopher.
died, and was honorably buried by his Scholar Epaminondas. Not long after,
Theanor, one of the Pythagorians in Sicily, was sent to bring Lysis thither,
but when he came to Thebes, he found him dead and buried, therefore going to
Epaminondas, after salutations, he told him that his Companions, who were rich,
willed him to give Polymnis, and his Chidren, a good sum of money in recompense
of that courteous entertainment which they had given to Lysis: Epaminondas,
after pleasant excuses made, told him that none could be received, saying
further Jason, a Captain of the Thessalians thought that I gave him a rude and
uncivil answer, when he, having earnestly entreated me to receive a good sum of
Gold, I sent him word that he did me wrong, and began to make War with me: for
that he, aspiring to make himself a Lord, would corrupt me with money, who am a
plain Citizen of a free Town, and living under the Law, But for thee Theanor, I
commend thy good will, because its honest and virtuous, but I tell thee thou
bring Physic to them that are not sick. Admit that thou, hearing we had
been in Wars, had brought us Arms to defend us, and when on the contrary thou
had found us quiet, and at peace with all our neighbors, thou would not
have thought fit to bestow these Arms, and leave them with those that had no
need of them. Even so, thou art come to relieve our poverty as though it were a
burden to us, whereas on the contrary, its an easy and pleasant thing to us to
carry, and we are glad we have it in our Houses amongst us, and therefore we
have no need of Arms, or money against that which does us no hurt at all. But
tell thy brethren that they use their goods very honestly: and also that they
have Friends here which use their Poverty as well: and as for the
intertainment, and burial of Lysis, he has himself fully recompensed us,
having taught us, amongst many other good lessons, not to be afraid of Poverty,
nor to be grieved to see it amongst us. Theanor having made some reply about
the good and evil of Riches, and told him that as Poverty was not evil in it
self, so neither was Riches to be had in contempt and despised: No truly (said
Epaminondas) yet considering with my self that we have a World of covetous
desires, some natural that are born with us, and bred in our flesh by the lusts
pertaining to it: Others strange to us, grounded upon vain opinions, which
taking settling, and becoming an habit in us by tract of time, and long use
through evil education, oftentimes do draw us down, and weigh our Souls with
more force and violence, than those that be connatural to us. For reason,
through daily exercise of virtue, and practice thereof, is a means to free us
from many of those things that are born, and bred with us. Yet we must use
continual force and opposition against our concupiscences which are strangers
to us, to quench them, and by all possible means to repress, and subdue them in
us.

And when this is done, there is also (said he) an exercise of justice against
greedy Covetousness, and a desire of getting, which is not, not to go rob our
Neighbors Houses, nor, not to rob men by the High Way, nor not to betray our
Friends, or Country for Money: for such an one opposes, not covetousness, but
possibility, its Law, or fear that bridleth his covetous desire to offend: But
that man that oftimes willingly abstains from just gains, he it is that by
exercise keeps himself far from unjust, and unlawful taking of money. For it is
impossible in great pleasures that are wicked and dangerous, the Soul should
contain it self from lusting after them, unless formerly, being often at his
choice to use them, he had contemned them. Its not easite to overcome them, nor
to refuse great Riches when they are offered, unless a man long before has
killed in him this covetous desire of getting, the which, besides many other
habits and actions, is still greedily bent shamefully to gain, pleasing himself
in the pursuit of Injustice, hardly forbearing to wrong an other so he may
benefit himself. But that man that disdaines to receive gifts from his Friends,
and refuses Presents offered him by Kings, and that has rejected the bounty
of Fortune, putting by all covetous desires of glistering Treasures laid before
him, he shall never be tempted to do that which is unjust, nor shall his mind
be troubled, but he will content himself quietly to do any thing that is
honest, having an upright heart, finding nothing in it but that which is good
and commendable. Yet was the Life of Epaminondas far more excellent than his
discourse, as will appear by that which follows.

Diomedon, the Cizicenian, at the request of Artaxerxes, King of Persia,
promised to win Epaminondas to take the Persians part. To effect this, he came
to Thebes, and brought a great mass of Gold with him, and with three Thousand
Crowns of it, he bribed a young man called Mycethus, who was greatly beloved by
Epaminondas. This young man went to him and told him the occasion of the other
man's coming to Thebes: But Diomedon being present, Epaminondas said to him, I
have no need of money: If the King of Persia wish well to the Thebans, I am at
his service without taking one penny: If he has any other meaning, His
contempt of Riches.
he has not Gold nor Silver eno^gh wherewith to corrupt me: For I will not
sell the love which I bear to my Country for all the Gold in the World: and as
for thee that do now tempt me, not knowing me, but judging me like unto thy
self, I pardon thee for this time, but get thee quickly out of the City lest
thou corrupt others, having failed to prevail over me: and for thee Mycethus,
deliver him his money again, which if thou do not presently, I will send thee
before a Justice.

Hereupon Diomedon besought him that he would let him go away in safety, and
carry that with him which he brought thither: Yea (said Epaminondas) but it
shall not be for thy sake, but for my honour-sake, lest thy Gold and Silver
being taken from thee, some man should accuse me that I had a share in that
privately which I had refused openly. Saying further, whither would thou that
I should cause thee to be conveyed? To Athens, said Diomedon: This was done
accordingly, and he had a strong convoy sent with him, and that he might not be
troubled by the way, betwixt the Gates of Thebes and the Haven wherein he was
to imbark himself, Epaminondas gave Chabrias the Athenian charge of him, that
he should see him safe at his journeys end.

Though Epaminondas was very Poor, His Poverty.
yet would he never take any thing of his Citizens or Friends: and being so
inured to poverty, he was enabled to bear it the more patiently by his study of
Philosophy, For on a time, having the leading of an Army of the Thebans into
the Country of Peloponnesus, he borrowed five Crowns of a Citizen for the
defraying of his necessary charges in that Journey. Pelopidas being a man of
great wealth and his very good Friend, could never possibly force upon him any
part of his Goods, but he rather learned of him to love poverty. For
Epaminondas taught him to think it an honor to go plainly in his Apparel, to
eat moderately, to take pains willingly, and in War to fight lustily. Yet when
he had occasion to relieve others, he would make bold with his Friends goods,
which in such cases were common to him, If any of his Citizens were taken
Prisoners by the Enemy, His Charity.
or if any Friend of his had a Daughter to be married, and was not able to
bestow her, he used to call his Friends together, and to assess every one of
them at a certain sum, after which he brought him before them who was to
receive the money, and told him how much every one had bestowed upon him, that
he might return thanks to them all.

But once he went far beyond this: For he sent a poor Friend of his to a Rich
Citizen of Thebes to ask of him six hundred Crowns, and to tell him that
Epaminondas desired him to let him have them. The Citizen being amazed at his
demand, went to Epaminondas to know what he meant to charge him so deeply, as
to make him to give six hundred Crowns to the other? It is (said Epaminondas)
because this man, being an honest man, is poor, and thou who have robbed the
Commonwealth of much, art rich.

He lived so soberly, His Sobriety.
and was such an enemy to all superfluity and excess, that being on a time
invited to Supper to one of his Neighbors, when he saw great preparation of
dainty meats, made dishes, and perfumes, he said unto him, I thought thou had
made a Sacrifice by this excess and superfluity, and so immediately went his
way. The like also he spoke of his own Table, saying, that such an Ordinary,
was never guilty of Traitors, and Treason. On a time being at a Feast with some
of his Companions, he drank Vinegar, and when they asked him what he meant by
it, and whether he drank it for his health or no? I know not (said he) but this
I am sure of, it puts me in remembrance how I live at home. Now it was not that
his stomach was an enemy to dainty meats, or that he lived so penuriously at
home, for he was marvelous noble minded: But he did it, that by his strict and
unreprovable life, he might bridle and restrain many insolences and disorders
which then reigned amongst the Thebans, and to reduce them to the former
temperance of their Ancestors.

Upon a time, a Cook giving up an account to him and his Fellows of their
ordinary expenses for certain days, he could find fault with nothing but the
quantity of Oil that was spent: which his Companions marvelling at; Tush (said
he) it is not the expense which offends me, but because we have poured in so
much Oil into our Bodies. The City of Thebes upon an occasion made a public
Feast, where they were very merry, and jolly: But on the contrary, Epaminondas
went up and down without Oil and perfumes, or decked with brave apparel,
seeming very sad: Some of his Familiar Friends meeting him in this Posture, and
wondering at him, asked him why he walked so alone, and ill apparelled through
the City? Because (said he) you may in the mean time freely and safely drink
your selves drunk, His Vigilance.
and make merry, taking thought for nothing.

His Modesty also was such, that it would in no wise suffer him to seek
advancement, but on the contrary he withdrew himself from Government, that he
might with the more quiet apply himself to the study of Philosophy. It happened
upon a time that the Lacedaemonians entreated aid of the Thebans, who at that
time were in League with them, and accordingly they sent them certain Foot
Companies: at which time Epaminondas being about thirty five years old, Armed
himself and went along with them. At this time it was, that that intimate
Friendship began betwixt Pelopidas and him, which continued even to the end of
their lives. These two being in a Battle the one by the other against the
Arcatians, whom they had in front against them in the plains of Mantinea, it
fell out that one of the points of the Battle of the Lacedaemonians in which
they were, retired, and many fled: But these two resolved rather to die than
fly, and accordingly they stood to it gallantly, till Pelopid is being wounded
in seven places, fell down upon a heap of dead Bodies. His Valor*
Then did Epaminondas (though he took him for dead) step resolutely before him
to defend his Body and Arms, he alone sighting against many, resolving rather
to die in the place than to leave Pelopidas amongst the dead men, until that
himself being thrust into the Breast with a Pike, and wounded in the Arm with a
Sword, was ready to faint: at which time Providence so ordered it, that King
Agesipolis came on with the other point of the Battle, and saved them both.

Not long after the Lacedaemonians by a stratagem, won the strong Castle of
Thebes called Cadmaea, and put a strong Garrison into it, and gave the
Government of Thebes unto Archias, Philippus, and Leontidas, authors of all the
mischief: Tyrants in Thebes.
whereupon, to avoid their Tyranny, Pelopidas, and many others were fain to
save themselves by flight, upon which they were banished by sound of Trumpet.
But as for Epaminondas they as yet said nothing to him, but let him alone in
the City: for he was contemned as a man of no account, because he was so much
given to his Book: and if he should have any mind to stir against them, yet
they judged he could do nothing because of his Poverty.

Whilst Pelopida and his Companions were at Athens, they laid a plot to free
Thebes from those Tyrants: But Epaminondas not making a show of any thing, had
devised another way to effect it, by raising the hearts and courages of the
young men of the City. For when they went out to play, and exercise themselves,
he always found out a way to make them wrestle with the Lacedaemonians; and when
he saw the Lacedaemonians throw them, and give them shrewd falls, they being the
stronger, he would privately rebuke the Thebans and tell them, that it was a
shame for them to suffer the Lacedaemonians to set their Feet upon their Throats
for want of courage, who yet were not half so strong, and boisterous as
themselves were. All this while Pelopidas and his followers went on in their
Plot, and had such good success, that one Night they got privily into the City
of Thebes and met at Charons House about forty eight in number. His prudence*
Epaminondas knew all this well enough, and at Night some took him aside and
endeavored to persuade him to join with them in delivering their City from
those Tyrants, to whom he answered, that he had taken order with his Friends,
and Gorgidas, to put themselves into a readiness upon any such occasion, but
for his own part he would not have a hand in putting any of his Citizens to
death, unless they were legally condemned: yet (said he) if you will make an
attempt for the delivery of the City so as that it be without murder or
bloodshed, I will join with you with all my heart: But if you will persevere
in your former determination, pray you let me alone, pure, and not defiled
with the blood of my Citizens, that being blameless I may take hold of another
occasion which may tend more to the good of the commonwealth. For the murders
that will be committed in this way, cannot be contained within any
reasonable bounds. I know indeed that Pherecides, and Pelopidas will
especially set upon the Authors of the Tyranny: but Eumolpidas, and Samiadas,
being fierce and Choleric men, taking the liberty of the Night, will never
sheath their Swords, till they have filled the whole City with Murder, and
slain many of the chief Citizens. Besides, its very convenient for the People
of Thebes, that some be left free, and blameless of these Murders, and
guiltless of all that should be done in the fury of this action.

Notwithstanding all that was said, The Tyrants slain.
the enterprise was executed, and the Tyrants put to death, the City was
restored to her ancient liberty, the Castle of Cadmaea was rendered up by
composition, and Lysandradas, the Lacedemonian, and other Commanders that were
in it, were suffered safely to depart, with their goods and Soldiers. This
was the occasion of the long Wars which followed between the Lacedaemonians and
Thebans, with whom the Athenians joined in League.

Epaminondas still applied himself to his Book: His Modesty.
yet at last he was put forwards by Pammenes, a chief man amongst the
Thebans, and he began to follovv the Wars very eagerly, and in diverse
encounters gave good proof of his prudence, hardiness, and valor, insomuch as
by degrees he attained to the highest charges of Government in the
Commonwealth: He is advanced to Honor.
and his Citizens, who before made small account of him till he was forty
years old, after, when they knevv him better, they trusted him with their
Armies, and he saved the City of Thebes, that was like to be undone, yea, and
freed all Greece from the servitude of the Lacedaemonians, making his Virtue, as
in a clear light, to shine with Glory, shevving the effects when time served.

Upon a time Agesilaus, King of Lacedemon entered into Boeotia with an Army of
twenty thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse, wherewith he harrased and
spoiled all the plain Country, and presented Battle to the Thebans in the open
Fields, which yet they would not accept of, finding themselves the weaker:
Howbeit, they defended themselves so well by the assistance of the Athenians,
and the wi^e conduct of Epaminondas and Pelopidas, that they caused Agesilaus
to return home with his Army. But when he was gone, The Spartans beaten.
the Thebans went with their Companies before the City of Thespies, which they
surprised, and put to the Sword two hundred of the Garrison, and afterward
returned back with their Army to Thebes; and Phaebidas, the Lacedemonian, who
was then Governor of that City, sallied out of the Town, and charged upon the
Thebans in their retreat, who entertained him so hotly, that he lost five
hundred of his men, and himself was slain in the Fight.

Not long after, the Lacedaemonians returned with their former Army to make War
with the Thebans, who having seized upon certain straights, and places of
advantage, so blocked up the way, that they could not over run the Country, and
spoil it as they had done before; yet did Agesilaus so molest, and trouble
them, A Bat^el,
that at last it came to a main Battle that held long, and was very cruel: and
though at the first Agesilaus had the better, yet the Thebans charged him so
furiously, that at the length he himself was wounded and forced to retire,
being well paid for teaching the Thebans Military Discipline. And this was the
first time that the Thebans knew themselves to be as strong and lusty as the
Lacedaemonians, whereupon they Triumphed in sign of Victory, and from that time
forward, they grew more courageous to make head against the Enemy, and to
present them battle. But that which most encouraged them, was, the presence of
Epaminondas, who counseled, commanded, and executed very Wisely, Valiantly,
and with great success.

At another time they went with a great number of chosen men before the City of
Orchomene, where yet they prevailed not, because there was a strong Garrison of
the Lacedaemonians that sallied out upon them, and the Fight was very sharp
between them: yet, though the Lacedaemonians were far more in number, The
Spartans beaten.
the Thebans gave them the overthrow, which never happened to them before. For
all other Nations thought that they had done excellent well, if with a far
greater number they had overcome a small number of the Lacedaemonians. But this
Victory, and an other, which fell out shortly after under the conduct of
Pelopidas, did so lift up and encourage the Thebans, that they became more
famous than ever they were before.

The year following, Artaxerxes King of Persia, intending to make War against
Egypt, and therein to intertain diverse strangers, labored to make Peace
amongst the Grecians, in hope that they, being at Peace amongst themselves
would be the more willing to have Soldiers lcavied amongst them. For which end
he sent Ambassadors to all the Towns of Greece, to persuade and entreat them
to be at Peace amongst themselves. The Greeks were very willing to harken
hereto, being wearied on all sides with such long Wars, and so were easily
drawn to make Peace; Peace among the Greeks.
wherein it was especially agreed, and concluded, that all the Cities of Greece
should be free, and use their own Laws: and Commissioners were sent abroad to
withdraw all the Garrisons where any were kept. Unto this the Thebans only
refused to agree, that every Town should severally capitulate for it,
requesting that the Towns in the Country of Boeotia should be comprehended
under the City of Thebes: but the Athenians mightily opposed themselves against
this, and Calistratus, one of their Orators, made a notable Oration about it
before all the States of Greece. Epaminondas on the contrary, made an excellent
and vehement speech in defense of the right of the Thebans, insomuch as this
controversy was left undecided, and the Treaty of Peace was universally agreed
to amongst all the other Grecians, The Thebans are excepted.
the Thebans only excepted, who were not comprised in it.

At this time the Athenians, and Lacedaemonians, who had long contended amongst
themselves about the Principality of Greece, now agreed, that the one should
command by Sea, and the other by Land: And therefore they could not endure that
the Thebans should aspire to be chief, which made them seek to dismember the
other Towns of Boeotia from them, the rather, for that the Thebans, being
strong and lusty of Body, and much encouraged by their late Victories over the
Lacedaemonians, would now contend with them for their superiority, having a
wonderful confidence in the Wisdom and Prowess of their Captains, especially of
Epaminondas.

Matters resting thus doubtful, the Citizens of Plataees, a Town of Boeotia,
were desirous, to enter into League with the Athenians, promising that if they
would send them Soldiers, they would put the Town into their hands: But the
Governors of Boeotia having intelligence of it, and being desirous to prevent
the Athenians, brought a party of Soldiers against it, who came before
Plataees before the Citizens heard any news of them, so that part of them were
surprised in the Field by the Horsemen, and the rest fled into the Town: where
having no aid, they were faign to accept of such terms as it pleased the
Thebans to grant them, which were presently to depart the Town with bag and
baggage, Plataees destroyed.
and never to return again into the Country of Boeotia. Then did they raze the
City to the ground, and sacked the Town of Thespies which also was at enmity
with them.

The Ambassadors of Persia again solicited the Greeks to a General Peace, and
Commissioners from every Town were to meet at Sparta about it. Epaminondas was
yet scarce known, having labored to conceal himself, and in all his exploits
of War, had ever preferred the advancement of his great Friend, and Companion
in Arms, Pelopidas, before himself. He was now chosen by the Thebans to go to
Sparta, where, finding that the other Commissioners did much comply with
Agesilaus, he spoke boldly, and plainly, not only in behalf of the Thebans, His
Wisdom.
but for all Greece also: making it evident to all, that War still increased
the greatness of Sparta only, which kept all the other Towns of Greece under.
He therefore advised them to establish a firm Peace, which would last the
longer, when all comprised in it, should be equals.

Agesilaus perceiving all the Commissioners to be very attentive to and well
pleased with this speech, he asked him a loud, if he thought it just, and
equal, that all Boeotia should be set at liberty. His Courage.
Epaminondas presently, and boldly asked him, if he thought it not also just
and reasonable that all Laconia should be set at liberty? Thereupon Agesilaus,
in great anger, stood up, and commanded him to answer plainly, if they should
not restore all the Towns in Boeotia to their Liberty? and Epaminondas answered
him as before. This so displeased Agesilaus (who had an old grudg to the
Thebans) that immediately he put their Name out of the List of those that
should be comprised within the Treaty of Peace, and proclaimed open War against
them, and now there was no remedy but the Thebans must bear the whole brunt
alone, for there was no one Town that durst send them any aid, because they
were all sworn to the Peace, insomuch as all judged them to be utterly undone.
Friends pitied there estate, and there enemies rejoiced, verily believing that
they could never stand before the Lacedaemonians.

Then did the Lacedaemonians send King Cleombrotus with an Army toward Thebes,
who being come near to Chaeronea with ten thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse,
he pitched his Camp there staying for his Allies. The Thebans being informed of
the approach of the enemy, chose Epaminondas to be their Captain General,
giving him the charge of this War, with six other Counselors to be assisting
to him. Now there came Oracles to Thebes from all parts; some promising
Victory, and others threatening their overthrow; and Epaminondas commanded them
to set those on the right hand of the chair for Orations, that promised
Victory, and the other on the left hand, which being so disposed of, he gat up
into the chair, and said to his Citizens, If you will be obedient to your
Captains, His Prudence.
and valiant against your enemies, these Oracles on the right hand belong to
you: But if through faintness of heart, ye refuse dangers, those on the left
hand shall be your Portion.

Then did he list the Names of all the Thebans which were able to bear Arms,
and chose out of some parts of Boeotia, such as he thought fittest for the
Wars. His Presence exceedingly cheered up his Army, and all the the time that
he was Captain, the Thebans never saw in their Camp any of those which they
call sudden fears. He used to say, that there was no Death more honest and
desirable than to die in the Wars, and that the body of a Soldier should be
hardened to endure any labor or pains. Fat men cashired.
He could not abide fat men, and therefore cashired a whole Company of them as
unprofitable burdens in his Army. He had in all, but six thousand fighting men:
and as they marched forwards, they met with some unlucky signs, as many
esteemed them: but he valued them not, thinking that a resolution to fight in a
good cause, ought to be much stronger, and of more force to raise in him good
Hope, than these evil signs that appeared, to make him fear the worst.

As he was marching toward the Lacedaemonians, they heard it Thunder, and they
that were near him, asked him what that meant, He answered, that it betokened
that the Enemies brains were troubled, and beclouded, who, having places of
advantage hard by them, yet encamped in the plains. Indeed the Lacedaemonians
waited there for their Allies, who yet failed them. For all of them, having at
leisure considered of the speech of Epaminondas at Sparta, began to distaste the
ambition of the Lacedaemonians. Epaminondas seeing his advantage, His Prudence.
caused his Army to march with speed, and wan the straights by the City of
Coronea, and encamped there: Cleombrotus under^ standing that the Thebans had
possessed themselves of that pass, despairing to recover it, he made his Army
to march a great compass about the Country of Phocide, going along the Sea
Coast through a dangerous, and troublesome way, and so at the last he entered
into the Country of Boeotia: and as he went, he took in some little Towns, and
certain Galleys that lay upon the Coast, and at the last arrived at Leuctres,
and there sat down to refresh his men, who were overwearied with their tedious
march. Then did Epaminondas presently advance that way to meet them, and having
passed over some little Mountains, he discovered them in the plain of Leuctres,
where his men were much amazed to see so great an Army of their Enemies.

The six Counselors came together to consider whether they should go forward
and fight, few against many, or else retreat, waiting for some better
advantage. In this Council, their opinions fell out to be equal. Three judged
it best to retreat, the other, whereof Epaminondas was one, thought it best to
fight, and with these three, Pelopidas, who was Captain of the Sacred Band,
joined, And Policy.
whereupon they all agreed to give them Battle. Epaminondas seeing his
Soldiers somewhat affrighted at the former ill signs, to put courage into
them, he suborned some that were newly come from Thebes, to scatter a report,
that no man could tell at Thebes what was become of the Arms that hung up in
the Temple of Hercules; but it was commonly said, that the Demigods, their
Ancestors, had taken them away, to aid their posterity, at this present time.
He caused another also, who was newly come from Trophonius hole, to report;
that the God which gives his Oracles therein, commanded him to tell the
Boeotians that when they had overcome their enemies in the plain of Leuctres,
they should celebrate yearly Plays to the honor of Jupiter: and to gain the
more credit to these devices, Leandridas, a Spartan, that was banished out of
his own Country, and now was assisting the Boeotians, being brought before the
Soldiers, he encouraged them to fight valiantly that Day: for he swore unto
them, that the Lacedaemonians had many Oracles, bidding them to beware of
Leuctres.

Epaminondas also, assembling his Army, encouraged them with strong, and lively
reasons, to show their valor, so that at last the Soldiers being freed from
their superstitious fears, longed for nothing more than to come to blows.
Epaminondas ever concluded his Orations to them with these Words: O worthy men,
embrace sacred Death: Advance your selves to a most honorable, and famous Fight
for your Country, for the Tombs of your Ancestors, and for your Holy things.
Just at this very time there came to the Thebans an aid of five hundred Horse,
and fifteen hundred Foot, all Thessalians, conducted by Jason. This Jason
endeavored to have made peace with both parties, but could not prevail.

Also as Cleombrotus retired with his Army out of Boeotia, he met a great
supply of Lacedaemonians, and their Allies, brought to him by Archidamus, the
Son of Agesilaus, These he sent before, thinking to daunt the courage of the
Thebans with the sight of them, and himself with the rest of his Army suddenly
returned into the plain of Leuctres, being fully resolved to fight: and the
Boeotians for their part shrunk not an inch back, and so on both sides they set
their men in Battle array. Epaminondas ordered his Battle after a new fashion
never practiced by any Captain: For having chosen out of his Army the best, and
most valiant Soldiers, he placed them together in one of the Points of his
Battle, where himself meant to fight in Person, seconded by Pelopidas, and his
three hundred chosen men, called the Holy Band: In the other Point he placed
his weaker men, commanding them expressly not to abide the charge of their
enemies that should assail them in Front, but fair, and softly retire when they
saw them come near them: and it fell out as he wished: and he hoped to
determine the Battle by the Virtue, and prowess of those where he had placed
all the flower, and choice of his Army.

Now the sign of Battle being given, A Battle.
the Lacedaemonians advanced with the two Horns of their Battle, ordered in the
form of a Crescent. On the contrary, one of the wings of the Battle of the
Boeotians began to give back, and the other with great fury ran to charge the
enemy in the Flank, and soon they were come to the Swords point, At the first,
because either side fought desperately, the Victory for a time stood doubtful,
but at last Epaminondas his Troop brake in amongst the Lacedaemonians, and slew
most of those that were about Cleombrotus. Yet while the King was alive, he
kept back the Thebans from the Victory, being accompanied with all the flower
of his Army, who fought very valiantly about him: But after he fell dead to the
ground, having received and given an infinite number of wounds, then thronged
they together on all sides, and there was a bloody and cruel fight about his
Body, where were heaps of men slain one upon another, and though Epaminondas
did all that possibly he could, yet the Lacedaemonians made such resistance,
that at last they forced the Thebans somewhat to give back, whereby they
conveyed the Body of the King out of the press: But this continued not long:
For Epaminondas both by his words and example, did so raise up and encourage
the hearts of his men, that they fought like Lions, and gave so fierce a second
charge upon their enemies, The Spartans beaten.
that they wholly routed them and made them fly for life, and Epaminondas
fiercely pusuing the flying enemy, made a great slaughter of them, and obtained
the most glorious Victory that ever Captain won, having in a pitched Field
overcome the most Noble, and warlike Nation of all Greece, and that with a far
smaller number of men than his enemies had. He also rejoiced more in this, than
in all his other Victories, because it happened to him in his Fathers
lifetime: and he often used to say, that of all the honest and happy Fortunes
that befell him, nothing joyed his heart more, than that he vanquished the
Lacedaemonians at Leuctres, his Father and Mother living to see it: and indeed,
he that day, did not only preserve their lives, but of all his Citizens
besides, the Lacedaemonians having fully resolved utterly to destroy the Thebans.

Epaminondas used at all other times to come abroad fine and neat, His Humility.
and with a pleasant countenance: but the next day after this Battle, he came
out very sad, heavy, and pensive, and when his Friends asked him, whether he
had heard any ill news which occasioned this posture, he said, No: but (said
he) I perceive by my self yesterday, that being overjoyed with the Victory I
obtained, my heart was more elvated than it ought, and therefore to day I
correct that joy, which yesterday exceeded its due bounds. He knowing that it
was the manner of the Spartans, as much as possible, to conceal their losses,
he suffered them not to carry away all their dead Bodies together, but every
City one after another, by which it appeared that there were four thousand of
them slain: But of the Boeotians there were not found above three hundred dead.
This Battle was fought in the beginning of the second year of the hundred and
second Olympiade.

The Lacedaemonians having by this overthrow lost the greatest part of their
honor, which they had maintained so long, yet lost not their courage; but to
keep their youth still in heart, and to take away all fear from such as had
escaped, they sent Agesilaus, with an Army into Arcadia, who was contented to
take a few small Towns of the Mantineans, and so to return home again. Some say
that Lycomedes, Captain of the Arcadians, making an inrode near to Orchomene,
slew in an encounter, Politropus, Captain of the Lacedaemonians, and two hundred
Spartans with him, which provoked the Lacedaemonians against them: and thereupon
the Arcadians, finding themselves too weak for them, they sought alliance and
aid from the Thebans. Sure it is that these two States were now at enmity,
which occasioned the Arcadians and Thebans to join together, who, with their
Allies being led by Epaminondas entered into Laconia, with an Army of forty
thousand men, besides thirty thousand others that followed the Camp. At this
time the Athenians sent Captian Iphecrates, with twelve thousand men, to aid
the Lacedaemonians: But before their coming, He plunders Laconia,
Epaminondas was entered into Laconia, and had sacked all the Country which had
not been wasted by any enemy for six hundred years before.

The Spartans seeing their Country thus plundered, and destroyed, were desirous
to have gone out with such Forces as they had, but Agesilaus would not suffer
them, telling them how dangerous it was for them to leave their City, and to
set upon such a potent, and numerous enemy. This made them quiet, and
Epaminondas in the mean time marched with his Army toward the River Eurotas,
which at that time was risen very high, because of the Winter rains. He
endeavored all he could, to draw forth Agesilaus to a Battle, who beholding
Epaminondas a great while, marching with his Army in Battle array along the
River side at the Head of his Troops, He bravos the Spartans.
he wondered at his boldness, and Valor, but would by no means adventure out
of his Fort: So that when this Army had plundered all Laconia, Epaminondas led
them back again with a very rich Booty. And though Agesilaus was commended for
preserving his City in safety; yet Epaminondas had by this inrode, and
especially by his Victory at Leuctres, so impoverished the Country, that Sparta
could never after recover that loss, nor grow into that reputation and power
which it had before. Yea, notwithstanding the aid sent by the Athenians, and
the skill and experience of Iphecrates, Epaminondas returned with his Army
entire as he came.

Epaminondas that he might keep the Lacedaemonians still underfoot, and heap new
troubles upon them, gave Counsel to the Arcadians, and their Allies, to
reedifie, and replenish with People the City of Messina, which the
Lacedaemonians had long before destroyed, and when all the whole Council had
given their consents to it, Messina reedified.
he forthwith, by diligent enquiry sought out all that had been ancient
Inhabitants in that City, and in the space of eighty five Days, having repaired
the ruined Houses, he raised again one of the most Noble, and ancient Cities of
Greece, and left there a strong Garrison for their security. This gat him as
much, if not more love and honor than any other service which he had ever done.

The Lacedaemonians being freed from a great fear by his departure, made an
agreement with the Athenians, leaving to them the chief command by Sea, and
reserving to themselves that by Land. And afterward, by the assistance of the
Athenians and that aid which came to them out of Sicily, by little and little
they recovered their Towns again.

The Arcadians, to stop their proceedings, assaulted the City of Pallene in
Laconia, Pallene destroyed.
and taking it by storm, put all the Garrison therein to the Sword, and then
razed the Town, and plundered all the Country there abouts. And expecting that
the Lacedaemonians would seek revenge, they sent for aid to the Thebans, who
sent Epaminondas and the other Counselors to assist them with six thousand
Foot, and five hundred Horse. The Athenians having intelligence hereof, sent
their Army under the conduct of Chabrias, who marched directly to Corinth,
where he met with a good supply of Soldiers from the Megarians, Pallenians,
and Corinthians, so that now he had a Brigade of ten thousand men. These
intended to fortify and stop all the passages and entrances into the Country
of Peloponnesus. The Lacedaemonians and their Allies joining also with them,
made up an Army of twenty thousand men: Peloponnesus fortified.
And accordingly, beginning at the City of Cencrees, unto the Haven of Lecheum,
they blocked all the ways from one Sea to another with mighty great pieces of
Timber laid across, and with a mavelous deep Diteh: and this great work was
followed with such speed, both by reason of the great multitude of laborers,
as also through the frowardness of them that prosecuted it with such
earnestness, that they had quite finished it before the Boeotians could arrive
there.

Epaminondas when he came thither, viewing this fortification, perceiving that
the easiest place to storm it, was that which the Lacedaemonians themselves
guarded, he sent to give them defiance though they were thrice as many in
number as he was, yet for all this they durst not come out, but kept close
under their fortification: Notwithstanding he assaulted them in it, and at last
drove them out. In the heat of the fight every one doing his best, some
assailing, others defending, Epaminondas chose out the valiantest men in all
his Army, and bravely charging the Lacedaemonians, he forced them to give back,
and in dispite of them, he entered into Peloponnesus, which of all other his
Noble exploits, was the most wonderful and memorable action. From thence he
marched to the Cities of Epidaure, and Trozen, He beats the Spartans.
and so pillaged all the Country: But he stayed not to take any of the Towns,
because they had strong Garrisons in them: Yet he put Sicyone, Phuente, and
some other Towns into such fear, that they yielded themselves to him.

This being done, he went to Corinth, and overcame the Corinthians in a set
Battle, and beat them home, even to the Gates of their City: Yea some of his
men were so unadvised, trusting to their own Valor, that they entered the
Gates of their City pel mel with those that fled, which put the Corinthians
into such a terrible fear, that they ran with all speed possible to shelter
themselves in their Houses: But Chabrias making head, beat them out again, and
slew some, whereupon he caused a token of Triumph to be set up, as if he had
given the Thebans an overthrow, for which Epaminondas laughed him to scorn. The
Boeotians brought their Army as near unto Corinth as they could, and Chabrias
with his Army encamped without the Walls in a very strong Place of advantage,
and there were many Skirmishes betwixt them, in which Chabrias behaved himself
with such Valor that he gained great reputation even of Epaminondas himself,
who upon a time being asked, whom he thought to be the greatest Captain,
himself, Chabrias, or Iphecrates? Its hard (said he) to judge whilst we are all
alive,

News was brought to him that the Athenians had again sent an Army into
Peloponnesus, furnished with new Armor: Indeed this Army consisted of ten
thousand Spaniards and Gauls, whom Dyonisius the Tyrant, sent out of Sicily to
aid the Lacedaemonians, having paid them for five months: they did some
reasonable service in this War, and at the end of Summer returned home again.

It fell out in these last encounters that Epaminondas having forced the
Lacedaemonians that guarded the fortification before mentioned, had many of them
in his power to have slain them: but he contented himself only with this Glory,
that in dispite of them, he had entered into Peloponnesus, seeking to do them
no more hurt; which gave occasion to those that envied his Glory, to blame him,
and to accuse him of Treason, as having willingly spared the enemies, His
Clemency.
because they should in particular thank him only: But here it will not be
improper to take notice how he behaved himself amongst his Citizens, and how
wisely he defended his own Integrity.

Amongst all those that envied his Glory and Virtue, He is envied.
there was one Meneclides, an Orator, and an eloquent man, but withal, most
wicked, and very malicious. He finding that E^aminondas won so much honor by
the Wars, never left persuading the Thebans to embrace Peace; and prefer it
before War, and that because hereby they should not always live under the
obedience, and command of one man. But Epaminondas one day told him in the open
Counsel: Thou will (said he) deceive the Thebans whilst thou advisest them to
leave the Wars: and highly commended ease and Peace, thou go about to put
iron bolts upon their Feet. For War begets Peace, which yet cannot hold long
but amongst them that know how to maintain it with the Sword. Then turning
himself to the Citizens, he said, If you will have the Principality and command
of all Greece, you must shroud your selves in your Tents, and lie in your
Pavillions in the open Fields, and not follow Sports and Pastimes here at home.
For he knew well enough that the Boeotians undid themselves by ease and
Idleness, which made him endeavor continually to keep them in exercise and War.

Upon a time when the Thebans were to choose Captains, they went about to
choose Epaminondas, one of the six Counselors: whereupon he said to them: My
Masters, pray you consider of it now you are at leisure before you choose me:
For I tell you plainly, If I be chosen your Captain, you must to the Wars. He
used to call the Country of Boeotia, which was a plain, and Champion Country,
the Stage of War, saying, that it was impossible to keep it, unless the
Inhabitants had their Targets on their Arms, and their Swords in their hands:
and this was not, because he did not love Peace, and privacy to study
Philosophy, or that he was not more careful of them that were under his charge
than he was of himself, using always to watch and forbear his meat, when the
Thebans were at their Banquets, and Feasts, giving themselves over to their
pleasures: but because he knew them well enough, and was never more careful of
any thing than to keep his Army from Idleness.

Upon a time the Arcadians desired him that some of his Companions might come
into one of their Towns to lie dry and warm there, all the Winter, but he would
by no means yield to it. For (said he to his Soldiers) now they see you
exercising your selves in Arms, they wonder at you as brave and valiant men;
but if they should see you at the Fire side parching of Beans, they would
esteem no better of you than of themselves. Neither could he endure
Covetuousness: for if at sometimes he gave his men leave to go a free booting,
his meaning was, that whatsoever they got, should be bestowed in furnishing
them with good Arms: and if any went about to fill his Purse with money, he
judged him unworthy to be a Soldier. Upon a time he understood that his
Target-bearer had received a great sum of money for the ransom of a Prisoner,
whereupon he said to him: Give me my Target, and go thy ways home, and buy thee
a Tavern wherein to spend the rest of thy life: for I perceive thou will no
more, like an honest man, put thy self in danger in the wars, as formerly thou
have done, because now thou art grown rich and wealthy.

Though Epaminondas was thus virtuous, and unblameable in his life, yet the
aforementioned Meneclides would never cease contending, and reproaching of him:
and one day he went so far as to upbraid him because he had no Children, and
was not married, and that he magnified himself more than ever King Agamemnon
had done. His prudence.
To this Epaminondas answered, Thou have nothing to do to counsel me to marry,
and in this respect, there is never a man here whose advise I would less make
use of than thine, (and this he spoke because the other was taken notice of to
be an Adulterer,) And whereas thou think that I envy the fame and renown of
Agamemnon, thou art foully deceived. Yet let me tell thee, that whereas he was
ten Years in winning one City, I on the contrary, by putting the Lacedaemonians
to flight in one day, have delivered not only our own City, but all Greece from
their slavery, But thanks be to you? My Lords Thebans (speaking to all the
Assembly) by your assistance I did it, and thereby overthrew the power and
government of our insulting enemies.

Yet after all his brave deeds, Heis accused and abused.
both he and Pelopidas: were ill rewarded for all their good service, by their
ungrateful Citizens: For at their return from Laconia, they, with some other of
the six Counselors, were accused, that after the time that their Government
was expired, they retained their power four months after the time appointed by
the Law. With much ado Pelopidas was quitted: But Epaminondas willed all his
other Companions to lay the fault upon him, who by his Authority forced them to
it; and instead of excusing himself, he told them all the brave exploits which
he had done at that time: Adding withal, that he was willing and ready to die,
if they so pleased, Provided that they wrote upon his Tomb, that Epaminondas
was put to death, because he had compelled the Thebans against their wills to
burn the Country of Laconia, which in five hundred years before had never been
plundered. That he had repeopled the City of Messina with Inhabitants, two
hundred and thirty years after it had been laid wast by the Lacedaemonians. That
he had brought all the People and Towns of Arcadia to be as one Body, in League
together, and had set all the Greeks at liberty: and all these things (said he)
we did in that Journey. The Judges when they heard this worthy and true
defense, they all arose from their seats, and laughed heartily, and would not
take up their Balls to Ballot against him.

But for the second accusation, to wit, that he had showed favor to the
Lacedaemonians for his own particular honor, he would make no particular answer
to it before the People, but rising out of the Theater, he passed through the
Assembly and went into the Park of Exercises. Upon this the People being
incensed against him, refused to choose him into Office as they had wont to do,
though there was a great need of him, and created other Counselors to go into
Thessaly: and the more (as they thought) to despite him, they commanded him to
go that expedition as a private Soldier, which he refused not, but went very
willingly.

Pelopidas being sent a second time into Thessaly to make peace between the
People and Alexander the Tyrant of Pheres, Pelopidas imprisoned by a Tyrant.
was by this Tyrant (not regarding that he was an Ambassador, and a Theban)
committed to Prison, together with Ismenias. Upon this, the Thebans being
justly offended, sent an Army of eight thousand Foot and five hundred Horse
against him, howbeit under the conduct of unskilful Captains, who, wanting
judgment to use their advantages, thought good to return home without doing any
thing: But as they went back, Alexander, being stronger in Horse than they,
pressed hard upon their Rear, killing some, and wounding others; so that the
Thebans knowing neither how to go forward nor backward, were in great distress;
and that which aggravated their misery was, that their Victuals were almost
spent. Being thus almost out of hope ever to get home in safety, Epaminondas
being at that time a common Soldier among the Foot, both the Captains and
Soldiers earnestly entreated him to help to redress this disorder. He
thereupon chose certain Footmen that were light armed, His Policy.
and all the Horsemen, and with these putting himself into the Rere of the
Army, he so lustily repulsed the Enemy, that the rest of the Army afterward
marched in great safety, and still making Head, as occasion served, and keeping
his Troops in good order, he at last brought them all well home.

This brave Act Crowned him with new Glory, confounded his enemies, and made
him well spoken of every where, and by it he obtained the love and good will of
the Citizens, who set great Fines upon the heads of those Captains who had
behaved themselves so unworthily in that expedition. And now the People seeing
that by so many worthy deeds he had stopped the slanderous mouths, and confuted
the accusations of his ill willers, they chose him again their Captain General
to conduct a new Army into Thessaly: At his coming all the Country wonderfully
rejoiced, only the Tyrant with his Captains, and Friends were exceedingly
dejected, and possessed with fear, being Thunderstruck with the fame of so
Noble a Captain, and his Subjects had a good mind to rise up against him,
hoping that they should shortly see the Tyrant fully recompensed for all the
wicked and cursed deeds that he had done amongst them.

Epaminondas when he came into Thessaly, preferred the safety and deliverance
of his Friend Pelopidas before his own Honor and Glory, His Prudence.
and fearing lest Alexander when he should see himself and his State in danger
to be overthrown, should in his rage revenge himself upon Pelopidas, he
therefore purposely drew this War out in length, marching often about him, but
never setting upon him in good earnest, often seeming to make preparations, and
yet still delaying: and this he did, to mollify the heart of this Tyrant, and
not to provoke (to the danger of his Friend) the inhumane and unbridled passion
of this cruel Bloud-sucker. Yet he being a Monster compounded of cruelty, and
cowardliness, was so afraid of the very name and reputation of Epaminondas,
that he presently sent some to him to excuse his fact, and to crave Peace. But
Epaminondas was not willing that his Thebans should make Peace and Alliance
with so wicked a man, only he was content to grant him a Truce for thirty Days,
Pelopidas released.
upon the delivering to him Pelopidas and Ismenias.

So with them he returned back to Thebes, and always continued a faithful
Friend to Pelopidas so long as they lived together: Yet would he never share
with him in his Riches, but did still persevere in his former strict Poverty
and Discipline. He was very bold, and yet it was mingled with a winning
sweetness, and a lively grace, as may appear in sundry Examples. Besides his
bold speech to Agesilaus, mentioned before: At another time the Argians having
made a League with the Thebans, the Athenians sent their Ambassadors into
Arcad^a, to see if they could gain the Arcadians to be their Friends, And these
Ambassadors began roundly and hotly to charge and accuse both the one and the
other, and Callistratus speaking for them, reproached them with Orestes, and
Oedipus: Epaminondas being present at that Assembly, stood up, His witty
Speeches.
and said, My Lords, we confess that in times past we had a man that killed his
Father, and in Argos, one that killed his Mother, but as for us now, we have
banished all such wicked Murderers out of our Country, and the Athenians have
entertained them.

At another time when the Spartans had laid many great and grievous imputations
to the charge of the Thebans, he said, If they have done nothing else, my Lords
of Sparta, yet at least they have made you forget to speak little. But that
which was most excellent, and observable in Epaminondas, and which indeed did
stop the mouth of envy it self was his moderation, and temperance, knowing how
to use any state or condition, and never to rage either against himself or
others, always, bearing this mind, that howsoever they took him, and in what
place soever they set him, he was well contented, so that he might but advance
the good of his Country: As may appear by this Example: on a time his
evil-willers, thinking to bring him into disgrace, and merely out of spite,
made him superintendant or overseer of all the customs, whilst others of his
inferiors, unworthy to be compared with him, were placed in the most honorable
Offices: Yet despised he not this mean Office, H^s Humility.
but discharged it very Faithfully: For (said he) the Office or Authority shows
not only what the man is, but also the man what the Office is.

Shortly after Epaminondas was returned out of Thessaly, the Arcadians were
overcome by Archidamus and the Lacedaemonians, who in the fight lost not a man,
and therefore they called this journey the tearless Battle: and Epaminondas
foreseeing that the Arcadians would yet have another storm, he gave them
counsel to fortify their Towns, which they did accordingly, Megalopolis built.
and built that City which afterward was called Megalopolis, situated in a
very convenient place. Whilst the Thebans made War with the Elians, their
Neighbors, the mind of Epaminondas was always lifted up to high enterprises
for the good of his Country, wherefore in an Oration which he made to his
Citizens, he persuaded them to make themselves strong by Sea, and to endeavor
to get the principality, and to make themselves the Lords thereof. This Oration
was full of lively reason, whereby he showed and proved unto them, that the
enterprise was both honorable, and profitable, which he made out by sundry
Arguments, telling them that it was an easy thing for them, who were now the
stronger by Land, to make themselves also the stronger by Sea: and the rather,
for that the Athenians in the War against Xerxes, though they had armed and set
forth two hundred Galleys, armed and well appointed with men, yet they
willingly submitted themselves to the Lacedaemonians. He alleged many other
reasons, whereby he prevailed so far, that the Thebans were willing to
undertake the enterprise, and thereupon gave present order to build an hundred
Galleys, The Thebans build a Navy.
and an Arsenal with so many Rooms that they might lay them under covert in the
Dock: They ordered also to send to them of Rhodes, and of Chio, and of
Byzantium, to desire their furtherance in this enterprise: for which end
Epaminondas was sent with an Army unto these Cities: In his Passage he met with
Leches, a Captain of the Athenians, with a number of Ships in his Fleet, who
was set on purpose to hinder this design of the Thebans: Yet Epaminondas so
affrighted him, that he made him retire back again, and holding on his course
he brought the aforenamed Cities to enter into League with the Thebans. Shortly
after the Thebans fell out with the City of Orchomene, which had done them
great hurt, and mischief, and having won it by assault, slew all the men that
were able to bear Arms, and made all the women and children Slaves.

Some time after the death of Pelopidas, certain private Persons of Mantinea,
fearing to be called to an account for their bad behaviors, and robberies
which they had committed, if the Arcadians and Elians should agree, they so
brought it about, that they raised a new quarrel in the Country, New Wars.
which was divided into two Factons, whereof the Mantineans were the chief on
the one side, and the Tageates on the other. This quarrel went so far, that the
Parties would needs try it by Arms. The Tageates sent to request aid of the
Thebans, who accordingly chose Epaminondas their Captain General, and sent him
with a good number of men of War to aid the Tageates. The Mantineans being
terrified with this aid that came out of Boeotia to their enemies, and at the
reputation of their Captain, they immediately sent to the Athenians, and
Lacedaemonians, the greatest enemies of the Boeotians, for their assistance,
which both the Cities granted. Upon this there fell out many and great
skirmishes in diverse parts of Peloponnesus: and Epaminondas being not far off
from Mantinea, understood by some of the Country men, that Agesilaus, and his
Lacedaemonians, were come into the Field, and that they wasted all the
Territories of the Tageates; whereupon, judging that there were but few men
left in the City of Sparta to defend it, he undertook a great exploit, and
dangerous, and had certainly effected it, if the marvelous good Fortune of
Sparta had not hindered it. A notable attempt.
His design was this: He departed from Tegea, by Night, the Mantineans knowing
nothing of it, and taking a by way, he had certainly surprised Sparta without
striking a stroke, had not a Post of Candia speedily carried word of it to
Agesilaus, who immediately dispatched away an Horseman to give intelligence to
them of Sparta to stand upon their guard, and he himself speedily hasted after,
and arrived there a little before the coming of the Thebans, who being very
near the City a little before day, they gave an assault to them that defended
it. This made Agesilaus to bestir himself wonderfully, even beyond the strength
of so old a man: But his Son Archidamus, and Isadas, the Son of Phoebidas
fought valiantly on all parts. Epaminondas seeing how prepared the Spartans
were to oppose him, began then to suspect that his design was discovered; yet
notwithstanding he left not off to force them all he could, though he fought
with great disadvantage, considering the places wherein he was: yea, he
continued fighting courageously, till the Army of the Lacedaemonians came on,
and till the Night approached, whereupon he sounded a retreat.

Then being informed that the Mantineans came on also with their Forces, he
withdrew his Atmy somewhat father off from the Town, and there Camped. After
which he caused his men to refresh themselves with Victuals, and leaving
certain Horsemen in the Camp, he commanded them to make fires in the moring,
and in the mean time himfelf with the rest of his men, Another but frustrated.
went to surprise Mantinea before any should discover that he was departed. Yet
herein also he failed of his purpose, the prosperity of the Thebans being come
to its height, and the course of Epaminondas his Life drawing near to an end,
whereby Greece was deprived of this Noble and Famous Captain, from whom was
taken a most notable Victory, and that twice, by strange accidents.

For at the second time, when he was come near to Mantinea that was left
without guard and defense, just then, on the other side of the Town there
arrived six thousand Athenians, conducted by their Captain Hegelecus, who
having put sufficient force into the Town, ordered the rest of his Army in
Battle array without the Walls, and immediately also came the Mantineans, and
Lacedaemonians together, who prepared to put all to the hazard of a Battle, and
therefore sent for their Allies from all parts: and when they were come
together they were in all twenty five thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse.
The Arcadians, Boeotians, and their partakers were thirty thousand Foot, A
Battle.
and three thousand Horse. When they came to the Battle, first the Horse
charged with great Fury, and the Horsemen of the Athenians encountering with
the Thebans, proved too weak for them, not because they were less valiant, or
hardy than the other, but because they had not so good Chieftains, and had few
Archers amongst their Troops. The Thebans on the other side were all
excellently well appointed, and had Thessalians amongst them, men very skilful
in their Bows, who so plied the Athenians that they wholly brake them, and put
them to the rout, yet in their flight they did not run amongst their Footmen,
which made them somewhat recover their Honor which they had lost by running
away. On the contrary part, as they fled, they met with some Companies of
Negropont, whom the Arcadians had sent to take in certain Hills hard by the
plain where the Battle was fought, whom they put all to the Sword.

The men at Arms of the Thebans seeing them turn their backs, did not pursue
them at all, but presently gave charge upon a great Battalion of Footmen,
forcing them all they could to break, and run through them. So the fight was
very cruel and sharp, yet in the end the Athenians were forced to quit the
place: whereupon a Colonel of Horsemen of the Elians, who stood as a reserve
to guard the Rere, defended them, and encountering with the Boeotians, he
resisted them, and made them give back, which reinforced the fault of the left
point of their Army. But in the right point, after the Horsemen had charged
one another, the fight was soon determined: For by reason of the great number
of men at Arms of the Thebans, and Thessalians, the Mantineans and their
partakers were soon put to rout, and having lost a great number of their men,
they sheltered themselves under the Battalion of their Footmen, and this was
the issue of the fight between the Horsemen,

As for the infantry, after they came once to the Sword, it was a mavelous
bloody, and cruel fight. For never before that time was there so many Greeks in
the Field one against another, nor so great and expert Captains, nor such
Valiant Soldiers as were now. The two Nations that at that time bare the Name
to be the bravest Footmen in all the World, to wit, the Thebans, and
Lacedaemonians, were now set in Front one against the other, and they began to
charge, neither sparing Life nor Limb. The first charge they gave was with
their Pikes, which being soon broken with the huge blows they gave each other,
then they came to it with their Swords, and lustily laying about them, Body to
Body, Death raged in every place, and there was a mighty carnage made: for
neither part shrunk back, or gave over with weariness, but stood to it like
undaunted men. And so continued this dangerous Fight for a long time, by reason
of the valiantness of either party, the Victory stood doubtful for a great
while, and it could not be judged which side was like to have the upper hand,
For every one that fought, had this resolution in his heart, not to fear Death
whatsoever befell them: But rather desiring to make proof of their utmost
Valor, they willingly parted with their lives to lie in the Bed of Honor. By
reason whereof, though the fight was sharp and cruel, yet the event remained
for a long space so uncertain, that it could not be discerned to which side the
Victory should fall.

But at last, Epaminondas seeing no other remedy, but that the issue of this
doubtful Fight depended upon his own Virtue and Valor, he resolved with
himself to adventure his life upon it: and presenty gathering about him all the
best, and choicest men of his Army, and of them having compounded a Company of
stout and resolute Blades, he ran with great fury into the thickest, and
greatest press of all his enemies, marching himsels the foremost man in all his
Troop, with a Spear in his hand, with the which at the first blow he gave, he
slew the Captain of the Lacedaemonians, and straightway the rest of his Company
began to assail their enemies. But Epaminondas laying about him like a lion,
slew so many in the place where he stood with his own hands, that at last he
opened the Battle of the Lacedaemonians, whom he pursued and laid on them so
lustily, that they being unable any longer to defend themselves against the
irresistible fury of himself and his followers, were enforced to give back and
leave the place to the Boeotians, who yet followed them at their heels, beating
them down so eagerly, that in a short space the whole Field was covered with
dead Bodies, lying on heaps one upon another.

But in the end, the Lacedomonians seeing that they could no way save
themselves, gathered courage out of despair, and a Company of them joining
together, all set upon Epaminondas throwing an infinte number of Darts at him,
of which some he avoided, others he received upon his Target, but yet there
were many that stuck in his Body which he pulled out, and fought with the same
Weapons against those that had thrown them at him. At last, when he had done
more than a man, and beyond all humane strength, thereby to win Honor to his
Country by gaining them the Victory, a certain Laconian called Anticrates,
thrust him into the Breast with a Dart with such force, He is deadly wounded.
as breaking the Wood, he left the Iron Head sticking in his Body. Having
received this deadly wound he fell immediately to the ground: But then was
there a more cruel fight about him than ever there was before, which occasioned
great Slaughter on both sides, till the Thebans by fine force made their
enemies to fly for their lives, and when they had pursued them a while, they
returned back to their Camp that they might keep the dead Bodies in their
Power, which was a certain Sign that the Victory was theirs, and then they
sounded a retreat, and so the Battle ended.

Both sides challenged the Victory and made Triumphs for it. The Lacedaemonians
did it, because the Athenians had slain those of Negropont that were sent to
seize upon the Hills before mentioned, and kept their bodies in their power.
The Spartans beaten.
The Thebans on the other side having overcome the Spartans, had the bodies of
them that were slain in the Battle, in their power, which was by far the
greater number, wherefore they said, that they were the Victors, Thus both
standing upon their terms, it was a good while before either would send a
Trumpet or Herald to the other for leave to bury their dead. Yet at last the
Lacedaemonians sent first, and then they all betook themselves to give the dead
an Honorable Burial. And as for him that had killed Epaminondas, he was highly
esteemed and honored for his Valiant Act, and the Lacedaemonians gave him many
rich Presents, and made him and his Posterity free from all public Taxes and
contributions in the Commonwealth.

As for Epaminondas he was brought yet alive into his Tent; howbeit his
Physicians, and Surgeons being called together to dress his Wounds: they all
concluded that so soon as they plucked the Head of the Dart out of his body, he
must needs die. And truly he made a most noble and worthy end. For first he
called for his Target-bearer, who was always at his hand in the Battle, and
asked him: Is my Target safe? He brought it straight. Then he asked, Who had
the Victory? The Boeotians answered, the Target-bearer. Then he commanded them
to bring to him Diophantus and Jolidas: they told him they were both dead: Upon
this he advised his Citizens to make Peace with their enemies, His advice to
the Thebans.
for that they had not any Captain of skill to lead them to the Wars. And now
(said he) it is time for me to die, and therefore pluck the Dart Head out of my
Body. At this word all his Friends that were about him fetched grievous sighs,
and even cried out for sorrow: and one of them weeping, said unto him: Alas
Epaminondas! Thou die now and leavest no Children behind thee: Yea (said he)
that I do: For I leave two fair Daughters behind me, whereof the one is the
Victory at Leuctres, His Death.
and the other this of Mantinea. So they pulled out the Dart, and immediately
he gave up the Ghost, without showing any sign that he was at all troubled at
it.

He used often to say, That War is the Bed of Honor, and that it is a sweet
Death to dye for ones Country. His Character.
He was one of the bravest Captains that ever we read of: For whereas others
excelled in some one or two Virtues by which they made their Fame great and
glorious, he excelled in all the Virtues and good Parts that could be desired
in a Grave, Politic and great Captain, to make him complete in all things that
could be expected in an Heathen. In his time he advanced his Country to the
Principality of all Greece. But after his Death they soon lost it: and not long
after Alexander the Great, utterly brake them in pieces, made Slaves of those
that survived, and razed their City to the very ground. As in his life time he
had always detested covetousness, so after his Death the Thebans were faign to
bury him at the common charge of the City, His Poverty.
because they found no money in his House to defray the least part of the
Funeral expenses.

THE WICKED LIFE AND WOEFUL DEATH OF HEROD the GREAT, In whose time Our LORD
CHRIST was Born.
HEROD, Herod's Pedigree.
surnamed the Great, was the Son of Antipas, or Antipater, an Idumaean, a prime
man, both for birth and wealth, amongst them: His Mothers name was Cyprus, born
at an eminent place amongst the Arabians, so that when this Herod acquired the
Kingdom of Judea, that Prophecy of old Jacob was fulfilled, Genesis 49. 10. The
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet,
until Shiloh come.

This Antipater, riding his circuit about the Province of Judea, whereof Julius
Caesar had made him Governor, repressed them who were desirous of innovation,
both by threats and counsel, telling them, that if they would be content with
their Prince Hyrcanus, (whom Caesar also had confirmed in the High Priesthood)
they might live happily in their own possessions: but if they promised
themselves new hopes, and thought that they should gain much by innovations,
they should have him a Master instead of a Governor, and Hyrcanus a Tyrant
instead of a King: and Caesar, and the Romans, bitter enemies instead of
Princes; for that they would by no means suffer any thing to be altered from
what they had settled. But Antipater perceiving Hyrcanus to be dull and idle, he
settled the state of the Province as himself pleased, making his elder Son,
Phasaelus, Governor of Jerusalem, and the Countries adjoining; and to Herod
his second Son, being then a very young man, he committed the care of Galilee.

Herod being Prefect of Galilee, Herod is made Governor of Galilee.
there was one Esekias, a Jew, who, associating to himself many other lewd
persons, exercised thievery, and used to make incursions into Syria in Troops:
He puts Esekias to death.
These Herod pursued, and having taken Esekias, he put him to Death; which fact
of his, gat him much favor with the Syrians, which Province also was then
under his Government.

The violence, and bold nature of Herod, who was desirous of the Tyranny, much
terrified the Princes of the Jews, wherefore they addressed themselves to
Hyrcanus, and openly accused Antipater; but especially they complained of
Herod, for that he had put to death Esekias, with many others, without any
Commission from Hyrcanus, in contempt of their Laws, by which, no man ought to
suffer, though never so wicked, unless he were first condemned by the Judges.
The Mothers also of them that were killed, ceased not daily in the Temple to
weary both the King and the people with their continual exclamations, desiring
that Herod might be made to give an account of these his doings before the
Sanhedrim: He is cted before the Sanhedrim.
whereupon Hyrcanus, moved herewith, commanded Herod to be called before the
Council, and to plead his own cause.

Herod, having ordered the affairs of Galilee, as he thought best for his own
advantage, being forewarned by his Father, that he should not come into the
Council as a Private Person, he took with him a moderate, but yet a sufficient
Guard: not too great, lest he should terrify Hyrcanus, nor too little, lest he
should expose himself to danger from the Judgment. When Herod therefore
presented himself before the Sanhedrim in his Royal Robes, Appears with his
Guard.
and his Guard in Arms, they were all astonished, neither durst any one of them
that accused him in his absence, now speak a word against him; but all of them
kept silence, Sameas his boldness.
not knowing what to do. Then one of the Council, called Sameas, a just man,
being not at all distracted with fear, rose up, and not only accused Herod of
presumption and violence, but laid the fault upon the Judges, and King himself,
who had granted him so great a liberty, and told them, that afterward, A
prediction.
by the just Judgment of God, they should be punished by Herod himself; and the
event made him a true Prophet. For the Judges of that Council, and Hyrcanus
himself, were afterward put to death by Herod, when he came to be King. But
Hyrcanus perceiving that the Judges were inclining to pass sentence of Death
upon Herod, put off the business till the next day, Herod slyes.
and privately advised him to shift for himself; and so he departed to
Damascus, as if he fled from the King, and presenting himself before Sextus
Caesar, Refused to appear when again cited.
and having secured his own affairs, he professed openly, that if he were again
cited by the Judges, he would not appear; which they took in great disdain, and
endeavored to persuade Hyrcanus that all these things tended to his
destruction.

Herod, Is made Governor of Calosyria.
to increase his power, gave a great sum of money to Sextus Caesar, who
thereupon made him Governor of Caelosyria: He, being elated with this
advancement, and taking it impatiently that he had been called before the
Council, raised an Army, and went against Hyrcanus: But his Father Antipater,
and Brother Phasaelus meeting him, by their entreaties prevailed, that he
should not go against Jerusalem, but be content to have affrighted them, adding
that it would be dishonorable for him, if he should attempt any thing farther
against him that had advanced him to his dignity; hereupon he desisted, judging
it sufficient for his future hopes, that he had showed to that Nation of what
power he was.

Cassius and Marcus, Is confirmed in it.
two Roman Generals, coming into Syria, after the death of Julius Caesar,
confirmed Herod in his Government of Caelosyria, and delivered to him great
Forces both of Horse and Foot, and Ships at Sea, promising him also the Kingdom
of Judea, after the War should be ended, which they were waging with M. Anthony
and young Caesar.

Not long after, Antipater (the Father of Herod) was feasted at Hyrcanus his
house, Antipater poisoned.
at which time, one Malichus, corrupting the Kings Butler, poisoned Antipater,
and presently raising a band of Soldiers, seized upon the Government of the
City of Jerusalem. Phasaelus and Herod being grievously offended hereat,
charged Malichus with their Fathers death, which he stiffly denied: But Herod
had a great mind presently to revenge the murder, and to raise an Army for
that purpose, had not Phasaelus interposed, who judged it more meet to
circumvent Malichus by Policy, lest they should seem to be the beginners of a
civil War, and accordingly Phasaelus made as though he accepted of Malichus his
justification, and believed that he was not guilty of his Fathers Death, and so
busied himself in building a stately Monument for him.

In the mean while, Herod coming to Samaria, and finding it in a desperate
estate, by reason of their civil Dissentions, he appeased the discords amongst
the Inhabitants, and restored it to peace: and not long after, the Feast of
Pentecost approaching, Herod goes to Jerusalem.
he went to Jerusalem, accompanied with some Soldiers, of whom Malichus being
afraid, persuaded Hyrcanus not to suffer him to enter; which Hyrcanus
accordingly did, alleging that amongst the holy People that came to the Feast,
it was not lawful to bring in a mixed multitude of profane men. But Herod
making small account of the prohibition, entered the City by night, and thereby
mightily terrified Malichus; who, thereupon, according to his wonted
dissimulations, openly bewailed with tears the death of Antipater, as of his
dear Friend: And it was judged meet by Herod's Friends, that he should take no
notice of this dissimulation, but courteously again entertain Malichus.

Herod, by Letters, certified Cassius of his Fathers death, who, very well
knowing the temper of Malichus, He is excited to revenge his Fathers death.
wrote back unto Herod to revenge the same, and secretly also gave order to the
Tribunes that were at Tire, to be aiding to Herod in his so just undertaking.

Cassius afterwar, having taken the City of Laodicea, Governors came from
every place, bringing Crowns and Presents to him: and here Herod, expecting
that Malichus should do the like, intended to have him punished for the Murder
of his Father: But Malichus had another design on foot, purposing, that whilst
Cassius was busy in prosecuting the war against M. Anthony, to stir up the
Nation of the Jews to revolt from the Romans, and to depose Hyrcanus, and get
the Kingdom to himself; But Herod, being politic, and understanding of the
treachery, invited him and Hyrcanus, with some other of their companions, to
supper: At which time he sent one of his Servants, under pretense of providing
for the Banquet, whereas indeed he sent him to the Tribunes, to desire them to
set upon Malichus with their weapons, who, being mindful of the commands of
Cassius, Malichus slain.
finding Malichus, they ran him through, and slew him; at which, Hyrcanus being
astonished, fell into a swoun, and being scarcely come to himself, he asked who
had slain Malichus, and when one of the Tribunes answered, that it was done by
the command of Cassius, he said, Truly Cassius has preserved me and my
Country, in killing him who was a Traitor to both; but whether herein he spoke
as he thought, or that through fear only he seemed to approve the fact, is
uncertain.

After Cassius was gone out of Syria, A sedition at Jerusalem.
there arose a Sedition at Jerusalem. For Faelix, who was left there by Cassius
with Soldiers, in revenge of the death of Malichus, set upon Phasaelus, and
the people betook themselves to their Arms. At which time, Herod was with
Fabius, the Governor of Damascus, and had a mind to help his Brother, but was
hindered by a sudden sickness: Yet did Phasaelus get the better of Faelix,
forcing him into the Town, and afterward agreeing upon quarter, suffered him
to go out: But he was very angry with Hyrcanus, that after the receipt of so
many favors from him, he yet favored Faelix, and suffered the Brother of
Malichus to seize upon some Castles, and amongst the rest, of the Castle of
Massada, which was a most strong piece.

As soon as Herod was recovered, he went against the Brother of Malichus, and
took from him all the Castles that he had seized upon, Herod's valor.
and Massada also, where he took him Prisoner, yet afterward set him at
liberty upon composition. He also recovered three Castles that were seized upon
by Masion, the Tyrant of the Tyrians in Galilee, but gave Quarter to all the
Soldiers, and sent them home well rewarded; His Policy.
by which means he procured the love of the Citizens, but the greater hatred of
the Tyrant.

Shortly after, Antigonus, the Son of Aristobulus, Brother to Hyrcanus, invaded
Judea, being assisted by Ptolomei, the son of Menaeus, and Fabius the Governor
of Damascus, and Masion, the Tyrant of the Tyrians, who adhered to him for the
hatred that he bore to Herod, whom Herod meeting, when they had scarce entered
the borders of Judea, He overcomes Antigonus.
overcame them in Battle, and drove them thence; whereupon Hyrcanus honored
him with Crowns, as soon as he returned to Jerusalem: For he was already
accounted as one of the Family of Hyrcanus, being to marry Mariamne, or Mary,
the daughter of Alexander, the Son of Aristobulus, the Brother of Hyrcanus, and
of Alexandra, the daughter of Hyrcanus.

M. Anthony having overcome Brutus and Cassius, there met him Ambassies from
all Nations in Bythinia, and amongst the rest, some of the Rulers of the Jews,
to accuse Phasaelus and Herod, alleging that Hyrcanus ruled only in show, but
in truth, all the power was in the two Brothers: Yet Anthony highly honored
Herod, who was come thither to wipe of all those objections, whereby it came to
pass, that his Adversaries were not so much as admitted to speak with Anthony:
and this Herod had obtained by his Bribes.

Yet not long after, Herod accused to Anthony.
there came an hundred of the most honorable amongst the Jews, to Daphne, near
Antioch, in Syria, to Anthony, to accuse Phasaelus and Herod, having chosen out
of their whole number the most Eloquent, to manage their business: But Messala
undertook the defense of the two Brothers, with whom also Hyrcanus joined, who
had betrothed his Granddaughter to Herod. Both Parties being heard, Anthony
asked Hyrcanus, whether of the two parties were fittest to Govern a
Commonwealth? who, speaking for the young men, But acquitted.
Anthony that loved them for their Fathers sake, his old Friend, he made them
both Tetrarchs, leaving to them the Government of all Judea, writing his
Letters to the same purpose, and clapped fifteen of their Adversaries into
Prison, and would have put them to death, had not Herod entreated for them. But
when the People did nothing but rail upon Herod, Anthony in displeasure slew
them all.

Antigonus the Son of Aristobulus hired the Parthians to translate the Kingdom
from Hyrcanus to himself and to kill Herod, War between Antigonus and Herod.
who coming along with him, and some Jews also joining themselves to him, he
came to Jerusalem, and they set upon the Kings House: But Phasaelus and Herod
defended it against them; and in the Market place, overcoming them in a fight,
forced them to fly into the Temple, where they shut them in, and placed sixty
men in some adjoining houses, to prevent their flight: but the people hating
the two brethren, set fire on those Houses, and burnt the men in them, which so
enraged Herod, that he slew many of the people: and each laying wait for the
other, every day some were murdered.

The day of Pentecost being come, many thousands of men, as well armed as
unarmed, Herod prevails.
gathered together about the Temple, from all parts of the Country, and seized
upon the Temple, and City, all but the Kings House, which Herod kept with a few
Soldiers, as Phasaelus did the walls. These brothers assisting each other,
assaulted their enemies, in the Suburbs forced many thousands of them to fly,
some into the City, and some into the Temple, and others into a rampire that
was near the City.

Hereupon Antigonus desired that Pacorus, the General of the Parthians might be
admitted to make peace between them: The Parthians falshhood.
which Phasaelus assented to, and Pacorus persuaded him to go with him as an
Ambassador to Barzapharnes (another General of the Parthians) laying an ambush
for him by the way: Phasaelus assented, though much against the mind of his
Brother Herod, and was willing to go with Pacorus, and took Hyrcanus along with
him. Pacorus leaving two hundred Horsemen with Herod, and ten whom they called
Eleutheri, went along with the Ambassadors. And as soon as they were come into
Galile, Barzapharnes entertained them with a cheerful countenance, and bestowed
gifts upon them, but watched an opportunity to entrap them: and so Phasaelus
was brought with his Company to a place near the Seaside called Ecdippon;
where Ophellus, a rich Syrian, understanding of the treachery intended against
them, offered Phasaelus some Ships to carry him away: But he unwilling to leave
Hyrcanus, and his Brother Herod in danger, expostulated with Barzapharnes about
the injury offered to them who were Ambassadors, who swore that these things
were not true, and presently went to Pacorus.

No sooner was he gone, but Hyrcanus and Phasaelus were clapped up in Prison,
much detesting the perfidiousness of the Parthians: and an Eunuch also was sent
to Herod with a command to surprise him if he could get him out of Jerusalem.
Herod flies from Jerusalem.
Herod having intelligence what had happened to his Brother, taking with him
such forces as he had in readiness, and his Mother Cybele, his Sister Salome,
his Wife Mariamne, and his Wives Mother Alexandra, the Daughter of Hyrcanus,
and his yougest Brother Pheroras, with their Servants, he privately by Night
took his flight into Idumaea.

In their journey, his Mother, by the overthrow of her Coach, was in great
danger of death, and Herod, fearing least the enemies should overtake them
whilst they stayed there, He would have killed himself.
drew forth his Sword, thinking to kill himself: But being restrained by those
which stood by, he went toward Massada, a very strong place, which is seated
in Arabia, and Palestine, by the nearest way that he could possible: The
Parthians first, and also the Jews pursuing him by that he was sixty furlongs
from the City, but he repelled them both in fight.

The next day after Herod had fled from Jerusalem, Jerusalem plundered.
the Parthians plundered the City, and the Kings House; only the Treasure of
Hyrcanus which was three hundred Talents, remained untouched. A great part also
of Herod's substance which he had not carried away with him, they siezed upon;
and not satisfied therewith, they harrized all the Country also, and razed the
rich City of Marissa.

Antigonus being thus settled in Judaea by the Parthians, Anigonu^ made King of
the Jews.
he received into his custody Hyrcanus, and Phasaelus, who were Prisoners: yet
he was much grieved that the Women were got away, whom he had intended to
deliver to the Parthians, together with the money which he had promised to give
them. Being afraid also lest Hyrcanus should again by the favor of the People
be restored to his Kingdom and Priesthood, Cuts off Hyrcanus ears.
he cut off his ears, thereby rendering him unfit for the Priesthood, the Law
forbidding that any one who wanted a member should approach to the Altar. Lev.
21. 17, etc.

Phasaelus knowing that his death was determined sought to lay violent hands
upon himself, Phasaelus kills himself.
but being hindered by reason of his chains, he dashed out his brains against a
stone: Yet before he was quite dead, hearing by a Woman that his Brother Herod
was escaped, he greatly rejoiced that there was one left to revenge his death.
The Parthians, though they missed of the Women, which they most of all desired,
yet having settled all things at Jerusalem with Antigonus, when they departed,
took Hyrcanus along with them Prisoner into Parthia.

Herod not hearing of his Brother Phasaelius his death, Herod flies to Melchus
King of Arabia.
went to Malchus, the King of the Arabians [Nabathaeans] who were obliged to
him by many favors he had done them, purposing so soon as possibly he could to
redeem his Brother for three hundred Talents from the enemy: For which cause he
carried along with him young Phasaelus, his Brothers Son, about seven years
old, to leave him for a pledge with the Arabians: But there met him some that
were sent from Malchus, Is rejected by him.
to command him to depart from the bounds of his Kingdom, for so the Parthians
had required: Yet he pretended that he did it by the request of his Noble men,
purposing to cozen him of that great treasure which his father Antipater had
committed to his trust. Herod taking this very heavily, turned aside into a
certain Temple, where he had left many of his followers: but the next day, when
he came to Rhinocorura he heard of his Brothers death.

Malchus, upon second thoughts, repenting of his ingratitude, sent in all have
after to Herod: but the Messengers could not overtake him: for he was gone far
on his journey toward Pelusium, Herod goes in to Egypt.
where the Mariners that were sailing to Alexandria, refused to take him in.
There, by the Magistrates of the City he was honorably entertained, and
brought to Cleopatra, the Queen, who could not prevail with him to stay at that
time, because he was hastening to Rome, From thence into Italy.
though the Sea was very tempestuous, and as then the affairs in Italy were in
no very good condition. As he sailed from Alexandria toward Pamphilia; he met
with a very great storm, which made him cast overboard much of his substance,
and scarcely got he to Rhodes.

At Rhodes two of his greatest Friends met him, He comes to Rhodes.
Sappinas, and Ptolomaeus, and finding that the City had suffered much in the
War against Cassius, he could not be restrained, no not by his present poverty,
but that he would do something for it, even beyond his ability: After which he
caused a Frigot to be built, and embarking himself with his Friends in it, he
arrived at Brundusium in Italy, So into Italy.
and fom thence went to Rome, declaring unto M. Anthony those things that had
happened to himself and his Family, and that thorough many tempests, and
dangers he had retired unto him, as his only refuge, in whom all his hope lay.

This Narration moved compassion in Anthony; Anthony favors him.
remembering also his Fathers friendship toward him, but that which prevailed
most, was the promise of a great sum of money if he would help him to the
Kingdom: Anthony also hated Antigonus as a man of a turbulent Spirit, and an
enemy to the Romans. Caesar also partly for that Antipater [Herods Father] had
been fellow Soldier with his Father in Egypt, And Caesar.
and for other courtesies which he had showed him, and partly to gratify
Anthony, whom he saw to be well affected to Herod, was willing to promote his
designs: whereupon the Senate being assembled, Messala, and Atpatinus, brought
in Herod, and after they had praised him, reckoning up the love, and services
that both he, and his Father had done for the Romans, and accusing Antigonus
both for former crimes, and for that newly he had received the Kingdom of the
Jews from the Parthians in contempt of the Romans: and when Anthony also had
declared to the Senate how much conducing it was to the Parthian War, then in
hand, that Herod should be made King: The Senate make him King.
Antigonus was declared an enemy, and the Kingly Title was devolved upon Herod
by their general suffrage.

Whilst these things were transacting at Rome, Ventidius, the Roman General
easily recovered Palestine, Antigonus, the King thereof, being much afraid of
him, and he exacted great sums of money from all men, but especially from
Antigonus, Herod's Family besieged.
who in Herod's absence had besieged his Family in Massada, which place, though
it abounded with all other kinds of provision, yet it wanted water, so that
Joseph, Herod's Brother, who commanded in chief there, with two hundred of his
Friends intented to fly to the Arabians; for that he heard that Malchus now
repented him of his former ingratitude toward Herod: A special providence.
But the very Night a great shore of Rain falling filled their Cisterns, which
made him change his purpose, and the next morning, making a gallant salley
forth, they killed many of Antigonus his men.

Ventidius encamped near to Jerusalem, and drew from Antigonus a sufficient sum
of money, and to the intent that his fraudulent dealing should not be
discovered, he left one Silo there, with part of his Forces under a pretense of
helping Joseph, who also was to be seed by Antigonus, lest he should raise him
some new troubles; which Antigonus submitted to, hoping that the Parthians
would shortly come to his aid.

After the Senate was dismissed, Anthony, and Caesar went out, leading Herod
between them, who also accompanied with the Consuls, and other Magistrates, and
so they went all together up into the Capitol, to sacrifice to the Gods, and to
place there the Decree of the Senate: and the New King, the first day of his
Reign, He returns homeward.
was Feasted by Anthony, and within seven days after he was by Anthony
dismissed out of Italy, honored with this unexpected felicity.

Shortly after Anthony being to go to the Parthian War, had all his Acts, as
well past as to come, confirmed by the Senate, whereupon he sent to some Kings
by his own authority to pay certain Tributes to him, Herod's Kingdom enlarged.
and he made Herod King both of the Idumaeans, and Samaritans.

Herod being returned out of Italy to Ptolemais, quickly gathered store of
Soldiers, both of such as he hired, as also of his own Countrymen, passing
through Galile against Antigonus: being aided by Silo, and Ventidius, who were
commanded by Anthony to conduct him into his Kingdom; and as he went on, his
Forces daily increased, and all Galile, except a few, sided with him.

As Herod was marching toward Massada, where he was necessarily to relieve his
Kindred, Joppa would not let him pass, wherefore he was to reduce it, lest he
should leave so strong a place behind him in his passage to Jerusalem: which
occasion Silo taking hold on (for he was not yet come to Herod) dislodged his
Army from about Jerusalem, whom the Jews pursued, but Herod meeting him with a
small party saved Silo, Herod relieves Silo.
who fought very cowardly.

After he had taken Joppa, He takes Joppa.
he hasted to Massada to raise the Siege, and his Army increased daily, many of
the Country people joining with him: and having relieved his Friends in
Massada, Besieges Jerusalem.
he hasted toward Jerusalem; and though Antigonus had laid ambushments for him
in diverse places, yet he drew near to the City, Silo following, and the Jews
being terrified with his power. When he had encamped on the West side of the
City, they upon the Walls shot at him with Darts and Arrows: others also
sallying out in Troops, beat up some of his quarters. Then did Herod by an
Herald proclaim round about the Walls, that he came for the public good, and
to preserve the City from ruin, and withal, he promised pardon for all former
actings. On the other side Antigonus, directing his Speech to Silo, and the
Romans, told them, that it was unjustly done of the Senate to give the Kingdom
to Herod, a private man, and an Idumaean, and so but an half-Jew, whereas by
custom it was to be given to one of the Highpriests line. His men also
shooting valiantly from the Towers, drove the enemy from the Walls: and Silo
(who was beforehand bribed by Antigonus) suborned some of his Soldiers to
demand of Herod more provisions, and larger pay, and to be withdrawn into
commodious Winter Quarters. The Army being thus troubled, and beginning to
dislodg, Herod entreated the Captains, and Soldiers of Silo's Army, that they
would not now forsake him, he being sent both by Anthony, Caesar, and the
Senate, to take possession of the Kingdom; and withal he sent into all the
Country, and brought in such store of provisions, that there was no occasion
for Silo, and his Army to complain. He commanded his Friends also that
inhabited about Samaria, that they should bring to Jericho Corn, Wine, Oil,
Cattle, and other necessaries, that the Soldiers for the future might have
plenty.

Antigonus having intelligence hereof, sent forth some to intercept the
Victualers: but Herod taking with him some Cohorts, viz. five of the Romans and
as many of the Jews, with some foreign Soldiers, and a few Horse mixed with
them, Herod takes Jericho.
flew out to Jericho, and found the City forsaken of the Inhabitants, and five
hundred Families of them were fled to the tops of the Hills, whom he took, and
dismissed in safety: But the Romans entering the City, plundered it, where they
found all sorts of precious movables. Herod leaving a Garrison there, returned
to his Camp before Jerusalem, and then dismissed the Romans, sending them into
Winter Quarters in Idumaea, Samaria, and Galile, which Countries were lately
surrendered to them: But Antigonus by bribes obtained of Silo, that part of the
Roman Army should he quartered in Lydda, currying thereby favor with Anthony:
and thus the Romans lived in plenty, and without bearing Arms.

But Herod could not be idle: His activity.
For sending his Brother Joseph into Idumaea, with a thousand Foot, and four
hundred Horse, himself went into Samaria, and there settled his Mother, and the
rest of his kindred, whom he had drawn out of Massada: Then did he march into
Galile, where he surprised some places which were yet held by Antigonus his
Garrisons: and when he came to Sephorus in snowy weather, Antigonus his men
fled away, and there he found great store of necessaries. From thence he sent a
Troop of Horse, and three Companies of Foot against some Thieves that dwelt in
Caves, He pursues the Thieves.
not far from the Village Arbela, by which means he kept them from doing
mischief. Then he marched with his whole Army, whom the enemy met, and
encountered resolutely, inso much as Herod's left wing began to waver, till
himself coming on with the main body, encouraged his own men to stand their
ground, and caused the enemy to flee, whom he followed as far as Jordan: by
which Victory he brought all Galile into his subjection, Subdues Galile.
except those that dwelt in the Caves: and so giving to every one of his
Soldiers a hundred and fifty Drachmes, and more to his Captains, he dismissed
them into their Winter Quarters.

There came Silo to him with his Captains who had wintered with Antigonus, and
who now would maintain, them no longer, commanding the Inhabitants thereabout
to spoil the Country of all Victuals, and to retire to the mountains that the
Romans might perish through famine: But Herod committed the charge of
provisions to his Brother Pheroras, and withal, commanded him to rebuild
Alexandrium, Alexandrium rebuilt.
who in a short time furnished the Soldiers with abundance of all necessaries,
and built again Alexandrium that had formerly been dismantled.

Ventidius in Syria sent for Silo to assist him against the Parthians, but
commanded him first to assist Herod, and to bring Herod, and the rest of the
Auxiliaries of those Provinces along with him: But Herod sending Silo to him,
went himself with his Soldiers against the Thieves that lived in Caves; and in
the mean time made Ptolomy Governor of the Country, which fell out ill for
him; for being set upon by those who had formerly disturbed the Country, he was
slain by them, Ptolomy slain.
after which they retired into Fens, and inaccessible places, infesting with
their inrodes, and robberies all the Country: But when Herod returned, he made
them pay dear for their Thieveries: for some of them he killed, others flying
to their fortified places he pursued, Herod beats the Thieves.
and having taken them, put them to death, and razed their strong holds, and
sined the Cities in an hundred Talents.

About this time Anthony commanded Ventidius to send Machaeras to aid Herod
with two Legions, and a thousand Horse; but when he came, being corrupted by
Antigonus with money, he would needs go to him, against Herod's mind, under a
color of observing his actions: but Antigonus suspecting him, denied him
admittance, and drove him away with slings, whereby he found that Herod had
given him good counsel, and blamed himself for not following of it: whereupon
he retired to Emmaus, Machaeras his cruelty.
and in his march killed all the Jews that came to hand, without distinction of
Friend or Foe, being provoked by Antigonus his dealing: At which cruelty Herod
was much grieved, intending to go to Anthony, and saying, that he needed other
manner of men than those who did him more hurt than his enemies, whereas of
himself he was able to subdue Antigonus: but Machaeras overtaking him,
entreated him to stay, or if he was resolved to go on, yet at least that he
would leave with him his Brother Joseph, that with their united Forces they
might make war upon Antigonus. Thus, after much entreaty, he was reconciled to
Machaeras, and so leaving his brother Joseph with his Army, he commanded him in
his absence, that he should not put all to the hazard of a Battle; Herod goes
to Anthony.
but himself hasted to Anthony, whom he found besieging Samosata, a City near
to the River Euphrates, and carried along with him some Auxiliaries both of
Horse and Foot. Anthony entertained him very honorably, and much praised him
for his valor.

Joseph, unmindful of his Brothers command, taking with him his own Forces, and
five Roman Cohorts that were given him by Machaeras, went toward Jericho,
purposing to reap the enemies Corn, now that it was ripe, and encamped in the
mountains, because the Roman Cohorts were raw Soldiers, most of them being
lately taken up in Syria: yet there he was circumvented by the enemy, in the
midst of those fastnesses, and having lost six Cohorts, he himself valiantly
fighting, Joseph is slain.
was slain: Antigonus being in a rage, caused the dead body of Joseph to be
whipped, though Pheroras, his Brother, offered fifty Talents to have redeemed
it: After this loss, the Galileans revolting from their Governors, drowned
those that were of Herod's party in the Lake: In Idumaea also there were many
innovations.

Anthony having made peace with his enemy, commanded Caius Sosius to assist
Herod against Antigonus, with two Cohorts: When Herod came to Daphne, the
Suburbs of Antioch, he heard of his Brother Joseph's deah, which caused him to
hasten his journey, and coming to Mount Libanus, he took thence with him eight
hundred men, and one Cohort of the Romans, and so came to Ptolemais, Herod
overcomes his enemies.
from whence in the night he passed with his Army through Galilee: Here his
enemies met him, whom he overcame in fight, and forced them into the Castle,
from whence they had issued the day before: Them he assaulted, but was
compelled to desist, by reason of the extremity of the weather, and to retreat
into some neighboring Villages: but upon the coming of another Cohort from
Anthony, they in the Castle were so affrighted, that they forsook the same by
night: Herod then hastened to Jericho, purposing to revenge his Brothers death:
and being come thither, he feasted his Nobles, and the feast being ended, A
special providence.
and his guests dismissed, he retired into his chamber, and presently the room
wherein they had supped, being now empty of company fell down without hurting
any, which made many to think, that surely Herod was beloved of God, who had so
miraculously preserved him.

The next day, six thousand of the enemies came down from the Mountains to
fight with him, and their forlorn-hope with darts and stones so terrified the
Romans, and some of Herod's Soldiers, that they fled, and Herod himself
received a wound in his side.

Antigonus, desiring to have his strength seem greater than it was, sent one of
his Captains, named Pappus, with some forces into Samaria, whilst himself went
against Machaeras. In the mean time Herod took in five Towns, and therein put
two thousand of the Garrison Soldiers to the sword; and setting the Towns on
fire, he went against Pappus, and was strengthened by many that came to him out
of Jericho and Judea: yet was the enemy so confident, that he would join battle
with him; Herod beats his enemies.
but in fight, Herod overcame them; and being inflamed with a desire to revenge
his Brothers death, he pursued them that fled, slew many of them, and followed
them into a Village, and there slew many more of them, who retreated into
houses, the rest fled: After which Victory, Herod had presently gone to
Jerusalem, and put an end to the war, had not the sharpness of the Winter
hindered him; for now Antigonus bethought himself to leave the City, and fly
elsewhere for safety.

Herod in the evening, A special providence.
when he had dismissed his Friends to refresh themselves, as yet hot in his
Armor, went into a chamber, attended with one only servant, to wash himself,
wherein some of his enemies armed, whom fear had forced thither, were hidden;
and whilst he was naked, and washing himself, first one, and then a second, and
a third, ran out armed with naked swords in their hands, so astonished, that
they were glad to save themselves, without profering the least hurt to the
King. The next day, Herod, amongst others, cut off Pappus his head, and sent it
by way of revenge for his Brothers death, Pappus slain.
to his Brother Pheroras; for it was Pappus that with his own hand had slain
Joseph.

Herod, Herod besieges Jerusalem.
in the beginning of the third year after he had been declared King at Rome,
coming with an Army to Jerusalem, encamped near the City, and from thence
removing to that place where the Walls were fittest to be assaulted, he pitched
his Tents before the Temple, intending to attempt them, as Pompey had done in
times past: and having encompassed the place with three Bulworks, by the help
of many workmen he raised his batteries; fetching materials from all places
thereabouts, and appointing fit men to oversee the work; Marries Mariamne.
and then himself went to Samaria to solemnize his Marriage with Mariamne, the
Daughter of Alexander, the Son of Aristobulus, who was formerly betrothed to
him.

The Marriage ceremony being over, Sosius came with an Army of Horse and Foot,
being sent by Anthony to the aid of Herod, and Herod also took a great party
with him from Samaria to Jerusalem; Herod's great Army.
so that the whole Army being come together, consisted of eleven Legions of
Foot, and six thousand Horse, besides the Syrian Auxiliaries, which were very
many, and so they pitched on the North-side of the City. Over this great Army
were two Generals, Sosius and Herod, who purposed to displace Antigonus, as an
enemy to the people of Rome, and to establish Herod in the Kingdom, according
to the Decree of the Senate.

The Jews being gathered together* out of the whole Country, The Jews fight
valiantly.
and shut up within the Walls, made a valiant resistance, boasting much of the
Temple of the Lord, and saying, that the Lord would not forsake his people in
the time of danger. By secret sallies also they burnt up, and spoiled all
provision without the City both for Man and Horse, whereby the Besiegers began
to be pinched: but Herod provided against their excursions, by placing
ambushments in convenient places, and sending parties to fetch in provision
from afar off, so that in a short time the Army was well furnished with all
necessaries.

By reason of the multitude of Workmen, the three bulworks were soon finished,
it being Summer time, so that no untemperateness of weather hindered them: and
with his Engines Herod often battered the Walls, and left nothing unassayed:
but the besieged fought valiantly, and were every way as active and subtle to
make void his endeavors; often sallying forth, and firing their Works, both
those that were finished, and others that were but begun, and coming to
handistrokes with the Romans, they were nothing inferior to them, but only in
Martial skill.

The Sabbatical year now coming, A Famine in Jerusalem.
brought a Famine upon the besieged Jews, notwithstanding which, they built a
new Wall within that which was beaten down by the battering Rams, and so
countermined the Enemies mines, that many times they came to Handystrokes under
ground, and making use of despair instead of courage, they held it out unto the
last, though Pollio, the Pharisee, and Samias his Disciple, advised them to
receive Herod into the City, saying, that they could not avoid his being their
King by reason of their sins.

They held out the siege for five months space, though there was so great an
Army before the City: but at length twenty of Herod's choicest Soldiers got
upon the Wall, and after them the Centurions of Sosius. So that the first Wall
was taken on the forti'th day, and the second on the fiftieth, and some
Galleries about the Temple were burnt down, which Herod charged (though falsely)
upon Antigonus, thereby to bring him into hatred with the people. When the
outward part of the Temple was taken, and the lower City, the Jews fled into
the inward part of the Temple, and the upper City: and fearing lest they should
be hindered from offering their daily Sacrifices unto God, they sent
Ambassadors unto Herod, to desire leave, that such Beasts only might be
brought in which were to be sacrificed: This request Herod easily granted,
hoping that by this means they would leave their obstinacy, and submit to him.
But perceiving that this courtesy prevailed not, and that they were still
resolute to continue the Sovereignty in Antigonus, he gave a general assault
and won the City, Jerusalem taken by Herod.
on the Kalends of January, on the second month, Cislu, being the day on which
the Jews were wont to celebrate a Fast in commemoration of the holy Roll that
was burnt by Jehoiakim.

The City being taken by assault, Cruelty.
all places were filled with murders: the Romans being incensed against the
Jews for holding out so long; and the Herodian Jews endeavoring to extirpate
the contrary faction; so that there were continual slaughters in the Porches
and Houses; yea, the reverence of the Temple, not saving the suppliants: They
spared neither age nor sex, nor so much as the little children: and though the
Conqueror Herod besought, and entreated them to forbear, yet none would hear,
or obey him, but as if they had been mad, they proceeded in their cruelty.

Antigonus coming down from the upper City, fell at Sosius his feet, who
nothing pitying his miserable condition, Antigonus imprisoned.
insulting over him, calling him Madam Antigonuus, and withal cast him into
prison, and set keepers about him.

And whereas a multitude of Strangers, that Herod had hired, came rushing in,
not into the Temple only, but even into the Sanctuary, some he thought to
restrain by entreaty, others by threats, and some by force, judging his Victory
worse than if he had been overthrown, if any of those things which were not
lawful to be seen, were exposed to the view of the profane multitude. He
restrained also the plundering of the City, as much as in him lay; entreating
Sosius to do the like, asking, if the Romans would make him King of a
Wilderness, the City being so wasted by rapines and murders: Sosius answered,
that the Soldiers desired the plunder of the City, in regard of their hard
service in the siege: Herod says the City.
To which Herod replied, that he would recompense every man out of his own
Treasury; and making good his promise, he freed the City from further misery:
Rewards the Romans.
For he bestowed gifts liberally upon the Soldiers, and proportionably upon
the Commanders, and bountifully upon Sosius: whereupon, Sosius offering a Crown
of Gold unto GOD, withdrew out of the City, leading Antigonus a Prisoner along
with him to Anthony.

Herod being thus settled in Jerusalem, Herod's cruelty.
he advanced those of his own faction, and daily put to death them of the
contrary: Amongst whom, he slew all those of the Sanhedrim, who had accused him
of a capital crime, before he was King, sparing only Pollio the Pharisee, and
Samias, his Disciple, whom he highly honored.

Then did he gather together all the Regal Ornaments, and much silver and gold,
which he exacted from rich men, all which he gave to Anthony and his Soldiers.
He put to death also forty and five of Antigonus his chief Noble men, setting
watches at their doors, that none of them might be carried out under pretense
of being dead: and what gold or silver soever was found, was all carried to
Herod, so that there was no end of the peoples miseries, the covetousness of
the needy Conquerours consuming all their estates. The fields also lay
untilled, because it was the Sabbatical year, in which it was unlawful to sow
the ground.

Of these miserable times, Who were spectators of it.
amongst others, were spectators, Zacharias the Priest, with his Wife
Elizabeth: Of the relicts of David's stock, Hely and Joseph: Anna also the
Prophetess of the Tribe of Aser, and Simeon the just, who received an answer
from the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death, till he had seen the Lord
Christ. Luke 2. 26.

Anthony being thus possessed of Antigonus, intended to keep him Prisoner to
adorn his Triumph; but Herod feared, that if Antigonus was brought to Rome by
Anthony, he might there contend with him before the Senate for the Kingdom:
considering also how the Nation of the Jews hated him, and favored Antigonus;
he thereupon gave great sums of money to Anthony, to cut off his head, Anthony
slew Antigonus.
which accordingly he did at Antioch: Antigonus being the first King that was
thus put to death by the Romans: and in him ended the Principality of the
Hasmonaeans: It being from the Captainship of Judas Maccabaeus to the death of
Antigonus, an hundred twenty six years, and two or three months; and by this
means, Herod, a stranger, got the Kingdom, and was totally freed from his fears.

Hyrcanus, (as we heard before) being carried Prisoner to Phraates King of the
Parthians; he entreated him courteously for the Nobility of his Descent, and
after a time, Hyrcanus honored in Babylon.
freeing him from Prison, he suffered him to live in Babylon, where were great
store of Jews, who honored him no less than as their King and High Priest: and
not only they of Babylon, but all the rest of the Nation of the Jews did the
like; who in old time had been carried captive beyond the River Euphrates, by
the Assyrians, of whom there were many millions. But Hyrcanus hearing that
Herod was made King of the Jews, he began to cast his hopes that ways,
expecting favor from Herod, whose life he had saved, when he was called in
question before the Sanhedrim. He consulted therefore with the Jews that came
to visit him, about his return into Judea, who by all means dissuaded him from
it, yet could they not prevail with him. Besides, Herod desired by all means to
get the poor old man into his clutches, Herod's subtilty.
and thereupon wrote to him to get leave of Phraates and the Jews, that he
might return, and that they would not envy him the joint rule with his Son in
Law, the time being now come, wherein he could requite the favors that
Hyrcanus had showed him, in being his nourisher and preserver. He sent also his
Ambassador to Phraates with great Presents, entreating him that he would not
hinder him from being thankful to him that had deserved so well of him.
Hyrcanus being forward of himself, dismissed by the Parthians, and honorably
furnished by the Jews for the expenses of his journey, he came at last to
Herod, who entertained him with all honor, gave him the upper hand in all
Assemblies, and the more honorable place at all Feasts, calling him Father,
hereby to delude him, lest he should suspect any treachery.

Herod providing that none of the Nobility should be created High Priest,
Hananeel made High Priest.
sent to Babylon for a Priest of base Parentage, whom formerly he had been
acquainted with, of the race of those Priests that had been carried away beyond
Euphrates, whose name was Ananelius, or Hananeel, and to him he gave the
High Priesthood.

This Alexandra the Daughter of Hyrcanus, Alexandra takes it ill,
the Wife of Alexander, the Son of Aristobulus, and Mother-in-Law of Herod,
took in ill part; for that Aristobulus her Son, and Brother of Mariamne, was
neglected, and another from a strange place should be made High Priest:
whereupon she wrote to Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, and Anthonies darling, that
she would procure the High Priesthood of Anthony for her Son. Cleopatra
neglected her request; but shortly after, Dellius, a friend of Anthonies,
coming into Judea, persuaded her to send the Pictures of her Son Aristobulus,
and of her Daughter Mariamne to Anthony, who then would deny her nothing: This
she assented to, and sent them by Dellius, who told Anthony, that they seemed
rather to be of a Divine, than of a humane race.

Anthony was much inflamed herewith, Anthony sends for Aristobulus.
yet thought it undecent to send for a Lady that was married to Herod, shunning
also the jealousy of Cleopatra: whereupon he wrote to Alexandra, to send her
Son to him, under some honest pretense: But these things coming to the ears of
Herod, he thought it not safe that Aristobulus, now in the flower of his age,
being but sixteen, should be sent to Anthony, the most potent man amongst the
Romans, and very much given to his Lusts. Wherefore he wrote back, that if the
youth did but step out of the Kingdom, all the Country would be up in Arms; the
Jews hoping for some innovations under a new King, and by this means he
satisfied Anthony.

Herod being continually molested with the entreaties of his Wife Mariamne,
that he would give the High Priesthood to her Brother Aristobulus, it being his
right, he called a Council of his Friends, to whom he inveighed against his
Mother-in-Law Alexandra, as if she had privately wrought Treason against his
Kingdom, and had endeavored by Cleopatra's means to translate it to young
Aristobulus; yet, lest he should seem to neglect both his piety to her,
Aristobulus made High Priest.
and the rest of that Kindred, he told them, he would now restore the
Priesthood to her Son, which hitherto Ananelius had supplied, by reason of the
young man's tender years: Alexandra being herewith overjoyed, and withal
grieved that she was suspected, fell a weeping, clearing her self of those
accusations, and gave him many thanks for her Sons honor, promising that
hereafter she would be most obedient unto him. And thus Herod, in the lifetime
of Ananelius, gave the High Priesthood to Aristobulus, being then but seventeen
years old.

Yet Herod, Alexandra confined.
fearing lest his Mother-in-Law Alexandra should seek occasion to raise new
troubles, confined her to the Palace, and commanded her to do nothing by her
own authority: yea, he set so strict a guard over her, that nothing was
concealed from him of all she did, to the very expenses of her Table. This she
took very heavily, She complains to Cleopatra.
and wrote to Cleopatra, complaining of her hard condition, and desired her to
yield her assistance: Cleopatra advised her with her Son to fly to her into
Egypt, which she liked, and therefore provided two Coffins, the one for her
self, the other for her Son, commanding her servants, that were privy to the
plot, to carry them out by night, and to convey them to a ship that was ready
prepared to carry them into Egypt. This business Aesopus, one of her servants,
blabbed to Sabbation, a friend of Alexanders, supposing that he had known all
before? which, as soon as Sabbation knew, though hitherto he was an enenmy of
Herod's, as being suspected to have been in the plot of poisoning his Father
Antipater, he took this occasion of being reconciled to the King, She is
surprised by Herod.
by discovering the matter, Herod being thus informed of the plot, dissembled
the matter till it was in execution, and then surprised her in her flight, and
brought her back: Yet did he pardon her fault, not indeed daring to punish her,
lest thereby he should discontent Cleopatra, that was willing to take any
occasion against him: wherefore, under a color of a magnanimous spirit, he
made show as if he pardoned her out of mere clemency.

The Feast of Tabernacles being now come, the new High Priest Aristobulus,
being just past seventeen years old, was to offer Sacrifice according to the
Law, and being clad in his Pontifical attire, he came to the Altar, and
performed the Ceremony with all Decency, whose excellent beauty and stature,
being higher than was usual for his age, and carrying in his countenance the
honor of his Lineage, Aristobulus highly honored.
drew the eyes, and love of all the multitude upon him; every one calling to
mind the worthy and memorable actions of his Grandfather Aristobulus; and
therefore, as overcome with affections toward him, they were so over-joyed,
that they could not contain themselves, but openly prayed for him, and wished
him all joy, and that more freely than was meet in those jealous times, under
such a King, proclaiming openly, both the memory, and thanks they owed to the
Family, for all the benefits they had received from it.

As soon as the Feast was ended, Aristobulus was entertained at a Banquet by
his Mother Alexandra: Herod also pretended favor to him, and enticed him into
a convenient place to sport with him after the manner of young men, and when
they were hot and weary, and left their sport, they walked out to the
Fish Ponds, which were near the Court, to take the fresh air, where also they
beheld some of the servants that were swimming: At last, by the persuasion of
Herod, Aristobulus undrest himself, and went in amongst them: Then they, who
were suborned by Herod, as it were in sport and jest, ducked him as he was
swimming, holding him under water, and never left off till they had drowned
him. He is drowned.
This was the end of Aristobulus, in the eighteenth year of his age, and in the
first year of his High Priesthood, which immediately returned to Ananelus.

The report of these things coming to the Women, they were all on an uprore,
and did nothing but weep, and howl over the body of the young man: Yea, sorrow
overspread the whole City, every one bewailing the calamity, as if it had been
his own: But Herod endeavored by all means to make the people believe, as if
it had fallen out by chance, without his privity, not only feigning sorrow,
Herod's subtilty.
but tears and grief also: and that he might the more comfort the Women, he
buried the body in a most magnificent manner, being liberal in prodigality, in
adorning his Monument, and in perfumes, and other precious things.

But his Mother Alexandra knowing the Treason, though she was often ready to lay
violent hands upon her self, yet repressed her passion, seeming not to be
suspicious, till an opportunity of revenge might offer it self.

And shortly after, Alexandra complains to Cleopatra.
she wrote to Cleopatra of the treachery of Herod, and of the lamentable death
of her Son. Cleopatra pitying her misfortune, took a particular care of this
business, as if it had been her own, and never rested from persuading Anthony
to revenge the young man's death; telling him that it was an unpardonable crime,
that he, who by his help, enjoyed a Kingdom that was another right, should
rage so insolently against the Family of the lawful Kings. Anthony being
prevailed with hereby, when he came to Laodicea in Syria, sent for Herod to
come before him, to answer what should be objected against him about the death
of Aristobulus.

Herod, Herod questioned by Anthony.
during the time of his absence, committed the care of his Kingdom to his Uncle
Joseph, privately commanding him, that if Anthony should do him any mischief,
he should presently put his Wife Mariamne to death; pretending that he so loved
her, that he should esteem it a great wrong, if any but himself should enjoy
her beauty, yea, though it was after his Death.

When Herod came to Anthony, he so appeased him with rich Presents, that he
brought on purpose with him from Jerusalem, But cleared by his Bribes.
and by his frequent conferences with him, that afterward Cleopatra's
instigations prevailed little: For Anthony said, that it was not fit that a
King should be accountable for his actions, otherwise he would cease to be a
King: For having once given him the honor, the free exercise of his Kingly
power was to be admitted unto him. He told Cleopatra also, that it was not fit
for her too much to meddle with other men's matters.

During Herod's absence, Joseph Governing the Kingdom, he had occasion many
times to converse with Mariamne, partly upon business, and partly to do her
honor; and in their discourses there was often mention made how much Herod
loved her, which discourse was laughed at by the Ladies, especially by
Alexandra; But he was carried on with such a desire of provoking the Kings love
to them, that he told them what private command the King had given him,
supposing this was an infallible argument of his love, because he could neither
endure to live without her, nor in death to be disjoined from her: but the
Ladies were not of his mind, rather abhorring the Tyranny of Herod, who, though
he were dead, yet would he seek their lives.

Presently after, a rumor was spread about the City, that Anthony had put
Herod to death, which much troubled all the Court, especially the Ladies:
whereupon Alexandra persuaded Joseph, that, taking them along with him, he
should fly to the Roman Legions that lay before the City, under the command of
the Tribune Julius, so that if any trouble arose in the City, they might be
secured by the Romans; adding, that she hoped if Mariamne came but once to the
sight of Anthony, she might obtain any thing of him, yea, even the Kingdom,
with whatsoever belonged to the Royal Family.

Whilst these things were under debate, there came Letters from Herod, which
dashed all, signifying how Anthony had honored him, both in the public
Assemblies, and inviting him to his Feasts, and that, during the accusations of
Cleopatra: so that he feared her not for the time to come, but hoped shortly to
return to them, Anthony having given Coelosyria unto Cleopatra instead of
Judea, upon condition that she should not hereafter demand Judea, nor trouble
him any further about that business.

As soon as these Letters were received, the speech about flying to the Romans
vanished, Herod's return.
but yet their debate about it was not hid: For as soon as Herod had brought
Anthony part of his way against the Parthians, he returned into Judea, and
immediately his Sister Salome, and his Mother Cyprus told him what Alexandra's
counsel was; neither was she herewith contented, but she accused her Husband
Joseph, as if he had been too familiar with Mariamne: and this she did out of
an old grudge, because the Queen (a woman of an high spirit) in their womanly
brabbles, had upbraided her with her obscure birth.

Mariamne by her Oath assured Herod of her chastity, who told her again, how
much he loved her; but she replied, that it was not the part of a lover, to
command that if he died, she should be put to death also. Herod judging that
this secret could never be known, except she had committed adultery with
Joseph, had much ado to refrain from killing her immediately: but love
overcoming his passion, Joseph put to death.
he refrained; yed did he command Joseph to be put to death, without suffering
him to plead for himself, Alexandra also he cast into prison, as the cause of
all these evils.

Cleopatra having brought Anthony part of his way toward Parthia, returned
toward Egypt, and by the way, was entertained by Herod, who assured unto her
that part of Arabia which was granted unto her by Anthony, to which he added
the revenues of Jericho, where are great store of the best Date Trees, and
where Balsom grows, Gardens of Balsom.
which being a precious Ointment only grows there, in two Gardens, both which
are the Kings, the one of twenty acres, the other of less.

By this means Herod grew into great familiarity with Cleopatra, who sought to
allure him to her Lust, either through her great intemperance, or because she
sought by this means to betray him; but though she pretended love to him, yet
Herod refused, and held a consultation with his Friends about killing her, who
dissuaded him from it, and therefore having appeased her by great Presents, and
all manner of obsequiousness, he accompanied her as far as Pelusium: yet
fearing both her, and the People of the Jews, he reserved the Castle as a
refuge for himself, laying in as many Arms there, as were sufficient for ten
thousand men.

Herod paid duly to Cleopatra the Tributes of Judea and Arabia, which Anthony
had given to her, not thinking it safe to give her any occasion of disgust
against him.

Herod being now free from troubles, and having taken Hyrcanium, a Town which
hitherto a Sister of Antigonus had kept, the Actian War brake forth, between
Augustus Caesar and Mark Anthony, Herod prepares to assist Anthony.
whereupon Herod made great preparation for the assisting of Anthony, but he
freed him from the trouble, telling him that he needed them not, and so
dismissing him, Herod returned home with a well-furnished Army, wherewith he
invaded Arabia, going as far as Diospolis, at which place the Arabians met him,
and after a fierce conflict, the Jews got the Victory.

After this, Herod made many inrodes into Arabia, in the seventh year of his
Reign, after the death of Antigonus, at which time the Actian War being begun,
A great Earthquake.
Judea was shaken with such an Earthquake as never was the like before, in
which ten thousand men were overwhelmed, by the ruins of the houses, yet the
Soldiers received no damage, because they lay in the open fields. This being
much aggravated by report, so emboldened the Arabians, that they laid hold on
the Ambassadors of the Jews, who, in this their affliction came to demand
peace, and slew them, and presently prepared for War with all earnestness.

Herod hearing hereof, encouraged his men, offered Sacrifice according to the
custom, and so in all haste marched with his Army over Jordan, and having
encamped at Philadelphia, there the fight began, about the taking of a Castle
that lay between him and the Arabians, Herod overcomes the Arabians.
in which the Jews got the better, and after continual skirmishes, forced the
Arabians to flight, who in their haste, treading upon one another, they lost in
all five thousand men: the rest were besieged in their Camp, and extremely
wanting water, they sent Ambassadors to Herod, who would not admit of them,
and was more eager upon them, for offering but fifty Talents for their freedom:
They being parched with continual thirst, came out of their Camp by great
companies, offering themselves to the Jews, by which means they took five
thousand of them in five days; and at last, the rest in the Camp came out to
fight; but despairing of any good success, there fell of them in the first
conflict about seven thousand more. By this overthrow the courage of the
Arabians was tamed, and Herod was declared Governor of that Nation, and so
returned home with great Glory.

The Actian War being finished, wherein Caesar finally overthrew Anthony,
Alexandra hoped that Herod should be severely punished by Caesar, Alexandra's
restlesness.
for assisting Anthony against him; whereupon she solicited her Father
Hyrcanus, not any longer to suffer the affliction of their Family, but rather
to reserve himself for better times: For which end she advised him to seek for
protection and entertainment of Malchus the King of Arabia. These
solicitations her Father at first repulsed, but at last being overcome by her
Womanish importunity, he sent Letters to Malchus, by one Dositheus a Friend of
his, desiring him to send some Horsemen to convey him to the Lake Asphaltitis,
which is distant from Jerusalem about three hundred furlongs. This Dositheus
was Kinsman to Joseph, whom Herod had put to death, yet, to curry favor with
the King, he showed him the Letters: Herod thanked him, and withal desired one
courtesy more, that he would seal up the Letters, and give them to Malchus, and
bring his answer to him. This he did, and the Arabian sent back word, that he
was ready to entertain Hyrcanus and his Family, and all the Jews that were of
his Party, and that he would send a band of Soldiers to conduct them in
safety, who should be obedient to Hyrcanus in all things. Herod having received
this answer, called Hyrcanus and asked him if he had any confederacy with
Malchus? who denying it, he produced the Letters in the Council of the
Sanhedrim, and commaded him to be put to death.

Herod having thus dispatched Hyrcanus, Herod goes to Caesar.
resolved to post unto Caesar, and expecting no good from him, because of his
great Friendship to Anthony, he was very jealous of Alexandra, lest, taking
this opportunity, she should stir up the people to rebel, and so fill the
Kingdom with domestical seditions. Wherefore committing the care of his Kingdom
to his Brother Pheroras, he left his Mother Cyprus, and his Sister Salome, and
all his kindred in the strong Castle of Massada: And commanded his Brother,
that if any thing befell him otherwise than well, he should retain the
Government of the Kingdom in his own hands: and because his Wife Mariamne, by
reason of some differences, could not live with his Mother, he placed her with
her Mother Alexandra in Alexandrion, committing the custody of them to his
Treasurer Joseph, and to Sohemus, an Iturian, under a color of doing them
honor, but yet he gave them this command, His cruel command.
that if they should certainly know that any sinister hap befell him, they
should presently put both the Ladies to death, and to the uttermost of their
power, keep the Kingdom for his Children, and his Brother Pheroras.

Herod having thus settled his affairs at home, posted to Rhodes to meet with
Caesar there, whither when he was come, laying only his Crown aside, but
retaining other his Princely Ornaments, he was admitted into Caesar's presence,
where, with great constancy, and magnanimity of Spirit, he freely confessed the
love he bore to Anthony, as also the supplies he had sent him of Corn, and
Money: adding moreover that he was ready with the same Faith to keep Friendship
with Caesar. Caesar honors him.
This Caesar exhorted him to, and restoring his Crown to him, exceedingly
honored him. Thus beyond all expectation, is Herod again confirmed in his
Kingdom, both by the free gift of Caesar, and also by a Decree of the Senate,
which Caesar procured for him: and Herod gave great Presents both to Caesar
himself, and to all his Friends about him, even above his ability, to show the
greatness of his mind.

During his absence, His Wife and Mother are full of discontents.
his Wife Mariamne, and his Mother Alexandra, took it very ill that they were
shut up in that Castle as in a Prison, so that they could neither enjoy their
own, nor make use of other men's goods: especially when by their feminine
flatteries they had fished out of Sohemus, what Herod had commanded concerning
them: She then began to wish that he might never return home, supposing that
she should live a most intolerable life with him: all which she afterward
dissembled not, but openly confessed what it was that did afflict her. For
Herod returning beyond all expectation, and relating to Mariamne what successes
he had, she seemed not to regard them, and at all the carasses that he made
her, she would sigh, so that Herod plainly perceived the hatred of his Wife
against him, insomuch that himself was wavering between love, and hatred
toward her.

Not long after Caesar passing through Syria toward Egypt, Herod's bounty to
Caesar, and his Army.
Herod entertained him with all Royal magnificence at Ptolemais, and showed all
hospitality toward his Army, giving them plenty of all sorts of Victuals, by
which means he was counted one of Caesar's chiefest Friends, and used to ride
about with him when he mustred his Army. He presented him also and his Friends
with a hundred and fifty Men, all clad in most sumptuous, and rich apparel,
yea, he suffered them to want nothing in their march to Pelusium, through
barren places, and such as wanted water, yet did he provide plentifully for
them, with which the Soldiers were much delighted. He also presented Caesar
with eight hundred Talents: yea, he gave such satisfaction to all, that they
confessed that it was greater than the Kingdom could afford.

Herod wavering between love and hatred toward his Wife Mariamne, Herod is
jealous of his Wife.
was continually incensed against her by the false accusations of his Sister
Salome, and his Mother Cypros, who labored to kindle his hatred and jealousy
against her: whereupon, probably he had proceeded rigorously with her, but that
news came seasonably that Anthony and Cleopatra were both dead, He meets Caesar.
and that Caesar had won Egypt, and was coming back, whom in all have he went
to meet, and so left his Family as it was. At his departure he commended
Sohemus to Mariamne, professing that he owed him much respect for the care he
had had of her: and gave to him also the Government of a part of Judea.

Herod meeting with Caesar before he was come out of Egypt, Caesar enlarges his
Government.
in confidence of his Friendship, spoke freely to him, and was highly honored
by him: For he bestowed upon him the four hundred Galatians, who were formerly
of Cleopatra's Guard, to be his Guard, and restored to him that part of his
Country which Cleopatra had seized upon, and added to his Kingdom Gadara, and
Hippon, and Samaria; and by the Seaside, Gaza, and Anthedon, and Ioppa, and
the Tower of Straton, which added much splendor to his Kingdom.

In Caesar's return through Syria, Herod conducted him as far as Antioch. At his
return, Herod's suspicions of his Wife are enencreased.
for the space of a whole year, suspicions increased daily between him and his
Wife Mariamne, she neglecting his carasses, and often upbraiding him either with
the death of her Grandfather Hyrcanus, or her Father Aristobulus, so that
Herod could scarce refrain from striking her, and Salome by the noise,
perceiving that Herod was much moved, she sent in the Butler, whom long before
she had suborned for that end, who told Herod that he was solicited by Mariamne
to deliver him a love potion, which he had by him, but what it was he knew not.
Herod hereupon examined the most faithful servant of Mariamne by torture, being
assured that she would attempt nothing without his privity, who not enduring
the torments, confessed that she was offended for something that Sohemus had
declared unto her, which when the King heard, he cried out, that Sohemus had
declared unto her, which when the King heard, he cried out, that Sohemus, who
had ever been most faithful both to him, and the Kingdom, would never have
spoken of these things, had there not been some more secret familiarity between
them than was fitting; and thereupon he commanded Sohemus to be apprehended and
put to death; and having called his Friends to Counsel, he accused his Wife for
practicing to poison him, which he so aggravated, that all that were present
perceived that he had a mind that she should be condemned, Mariamne condemned
to death.
which was accordingly done by the general consent of them all: and whereas
they thought that the execution should not be over speedy, but rather that she
should be secured in some of the Kings Castles, Salome exceedingly urged the
King that she should presently be put to death, for fear lest there should be
some commotion among the People she being alive and in Prison: and thus was
Mariamne brought to her death.

When her Mother Alexandra saw her going to execution, and considered that she
must look for the same at Herod's hands, that she might not seem to be guilty of
the same crime, she began to upbraid her Daughter as being wicked and
ungrateful toward her Husband, Her Mothers Hypocrisy.
saying, that she deserved death who durst attempt so heinous an act. Whilst
she counterfeited these things, and made as if she would have pulled her
Daughter by the hair, they that were present condemned her hypocrisy; but she
that was led to death returned her no answer, but refelled the false
accusation, with a resolute countenance, Mariamnes Death.
and mind, and underwent her death without fear.

She being dead, Herod's excessive grief for her.
Herod began to be more inflamed with love toward her, often calling upon her
Name, and lamenting her death beyond decency; and although he sought to divert
his grief by pleasures, feastings, and drinking, yet all availed nothing.
Whereupon he cast off the care of his Kingdom, and so far gave up himself to
sorrow, that he would bid his Servants call Mariamne, as though she were yet
living.

As Herod was thus tormenting himself, A great Plague follows.
there came a great Plague, which swept away a great part both of the Nobility,
and Commons, every one judging that this Plague was sent by God for the unjust
death of the Queen. The Kings discontents being increased hereby, he at last
hid himself in a solitary Wilderness under a pretense of hunting; Herod's
Melancholy and sickness.
where still afflicting himself, he fell into a great sickness, which was
accompanied with an inflammation and great pain in his Neck, so that he began
to rave; neither could any applications ease him, but rather made the disease
more painful, so that those about him began to despair of his life: and his
Physicians, partly because of the stubborness of the disease, and partly
because in so great danger there was not any free election of diet, they gave
him leave to eat whatsoever he would.

Herod lying thus sick in Samaria, Alexandra's Treason and Death.
and Alexandra being at Jerusalem, she endeavored to get the two Castles of
the City into her hands, the one adjoining to the Temple, the other situate in
the City: For which end she solicited the Governors of them to deliver them
up unto her, and to the Children of her and Mariamne, lest that Herod being
dead, they should be seized upon by others: But they who had ever been faithful
to Herod, were now much more diligent in their Office, both out of an hatred of
Alexandra, and because they thought it a great offense to despair of the
recovery of their Prince. Hereupon they presently sent Messengers to Herod, to
acquaint him with Alexandra's attempt, who thereupon commanded her to be slain.
At length overcoming his disease, he recovered his strength both of body and
mind, Herod grows cruel.
but grew so cruel, that upon the least occasion he was ready to put any one to
Death.

Salome, Salome leaves her Husband and comes to Herod.
Herod's Sister, having been married to Cossaborus an Idumean, a difference now
arising betwixt them, she, contrary to the custom of the Jews, sent him a Bill
of Divorce, and came away to her Brother Herod, telling him that she preferred
his love before her tie to her Husband: the reason which she pretended was,
that Cossaborus had practiced some innovations with Lysimachus, Antipater, and
Dositheus, confirming it from this, because he had privily kept in his Country
the Children of Bebas, now for the space of twelve years from Herod's taking of
Jerusalem: Herod's cruelty.
As soon as Herod heard this, he sent some to their hiding places, and killed
them, with many others, to the intent that none should remain of the kindred of
Hyrcanus: He also took out of the way all such as excelled in any dignity, that
he might do whatsoever seemed him good, there being none to resist him.

Herod by these practices growing more secure, he began to degenerate more and
more from his Country fashions, violating them by foreign inventions. For
first he instituted Wrestlings every fifth year in the honor of Caesar, He
instituted Games to the discontent of the Jews.
for the exhibiting of which, he began to build a Theater in Jerusalem, and an
Amphitheatre in the plain, both of them very sumptuous for the Workmanship, but
clean contrary to the Jewish customs: Yea he would have this solemnity to be
enrolled, and to be proclaimed in the neighboring Countries, and to remoter
Nations, and by propounding greater rewards, he invited, not only those those
were skilful Wrestlers, but also excellent Musicians, and such as Played on
several Instruments. Yet that which above all troubled the Jews, were the
Trophies, which being covered with Armor, they thought to be Images, forbidden
by their Law; but Herod to satisfy them, commanded the Armor to be taken off,
and showed them that they were mere stocks of Wood, whereupon all their anger
was turned into laughter.

Herod having many ways provoked the Jews, A conspiracy against Herod.
ten Citizens of Jerusalem made a Conspiracy against him, amongst whom one was
blind, who made one, not because he could do any thing, but to show how ready
he was to suffer with those that defended their Country rights: Herod had
appointed secret spies to discover such plots, one of which had fished this
matter out, and acquainted Herod with it, who caused them to be apprehended,
and when they were brought before him, with undaunted countenances they drew
out their Weapons from under their Garments, protesting, that, not out of any
private respect, but in the behalf of the public weal, they had undertaken
this conspiracy. The Conspirators are put to Death.
Then were they led away, and put to death with all manner of tortures. Not
long after, their accuser being hated of all men, was slain by some, and being
cut in pieces, was thrown to the Dogs. Yet were the authors hereof concealed,
till after long, and wearisome inquisitions, it was by torture wrung out from
some silly Women who were privy to it. Herod's cruelty.
When Herod had thus found out the Authors, he punished them with death, and
their whole Families.

Herod the better to secure himself from the seditions of the tumultuous
people, He fortified Samaria, and built a Temple there.
in the thirteenth year of his Reign, began to fortify Samaria, which was a
days journey from Jerusalem, and called it Sebaste (or Angusta,) The circuit of
it was twenty furlongs, in the midst whereof he built a Temple of a furlong and
an half, which he wonderfully adorned, and so ordered, that many of the
Soldiers, and of the neighboring Nations came and dwelt there.

Herod also built another Cidadel to be as a bridle to the whole Nation, namely
the Tower of Straton: He built several Castles.
Also in the great plain he built a Castle, and chose of his Horsemen by lot,
to keep it. Another he built in Galile, and one in Peraea: which Castles being
so conveniently disposed in several parts of the Country, took away from the
people all opportunity of rebellion.

About this time very grievous calamities befell the Nation of the Jews. Plague,
and Famine.
First there was a long Drought, after which followed a Famine: After the
Famine, by reason of their ill diet, there came diverse Sicknesses, and the
Plague; and Herod, having not wherewithal to supply the public wants, was
forced to melt the Gold and Silver that was in his Palace, Herod's care to
provide for the People.
not sparing any thing for the curiosity of the Workmanship: no not so much as
the Vessels which were for his own daily use. These being turned into money, he
sent to buy provisions into Egypt, where Petronius was Governor under Caesar,
who though he was pestered with multitudes that repaired to him upon the like
necessity, yet being Herod's Friend, he gave his Servants leave to export Corn,
and was assisting to them, both in the buying, and carriage of it.

When the Corn was brought to Herod, he was very careful to see it divided,
first to such as had most need, and then because there were many who by reason
of old age, or some other weakness, were unable to dress it themselves, he
appointed them certain Bakers to provide their food for them: By this means he
procured the good will of the people, and the praise of a prudent and provident
Prince.

He provided also for his Subjects against the sharpness of the Winter, taking
care that none should want clothing, their Cattle being dead, and Wool, and
other materials failing. And when he had made provision for his own People, His
bounty to strangers.
he took care also for the neighboring Cities of the Syrians, to whom he
allowed Seed for sowing of their ground: and the Castles, and Cities; and those
of the common People, who had great Families, coming to him for succor, he
found a remedy for them also: Insomuch that he gave to those that were not his
Subjects ten thousand Cores of Corn, each Core containing ten Athenian bushels.

As soon as the Corn was ripe for harvest, Herod dismissed fifty thousand Men,
whom he had fed in the time of Famine, into their own Countries: by which
diligence he restored the almost ruined estate of his own Subjects, and did not
a little relieve his Neighbors, who groaned under the same calamities.

At the same time also he sent aid to Caesar. He sends aid to Caesar,
to wit, five hundred chosen Men of his own Guard, whom Aelius Gallus led into
the Arabian Wars, where they did most excellent service.

Herod also built himself a Palace in Sidon, He built himself a Palace.
in which he built two very large and stately Houses, with which the Temple it
self could in no wise compare, and called one of them by the name of Caesar,
and the other by the name of Agrippa.

Herod having removed from the Priesthood Jesus the Son of Phales, He makes a
new High Priest: and marries Mariamne.
made Simon (a Priest of Jerusalem; the Son of Boethus of Alexandria) Priest in
his room, and took also his Daughter Mariamne to Wife, that was the most
beautiful Virgin of that age.

The marriage solemnities being over, He built another Palace.
he began to build another new Palace, unto which he adjoined a Town, which he
called Herodian, in a place distant from Jerusalem, about sixty furlongs
toward Arabia, in the place where he had overcome the Jews when he was thrust
out by the Arms of Antigonus.

He built also Sebaste, And Sebaste, and a stately Haven.
and having finished that, he began to build another most magnificent City in a
place by the Seaside, where Straton stood, which he called Caesaria, and added
to it an Haven of admirable work, equal in bigness to the Haven Piraetus: all
which he finished in twelve years space, sparing neither labor nor cost about
them.

Then did he send his two Sons, He sent his Sons to Caesar.
Alexander, and Aristobulus, (whom he had by Mariamne the Asmonaean) to Rome to
Caesar, to be there educated under him, for whom Lodgings were prepared at the
House of Pollio, Herod's great Friend. Caesar entertained the young men very
courteously, and gave Herod power to make which of his Sons he pleased the heir
of his Kingdom: Caesar enlarged his Kingdom.
he added also to his Government Trachonitis, Batunaea, and Auranitis.

When Herod had received Trachonitis, he took guides, and went to the Den of
the Thieves, He represented the Thieves.
restraining their Villainies, whereby the people lived in quiet: But Zenodorus,
the former Governor, being moved, partly thorough envy, and partly with the
loss of his Government, went to Rome, to accuse Herod, but could effect nothing.

About this time Herod went to Mytelene, He went to Agrippa.
to salute his chiefest Friend Agrippa, and so returned into Judaea: and
presently after some Citizens of Gadara went to Agrippa to accuse Herod, whom
he vouchsafed not so much as to hear, but sent them bound to Herod: Yet did he
spare them: for though he was inexorable toward his own People, yet did he
willingly contemn, and forgive injuries received from strangers.

Zenodorus had solemnly sworn to the Gadarens, that he would do his utmost with
Caesar to get them freed from the jurisdiction of Herod, and to be annexed to
the Province of Caesar: Many of themselves also exclaimed against Herod, (...).
calling him cruel Tyrant, complaining to Caesar of his violence and rapines,
and for rasing, and robbing their Temple: Yet was Herod nothing herewith
terrified, being ready to answer for himself: But Caesar used him courteously,
and was nothing alienated from him for all these tumultuous complaints: The
Gadarens therefore perceiving the inclination of Caesar and his Friends toward
Herod, despairing of good success, and fearing to be delivered into Herod's
hands, some of them cut their own Throats, others fearing torments brake their
own Necks, or drowned themselves in the River, and thus, seeming to forejudg
themselves, Caesar absolved Herod from all their accusations.

Zenodorus also having his bowels burst, through much blood that came from him,
ended his life at Antioch in Syria; whereupon Augustus Caesar gave his
Tetrarchy to Herod: he made him also one of the Governors of Syria, Caesar
still enlarged his Dominions.
commanding the rest of the Governors of that Province, to do nothing without
his advice.

Herod bestowed upon his Brother Pheroras a hundred Talents out of the revenues
of his Kingdom, and begged a Tetrarchy for him of Caesar, to the intent that if
himself should happen to die, Pheroras estate might be secure, and not subject
to Herod's Children.

Caesar coming into the East, having settled his affairs there, Herod conducted
him to the Seaside, and so returned into his own Kingdom, where he built a
goodly Temple in honor of Caesar, Herod buil^ a Temple and eased his Subjects.
all of white Marble, near to Panion, at the foot of which mountain were the
spring-heads of Jordan: He also remitted to his Subjects some part of their
Tribute, under pretense that he would ease them after the great dearth, but
indeed to appease the minds of his Subjects, who were offended at his vast
works, which seemed to tend to the destruction of Religion and good manners, as
was commonly talked. As also to prevent these reports, he forbad all private
meetings in the City, His jealousies.
and to frequent Feastings: He had spies also who would mingle themselves in
all Companies, and mark what People said: yea himself would go about in the
Night in the habit of a private Person, and mingle himself in the company of
People to hear what they thought of him: and such as peremptorily disliked his
doings, he would punish without all mercy: the rest of the multitude he bound
to him by Oath, requiring that they should not depart from their fidelity, and
duty: Yea he required this Oath of many of the Pharisees, as of Pollio, and
Sameas, etc. which though he could not get them to take, yet did he not punish
them as he did others, in regard of that respect that he bore to Pollio:
Neither did he impose it upon the Esseans, whom he much esteemed for one
Manaherus sake, who was a Prophet, and when Herod was but a Boy, he saluted him
King of the Jews, and foretold that he should Reign above thirty years.

Herod in the eighteenth year of his Reign, propounded to the Jews his building
the Temple at Jerusalem, He rebuilt the Temple at Jerusalem.
whom when he saw troubled least, when he had pulled down the old, he should
not be able to finish a new one, he told them, that the old Temple should
remain whole as it was, till all the materials necessary for the new Fabric,
should be fully prepared: neither did he deceive them for he provided a
thousand Wagons to carry stones, and he chose out of all the Artificers ten
thousand that were the most exquisite Workmen, and a thousand Priests, clothed
in their Priestly Garments at his cost, who were not altogether ignorant of the
Masons, and Carpenters Art, to oversee them.

All necessary materials for this stately work being provided in the space of
two years, Herod began to build the Temple at Jerusalem, forty six years before
the first Passover of the Ministry of Christ and therefore that Text, Joh. 11.
20. should be thus translated, This Temple has been built forty six years
hitherto: So the learned Primate of Ireland, and our Countryman Lydiat, read
it.

Indeed the building of the Temple under Zorobabel began in the first year of
the Monarchy of Cyrus, and after some interruptions, was finished in twenty
years space, viz. in the sixth year of Darius Hystaspes: but the magnificent
building of it, Nine years it was in building.
begun by Herod at this time was finished in nine years space and an half: and
truly the riches of Herod alone, were not sufficient to perfect so magnificent
a structure, but all the holy treasures of many ages, that were sent to them
from all the parts of the World to Jerusalem, were spent about it.

Not long after Herod set sail for Italy, He goes into Italy.
to salute Caesar, and to see his Children at Rome, and as he passed through
Greece, he was, not only present at, but Judge of the Olympic exercises, where,
observing that they did not answer the resort that was to them, through the
poverty of the Elienses, he bestowed toward them a yearly revenew, that so
their Sacrifices might be made the more splendid, as also other things that
tended to the gracing of so great a meeting: His bounty.
For which bounty he was declared perpetual Judge of those exercises.

When he came to Rome, Caesar entertained him courteously, and delivered to him
his Sons sufficiently instructed in the Liberal Sciences, and so from thence he
went into Galatia.

At Jerusalem, by the diligence of the Priests, the building of the Temple
properly so called, that contained the Holy, and the Holy of Holies, was
finished in a year and a half; during which time, it is reported that it never
rained in the day time, but only in the Nights: and in the eight years
following, the Porches, the Ranges, and the rest of the buildings about the
Temple were all finished.

When Alexander, and Aristobulus were returned into Judea, and had gained all
men's love, Salome the Sister of Herod, and her Faction, fearing that at some
time or other they would revenge their Mothers death, cast out a rumor amongst
the people, that they hated their Father, because he had caused their Mother to
be slain: But Herod as yet suspecting no ill, used them with all Honor, as
they deserved: and because they were now grown to men's estate, Herod's Sons
married.
he provided them Wives: for Alexander, Bernice, the Daughter of Salome, and
for Aristobulus, Glaphira, the Daughter of Archelaus, the King of the
Cappadocians.

Then Herod hearing that Agrippa was again come into Asia, he went to him, and
begged of him that he would come into his Kingdom as to his Friend, Herod
entertains Agrippa.
and Guest; and as he came, he entertained him in all the Cities that he had
newly built, showing him the public buildings, and presenting, both to himself
and friends all kind of delights which might set forth his magnificence, at
Sebaste, and the Port of Caesarea, and in the Castles of Alexandrion, Herodion,
and Hyrcania. He brought him also into the City of Jerusalem, where all the
People met him in their best, and Festival attire, and with acclamations of
joy: Agrippa also sacrificed an Hecatombe to God, and feasted the People; and
though he would willingly have stayed longer there, yet, fearing storms, the
Winter no^ drawing on, he hasted to sail into Jonia, both he and his Friends
having been honored with great presents by Herod.

As soon as the Spring came, Herod hearing that Agrippa was going with an Army
to Bosphorus, made have to meet him, and taking his way by Rhodes, and Chios,
he came to Lesbos, thinking there to find him: But Agrippa being driven back by
contrary North-winds Herod stayed at Chios, to whom many came privately to
salute him, upon whom he bestowed many princely gifts, Herod's great bounty.
and when he perceived that the Gate of the City that was thrown down in the
War against Methridates, as yet lay buried in its ruins, and that by reason of
the poverty of the Inhabitants, it could not by them be restored to its former
beauty and greatness, he bestowed upon them so much money as would abundantly
suffice to finish it, and exhorted them to hasten the restoring of their City
to its former beauty, and grandeur.

As soon, as the wind served, he left Chios, and sailed to Mytilene, and from
thence to Byzantium, and there understanding that Agrippa had already passed
the Cyanian Rock, he followed him with all speed, and overtook him at Sinopi, a
City in Pontus, where, beyond Agrippa's expectation, he arrived with his Navy:
His coming was yery grateful to him, and they embraced each other with singular
affection, His love to Agrippa.
Agrippa looking upon it as an evident argument of his fidelity and friendship,
that leaving his manifold occasions, he would come to him in so seasonable a
time. Wherefore Herod still abode with him in the Army, was Companion with him
in his labors, and partaker of his counsels: He was also present with him when
he went to be merry, and was the only man that he used in difficult matters,
for the love that he bore unto him.

Agrippa having forced the Bosphorans to lay down their Arms, in his whole
journey thorough many Countries and Cities, he gratified Herod in many things,
Agrippa's love to him.
and at his entreaty, relieved the necessities of many: If any one needed an
Intercessor to Agrippa, Herod was the only man, by whom he could obtain his
suit, and assisted many in whatsoever they had need of.

When they were come into Jonia, a great multitude of Jews that inhabited that
Country, complained of the great injuries that they suffered from the Jonians,
who would not permit them to live after their own Laws, but that upon their
Festival days, they haled them before their Tribunals, and forbad them to send
holy money to Jerusalem, which also they perverted to secular affairs, contrary
to the privileges granted them by the Romans: Herod's favor to the Jews in
Jonia.
Herod took care that Agrippa should hear their complaints, and allowed them
Nicholas Damascene, one of his Friends, to plead their cause, which when he had
largely performed before Agrippa (many honorable Romans, and some Kings and
Princes being present) the Grecians denied the thing, excusing themselves that
the Jews were troublesome to them: But they on the contrary proved that they
were freeborn Citizens, and that they lived according to their own Laws
without injuring of any; wherefore Agrippa answered that both for his Friend
Herod's sake, as also because that which they demanded was just, he would
gratify them therein: He ordered therefore that the privileges which were
formerly granted them, should remain inviolable, and that none should molest
them for living after their Country Laws. Then Herod rose up, and gave him
thanks in the name of them all: and so after mutual embraces, they took their
leave each of other, and departed from Lesbos.

Herod in a few days after, having a prosperous Gale, arrived at Caesarea, and
from thence went to Jerusalem, where, calling all the People together, he gave
them an account of his Journey, Herod ingratiates himself with the Jews.
and told them what immunities he had procured for the Jews in Asia; and to win
them the more to his friendship, he professed that he would remit to them the
fourth part of his Tribute; with which bounty they being exceedingly taken,
wished him all happiness, and departed with great joy.

Presently after his return, He is incensed against his Sons.
he was greatly incensed by the false accusations and artifices of his Sister
Salome, and his Brother Pheroras, against his two Sons that he had by Mariamne,
Alexander, and Aristobulus: whereupon to take down their spirits, he began to
use them more hardly, and publicly he put hopes of the Kingdom into his Son
Antipater, whom he begat when he was a private man, his Mother also being a
woman of mean Parentage, whom formerly he had banished the City in favor to
his two other Sons, and writing often unto Caesar for him privately, he gave
him great commendations: and at the entreaties of Antipater, he recalled also
his Mother Doris, whom he had put away when he married Mariamne.

Agrippa after his ten years Government in Asia, He visits Agrippa.
being now to depart, Herod sailed to salute him; taking with him of all his
Sons only Antipater, whom he delivered to Agrippa with many gifts, to be
carried to Rome, and to be brought into Caesar's favor.

Antipater was much honored at Rome, Antipaters subtility.
being commended to all his Friends by his Fathers letters: and though he was
absent, yet desisted he not by writing to incense his Father against the Sons
of Mariamne, pretending his great care of his Fathers safety, but in truth, to
make way for his succession in the Kingdom. About this time Agrippa died, and
being brought into the Marketplace of Rome, Augustus commended him in a Funeral
Oration.

Herod being now incensed against his Sons, Herod accuses his Sons.
Alexander and Aristobulus, he sailed with them to Rome to accuse them before
Augustus, and not finding him there, he followed him as far as Aquileia, before
whom he accused them of treachery against him; but the young men satisfied all
that were present by their Apology for themselves mixed with prayers and tears,
so that they were reconciled to their Father: After which, giving thanks unto
Caesar, they departed together, and with them Antipater also, who pretended
much joy that they were received into favor again.

A few days after Herod gave Caesar three hundred Talents, Caesar's favors to
Herod.
and again Caesar gave him half the revenues of the metal Mines in Cyprus, and
the other half also he committed to his oversight, and having honored him with
other gifts of Hospitality, he gave him leave to choose which of his Sons he
pleased to be his successor, or if he liked it better to divide his Kingdom
amongst them, which when he was about to do, Caesar told him that he would
not suffer but that he should have his Kingdom during his life in his own
power, as well as his Sons.

In Herod's absence there was a rumor spread in Judea that he was dead,
vvhereupon the Trachonites revolting, fell to their old trade of Thieving; but
by the diligence of his Captains that he had left in his Kingdom, they were
subdued, Thieves subdued.
and forty of the chief of them, being terrified by the punishment of those
that were taken, left their Country and fled into Arabia Nabathaea, where
they were entertained by Silaeus (who was an enemy to Herod, because he had
denied him his Sister Salome to Wife) who gave them a place to dvvell in that
was well fortified.

Herod and his Sons sailing homvvard, Herod returns with his Sons,
arrived at Sebaste in Cilicia, where they met with Archelaus King of
Cappadocia, who courteously entertained Herod, much rejoicing that his Sons
were reconciled to him, and that Alexander had fairly ansvvered the crimes
that were objected against him: and so giving royal gifts each to other they
parted.

Herod being returned into Judea, called the people together, and told them
what he had done in his Voyage, and declared to them, that his Sons should
Reign after him, first, Antipater, and then Alexander and Aristobulus, that he
had by Mariamne.

About this time, Agrippa born.
in the year of the world 3994, Agrippa, the first King of the Jews of that
name, was born, who dyed when he was fifty four years old, being struck by an
Angel, Act. 12. 23. Also that lame man was now born, who being above forty
years old, was healed, by Peter, at the Beautiful Gate of the Temple, Act. 4.
22.

Herod having finished Caesarea Stratonis, in the twenty eighth year of his
Reign, he dedicated it with great solemnity, and many sports and pastimes:
After which, Herod's great bnildings.
he began to build another Town in a field called Capharsala, which he called
Antipatris, after his Fathers name; and a Castle also, which he called Cyprus,
after his Mothers name. In honor also of his dead Brother, he built in
Jerusalem a very fair Tower, not inferior to the Egyptian Pharos, and called
it Phasaelus: and afterward he built a Town of the same name in the Valley of
Jericho, from whence the Country thereabouts is called Phasalus.

Herod, having wasted his wealth by his great Prodigality, and now wanting
money, after the example of John Hyrcanus, in the night, without the knowledge of
the people, he opened David's Sepulcher, where, though he found no money, yet he
found great store of precious things, He robs David's Sepulcher.
and ornaments of gold, which he took away: for the expiation of which fact, he
afterward built a most sumptuous Monument of white Marble at the entrance of
the Sepulcher.

Antipater, Antipaters s^btilty.
suborning other men falsely to accuse his Brethren, Alexander and Aristobulus,
takes upon him their defense, that making a show of good will to them, he might
the easier oppress them: and by these subtilties he so wrought upon his Father,
that he thought him to be his only preserver. Hereupon Herod commended his
Steward Ptolomy unto Antipater, and communicated all his Counsels with his
Mother Doris, so that all things were done as they pleased, and still the King
was imbittered against those, whom it was their profit that he should be angry
with.

About this time Pheroras (Herod's Brother) fell so madly in love with his own
servant, that he refused marriage with Cypros, the Kings Daughter, that was
offered him by his Brother: He also accused Herod to his Son Alexander, as if
he had been greatly in love with his Wife Glaphyra: for both which, Herod was
highly displeased with him.

In the year of the world 3996, he began to be diseased, who, lying at the Pool
of Bethesda, was, after thirty eight years, restored to health by Christ, Joh.
5. 5.

Alexander, Alexander reconciled to his Father.
by the subtilties of his adversaries, being even driven to desperation, was at
this time reconciled to his Father, by Archelaus, King of the Cappadocians, who
came to Jerusalem to visit Herod, and being accounted one of Herod's chief
Friends, received great gifts from him, and when he departed, Herod brought him
as far as Antioch.

Not long after, Herod goes again to Rome.
Herod went a third time to Rome to visit Caesar, in whose absence those
Thieves of Trachonis, whom Sylloeus had entertained, with their inrodes
infested not only Judaea, but all Coelosyria; Syllaeus affording them both
impunity and security.

Herod being returned from Rome, He returns and dedicates the Temple.
celebrated the Dedication of the Temple, re-edified by him in the space of
nine years and a half, on the very Birthday of his Kingdom, which he was wont
to celebrate with great joy, at which time he Sacrificed unto God three hundred
Oxen, and other of the people offered an innumerable company of Sacrifices,
every one according to his ability.

Herod finding that in his absence his People had sustained much damage by
those Thieves of Trachonis, Thieves do much mischief.
and seeing he could not subdue them, being under the protection of the
Arabian, he therefore entered Trachonis, and destroyed their Families, which yet
did but incense them the more; so that contemning all dangers, they molested
Herod's Countries with continual excursions, driving, and carrying away the
peoples Goods.

Herod, hereupon sent to the Presidents of Syria, Saturninus and Voluminous,
desiring that he might have the punishing of the Thieves of Trachonis, who by
their incursions had often wasted his Country. They, when they heard hereof,
being increased to the number of a thousand, began to waste both Fields and
Villages, cutting the throats of all that fell into their hands; wherefore
Herod demanded those Thieves to be delivered over to him, and withal, required
the sixty Talents that he had lent Obodas, upon Syllaeus his security, who had
thrust Obodas from the Government, and now ruled all himself: But Syllaeus
denied that the Thieves were in Arabia, and deferred also to pay the money;
whereupon the business was debated before Saturninus and Voluminous, and in
conclusion it was determined by them; that within thirty days space, both the
money should be repaid, and the runawayes of both Countries should be delivered
up, and Syllaeus swore by the Fortune of Caesar, before the Presidents of
Syria, that he would perform what was enjoined.

But when the time was expired, Syllaeus being unwilling to stand to the
agreement, went to Rome: and in the mean time Herod, by the permission of
Saturninus and Voluminous, to punish those obstinate people, raised an Army,
entered Arabia, and marched as far in three days as they used to do in seven;
Herod destroys the Thieves.
and when he came to the Castle where the Thieves kept, he took it at the first
assault, and demolished a Fortress also called Raeptu: and when a Captain of
the Arabians came to their aid, they joined Battle, in which few of the
Herodians were slain, but there dyed twenty five of the Arabians, together with
their Captain, whereupon the rest ^led. Being thus revenged of the Thieves, he
brought three thousand Idumaeans into Trachona, to restrain the Thieveries
committed there, and certified the Roman Generals, that he had only used that
power which they had granted, against those obstimate Arabians, which, upon
enquiry, they found to be true.

There were Letters posted away to Rome, Caesar incensed aga^^st him.
to Syllaeus, that related matters far otherwise, aggravating every thing after
their manner, by which Lies Caesar was so much incensed against Herod, that he
wrote threatening Letters to him, because he had marched with an Army out of his
own Kingdom without his leave: and he was so far provoked, that he would not
hear his Ambassadors, but dismissed them without an answer.

The Trachonites and Arabians taking hold of this occasion, molested the
Garrison of the Idumaeans, that Herod had set over them; but Herod being
affrighted with Caesar's anger, was fain to connive at it.

About this time Obodas, King of Arabia Nabathaea, dyed, and one Aeneas
succeeded him, who changed his name into Aretas; which Syllaeus hearing of at
Rome, endeavored by false accusations to have him thrust from the Kingdom, and
to get it to himself, bestowing much money upon the Courtiers, and promising
great things unto Caesar, whom he knew to be offended with Aretas, for assuming
the Kingdom without his consent. In the mean while, Aretas sent Letters, and
rich presents unto Caesar, and amongst them, a Crown worth many Talents: But
Caesar would not hear his Ambassadors, and scorned his Presents, and dismissed
them without any thing done.

Herod, being continually vexed with the insolences of the Arabians, sent
Nicholas Damascene to Rome, to see, if by the mediation of his Friends, he
could get Justice from Caesar: Herod falls out with his Sons, and imprisons
them.
But in the mean time the discord with his Sons that he had by Mariamne, was
greatly heightened by the artifices of Eurichus a Lacedemonian, which occasioned
Herod, to find out their supposed Treachery, to put to death by various
torments, many both of his own, and of his Sons Friends, yet could he find no
other evil by them; but some too free complaints of improvident young men,
concerning their Fathers immoderate cruelty, and his too easy harkening to
base pick-thanks, of the wicked deceits of their Brother Antipater, and of the
faction that was combined against them, and that, to free themselves from these
mischiefs, they were said to think of flying to Archelaus, King of Cappadocia,
which thing indeed they did not deny: Hereupon Herod cast them into Prison, as
if they had been convicted of Treason against their Father, resolving to punish
them according as his affairs went at Rome: and concerning this business he
sent Letters to Caesar by Voluminous the Roman General, and Olympius, his Friend.

At Rome, Nicholas Damascene joined himself to the Arabians, that came to
accuse Syllaeus, professing that he was his accuser also before Augustus, and
not Herod's defender, and this he did, lest he should be repulsed as others had
been before him. When by this means he had gotten access into Caesar's presence,
he indeed laid open many of Syllaeus his crimes, and withal added, that Caesar
was circumvented with his lies in the cause of Herod, which he confirmed by
certain authentic records: This so prevailed with Caesar, that he condemned
Syllaeus, and remanded him into the Province, that when he had satisfied the
debt he might be punished.

From this time Augustus was reconciled to Aretas, Caesar is reconciled to
Herod.
and Herod, and then received the Presents that before he had so often
rejected, and confirmed the Kingdom of the Arabians to Aretas. He advised Herod
also by his Letters, to call a Council of his Friends at Berytus, and joining
the Presidents of Syria with Archelaus the King of Cappadocia, by their joint
advice to determine of the business about his Sons.

About this time the Angel Gabriel (who long before had foretold to Daniel An
Angel appears to Zachary.
the coming of the Messiah by a certain number of Weeks) appeared at the right
side of the Altar of incense to Zachary the Priest, of the course of Abia,
telling him, that there should be born to him now in his old age, his Wise
Elizabeth also being well stricken in years, and barren, a Son Called John, a
Nazarite, and the forerunner of the Lord, in the spirit and power of Elias:
which he not believing, was made dumb, Luke. 1. 5. 22.

Herod having received Augustus his Letters, rejoiced exceedingly, both because
he was returned into his favor, and for that he had granted him power to do
what he would with his Sons, and hereupon he convened by messengers all those
that Caesar had appointed, to Berythus, except only Archelaus, and kept his
Sons not far from the place, Herod procures his Sons to be condemned.
in a City of the Sidonians: and the Case being opened, Saturninus, one that
had been Consul, delivered his opinion, but moderated with circumstances, that
Herod's Sons were to be condemned, but not to be put to death: After him, his
three Sons that were his Lieutenants, delivered their opinions to the same
purpose: But Voluminus pronounced, that they were to be punished with death,
whose opinion the major part followed: and so the Council being ended, Herod
took his Sons with him, and meeting with Nicholas Damascene at Tyrus, they went
together to Caesarea.

Here, Herod's cruelty.
whenas a certain old Soldier named Tyro, had smartly reprehended Herod for
his wickedness determined against his Sons, and told him that three hundred
more of his Captains were of the same opinion, Herod commanded him to be cast
into Prison: Trypho the Kings Barber, taking this occasion, accused Tyro for
that he had often solicited him to cut the Kings throat with his razor, as he
was trimming him, and immediately both Tyro and his Son, and the Barber were
tortured: and Herod bringing those three hundred Captains, and Tyro and his
Son, and the Barber, accused them before the People, against whom the people
throwing any thing that came next to hand, slew them every one.

Then were Alexander and Aristobulus led to Sebaste, Herod's Sons strangled.
and there strangled by their Fathers command, and their bodies were buried in
the Castle of Alexandrion, where Alexander, their Grandfather by the Mothers
side, and many of their Progenitors had been buried.

Antipater, Antipaters Treason,
when his Brethren were now dead, intended to remove his Father also out of the
way: and knowing that he was hated by many in the Kingdom, he endeavored by
Bribes to get the good will of his Fathers Friends, both at Rome and in Judea;
but especially of Saturninus, the President of Syria, and of Pheroras, and
Salome, the Brother and Sister of Herod.

At this time Herod sent home Glaphira, the Widow of his Son Alexander, to her
Father Archelaus the King of Cappadocia, and gave her a Dowry out of his
Treasury, lest some controversy should arise concerning it, and withal, he
took great care of the young children of Alexander and Aristobulus, which
Antipater took very heavily, fearing, lest when they should come to age, they
would hinder his designs: he sought therefore their destruction: and he so
overcame Herod by his flatteries, that he suffered him to marry the daughter of
Aristobulus, and his Son to marry the daughter of his Uncle Pheroras.

About this time Herod invited Zamaris, a Babylonian Jew, and gave him a
Country in Trachonis to inhabit, and this he did, that he might be a guard to
that Country against Thieves: and Zamaris coming with five hundred Horse, and
an hundred of his Kinsmen, erected Castles in diverse places of that Country, by
which means he secured the Jews that came from Babylon to the Feasts at
Jerusalem, from the Thieves,

Antipater working Treason against his Father, drew in his Uncle Pheroras and
some of the Kings women, that were most addicted to the Sect of the Pharisees,
except Salome, Of the Pharisees,
who constantly adhered to her Brother Herod. These Pharisees were a crafty
people, arrogant, and enemies to Kings, and they only of the whole Nation of
the Jews, refused to swear allegiance to Herod and Caesar, and were about six
thousand. For which cause Herod fined them, and the Wife of Pheroras paid their
fine for them, to whom, by way of requital, they foretold that the Kingdom
should be taken from Herod and his children, and be transferred upon her
Husband, and Her, and their children: these things Salome made known to Herod,
Herod slew some of them.
who, examining the business, put some of the Pharisees to death, and with
them, the Eunuch Dagoas, and his darling Carus, who was commended to him for
his handsomness; and besides these, all the rest of his Family whom he found to
have conspired with the Pharisees.

Herod having punished the Pharisees, called a Council of his Friends, and
before them began an accusation against the Wife of his Brother Pheroras, and
when Pheroras, though to gratify his Brother, would not forsake her, he forbad
Antipater Pheroras his company: and Antipater, that he might remove all
suspicion from himself, procured by his Friends, that his Father should send
him immediately to Augustus: Herod sends his Son to Caesar.
and accordingly Herod sent him with great Presents, and his Will, in which he
declared, that Antipater should succeed him in the Kingdom: But if he died
before him, then his Son that he had by Mariamne, the Daughter of Simon the
High Priest.

In the sixth month after John was conceived, The Angel appears to Mary.
the Angel Gabriel was sent to Nazareth in Galilee, to the blessed Virgin Mary
betrothed to Joseph, of the same Tribe with her: viz. of the stock of David,
and declared to her that she should bring forth the Son of God, and call his
name Jesus, and she being more fully taught of his admirable conception by the
power of the Holy Ghost overshadowing her, with great Faith, said, Be it to the
Handmaid of the Lord according to thy word, Luke 1. 26, 38. and presently after
she went into the Hill-Countrey, into a City of Judah, (viz. Hebron, a City of
the Priests, situated in the mountains of Judea, Josh. 21. 10, 11.) where,
when she entered into the House of Zachary, and saluted her Cousin Elizabeth,
the Babe sprang in her womb, and she, being filled with the Holy Ghost,
declared that Mary was blessed, etc. Luke 1. 39, 56.

Herod banished his Brother Pheroras into his Tetrarchy, Herod banished his
Brother.
because he would not part with his Wife, who swore that he would never return
till he heard of Herod's death, so that a little after, Herod falling sick, and
often sending for him to receive some private instructions, he refuled to come
for his Oathsfake.

When Elizabeth's time was come, John Baptist is born.
she brought forth a Son, who was called John, and Zacharies speech being
restored to him, he prophesied, saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc.
Luke 1. 57, 58. and Joseph finding his betrothed wife to be with child, thought
of putting her away privily, but being warned by God in a dream, he took her to
wife, Mat. 1. 24.

Pheroras falling sick, and Herod, Pheroras dies.
beyond expectation, being recovered, went to visit him, and very kindly sought
help for him, but he died within a few days after, whose Body was brought to
Jerusalem, and interred by Herod, who honored him with public mourning.

At this time, two of Pheroras's freed men declared to Herod, how he was killed
by poison, given him by Doris, the Mother of Antipater, which, whilst Herod
enquired into, by little and little he found out greater Villainies, and the
manifest Treasons of his Son Antipater; Antipaters' Treason.
who, when he went to Rome, had delivered a deadly poison to Pheroras, that was
sent him out of Egypt from his Uncle Theodore, the Brother of Doris,
wherewithal to make away his Father, that so the suspicion of the Parricide
should not lie upon him, being so far absent.

Hereupon, Herod put Doris out of the Palace, and took from her Jewels that
were worth many Talents: He also put from him his Wife Mariamne, the Daughter
of the High Priest, as a Partner of all these secrets, and blotted her Son out
of his Will, and deprived her Father of the High Priesthood, and substituted in
his room Matthias, the Son of Theophilus, that was born at Jerusalem.

Presently after came Bathillus, Antipaters freed man, from Rome, who being
tortured, confessed, that formerly he had brought poison, and given it to Doris
and Pheroras, that if the first proved too weak, they should be sure to
dispatch Herod with the second. There came also Letters from his Friends at
Rome, Antipaters Craft.
to the King, written by the entreaty of Antipater, in which Archelaus and
Philip, Herod's Sons, were accused, for often complaining of the death of
Alexander and Aristobulus, pitying the misfortune of their murdered Brethren:
For these young men were studying at Rome, and their Father had now commanded
their return: whereupon Antipater by great gifts corrupted those Friends, that
by their Letters they might make the young men suspected to their Father, who,
if they lived, might be an hindrance to his hopes.

About this time, Christ is born.
Augustus taxing all the Roman world, our Lord Christ was born, Luke 2. 4, 5.

Shortly after, there came Wise men from the East, the Star being their guide,
to Herod at Jerusalem, and there, being taught that the birthplace of Christ
was Bethlehem of Judea, thither they went, and entering into the house, which
was showed them by the Star that stood over it, they found the Child, and fell
down and worshipped him, etc. Mat. 2. 1. 12.

After the Angel of the Lord appeared unto Joseph in a dream, warning him to
fly into Egypt, Joseph flies into Egypt.
where he remained till the death of Herod, Mat. 2. 13, 14, 15.

Herod thinking that the Child was still at Bethlehem, Herod kills the children.
that he might destroy him amongst the rest, killed all the children which were
in Bethlehem, and in all the Coasts thereof, from two years old and under,
according to the time (of the Star first seen in the East) that he had enquired
of the Wise men, Mat. 2. 16.

Herod receiving Letters from Antipater from Rome, in which he signified, that
having dispatched all his business according to his own mind, he would shortly
return into his own Country; Herod ensnarers his Son.
he wrote back to him again, dissembling his anger, that he should make haste,
lest any thing should befall him in his absence, that he should not like of;
and also gently complaining of his Mother, he promised that he would remit all
differences at his return.

Antipater heard uo news all this while either of the death of Pheroras, or of
those things that were on foot against him, though there were seven months
space between the wickedness proved against him, Antipaters return.
and his return. For in his journey, at Tarentum he met with a Letter of the
death of Pheroras, and in Cilicia, those Letters of his Father that called him
back so hastily; and when he came to Celenderis, a Town of Cilicia, he began to
doubt of his return, hearing of, and being extreme sorrowful for the disgrace
of his Mother, yet failing forwards, he came to Sebaste, a Port of Caesarea,
where, being saluted by none, he went to Jerusalem.

It happened that Quintilius Varus was the same time at Jerusalem, being sent
as Successor to Saturninus into Syria, and then called thither by Herod to
assist him with his Counsel in those his weighty affairs. As they were sitting
both together, in comes Antipater, not knowing any thing, and in his purple
Garment that he used to wear, entering the Palace; but himself being entered, the
Guards suffered none of his followers to come in with him: As he was coming
near, his Father thrust him from him, reproaching him with the murder of his
Brethren, and his intention of poisoning his Father, telling him that the next
day Varus should hear, and determine all things betwixt them; and accordingly
the next day, Antipater accused by his Father.
Varus and the King sitting in Judgment, his Father himself first began the
accusation, and left the prosecution and confirmation thereof, to his old
Friend Nicholas Damascene, one that knew all the business; and when Antipater
could not clear himself from the crimes objected against him, Varus commanded
the poison that he had prepared for his Father to be brought forth, which being
given to a condemned main, killed him immediately: after which, Varus rose from
the Council, and the next day went to Antiochia: but Herod cast his Son into
Prison, and signified so much by Letters to Caesar: sending also messengers,
who by word of mouth might acquaint him with the cursed Treason of Antipater.

As these Messengers were posting to Rome, Herod's sickness.
Herod fell sick, and made his will, leaving his Kingdom to his youngest Son,
Herod Antipas, being exasperated against his two elder Sons, Archelaus and
Philip, by the false accusations of Antipater.

Judas the Son of Sariphaeus, and Matthias the Son of Margalothus, two of the
most Learned of the Jews, and best Interpreters of the Law, knowing that the
Kings sickness was incurable, persuaded some young men, that were their
Scholars, The Golden Eagle hewn down.
to throw down the Golden Eagle that was set up by Herod, over the great gate
of the Temple; who accordingly, going up at noon day, pulled, and hewed down
with their axes, the Eagle, a great multitude being in the Temple, and
beholding it: which, as soon as it was told the Captain, he came with a strong
Band of Soldiers, and laid hold upon some forty of the young men, together
with their Masters, and brought them to Herod: These constantly defending what
they had done, Herod commanded them to be bound, and sent them to Jericho: Then
calling for the Rulers of the Jews, into whose Assembly he was brought in a
Litter, by reason of his weakness, he complained to them, not so much of the
injury done to himself, as to God (as he said.) These denying that it was done
by their order, somewhat pacified him, only he took away the High Priesthood
from Matthias, whom he suspected not to be a stranger to that fact, and made
his Successor Jazer, the Brother of his Wife Mariamne, the Daughter of Simon
the High Priest; but he burned alive the other Matthias, Herod puts them to
death.
that was the author of this sedition, and his companions.

Herod's disease began now to grow worse: His sickness increases.
for he was burned with a slow fire, which was not perceived so much by the
outward touch, as by the inward effects of it, which burnt up his very Bowels:
He had also the disease called the Bulemia, or Dog-like appetite, which
provoked him to a continual desire of eating, and yet nothing would satisfy
him: He was also continually tormented with ulcers in his Bowels, and pains of
the Cholick: His feet swelled with a moist phlegm, and his thighs also: His
members rotted, and were full of worms, which occasioned an intolerable stink:
He was no less troubled with a Priapisme: and moreover was vexed with grievous
convulsions, and difficulty of breathing.

And though he was so grievously tormented, All means of cure fall him.
that every one judged that he could not be able to endure it long, yet he
hoped that he should break through it, being very careful to send for the
ablest Physicians, and sought medicines from every place: He went also beyond
Jordan, to the Hot Baths at Callirhoe, which run into the Asphaltite Lake,
which, beside the medicinal virtue, are pleasant, and good to be drunk: There
being, by the advice of his Physicians, set into a Bathing tub of oil, he
seemed to them to be giving up the Ghost, yet by the sudden crying out, and
lamentations of his Friends, he came to himself again, and now seeing no hope
of recovery, he commanded fifty Drachmaes to be given to every Soldier, and
having showed much liberality to his Captains and Friends, he returned again to
Jericho.

Augustus being told, that amongst the Children which Herod had caused to be
slain at Bethlehem, there was a Son also of his own slain, He said, That it was
better to be Herod's Hog than his Son.

Herod an Edict called together to Jericho all the most Noble of the Jews, and
when they came, he shut them all up together in a place called the Hippodrome,
giving command to his Sister Salome, and her Husband Alexus, that as soon as He
was dead, His cruelty.
they should cause his Soldiers to slay them all, that so the people might
have cause of sorrow, who otherwise (he feared) would rejoice at his death.

At this time Letters came from Rome, from the Ambassadors whom He had sent to
Caesar, wherein they certified him, that the Emperor left Antipater to his
Fathers pleasure, either to banish, or to put him to death. Herod hearing this,
was a little cheared: but presently his torments returning, and being greedy of
meat, He attempts to murder himself.
He called for an apple, and a knife to pare it, intending with the knife to
have stabbed himself, which also he attempted: but Archelaus, his Nephew,
prevented him, and holding his right Hand, called for help. This accident
caused much sorrow, fear, and tumult through the whole Palace, as if Herod had
been dead.

Antipater perceiving the noise, thought verily that his Father was dead, and
thereupon began to tamper with his Keeper about letting him out, promising him
great Rewards, both for the present, and for the future, when it would lie in
his power amply to reward him: This his practice the Keeper told to the King,
who, for indignation cried, and though he was so near death yet did he raise up
himself on his Bed, and commanded one of his Guard to go presently and kill
Antipater, Antipater slain.
and to bury him in the Castle of Hyrcanion, without any honor, which was done
accordingly.

Then did He make a new Testament: for Antipas, Herod's Will.
whom before he had made Successor to his Kingdom, he made Tetrarch of Galilee
and Petrea: To his Son Philip he assigned the Regions of Gaulanitis,
Trachonitis, Batanaea and Pancada, the name of a Tetrarchy, but he gave the
Kingdom to his Son Archelaus: To his sister Salome he gave Jamnia, Azotus, and
Thasaelis, with five hundred thousand Drachmaes: To the rest of his Kindred he
gave money and yearly Pensions. To Caesar he gave ten Millions of Drachmaes of
silver, and all his Plate, as well of Gold as of Silver, and a great quantity
of precious movables: and to Livia, Caesar's Wife, and some certain Friends, he
gave five Millions of Drachmaes.

Having thus ordered these things, His Death.
five days after Antipater was put to death, he dyed himself, having enjoyed
the Kingdom 34 years after the death of Antigonus: but from the time that he
was declared King by the Romans 37 years, about the 25th of our November, in
the year of the world 4001, and after the Birth of Christ, about two years.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF HANNIBAL THE GREAT,
HANNIBAL, the Son of Amilcar was about twenty six years old, Hannibal chosen
General.
when he was chosen General of the Carthaginian Forces in Spain. He was elected
by the Army as soon as Asdrabal (their late General) was dead, and the election
was approved, and confirmed by the Senate or Carthage, wherewith Hanno, and his
faction was nothing pleased. This was now the third of the Barchine Family (so
called of Amilcar, whose surname was Barcas) that commanded in chief over the
men of War. Hanno therefore and his Partisans, being neither able to tax the
Virtue of their enemies, nor to perform the like services to the Commonwealth,
had nothing left whereby to value themselves, excepting the general
reprehensions of War, and cautelous advise of not provoking the Romans: but
they were little regarded. For the Carthaginians saw apparently, that the Oath
of the Romans to the Articles of Peace, was like to hold no longer, than till
the Romans could find some good advantage to renew the War. It was therefore
rather desired by the Carthaginians, that whilst they were in a fit condition,
the War should begin, rather than in some unhappy time of Famine or Pestilence,
or after some great loss in their Army or Fleet, they should be driven to yield
to the impudent demands of their insulting enemies.

This disposition of his Citizens Hannibal well enough understood. Neither was
he ignorant that in making War with the Romans it was no small advantage to get
the start of them. Could he but bring his Army into Italy, he hoped to find
Friends and assistance, even from those People, that helped to increase the
Armies of the Romans. But his design must be carried privately, or else it
would be prevented. He resolved therefore to lay Siege to Saguntum in Spain,
where he now was with his Army, which might seem not greatly to concern the
Romans, and would highly please the Carthaginians.

Having resolved hereupon, nevertheless he went orderly to work, beginning with
those that lay next in his way. First therefore he entered into the Territory
of the Olcades, and besieging Althaea, He besieges, and takes many Towns.
in a few days he became Master, not only of it, but of all the other Towns in
their Country; and the Winter coming on, he rest his Army in New Carthage, or
Carthagena, imparting liberally to his Soldiers of the Spoils that he had
gotten in his late Conquests.

In the Spring he made War upon the Vaccaei, and with little difficulty wan,
first Salamanca, and after it Arbucala, though not without a long Siege and
much difficulty: But in his return he was put to the height both of his Valor,
His Valor, and Policy.
and Prudence. For all such of the Vaccaei that could bear Arms, being made
desperate by the spoil of their Country, with diverse others that had escaped in
the late overthrow, joining with the Toletans, made up an Army of one hundred
thousand able men, waiting for Hannibal on the Banks of the River Tagus. They
knew that he was very adventurous, and had never turned his back upon any
enemy, and therefore hoped, that having him at such an advantage, they should
easily have foiled him. But at this time our Great Man of War, knew as well how
to dissemble his Courage, as at other times to make good use of it. For he
withdrew himself from the River side, as seeming fearful to pass over it,
aiming thereby to draw over that great multitude from their Banks of advantage.
The Spaniards, as Hannibal expected and desired, thinking that he retreated out
of fear, thrust themselves in a disordered manner into the River, to pursue
him. But when Hannibal saw them well near over, he turned back his Elephants to
entertain them at their landing, and thrust his Horsemen, both above and
beneath them into the River, who by the advantage of their Weapons slew almost
all of those in the River without resistance, His Victory.
and then pursued the rest, who being amazed, fled, and so he made a very great
slaughter of them.

The Saguntines perceiving the strom drawing near to them, hastened their
Ambassadors to Rome, who complained that they were like to be undone, only for
their Friendship to the Romans. This so moved the Senate, that some would have
War presently proclaimed, both by Sea, and Land, and the Consuls sent with
Armies, one into Spain, the other into Africa: But others went more soberly to
work (according to the Roman gravity) whereby it was concluded, that
Ambassadors should be sent into Spain, to view the State of their Confederates.

These Ambassadors found Hannibal at Carthagena, where they had Conference
with him, who carried himself so reservedly, that they departed, as doubtful as
they came. But whilst they were passing to and fro, Hannibal prepared, not only
his Forces, but some Roman pretenses against Saguntum. For the Tudetani, who
were Neighbors to the Saguntines, complained to him of sundry wrongs that they
had received from them of Saguntum: Probably Hannibal himself had hatched some
of them. Having therefore such an occasion, he sat down with his whole Army
before Saguntum. He besieges Saguntum.
The Romans were glad of the Quarrel, as hoping that Carthage, with all
belonging thereto, would in short space become their own. Yet were they not
hasty to threaten before they were ready to strike; but meant to temporize
until they had an Army in readiness to be sent into Spain, where they intended
to make Saguntum, the seat of War.

In the beginning of Hannibals Siege, his Carthaginians were much discouraged
by reason of the brave Sallies which the Saguntines made upon them, in one of
which Hannibal himself received a dangerus wound in the Thigh that made him
unable to stir for many days. Yet in the mean time he was not unmindful of his
business, but gave order to build certain movable Towers that might equal those
upon the City Walls, and to prepare to batter the Curtains, and to make a
breach. These being sinished and applied, had soon wrought their desired
effect. A large breach was made by the fall of some Towers, whereat a hot
assault was given: But it was so gallantly defended by the besieged, that the
Carthaginians were not only beaten from the breach, and out of some ground
within the City, which in the first fury they had wan, but they were pursued
even to their own Trenches and Camp. Yet at length the Carthaginian Army
(wherein were one hundred and fifty thousand men) did so tire out the Townsmen
by their continual Allarms, that at length it gat into the Town, and had been
Masters of it, but that they were hindered by some Counter-works which the
besieged had raised.

In this extremity there was one Alcon, that came out of the City to treat with
Hannibal, who would give no other terms but these hard ones, That they should
deliver up to him all the Gold, Silver, and Plate, and other Riches which they
had in the City; That the Citizens should leave the City, and take up such
other habitations as he should appoint them; neither should they carry any more
out with them, save the clothes on their back. These terms seemed so
unreasonable to Alcon, that he durst not return into the City to propound them
to the Citizens. Yet might they far better have submitted thereto, how hard
soever, because thereby they might have saved their lives, Saguntum taken.
and the honor of their Wives and Daughters, whereas, the City being shortly
after taken by storm, they saw their Wives and Daughters defloured before their
Faces, and all put to the Sword that were above fourteen years of age. The
Treasures found in Saguntum, which were very great, Hannibal reserved,
therewith to pay his Army. The Slaves, and other booty, he divided amongst his
Soldiers, reserving some choice things, wherewith to present his Friends at
Carthage, to encourage them to the War.

This news exceedingly vexed the Romans, Roman Ambassadors sent to Carthage.
being angry at their own slowness to send help to Saguntum, which held out
eight Months, looking still for succor but in vain. Then did the Romans send
Ambassadors to Carthage, to demand whether this act were done by their done by
their consents, or whether it were Hannibals presumption alone? If they granted
the former, they were to give them defiance. Answer was made them in the Senate
of Carthage by one of the Senators, to this effect. That by this Message the
Commonwealth of Carthage, was urged to plead Guilty, or nor Guilty: That it
belonged to them to call their own Commanders in question, The Carthaginians
answer.
and to punish them according to their Faults; but to the Romans to challenge
them if they had done any thing contrary to their late League and Covenant. Its
true (said this Speaker) that in our negotiations with Luctatius your
Ambassador, the Allies of both Nations were comprehended, but the Sanguntines
were not then your Allies, and therefore no parties to the Peace then made: For
of your Allies for the future, or of ours, there was no question: As for the
last agreement between you and Asdrubal, wherein you will say that the
Saguntines were comprehended, its you that have taught us how to answer that
particular. For whatsoever you found in the Treaty between us and Luctatius, to
your disadvantage, you said it was his presumption, as promising those things
for which he had not Commission from your Senate: If then it be lawful for you
to disavow the Actions of your Ambassadors and Commanders, concluding any thing
without precise Warrant from you; the same liberty may we also assume, and hold
our selves no way bound in honor to perform the contract that Asdrubal made
for us, without our Command, and Consent.

In conclusion, the Carthaginian Senate moved the Roman Ambassadors to tell
them plainly the purposes of those that sent them? whereupon Q. Fabius,
gathering up the skirt of his Gown, as if something had been in the hallow
thereof, made this short reply, I have here in my Gown-skirt both Peace and
War; Make you (my Masters of the Senate) election which you will have. All
answered, even which of them you have a fancy to offer us. War denounced by the
Romans.
Then (quoth Fabius) take War, and share it amongst you. Which all the Assembly
willingly accepted.

War being thus proclaimed, Hannibal resolved not to put up his Sword which he
had drawn against the Saguntines, till he had therewith opened his passage to
the Gates of Rome. So began the second Punick War; indeed second to none that
ever the People of Rome met with. Hannibal wintered at Carthagena, giving
license to his Spanish Soldiers to visit their Friends, and refresh themselves
against the Spring. In the mean while he gave Instructions to his Brother
Asdrubal for the Government of Spain in his absence. Hannibal prepares for
Italy.
He also took order to send many Troops of Spaniards into Africa, to supply the
rooms of those Africans which he had drawn into Spain, as also that the one
Nation might remain as Pledges for the other. He selected also four thousand
Foot, all young Men, and Persons of Quallity, out of the best Cities of Spain,
which were to be Garrisoned in Carthage it self, not so much to strengthen it,
as that they might serve for Hostages. He also left with his Brother, to guard
the Coasts, and Ports, fifty seven Galleys, whereof thirty seven were ready
Armed. Of Africans and other Nations, Strangers, he left with him above twelve
thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, besides one and twenty Elephants.

Having thus taken order for the defense of Spain and Africa, he sent some to
discover the Passages of the Pyrenaean Mountains that part Spain from France;
and of the Alps, that part France from Italy. He sent Ambassadors to the
Inhabitants of the Pyrenes, and to the Gauls to obtain a quiet passage, that he
might bring his Army entire into Italy. These being returned with good
satisfaction: In the beginning of the Spring he passed over the River of Iberus
with an Army of ninety thousand Foot, and twelve thousand Horse.

All those parts of Spain which had not before been entered, He Conquers much
of Spain.
he now subdued; and appointed one Hanno to Govern Spain on the east side of
Iberus, with whom he left ten thousand Foot, and one thousand Horse. When he
came to the borders of Spain, some of his Spanish Soldiers returned home
without asking leave; which, that others also might not attempt, he courteously
dismissed such as were willing to be gone: Hereby the Journey seemed the less
tedious to such as accompanied him voluntarily. With the rest of his Army,
consisting now but of fifty thousand Foot, and nine thousand Horse, he passed
the Pyrenes, and entered into Gaul (now France:) His passage through France.
But he found the Gauls bounding upon Spain ready in Arms, to forbid his
entrance into their Country: but with gentle Speech, and rich Presents, which
he sent to their Leaders, he wan them to favor his expedition. So without any
other molestation, he came to the Banks of Rhodanus, where dwelt on each side
of the River a People called Volcae. These being unacquainted with the cause of
his coming, sought to stop his passage over the Water: But he was greatly
assisted by those of Vivarets, and Lionois: for though many of them had
transported themselves, and their goods into Daulphine, thinking to defend the
Banks against him; yet such as remained, being willing to free their Country
from such unwelcome Guests, they helped him to make Boats: informed him of a
better passage higher up the River, and sent him Guides.

When his Boats were ready, He is opposed.
he sent Hanno the Son of Bomilcar, up the River, to the Ford, and himself in
the mean time made a show of entering the Ford below, that Hanno charging the
Gauls on their own side, and himself at the same time passing the River in
their faces, might win the further Bank, which was done accordingly, His
Victory in France.
though with some difficulty, and thereby the enemies were dispersed.

Having passed this first brunt, and overcome both the rage of the River, and
those that defended it, he was visited by the Princes of the Cisalpine-Gauls,
that inhabited Piemout and Milan, who had lately revolted from the Romans.
These informed him that the passage over the Alps was not so difficult as
report made it, Some Gauls encourage him.
and gave him Guides, with many other encouragements. Yet found he himself
extremly encumbered by the Savoyards, He passes the Alps.
and lost more of his Carriages and Carthaginians than he could well spare. For
he was twice strongly assaulted by them before he could recover the Plains on
the other side. He was fifteen days passing over the Alps, wherein, besides
the trouble of his enemies, he was much assaulted by foul weather, and Snow, it
being now the beginning of Winter. But the fair and fertile plains which they
now were entering into, with the assistance and encouragement of the Cisalpine
Gauls, gave them much comfort, having nothing else of difficulty remaining, but
that which from the beginning they made account to overcome by their proper
Valor and Resolution, namely, the Roman Armies and resistance.

The Roman Ambassadors who had denounced War at Carthage, in their return
homewards, took Spain in their way, with a purpose to draw into their Alliance
as many Cities and Princes as they could. The first that they attempted were
the Volcians, from whom they received this answer: that they would never join
with them who had forsaken the Saguntines in their greatest need; and that
themselves had found the Carthaginians such good Neighbors, that they meant
still to adhere to them. From Spain the Ambassadors passed through Gaul,
persuading them not to suffer Hannibal to pass through their Country, and
gloried much in their own strength: But the Gauls laughed them to scorn, and
had scarce Patience to hear them speak: telling them that they meant not to set
their own Houses on fire, to save the Romans from burning; that the
Carthaginians had never offended them as the Romans had done, who had already
forced some of them out of their habitations, and made others Tributaries, who
were as free as themselves.

With these unpleasing answers the Ambassadors returned home; carrying no good
news of Friends like to help them, but rather that the Gauls intended to take
part with their enemies. And accordingly when the Cisalpine-Gauls heard that
the Carthaginians had passed Iberus, The Gauls rise against the Romans.
and were marching toward Rome, the Boij, and Insubrians rose up against the
Romans: Their quarrel was the late planting of Roman Colonies at Cremona, and
Placentia, within Territories. Relying therefore upon the Carthaginian succor,
which they thought to be at hand, laying aside all regard of those Hostages,
that they had lately given to the Romans, they fell upon those Colonies. The
Towns they could not win, but they forced the Roman Commissioners which were
abroad, They besiege Modena.
to fly into Modena, where they besieged them. But the Gauls, having little
skill in besieging Cities, grew weary, and were desirous of Peace: This they
did on purpose to draw on some meeting, that laying hands on the Roman
Deputies, they might with them redeem their Hostages; and it fell out in part
according to their wish: For Ambassadors coming to them from Rome to treat
with them, they made them Prisoners. Manlius the Praetor hearing of this
outrage, marched with his Army to relieve the Besieged. But the Gauls laid an
Ambush in his way, that falling upon him, utterly routed him, and slew most of
his Army, except a few that escaped into a defensible place upon the River Po.
This being heard of at Rome, C. Atilius, the other Praetor, hasted with another
Army to relieve the besieged.

But as the Gauls were too hastly, The Romans send an Army, into Spain.
so the Romans were too slow in the beginning of this War. For they could not
believe that Carthage, which had almost servilely endured so many indignities
from them in the late peace, durst be so bold on a sudden, as to attempt the
Conquest of Italy it self. Wherefore they appointed one of their Consuls to
make War in Spain, and the other in Africa. Titus Sempronius went into Africa
with one hundred and sixty Galleys of five to an Oar, which preparations seemed
to threaten Carthage her self. P. Cornelius Scipio, the other Consul, hasted
toward Spain, and by the way, touching at Massilia, he was there informed,
that Hannibal had passed the River Rhodanus, whom he had thought to have found
busy in Spain. Hannibal also heard of the Consuls arrival, with whom he meant
to have nothing to do. Yet both sent forth Scouts, Hannibal sent out five
hundred Numidians, and Scipio three hundred of his best Horse. They met, and
fought, and the Romans had the better of it. But when Scipio drew near,
thinking to have met with the Carthaginians, he found that they were gone three
days before, with an intent to see the Walls of Rome.

Scipio hereupon sent his Brother Cn. Cornelius Scipio into Spain, with the
greatest part of the Army, against Asdrubal, and himself with the choicest
returned back, and landing at Pisa, he marched through Tuscany and Lumbardy,
where he drew together the broken Bands of Manlius and Atilius, who were lately
beaten by the Gauls, intending therewith to oppose the enemy, thinking to find
them tired with their long Journey.

Five months Hannibal had spent in that tedious march from Carthagena.
Hannibals losses in his march.
When he had passed Rhodanus, he had in his Army but thirty eight thousand
Foot, and eight thousand Horse, the rest having perished with Diseases,
Enemies, Rivers, and Mountains. Having newly passed the Alps, and scarce
refreshed his wearied Army in Piemont, he sought the Friendship of the Taurini,
who being at this time in War with the Insubrians, (his good Friends) the
Taurini refused it; whereupon he besieged their chief Town, and in three days
wan it, the spoil whereof did much encourage his Army, and the othere Calamity
terrified their Neighbors. Most of those parts would willingly have joined
with Hannibal, but when the Consul Scipio came amongst them, they began to be
better advised. This wavering affection amongst the People, made the Generals
to hasten to a Battle. Their meeting was at Ticinum [now Pavia] where each of
them wondered at the others expedition.

The Senate at Rome were much amazed at Hannibals arrival in Italy: wherefore
they sent presently to Sempronius and the other Consul, now in Sicily, Hannibal
prepares to fight.
to give him notice of it, and to require him speedily to return with his Army
for the safeguard of Italy, which accordingly he did. Scipio and Hannibal were
now so near, that fight they must e're they could part, and therefore each of
them encouraged their Soldiers by the best Arguments they had: Hannibal
assuring his men, that there was no mean betwixt Victory and Death.

When the Armies approached near each to other, A Battle.
Scipio sent forth his Horsemen of the Gauls to begin the fight, lining them
with his Darters for their assistance; himself, with his men at Arms followed
slowly in good order. The Gauls, being in their Generals sight, behaved
themselves gallantly, and were as bravely opposed; but their Darters at the
very first, ran cowardly away without casting a Dart, for fear of being trodden
down by the enemies Horse. Yet did the Gauls maintain it stoutly, and did more
hurt than they received: neither was Scipio unmindful to relieve them;
wherefore he adventured him self so far, that he received a dangerous wound,
and had there perished, if his Son (afterward called Africanus) had not
brought him off. Whilst the Romans were busy in helping their Consul, an
unexpected storm assailed them at their backs: Hannibal had appointed his
Numidian Horsemen to charge the Romans in their Flank, so and to compass them
about, whilst he, with his men at Arms, sustained their charge, and met them in
the face. The Numidians performed it well, cutting in pieces the scattered Foot
that ran away at the first encounter, and then falling on the backs of those
that charged Hannibal, by this impression the Romans were shuffled together,
and routed, The Romans beaten.
betaking themselves to their heels, and leaving to their enemies the honor of
the day.

Scipio perceiving how things were like to go, almost stole the Retreat with
most of his Footmen yet unbroken, and recovered the Bridge over Ticinus: but
notwithstanding his have, he lost six hundred of his men which brought up his
Rear, and should have broken down the Bridge. It was two days after, e're
Hannibal could pass the River; Scipio in the mean time refreshing his men, and
easing himself of his wound in Placentia: But when Hannibal presented them
Battle again, and they durst not accept of it; the Gauls which before assisted
the Romans out of fear, took courage, and left them; and thinking that now the
time was come for the recovery of their Liberty, that night they fell upon the
Roman Camp, wounded, and slew many, especially of those that kept the Guard,
The Gauls forsake the Romans.
with whose Heads in their hands they fled over to the Carthaginians, and
presented their service: Hannibal received them exceeding courteously, and sent
them to their own homes, that they might persuade the rest of the Nation to
become his Confederates.

The same night the Consul stole a retreat, as he had done before, but not with
the like success: For Hannibal had an eye upon him, and e're he was gone far,
Hannibal beats the Consul.
he sent his Numidians after him, and himself followed with the Body of his
Army. Then had the Romans received a great blow, but the Numidians, greedy of
prey, fell to ransacking their Camp, and thereby gave them liberty of escaping,
only some in the Rear were either slain, or taken Prisoners. Scipio being
unable to travel by reason of his wound, and judging it meet to stay for the
coming of his fellow Consul, entrenched himself strongly upon the Banks of the
River Trebia; which so diminished his Reputation, that every day more of the
Gauls fell to Hannibal; amongst whom came in the Boij, that brought with them
the Roman Commissioners: Hitherto they had kept them as Pledges, wherewith to
recover their own Hostages; but now they delivered them to Hannibal as tokens
of their affection to him. Hannibal being in great want of Victuals he
attempted the taking of Clastidium, wherein the Romans had laid all their Store
and Ammunition, He wins Clastidium.
and a Brundusian that had the keeping of it, surrendered it to him for a little
money.

The news of these disasters coming to Rome, filled the Senate and People with
a desire of revenge, their Foot wherein their greatest strength lay, being yet
entire: they therefore hasted away Sempronius with his Army, who, by speedy
marches came to Scipio, upon the Banks of Trebia. The Consuls took Counsel what
was fittest to be done, now that their Armies were conjoined: Sempronius was
eager to fight before Scipio recovered of his wound, that he might get the
whole glory of the Victory: He also feared the election of new Consuls, his
time being almost expired: But Scipio persuaded the contrary, by many
arguments: yet would not Sempronius be taken off, wherewith Hannibal was
exceedingly pleased, who feared nothing so much as delays. To further the
desire of Sempronius, the Gauls that inhabited near to Trebia, complained of
injuries done to them by the Carthaginians. Indeed they neglected to supply
Hannibal with necessaries, and therefore he was bold to be his own Carver.
Hereupon Sempronius sent forth a thousand Horse, Hannibals Forrages beaten.
which coming unlooked for upon Hannibals Forragers, who were heavy laden, they
cut many of them in pieces, and chased the rest even to their Camp. This
indignity made the Carthaginians to sally out, who caused them to retire faster
than they came: Sempronius relieved his own men, and Hannibal did the like: So
that at length the Roman Army was drawn forth, and Battle offered, if the
Carthaginians had not refused it.

This Victory (for so the Consul would name it) made the Romans very desirous
to try it out in open Field, notwithstanding Scipios diswasion from it. This
Hannibal was informed of by the Gauls that were in the Roman Camp: therefore he
resolved to secure the Victory by adding a Stratagem to his Forces. He found in
a hallow place overgrown with Reeds, a fit Trench to cover an Ambush: Therein
he cast his Brother Mago with a thousand choice Horse, and as many Foot. The
rest of his Army, when he had well fed, and refreshed them, he led into the
Field and marched toward the Consuls. Early in the morning he had sent over
the River some Numidian Horsemen to brave the enemy, and draw him forth to a
bad Dinner before he had broken his Fast. Sempronius readily embraced the
opportunity of fighting, and forthwith sent over the River in a miserable cold
day, his Footmen, who were almost to the Arm-holes, which together with the
want of Food, did much enfeeble them: The Romans were stoing in Foot, Another
Battle
having in all thirty six thousand: The Mass of those were ranged in a gross
Battalion, guarded on the Flanks with three thousand Horse, thrusting their
light armed and Darters in loose Companies before the rest in the nature of a
Vaunt-guard. The Carthaginians equalled them in Foot, and exceeded them in
Horse: when therefore the Roman Horse were broken by the Numidians: when their
Foot were charged, both in Front and Flank, by the Spaniards, Gauls, and
Elephants, and when all were pressed in the Rear by Mago and his Men out of the
Ambush, then fell the Romans by heaps under their Enemies Swords, The Romans
beaten.
and were beaten down as well fighting as flying, so that of thirty six
thousand, there escaped no more than ten thousand of all sorts.

The remainder of this broken Army was collected by Scipio, who got therewith
into Placentia, stealing away the same Night, which was very rainy. Sempronius
escaped with great danger, and fled to Rome, where he did his Office in
choosing new Consuls for the year following, and then returned to his Province
with a fresh supply against Hannibal.

The Winter proved very sharp, and unfit for service, which well pleased the
Romans, who lay warm in Placentia, and Cremona. Yet did not Hannibal suffer
them to lie very quiet, but vexed them with continual Alarms, assaulting diverse
places, and taking some. He also wan the Lygurians to him, who, to testify
their faithful love, presented him with two Roman Questors, [Treasurers,] two
Colonels, and five young Gentlemen; the Sons of Senators. Hannibals Policy.
These and all his other Prisoners, Hannibal held in straight places, laden
with Irons, and miserably fed. But there followers he entreated courteously,
and sent them to their own Countries without ransom, protesting that he
undertook the War in Italy to free them from the oppression of the Romans. By
these means he drew many to his party, and assistance. But some of the Gauls,
Treacheries against him.
fearing that their Country should be made the seat of War, conspired against
his Life: others discovered the danger to him, who yet, soon after, were ready
to practice the same; which enforced Hannibal to use Perukes and false Beards
the better to conceal himself from them.

At length when Summer was come, he resolved to leave these giddy Companions
and so passed the Appenine Hills that he might approach nearer to Rome. So away
he went having his Army much recruted with Ligurians and Gauls; and to prevent
the obstructions in the ordinary way, he chose to travel through the Fennes of
Tuscany. His dangerous march.
In those Marshes and Bogs he lost all his Elephants save one, with one of his
own eyes, through the moistness of the Air, and by lodging on the cold Ground:
Yet at last with much ado, he recovered the firm and fertile Plains, and
Quartered about Arretium, where he somewhat refreshed his weary Army, and heard
news of the Roman Consuls.

C. Flaminius and Cn. Servilius, were newly chosen Consuls for this year: The
first a tractable man, wholly governed by the Senate; the other a hotheaded
man, who fearing some obstruction, gat him out of the City before the day of
Election, that he might, as soon as he was chosen, take possession of his
Office: fearing lest he should lose his Honor, which he hoped to gain in the
War. The Senators were so displeased at this, that they sent for him back; but
he neglected their Command, and hasted to meet with the Carthaginians, whom he
found at Arretium.

Hannibal was well pleased with the fiery disposition of this Consul, and
therefore provoked him by many indignities, hoping thereby to draw him to
fight, ere Servilius came with the rest of the Army. For which end he put to
Fire and Sword all the Country round about him, even under the Consuls Nose. By
this Flaminius thought his Honor to be much impaired, and therefore advanced
toward the Enemy. Many advised him to stay for his Colleague, but he would not
be persuaded: Then he commanded the Army to march.

All the Territory of Cortona as far as to the Lake of Thrasymene was on a
light Fire, which, whilst Flaminius thought to quench with his enemies blood,
he pursued Hannibal so unadvisedly, that he fell, with his whole Army into an
Ambush: from thence he was charged unaware from all sides, so that he knew not
which way to turn, nor how to make resistance. There was he slain in that
place, accompanied with the Carcasses of fifteen thousand of his Countrymen:
About six thousand of his Vantguard took courage out of desparation, and
breaking through their Enemies, they recovered the tops of the Mountains: but
being discovered there, Maharbal was sent after them, The Romans beaten again.
who overtook them by Night in a Village, and surrounded them with his Horse,
and so they yielded, rendering up their Arms upon promise of life and liberty.
This accord Hannibal refused to confirm, and so made them all Prisoners.

At this time he had about fifteen thousand Prisoners: all that were not Romans
he set free without ransom, still protesting, that for their sakes he came
into Italy: But the Romans he kept in straight Prison, and held them to hard
meat.

Presently after the Battle of Thrasymene, C. Sempronius, with four thousand
Horse came near to Hannibals Camp. He was sent from Ariminum by Servilius, the
other Consul, to increase the strength of Flaminius, but coming too late, he
only increased the misadventure. Hannibal sent out Maharbal to intercept him,
who finding them amazed at the ill news of the late loss, The Romans beaten.
charged, and brake them, killing almost half of them, and drew the rest simply
to yield to mercy. Servilius hearing of the overthrow and death of his
Colleague, hasted to Rome for the defense of it.

Greatly were the Romans amazed at these disasters, Great fear at Rome.
and their approaching danger. Wherefore they had recourse to a remedy which
had been long out of use, and that was, to choose a Dictator, whose power was
above the Consuls, and scarcely subject to the Control of the whole City: And
now they chose Q. Fabius Maximus, A Dictator chosen.
the best reputed Man of War in the City, and Fabius chose M. Minutius Rufus,
Master of the Horse, who was as the Dictators Lieutenant.

The first act of Fabius was the reformation of somewhat that was amiss in
matter of Religion: then were the Walls and Towers of Rome repaired, and
fortified, the Bridges upon Rivers were broken down, and all care taken for the
defense of Rome it self. Four Legions the Dictator raised in have, and from
Ariminum he received the Army which Servilius had conducted thither. With these
he marched apace after Hannibal, not to fight, but to affront him. Fabius his
watiness.
He always lodged upon high grounds, and of hard access, knowing that the Roman
Horse were far inferior to the Numidians. Hannibal in the mean while pursued
his Victory, and ranged over all the Countries, using all manner of cruelty
toward the Inhabitants, especially those of the Roman Nation, of whom he put
all to the Sword that were able to bear Arms. Passing by Spoletum, and Ancona,
he encamped upon the Adriatic shores, refreshing his diseased and over
traveled Army: and armed his Africans, after the Roman manner, and made his
dispatches for Carthage, presenting his Friends, (which were very many) with
part of the Spoils that he had gotten.

Having refreshed his Army, cured his wounded, and fed his Horses, he followed
the course of the Adriatic Shore toward Apulia, a Northern Province of the
Kingdom of Naples, spoiling all that lay in his way. Yet took he not one City
in all those Countries. Indeed he assaied Spoletum, but finding it well
defended, Hannibals Policy.
he presently gave it over. All his care was to weaken the Romans in force and
reputation; knowing that when he was absolute Master of the Field, if would not
be long before the walled Cities would open their Gates to him. To this end he
presented Fabius with Battle, and provoked him with all manner of bravado's;
but Fabius would not bite: His design was to attend the Carthaginians so near
as to keep them from straggling, Fabius his Wisdom.
and to preserve the Country from utter spoil. Thus by degrees he inured his
Men to dangers, and brought them first to look on the Lion afar off, that at
length they might adventure to sit on his tail.

But Minutius had a contrary disposition, and was as fiery as Flaminius, taxing
Fabius with cowardliness and fear; yet nothing moved this wary Dictator: He
suffered Hannibal to cross the Apennine Mountains, and to fall upon the rich
and pleasant Territories of Campania: Fabius still keeping upon the Hills, and
fast grounds. When Hannibal saw that he could by no means draw him to fight,
and that the Winter drew on, he resolved to rest his Army that was laden with
spoil, in some safe and plentiful Country till the Spring came again. But
before he could do this, he must pass along by the Dictators Camp, that hung
over his head: For there was no other way for him to get out of this fertile
Country which he had already wasted. But by the error of his Guide he was
brought (as it were) into a pinfold. Now began the wisdom of Fabius to be
admired, and applauded, as if he had caught the Carthaginians in a trap. But
Hannibal freed himself by a fine invention: He had gotten about two thousand
Kine, Hannibals Stratagem.
upon whose Horns he tied dry Fagots, and in the dark Night setting them on
fire, he caused them to be driven up the Hill. The sight was strange and
terrible to the Romans, and Fabius himself thinking it to be a devise to
circumvent him, kept within his Trenches. So Hannibal and his Army escaped the
danger, and gat into a safe Country. Then did he make semblance of marching
toward Rome, the Dictator coasting him after the wonted manner; and keeping
still on the high grounds betwixt him and the City, whilst the Carthaginians
wasted all the plain Countries, and taking Geryon in Apulia, he turned it into
Barns and Storehouses for the Winter, and encamped under the broken Walls. Thus
little was done till the Dictator was called home to Rome about some business
of Religion; and when he went, he left the Army in charge with Minutius, the
Master of the Horse.

Minutius was glad of this opportunity to show his sufficiency. He was
persuaded that the Romans in plain Field would beat the Carthaginians, who had
got the former Victories by subtilty, and ambushes. All the Army was of his
opinion, and therefore they preferred his forwardness before the cold wariness
of Fabius: Hereupon he resolved to Fight, though he had been peremtorily
forbidden by the Dictator, and the breach of whose command was Death: But
Minutius thought that the honor of the Victory, and love of the Army, would
secure him. Hannibal on the other side was very glad that he should play with a
more adventurous Gamster: therefore he drew near, and provoked the Romans,
sending forth a third part of his Army to wast the Country. There was a piece
of high and advantageous Ground between the two Armies: Hannibal sent two
thousand Horse to seize upon it: But Minutius by fine force, won it from them,
and encamped upon it, whereby he became a nearer Neighbor to Hannibal.

Minutius for many days not stirring, Hannibal sent forth many of his men to
fetch in Harvest. This advantage Minutius wisely espied, and therefore drawing
forth his Army, presented Battle to Hannibal, but he was not now in case to
accept of it; wherefere Minutius sent out some against the Forragers, Hannibals
Forragers beaten.
who were scattered all over the Fields, and laden with Booty, and so were
easily overthrown. It angered Hannibal that he was not able to help them, but it
angered him worse when the Romans took heart to assault his Trenches. But in the
heat of this business Asdrubal came from Geryon with four thousand Horse, which
emboldned Hannibal to issue forth against the Romans, to whom he did not so
much hurt as he had received.

For this piece of service Minutius was highly honored by the Army, and more
cried up by the People at Rome, all judging him more worthy of Command than
Fabius. But the Dictator was not so joyful of the news, as angry that Minutius
had disobeyed his command. He said, that he knew his own place, and that he
would teach the Master of the Horse to know it also; and that he would make him
give an account for what he had done in his absence. Minutius made equal with
Fabius.
The People much disliked these his Speeches, and made an Act, that Minutius
should be joined in equal authority with the Dictator.

Before this Business was effected, Fabius seeing how things were like to go,
dispatched the election of a new Consul in the room of Flaminius, and having
finished his business, went out of the City toward his Army. But the news of
Minutius his advancement was at the Camp as soon as he, so that his Lieutenant
treated with him now as his Colleague, asking him how they should divide their
authority: Fabius briefly told him, that seeing the Citizens had made the
Master of the Horse equal with the Dictator, he would divide the Legions with
him by Lot, according to the custom: Minutius was ill pleased with this, for
with half the Army he could not work such wonders as he hoped for. Yet meant he
to do his best: and so taking half the Army, he encamped about a mile and a
half from Fabius.

It behoved the Master of the Horse to make good the opinion which had thus
advanced him; therefore he sought good occasion to fight, to which Hannibal,
was as forward as he. The Country between them was open and bare, yet Hannibal
found means to lay an ambush in it: For the sides of the Valley had many
spacious Caves, and Hannibal in the Night, thrust into them five hundred Horse,
A Battle.
and five thousand Foot: and least they should be discovered, he made offer
betimes in the Morning to seize upon a piece of ground that lay on the other
side from the Caves, thereby turning all their eyes that way. Minutius hoping
to increase his honor as he had gotten it, sent first his light Armuture, then
his Horse, and at length he followed in Person with the Legions. He was soon
caught, and so environed on all hands, that he neither knew how to make
resistance, nor a safe retreat. In this dangerous case, whilst the Romans
defended themselves, The Romans beaten.
they lost many of their best men. But Fabius drew near in good order to
relieve them, and doing therein the office of a good Citizen, regarding more
the good of his Country, than the disgrace which he had wrongfully sustained.

Upon Fabius his approach, Hannibal retired: Fearing (as he said) to be well
wet with the Cloud that had hung so long upon the Hill-tops. Minutius forthwith
submitted himself to Fabius, by whose favor he acknowledged, that his life was
preserved. Thence forward the War went on slowly whilst Fabius his Dictatorship
lasted, and the year following also when he had delivered up his charge to to
the Consuls, that followed his instructions.

With little pleasure did they of the poorer sort in Rome hear the great
commendations which were given to Fabius by the principal Citizens, because the
War was not finished, nor much done tending thereto: And this affection was
very helpful to Terentius Varro in his suit for the Consulship; and farther to
help him, he had a kinsman, Bibius Herennius, Tribune of the People: He boldly
affirmed that Hannibal was drawn into Italy, and suffered there to range at his
pleasure by the Noblemen; that without a Plebeian Consul the War would never be
ended, etc. By which persuasions the multitude were won to be wholly for
Terentius, to the great vexation of the Nobles, who could not endure such an
upstart: But nothing could hinder the choice of Terentius: Wherefore the
Nobles, (to ballast this hotheaded man) set up L. Aemilius Paulus, a gallant
man and a brave Captain, to stand for the other Consuls place, and he easily
carried it.

These new Consuls, Varro, and Paulus, omitted no diligence in preparing for
the War, wherein, though Varro made the greatest noife, boasting what wonders
he would do if he could but once see Hannibal, yet the care, and prudence of
Paulus did tend much more toward the effecting of it. He wrote to the two old
Consuls to forbear fighting, and yet to ply the Carthaginians with daily
Skirmishes, and so to weaken them by degrees, that when he and his Fellow
Consul came with the new Army, they might find the four old Legions well
accustomed to the Enemy, and the Enemy well weakened. These new Consuls raised
an Army of above eighty thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse.

Hannibal all this while lay at Geryon, where all his provision, and store was.
The Romans, to be near him, lodged about Canusium, laying up most of their
provisions in the Castle of Cannae. Cannae Castle taken.
This place Hannibal wan, and thereby not only furnished himself, but compelled
his Enemies to want many necessaries: Hereby he also enabled himself to stay in
that open Country, fit for the service of the Horse. Of this mishap when
Servilius had informed the Senate, it then seemed needful to them to (...)
Battle with the Carthaginian, rather than to suffer him thus to roo^ himself in
Italy.

When all things were ready in the City, and the season of the year
commodious, the two Consuls, with their Army set forward against Hannibal. This
was done with great solemnity: Sacrifices and solemn Vows were made to Jupiter,
and the other Gods, for good success and Victory: and the Generals were
accompanied with a great number that brought them out of the City, and
dismissed them with Friendly leave-taking, and good wishes.

These new Generals arriving at the Camp, dismissed M. Atilius, one of the last
years Consuls, because of his age, and retained Servilius with them, as their
assistant. Aemilius labored to encourage his men, telling them, that the enemy
had stole all the former Victories by his Ambushes; that otherwise the Romans
were far beyond them in Valor etc. and therefore he exhorted them to play the
men and do their best. This set them on fire to be dealing with the
Carthagiuians, and herein Varro concurred with them, longing for an opportunity
to get the honor which he promised to himself, having now such a numerous
Army. By this means the Romans fell into a great inconvenience by the
disagreement of their Generals; Varro would fight, Varro makes have to figh^.
and Aemilius would not for the present, hoping for better advantage ere long,
when the enemy should be forced to dislodg out of the plain Country. The
Consuls command in turns every day. Aemilius lodged six miles from Hannibal
where the ground was uneven. Terentius the next day descended into the plains,
his Colleague beseeching him to stay, but could not prevail. He sat down near
to the Carthaginian, who yet gave him but a rude vvelcome, and entertainment.
The Carthaginian Horse, and light Armature fell upon the Roman Vaunt-Courriers,
and put the whole Army into a tumult, whilst it was yet in its march; but the
Carthaginians were beaten off; though not without loss. The next day Aemilius,
who could not securely draw back the Army, encamped upon the River Aufidus,
sending part of his Forces over the River where they encamped themselves, with
the rest he fortified and kept within his Trenches. Varro was persuaded that it
concerned him in honor to make good his word to the People of Rome. When
therefore it was his turn to Command, at the break of Day he began to pass the
River, without staying to bid his Colleague good morrow: But Paulus came to
him, laboring by all means to dissuade him. Terentius had norhing to answer
but that his honor was engaged. Hannibal had twice or thrice braved them,
which must not be endured. When Aemilius perceived that he could not prevail,
he was careful that what must be done, might be done well. Ten thousand Foot he
caused to be left behind in the Camp, opposite to the Carthaginians, to the
intent that Hannibal might be forced to do the like, or else when they were in
fight, these might fall upon his Camp, and take it, They prepare to fight.
with all the wealth therein, which would much distract the Carthaginians. This
done the Consuls drew forth their Army over the Water, and ranged them in order
of Battle.

This Hannibal was very glad of, and therefore without any delay, passed over
the River also, leaving in his own Camp enough to defend it, and no more. To
encourage his men, he told them how fit the ground was wherein they were to
fight; and that therefore they were to thank the Gods who had so infatuated the
enemies as to choose such a place where the stronger in Horse was sure to
prevail. Besides (said he) These are the men whom you have beaten as often as
you have seen them: and now you are to fight for their Cities, and all the
Riches that are in them, and ere many hours pass ye shall be Lords of all that
the Romans enjoy. This set his men (...) to be it; and at the same time came
his Brother Mago, whom he had sent to view the countenance of the Enemy, to
whom he said, What news? What works are we like to have? Work enough, answered
Mago, for they are a horrible Company; As horrible a many as they be, said
Hannibal, I tell thee that amongst them all, there is not one man whose name is
Mago, and therewith he fell a laughing, which all the Soldiers also took for a
good Omen.

In this great day the Carthaginian excelled himself, expressing abundance of
Military skill, The great Battle at Cannae.
and of greatness of spirit, and courage. He so marshalled his Army, that all
hands were brought to fight, where every one might do the best service. His
Darters, and Slingers he sent before to encounter the Roman Velites: His
Africans Armed after the Roman manner, made the two Wings, very deep in File.
Between these he ranged the Gauls and Spaniards armed, the first with broad
Swords, and the other with short and vvell-pointed Blades. The Gauls were
strong of Body, and furious in giving the Charge, but soon vvearied, spending
their violence at the first brunt. The Spaniards were less eager but more
wary. These Hannibal caused to advance, leaving void the place wherein they had
stood, and into which they might fall back, if they were overhardly pressed.
Between the left Batallion by the River side, were the Gauls and Spanish Horse
under Asdrubal: On the right Wing was Maharbal with the Numidian Horse.
Hannibal himself with his Brother Mago, led the Rear. His Army this day was
ten thousand Horse, and forty thousand Foot: His Enemies had two to one against
him in Foot, and he five to three against them in Horse.

The Roman Army was marshelled after their usual manner. On the right hand
were the Roman Horsemen under the Consul Paulus: On the left Wing was Varro
with the rest of the Horse which were of the Latins and other associates, and
Servilius had the leading of the Battle. The Sun was newly ri^en, and offended
neither part, the Carthaginians having their faces Northward, and the Romans
Southward.

After some light Skirmirshes betvveen the two Forlorns, Asdrubal brake in
upon the Consul Paulus, and after a rough charge, and much execution done, the
Roman Horse were overborn, and driven by plain force to a staggering recoil.
When the Battles came to joining, the Roman Legionaries found work enough, and
more than enough to break that Body upon which at first they fell: yet at last
Hannibals men were forced to a hasty retreat. But whilst the Legions,
follovving their supposed Victory, rushed on upon those that stood before them,
and thereby engaged themselves deeply within the principal strength of the
Enemy, the two African Battalions on either side, advanced so far, that getting
beyond the Rear of them, they almost wholy enclosed them. Asdrubal having
broken the Troops of the Roman Horse, follovved them along upon the River side,
beating down, and killing most of them without regard of taking Prisoners.
The Consul Paulus left his Horse, and cast himself amongst the Legions, as
hoping by them to make good the day. But he failed of his expectation: Yet did
he cheer up his men as well as he could both by Words, and Example, slaying
many with his own hands. The like did Hannibal amongst his Carthaginians in
the same part of the Battle, but with better success. For the Consul received
a blovv from a Sling that vvounded him much, and though a Troop of Roman
Gentlemen did their best to save him from further harm, yet was he so hardly
laid at, that by vvounds and weakness he was compelled to forsake his Horse:
vvhereupon all his Company also allighted.

Hannibal being near, and seeing this, said, pleasantly, I had rather he would
have delivered them to me bound, hand and foot, meaning, that he had them
almost as safe as if they had been so bound. All this while Varro, with his
associates in the left Wing, was marvellously troubled with Maharbal, and his
Numidians; who beating up and down upon the great Sandy plain, raised a foul
dust, which by a strong South wind, was driven into the eyes and mouths of the
Romans. These using the advantage both of their number and lightness, wearied
the Consul and his followers exceedingly, neither giving nor sustaining any
charge, but continually making offers and then wheeling about. Yet at the
first, they seemed to promise him a happy day of it. For when the Battles were
even ready to join, five hundred of these Numidians came pricking away from
their Fellows, with their Shields on their backs, as was the manner of those
which yielded, and throwing down their Arms, yielded themselves, Varro had no
leisure then to examine them, but bad them to rest quietly behind his Army till
all was done. These crafty Merchants did as he bad them for a while, till they
had opportunity to put their design in execution. Under their Jackets they had
short Swords and Poniards, with which and other Weapons that they gathered up
of those that were slain, they flew upon the hindmost of the Romans, whilst all
eyes were bent another way, Hannibals Policy. The Romans beaten.
where they did much mischief, and raised great terror. Thus Hannibal in a
plain ground found means to lay an Ambush at the back of his enemies.

The last blow that put an end to all, was given by the same hand that gave the
first. Asdrubal having routed and slain all the Roman Horse, save the Company
of A milius that joined themselves to the Foot, did not stay to charge upon the
face of the Legions, but, fetching a compass, he came up to the Numidi^ ns with
whom he joined, and gave upon Terentius. This fearful Cloud prognosticated a
dismal storm; wherefore Terentius his followers, having wearied themselves much
in doing little, and seeing more work toward then they were like to sustain,
thought it their saffest way to secure themselves by present flight. The Consul
also was as careful to provide for his own security as were they. Now he found
that it was one thing to talk of Hannibal at Rome, and another to encounter
him. Close at the heels of him and his flying Troops were Numidians, appointed
by Asdrubal to the pursuit as fittest for that service. Asdrubal himself with
his Gauls and Spanish Horse, fetching a compass, fell upon the backs of the
Romans, who were almost surrounded, and much distressed before. Here began a
miserable slaughter, the vanquished multitude thronging each other, not finding
which way to turn. Aemilius, who could not sit his Horse before, whilst the
spaces were open by which he might have withdrawn himself, was now unable to
fly, his way being stopped by a throng of his miserable followers, and heaps of
Bodies, that fell apace in that great Carnage.

In this terrible overthrow dyed all the Roman Foot, save two or three
thousand, who escaped into their lesser Camp; and the Night following about
four thousand Foot and two hundred Horse fled into Canusium. The Camps were
both yielded to Hannibal by those who yet remained in them. Terentius the
Consul recovered Venusia with seventy at most in his Company; the rest of his
Troops were scattered over the Fields, and gathered up by the Numidians and
made Prisoners. There died in this great Battle of Cannae, besides the Consul
Paulus, two of the Roman Questors, twenty one Colonels, eighty Senators, or
such as had born Office; amongst whom was Servilius, the last years Consul, and
Minutius, late Master of the Horse, and about eight thousand were taken
Prisoners. Hannibal lost about four thousand Gauls: fifteen hundred Spaniards
and Africans, and about two hundred Horse. A loss not sensible in the joy of so
great a Victory; which if he had pursued, as Maharbal advised him, and
forthwith marched against Rome, probably the War had presently been at an end.
But Hannibal knew how to get, not how to use a Victory: and God had otherwise
determined.

When Hannibal had sacked the Roman Camps, and trused up the spoils, he
dislodged and marched away to Samnium, finding a disposition in many People
thereabouts to forsake the Romans, and to make aliance with him. The first Town
that opened their Gates to him, Many Towns intertain Hannibal.
was Cossag, where he laid up his Baggage; and leaving his Brother Mago to take
in other places, he hastened into Campania. He dismissed all his Prisoners that
were nor Romans, without ransom; whereby he won the affections of most of the
Common People in Italy, to incline to him. He also gave leave to his Roman
Prisoners to sent to Rome to procure their ransom, with whom he sent Carthalo,
the General of his Horse, to see how Rome stood affected to peace. The Senate
commanded Carthalo to depart out of their Territories, and refused to redeem
their Prisoners; probably, because they wanted Money wherewithal to do it.

Campania is a most pleasant and fruitful Country, and Capua, the chief City in
it, rich and wealthy, the Citizens despised now the unfortunate virtue of the
Romans, and sent Ambassadors to Hannibal with whom these Articles were agreed
upon: That the Campans should be absolutely free, and Governed by their own
Laws: That no Citizens of theirs should be subject to any Carthaginian
Magistrate in War or Peace; and that Hannibal should deliver to the Campans
three hundred Roman Prisoners, such as themselves should choose, whom they
might exchange for their Gentlemen that were Hostages with the Romans. Then did
Hannibal hasten toward Capua, leaving Naples that he had thought to take in by
Scalado, but found the Walls too high, and himself not fully furnished for a
Siege. Capua intertains him.
At Capua he was entertained with great solemnity and Pomp; all the Town being
so earnestly in love with their new Guests that they murdered all the Romans
that at present they could come by.

The same course with these of Capua, ran the other Cities thereabout, except
Nola, Nuceria, Naples, Cassiline, and Acenae, which yet stood out for the
Romans. Rome it self was in great fear of Hannibals coming at the first report
of the overthrow at Cannae; The Romans mourn.
and the grief of that loss was so general, and immoderate, that it much
hindered their provision against apparent danger. All the Senators found work
enough to quiet the Peoples lamentations. Courriers were sent forth to bring
them certain tidings how things went, whereof when Letters from the Consul
Varro had fully informed them, they were so amazed, that they ran into
Barbarous Superstition, and by the advice of their Southsayers, they buried two
Men, and two Women alive in the Ox-market. Ambassadors also were sent to the
Oracle at Delphi, Their Superstition.
to enquire with what Prayers and Supplications they might pacify the Gods,
and obtain an end of their calamities.

In the midst of these extremities they called home their Consul Terentius that
he might name a Dictator, and all sorts of people went forth to meet him, and
welcome him home, which was done to hold up their reputation. M. Junius was
chosen for the Dictator, A Dictator chosen.
and T. Sempronius Master of the Horse. These fell presently to the mustring of
Forces, and raised four Legions and a thousand Horse, yet were they faign to
take some that were very Boys, and they increased their number by adding to
them eight thousand sturdy Slaves, to whom liberty was promised if they would
deserve it by their manly service: The Dictator also Proclaimed, that whosoever
were in debt and could not pay it, or that had committed any capital offense,
should be pardoned if they would serve in the War: and to Arm these they were
faign to take down out of their Temples the spoils of their enemies that had
been there hung up.

The Dictator having dispatched all needful businesses in the City, took the
Field with twenty five thousand Men, with whom he marched into Campania, and
did little more then to keep Hannibal from spoiling the Country. Marcellus, one
of the Roman Praetors, lying at Ostia with a Legion and fifteen hundred
Soldiers newly taken up, with whom he should have gone into Sicily, hearing of
the overthrow at Cannae, sent his new levied men to Rome for the defense of it,
and with his Legion marched to Nola to help the Citizens there: Hannibal had
many Friends in Nola amongst the common People, and therefore brought his Army
thither; and on a day seeing the Walls unmanned, he bad his Soldiers bring the
Ladders and scale them: Hannibal beaten.
But whilst they did it, and were in confusion. Marcellus with his men, issued
out at three several Gates, and set upon the Carthaginians, expecting no such
thing, and did such execution amongst them, that this was accounted a Victory,
and reputed the bravect act in all those Wars, from whence they concluded that
Hannibal might be overcome.

From thence Hannibal went to Acerrae, where being refused entrance, he laid
Siege to it on every side, Acerrae taken by Hannibal.
wherewith the Citizens being terrified, before his works were finished, they
stole out by Night, and left the Town empty; which Hannibal sacked and burnt,
then hearing that the Dictator was about Cassiline, thither went he, but found
him not; only many Companies of the Roman Confederats were gotten into the
Town, and kept it: The Citizens were affected to Hannibal, and would faign
have been free from there Guests, who finding their intent, in a Night slew
all the Citizens, Cassiline besieged.
and fortified a part of the City against the enemy. Hannibal gave diverse
assaults to it, but was still repelled with loss, and may sallies they made
with variable success: Hannibal mined, and they countermined, so that he was
driven to enclose them, that he might vvin it by Famine. T. Sempronius
Gracchus, Master of the Horse lay up the River with the Roman Army, and would
faign have relieved the Besieged, but durst not venture. Barrels of Corn he
sent floating down the River to relieve them, which, being discovered, came
into Hannibals hands. Gracchus cost abundance of Nuts into the stream, which
faintly sustained the Besieged. At length when all their food was spent, and
whatsoever green thing grevv under the Walls, the Carthaginians plovved up the
ground, and the besieged presently sowed it with Rape-seed. Hannibal admired
their patience, and said, That he meant not to stay there till the Rapes were
grown, and therefore, whereas he had intended to have made them an example for
their obstinacy, he was now content to grant them their lives upon an easy
ransom, and so quietly dismissed them. The time of the year now being come,
Hannibal retired into Capua, where he vvintered, and where (as some say) his
Army was corrupted with the pleasures and plenty there, and made more
effeminate than before.

About this time Hannibal sent his Brother Mago to Carthage with the joyful
nevvs of this great Victory. Mago sent to Carthage.
He told the Carthaginian Senate, with how many Roman Generals his Brother
had fought, how many Consuls he had chased, vvounded, or slain. How the
Romans, who never used to shun a Battle, were now grown so cold that they
thought their Dictator Fabius the only good Captain. That not without reason
their spirits were thus abated, since Hannibal had slain above two hundred and
six thousand of them, and taken above fifty thousand Prisoners. He told them
how many States in Italy followed the Fortune of those great Victories. He told
them that the War was even at an end, if they would follovv it close and give
the Romans no time of breathing. He wished them to consider that the War was
carried into an enemies Country, that so many Battles had diminished his
Brothers Army, that the Soldiers that had deserved so well, ought to be well
rewarded, and that it was not good to burden their new Italian Friends with
exactions of Money, Corn, etc. But that these must be sent from Carthage. Lastly
he caused the Gold Rings, taken from the Fingers of the Roman Knights that were
slain, to be powered out before them, which being measured, filled three Bushels.

This errand of Mago for the present found extraordinary good welcome; And
large supplies were voted to be sent to him: Large supplies promised to
Hannibal.
But his old enemy Hanno, obstructed them, and the too much Parsimony, of the
Citizens was the cause that there was very little done, and that which was done
came too late. However, Mago brings the news of the great supply which was
decreed to be sent; which much rejoiced Hannibal and his new confederates. The
Spring drew on when the supply was expected, but there came no more than a few
Elephants, and Hannibal was forced to rest contented with them. Then did he
take the Field, and sought to make himself Master of some good Haven Town that
might serve to intertain the Carthaginian Fleet when it should arrive with the
supplies. For this end he sent Himilco, who by the help of his good Friends the
Brusians, won Petilia; he won also Concentia and Crotan, and the City of Locri,
Diverse Cities taken.
and many other places; only the Town of Rhegium, over against Sicily, held out
against him.

The Romans at this time were in such a case, that Hannibal with a little help
from Carthage, might have reduced them to great extremity. But his own Citizens
suffered him to languish with expectation of their promised supplies, which
being still deferred from year to year, caused as great opportunities to be
lost, The promised supplies come not.
as a Conqueror could have desired. But whatsoever Hannibal thought, he was
faign to apply himself to his Italian Friends, and to feed them with Hopes, and
to trifle way his time about Nola, Naples, Cumae, etc. being loath to weaken
his Army by a hard Siege; that was to be reserved for a work of more
importance. Many offers he made upon Nola, but always with bad success. Once
Mercellus fought a Battle with him there, under the Walls of the City, having
the Citizens to assist him, wherein Hannibal lost a thousand men; which was no
great marvail; his forces being then divided, and employed in sundry parts of
Italy at once.

At this time T. Sempronius Gracchus, and Q. Fabius Maximus, the late famous
Dictator, were chosen Consuls. But Fabius was detained at Rome about matters of
Religion, or Superstition rather, wherewith the City was commonly, especially
in the times of danger, very much troubled, so Gracchus alone, with a Consular
Army, waited upon Hannibal amongst the Campanes, not able to meet him in the
Field, yet attentive to all occasions that should be presented. The Slaves,
that lately had been Armed, were a great part of his followers. These and the
rest of his men Gracchus continnally trained, Gracchus his Prudence.
and had not a greater care to make his Army skilful in the exercises of War,
than in keeping it from quarrels that might arise by their upbrading one
another with their base condition.

Gracchus at this time had a bickering with the Capuans, upon whom he came at
unawares, The Capuans beaten.
and slew above two thousand of them, and took their Camp, but staid not long
to rif^le it for fear of Hannibal, that lay not far off. By this his Providence
he escaped a greater loss, than he brought upon the Capuans: For when Hannibal
heard how things went, he presently marched thither, hoping to find these
young Soldiers and Slaves busied in loading themselves with the Booty: But
they were all gotten safe into Cumae, which so angered Hannibal, that at the
earnest request of the Capuans, he assailed it the next day. Much labor, and
with ill success he spent about this Town. Cum^ besieed.
He raised a Wooden Tower, and brought it close to the Walls thereby to
assault it, but they within built a higher Tower, whence they made
resistance, and found means to set Hannibals Tower on fire, and whilst the
Carthaginians were busy in quenching the fire, they issued out, charged them
valiantly and drove them to their Trenches. The Consul vvisely sounded a
retreat in time, or Hannibal had requited them. The day following, Hannibal
presented Battle to them, but Gracchus refused it: The Siege raised.
Seeing therefore no likelihood to prevail, he raised his Siege and departed.

About this time Fabius, the other Consul, took the Field, and recovered some
small Towns that Hannibal had taken, and punished the Inhabitants severely for
their revolt, the Carthaginians Army was too small to Garrison all the Towns
that had yielded to them, and withal, to abide (as it must do) strong in the
Field. Wherefore Hannibal, attending the supply from Carthage that would enable
him to strike at Rome it self, was driven in the mean time to alter his course
of War; and instead of making (as he had formerly done) a general invasion upon
the whole Country, he was faign to vvait upon occasions, that grevv daily
more commodious to the Enemy, Hannibal delays.
than to him. When Hannibal was gone to Winter into Apulia, Marcellus waste
the Country of the Hirpines, and Samnites: the like did Fabius in Campania.

The People of Rome were very intentive upon the Work they had in hand, they
continued Fabius in his Consulship, and joined with him Cladius Marcellus. Of
these two, Fabius was called the Shield, and Marcellus the Roman Sword. The
great Name of these Consuls, and the great preparations which they made, put
the Campans in fear that Capua it self should be besieged, wherefore at their
earnest request Hannibal came from Arpi, and having comforted his Friends, on a
sudden he fell upon Puteoli, a Sea-town of Campania, about which he spent
three days in vain, there being six thousand in Garrison, wherefore he left
it, and marched to Tarentum, wherein he had great intelligence.

In the mean time Hanno made a journey against Beneventum, A Battle.
where T. Gracchus met him. Hanno had with him about seventeen thousand Foot,
Brutians, and Lucans, besides twelve hundred Horse, most of them Numidians and
Moors. Four hours he held the Romans work ere it could be perceived to which
side Victory would incline. But Gracchus his Soldiers, which were most of them
Slaves, had received from him a peremptory denunciation, that this day or never
they must purchase their Liberty, by bringing every man an Enemies Head. The
sweet reward of Liberty was so desirable, that they feared no danger in
earning it, though the cutting off their Enemies Heads troubled them
exceedingly, which Gracchus perceiving, proclaimed that they should cast away
the Heads, assuring them that they should have their liberty presently after
the Battle, if they wan the day. This made them run headlong upon the Enemy,
whom their desperate fury had soon overthrown, if the Roman Horse could have
made their party good against the Numidians. But though Hanno did what he
could, and pressed so hard upon the Roman Battle, that four thousand of the
Slaves retired to a ground of strength, The Cartbaginians beaten.
yet was he glad at length to save himself by flight with two thousand Horse,
all the rest being either slain or taken. Gracchus performed his promise to the
Slaves, making them free: only on those four thousand, that went aside in the
Battle, he inflicted this slight punishment, that as long as they served in the
Wars, they should eat standing, unless sickness forced them to break this
order. So Gracchus with his Army returned into Beneventum, where the
newly-enfranchised Soldiers, were Feasted in public by the Townsmen, some
sitting, some standing and all with their Heads covered, as the manner of such
was, with white Caps. This was the first Battle worthy of note, that the
Carthaginians lost since the coming of Hannibal into Italy.

Thus the Romans by degrees began to get heart, and repair their breaches, only
their Treasury was very empty, vvhereupon the People were called together, The
Romans poverty, how supplied.
and were plainly told, that in this exigent, there must be no taking of money
for Victuals, Weapons, Apparel, or other necessaries for the Soldiers, but
that they must trust the Commonwealth with the loan of these things till the
Wars were ended. This was willingly assented to, and the Armies were well
supplied both at home and abroad.

In the mean time the Roman Generals omitted no part of industry in seeking to
recover what had been lost. Cassiline taken by the Romans.
Cassiline was besieged by Fabius, unto whose assistance Marcellus came; The
Town was well defended by a Carthaginian Garrison for a long time, but at
length, the Inhabitants grew fearful, craved a Parlee, and agreed to deliver it
up, so as all might have liberty to depart whither they pleased. This was
consented to, yet as they were issuing out, Marcellus seizing upon a Gate,
entered with his Army and put all to the Sword: only about fifty that had gotten
out, ran to Fabius, who saved them, and sent them to Capua.

Hannibal was this while about Terentum, but after long expectation of having
it delivered to him, he was faign to depart without it. So he went to Salapia,
which he intended to make his wintring place, and began to Victual it.

The new Consuls chosen at Rome, were Q. Fabius, the Son of the present Consul,
and T. Sempronius Gracchus the second time. The old Fabius became Lieutenant to
his Son; and on a time when the old man came to the Camp, his Son rode out to
meet him. Eleven of the twelve Lictiors, let him pass by on Horseback, which
was against the custom; but the Son perceiving this, bad the last of the
Lictiors to take notice of it, who thereupon bad old Fabius alight, and come to
the Consul on Foot: the Father cheerfully did so, saying, It was my mind, Son,
to make trial, whether thou did understand thy Self to be Consul. Altinius a
wealthy Citizen of Arpi, came to Fabius and offered to deliver the Town into
his hands. Hannibal hearing of it, was glad, and sent for the Wife and Children
of Altinius into his Camp, he examined them by torment, and being assured of
the Treason, he commanded them to be burnt, and seized upon all Altinius his
wealth. Arpi taken by the Romans.
Fabius shortly after came to Arpi, which he took by Scalado in a stormy Night.
Five thousand of Hannibals Soldiers lay in the Town, and of the Arpines there
were about three thousand. These were thrust formest by the Carthaginian
Garrison, who suspected them, and therefore thought it no wisdom to trust them
at their backs. But after some little resistance, the Arpines gave over the
sight, and Parlied with the Romans, and the Arpine Praetor, going to the Roman
Consul, received his Faith for the security of the Town, wherefore they
presently made head against the Garrison, yet did the Carthaginians make stout
resistance, till it was agreed that they should pass safely, and return to
Hannibal.

About this time Cliternum was taken by Sempronius Tuditanus, one of the Roman
Praetors. Also one hundred and twelve Gentlemen of Capua offered their service
to C. Fulvius, the other Praetor, only upon condition to have their goods
restored to them: which showed that their affections were turned from Hannibal
to the Romans. The Consentines also and the Thurines, which had yielded to
Hannibal, when there was no appearance of those great succors which were
promised from Carthage, returned to their old allegiance again. Others would
have done the like, The Romans beaten.
but that at this time Hanno met with, and slew L. Pomponius, and a great
multitude that followed him.

Hannibal in the mean time had all his care about Tarentum, which if he could
take, it would be very commodious for the Landing of the supplies, which he yet
expected. Long he waited for an opportunity, and at last by the help of his
Friends within it, Tarentum taken by Hannibal.
he one night entered at the two Gates that were opened for him, and presently
made to the Market^place; which the Governor perceiving, fled to the Port, and
taking Boat, got into the Citadel that stood at the mouth of the Haven.
Hannibal having gotten the spoil of the Roman Soldiers Goods, he addressed
himself against the Citadel, which stood upon a Poninsula, and was joined to
the Town by a causway, which was fortified with a Wall and a Ditch. Against
this Hannibal raised some works, hoping in a short time to take it, but whilst
he was thus busied, there came in a strong supply by Sea to them, which made
his attempt hopeless. The Tarentins Fleet lay in the Haven and could not go
forth by reason of the Citadel, whereby the Citizens were likely in a short
time to suffer want: To help this, Hannibal caused their Ships to be drawn up,
and carried through the streets, which were long and plain, and lanched them
into the Sea without; which done, they so cut off all supplies, that the
Citadel began to suffer want.

Now this while the Roman Forces grew strong, and Q. Fulvius Flaccus, with
Appius Claudius, the new Consuls, prepared to besiege the great City of Capua,
having now armed twenty three Legions, though to fill them up, they had listed
many Boys, and they made a Law for their encouragement, that their years
should go on from that time, as if they had been of lawful age.

Before the Roman Army drew near, the Capuans, through their own wretchlesness,
began to feel want of Victuals, they sent therefore to Hannibal, desiring him
to succor them before they were closed up, and he sent Hanno with an Army to
supply their wants. Hanno appointed them a day to bring store of carriages to
convey in the provisions which he should make, but when the day came, they
brought only forty Wagons, with a few pack-Horses. Hanno was much vexed at
it, and appointed them another day when they should come better provided: The
Carthaginians beaten.
But in the mean while Q. Fulvius the Consul, came privately to Beneventum, and
having heard that Hanno was gone abroad a Forraging, he marched all night, and
by the break a day, assaulted his Camp, which for a long time was gallantly
defended, but at last, though with great loss, he won it, in which six thousand
were slain, seven thousand taken Prisoners, besides a great Booty that Hanno
had lately gotten from the Roman Confederates. This misadventure, and the near
approach of the Roman Consuls, made them of Capua to send a pitiful message to
Hannibal, entreating him to hasten to their relief, considering how faithful
they had been to him. Hannibal answered them with fair promises, and sent away
two thousand Horse to keep their Lands from spoil, whilst himself was intent
about taking the Citadel, and some other Towns in those parts.

The Consuls, fortifying Beneventum, Capua besieged by the Consuls.
to secure their backs, addressed themselves to the siege of Capua. Many
disasters befell the Romans in the beginning of this great enterprise.
Gracchus, a brave Soldier, and lately twice Consul, was slain. He was
honorably interred by Hannibal, some of whose straglers had slain him, the
Manumissed Slaves that served under him, took this opportunity to go every man
whither he pleased, so that it was long ere they could be got together again.
Yet the Consuls proceed in their work. Mago and the Citizens gave them but bad
welcome, sallying out, and slaying fifteen hundred of their men. The Siege
raised by Hannibal.
Neither was it long ere Hannibal himself came, fought with them, and caused
them to dislodge. They removed by night and went several vvays: Fulvius,
toward Cannae, and Claudius into Lucania. Hannibal follovved Claudius, but
could not reach him. Yet by the way he met with one Penula, The Romans beaten.
a stout man that had the charge of near sixteen thousand men, with him he
fought, and slew him, and almost all his men, scarce a thousand of them
escaping. Then was Hannibal informed that Cneus Fulvius, a Roman Praetor, was
in Apulia with about eighteen thousand men. Coming to Fulvius, so forward he
was, that needs he would have fought with him that night. Another Victory.
Hannibal set Mago with three thousand men in an Ambush, then offering Battle
to Fulvius, he soon had him in the Trap, whence he was glad to escape himself,
leaving all, save two thousand of his men, dead behind him.

These two great blows much astonished the Romans. Yet when they had gathered
the remainders of those Armies, the Consuls fell hard again to the Siege of
Capua. Capua besieged again.
At the first sitting down of the Consuls they proclaimed, that whosoever would
come out of Capua by such a day, should be pardoned, and enjoy his estate, if
not, no grace was to be expected: the Capuans relying on their own strength,
and the assistance of Hannibal rejected this offer with scorn: And before they
were wholly closed up, they sent to Hannibal requesting his help: He gave them
good words, and dismissed them. But he, thinking that they were well able to
hold out for a long time, staid to dispatch his business, before he went, by
which means the Consuls had time enough to entrench and secure themselves.

When the Consulship of Claudius and Fulvius was expired, they were continued
in their charge of the Army as Proconsuls, and their design was to take Capua
by Famine. Hannibal comes to relieve them.
But Hannibal came before he was expected by the Romans, and took one of their
Forts, and fell upon their Camp; the Capuans also at the same time sallyed out
but were beaten in again; Yet did Claudius in pursuing them, receive a wound,
that ere long brought him to his Grave. Hannibal followed his business better
and had almost taken the Camp, yet at length was repelled.

This extremely angered Hannibal and made him entertain a haughty resolution,
even to set upon Rome, which accordingly he pursued, and because that work must
be done with celerity, he caused his men to provide victuals for ten days, and
so marched forward. This news coming to Rome, they sent to acquaint their
Generals with it, wishing them to do what they judged best for the safety of
the City. And thereupon Q. Fulvius took fifteen thousand choice Foot, and a
thousand Horse, and with them hasted toward Rome.

As Hannibal drew near, making woeful havoc as he went, all the streets and
Temples in Rome were filled with women, Hannibal intends for Rome and leaves it.
crying, and praying, rubbing the Altars with their hair, the Senators were all
in the Great market place, ready to give advice upon all emergencies. But
Fulvius and Hannibal arrived at Rome near together. The Consuls and Fulvius
encamped without the Gate of Rome, attending Hannibal, who coming within three
miles of the City, advanced with two thousand Horse, and rode along a great way
under the Walls, viewing, and considering how he might best approach them. Yet
went he back without doing or receiving any hurt. Many tumults were at this
time raised in the City, and the multitude were so affrighted, that they would
have run out of the Gates if they could have done it with safety.

The day following Hannibal brought up his Army and presented Battle to the
Romans, who would have accepted it, had not a terrible shower of Rain caused
both the Armies to return into their Camps; and this happened two days
together, and the weather cleared up presently after. But Hannibal, who had
brought but ten days provision with him, could not stay any longer, he
therefore made all the spoil he could in the Roman Territories, passing like a
Tempest over the Country, and run toward the Eastern Sea so fast, that he had
almost taken Regium before his arrival was suspected. As for Capua he gave it
for lost, and cursed the faction of Hanno, which thus disabled him to relieve
that fair City.

Fulvius returned back to the Siege of Capua, which now began to suffer want.
And faign they would have sent again to Hannibal but that all ways were
intercepted. The truth is, Hannibal had already done his best, and now began to
faint under the burden of that War, wherein (as he afterward protested) he was
vanquished by Hanno and his Partisans in the Senate of Carthage, rather than by
any force of the Romans. Capua being now brought to extremity, the multitude
forced the Senators to consult about the delivering of it up to the Romans: The
bravest of the Senators foresavv what the issue would be, and therefore one of
them invited the rest home to Supper, telling them that when they had Feasted
themselves he would begin to them such a health as should for ever free them
from the malice of their enemies, the Romans: Twenty seven of the Senators
embraced the motion, Capu^ taken.
and when they had Supped, drank Poison, whereof they died: The rest, hoping
for mercy, yielded to discretion. So a Gate was opened whereat a Roman Legion
entered, disarmed the Citizens, and made the Carthaginians Prisoners; The
Senators were laid in Irons; and presently after, Fulvius caused all the
Campane Prisoners to be bound to stakes, The Consuls cruelty.
and scourged a good while with Rods, after which he struck off their heads.
The like rigor Fulvius used to all the Towns of the Campanians: most of the
Inhabitants, with their Wives and Children he sold for Slaves, the rest were
banished; after which the Glory of Hannibal began to shine more dim, and most
of Italy by the terrible example of the Capuans, had a General inclination,
upon good conditions, to return to the Roman side.

Marcellus and Levinus being chosen Consuls, Levinus went into Sicily, and
Marcellus was to make War with Hannibal: They were busy in raising Soldiers,
but wanted money extremely; many ways were proposed how to supply that want. The
public wants supplied.
At last the Consuls said, that no persuasions would be so effectual with the
People, as good examples; wherefore they propounded and it was presently
resolved, that every one should bring and put into the Treasury all the money,
Jewels, and Plate that they had, and none reserve more than one Salt, and a
Bowl wherewith to make their offerings to the Gods: as also a Ring for
himself: and some other small Ornaments for his Wife and Children; and this was
accordingly done by all, with much cheerfulness.

Then went forth Marcellus against Hannibal, whose Army was now greatly
diminished by long and hard service. His credit also amongst his Italian
Friends was much weakened by the loss of Capua: This put him upon pillaging
those Towns which he could not keep, thinking that the best way both to enrich
himself, and to preserve it from his enemies: but this farther alienated them
from him, Salapia yielded to Marcellus.
whereupon Salapia yielded to Marcellus, and betrayed to him a gallant Regiment
of Numidians, the very best that Hannibal had. After this the Consul took two
Cities of the Samnites, wherein he slew above three thousand of Hannibals men;
which Hannibal could not prevent, the Romans being grown stronger in the Field
than he. But now came news that Massanissa was at Carthage, with five thousand
Horse, ready to set sail for Spain, whither, when he came, he was to accompany
Asdrubal, the Brother of Hannibal into Italy. This did not more comfort
Hannibal and his followers, than it terrified the Romans.

At this time Hannibal was informed that Cn. Fulvius, a Roman Praetor, lay near
to Herdonea, to get the Town by practice: Hannibal made great marches
thitherward, and when he came, offered Battle to Fulvius, who readily embraced
it. The Romans beaten.
The Roman Legions made good resistance a while, till they were compassed
round with the Carthaginian Horse: then fell they to rout, and a great
slaughter was made of them; Fulvius, with twelve Colonels, and about thirteen
thousand were slain, and Hannibal set Herdonea on fire because it was appointed
to be delivered up to the Romans.

Marcellus hearing this, A Battle.
hasted thither: At Venusia they met, and fought a Battle from Morning till the
Night parted them, and ended with uncertain Victory. Many more skirmishes they
had, but none of importance.

Then Q. Fabius Maximus, and Q. Fulvius were again chosen Consuls: and Fabius
resolved to besiege Tarentum, which if he could win, like it was that scarce
any one good City would remain true to Hannibal, and in the mean time he
desired Fulvius, and Marcellus, with their Army, to press Hannibal so hard that
he might have no leisure to help Tarentum. Marcellus was glad of this
opportunity, judging that no Roman was so fit to deal with Hannibal as himself:
He followed him therefore from place to place, desiring ever to come to Battle,
but upon unequal terms. Hannibal only entertained him with skirmishes, meaning
to keep his Army entire, till Asdrubal came to him. But Marcellus was so
importunate, that he could not be rid of him, wherefore Hannibal bad his men to
beat soundly this hotspur Roman Captain of whom he could not be rid till he had
let him blood. A Battle.
Then followed a Battle wherein Hannibal had the Victory, took six Ensigns and
slew about three thousand of the Romans. The Romans beaten.
Marcellus rated his men exceedingly, and called them cowards, which did so
shame them, that they asked pardon, and desired him to lead them forth again
against the enemy. Hannibal was angry to see that nothing would make them
quiet, and so they fought again, and though the Romans had the better of it,
fighting very desperately, yet they lost so many men that they had little cause
to boast of the Victory: Only this advantage they had, that hereby Fabius got
time to prosecute his Siege at Tarentum without disturbance. Fulvius the other
Consul this while took in diverse Towns of the Hirpines, Lucans, and
Volscentes, that willingly rendered themselves and betrayed Hannibals Garrisons
to him.

Fabius, by the Treason of a Brusian Captain in Tarentum had the Town delivered
into his hands, Tarentum taken.
and yet when he was entered he put all to the Sword, Brutians as well as
others, whereby his credit was much impaired. All the Riches of the Town he
sought out, which was very great, and sent it to the Treasury at Rome where
there was much need of it. Hannibal having gotten clear of Marcellus, The
Romans beaten.
fell upon those that besieged Caulonia, all whom he slew or took Prisoners,
and then he hasted to relieve Tarentum; But when he came within five miles,
he heard that it was lost. This grieved him, yet he said no more than this,
The Romans have also their Hannibal: We have lost Tarentum in like sort as we
got it. But lest he should seem to retreat out of fear, he encamped there four
or five days, and thence departing to Metapont, he bethought himself how to
take Fabius in a Trap. He caused the chief of Metapont to write to Fabius;
offering to betray it into his hand. These letters were sent by two young men
of the City, who did their errand so well, that the Consul wrote back, and
appointed the day when they should expect him. Hannibal being glad of this, at
leisure made ready his Ambushes for the wary Fabius; but something hindered him
from coming, and so all was frustrated.

M. Claudius Marcellus, and T. Quintus Crispinus were chosen Consuls, who had a
strong desire to make War upon Hannibal, assuring themselves of Victory.
Crispinus had also a desire to make his Consulship Famous by taking some good
Town, as Fulvius and Fabius had done by taking of Capua, Loory besieged.
and Tarentum: wherefore he went and besieged Locri, the best City in Italy
that held for the Carthaginian, bringing all sorts of Engines to promote the
work. But Hannibal was not slow to relieve the City, at whose approach,
Crispinus rose and retreated to his fellow Consul. Thither followed Hannibal,
to whom the Consuls offered Battle: He refused it, yet daily entertained them
with Skirmishes, waiting for some advantage, and reserved his Army to a time of
greater employment when his Brother Asdrubal should come into Italy. Marcellus
was not well pleased with this, and therefore sought to force him to fight; for
which end he commanded a Navy by Sea, The Romans beaten.
and the Garrison of Tarentum again to besiege Locri: But Hannibal had an eye
behind him, and by the way, laid an Ambush for those of Tarentum, slew three
thousand of them, and made the rest to fly back into Tarentum. As for the
Consuls, Hannibals desire was to wast them by little, and little. Betwixt him
and them was a little Hill, overgrown with Bushes, amongst them he hid some
Numidians, willing them to attend every advantage. To this Hill the Consuls
thought fit to remove their Camp; thither therefore they rode to view the
place, taking with them the Son of Marcellus, a few Colonels, and other
principal men, and about two hundred Horse. The Numidian Sentinel gave warning
of their approach, and the other discovered not themselves till they had
surrounded the Consuls and their Company. The Consuls defended themselves
hoping to be quickly relieved from the Camp that was near at hand: The Consuls
slain.
But all their Horse save four, forsook them and fled. Marcellus was slain with
a Lance; Crispinus had his deaths wound, and young Marcellus was wounded, yet
got to the Camp, the rest were all slain. Hannibal gave an honorable Funeral
to Marcellus, bestowing his ashes in a Silver pot, covered with a Crown of
Gold, and sent it to his Son to be interred where he pleased.

Then Licinius the Roman Admiral laid hard Siege to Locri, The Romans beaten.
wherefore Hannibal went thither again, but as soon as his Vant-couriers
appeared, the Romans ran in confused heaps to their Ships, leaving all their
Engines, and whatsoever was in their Camp to Hannibal.

C. Claudius Nero, and M. Livius were chosen Consuls, at which time Asdrubal
was already come into France, and was approaching toward Italy. Livius would
not stir against him, but with a considerable Army, and those of the choicest
men: and Claudius with another Army, was sent against Hannibal. By this time
news came that Asdrubal was passing the Alps, and that the Ligurians, and those
about Genoa were ready to join with him. When all was ordered according to the
Consuls minds, they went forth of the City, each his several way. Great fear at
Rome.
The Citizens were full of fears, there being another Son of Amilcar come into
Italy, and one that in this expedition seemed to be of more sufficiency than
Hannibal. For whereas in that long and dangerous march through so many
Barbarous Nations, over great Rivers, and Mountains, Hannibal had lost a great
part of his Army, Asdrubal in the same Journey had increased his, descended
from the Alps like a rolling Snowball, far greater than when he came over the
Pyrenes. This made the People wait upon their Consuls out a Town, like a
pensive train of Mourners.

Asdrubal at his first coming into Italy set upon Placentia; Asdrubal comes
into Italy.
but there he lost a great deal of time, and yet was faign at last to leave it,
whereby he gave the Roman Consuls leisure to make ready for him, and caused his
Brother Hannibal to make no have to meet him, knowing that Placentia would not
be taken in have.

Nero made what speed he could to meet with Hannibal, and stop him from joining
with his Brother. He had with him forty thousand Foot, besides Horse, with
which he often offered Hannibal Battle, and in diverse Skirmishes had the better
of him. At Grumentum Hannibal fought with him, but was worsted, yet gat he off
and marched away to Venusia, with Nero still at his heels. Thence he went to
Canusium, and sat down there near the place where he had obtained his most
memorable Victory. There also Nero sat down by him, thinking it enough to
hinder him from joining with his succors. There was he advertised of Asdrubals
approach by Letters that were going to Hannibal which he intercepted: wherefore
he resolved that it was better to run some desperate adventure than to suffer
them to join together. He therefore took six thousand Foot and a thousand
Horse, all of his choicest men, and away he posted as fast as he could to
assist his Fellow Consul. Livy at that time lay encamped near to Serea Gallica,
and Asdrubal within half a Mile of him. In six days Nero finished his journey
thither, and by the way his company was increased by some voluntaries. The next
day after his coming, they consulted together, and resolved to fight the Enemy,
Asdrubal perceiving that both the Consuls were now together, and thereupon
feared that Hannibal was slain, and though before he was forward to fight, yet
now he thought it no shame to retreat farther from them. So he dislodged
secretly by Night, intending to get over the River Metaurus: but being misled
by his Guides, he had not gone far before Nero was at his heels with all the
Horse, which hindered him from going any farther, and the other Consuls followed
with the Legions in order of Battle. Asdrubal, seeing a necessity to fight,
omitted no care, or circumspection. His Gauls he placed in the left Wing upon a
Hill, which the Enemy could not ascend without much difficulty. In the right
Wing he stood himself, with his Africans and Spaniards: His Lygurians he placed
in the midst, A Battle.
and his Elephants in the Front of the Battle. On the Romans side Nero had the
right Wing, Livius the left, and Portius led the Battle, Livy and Portius found
strong opposition, and with great slaughter on both sides, prevailed little of
nothing. Nero labored much in vain against the steep Hill, where the Gauls
stood out of his reach: wherefore taking part of his Forces, he led them round
behind Livy and Portius, and charged Asdrubal in the Flank, which made the
Victory incline to the Romans: For Nero ran all along the depth of Asdrubals
Battle, and put it to rout. Of the Spaniards and Africans the greatest part
were slain: the Ligurians and Gauls saved themselves by flight: Of the
Elephants only four were taken alive: the rest were slain, most by their
Riders, the Guide having in readiness a mallet and a chissel wherewith he gave
a stroke between the Ears in the joint next the Head, wherewith he killed the
Beast upon a sudden.

Asdrubal strove with great Patience and against many difficulties, and
performed all the duties of a worthy General, and stout Soldier, and when he
saw the loss irreparable, he rode manfully into the thickest of the Enemies,
where fighting bravely, Asdrubal slain.
he was slain. The number of the slain on both sides is variously reported, the
Camp and all the Riches in it fell into the hands of the Romans.

When it was known at Rome how Nero had left his Army, they were much amazed
and full of fears: The People filled the Market place, the Women ran to the
Temple with Vows and Prayers, and all were filled with melancholy: therefore
the news of this Victory was entertained with exceeding joy, as if Hannibal
were already driven out of Italy. Nero returning to his Camp, threw the Head of
Asdrubal before the Carthaginians and brought forth his African Prisoners
bound, sending two of them to give Hannibal notice what had happened.

Hannibal having in this unhappy fight, lost, besides his worthy Brother, all
hope that had so long sustained him in Italy, Hannibal retires into Brusia.
withdrew himself into the Country of the Brusians, and thither he caused all
the Lucans, his Friends, to remove, as likewise all that dwelt in Metapontum.
For he wanted men to defend so many places as he held, lying so far asunder.
Wherefore he drew them all into a lesser compass in the utmost cornet of Italy;
it being a Country of much fastness, and the People exceedingly devoted unto
his Service. This was in the thirteenth year after his coming into Italy; and
from thence to the eighteenth year wherein he departed, there was no memorable
thing done. For Hannibal wanted strength wherewith to make any great attempt,
the Romans had little mind to provoke him, but thought it well that he was
quiet. This commendation is given him by the Roman Historians themselves. That
making War upon a People, of all others the most Warlike, he obtained so many
Victories by his own good conduct: And that leading an Army compounded of so
many sundry Nations Africans, Spaniards, Gauls, Carthaginians, Italians, and
Greeks, which were neither in Language, Laws, His Prudence.
Conditions, or any other thing, one like to another, yet he held them all in
such good order, that they never fell to sedition amongst themselves, or
against their General. And here we must leave him till he be drawn into Africa
by Scipio.

P. Cornelius Scipio having conquered Spain, Scipio comes from Spain.
returned home to Rome, where he made suit for the Honor of a Triumph, which
was denied him, because he only had the place of a Proconsul: Is chosen Consul.
Yet to make him amends, they chose him Consul, together with P. Licinius
Crassus, who being high Priest also, might not go ar from the City, as being to
attend the matters of their Superstition: which made well for Scipio, who was
desirous to be sent into Africa, to trasfer the War thither. Some there were of
the Senators, especially Q. Fabius Maximus, that opposed him therein: yet at
length he obtained to have the Isle of Sicily for his Province, with leave to
pass into Africa if he found it expedient.

The Treasury at Rome being extremely exhausted, no money was given to Scipio,
neither was he allowed to press Soldiers for his African Voyage: But the
People made up the backwardness of the Senate with their forwardness: For
besides his Roman Soldiers, he had about seven thousand Voluntaries that came
to him from sundry parts of Italy. Several Towns also furnished him, with Corn,
Iron, Handmills, and all other necessaries, so that having his Navy in
readiness, He goes into Sicily.
he transported his Army into Sicily, where he found, besides other Forces, two
gallant Legions of old Soldiers that had served at Cannae. For increasing his
number of Horse, he pressed three hundred young and rich Gentlemen of Sicily,
and then discharged them again, upon condition that they should deliver their
Horse and Arms to as many Roman Gentlemen whom he had brought along with him
for the same purpose.

Then did Scipio employ Laelius into Africa, Sends into Africa.
rather to make discover than to do any thing, who yet took a great Booty, and
struck no little terror into the Carthaginians, who saw their affairs now to
be upon the terms of change. He also procured King Massanissa to revolt from
the Carthaginians and to join with the Romans. And goes himself.
Then did Scipio embark his Army for Africa, where he landed near the Fair
Promontory, and presently after encamped before Utica.

The Carthaginians at this time had no Captain of note in their City, nor a
better Army than of raw Soldiers that were levied in have. Asdrubal the Son of
Gesco, that was lately chased out of Spain by Scipio, was their best Man of
War. But before he was ready to take the Field, Scipio had beaten the Troop of
Carthaginian Horse that were sent to impead his landing, and slain Hanno their
Captain; he had also sacked one of their Towns, and taken eight thousand
Prisoners, and sent them into Sicily. He took also Salva which he fortified.
Utica besieged.
Then passed he to Utica and besieged it forty days with all sorts of Engines,
but prevailed not. By this time Asdrubal had gotten thirty thousand Foot, and
three thousand Horse, but all raw Soldiers, and King Syphax brought to their
help fifty thousand Foot and ten thousand Horse, with which they marched
bravely toward Scipio, who thereupon lest the Siege, and encamped upon the
Shore in a place of advantage which he strongly fortified, and Winter drawing
on, Massanissa, brought in great store of Corn, Cattle, and other Provisions to
him. Asdrubal and Syphax encamped near unto him: their Soldiers covered their
Huts with Mats and Reeds, and dry Boughs, and being held in hand about a treaty
of Peace, they grew remiss, and careless in keeping their Guard, which Scipio
being informed of, took his opportunity in the Night to set their Camps on
fire, The Carthaginians beaten.
and in the confusion slew, and took Prisoners most of them.

Yet did the Carthaginians make shift to raise another Army of near thirty
thousand, reckoning in Syphax, and his men, and four thousand Spaniards, And a
second time.
Mercenaries, that were lately come to them: Scipio went to meet them, and
another Battle was fought, and the Victory easily obtained by Scipio against
those raw and untrained men. Thus Scipio became Master of the Field, and took
in diverse Cities, and sent Massanissa and Laelius after Syphax into his
Kingdom, whom they beat again, took him Prisoner, and partly by fair means, and
partly by soul, became Masters of most of his Kingdom, which Scipio bestowed
upon Massanissa. And this was the first time that the Romans took upon them to
make Kings.

The Carthaginians were extremely dismayed, when they heard this news, and for
the calamity which had befaln their good Friend Syphax, and when they
understood that Massanissa, their immortal Enemy, had gotten possession of his
Kingdom. They sue for Peace.
This made them send forth Ambassadors to Scipio to make suit for Peace. When
these came into Scipios presence, they basely prostrated themselves on the
ground, and kissed his Feet, and made as unworthy a Speech, beseeching him to
pass by their offenses, and to grant them Peace.

Scipio knew well in what a poor case Rome then was, and how unable to defray
the charge of the War if it should be continued, and therefore he was willing
to grant them Peace upon these conditions: That they should render up all the
Prisoners, and all their Renigadoes, and Slaves; That they should withdraw
their Armies out of Italy and Gaul: That they should not meddle with Spain, nor
with any Islands betwixt Italy and Africa: That they should deliver up all
their Ships of War, save twenty: That they should pay him a great sum of Money,
with some hundred thousand Bushels of Wheat and Barley: All these they assented
to, whereupon he granted them a Truce that they might send their Ambassadors to
the Senate of Rome. They dealt deceltfully*
But the truth was, they desired only to get time till Hannibal might come
back, in whom they reposed all their confidence: And therefore they took
occasion to pick new Quarrels with the Romans, which they were the rather
encouraged to, hearing news that Hannibal was already landed in Africa, by
whose means they hoped either to drive the Romans out of Africa, or to procure
better terms of Peace.

Hannibal departed out of Italy no less passionate then men are wont to be,
Hannibal leaves Italy.
when they leave their own Countries to go into Exile: He looked back to the
shore, accusing both Gods and Men, and cursing his own dullness in that he had
not led his Army from Cannae, hot and bloodied as it was, to the Walls of Rome.

Arriving in Africa he disembarked his Army at Leptis, Comes into Africa,
almost one hundred Miles from Carthage. He was ill provided of Horse, which he
could not easily transport out of Italy. From thence he passed through the
inland Country, gathering Friends by the way. Tychaeus, a Numidian Prince that
had the best Horses, he allured to join with him: and one Mazetallus, another
Prince brought him a thousand Horse. The Carthaginians in the mean time
neglected to make those preparations that would have secured the Victory, and
yet they sent to Hannibal, requiring him without delay to do what he could.
Hannibal answered, that they were his Lords, and therefore might dispose of him
and his Army, but since he was General of their Forces, he desired that he
might have leave to make choice of his own time. Yet to please them, he made
long marches to Zama, and there encamped.

From Zama he sent forth his Scouts to learn where the Romans lay, and what
they were doing. Some of these were taken and brought to Scipio, who showed
them all his Camp and so dismissed them. Hannibal admired at his Generosity,
and had a very great desire of an interview that he might talk with him: and
this he signified by a Messenger. Scipio embraced the motion and sent him word
when and where he might meet with him. Accordingly the two Generals rode forth,
An interview of the Generals.
with each of them a Troop of Horse till they met, and then their men were bid
to stand off: Each of them had his Enterpreter, and when they met they stood
silent for a while, viewing one the other with mutual admiration. Then began
Hannibal to salute the Roman to this effect. Hannibals Speech to
That it had been better for Carthage and Rome, if they could have contained
their ambition within the shoars of Africa and Italy: for that the Countries of
Sicily and Spain, were no suffic^ent recompense for so many Fleets as had been
lost, and so much blood as had been shed, in making those costly purchases: But
since what was past could not be recalled, he said, That it was time for them
at the length to put an end to those contentions, and to Pray the Gods to endue
them with more Wisdom for hereafter. To which peaceable disposition his own
years, and long trial of Fortune, both good and bad, made him inclinable: But
he feared that Scipio, for want of such experiences, would rather fix his mind
upon uncertain hopes, than upon the contemplation of that mutability, whereunto
all humane affairs are subject: Yet (said he) my own example may peradventure
teach thee moderation. For I am that same Hannibal that after my Victory at
Cannae, wan the greatest part of Italy, and devised what I should do with your
City of Rome which I hoped verily to have taken. Once I brought my Army to your
Walls, as thou have since brought thine to ours of Carthage: But see the
change, I now stand here entreating thee for Peace. This may teach thee
Fortunes instability. I fought with thy Father Scipio. He was the first Roman
General I met with in the Field: I did then little think that the time would
come when I should have such business with his Son: and thou may have
experience of the like in thy self, who knows how soon? what say thou? Can
thou be content that we leave to you Spain, and all the Islands between Italy
and Africa? By effecting this thou shall have Glory enough, and the Romans may
well be glad of such a bargain: and we will be faithful in observing the Peace
with you. If thou refusest this, consider what an hazard thou must run to get
a little more? If thou stayest but till tomorrow Night, thou must take such
Fortune as the Gods shall allot. The issue of Battles is uncertain, and often
beguiles expectation. Let us therefore without more ado make Peace. Say not
that some false-hearted Citizens of ours, dealt fraudulently of late in the
like Treaty. Its I Hannibal that now desire Peace, which I would never do but
that I think it expedient for our Country: and judging it expedient I will
always maintain it.

To this Scipio answered, Scipio replies*
That he was not ignorant of the mutability of Fortune: That without any note
of insolence he might well refuse the conditions offered: But (said he) if thy
Citizens can be contented, besides what I proposed and they formerly assented
to, to make such reparation for these late injuries as I shall require, then I
will further advise what answer to give you, otherwise prepare for War, and
expect the issue.

Hereupon they brake off, and each returned to his own Camp, bidding there
Soldiers to prepare for Battle, They prepare to fight.
wherein should be decided the quarrel between Rome and Carthage. The next
Morning at broak of Day they issued into the Field, each of them ordering their
Men as they judged most convenient After which Scipio rode up and down his
Army, bidding them remember what they had achieved since they came into
Africa. He told them, that if they wan the Day, the War was at an end, and this
Victory would make them Lords of all the World, for after this, none should be
able to resist them: But if they were beaten, there was no possibility of
escaping; they must either conquer or die, or be miserable Slaves under most
merciless enemies.

Hannibal was far the weaker in Horse and a great part of his Army were raw
Soldiers, yet his Lords of Carthage would brook no delay. He encouraged
therefore his men as was most furtable to their qualities. To the Mercenaries
he promised bountiful rewards. The Carthaginians he threatened with inevitable
servitude if they lost the day: but especially he animated his old fellow
Soldiers by the many Victories which they had gotten over those that far
exceeded them in number. He bad them look on their Enemies and see whether they
were not by far fewer than that huge Army they had ^laughtered at Cannae. He
bad them remember that it was the Father of this Scipio whom they had made to
run away, etc. Wherefore he entreated them, upon whose virtue he meant wholly
to repose himself, that they would strive that day to make good their honor,
and to purchase the fame of Men Invincible.

When the Armies drew near, the Numidian Horsemen on both sides began to
Skirmish: A Battle.
the Trumpets, and other Instruments sounded to Battle. Hannibals Elephants
(which were always an uncertain kind of help) were to break upon the Romans:
But some of them ran back upon their own Horse, which they so disordered, that
Massanissa, taking the advantage, before they could re-ally, charged them, and
drove them quite out of the Field. The rest of these Beasts, made a great spoil
amongst the Roman Velites, but being wounded, they ran back upon the right
point of their own Battle, and disordered the Carthaginian Horse that were in
the Wing; which gave such advantage to the Roman Horse, that charging them
when they were in disorder, they drove them away likewise. Then did the
Battles of Foot advance, and ran one at the other, and the Mercenaries at the
first seemed to have the better of the Romans: But at length the Roman
Discipline prevailed against boisterous strength. And whereas the Romans, were
seconded by their Friends, these Mercenaries received no help from those that
should have seconded them. For the new raised Africans, when they saw the
Mercenaries give back, they retired also, which made the hired Soldiers think
themselves, betrayed, whereupon they declined the fight. The Carthaginian
Battle was herewith more terrified than before, so that refusing to give way to
the Mercenaries they fell out amongst themselves, and forbore to make head
against their Enemies. Thus were many of them beaten down and slain through
their own indiscretion: And this gave the Romans such advantage that they made
a great slaughter both of the Carthaginians and Mercenaries, who could neither
sight nor easily fly. Such as could, ran toward Hannibal, who kept his ground
and would not stir to help these run-aways.

Then did Scipio advance against Hannibal who entertained him after another
manner than ever he had been received in his Life before. All the former days
work, seemed but a Pastime in comparison of this. The Romans were encouraged
because they had prevailed all the day before; they were also far more in
number: But Hannibals old Blades were fresh and the better men. They fought
with such obstinate resolution that no man gave back one Foot, but rather chose
to die than to lose their ground, so that for a long time the Victory was
uncertain: But the return of Massanissa and Laeli is with the Horse from the
pursuit of the Enemies, was to the Romans most happy and in a needful time.
These upon a sudden, charging Hannibal upon the Rear, Hannibal beaten.
overbore them with mere violence and put them to rout.

Hannibal with a few Horse saved himself by flight, He flies to Carthage, and
persuades them to seek Peace.
and staid not till he came to Carthage; where, coming into the Senate, he told
them plainly, that there was no other way left but to make such a Peace as
could be procured. Amongst other things it was agreed, that the Carthaginians
should pay to the Romans two hundred Talents a year for fifty years together.
Which money, when it came to be collected, there was pitious lamentation amonst
the People, the Roman Yoke beginning to pinch them already, that some of the
Senators could not forbear Weeping; but Hannibal could not refrain from
Laughter: For which Asdrubal Haedus (one of Hanno's faction) checked him,
saying, that it ill becommed him to laugh, since he had been the cause why all
others did Weep. He answered, that Laughter did not always proceed from Joy,
but sometimes from indignation. Yet (said he) My Laughter is more seasonable,
and less obsurd, than your Tears. For you should have wept when you gave up
your Ships and Elephants, and when you bound up your hands from use of Arms
without the good leave of the Romans. This miserable condition keeps us under,
and holds us in assured servitude. But of these things you had no feeling: Now
when a little money is wrung from you, you are very sensible of that. God grant
that the time come not, wherein you shall acknowledge, that it was the least
part of your misery for which you have shed these Tears.

Afterward Hannibal in the Civil administration of the City, His Civil
employment.
gave an overthrow or two, to the Judges which at that time bore all the sway
in Carthage, having all the lives, goods, and fame of the rest in their power.
Shortly after Hannibal was chosen Praetor, by virtue of which Office, he was
superior to them for that year. He sent upon an occasion for one of the
Treasurers to come to him, but he proudly refused, whereupon Hannibal sent a
Pursevant for him, and brought him in Judgment before the People, accusing not
only him, but the rest of the Judges for their insolency, and unbridled Power,
withal, propounding a Law that the Judges should be chosen from Year to Year.
He found also that they had robbed the Treasury, which caused the Taxes to be
laid upon the common People, whereof he made such plain demonstration, that
they were compelled to restore with shame what they had gotten by Knavery. This
so irritated his Enemies, who were of the Roman Faction, He is complained of to
the Romans.
that they complained to the Roman Senate that the Barchine Faction grew strong
again, and that Hannibal would shortly be in Arms: For he was like a Wild Beast
that could never be tamed: that he held secret intelligence with King
Antiochus, who was an enemy to the Romans, etc.

Hereupon the Senate sent three Ambassadors to Carthage to demand Hannibal, but
he kept such good espial upon the Romans that he was informed of their
intentions, against which he was never unprepared: And therefore when Night was
come, he stole out of the City, accompanied with two Friends whom he could
trust, and having Horses in a readiness, he rode all Night, and came to a Tower
of his own by the Sea side, and having provided a Ship in a readiness, He flies
from Carthage to Tire.
he bad Africa, farewell, lamenting the misfortune of his Country more than his
own, and shaped his course to Tire which was the Mother City of Carthage: There
he was entertained Royally, in whose worth and honor the Tyrians thought
themselves to have interest because of the affinity between the Cities, He goes
to Antiochus.
Thence went he to Antiochus, who was exceeding glad of his coming, intending
War against the Romans.

To him Hannibal gave excellent advice how he might carry on his War against
the Romans, His counsel neglected.
with best advantage; but Antiochus hearkened more to his Courtiers than to
him, and so was shamefully beaten by the Romans: at which time he admired
Hannibal as a Wise Man, yea as a Prophet, who long before had foreseen, and
foretold him what now was come to pass, and when it was too late, wished
that he had followed his Counsel. To be brief, Antiochus was forced by the
Romans to sue for Peace, which at last the Romans yielded to: Provided amongst
other things, that Hannibal might be delivered into their hands. Hannibal
getting an incling of this, fled to Gortina in Creet, where he lived a long
time very quietly, but at length he fell into the envy of many by reason of his
great wealth, vvhereupon he filled certain great Chests with Lead, and
deposited them in the Temple of Diana there, as if he kept the Treasure for a
dead lift: and thereupon the People, having such a Pledge as that of him, looked
less after him: He flies to Prusias.
But he in the mean time stole away to Prusias, King of Bythinia, having first
molten his Gold, and povvered it into some hollovv Statues of Brass, which he
carried away with him.

Shortly after there fell a War betvveen Prusias, and Eumenes, King of
Pergamus, Prusias being encouraged to break his League and to make War upon
him, by his considence in Hannibal, whom he had their to manage his War for
him. The War therefore grew hot betwixt them, both by Land and Sea. But
Eumenes, by the assistance of the Romans, overpowred Prusias in both: And
whereas Prusias was but weak of himself, Hannibal procured him the assistance
of some other Kings and States, and those of very Warlike Nations: and amongst
them the aid of Philip, King of Macedonia, who sent him Philocles his General,
with a very considerable Army to help him.

When Prusias had received an overthrow from Eumenes by Land, he sought to try
his Fortune by Sea, wherein yet he was too weak for him: wherefore Hannibal
advised him to try whether he could not do that by Policy, which by plain force
he was not able to effect. He put therefore a multitude of all sorts of
Serpents into Earthen Pitchers, to be hurled aboard the Enemies Ships when they
were in sight: giving order to the Soldiers and Seamen to set all upon the
Ship wherein Eumenes himself was, and to defend themselves from the rest as
well as they could: and that he might the more certainly know in which Ship
Eumenes was, he sent an Herald beforehand with a Letter, containing nothing
but a mere flout to Eumenes, and full of abuses to his Person. Whenas therefore
Prus^^is his men came to it, they fought neither against great nor small, but
only against the Ship wherein Eumenes was, whereupon he was faign to seek his
safety by flight; yet had he perished had he not trust in upon the next shore,
where he had placed, for a relief upon all occasions, a company of his men.

As for Eumenes his other Ships, when they pressed hard upon the Enemy, they
let fly amongst them their Earthern Pitchers full of Snakes, which at first
Se^med to them a ridiculous thing: but when the Pitchers, falling upon the
Deeks, brake in pieces, out flew the Snakes, so that they could stir no where
in the Ships by reason of the Serpents, whereby they found themselves no less
annoied by their stings, than with the Arrows of their Enemies, which caused
them to give over fighting, and to fly to their Camp which was upon the Shore.

Thus Hannibal by this trick, got the better of Eumenes in that fight. Nor then
only, but also in sundry other encounters; and by one Stratagem or other, he
ever put Eumenes to the worst. And once when he advised Prusias to fight, and
he durst not, because the entrails of the Beast (said he) forbid me. What (said
Hannibal) will you rely more upon a little piece of flesh in a Calf, than upon
the Judgment of an old experienced Captain in the Field?

Now as soon as news of these things came to the Senate at Rome, they sent T.
Quintius Flaminius Ambassador to Prusias, not so much to withdraw him from
prosecuting the War against Eumenes, as to entreat him to deliver to them
Hannibal, the most spiteful Enemy they had in all the World.

Prusias, Who betrays him.
to gratify the Romans resolved either to kill Hannibal, or to deliver him
alive into the hands of Flaminius, for which end he sent a Troop of Soldiers
to inviron the lodging where Hannibal lay. But Hannibal having before found
cause to suspect the faith of Prusias, had made some secret sallies under
ground to save himself from any Treasonable, or sudden assault. But finding now
that all passages were shut up against him, he had recourse to his last remedy,
which he was constrained to put in practice as well to frustrate his Enemies
from their Triumphing over him, as to save himself from their torture and
merciless hands, who, as he well knew, would neither respect his famous
enterprises, his Honor, nor his Age. When therefore he saw no other way of
escaping he took the Poison, which he always had in readiness for such an
exigent, and being ready to swallow it down, he uttered these Words. His last
Speech.
I will now (said he) deliver the Romans from that fear which has so long
possessed them: that fear which makes them impatient of attending the Death of
an Old Man. This Victory of Flaminius over me, which am disarmed, and betrayed
into his hands, shall never be numbered in the rest of his Heroical deeds. No:
it shall make it manifest to all the Nations of the World, how far the Ancient
Roman Virtue is degenerated, and corrupted. For such was the Nobleness of their
Forefathers, as when King Pyrrhus invaded them in Italy, and was ready to give
them Battle at their own Doors, they gave him intelligence of the Treason
intended against him by Poison: whenas these of a latter race, have employed
Flaminius, a Man who heretofore had been one of their Consuls, to practice with
Prusias, contrary to the honor of a King, contrary to his Faith given for my
safety, and contrary to the Laws of Hospitality, to slay, or deliver up his own
Guest. He Poisons himself.
Then drank he off that Poison, and died.

P. Scipio Africanus in a discourse which he had with Hannibal, asked him,
which of all the famous Captains that ever lived, he judged most Worthy?
Hannibal gave to Alexander the Great, the first place: to Pyrrhus the second:
and the third he challenged to himself. But Scipio, who thought his own Title
better, than that it ought to be forgotten, asked yet further, What then
would thou have said, Hannibal, if thou had vanquished me? The
Carthaginian replied, Then would I not have given the first place to Alexander,
but have claimed it as due unto my self.

When the conditions of Peace granted by the Romdns to the Carthaginians were
reported to the Citizens, they were very unpleasing, whereupon one Gesco, stood
up to speak against them, persuading the People not to yield to such
intolerable demands: But Hannibal observing what favorable audience was given
to this vain Orator, by the unquiet, yet unwarlike Multitude, he was bold to
pull him down from his standing by plain force: Hereat all the People murmured,
as if their common liberty were too much wronged by such insolence of this
presumptuous Captain: Which Hannibal perceiving, rose up and spoke unto them,
saying; That they ought to pardon him if he had done otherwise than the customs
of the City would allow, for a^ much as he had been thence absent ever since he
was a Boy of nine years old, until he was now a Man of five and forty. Having
thus excused himself, he exhorted them to embrace the Peace, as wanting ability
to defend themselves, had the demands of the Enemy been y^^ more rigorous.

His Father Amilcar, at what time he did Sacrifice, being ready to take his
journey into Spain, called his Son Hannibal, being than but nine years old,
caused him to lay his hand upon the Altar, and to swear, that being come to
man's estate, he should pursue the Romans with immortal hatred, and that he
should work them all the mischief that possible he could.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF POMPEY THE GREAT.
STrabo, His Parentage.
the Father of Pompey was much hated by the People of Rome, who feared his
greatness obtained by Arms (for he was a Noble Captain) and to show their
distaste, when he was slain by a Thunderbolt, as his Body was carrying to
burial, the People seized upon it, and did great despite unto it: But on the
contrary, never any other Roman; besides Pompey, had the love of the People so
soon, nor that continued constanter, both in prosperity, and adversity, than it
did to him: And that which procured their love, His towardliness.
and good liking, was his temperance in life, aptness to Arms, Eloquence of
Speech, Faithfulness of his Word, and Courtesy in his Behavior. He gave
without disdain, and received with great Honor: Being but a Child, he had a
certain grace in his look, that wan Men's good wills before he spoke. His
countenance was amiable mixed with gravity; and when he come to Man's estate,
there appeared in his gesture, and behavior, a grave, and Princely Majesty.
His hair stood a little upright, and the sweet cast, and motion of his eyes
made him very graceful. He was sober, and temperate in his Diet, contenting
himself with common Meats; and when once in his sickness, his Physicians
advised him to eat a Thrush, and none could be gotten, a Friend told him, that
Lucullus (a certain great man) kept them all the year, where he should be sure
not to fail; he replied, What then? His abstinence.
If Lucullus were not, should not Pompey live? and therewithal, letting his
Physicians counsel alone, he bad them dress him such meat as was easy to be
had.

Pompey being a young man, and in the Field with his Father, who was in Arms
against Cinna, there lay with him in his Tent a Companion of his, called Lucius
Terentius, who being corrupted with money, promised Cinna to slay Pompey, and
other of his Confederates had promised to set their Generals Tent on fire. This
conspiracy was discovered to Pompey as he sat at Supper, which nothing amazed
him, but he drank freely, and was merrier with Terentius than ordinary: His
courage and prudence.
But when it was bedtime, he stole out of his own Tent, and went into his
Fathers. In the Night Terentius went into Pompey's Tent, and with his Sword
gave many a thrust into the Matteress: Presently also the whole Camp was in an
uprore, and the Soldiers, out of hatred to their General, would needs in all
have have gone, and submitted to the Enemy: and Strabo durst not go out of his
Tent to speak to them, but Pompey ran amongst these Mutineers, and with Tears
in his Eyes besought them not to betray their General: He went also and threw
himself flat on the Ground athwart the Gate of the Camp, and told them that
they should march over him if they had such a desire to be gone: whereupon, the
Soldiers being ashamed of their treachery, returned to their Lodgings.

Presently after his Fathers death, He is accuised
Pompey being his heir, he was accused for robbing the common Treasury, and in
particular for taking certain toils, and cords of Hunters nets: He confessed
the having of them, and that his Father gave him them when the City of Asculum
was taken; but that he had since lost them, when Cinna came to Rome with his
Army, at which time the unruly Soldiers, breaking into his House, plundered
him of all that he had. This matter had many days of hearing before it was
determined, in which time Pompey showed so much courage, and prudence in
managing of it, that he wan such credit, and favor by it, that Antistius, who
at that time was Praetor, and Judge of the cause, fell into such a likeing of
him, that secretly he offered him his Daughter in Marriage, and Pompey liked so
well of the Match, that the Parties were privately made sure each to other: And
not long after, through the care, and pains of Antistius, And cleared.
when the Judges came to pass Sentence, Pompey was cleared.

This business being over, His marriage.
Pompey married Antistia: after which going into Cinna's Camp, he was
wrongfully accused of some misdemeanors; whereupon, being afraid of the
Tyrant, he secretly stole away; and when he could not be found in Cinna's Camp,
there went a rumor abroad that Cinna had murdered him, which so irritated
some, who of a long time had hated Cinna, that upon this occasion, they rose
up against him: But he thinking to save himself by flight, was pursued by a
Captain with a drawn Sword; Cinna seeing him, fell down on his knees to him,
and proffered him his Signet Ring, which was of great price, to spare his
life: Tush (said the Captain) I come not to seal any Covenant, but to be
revenged upon a Villain, and cruel Tyrant, Cinna slain.
and vvithall ran him through and slew him.

Cinna being thus dispatched, Carbo succeeds.
Carbo took upon him the Govenment, a more cruel Tyrant than the former: And
after him, Sylla succeeded; and at this time the Romans, being grievously
oppressed by one Tyrant after another, thought themselves happy in the change
of Governors. For their City was brought into such misery, as hoping no more
to see Rome recover her lost liberty, they desired yet a more tolerable
bondage.

In Sylla's time, And Sylla.
Pompey was at a place in Italy called Picenum, in the Marches of Anconae,
where he had certain Lands, but much more the love and favor of the Citizens
for his Fathers sake. He seeing that the most Noble Men of Rome forsook their
Houses, and estates to repair to the Camp of Sylla, as unto a place of safety,
he also resolved to go thither, yet not in a base manner, like a Fugitive, but
purposed to raise an Army, and to go in an Honorable manner as one that could
do Sylla good service. So he made trial of the good will of the Picentines, who
readily joined with him, and whereas there was amongst them one Vindius, who
opposed Pompey, saying, That a Boy that came from School but the other day,
must now in have be a Captain, the rest of the Citizens were so incensed
against him, that they ran upon him and slew him.

Thus Pompey being but twenty three years old, not tarrying for Commission from
any man, took upon himself Authority, and causing a Tribunal to be set up in
the midst of the Market place of Auximum, a great, and populous City, he
commanded the two Brethren, called the Ventidians (the chiefest men of the
City, but his Enemies) presently to avoid the City: Then began he to leavy men
to constitute Captains, Lieutenants, Sergeants, and such other Officers as
appertain to an Army. And from thence he went to the other neighboring Cities,
where he did the like, so that in a short space he had gotten three complete
Legions together, Pompey raised an Army.
as also Ammunition, Carts, and all other necessaries for them.

In this sort did Pompey advance toward Sylla; He goes toward Sylla.
not in have, as a man that was afraid to be met with by the way, but by small
Journeys, lodging still where he might have the best advantage against an
Enemy, causing the Cities wheresoever he came to declare against Carbo, and for
Sylla. Yet three Captains who adhered to Carbo, Carinna, Caelius, and Brutus,
did in three several places compass him in on every side, thinking to have
destroyed him. Pompey was nothing amazed hereat, His danger by the way.
but marshalling his Army, he first set upon Brutus, having placed his Horsemen
(amongst whom himself was in Person) before the Battle of his Footmen, and when
the Men at Arms of his Enemy (who were Gauls) came to charge upon him, he
singled out the chiefest amongst them, and ran him through with his Spear, and
slew him. His Victories.
The other Gauls seeing their Champion slain, turned their backs, and in their
flight, over ran their own Footmen; so that at last they all fled for their
lives.

Then the Cities round about, being terrified with this overthrow, came in and
yielded themselves to Pompey: Afterward Scipio also the Consul, coming against
Pompey to fight him, when the Battles were ready to join, before they threw
their Darts, Scipio's Soldiers saluted Pompey, and went over to his side,
whereupon Scipio was faign to fly. And lastly Carbo himself sending diverse
Troops of Horse against him by the River Arsis, Pompey charged them so
furiously, and drove them into such a place of disadvantage, that being neither
able to fight nor fly, they delivered up themselves with their Horses, Arms,
and all to his mercy.

Sylla all this while heard nothing of these overthrows which Pompey had given
to his Enemies, but understanding his danger, being environed with so many
Arms, fearing lest he should miscarry, he made have, and marched to his relief.

Pompey being informed of Sylla's approach, commanded his Captains to Arm
themselves and to set their Army in good array, that their General Sylla might
see how bravely they were appointed. For he expected that Sylla would do him
great honor, as indeed he did, even beyond his expectation: For when Sylla saw
him afar off, He meets Sylla.
coming toward him, and his Army marshelled in such good order of Battle, and
his men so bravely advancing themselves, being elated with their late
Victories, he allighted from his Horse; and when Pompey came to do his duty to
him, and called him Emperor, or Sovereign Prince, Sylla resaluted him with the
same Title, which made all that were present to wonder that he would give so
honorable a name to so young a man as Pompey was, Sylla honors him.
who as yet was not made a Senator: Considering also that Sylla himself did now
contend for that Title, and Dignity with Marius, and Scipio. The intertainment
also that Sylla gave him afterward, was every way answerable to the first
kindness that he showed him. For when Pompey at any time came to him, he would
rise up, and put off his Cap to him, which he did not to any other Noble Man
that was about him: Yet was not Pompey puffed up with all this, nor the prouder
for it.

Shortly after Sylla would have sent Pompey into Gaul (now France) because that
Metellus, the Roman General there, was thought to have done no exploit worthy
of so great an Army as he had with him: But Pompey answered, that there was no
reason to displace an ancient Captain that was of greater fame, His Modesty.
and experience then himself, Yet (said he) if Metellus himself be contented,
and will desire it of me, I will willingingly go, and help him to end this War.
Metellus being informed hereof, wrote for him to come.

P^mpey then entering Gaul, did of himself wonderful exploits, and so revived
the courage, His acts in Gaul.
and valor of old Metellus, that the War prospered exceedingly in their Hands:
But these were but Pompey's first beginnings, and were wholly obscured by the
luster of those many Wars, and great Battles which he fought afterward.

When Sylla had overcome all Italy, and was proclaimed Dictator, he rewarded
all the great Captains, and Lieutenants that had taken his part, and advanced
them to honorable places, and Dignities in the Commonwealth, freely granting
whatsoever they requested of him; But for Pompey, highly esteeming him for his
Valor, and thinking that he would be a great support to him in all his Wars,
he sought by some means to ally him to himself, Metella, his Wife being also of
the same opinion, they both persuaded him to put away his Wife Antistia, His
second marriage.
and to marry Aemilia, who was Daughter to Metella by a former Husband, though
she was married to another, and now with child by him. Tyrannical proceedings.
These marriages were wicked, and Tyrannical, fitter for Sylla's time, than
agreeable to Pompey's nature, and condition. And truly it was a shameful thing
for Pompey to forsake his Wife Antistia, who for his sake, a little before had
lost her Father, that was murdered in the very Senate House upon suspicion
that he took part with Sylla for his Son Pompey's sake: and to take Aemilia
from her lawful Husband, by whom she was great with child, and to whom she
had been married not long before: which also caused the Mother of Antistia to
lay violent hands upon her self, seeing her Daughter to receive such open and
notorious wrong. But God who hates such injustice, and cruelty, followed Pompey
with this Judgment, that his Wife Aemilia died miserably presently after in
childbirth in his House.

About this time news was brought to Sylla, that Perpenna was gotten into
Sicily, and had brought all that Island into subjection to him, where he might
safely intertain all Sylla's Enemies: That Carbo also kept the Seas thereabouts
with a certain number of Ships: That Domitius was gone into Africa, to whom
resorted many other Noblemen who were escaped from the proscriptions and
outlaries of Sylla.

Against all these was Pompey sent by his Father in Law with a great Army, He
is sent into Sicily.
who no sooner was arrived in Sicily but Perpenna fled, and left the Island to
him. Then did Pompey deal friendly and favorably with all the Citizens which
before had endured great troubles and misery, And conquer^ it.
and set them again at liberty, the Mamertines only excepted, who dwelt in
Messina: they despising his jurisdiction and Government, pleaded the ancient
privileges of the Romans which had been formerly granted unto them. His
cruelty.
But Pompey ansvvered them angerly, What do you prating to us of your Law that
have our Swords by our sides? He dealt also too cruelly with Carbo in his
misery; for he might have killed him in hot blood when he first fell into his
hands with less blame: But Pompey, when he was taken, caused him to be brought
before him, though he had been thrice Consul, and to be publicly examined,
sitting himself in his Tribunal, and condemned him to dye in the presence of
them all, to the great distaste, and offense of all that were present: Yet he
bad them take him away to execution, which was done accordingly.

Pompey dealt as cruelly also with Quintus Valerius, a man of rare parts, and
excellent Learning, who being brought to Pompey, he took him aside, and walked
a few turns with him, and when he had learned what he could of him, he
commanded his Guard to take him away and dispatch him. Pompey indeed was
compelled to make away all Sylla's enemies that fell into his hands: But for
the rest, all that he could suffer secretly to steal away, he willingly
connived at it, and would not take notice of it, yea, himself did help many to
save themselves by flight.

Pompey had determined to have taken sharp revenge of the City of the
Himerians, who had stoutly taken the enemies part: But Sthenes, one of the
Governors of the City, craved audience of Pompey, told him boldly, that he
should do great injustice if he should pardon him, who was the only offender,
and destroyed them who were not guilty. Pompey then asking him who he was that
durst take upon himself the offense of them all? Sthenes answered, That it was
himself who had persuaded his Friends, and compelled his enemies to do what was
done: Pompey being much pleased to hear the frank speech, and boldness of the
man, he forgave both him, and all the Citizens.

After this Pompey being informed that his Soldiers did kill diverse in the
highways, he caused all their Swords to be sealed up, His Prudence.
and whose seal soever was broken, he punished them soundly for it.

Pompey being busy about these matters in Sicily, he received instructions, and
a Commission from Sylla, and the Senate at Rome, to depart thence immediately
into Africa, with all his power to make War against Domitius, who had a very
great Army. Pompey accordingly speedily prepared to take the Seas, leaving
Memmius, his Sisters Husband, to Govern Sicily, and so imbarking in sixscore
Galleys and eight hundred other Ships, He passes into Africa.
wherein he transported his Victuals, Ammunition, Money, Engines for Battery,
and all other his Warlike provision, he hoised Sail, and Landed one part of his
Army at Utica, and the other at Carthage, and presently after his landing,
there came to him seven thousand Soldiers from his enemies to take his part,
besides seven whole Legions that he brought with him.

Against him came Domitius with his Army in Battle array; but before him there
was a Quagmire, His great Victories there.
that ran with a very swift stream, very hard to get over; Besides, it had
rained exceedingly all that morning, so that Domitius judging it impossible
then to fight, bad his men truss up and be gone, Pompey on the other side,
spying this advantage, caused his men to advance, and coming upon the enemy,
who was now out of order, had a cheap Victory over them, wherein he slew about
seventeen thousand of them, whereupon he was by his Soldiers saluted with the
name Imperator, or Emperor, but he told them he would not accept of that
honorable Title, so long as he saw his enemies Camp yet standing, whereupon
they ran presently and assaulted it, and took it by force, and slew Domitius
therein.

After this overthrow, all the Cities in that Country, came and submitted to
Pompey, and those that refused were taken by force. They took also King Jarbas,
who had sided with Domitius, and gave his Kingdom to Heimpsal. But Pompey being
desirous further to employ his Army, he went many days Journey into the main
Land, conquering all wheresoever he came, making the power of the Romans
dreadful to those Barbarous Nations, who before made small account of them. He
caused also the Wild Beasts of Africa to feel his force, bestowing some days in
Hunting of Lions, and Elephants: And in forty days he conquered his enemies,
subdued Africa, and settled the affairs of the Kings, and Kingdoms of that part
of the Country, being then but twenty four years old.

Pompey being returned to Utica, He is commanded to disband his Army.
he received Letters from Sylla, willing him to discharge his Army, and to
retain only one Legion with himself till the coming of another Captain that was
to succeed him in the Government of that Country. This grieved him not a
little, though he made no show of it at all: But the Soldiers were much
offended at it, and when Pompey prayed them to depart, they gave out broad
speeches against Sylla, and told him directly that they were resolved not to
leave him whatsoever became of them, and that they would not leave him to trust
to a Tyrant. His Soldiers love to him.
Pompey, seeing that he could not prevail with them, rose out of his seat, and
went into his Tent weeping: But the Soldiers followed him, and brought him
again to his Chair of State, entreating him to remain there, and command them,
and he desired them to obey Sylla, and to leave their mutinies. In fine, he
seeing they were resolved to press him, swore that he would kill himself rather
then they should compel him, yet scarce did they leave him thus.

Hereupon it was reported to Sylla that Pompey was rebelled against him; which
when he heard, he said to his Friends, Well, I see then that it is my Destiny
in my old age to fight with Children. This he said, because of Marius the
younger, who had done him much mischief, and had greatly endangered him. His
return into Italy.
But afterward, understanding the truth, and hearing that all generally in
Rome would go to meet Pompey, and receive him with all the honor they could,
he resolved to go beyond them all in show of good will: wherefore going out of
his House to meet him, he embraced him with great affection, Sylla honors him.
and welcomed him home, calling him Magnus, that is Great, and commanded all
that were present to give him that Name also.

After this Pompey required the honor of a Triumph, which Sylla opposed,
affirming that this honor should be granted to none but to such as had been
Consuls, or at least Praetors: He told him also, that if he should stand for it
he would oppose him. Pompey was not discouraged herewith, but boldly told him,
That all men did honor, not the setting, but the rising Sun. Sylla heard not
well what he said, and therefore enquired, and when it was told him, he wondered
at the confidence of so young a man, and cried out twice, Let him then Triumph
on Gods Name. His first Triumph.
Yet many were offended at it, but Pompey to anger them more, would be brought
in his Triumphant Chariot drawn by four Elephants, many of which Beasts he had
taken from the Kings, and Princes whom he had subdued: Howbeit the City Gates
being to narrow for them, he was faign to leave his Elephants, and to be drawn
in with Horses.

Now his Soldiers that had not all they looked for, nor that was promised to
them, sought to hinder his Triumph, which being reported to him, he said. That
he would rather lose all his preparations, than be forced to flatter them: He
might have been made a Senator if he had sought after it, but in that he did
not, Sylla envi^^ him,
being so young, it pleased the People exceedingly, especially when after his
Triumph they saw him still amongst the Roman Knights: On the other side Sylla
was much vexed to see him come so fast forward, and so soon to rise to so great
credit: yet being ashamed to hinder him, he suppressed it, till Pompey,
contrary to his mind, brought in Lepidus to be Consul, through the good will of
the People that furthered his desire. Hereupon Sylla seeing Pompey returning
cross the Market place after the election, The People love him.
with a great train of followers, he said to him, O young man! I see thou art
glad of this Victory, and so thou have cause: for questionless its a brave
thing that through the favor of the People thou have brought in Lepidus ( the
vilest person of all other) to be Consul, before Catulus the honestest man in
the City: But let me advise thee to look well to thy self, for thou have
advanced one that will be a dangerous enemy to thee.

Sylla also discovered his ill will to Pompey, in that when he made his Will,
he gave Legacies to every one of his Friends, and left Pompey wholly out:
Sylla's Death.
yet did Pompey take it well enough, and whereas Lepidus, with some others,
after Sylla's Death, would have kept his Body from being Buried in the Field of
Mars, and from Funeral solemnities, Pompey prevailed to bury him honorably.

Shortly after Sylla's Death, his Prophecy to Pompey concerning Lepidus proved
true; For Lepidus openly usurping the power which Sylla had, raised an Army of
those of Marius his faction, whom Sylla had hitherto suppressed, which put
Pompey upon his best skill, Pompeys Wars with Lepidus.
and experience; For which end he presently took part with the Nobility, and
the honester part of the People, by whom he was employed to raise an Army
against Lepidus, who had already the greatest part of Italy, and by the help of
Brutus, kept Gaul on this side the Mountains: the rest, Pompey easily subjected
to himself, only he was somewhat long in besieging Brutus in Modena. During
which time, Lepidus brought his Army to the Gates of Rome, demanding his second
Consulship, which much affrighted the People: But they were soon comforted by a
Letter which Pompey sent, wherein he informed them that he had ended his Wars
without bloodshed. For Brutus had yielded himself to Pompey who had slain him.

Shortly after, Lepidus was driven out of Italy into Sardinia, where he fell
sick, and died. At this time Sertorius was in Spain, who kept the Romans in
great awe, being a valiant Captain, and one to whom all the Fugitives resorted.
He had already overthrown many inferior Captains, and was now grapling with
Metellus Pius, who in his youth had been a Noble Soldier, but now being old,
and too wary, he neglected many opportunities, which Sertorius, by his
dexterity took out of his hands.

Hereupon Pompey keeping his Army together, endeavored, by the help of his
Friends, to be sent into Spain, as an assistant to Metellus: and at last, by
the endeavor of Lucius Philippicus, he obtained the Government of that Country.

When Pompey was arrived in Spain, Sertorius gave out bitter jeers against him,
He goes into Spain.
saying, That he would use no other weapons against the young Boy but Rods: and
that, if he were not afraid of the old woman, meaning Metellus, much less was
he afraid of him. Yet for all these brags, he stood better upon his guard, and
went stronger to fight than he did before, being afraid of Pompey. In this War
the success was very various, yet nothing grieved Pompey more than Sertorius
his winning the City Lauron. His Wars there.
Yet shortly after in a set Battle, near the City of Valentia, he slew
Herennius, and Perpena, both Gallant Soldiers, and Lieutenants to Sertorius,
with ten thousand of their men. This Victory so encouraged Pompey, that he
hasted to fight with Sertorius himself before Metellus came to him, that he
might have the sole Glory of the Conquest. So they both met by the River of
Sucron in the evening, both fearing the coming of Metellus, the one that he
might fight alone, the other that he might fight with one alone. But when it
came to trial, the Victory fell out doubtful, for either of their wings had the
upper hand: Sertorius wa^ great honor in this Battle, bearing all before him
wheresoever he went: and Pompey encountering a great man at Arms, cut off one
of his hands, yet he escaped by turning up his Horse with very rich caparisons
amongst Pompey's followers, and whilst they were contending about the Horse, he
escaped.

The next morning very early, both the Generals brought their Armies again into
the Field, to confirm the Victory, which either of them supposed that he had
gotten: But Metellus, coming to Pompey at that present, Sertorius retreated,
and dispersed his Army. Pompey going to meet Metellus; when they came near, he
commanded his Sergeants, and Officers to put down their bundles of Rods, and
Axes which they carried before him, to honor Metellus the more, being a better
man than himself: But Metellus would not suffer it, but in every thing made
Pompey his equal, only when they Camped together, Metellus gave the watch word
to all the Army.

Sertorius with a running Army, cut them short of Victuals, spoiling the
Country, and keeping the Seaside, so that they were forced to divide
themselves and to go into other places for Provision. Pompey in the mean time
having spent most of his estate in this War, sent to Rome for money to pay his
Soldiers, threatening that if they would send him no money, he would return
with his Army into Italy. Lucullus being now Consul, though he was Pompey's
enemy, yet procured the money for him, that himself might the better prevail to
be sent against King Methridates: For he feared that if Pompey returned into
Italy, he would procure to have that employment.

In the men time Sertorius died, and Perpenna, who was chiefest man about him,
supplied his room. But though he had the same Army, the same means, and the
same power, yet had he not the same wit, and skill to use it. Pompey therefore
marching directly against him, quickly discovered his insufficiency, and laid a
bait for him, sending ten Troops to prey in the Fields, commanding them to
disperse themselves abroad, which accordingly they did, and Perpenna, took the
opportunity, and charged upon them, and had them in chase, but Pompey tarrying
for them at a Foord, was ready with his Army in good order, His Victory.
gave them Battle, and obtained the Victory, and thus ended all the War: For
most of the Captains were slain, and Perpenna himself taken Prisoner, whom he
presently put to Death. Perpenna showed to Pompey Letters from the greatest
Noblemen of Rome, who were desirous of change of Government, willing him to
return into Italy. But Pompey fearing that they might occasion great commotions
in Rome, His Prudence.
put Perpenna presently to Death, and burned all the writings, not so much as
reading any one of them.

Pompey after this, His return into Italy.
remained in Spain till he had pacified all tumults, and then went with his
Army back into Italy, and arrived just when the War of the Bondmen and Fencers,
led by Spartacus, was in the greatest fury. Upon Pompey's coming, Crassus being
sent General against them, made have to give them Battle, wherein he overcame
them and slew twelve thousand and three hundred of these fugitive Slaves. Yet
Fortune intending to give Pompey some part of the honor, His Victory over the
Fencers.
five thousand of these Bondmen, who escaped from the Battle, fell into his
hands, whom he overcame, and wrote to the Senate at Rome, that Perpenna had
overcome the Fencers in Battle, and that he had plucked up this War by the
roots. The Romans receiving these Letters, were very glad of the news for the
love which they bore to him. Yet for all the great honor and love they did
bear to him, they suspected, and were afraid of him, because he did not disband
his Army, fearing that he would follow Sylla's steps, and rule over them by
force: Hereupon as many went forth to meet him out of fear, as out of good
will. But when he told them, that he would disband his Army so soon as he had
Triumphed, then his ill-willers could blame him for nothing, but that he
inclined more to the People than to the Nobles; and because he desired to
restore the Tribuneship to the People, which Sylla had put down.

Indeed the common People at Rome never longed for any thing more than they did
to see the Office of the Tribunes set up again: His favor with the People.
and Pompey was very glad that he had such an opportunity, thereby to
ingratiate himself with them, and to requite the love which they had showed to
him. This was the second Triumph, and the first Consulship which the Senate
decreed to Pompey, which made him neither the greater, nor the better man, Yet
was it such an honor, as Crassus (the richest, greatest, and eloquentest man
in Rome) durst not demand before he had requested Pompey's good will therein:
And truly Pompey was very glad of the request, having of a long time sought an
opportunity whereby to gratify him, and therefore he made earnest suit to the
People for him, assuring them that he would as much thank them for making
Crassus his fellow-consul, and Colleage, as he would for making himself Consul.

Yet when Pompey had obtained his request, and they were both created Consuls,
they were in all things contrary one to the other, and never agreed in any one
thing whilst they ruled together: Crassus had the more authority with the
Senate, and Pompey with the People: for he restored to them the Office of
Tribunes, and passed by Edict, that the Knights of Rome should have power again
to Judge in causes both civil and criminal. This wonderfully pleased the
people, when himself came in Person to the Censors, and prayed that he might be
dispensed with for going into the Wars.

At this time Gellius and Lentulus were the Censors, who being honorably set
in their Tribunal seats, taking a view of all the Roman Knights that mustered
before them, they marvelled when they saw Pompey coming, with all the Ensigns
of a Consul born before him, and himself (as other Knights did) leading his
Horse by the Bridle: and when he came near, he commanded the Sergeants that
carried the Axes before him, to make room for him to pass by the Bars with his
Horse, where the Censors sat. This made the People to flock about him,
wondering and rejoicing with great silence: the Censors themselves also*were
mavelous glad to see him so obedient to the Law, His Humility,
and did him great reverence. Then did the elder of the Censors examine him
thus; Pompey the Great, I pray thee tell me, if thous did serve so long in
the War as the Law does appoint? Pompey answered aloud, Yes verily have I done,
and that under no Captain but my self. The People hearing this, shouted aloud
for joy, and the Censors themselves came down from their seats, and accompanied
Pompey to his House, to please the great multitude that followed him, clapping
their hands for joy.

At the end of their Consulship, grudges growing higher between Crassus, and
Pompey, there was one Gaius Aurelius, a Knight, who till then had never spoken
in the public Assembly: He getting up into the Pulpit for Orations, told the
People openly, that that night Jupiter had appeared to him, and commanded him
to tell both the Consuls from him, that they should not leave their Office
before they were reconciled together: Yet for all this Pompey stirred not: But
Crassus took him by the hand, and spoke thus before the People; My Lords! I
think it no dishonor to me to give place to Pompey, since you your selves have
thought him worthy to be called the Great, before he had any hair on his face,
and to whom you granted the honor of two Triumphs before he came to be a
Senator. Having thus spoken, they were reconciled together, and so gave up
their Office.

Crassus after this, retired to his former manner of life, and Pompey, as much
as he could, avoided pleading men's causes in public, and by degrees withdrew
himself from frequenting the Marketplace, and came seldom abroad, but when he
did, His Pride.
he had always a great train following him. It was a rare thing to see him to
be familiar with any one, or to come abroad but with a great company of
attendants.

The power of the Pirates upon the Seas began in Cilicia, The power of the
Pirates.
of which at first there was no great account made, till they grew bold and
venturous in King Methridates Wars, being hired to serve him: and when the
Romans engaged in Civil Wars at home, they neglected looking after them, which
made them more audacious. For they did not only rob and spoil all Merchants by
Sea, but plundered Islands, and Citics upon the Seacoast, insomuch as men of
great Nobility, and Wealth joined with them, and they set up storehouses in
diverse places, and had Beacons to give warning by fire all along the
Seacoasts, which were well watched: they had also great Fleets of Ships well
furnished, with excellent Galliots, skilful Pilots, and Mariners: their Ships
were swift of Sail, and Pinnaces for discovery. All the Seacoast over there
was music, singing, and rioting amongst them: Prizes were daily brought in,
Persons of quality taken prisoners, and put to great ransom. Their Ships were a
thousand in number, and they had taken four hundred Towns. They had spoiled and
destroyed many Temples that had never heen profained before. They had many
strange Sacrifices and Ceremonies of Religion amongst them, and besides all
other insolences and injuries whcih they did the Romans by Sea, they often went
on Land, and Plundered and destroyed their Country Houses; and once they took
two Roman Praetors in their Purple Robes, with their Sergeants and Officers,
and carried them quite away. At another time they surprised the Daughter of
Antonius (a man that had the honor of a Triumph) as she was vvalking in the
Fields, and put her to a great ransom. And further to dispite the Romans, when
they had taken any of them, and they told them that they were Citizens of Rome,
they would cloth them like Romans, and putting out the Ship-ladder they would
bid them be gone to Rome, and if they refused they would throw them overboard,
and drown them.

These Pirates had all the Mediterranean Seas at their command, that a Merchant
durst scarce look out, or traffic any whether. This moved the Romans (fearing
a famine by their means) to send Pompey to recove^ the Dominion Pompey sent
against them.
of the Seas from them. The first man that moved that Pompey might not only be
made Admiral at Sea, but have absolute power to command all Persons whatsoever
without giving any account of his doings, was Gabinius, Pompey's Friend: His
large Commssion.
which was done accordingly, and absolute authority was given unto him, not
only of the Seas, but for the space of four hundred Furlongs from the Sea,
within which compass were many great Nations, and mighty Kings. It gave him
power also to choose out of the Senate fifteen Lieutenants, and to give to
every one of them several Provinces in charge, and also to take money out of the
Treasury to defray the charges of a Fleet of two hundred Sail, with full power
besides to leavy what men of War he thought good, and as many Galliots, and
Mariners as he pleased.

This Law was confirmed by the People. Yet the Nobility, and chief Senators
thought that this authority did exceed, not only all envy, but that it gave
them apparent cause of fear to give such unlimited power to a single Person:
whereupon they were all against it but Caesar, who promoted it, not so much to
favor Pompey, as to ingratiate himself with the People, But the Noblemen fell
out with Pompey, and one of the Consuls was very hot with him, told him that he
sought to follow Romulus his steps, but peradventure he would come short of
that end he made: This so provoked the People that they had thought to have
killed him: But Catulus, a worthy man, spoke also against this Edict, yet spoke
much in the praise of Pompey, and in conclusion, advised the People not to
adventure a man of so great account in such dangerous Wars; For (said he) if
you chance to lose him, whom have ye then to put in his place? The People cried
out, Your self. After this, seeing how the People were bent, he spoke on more.

Next after him Rosoius would have persuaded them to have sent another with
Pompey as his Colleague, but the People made such an outcry against him, that a
Crow flying over the Market place fell to the ground. Upon the day when the
Decree was to be fully passed, His Policy.
Pompey went forth of the City, and when he understood that it was confirmed,
he returned the same Night privately, to avoid the envy they would have born
him if the People should have flocked in multitudes to have waited on him home.

The next morning he came abroad, and Sacrificed to the Gods, and audience
being given him in a public meeting, he so handled the matter that they much
enlarged his power, almost doubling the preparations, which were at first
Decreed to him. For it was ordained that he should have five hundred Ships, one
hundred and twenty thousand Footmen, and five thousand Horsemen. He chose also
twenty four Senators, all of them having been Generals of Armies, and two
General Treasurers. Whilst these things were preparing, the price of Victuals
fell, which rejoiced the People much, and they said openly, that the very Name
of Pompey had almost ended the War already.

Pompey divided all the Sea into thirteen Divisions, and in each of them he
appointed a certain number of Ships, and a Lieutenant over each of them: and by
thus dispersing his Navy all abroad, he brought all the Pirates Ships that were
in a Fleet within his danger, His Victories over the Pirates.
and when he had taken them, he brought them all into an Harbor. But such of
them as could escape, fled into Cilicia, as the surest place of retreat: These
Pompey would needs follow in his own Person with sixty of his best Ships: Yet
went he not till he had scowred the Tuscan Seas, with the coast of Libia,
Sardinia, Sicily, and Corsica, of all those Thieves that had wont to keep
thereabouts, and this he did within the space of forty Days, taking infinite
pains, both himself and his Lieutenants.

Piso, one of the Consuls, did all he could to hinder Pompey's preparations,
and supplies O^^men, out of envy to his prosperity. Pompey being informed of
it, He comes privately to Rome.
sent his Ships to Brundusium, himself in the mean time passing through Tuscany
came to Rome; where so soon as his coming was known, the People ran out to meet
him, as if he had been a long time absent; and that which made them more joyful
was, that now Victuals came in freely out of all parts, the Seas being cleared
from Pirates. Pompey could have had Piso put out of his Consulship, but would
not. So having settled all things in quiet according to his desire, His return
to his Navy.
he hasted to his Navy at Brundusium, and hoising Sail, passed to Athens, where
he landed and Sacrificed to the Gods, and so returned to his Ships. At his
going out of the City there were two Writings in his praise affixed to the
Gate. That within was this, The humbler that thou do thy self as Man behave,
The more thou do deserve the Name of God to have.
That on the outside of the Gate was this, We wished for thee, we wait for thee,
We worship thee, we wait on thee.


Now Pompey having taken many of these Pirots, upon their submission spared
their lives, which so encouraged the rest, that flying from his Captains, and
Lieutenants, His Clemency, and Wisdom.
they came and delivered up themselves with their Wives and Children into his
hands. Pompey pardoned all that thus came to him, and by that means came to
have knowledge of the rest, whom he pursued, and in the end took. The most and
richest of them had convaied their Wives, Children and goods into strong
Castles and Towns upon Mount Taurus, and they that were fit for service,
embarked, and lay before a City of Corasesium, where they tarried for Pompey,
and gave him Battle by Sea, and after endured a Siege by Land: Yet after a
while, they besought him to receive them to mercy, yielding themselves, their
Towns, and Islands, which they had strongly fortified, into his hands. Thus was
this War ended, and all the Pirates, within less than three Months space, driven
out of the Seas.

Pompey won also a great number of Ships, and ninety Galleys armed with Copper
Spurs. As for those whom he had taken (who were in number about twenty thousand
lusty Men and good Soldiers) he would not put them to Death, but planted them
in inland Countries in certain small Towns of the Cilicians, that were scarce
inhabited, who were very glad of them and gave them Lands to maintain them: and
whereas the City of the Solians had not long before been destroyed by Tygranes,
King of Armenia, he replenished it again by placing many of them there. He
bestowed others of them in the City of Dyma in the Country of Achaia, which
lacked Inhabitants, and had great store of good Land belonging to it, though
many of his Enemies greatly blamed him for it.

Before Pompey was chosen General against the Pirates, young Metellus was sent
Praetor into Creet, who finding it to be a Den of these Thieves, he took many
of them, and put them to Death: the rest that escaped, being straightly
besieged by him, sent unto Pompey, craving pardon, and desiring him to receive
them to mercy: Pompey accordingly pardoned them, and wrote to Metellus,
requiring him to give over that War, commanding the Cities also that they
should not obey Metellus. He sent also Lucius Octavius, one of his Lieutenants,
who entered into the Towns besieged by Metellus, and sought against him in the
behalf of the Pirates. His Envy.
This act of Pompey procured him much ill will, for that he fought for the
common Enemies of the World, who had neither God nor Law, and that only to
deprive a Roman Praetor of his Triumph, who had done such good service against
them. Yet Metellus left not off his Wars for Pompey's Letters, but having taken
the Pirates, he put them to Death.

When the news came to Rome that the Piratick War was ended, and that Pompey
had no more to do, but to go from City to City to visit them, one Manlius a
Tribune of the People, brought in another Law, that Pompey, taking the Army
from Lucullus, and all the Provinces under his Government, with all Bythinia,
His Commission much enlarged.
which Glabrio kept, should go and War upon Tygranes, and Methridates; and yet
reserve in his hands all his jurisdiction, and Army by Sea in as royal a manner
as he had it before, which was to make him an absolute Monarch over all the
Roman Empire. The Senate stuck not so much at the injury offered to Lucullus,
depriving him of the honor of his doings, and giving it to another, but that
which most grived them was, to see Pompey's power established into a plain
Tyranny: Hereupon they encouraged one another to oppose it to the uttermost:
yet when the day came for the passing of this Law, they all drew back for fear
of angring the People, and none durst oppose it: Only Catulus inveied against
it a long time together: But say what he could, the Decree passed by the voices
of the Tribes. And thus was Pompey in his absence, made Lord of all that which
Sylla, with much effusion of blood had attained to with great difficulty.

When Pompey by Letters from Rome was informed what Law the People had past in
his behalf, he seemed to be much grieved that such great Offices, and charges
should be laid upon him one in the neck of another, and clapping his hands on
his Thigh, His Dissimulation.
he said, O Gods! shall I never see an end of these troubles? Had it not been
better for me to have been a mean Man, and unknown, than thus continually to be
engaged in War? What! shall I never see the time, that breaking the neck of
spite, and envy against me, I may yet once in my life live quietly at hone in
my Country with my Wife and Children. His Friends that were about him were much
displeased with this his deep dissimulation, knowing that his ambitious desire
to rule, made him glad at heart to be thus employed, the rather because of the
contention between him and Lucullus, which his deeds forthwith discovered.

Hereupon he sent forth his Preceps into all quarters, requiring all Soldiers
immediately to repare to him, His Pride.
and caused all the Kings, and Princes within his jurisdiction to attend him,
and so, going through all the Countries, he changed all that Lucullus had
before established, He also released the penalties that were imposed upon them,
and took from them all the favors that Lucullus had granted them.

Lucullus finding himself so hardly dealt with, Friends on both sides mediated
a meeting betwixt them, that they might talk together, and accordingly they met
in Galatia, having their Sergeants, and Officers with Rods wreathed about with
Laurel carried before them, which shevved that Pompey came to take Lucullus's
honor from him. Indeed Lucullus had been Consul before Pompey, and was the
older man, yet Pompey exceeded him in dignity having Triumphed twice. At their
first meeting they discoursed very courteously, each commending the others
deeds, and each rejoicing at the others good success: but at parting they fell
to hot words; Pompey upbraiding Lucullus's covetousness, and Lucullus Pompey's
ambition, so that their Friends had much ado to part them.

Lucullus when he was gone, divided the Lands in Galatia which he had
conquered, He crosses Lucullus.
and bestowed other gifts upon them. Pompey on the other side, camping hard by
him, commanded the People every where not to obey him: He took his Soldiers
also from him, leaving him only sixteen hundred, choosing out such as he
thought would do him small service. He blemished his Glory also, telling every
one that Lucullus had fought only with the shadow and pomp of those two Kings,
and that he had left him to fight with all their force, and power. Lucullus on
the other side said, that Pompey went only to fight with such as himself had
subdued, and that he sought the honor of Triumph over Armenia and Pontus, as
he had formerly practiced to Triumph for overcoming a few Slaves and Fugitives.

Lucullus being now gone, Pompey sent strong Garrisons into all the Sea coast
from Phoenicia to the Bosphorus, and then marched toward Methridates, who had
in his Camp thirty thousand Footmen, and two thousand Horsemen, yet durst he
not fight, but encamped upon an high Mountain till he was forced to leave it
for lack of Water. He was no sooner gone but Pompey seized upon the place, His
Wars with Methridates.
and setting his Soldiers to dig, he found Water enough for all his Army. Then
he encamped round about Methridates besieging him in his own Camp: Methridates
endured it forty five days, and then slaying all the sick and impotent in his
Camp, with the choice of his Army he escaped by Night.

Another time Pompey found him by the River Euphrates, and lodged hard by him:
Methridates prepared, suspecting that Pompey would that Night storm his Camp;
but Pompey thought it not safe to fight in the dark, and therefore resolved
rather to encompass him that he might not fly, and to fight him in the morning:
but Pompey's old Captains would needs fight presently, which Pompey at last
consented to, and the Romans ran upon them with great cries, which so
affrighted their Enemies, that they presently turned their backs and fled, so
that the Romans slew ten thousand of them, and took their Camp. Methridates
himself with eight hundred Horsemen, made a Lane through the Romans and so
escaped: Yet as soon as they were passed, his men dispersed, some one way, some
another, that himself was left but with three Persons only, whereof
Hypsicratea, a manlike woman was one, who never left him, but always looked to
his Horse, being armed after the Persian manner, till he came to a strong
Castle called Inora, where was store of Gold, and Silver, and the Kings
chiefest Treasure. Here Methridates divided all his richest Apparel amongst his
Friends, and to each of them a mortal Poison to carry about them, whereby they
might prevent falling into their Enemies hands alive.

Pompey built a City in the place where he gained this Victory betwixt the
Rivers of Euphrates, He build^ a City.
and Araxes, situate in Armenia the Less, which he called Nicopolis. This City
he gave by the consent of his Soldiers, to such of them as were old, lame,
sick, wounded, or disbanded: to whom many of the Neighbors afterward
repairing, the Nicopolitans lived after the manner of the Cappadocians.

From hence Methridates had intended to have gone into Armenia, but King
Tigranes prohibited it, Methridates flight.
and promised an hundred Tallents to him that could kill him: Passing therefore
by the head of Euphrates, he fled through the Country of Colchide: In the mean
time Pompey invaded Armenia, being solicited thereto by Tigranes the younger,
who rebelled against his Father, and met Pompey at the River of Araxes, which
falls into the Caspian Sea. Then did Pompey and he march forward, taking in
such Towns as yielded unto them. Tigranes, who had been much weakened by
Lucullus, understanding that Pompey was of a mild and Gentle nature, he put his
Soldiers into Garrisons, and himself with his Friends, and Kinsman went to
meet Pompey. When he came near his Camp, being on Horseback, there came two
Sergeants to him commanding him to alight, which he did accordingly, and put
off his Sword and gave it them, Base flattery.
and when he came before Pompey he shamefully fell upon the ground, and
embraced his knees; but Pompey took him by the hand, raised him up, and made
him sit down by him on the one side, and his Son on the other, saying to them
both, As for your former losses you may thank Lucullus for them, who has taken
from you Syria, Phoenicia, Cilicia, Galatia, and Sophena, but for what you have
left till my coming, you shall enjoy it, paying to the Romans six thousand
Tallents, for the wrong you have done them: Provided also that your Son shall
have Sophena for his part.

Tigranes accepted of the conditions, whereupon the Romans saluted him King,
and he gave great sums of money amongst the Army: But his Son was much
discontented, and when Pompey sent for him to come to Sup with him, he refused,
wherefore Pompey imprisoned him, and kept him to be led in his Triumph at Rome.

Shortly after Phraates, King of Parthia, sent Ambassadors to desire this young
Prince who was his Son in Law, and to tell Pompey that Euphrates must be the
uttermost bounds of his Conquest. Pompey answered, that Tygranes had more right
to his Son than Phraates, and as for limiting his borders, he would do it with
Justice. So leaving Afranius to keep Armenia, he passed by other Nations that
inhabited about the Mountain of Caucasus, having Methridates in chase. Two of
the chiefest of these Nations were the Iberians, and the Albanians, near to the
Caspian Sea. These, upon his request, suffered him to pass through their
Countries. But Winter hasting on apace, these Barbarous People raised an Army
of forty thousand fighting men, and passed over the River of Cyrnus. His War
with the Albanians.
Pompey could have hindered their passage, but yet let them come over, and then
fought with them, and overcame them, and slew multitudes of them in the Field,
whereupon they submitted, and made peace with him.

Then Pompey went against the Iberians, And Illyrians.
who took part with Methridates. They were more and better Soldiers than the
Albanians: they were never subject to the Medes, and Persians, nor to Alexander
the Great. These Pompey overcame also in a bloody fight, and slew nine thousand
of them, and took ten thousand Prisoners. From thence he went into the Country
of Colchide, where Servilius met him by the River of Phasis* with his Fleet
with which he kept the Pontick Sea: He found it a hard work to pursue
Methridates any further, who had hid himself amongst a People that bordered
upon the Lake of Maeotis. He heard also that the Albanians had rebelled,
wherefore he went back to be revenged on them, passing over the River of Cyrnus
again, yet with much difficulty, because the Barbarous People had made a
defense on the further side, by felling, and laying many Trees across all along
the Bank of the River: and when he was got over, he was to travel through a dry
Country a great way before he came to any Water, whereupon he caused ten
thousand Goats skins to be filled with Water, and so marched over it. At the
River Abas he met with his Enemies, who had now an Army of one hundred and
twenty thousand Footmen, and ten thousand Horsemen, but Armed only in Beast
skins. There General was Cosis, the Kings Brother. In the Battle this Cosis
flew upon Pompey, His Valor.
and throwing a Dart at him, wounded him in the flank; but Pompey ran him
through with a Lance and slew him. Some say that some Amazons assisted this
People against Pompey.

After this Battle Pompey going back to invade the Country of Hyrcania, as far
as the Caspian Sea, Serpents drive him back.
was forced to retreat by reason of an infinite number of deadly Serpents that
he met withal, wherefore he went back into Armenia the less, to which place he
had many rich presents sent him from the Kings of the Elymians, and the Medes,
to whom he returned courteous answers. Yet he sent Afranius with part of his
Army, against the King of Parthia, who had much harrased and plundered the
Country of Tygranes, and he drove him out.

At this time the Concubines of Methridates were brought to him, but he would
not touch any one of them, His Chastity.
but sent them all home again to their Parents, and Friends, being most of them
the Daughters of Princes, and other Noble Captains, Only Stratonice whom
Methridates loved above all the rest, with whom he had left the custody of his
Castle where lay all his Treasures of Gold and Silver, was but a Singers
Daughter. She delivered the Castle into Pompey's hands, His self-denial.
and besides, offered him rich and goodly presents, all which he refused,
saving such as might serve to adorn the Temples of the Gods, and that might
beautify his Triumph, leaving the rest to Stratonice to dispose of as she
pleased. The King also of the Iberians sent him a Bedstead, Table, and Chair,
all of pure Gold, praying him to accept it as a token of his love, he delivered
them into the Treasurers hands to be accountable for them to the State.

From hence Pompey went to the City of Amisus, where he did such things as he
had before condemned in Lucullus, taking upon him to establish Laws, to give
Gifts, and to distribute such honors, as Victorious Generals used to do when
they had ended all their Wars. And this he did to gratify twelve Barbarous
Kings, and Princes, and Captains that came to him thither. Writing also to the
King of Parthia, he gave him not that Title which others used to do, who styled
him King of Kings. He had also a wonderful desire to win Syria, His Ambition.
and to pass through Arabia even to the Red Sea, that he might enlarge his
Victories every way, even to the Great Ocean. As he did when he conquered
Lybia, and in Spain had enlarged the Roman Empire to the Atlantic Sea; and in
pursuit of the Albanians he went almost to the Hyrcanian Sea.

As he passed on toward the Red Sea, he commanded his Soldiers, with a
sufficient number of Ships to wait for the Merchants that sailed to Bosphorus;
and to seize upon the Victuals, and other Merchandise that they carried
thither: and so passing on with the greatest part of his Army, he came to the
place where he found the Bodies of the Romans that were slain by Methridates
under their Captain Trierius, His Charity.
which he caused to be honorably buried, which thing Lucullus had neglected to
do, which made his Soldiers hate him.

Pompey having now by Afranius conquered the Albanians dwelling about Mount
Amanus, His acts in Syria, and Judaea.
he marched into Syria, and conquered it, making it a Roman Province: He
conquered also all Judaea, where he took King Aristobulus: He built certain
Cities there, and delivered others from bondage, sharply punishing the Tyrants
in them. He also spent much of his time there, in deciding controversies, and
in pacifying the contentions which fell out betwixt free Cities, Princes, and
Kings. And truly if Pompey's fame, and renown was great, so was his Virtue,
Justice, and Liberality, which covered many faults which his familiar Friends
about him did commit. For he was of such a gentle nature, that he could neither
keep them from offending, nor punish them when they had offended.

Whilst Pompey was in Judaea, Pompey's acts in Judaea.
being angry with Aristobulus, he marched against him, Hyrcanus (the Brother of
Aristobulus, who contended with him for the Kingdom) provoking him thereunto.
Pompey understanding that Aristobulus was fled into Alexandrion, a strong and
stately Castle, seated upon a high Hill, he sent and summoned him to come unto
him, and Aristobulus being advised not to make War against the Romans, he came
to Pompey: and after he had debated his Title to the Kingdom, with his Brother
Hyrcanus, by Pompey's permission he retired into the Castle again. This he did
two or three times, always flattering Pompey out of hope to prevail in his
suit. Yet Pompey required that he should deliver up his Castles into his hands,
which he was fain to do, though he was much discontentedat it, and therefore he
went to Jerusalem with a purpose to prepare for War.

Pompey not thinking it fit to give him any time for preparation, followed him
immediately, He comes to Jericho.
and first encamped at Jericho, where were most excellent Dates, and Balsom,
the most precious of all other Ointments, and from thence he marched toward
Jerusalem. Aristobulus repenting what he had done, came and met him, promising
him money, and that he would yield up, both himself and the City in a peacable
way. Pompey pardoned him, and sent Gabinius with a party of Soldiers to
receive the money: Yet were they faign to return without it: for Aristobulus's
Soldiers would not stand to what he had promised. Pompey being much provoked
hereby committed Aristobulus into custody, He marches to Jerusalem.
and presently marched against Jerusalem.

The Citizens being at this time divided amongst themselves, they that stood
for Hyrcanus were willing to open the Gates to Pompey: But the faction of
Aristobulus refused, and prepared for War, becausey Pompey kept their King
Prisoner: and accordingly they seized upon the Temple, and cut down the Bridge
which led into the City. Hyrcanus and his Friends, let in the Army, and
delivered over to them, both the City, and the Kings Palace, the custody of
both which, Pompey committed to Piso, who fortified the Houses and buildings
that were near the Temple, first offering to the Besieged conditions of Peace,
and when they refused, he prepared to give a General assault, being assisted by
Hyrcanus with all things needful.

On the North side of the City Pompey encamped, which was the easiest to be
assaulted: yet were there high Towers, and a deep Ditch made with hands, The
Temple besieged.
besides a deep Valley which begirt the Temple, and toward the City, the place
was very steep when the Bridge was taken away. To overcome these difficulties,
the Romans raised Mounts, cutting down Trees round about, and filling up the
Trench with materials which the Souldies brought. This work proved very
difficult, considering the vast depth of the Trench, and the resistance of the
Jews, made from above. But when Pompey observed that the Jews rested every
seventh Day (for though they would defend themselves from an assailing Enemy,
yet they held it unlawful on that day to hinder any work that the Enemy did) he
chose those Days especially wherein to carry on his work: So that in time the
Trench was filled, and the Tower fitted upon the Mount, and the Engines planted,
which shot huge Stones wherewith they battered the Temple, yet was it long
before those strong and stately Towers yielded to the assaults of the Besiegers.

The Romans being much tired, Pompey wondered at the obstinacy of the Jews,
especially considering that all this while they never intermitted their daily
Sacrifices, which the Priests every Morning and Evening offered upon the Altar,
not omitting the same in their greatest extremities. In the third month of the
Siege, the greatest Tower, being shaken by the battering Rams, at last fell,
and brake down a great piece of the Wall, at which breach many of the Romans
rushed into the Temple. The Temple taken.
These running up and down, while some of the Jews sought to hide themselves,
and others made small resistance, slew them all. Many of the Priests, though
they saw the Enemies rushing in with their drawn Swords, yet being nothing at
all dismayed, continued their Sacrifices and were slain at the very Altar,
preferring the duty which they owed to their Religion before their own lives.

All places were full of slaughters. Some of the Jews were slain by the Romans,
others by their own Countrymen that were of the contrary faction. Many threw
themselves down headlong from the Rocks: The Jews slain.
others setting their Houses on fire, burnt themselves, not enduring to behold
those things that were done by the Enemy. Here fell twelve thousand of the
Jews, whereas of the Romans there were but few slain, though many wounded.
Amongst the Captives that were taken, was Absolon, the Uncle and Father in Law
of Aristobulus, the Son of John Hyrcanus.

Upon the same day and in the same month was the Temple taken by Pompey, Note
the time when the Temple was taken.
as it had been taken by Nebuchadnezzar five hundred and forty three years
before: and it fell out also to be on their Sabbath, about the twenty eight day
of our December, Pompey, entered into the Temple, and many others with him, and
there beheld those things which were not lawful to be seen by any, but the High
Priests only. And whereas there were in the Temple, the Table and Candlesticks
with the Lamps, all Vessels for Sacrifice, and the Censers all of pure Gold,
and a huge heap of Spices, and in the Treasuries of sacred money above two
thousand Talents, yet Pompey meddled not with any of these, but the next day he
commanded them which had the charge of the Temple, to purify, and cleanse it,
and to offer their solemn Sacrifices unto God.

Pompey then restored the High Priesthood to Hyrcanus, Hyrcanus made Prince and
Priest.
both because he had showed himself so forward all the time of the Siege, as
also for that he hindered the Jews that were in all the Country from joining
with Aristobulus: and together with the Priesthood he gave him the Principality
also, only forbidding him to wear a Crown. Then did he put to death those that
were the chiefest cause of the War, and made the Jews Tributaries to the Romans
and the Cities which they had formerly conquered in Caelosyria, he took from
them, commanding them to obey their own Governors: and the whole Nation of the
Jews, formerly advanced through prosperity, he contracted within their ancient
bounds.

The King of the Arabians that dwelt at the Castle of Petra, that never before
made any account of the Romans, was now greatly afraid, and wrote to Pompey
that he was at his devotion to do what he commanded. Pompey to try him, brought
his Army before his Castle of Petra, and lodged them for that day, and fell to
riding, and mannaging his Horse up and down the Camp: In the mean time Posts
came riding from the Realm of Pontus with Letters of good news, as appeared by
their Javelins wreathed about with Laurel: the Soldiers seeing that, flocked
about the place to hear the news, but Pompey would make an end of his riding
before he would read the Letters, whereupon many cried to him to alight, which
he did: But then he wanted a high place to stand upon, and the Soldiers were
so impatient to hear the news that they would not stay to make one, they heaped
Saddles one upon another, Methridates Death.
and Pompey getting up upon them, told them, that Methridates was dead, having
killed himself because his Son Pharnaces rebelled against him, and had wan all
which his Father possessed, writing to him that he kept it for himself and the
Romans. Upon this news all the Camp rejoiced wonderfully, and Sacrificed to the
Gods with great mirth.

Pompey finding this troublesome War to be so easily ended, presently left
Arabia, and by speedy marches he came to the City of Amisus. There he met with
great Presents which were sent him from Pharnaces, and many dead Bodies of the
Kings Kindred, and the Body of Methridates himself, who was known by certain
scars in his Face. His Policy.
Pompey would by no means see him, but to avoid envy he sent him away to the
City of Sinope. He much wondered at his rich Apparel, and Weapons: The Scabbard
of his Sword cost four hundred Talents: His Hat also was of wondrous
Workmanship. Pompey having here ordered all things according to his mind, he
went homewards with great pomp and Glory. Coming to Mytylene, he eased the City
of all Taxes for Theophanes his sake, and was present at certain Plays, the
subjects whereof were the great acts of Pompey He so liked the Theater where
these Plays were made, that he drew a moddle of it to make a statelier than it
in Rome. As he passed by the City of Rhodes, His Liberality.
he heard the Rhetoricians dispute, and gave each of them a Talent. The like he
did at Athens unto the Philosophers there, and toward the beautifying of the
City he gave them fifty Talents.

At his return into Italy he expected to have been received very honorably, He
returns in to Italy.
and longed to see his Wife, and Children, thinking also that they longed as
much to see him: But God so ordered it, that in his own House he met with
occasion of sorrow: For his Wife Mutia in his absence had played the Harlot.
Yet whilst he was a far off, he made no account of the reports which were made
to him of her: He divorceth his Wife.
But when he drew near to Italy, he was more attentive to them, whereupon he
sent her word he would own her no more for his Wife. There were also rumors
spread abroad in Rome which much troubled him; it being given out that he would
bring his Army strait to Rome, and make himself absolute Lord of the Empire.
Crassus hereupon, to give more credit to the report, and to procure the greater
envy against Pompey, conveyed himself, Family, and Goods out of Rome.

But when Pompey came to Italy, He disband^ his Army.
calling his Soldiers together, he made an Oration to them as the time and
occasion required, and then commanded them to disband, and every one to return
to his own home, and to follow his business till the time of his Triumph. As he
passed, such was the love of the People to him, The People honor him.
that multitudes of them accompanied him to Rome whether he would or no, and
that with a greater power than he brought with him into Italy, so that if he
had been disposed to have made Innovation, he needed not the assistance of his
Army therein.

At this time there was a Law that no man should enter into Rome before his
Triumph, wherefore Pompey sent to the Senate, requesting them to defer the
choice of Consuls for a few days, that he might further Piso, who sued for the
Consulship that year: But through Caetoes means they denied his request. He
seeks to win Catio.
Pompey marvelling to hear of his boldness and free Speech, was very desirous
to make him his Friend. So Cato having two Neeces, he desired to marry one
himself, and to have the other for his Son; but Cato flatly denied him, though
his Wife, and Sister were angry that he refused to make alliance with Pompey
the Great.

After this, Pompey being desirous to prefer Afranius to be Consul, he caused
money to be given to the Tribes of the People, which being reported abroad, made
every man speak evil of him, as having put the Consulship to sale for money,
whereas himself had purchased it by his Noble and Valiant deeds.

The time for his Triumph being come, the stateliness, and magnificence was
such, His second Triumph.
that though he had two days to show it, yet lacked he time to produce all. For
there were many things prepared for the show which were not seen, and would
have set forth another Triumph. First the Tables were carried wherein were
written the Names of the Nations for which he Triumphed: as the Kingdoms of
Pontus, Armenia, Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, Media, Colchis, Iberia, Albania,
Syria, Cilicia, and Mesopotamia: As also the People that dwell in Phoenicia,
Palestina, Judaea, and Arabia: And all the Pirates that he had overcome by Sea,
and Land. In all these Countries he had taken a thousand Castles, and near nine
hundred Towns, and Cities. Of Pirates Ships eight hundred. Moreover he had
replenished with Inhabitants thirty nine desolate Towns. These Tables also
declared, that the Revenue of Rome, before these his conquests, arose but to
five thousand Myriads, but now he had improved them to eight thousand, and five
hundred Myriads. Besides, he now brought into the Treasury to the value of
twenty thousand Talents in Silver, Gold, Plate, and Jewels, besides what had
been distributed already among the Soldiers, of which he that had least, had
fifteen hundred Drams for his share.

The Prisoners that were led in this Triumph, were the Son of Tygranes, King of
Armenia, with his Wife, and Daughter: The Wife of King Tygranes himself, called
Zozime: Aristobulus King of Judaea. The Sister of Methridates, with her five
Sons: And some Ladies of Scythia. The Hostages of the Iberians and Albanians,
as also the Kings of the Commagenians: Besides a great number of Marks of
Triumph which himself and his Lieutenants had won in several Battles. But the
greatest honor that ever he wan, and which no other of the Consuls ever
attained to, was, that his three Triumphs were of the three Parts of the World,
to wit, his first of Africa: his second of Europe: And his third Asia; and all
this before he was forty yeards old. But from this time forward Pompey began to
decline, till (with his Life) he had lost all his Honor.

Lucullus at his return out of Asia, was well received by the Senate, and much
more after Pompey was come to Rome. For the Senate cncouraged him to deal in
affairs of State, being of himself slow, and much given to his ease and
pleasure, because of his great Riches. So when Pompey was come, he began to
speak against him, and through Catoes assistance, gat all things confirmed
which he had done in Asia, and which had been undone by Pompey. Pompey, having
such an afront put upon him by the Senate, had recourse to the Tribunes of the
People, the vilest of whom was Clodius, who closed with him, and had Pompey
ever at his Elbow, ready to second what motion soever he had to make to the
People: He also desired Pompey to forsake Cicero, his ancient Friend, but
Clodius his utter Enemy. By this means Cicero was brought into danger, and when
he required Pompey's assistance, he shut the door against him, Cicero leaves
Rome.
and went out at a backdoor; whereupon Cicero was forced to forsake Rome.

At this time Julius Caesar returning from his Praetorship out of Spain,
Caesar's Policy*
laid such a plot as quickly brought himself into favor, but tended to the
ruin of Pompey. He was now to sue for his first Consulship, and considering the
enmity between Pompey and Crassus, he considered that if he joined with one, he
made the other his Enemy, he therefore made them Friends, which indeed undid
the Commonwealth. For by this means Caesar was chosen Consul, who strait fell
to flattering of the People, He flatters the People*
and made Laws for their advantage, distributing to them Lands, which embased
the Majesty of the chief Majestrate, and made a Consulship no better than the
Tribuneship of the People. Bibulus, his Fellow Consul, opposed him what he
could, and Cato also, till Caesar brought Pompey into the Pulpit for Orations,
where he asked him whether he consented to the Decree which he had set forth?
Pompey answered That he did: und that he would defend it with the Sword. This
gat him much ill will.

Not many days after, Pompey marries Caesar's Daughter.
Pompey married Julia the Daughter of Caesar, formerly betrothed to Servilius
Caepio: and to pacify Caepio, Pompey gave him his own Daughter in marriage,
whom yet he had promised to Faustus, the Son of Sylla. Caesar also married
Calphurnia, the Daughter of Piso. Afterward Pompey filling Rame with
Soldiers, carried all by force. For as Bibulus came to the Market place
accompanied with Cato and Lucullus, they were basely abused, and many were
wounded, and when they were driven away, they passed the Act for dividing of
the Lands as they pleased. The People being encouraged hereby, never stuck at
any matter that Pompey and Caesar would have done. And by this means all
Pompey's former Acts were confirmed, though Lucullus opposed what he could.
Caesar also was appointed to the Government of both Gauls with four whole
Legions.

Then were chosen Consuls, Piso, Father in Law to Caesar, and Gabinius,
Pompey's great flatterer. He dotes on his young Wife.
Pompey now so doted on his young Wife, that he suffered himself wholly to be
ruled by her, and leaving all public affairs, he went with her to Country
Houses, and places of pleasure, which encouraged Clodius, a Tribune of the
people to despise him, and to enter into seditious attempts. For when he had
driven Cicero out of Rome, and sent away Cato to make War in Cyprus, and Caesar
was occupied in Gaul, finding that the people were at his beck, because he
flattered them, he then attempted to undo some things that Pompey had
established. Amongst others he took young Tygranes out of prison, and carried
him up and down with him, and continually picked quarrels against Pompey's
Friends. Pompey coming abroad one day to hear how a matter of his was handled,
this Clodius having gotten a company of desperate Ruffians about him, gat up
into a high place, and asked aloud, Who is the most licentious Captain in all
the City? Pompey disgraced.
They answered, Pompey. And Who (said he) is he that scratched his head with
one finger? They again answered, Pompey, clapping their hands with great scorn.
This went to Pompey's heart, who never used to be thus abused, and he was yet
more vexed, when he saw that the Senate was well pleased with this his
disgrace, because he had forsaken, and betrayed Cicero. Upon this a great
uprore was made in the Market place, and many were hurt, whereupon Pompey would
come no more abroad whilst Clodius was Tribune, but advised with his Friends
how he might ingratiate himself with the Senate: they advised him to put away
his Wife Julia, to renounce Caesar's Friendship, and to stick again to the
Senate. Some of these things he disliked, yet was content to call home Cicero,
who was Clodius his mortal Enemy, and in great favor with the Senate.

Hereupon Pompey brought Cicero's Brother into the Market place to move the
matter to the People, with many men about him, and they fell to blows, so that
many were slain, Cicero recalled.
yet he overcome Clodius, and Cicero was called home by the Decree of the
People, who also brought Pompey into favor with the Senate, and caused a Law
to be made whereby to enable Pompey to bring Corn to Rome; and thus by Cicero's
means Pompey had once again power given him both by Sea and Land over all the
Roman Territories. For all the Havens, Marts, and Fairs, and all Storehouses,
and Merchandises, yea, and Tillage, came into his hand.

For this Clodius accused him, saying, that the Senate had made this Law, not
because of a dearth of Victuals, but that they made a dearth that so the Law
might pass for restoring Pompey's power, which was almost come to nothing.
Pompey having now full Authority to cause Corn to be brought to Rome, Pompey
sent for Corn.
he sent his Friends, and Lieutenants abroad, and himself went into Sicily; and
when he was ready to return again, there arose such a storm, that the Mariners
feared to weigh their Anchors; but he commanded them to do it, Note.
saying, Its necessary that the People should have Corn, but its not necessary
that I should live. Thus by his prudence and courage he filled all the Markets
with Corn, and the Seas with Ships, and so great plenty of Provision was
brought in, as fully furnished, not only Rome, but all Italy.

About this time Caesar's great conquests in Gaul wan him much credit. But
whilst they thought him to be Warring afar off, Caesar comes privately to Rome.
he appeared in the midst of the People at Rome, and much opposed Pompey in the
weightiest matter of the Commonwealth. For he had the power of an Army which he
hardened with pains, and continual exercise, not only to fight against the
Barbarous People, but to make himself invincible, and dreadful to the World.
Moreover, by that infinite quantity of Gold, and Silver, and other Treasures
that he gat from the Enemy, he purchased many Friends to himself, sending great
Presents to Rome, He bribes the Officers.
to the Aediles, Praetors, Consuls, and their Wives; therefore when he was come
back over the Alps, and Wintered in the City of Luca, multitudes of the People,
yea, two hundred of the Senate themselves, amongst whom were Crassus and
Pompey, went out of Rome unto him. All these Caesar returned back again, some
with store of money, others with good Words: But with Pompey and Crassus he
agreed, that they two should sue to be Consuls, and that himself would send
good store of voices upon the day of Election: and that if they were chosen
they should get a Decree of the People, that they should have some new
Provinces, and Armies assigned to them, and withal, that they should procure
his Government to continue for five years longer. This Plot being discovered,
and spread abroad, gave great distaste to honest men, and many who had intended
to sue for the Consulship, gave it over. Only Lucius Domitius, being encouraged
by Cato, stood for it. For (said he) Thou do not contend for the Consulship,
but to defend the liberty of thy Country against two Tyrants. Pompey fearing
Catoes faction, thought it not safe to let Domitius come into the Market place:
He sent therefore armed men against him, who slew the Torch-bearer that came
before him, and made all the rest to fly, amongst whom Cato was the last man
that retired, who, whilst he defended Domitius, was wounded in the Elbow.

Thus Pompey and Crassus came to be Consuls, Pompey chosen Consul.
wherein they carried themselves very dishonestly. For the People being about
to choose Cato, Praetor: Pompey perceiving of it, brake up the Assembly, falsely
alleging that he had certain ill signs, and afterward, corrupting the
Tribes, they chose Antias, and Vatinias, Praetors, and then by Trebonius, a
Tribune of the People, they published an Edict that Caesar should hold his
Government five years longer: Unto Crassus they appointed the Province of
Syria, Provinces divided.
and to make War against the Parthians. Unto Pompey they allotted Africa and
both the Spains, with four whole Legions, of the which, at Caesar's request, he
sent him two, to assist him in his Wars in Gaul.

Crassus, at the going out of his Consulship, departed into Syria, and Pompey
remained in Rome to dedicate the Theater which he had built, Pompey's Theater
dedicated.
where he caused many goodly Plays to be made, and caused Wild Beasts to be
baited, and hunted, amongst which, five hundred Lions were killed: but the most
terrible fight of all, was amongst his Elephants. This he did to gratifi^ the
People, though to his very great cost, and he procured much love to himself
thereby. But he got more envy from others by committing the Government of his
Provinces, and Legions, unto his Lieutenants, whilst himself with his Wife took
their pleasure up and down Italy.

At an Election of the A^diles, on a sudden there was a great hurly-burly,
Swords were drawn and many were slain about Pompey, so that he was saign to
send home his Garments that were sprinkled with their blood and to fetch
others. His young Wife that was great with child, seeing his clothes bloody,
was so frighted that she fell into a swound, that they had much ado to recover
her. At another time, being with child again, she fell in labor, and died in
childbirth: Julia dies.
and as Pompey was carrying her into the Country to bury her near unto the City
of Alba at his Country House, the people took her corpse, and carrying it into
the Field of Mars, buried it there: and this they did more for Caesar, than for
Pompey's sake.

This alliance between Pompey and Caesar being thus broken, Pompcy and Caesar
quarrel.
which rather covered than bridled their ambition to Rule, there arose a new
stir in Rome, and every man's mouth was full of seditious words: About which
time news came that Crassus was overcome and slain in Parthia, who was the only
bar to hinder these two from civil War: for they both feared him, and therefore
kept themselves quiet. Yet they thought the Empire of Rome was too little for
them. Pompey thinking that Caesar would not disband his Army, sought to
strengthen himself against him by procuring Offices in the City: and when he
could not procure them, the people being bribed by Caesar, he left the City
without a Magistrate, so that there were none to command, or whom the people
might obey. Hereupon a rumor was spread that a Dictator must be chosen, and
that Pompey must be the man: This Cato opposed with all his power: Bnt when
Pompey's Friends excused him, saying, that he neither sought, nor would accept
of it, then Cato highly commended him, and prayed him to see good order kept in
the Commonwealth, which accordingly he undertook.

Then were Domitius and Massala chosen Consuls, but after a while one of them
died, vvhereupon many were earnestly bent to have a Dictator, and Cato fearing
great disorders, was willing that Pompey should have some Office to keep him
from that which was more Tyrannical. Bibulus a chief man in the Senate, and
Pompey's Enemy, was the first man that moved that Pompey might be chosen Consul
alone: For (said he) by this means the Commonwealth shall be rid of present
trouble, or it shall be in bondage to an honest man. It was expected that Cato
would have opposed this motion; but rising up, he told them, that he would
not first have made this motion, but seeing it was propounded by another, he
thought it meet, and reasonable to be follovved. For (said he) Its better to
have an Officer to command, whatsoever he be, than to have none at all, and
that there was none so sit to command in so troublesome a time as Pompey.

All the Senate consented hereto, Pompey made Consul.
and ordained that Pompey only should be Consul, and that if he savv it needful
to have the assistance of an other, he might name whom he saw good, yet not
till two months were past. Pompey being thus made Consul alone, he carried it
very friendly unto Cato, and thanked him for the honor he had done him,
entreating his assistance in the execution of his Office. Cato replied that he
had no reason to thank him; for what he had done, he had not done it for his
sake, but out of his respect to the public good: and that if he asked his
counsel in any thing, he would give it him privately, if not, that he would
openly speak that which he thought best,

Pompey then married Cornelia, He marries Cornelia,
the Daughter of Metellus Scipio, the late Wife of young Publius Crassus, slain
with his Father in Parthia. This Lady was of excellent beauty, and gifts, well
learned, skilful in Music, Geometry, and Philosophy; she was modest, and
sober, free from brawling, or foollish curiosity. Her Father was Noble both by
Birth, and deportment. Yet many disliked Pompey's marrying so young a Wife, and
giving himself to Feasting and Jollity, when he should have looked to his
Consulship in so troublesome a time.

Pompey proceeded sharply against those that by Bribery, and indirect means
came to their Offices. His justice,
He made Laws, and Ordinances for the administration of Justice, and himself
dealt uprightly in all things, and took order that Judgment should be
administered with silence, safety, and gravity. But when his Father in Law was
accused, he sent for three hundred and sixty Judges home to his House, praying
them to help him, which the accuser of Scipio understanding, let fall his suit,
And injustice.
Plancus also being accused, Pompey (contrary to the Law) spoke in his
commendation; whereupon Cato, who was one of the Judges, stopped his Ears,
saying, that he would not hear an offender praised, being contrary to the Law:
Plancus was condemned by all the Judges to the great shame of Pompey, Yet
otherwise he set all things in good order, and chose his Father Scipio for his
fellow Consul for the five last Months. Then he caused the Government of his
Provinces to be assigned to him for four years more, with commission to take
out of the Treasury a thousand Talents yearly, for to defray the charges of his
Wars.

Caesar's Friends seeing this, moved that some consideration might be had of him
also, who made great Wars for the Commonwealth, and by his good service had
deserved either to be chosen Consul again, or else that they should prolong his
charge, and Government, that no other successor might reap the fruit of his
labors; Much stir arose about this matter: But Pompey said, that he had
received Letters from Caesar, by which he requested a successor, and to be
discharged of this War: adding that he thought it fit they should grant him the
privilege to demand the second Consulship though he was absent. This Cato
stoutly withstood, saying, that leaving his Army he must return home as a
private man, and in his own Person crave recompense of his Country. Pompey
replying nothing hereto, made many think he bore no great good will to Caesar;
the rather because he had sent to him for the two Legions which he had lent him
under color of his War against the Parthians. Though Caesar smelt his design,
He sends to Caesar for his two Legions.
yet he sent his Soldiers, and rewarded them liberally.

About this time Pompey fell dangerously sick at Naples, His sickness, and
recovery.
whereof he yet recovered again, and the Neapolitans sacrificed to the Gods,
for his recovery; the like also did their Neighbors round about, and it ran so
generally through Italy, The People honor him.
that there was no City or Town wherein they did not make open Feasting, and
rejoiced for many days together. The infinite number of People also which went
to meet him out of all places was such, that there was not room enough for them
all, but the Highways, Cities, Towns, and Ports were full of People, Feasting
and sacrificing to the Gods for his recovery. Diverse also went to meet him that
were Crowned with Garlands, casting Nosegays, and Flowers upon him. Yet some
thought that this was the cause of the civil Wars that ensued. Pompey's Pride.
For hereupon he grew so proud to see himself thus honored, that forgetting
his former Government, he began to despise Caesar, thinking that he could
easily overcome him when he pleased, Besides, Appius that brought him his two
Legions from Caesar out of Gaul, reproached much his doings there, and gave out
many foul words against Caesar. For he said that Pompey knew not his own
strength, who might overcome Caesar with his own Legions, for that when they
saw Pompey they would forsake Caesar and turn to him.

These flattering Speeches made Pompey so secure, that he laughed them to scorn
who were afraid of War; and such as said that if Caesar came to Rome, they knew
not how his power could be resisted, he smilingly bad them take no thought, for
if he did but stamp on the ground, he could fill Italy with Armies both of
Horse and Foot out of all places. Note.
In the mean time Caesar increased his Army, and drew near to Italy, and sent
some of his Soldiers daily to Rome to be present at the election of
Magistrates, and many of those that were in Office he wan with money: amongst
whom was Paulus, one of the Consuls, whom he drew to his side by giving him
fifteen hundred Talents, The like he did to Curio, a Tribune of the People by
paying his vast debts, and he gained thereby Mark Anthony, who was engaged for
a great part of Curio's debt. A Captain also sent from Caesar, being at the
Senate door, and understanding that they would not prolong Caesar's Government
as he desired, The miseries of War.
clapping his hand on his Sword, he said, Well! this shall give it him.

Curio requested in the behalf of Caesar, that they would either cause Pompey
to disband his Army, or else license Caesar to have his Army as well as he. For
(said he) being private men they will either agree between themselves, or both
being of like strength, neither will seek any alteration for fear of the other.
But Marcellus the Consul, opposed this hotly, calling Caesar Thief, and saying
that he would proclaim him an open Enemy to Rome if he did not disperse his
Army. Yet Curio, Anthony, and Piso procured that the Senate should decide the
matter, saying, All they that would have Caesar disband his Army, and Pomey to
keep his, let them go to the one side of the House, and such as would have them
both to disband, let them stand on the other: by this means it was carried
against Pompey. Curio much rejoiced at the Victory, and going into the Market
place, he was there received by his faction with shouts of joy, and clapping of
hands, and Nosegays of Flowers thrown upon him.

Pompey was not present to see the good will of the Senators to him: but
Marcellus stood up and said, that he would not stand trifling, and hearing
Oration, when he knew that ten Legions were already passed over the Alps,
intending to come in Arms against them, and that he would send a man that
should defend their Country well enough. And so going through the Market place
unto Pompey, being followed by all the Senators, he said openly: Pompey, I
command thee to help thy Country with that Army thou have already, Pompey made
General against Caesar.
and also to leavy more to aid thee. Lentulus also used the same Speech to him,
who was chosen for the year following.

When Pompey went to leavy Soldiers in Rome, some would not obey him, and
others went very unwillingly, the most part of them crying out Peace, Peace.
The fruits of division.
Anthony also, against the Senators minds, read a Letter to the People sent
from Caesar, wherein he seemed to make reasonable requests to draw the
affections of the common People to him. For he moved that both Pompey and he
should resign their Governments, and dismiss their Armies, referring themselves
wholly to the Judgments of the People, and to deliver up unto them an account
of their doings. Cicero, who was lately returned from Cilicia, endeavored to
bring them to an agreement, propounding that Caesar that should leave the
Government of Gaul, and his Army, reserving only two Legions, and the Government
of Illyria, attending his second Consulship.

Pompey liked not this motion, and so all treaty of Peace was cut off. In the
mean time news came to Rome that Caesar had won Ariminum, a large and strong
City in Italy, Wars between Pompey and Caesar,
and that he came directly to Rome with a great power: But the truth was he
came but with three thousand Horse, and five thousand Foot, and would not stay
for the rest of his Army that was not yet come over the Alps, but hasted rather
to suprise his Enemies on the sudden, who were all in a hurly-burly, not
expecting him so soon, than to stay till they were fully ready to fight with
him. When he came to the River of Rubicon (which was the utmost bound of the
Province which he had the charge of in Italy) he made an Alt, Caesar passes
Rubicon.
pondring with himself the great enterprise he took in hand: At last he cried
out to them that were by, Jacta est alea, let the Die be cast: Or let us put
all to the hazard, and so passed on with his Army.

News hereof coming to Rome, never was there such a consternation and fear seen
amongst them. For all the Senate ran immediately to Pompey, together with all
the rest of the City Magistrates, and Tullus asked him, what power he had in
readiness to resist Caesar? He answered (but something faulteringly) that he
had his two Legions that came from Caesar, and with those that he had levied in
have, he thought he should make up thirty thousand fighting men. Pompey
reproached.
Then Tullus cried out, Ah! thou have mocked us Pompey; and thereupon ordered
Ambassadors to be sent to Caesar. Phaonius also, a bold man, said, Stamp now
with thy Foot upon the Ground, Pompey, and make those Armies come which thou
have promised. Pompey patiently bore this mock. Then Cato thought good that
they should make Pompey Lieutenant General of Rome, with full and absolute
Power to command all, saying, They that knew how to do the greatest mischief,
know best how to remedy the same. And so immediately he departed to his
Government in Sicily. Also all the other Senators went to the Provinces
whereunto they were appointed.

Thus all Italy being in Arms, no man knew what was best to be done: For such
as were out of Rome came flying thither out of all parts, The confusion in
Italy.
and such as were in Rome, fled out as fast, where all things were in disorder.
They which were willing to obey were very few, and they who by disobedience did
hurt, were too many, neither would they suffer Pompey to order things as he
would, because every one followed his own fancy, yea, in one day they were in
diverse minds. All this while Pompey could here no certainty of his Enemies, the
reports being so various; and when he saw the tumult, and confusion so great at
Rome that there was no possibility of pacifying it, he commanded all the
Senators to follow him, Pompey leaves Rome.
declaring all such as staid behind to be Caesar's Friends. The two Consuls fled
also without Sacrificing to the Gods, as their manner was when they went to
make War: And Pompey in his greatest danger and trouble had great cause to
think himself happy, because he had every man's good will.

Shortly after Pompey was gone out of the City, Caesar enters Rome.
Caesar came into it, who spoke very friendly to all whom he found there,
laboring to quiet their fears: Only he threatened Metellus, one of the
Tribunes, because he would not suffer him to take any of the Treasure of the
Commonwealth, saying, That it was not so hard a thing for him to kill him as to
speak it. Thus having put by Metellus, and taken what he pleased out of the
Treasury, he prepared to follow Pompey, intending to drive him out of Italy
before his Army should come to him, out of Spain.

Pompey in the mean time took Brundusium, Pompey at Brundusium.
and having gotten some Ships together, he caused the two Consuls presently to
embark, with thirty Compays of Footmen, which he sent before to Dyrrachium. He
sent also his Father in Law Scipio, and his Son Cneius Pompeyius into Syria to
provide him Ships. Then did he fortify Brundusium, and guarded the Walls with
Soldiers, commanding the Citizens not to stir out of their Houses. He cast up
Trenches also within the City at the end of all the streets, saving those two
which led to the Haven, and filled those Trenches with sharp pointed stakes,
and when at leisure he had embarked all the rest of his Soldiers, he by a
sign, called off those which guarded the Walls, and having received them into
his Ships, He leaves Italy.
he hoisted Sails and departed.

Caesar finding the Walls of Brundusium unguarded, presently suspected that
Pompey was fled, Caesar pursues him.
and rushing into the City, he had certainly fallen into the Pits, but that the
Brundusians gave him warning of them, whereupon he fetched a compass about to
go to the Haven, and coming thither, he found all the Ships under sail save
two, wherein were a few Soldiers. Some judged this departure of Pompeys the
best Stratagem of War that ever he used: But Caesar marvelled that being in so
strong a City, and expecting his Army out of Spain, and being Master of the
Seas besides, he would so easily forsake Italy. Thus Caesar within threescore
days became Lord of all Italy without bloodshed. He was very desirous speedily
to have followed Pompey, but having no Ships ready, he was forced to stay. Then
did he hasten into Spain to join Pompey's Army with his own.

Pompey in the mean space had gotten a mavelous great power together both by
Sea, Pompey's Power by Sea.
and Land. By Sea he had five hundred good Ships of War, besides multitudes of
Galliots, Foists, and Pinnaces, By Land he had all the flower of the Horsemen
of Rome, and of all Italy to the number of seven thousand Valiant men, and of
great Houses: But his Footmen were raw and untrained Soldiers, whom Pompey
continually exercised at the City of Beraea, taking as much pains therein as if
he had been in his youth. It was great encouragement to others to see Pompey,
His industry and activity.
being fifty eight years old, fighting on foot completely Armed, and then
speedily to mount on Horseback, and in his full Career to draw, and put up his
Sword, to cast his Dart, with as much agility and strength, and point blank,
that few young men could do the like.

To Pompey there came diverse Kings, Many came to him.
Princes, and Lords of great Countries: and of Roman Captains, who had born
Office, to the number of a whole Senate. Amongst these, there came also
Labienus, who formerly had been Caesar's great Friend, and an assistant to him
in his Wars in Gaul. There came also to him Brutus, a very Valiant man, who
had never before spoken unto Pompey, because he thought him guilty of his
Fathers Murder, but now he willingly joined with him as a defender of the
Roman Liberties. Cicero himself also, who had Written, and given counsel for
Peace, thought it a shame not to be amongst the number of those who would
hazard their lives in the defense of their Country. There came also Didius
Sextus, though he was an old man, and lame of one of his Legs, whom when
Pompey savv coming (though others laughed him to scorn, yet) he rose up and
went to meet him, judging it a sign of much love when such old men chose
rather to accompany him in danger, than to remain at home in safety.

The chief of Pompey's Army, sitting in Counsel, decreed that no Citizen of
Rome should be put to death, but such as fell in Battle: That no City subject
to the Empire of Rome should be sacked, which made Pompey's part liked the
better: And most judged those, Enemies both to the Gods, and Men, that did not
vvish him the Victory. Caesar's courtesy, and mildness,
Caesar also shevved himself very courteous, and merciful; for having taken all
Pompey's Army in Spain, he set all the Captains at liberty, and only reserved
the Soldiers to himself: Then coming over the Alps again, he passed through
all Italy, and came to Brundusium in the Winter time, and from thence, passing
over the Sea he came to the City of Oricum: and having Vibius, one of Pompey's
familiar Friends with him, whom he had taken Prisoner, he sent him to Pompey
again to desire that they might meet, and both of them disband their Armies
within three days, and being reconciled, and having given their Faith each to
other, to return into Italy like good Friends together. But Pompey durst not
trust to these fair words, judging them but snares to entrap him. He therefore
suddenly removed to the Sea coast, and took all the places of strength near to
the Sea side, safely to lodge his Camp in, and all the Ports, Harbors, and
Creeks, fit for Ships to lie in, so that whatsoever Wind blew, it served his
turn to bring him either men, victuals, or money.

Caesar, on the other hand was so distressed both by Sea and Land, that he was
driven to hasten to a Battle, Caesar wants Victuals.
and to assail Pompey even in his own strength, to force him to fight with him,
and for the most part he always had the better in most skirmishes, saving one,
wherein he was in danger to have lost all his Army. For Pompey had valiantly
repulsed all his men, and made them fly, Caesar beaten,
and had slain two thosand of them in the Field, but he durst not enter pell
mell with them into their Camp when they fled: which made Caesar say to his
Friends, That his Enemy had won the Victory that day if he had known how to
overcome. This Victory did so encourage Pompeys men, that they would needs
hazard a Battle. But Pompey, though he wrote to many of his Friends and
Confederates as if he had already beaten Caesar, yet was he not willing to
adventure all upon a Battle, thinking it better, by protracting time and
cutting his Enemy short of Victuals, to overcome him.

For this end Pompey persuaded his men to be quiet, and not to stir: But when
Caesar, after this last bickering, being scanted of Victuals, raised his Camp,
and departed to go into Thessaly, through the Country of the Athamaneans, then
he could no longer bridle their courage, who cried out, Caesar is fled, let us
follow him: And others said let us return home into Italy. Imprudence.
And some sent their Friends, and Servants to Rome to hire them Houses near the
Market place, intending at their return, to sue for Offices. Some in a jollity
would needs sail to Lesbos, where Pompey had left his Wife Cornelia, to carry
her the good news that the War was endeed.

Pompey calling a Counsel, Affricanus thought it best to go into Italy, and to
win that, as being the chiefest mark they shot at in this War: For whosoever
had that, was sure of all Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, Spain, and Gaul: He said
also, that it was a dishonor to Pompey (who should be very tender of his
credit) to suffer their Country to be in such bondage, and subjection to
Slaves, and base flatterers of a Tyrant, when as it offered it self as it were,
into their hands. But Pompey thought it dishonorable for him to fly from
Caesar, and to make him follow him, since he now had him in chase, nor lawful
before the Gods now to forsake his Father in Law Scipio, and many others, who
had been Consuls, and who were dispersed up and down Greece, and Thessaly, who
by this means would certainly fall into Caesar's hands, together with their
Riches, and Armies. He said also, that they had care enough for the City of
Rome by drawing their Armies farthest from it, so as they remaing safe and
quiet at home, not feeling the miseries of War, might joyfully welcome him home
that remained Conqueror.

With this determination he followed Caesar, not intending to give him Battle,
but to besiege him and so to cut him short of Victuals: But whilst he pursued
him fair and softly, his men cried out of him, that he intended not to War
against Caesar, but against his own Country, that he might still keep the
authority in his hand. Phaonius also mocked him, and went crying up and down,
My Masters, I give you notice that you are like to eat no Tusculan Figs this
year. Folly.
With these and many other such lewd Speeches, they compelled Pompey to submit
to their rash and giddy desires, contrary to his more prudent purpose, and
determination, which yet a General over so many Nations, and Armies, should not
have done. These little considered that he with whom he was to sight, Caesar's
great Victories.
was Caesar, who had taken a thousand Towns, and Cities by assault, had subdued
above three hundred several Nations, had won infinite Battles of the Germans
and Gauls, and was never overcome: Had also taken a Million of men Prisoners,
and had slain as many in diverse Battles. Yet Pompeys men still vexing him with
their importunity, when they were come into the Fields of Pharsalia, caused him
to call a Counsel. There Labienus the General of the Horsemen, swore before
them all, that he would not return from the Battle till he had driven his
Enemies out of the Field: and the like Oath did all the rest of the Commanders
take.

The Night before the fatal Battle there were heard sudden and fearful Noises
in Pompeys Camp, Prodigie^.
which awaked all the Soldiers. At the changing of the fourth Watch, there was
seen a great light over Caesar Camp, like unto a burning Torch which came and
fell in Pompeys Camp. In the morning Caesar intending to raise his Camp, and to
remove to the City of Scotusa, whilst his Soldiers were busy in sending away
their Bag, and Baggage, some brought Caesar word that they saw much Armor, and
many Weapons carried too and fro in their Enemies Camp, and heard a great noise
and bustling, as of men that were preparing to fight. His Scouts also brought
him word that Pompeys Van was already set in Battle array. Caesar much rejoiced
when he heard this, saying, Now the day is come that we shall no longer sight
with hunger, and want, but with men, and thereupon gave order that they should
presently put out the red coat of Arms upon his Tent, which was the sign used
amongst the Romans when they were to fight. The Soldiers when they saw that,
left their Tents, Carriages and all, and with great shouts of Joy, ran to arm
themselves, and so without noise or tumult they were by their Captains put into
Battle array.

Pompey himself led the right Wing of his Battle against Anthony. The middle
Battle he gave to Scipio his Father in Law which was right against Domitius
Calvinus: The Battle of Pharsalia,
His left Wing was led by Lucius Domitius Aenobarlius, which was guarded by the
men at Arms; for all the Horsemen were placed there, to distress Caesar if
possibly they could, and to overthrow the tenth Legion, which contained the
valiantest Soldiers that Caesar had; and amongst whom himself always used to
fight in Person. Caesar seeing the lest Wing of his Enemies so strong with the
guard of Horsemen, brought six Company's of Foot for a reserve, and placed them
behind the tenth Legion, commanding them to stand close, that they might not be
discovered by the Enemy: and commanded them when the Horsemen should charge
upon them, that they should not throw their Darts strait forward but upwards at
their Faces: For (said he) These brave Fellows and fine Dancers, will not
endure to have their Faces marred.

Pompey being on Horseback rode up and down to observe how both Armies were
marshelled, and perceiving that his Enemies stood still in their ranks,
expecting the signal of Battle, and that his own Battle vvaved up and down
disorderly, as men unskilful in the Wars, he feared that they would fly before
they were charged. Therefore he commanded his Van to stand steadily in their
ranks, and to defend themselves in a close fight when the Enemy should assault
them. But Caesar disliked this devise: for thereby (said he) the force of their
blows was lessened, and by withholding them from giving the charge, that
courage was taken away which the assailant carries with him when he comes on
with fury, it made them also more fainthearted in receiving the Enemies charge.
In Caesar's Army there were about twenty two thousand fighting men, and in
Pompeys above twice so many.

When the signal of Battle was given on either side, and the Trumpets sounded
an Alarm, every man began to look to himself. But a few of the chiefest of the
Romans, and some Grecians that were amongst them, that yet were not entered into
the Battle, perceiving the eminent danger, began to bethink themselves to what
a sad pass the ambition, and contention between these two great Persons had
brought the State of Rome unto, where were Kinsmen against Kinsmen, and
Brethren against Brethren imbrewing their hands each in others blood. Whereas,
if they could have been contented quietly to Govern what they had conquered,
the Roman Empire was big enough for them both. Or if that could not have
quenched their insatiable desires and thirst after Glory, they had occasion
enough offered them against the Germans, and Parthians: Or else they might have
proceeded to conquer Scythia, and India. For what Scythian Horsemen, or
Parthian Arrows, or Indian Riches, could have withstood the power of seventy
thousand Roman Soldiers, especially being led by two such Captains as were
Pompey and Caesar, whose Names were famous through the World.

Now when the Fields of Pharsalia, were covered over with Horse and Men in
Arms, after the Signal was given, the first man of Caesar's Army that advanced
forward to give the charge, was Caius Crassinius, a Captain of one hundred
twenty and five men: and this he did to make good his promise to Ceasar, who
having asked him that morning what he thought of the event of the Battle? he
said, Oh Caesar! Thine is the Victory, and this day thou shall commend me
either alive or dead. Valor.
Thereupon he brake out of his rank (many others also followed him) and ran
into the midst of his Enemies, making a great slaughter; but as he still
pressed forward, one ran him through the neck and slew him.

Pompey did not make his left Wing to advance over suddenly, but staid to see
what his Horsemen would do, who had already divided themselves, intending to
compass in Caesar, and to force his Horsemen (who were fewer in number) to give
back upon his squadron of Footmen, and thereby to disorder them. But on the
other side, Caesar's Horsemen gave back a little, and the six Companies of
Footmen that he had placed secretly behind them (being three thousand in
number) ran suddenly to charge the Enemy in the Flank, and coming near to
Pompeys Horsemen, they threw their Darts (as Caesar had appointed them) full in
their Faces. The young Gentlemen, being raw Soldiers, and little expecting
such a manner of fight, had not the hearts to defend themselves, nor could
abide to be hurt in their Faces, but turning their Heads, and clapping their
hands on their Faces, they fled shamefully. They being thus routed, Caesar's men
made no account to follow them, but went presently and charged his Infantry,
and especially where they had no guard of Horsemen, by which means they might
be the easiler compassed about. Thus they being charged by these in the Flank
and in the Van also by the tenth Legion, finding themselves (contrary to their
expectation) compassed about by their Enemies, whereas they thought to have
environed them, they could no longer make resistance, but were put to the rout
also.

When Pompey saw the dust flying up in the air, Pompey beaten.
and thereby conjectured the flight of his Horsemen, he was like a man amazed,
and at his wits end, forgetting that he was Pompey the Great, and so retiring
into his Camp, he fat silent for a good while, till such time as his Enemies
entered pell mell into it, together with his men that fled: and then he said no
more, but, What! Into our Camp? And so rising up, he put on a Gown fit for his
sad condition, and secretly stole out of the Camp: His other Legions also fled,
and Caesar's men made a huge slaughter of the Tent keepers, and of their
Servants that guarded the Camp: there were slain about six thousand. But at the
taking of the Camp Caesar's Soldiers plainly saw the madness and folly of
Pompeys men: For their Pavillions and Tents were full of Nosegays, and Garlands
of Myrtle, and their Couches covered with Flowers, their Tables full of Bowls
of Wine, as men prepared to sacrifice for joy, rather than to arm themselves to
fight.

When Pompey was gone a little way from his Camp, He flies.
he forsook his Horse, having very few with him, and perceiving that none
pursued him, he walked fair and softly on Foot, having his head full of
thoughts. For he, for thirty four years together used always to be Victorious,
and therefore now it was strange to him to fly: Vanity of all earthly
enjoyments.
He now law how in one hours space, he had lost all that Glory and Riches which
he had purchased by so many great Victories. He, that not long before was
followed and obeyed by so many thousand men of War, by so many Nations, and
Horsemen; by such a great Fleet upon the Sea, was now fallen into a low and poor
estate, with so small a train, that his very Enemies who sought him, knew him
not.

When he had thus passed the City of Larissa, he came into the Valley of Tempe,
where being a thirst he fell down on his belly, and drank of the River, then
rising up, he went, and came to the Sea side, and lay all Night in a Fishers
Cottage. The next Morning by break a day he went into a little Boat upon the
River, having some Freemen with him, and as for his Slaves he dismissed them,
and bad them go boldly unto Caesar, and not to be afraid. Thus rowing up and
down the shore side in this little Boat, he espied a great Ship in the Sea
lying at Anchor, which was ready to sail away: The Master of the Ship was one
Peticius, a Roman, who, though he was not acquainted with Pompey, yet he knew
him well by sight. Some of the Mariners told Peticius that they saw a little
Boat coming toward them, wherein were some men that held up their hands, and
made signs to them: Peticius looking, knew Pompey, and commanded his Mariners
to let down the Boat, wherewith giving Pompey his hand, he received him into
the Ship, and those that were with him, and then hoised Sail. With Pompey their
were both the Lentuli, and Faonius. Presently after they espied King Dejotarus
coming in a Boat toward them, and making signs to be taken in, which
accordingly they did. At Supper time the Master made ready such meat as he had
aboard. And Faonius seeing Pompey for want of attendants, Humillity.
washing himself, he ran to him, and anointed him, and ever after waited upon
him, doing such Offices as Servants do to their Masters, washing his Feet, and
preparing his food for him.

Pompey then passing by the City of Amphipolis, sailed to the Isle of Lesbos to
fetch his Wife Cornelia, Pompey goes to his Wife.
and his Son, who were at Mitilene, and having there cast Anchor in the Rode,
he sent a Servant into the City to his Wife, whose Message did not answer her
expectation. For she had still been put in hope by Letters of her Husbands good
success, and that the War was well ended: The Messenger finding her thus
confident, thought not fit to salute her, but rather by his Tears discovered
the great misfortune of Pompey; and at last told her, that she must dispatch
quickly if she would see her Husband, with one Ship only, and that not his own,
but borrowed: The young Lady hearing this, fell down in a swound before him,
but after she was come to her self, remembering that it was now no time to weep
and lament, she went speedily through the City to the Sea side. There Pompey
meeting her, took her in his Arms and embraced her: But she finking under him,
fell down, and at last said: Their Speeches each to other.
Out alas? Woe worth my hard Fortune, not thine, good Husband, who now see thee
with one poor Ship, who before thou marriedst me the Unfortunate Cornelia, was
wont to sail in these Seas attended with five hundred. Alas! Why art thou come
to see me, and did not rather leave me to my accursed destiny, seeing my self
am the cause of this thy evil? Alas! How happy had I been if I had died before
I heard of the death of my first Husband Publius Crassus, slain in the Parthian
War? And how wise had I been if (according to my determination) I then had
slain my self, whereas I yet live to bring this misfortune upon Pompey the
Great? To this Pompey answered: Peradventure (my Cornelia) thou have known a
better fortune which has also deceived thee, because she has continued longer
with me than her manner is. But since we are born men, we must patiently bear
these troubles, and once more try what she will do. For it is not impossible
for us again to change this adversity for prosperity, no more than it was to
fall from our late prosperity into this Calamity.

When Cornelia heard him say so, she sent into the City for her household
stuff, and Family: The Metilenians also came to salute Pompey, praying him to
come and refresh himself in their City: But Pompey refused, and advised them to
obey the Conqueror; for (said he) Caesar is of a just, and courteous Nature.
Then Pompey turning to Cratippus the Philosopher, who came amongst the Citizens
to visit him, He reasons about Providence.
made his complaint to him, and reasoned a little with him about Divine
Providence. Then taking his Wife and Friends he hoised sail and departed,
staying no where but to take in fresh provision and water.

The first City that he touched at, was Atalia in the Country of Pamphilia.
Thither came to him some Galleys out of Cilicia, and many of his Friends and
Soldiers, insomuch as he had now sixty Senators in his Company. Then
understanding that his Army by Sea was yet whole, and that Cato had gathered
together a great number of his Soldiers after the overthrow, whem he had
transported with him into Africa, he complained to his Friends for that they
had compelled him to fight by Land, and not suffered him to make use of his
Fleet, wherein he was the stronger, and that he kept not his Army near to the
Sea, that in case he miscarried at Land, he might presently have repaired to
his Fleet at Sea, and thereby have resisted his Enemy.

Thus Pompey being driven to attempt somewhat according to his small ability,
to some Cities he sent Ambassadors, to others he went himself to gather money,
wherewith he armed and manned some Ships. But fearing the sudden approach of
his Enemy, before he could be in readiness to resist him, he bethought himself
to what place he might retire for his better safety, and resolved that there
was never a Province of the Romans that was able to secure him, and for other
strange Nations, he thought none safer for him to retire into than Parthia,
which was able to aid and help him. Some advised him to go into Africa unto
King Juba. But Theophanes the Lesbian said, that it was great folly to decline
Egypt that was but three days sail from thence, and where Ptolomy was, who was
lately come to man's estate, and was infinitely bound to Pompey for the late
favors which he showed to his Father, and not put himself into the hands of
the Parthians, the most unfaithful Nation in the World. He thought it also an
ill part for him to carry his young Wife of the Noble Family of Scipio, amongst
such barbarous People, who care not how basely they abuse any strangers. The
Speech altered Pompeys mind, and made him resolve to fly into Egypt: and so
with his Wife Cornelia, Pompey flies into Egypt.
he departed from Cyprus in a Galley of Seleucia. The rest of his Train,
embarked also, some in Galleys, other in Merchant Ships, and so passed the Sea
without danger.

When Pompey heard that King Ptolomy was in the City of Pelusium with his Army,
He s^^ds to King Ptolomy.
warring against his Sister, he steered that way, and sent a Messenger before
to the King, to certify him of his arrival; and to entreat him to give him
entertainment: King Ptolomy was at this time but a young man, and under him,
the whole Realm was governed by one Photinus. He therefore assembled a Council
of the chiefest, A Council about Pompey,
and wisest of his Court, and when they were met, Photinus in the Kings name
commanded every man to declare his Judgment about the reception of Pompey
whether they should intertain him or not; and truly it was a sad thing that
Photinus an Eunuch, and Theodotus of Chio, who was the Kings Schoolmaster for
Rhetoric, and Achillas an Egyptian, should consult amongst themselves what
they should do with Pompey the Great.

All this while Pompey rode at Anchor near to the shore, expecting the
resolution of this Council, amongst whom their opinions were various, some
were for, others against his reception; But Theodotus the Rhetorician, to show
his eloquence, persuaded them that neither the one, nor the other was to be
done. For (said he) if we receive him, Base treachery and ingratitude.
we shall make Caesar our Enemy, and Pompey our Lord: If we receive him not,
Pompey will blame us, and Caesar also for not keeping him. Our safest way
therefore is to kill him: for thereby we shall win the good will of the one,
and not sear the displeasure of the other: Adding that Mortui non Mordent, A
dead man bites not. This they all resolved upon, and accordingly gave Achillas
Commission to do it.

This being concluded, Achill as took with him Septimius (who had sometimes
served under Pompey) and Salvius a Centurion, and two or three other Soldiers,
and so made to wards Pompeys Galley, about whom there were at this time the
chiefest of his Train to see what would be the issue of this matter. But
when they favv what intertainment he was like to have, and that they came not
in that Princely manner, answerable to the hopes that Theophanes had put them
in, seeing so few men coming toward him in a Fisherboat, they began to
mistrust the sequel, and advised Pompey to turn back, and to launch again into
the Sea, whilst he was yet out of the reach of their Darts. In the mean time
the Fisherboat drevv near, and Septimius rose up and saluted Pompey in the
Roman Tongue by the name of Imperator, or Emperor. Achillas also spoke to him
in Greek, vvishing him to come into his Boat, the shore being full of mud, and
sand banks, so that his Galley could not carry him to the shore.

At this time they saw afar off diverse of the Kings Galleys which were arming
with all speed possible, and all the shore was full of Soldiers, so that
though Pompey and his Friends would have altered their minds, yet they could
not tell how to escape, and if they had diseovered their mistrust of them,
they had given the Murderers a cloak for their cruelty. Pompey takes his leave
of his Wife and Son.
Pompey therefore taking his leave of his Wife Cornelia, who lamented his
Death before his end, he commanded two of his Centurions to go down before
him into the Boat, and took with him only Philip, one of his Slaves
enfranchised, with another Slave called Scynes. When Achilles reaching out his
hand to receive Pompey into his Boat, he turned him to his Wife, and Son, and
repeated these Verses of Sophocles: The Man that into Court comes free,
Must there in state of bondage be.


These were the last Words which he spoke to them. The Land being far off, when
he saw never a man in the Boat speak friendly to him, he said unto Septimius,
Methinks, my Friend, I should know thee, for thou have served under me
heretofore: the other nodded with his head, but gave him no answer. Pompey
observing these things, took a little Book into his hand, wherein he had
written an Oration that he meant to make to King Ptolomy, and began to read it.
As they approached to the shore, Cornelia, with her Friends about her, stood up
in great fear, to see what would become of Pompey, and she hoped well when she
saw many of the Kings People on the shore, coming toward Pompey, as it were to
receive, and honor him at his landing. But even as Pompey took Philip by the
hand to rise more easily, Septimius came behind him, and thrust him through
with his Sword: Salvius, and Achillas also made at him with their Swords.
Pompey did no more but took up his Gown, with which he covered his face, and
took the wounds in a manly manner, Pompey is slain.
only sighing a little. Thus ended he is Life the very next day after his
Birth, being fifty nine years old.

They which rode at Anchor in their Ships, when they saw him thus Murdered,
gave such a fearful cry that it was heard to the shore: And weighing their
Anchors with speed, they hoised Sail and departed, having a lusty gale of Wind
to help them. The Egyptians had thought to pursue them, but when they saw they
were past their reach, they let them go. Then striking off Pompeys Head they
threw his Body overboard, where it was a miserable spectacle to all that
desired to behold it. Philip, his infranchised Bondsman, stirred not from it
till the Egyptians had glutted themselves with looking upon it. Then having
vvashed it with Salt water, and wrapped it up in an old Shirt of his own, he
sought about the Sands, and at last found a piece of an old Fisher-boat, scarce
enough to burn all the Body: and as he was gathering the pieces of this Boat
together, there came to him an old Roman, who in his Youth had served under
Pompey, saying, O Friend, what art thou that preparest the Funerals of Pompey
the Great? Philip answered, that he was a Bondsman of his infranchised. Well
(said he) thou shall not have all this honor alone, Pray thee let me accompany
thee in this devout deed, that I may not altogether repent me that I have dwelt
so long in a strange Country, where I have endured much misery; but to
recompense me, let me have this good hap to touch Pompeys Body, and to help to
bury this most famous Captain of the Romans.

The next day Lucius Lentulus, not knowing what had happened, coming out of
Cyprus, sailed by the shore side, and perceiving a Funeral fire, and Philip
standing by it, he asked him whose Funeral it was? But straight fetching a
great sigh, alas (said he) perhaps it is Pompeys the Great. Then he landed a
little, and was presently slain. This was the deplorable end of Pompey the
Great.

Caesar not long after came into Egypt, where there were great Wars, at which
time Pompeys Head was presented to him, but he turned aside and would not see
it, abhorring him that brought it as a detestable Murderer. Then looking on
his Signet Ring whereon was engraven a Lion holding a Sword, The Murderers
justly punished.
he burst out a weeeping. Achillas and Photinus he put to death. King Ptolomy
being overthrown in Battle by the River Nilus, vanished away and was never
after heard of. Theodotus escaped Caesar's hands, and wondered up and down Egypt
in great misery, despised of every man. And afterward Marchus-Brutus (who slew
Caesar) when he conquered Asia, met with this Theodotus by chance, and putting
him to all the torments he could possibly devise, he at last slew him. The
Ashes of Pompeys Body were afterward brought to his Wife Cornelia, His Burial.
who buried them in a Town of hers near the City of Alba.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF JULIUS CAESAR The First FOUNDER OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.
JULIUS CAESAR by the Fathers side was of a very Noble and ancient Family,
Caesar's Parentage.
and by the Mothers side he descended from the Kings of Rome, who were
extracted from the Trojan Aeneas. When he was a youg man, Sylla having gotten
the Lordship of Rome, would have had him put away his Wife Cornelia, who was
the Daughter of Cinna, the Dictator, but he could not prevail with him, either
by promises or threats to do it, whereupon he took away her Joynter from him.

Sylla being very busy in putting to Death many of his Enemies, yet passed by
Caesar whom he contemned for his youth. His danger by Sylla.
And Caesar was not contented to retire in safety in those stormy times, but
came and made suit to the People for the Priesthood which was then void, when
he had scant any hair on his Face: but by Syll^s means he suffered a repulse,
who was so irritated hereby, that he determined to have killed him; and when
some of Syllas Friends told him, that it was to no purpose to put so young a
man to Death, he answered, That they did not consider that there were many
Marius 's in that one Boy.

Caesar being informed of his danger, His flight.
secretly fled from Rome, and hid himself a long time amongst the Sabines,
wandering from one place to another, yet at length he fell into the hands of a
party of Syllas Soldiers who sought for him, but he bribed their Captain with
two Talents, and so escaped. Then went he unto the Sea side, and taking Ship,
he passed into Bythinia unto King Nicomedes. He is taken by Pirates.
And after a while, he took Sea again, and fell into the hands of some Pirates,
who at that time kept all the Seacoast, with a great Fleet. They asked him
twenty Talents for his Ransom, Caesar laughed them to scorn, as not knowing
what a man they had taken, and of himself promised them fifty Talents, and sent
some of his men to get him this money, so that he was almost left alone amongst
these Thieves, which were the cruellest Butchers in the World, having only one
of his Friends and two Slaves with him.

Thus he continued thirty eight days amongst them, not as a Prisoner, but
rather waited upon as a Prince by them: His boldness.
For he boldly exercised himself amongst them in their sports: He would make
Orations and call them together to hear them, and if they seemed not to
understand or regard them, he would call them Blockheads and Beasts, and
laughing would threaten to hang them, and they took all in good part, thinking
that it proceeded from his Boyish simplicity.

When his Ransom was come, he paid it them and so was dismissed; He is
delivered.
and presently arming and manning some Ships out of the Haven of Miletum, he
followed these Thieves, and finding them yet at Anchor, he took most of them,
and got a great Booty, and carried their Persons to the City of Pergamus, and
there imprisoned them, whilst himself went to Jumus, the Governor of Asia, to
whom the execution of these Pirates did belong. But he desiring to get the money,
because there was good store of it, said, that he would consider of the^e
Prisoners at better leisure. Caesar hereupon returned back to Pergamus, He
crucifies the Pirates.
and there hung up all the Thieves openly upon the Cross, as he often had
threatened that he would do, when they thought that he was but in jest.

When Syllas power began to decay, Caesar's Friends wrote to him to return to
Rome: But he first went to Rhodes to study there for a time, under the Tuition
of Apollonius, an honest man and excellent Rhetorician, whose Scholar also
Cicero had been. Caesar had an excellent gift to speak well naturally, which
was much helped by his Studies, so that he was very Eloquent, and might have
been second to none, but that he applied himself rather to follow the Wars, and
to manage great matters than to pleading of causes.

When he was returned again to Rome, His return to Rome.
he immediately wan the good will of the People by his Eloquence, and courteous
speaking to every man, being more ceremonious in his deportment than could be
expected from one of his years. He grows popular.
Besides, he ever kept a good Table, and fared well, and was very liberal,
which much increased his estimation with the People. And his Enemies, presuming
that when he could not hold out that charge and expense, the favor of the
People would quickly decay, And is feared.
they suffered him to go on, till by degree he was grown very great, and
powerful. So that though some of them foresaw that his power would at last turn
to the destruction of the Commonwealth of Rome, yet now they knew not how to
prevent it. Indeed Cicero was the first man, who mistrusting his dealings,
found out his subtilty and malice, which he cunningly cloaked under a show of
courtesy, and familiarity: Yet (said he) When I consider how finely he combeth
his fair bush of hair, and how smooth it lies, and that I see him scratch his
Head with one finger, my mind gives me then, that such a man should not be so
wicked as to design the ruin of the Commonwealth.

The first time that he made proof of the good will of the People was, when he
stood in competition with Pompey to be chosen a Colonel of a thousand Foot
Soldiers, and carried it against him; but a more manifest proof of it was at
the Death of his Aunt Julia, the Wife of Marius the elder. For then he solemnly
made an Oration in her commendations in the Market place, and at her Burial,
did boldly show forth the Images of Marius, which was the first time that they
were seen after Syllas Victory over him, at which time Marius and all his
partakers had been proclaimed Traitors and Enemies to the Commonwealth. And
whereas some cried out upon Caesar for doing it, the People on the other side
applauded and thanked him for it. And whereas there was an ancient custom that
the Romans used to make Funeral Orations in commendation of old Ladys, but not
of young Women. Caesar was the first that praised his own Wife in an Oration at
her Funeral, which much engaged the People to him, seeing him of so kind, and
loving a nature.

Shortly after he was made Treasurer under Antistius Vetus, His preferment.
the Praetor, for which he ever after honored him, so that when he himself
came to be Praetor, he made his Son Treasurer under him, and when he came out
of that Office, he married his third Wife, whom was Pompeia and married his
Daughter Cornelia which he had by his first Wife, to Pompey the Great. He
further ingratiated himself with the People by disbursing a great sum of his
own money in mending the Appian way, when he was made Overseer thereof: as also
for that, when he was chosen an Aedile, he showed the People the pastime of
three hundred and twenty couple of Sword Players, and exceeded all others in
the sumptuousness of his Feasts and sports which he made for the delight of
the People, which made them daily to give him new Offices by way of requital.

Not long after the High Priest Metellus died, and Isauricus and Catulus, two
of the chiefest men, and of the greatest authority in Rome, contended for the
place: Caesar also presented himself to the People and sued for it, and Catulus
fearing the event, sent a great sum of money to Caesar, to procure him to leave
off his suit: Caesar sent him word, that he would disburse a greater sum than
that to maintain the suit against him: and when the Day of Election came, his
Mother bringing him to the Door, Caesar weeping kissed her, and said, His
ambition*
Mother, This day thou shall see thy Son chief Bishop of Rome, or banished from
Rome; He is made High Priest.
and accordingly he carried it by the suffrages of the People, insomuch as the
Senate and Noble men were all afraid of him, judging that from henceforth he
would make the People do what he pleased.

Afterward Caesar going into the Senate to clear himself of some accusations
that were brought against him, the Senate keeping him somewhat longer than
ordinary, the People come to the door and called for him, bidding them let him
out. Whereupon Cato fearing an insurrection of the poor and needy Persons, who
put all their hopes in Caesar, moved, that a frank distribution of Corn for a
month should be made amongst them, which indeed put the Commonwealth to the
charge of fifty five hundred Myriads, but it quenched the present danger, and
did happily scatter the best part of Caesar's strength, and that at such a time
when he was made Praetor, and had thereby opportunity of doing much mischief.
Yet all the the time of that Office, His Moderation
he never attempted to make alteration in the Commonwealth.

About this time Clodius was suspected of too much familiarity with Pompeia,
wherefore Caesar put her away. He puts away his Wife.
The Government of Spain being fallen unto Caesar as he was Praetor, his
Creditors came with great importunity calling for their debts: But he being
unable to satisfy them; went to Crassus, the richest man in Rome; who stood in
need of Caesar's bloldness and courage to withstand Pompeys greatness, who
became his surety to his greadiest Creditors, for eight hundred and Thirty
Talents, whereupon he was suffered to depart to his Province.

As he passed over the Alps he came to a little poor Village, where his Friends
that did accompany him, asked him merrily if there were any contending for
Offices in that Town, and whether there were any strife amongst the Noblemen
for honor? His ambition.
Caesar answered, I cannot tell: but for my part, I had rather be the chiefest
man here, than the second person in Rome. Another time in Spain reading the
History of Alexander he was sorrowful a good while after, and at last burst out
into weeping. His Friends marvelling at it, asked him what was the cause of his
sorrow? He answered, Do you not think that I have good cause to be sorry, when
Alexander ( being no older than my self) had conquered so many Nations and
Countries, whereas hitherto I have done nothing worthy of my self.

When he first came into Spain he followed his business close, and in a short
time had joined ten new Ensigns of Foot Soldiers, unto the other twenty which
he had before. Then marching against the Gallicians, and Lusitanians, he
conquered all before him as far as to the Atlantic Ocean, His Victories in
Spain.
subduing those People which before knew not the Romans for their Lords; and
then did as wisely take order for the establishing of Peace. For he reconciled
the Cities together, made them Friends: But especially he pacified all suits of
Law betwixt Debtors and Creditors which arose by usury: His Prudence.
Ordaining that the Creditors should take yearly two parts of the revenew of
their Debtors, till such time as they had paid themselves, and that the Debtors
should have the other third part to live upon. By this he won great estimation
to himself, and returned from his Government very wealthy, his Soldiers also
were full of rich spoils.

The Romans had a custom, that such as desired the honor of Triumph, should
stay without the City, whereas they that sued for the Consulship must of
necessity be there in Person. Caesar coming home just at that time when Consuls
were to be chosen, he sent to request the Senate that he might be permitted to
sue for the Consulship by his Friends: Against this Cato at first did
vehemently invey, alleging that it was contrary to an express Law. But when
he perceived that many of the Senators (being Caesar's Friends) favored his
request, he cunningly sought all he could to prevent them: whereupon Caesar
resolved rather to give over his suit, for the Triumph, than to lose the
Consulship: So he came into the City, and outwitted all but Cato. His device
was this. Pompey and Crassus were the two greatest Persons in Rome, and at jar
between themselves: His Subtilty.
Caesar affecting to make himself greater than either of them, sought to make
them Friends, and thereby to get the power of them both: For indeed, they both
affected his Friendship, that by his help they might supplant one another. And
in the end, by his endeavors, a peace was concluded betwixt them: yet being
still jealous one of another, and fearing to lose Caesar, they both sought to
gratify him, and by this means he made himself equal to either of them: and
that power which they two had formerly usurped, was now divided between three,
and in the end Caesar hereby got the sole command.

This league being made betwixt them, Caesar demanded the Consulship, being
brought into the Assembly for the Election betwixt these two Noble Persons and
was there chosen Consul, He is chosen Consul.
together with Calphurnius Bibulus, without the contradiction of any: And when
he was entered into his Office, he began to put forth Laws meeter for a
sedicious Tribune than for a Consul, because by them he preferred the division
of Lands, and distributing Corn to every Citizen Gratis, and all to please the
People: And when the Senators opposed it, he took the advantage, Protesting
that the Senate by their austerity drove him against his will to cleave to the
People, and thereupon he asked Crassus and Pompey in the open Assembly, if they
gave their consents to his Laws? They answered, yea. Then he prayed them to
stand by him against those that threatened to oppose him with the Sword: Crassus
said he would, and Pompey did the like, adding, that he would come with his
Sword and Target both against such; which gave great offense to the Senate, but
the common People much rejoiced.

Caesar to oblige Pompey more to him, He Marries his Daughter to Pompey.
gave him his Daughter Julia in Marriage, who was made sure before to Servilius
Caepio, promising him in her stead Pompeys Daughter, who also was made sure
unto Faustus, the Son of Sylla. And shortly after Caesar himself Married
Calphurnia, the Daughter of Piso, whom he caused to succeed him in the
Consulship. Cato then cried out, and called the Gods to witness, that it was a
shameful thing that they should make such havoc in the Commonwealth by such
horribly Bawdy matches, hereby dividing amongst themselves the Government of
Provinces, and great Armies. And Bibulus perceiving that he did but contend in
vain, Caesar being too potent for him, and that his Life was in danger for
opposing these Laws, he kept his House all the rest of his Consulship.

Pompey having married Julia, he filled the Marketplace with Soldiers, and by
open force authorized the Laws which Caesar had made in favor of the People:
He is sent into Gaul.
He procured also that Caesar had both the Gauls, and all Illyria, with four
Legions, granted him for five years: and when Cato stood up to speak against
it, Caesar bad his Officers to lay hold on him, and carry him to Prison,
thinking that he would have appealed to the Tribunes, but Cato said no more,
but went his way. And Caesar seeing that not only the Nobility, but the Commons
also were offended at it, out of respect to Cato's virtues, he secretly prayed
one of the Tribunes that he would take Cato from his Officers, which was done
accordingy. Many of the Senators refused to be present in the Senate under him,
but left the City, because they could not endure his doings; whereupon one
Considius, an old man told him, that the Senators durst not meet because of his
Soldiers. Why then (said Caesar) do not thou also keep home out of the same
fear? Because (said he) My age takes away my fear from me, for having so short
a time to live, I care not to prolong it further.

Caesar preferred Clodius, a base fellow, to be Tribune, who sought the Office
for no other end but to destroy Cicero, He betrays Cicero.
who had discovered his Villainies, and Caesar would not go to his Province till
he had set them two together by the ears, and driven Cicero out of Italy. Yet
did he deserve the name of as brave a General as any that went before him, if
we consider the hard Countries which he adjoined to the Empire of Rome: The
multitude and power of the Enemies whom he overcame: The rudeness and Valor of
the men with whom he had to do, whose manners yet he molli^ied, and civilized:
His courtesy, and clemency to those whom he overcame: His great bounty and
liberallity to those that served under him: As also if we consider the number
of Battles that he fought, and the multitude of Enemies that were slain by him.
His Valor and great successes.
For in less then ten years, he took by assault above eight hundred Towns: He
conquered three hundred Nations: and having at several times above thirty
hundred thousand Soldiers against him, he slew a Million of them, and took as
many more Prisoners. He was so entirely loved of his Soldiers, His Soldiers
Valor.
that to do him service, and to advance his honor, they were invincible: As
appears by the example of Acilius, who in a Sea Fight before the City of
Marseiles, boarding one of the Enemies Ships, had his right hand cut off, and
yet he ran upon his Enemies, thrusting them in their faces with his Target on
his left hand, and so prevailed that he took their Ship.

One Cassius Scaeva also in a fight before the City of Dyrrhacium, having an
eye put out with an Arrow, his shoulder stricken through with a Dart, and his
thigh with another, having received thirty Arrows upon his Shield, called to
his Enemies as if he would yield to them: but when two of them came running to
him, he cut off one of their arms by the shoulder, and wounded the other in
the face, and made them give back till he was fetched off by some of his
fellows. In Britain also when some of his Captains were driven into a bog full
of mire and dirt, the Enemies fiercely assaulting them there, Caesar viewing
the Battle, he saw a private Soldier thrust in amongst the Captains, where he
fought so valiantly that at length he forced the Barbarous People to fly, and
thereby saved the Captains, who otherwise had perished there: And then this
Soldier being the hindmost of all the Captains, marched through the bog,
sometimes swimming, and sometimes on foot, till he gat to the farther side,
only he lost his Target. Caesar wondering at his valor, ran and embraced him:
But the poor Soldier, hanging down his head, with tears in his eyes, fell at
Caesar's feet, begging pardon for leaving his Target behind him. In Africa also,
Scipio having taken one of Caesar's Ships, slew all that were in it, save
Petronius, a Treasurer, to whom he proffered life: But Petronius answered him,
that Caesar's Soldiers used to give others their lives, and not to have their
lives given them, and thereupon slew himself with his own Sword.

Now Caesar bred this courage in them by rewarding them bountifully, and
honoring them. He also gave them a good example by adventuring himself upon
manifest dangers, and putting his body to extreme pains when there was
occasion, which filled them with admiration. As for his constitution he was
lean, white, and soft skinned, and often troubled with the Headache, and
sometimes with the falling sickness, His Temperance.
yet yielded he not to his sickness, but rather took pains as a Medicine to
cure it, traveling continually, living soberly, and commonly lying abroad in
the Fields. Most nights he slept in his Coach, and in the days traveled up and
down to see Cities, Castles, and strongholds. He had always a Secretary with
him in his Coach, who writ as they went by the way, and a Soldier behind him
that carried his Sword. He made such speed when he had gotten his Office at
Rome, that in eight days he came to the River of Rhone. He was an excellent
Rider from his youth: His activity.
for holding his hands behind him, he would run his Horse upon the Spur.

In his Wars in Gaul, or France, he used to exercise himself in inditing
Letters by the way, wherein he was so nimble that he employed two Secretaries,
or more at one time. He made very little account of his Diet, Supping one night
in Millane with his Friend Valerius Leo, there was served at Table some Sperage
with some perfumed oil instead of Sallet oil, he eat it, and found no fault,
blaming his Friends who were offended at the mistake, saying, that if they
liked it not they should have let it alone, and that it was not good manners
hereby to shame their Friend. At another time in his Journey he was forced by
foul weather to shelter himself in a poor Cottage that had but one Cabin, and
that so narrow that one could scarce lie in it, whereupon he said to his
Friends, the greatest rooms, are fittest for the greatest men, and Beds for
sick persons, and so caused Oppius that was sick to lie there, and himself with
the rest of his Friends, lay without doors.

The first War that Caesar made in Gaul, He overcomes the Swissers.
was against the Helvetians, or Swissers, and the Tigurines, who having set
fire of their own Cities and Houses, came to invade that part of Gaul which was
subject to the Romans. These were a very Warlike and Valiant People, and in
all they were three hundred thousand souls, whereof there were one hundred and
ninety thousand fighting men: yet were they overthrown by Labienus, Caesar's
Lieutenant at the River Arax. And when the Heluetians afterward came suddenly
to set upon Caesar, he made have to get into some place of strength, and there
ordered his Battle against them, and when one brought him his charging Horse,
he said, when I have overcome mine enemies, then I will get upon him, to pursue
them, and so marching against them on foot, he fiercely charged them: The
Battle continued long before he could make them fly: yet had he more ado to
take their Camp, and to break the strength that they had made with their Carts.
For not only those that were fled into it, made head again, but their Wives and
Children also fought stoutly for their lives, till they were all slain, and the
Battle was scarce ended by midnight.

Presently after, above one hundred thousand of those that had escaped from
this Batt^l, were forced by Caesar to return into their own Country again, and
to the Towns which they had burnt; and this he did lest the Germans should come
over the Rhine, and settle themselves in that Country being void.

The next War that Caesar made was in defense of the Gauls against the Germans,
And the Germans.
though himself had before admitted Ariovistus their King to be received as a
confederate of the Romans: Notwithstanding which, they were grown very unquiet
Neighbors, watching but an opportunity to possess themselves of the rest of
Gaul. Caesar perceiving that some of his Captains much feared them, especially
the young Gentlemen of Noble Families, who went along with him as to some
Pastimes, he commanded all that were afraid to return home, and not endanger
themselves against their wills. But for himself he said, he would set upon
those Barbarous People, though he had left him but the tenth Legion only. Upon
this the tenth Legion sent their Officers to thank him for the good opinion he
had of them: and all the other Legions blamed their Captains for their
backwardness, and followed him cheerfully till they came within two hundred
Furlongs of the Enemies Camp.

Ariovistus his courage was well cooled when he saw Caesar so near, And the
Gauls.
whereas they thought that the Romans were afraid of them: His Army also was in
a great amaze. But that which discouraged them most, was the Prophesies of some
foolish women, who observing the terrible noise which the Water in the River
made, advised the Germans by no means to fight, and they being possessed with a
superstitious fear, sought to avoid the fight: Yet Caesar skirmished with them
every day and sometime followed them to their Forts, and little Hills where
they lay, whereby he so provoked them that at last they came down with great
fury to fight. In this Battle he overcame them, and pursued them very eagerly,
making a great slaughter of them even to the River of Rhine, filling all the
Fields with dead Bodies, and spoils. Ariovistus himself flying speedily got
over the River, and escaped with some few of his men: At this Battle there were
slain about eighty thousand Germans.

After this Battle Caesar left his Army to winter amongst the Sequanes, and
himself thinking of the affairs of Rome, His Policy*
returned over the Alps to a place about the River Po: whilst he lay there he
labored to make Friends at Rome: and when many came to visit him there, he
granted all their suits, and sent them back, some with liberal rewards, and
others with large promises, whereby he engaged them to him.

During all the time of Caesar's great conquests in Gaul, Pompey did not
consider how Caesar conquered the Gauls with the Roman weapons, and wan the
Romans with the Riches of the Gauls. At this time Caesar being informed that
the Belgae who were the most Warlike Nation of all the Gauls, He overcomes the
Belgae.
were all up in Arms and had raised a very great Power, he presently made
toward them with all possible speed; and found them overrunning and plundering
the neighbor Countries and confederates of the Romans, wherefore he gave them
Battle, and overthrew their chiefest Army, and slew so many of them that the
Lakes and Rivers were died with their blood, and filled with their dead Bodies,
that the Romans passed over on foot upon them: After this overthrow, such of
them as dwelt near the Sea yielded themselves: and from thence he conducted his
Army against the Nervians, the stoutest Soldiers of all the Belgae. These
dwelling in a Woody Country, had conveyed their Wives, Children and Goods into
a very great Forest, remote from their Enemies, and being above eighty
thousand fighting men, they watching their opportunity, set upon Caesar when
his Army was out of order, and little expecting them. At the first charge they
brake the Roman Horsemen, and encompassing the seventh and twelfth Legions,
they slew all the Captains, and had not Caesar himself with his Shield on his
Arm, run amongst them, making a lane as he went, and the tenth Legion, seeing
him in that danger, followed him with all speed, there had not a Roman escaped
alive that day. But looking upon Caesar's Valor, his men fought desperately,
even beyond their abilities, and yet could they not make the Nervi fly, A
Battle.
but they fought it out bravely till most of them were slain in the Field, five
hundred only of them escaping. Yet was it a bloody Battle to the Romans, for
that of four hundred Gentlemen, and Counselors of Rome, there were but three
saved.

The Senate of Rome made great signs of joy for these Victories, by sacrificing
to the Gods, Plays, etc. and as Caesar's fame was increased hereby, so he wan
upon the Peoples love: And always, when his affairs would permit, he used to
Winter by the River Po, to give direction about his affairs at Rome. And truly
not only such as sued for Offices at Rome, obtained them by Caesar's money, and
therefore employed all their power to promote his Interest, but the chiefest
also of the Nobility, His Policy.
went to Luke unto him, insomuch as at one time there have been seen before his
Gates, one hundred and twenty Sergeants carrying Rods and Axes before the
Magistrates that have waited upon him, and two hundred Senators besides. Here
they held a Council, wherein it was agreed, that Pompey and Crassus should
again be chosen Consuls for the year following: and that Caesar should have
more money delivered him to pay his Army, and that his Government should be
prorogued for five years longer.

Then Caesar returning into Gaul to his Army, found there a great War begun For
two Potent Nations of the Germans, having passed over the River of Rhine to
conquer new Lands, Caesar fought with them, which himself thus discribeth:
These Barbarous People (says he) after they had sent Ambassadors to me to
desire peace, contrary to the Law of Arms, came and set upon me as I traveled
by the way, insomuch as eight hundred of their men overthrew five thousand of
my Horsemen, who nothing at all expected their coming, and going on to
describe their farther proceedings, he says, that they again sent Ambassadors
to him to mock him, whom he kept Prisoners, and then setting upon the Enemies,
who were about four hundred thousand Persons, he slew most of them, saying a
few that flying gat back over the River of Rhine and so escaped. He overcomes
the Germans.
Caesar, taking this occasion, and being ambitious to have the honor of being
the first Roman that ever passed this River with an Army, he built a Bridge over
it, though the River were very broad, and ran with a violent stream, and
especially there where he built the Bridge: and the Barbarians casting great
Trees into the River, they were carried down with such violence that by their
great blows they did sore shake the Posts of the Bridge, to prevent which, and
to abate the fury of the stream, Caesar caused a Pile to be made a good way
above the Bridge, which was forcibly rammed into the bottom of the River, so
that in ten days space he had finished his Bridge of goodly Carpenters work: A
very rare invention as could be possibly devised.

Then passing his Army over this Bridge, He passes over the Rhine.
he found none that durst fight with him: For the Suevians who were the most
Warlike People of the Germans, had retired themselves and Goods into great
Valleys, Bogs, Woods, and Forests. Caesar therefore having burnt up the
Enemies Country, and confirmed the League with the confederates of the Romans,
he returned back into Gaul. About this time also he made a Journey into
England, being the first that sailed the Western Ocean with an Army, And went
into England.
and that passed through the Atlantic Sea to make War in this great and Famous
Island, and was the first that enlarged the Roman Empire beyond the habitable
Earth. For he twice passed the Seas out of France into England, where he fought
many Battles with the Brittans, in which he did more hurt to the Enemies, than
enrich his own men: therefore this War had not such success as he expected,
which made him only to take pledges of the King and to impose a yearly Tribute
upon him, and so returned back into Gaul.

He was no sooner landed there, Julias death.
but he met with Letters which advertised from Rome of the death of his
Daughter, the Wife of Pompey, for which they both of them were very sorrowful:
and by this means the league betwixt Pompey and Caesar was broken, to the great
prejudice of the Commonwealth. Caesar's Army being very great, he sent it into
several Garrisons for their Winter Quarters, and returned into Italy, as he
used to do. During which time all Gaul rebelled again, and had raised great
Armies, who were led by one Ambiorix. These did first set upon the Garrisons of
Catta, and Titurius, whom they slew together with all their men. Then they went
with sixty thousand men, and besieged the Garrison which Quintus Cicero had in
charge, and had almost taken it by storm, Ciceroes Soldiers being all wounded,
yet they showed such valor that they did more than men in their own defense.
This news coming to Caesar, who was far off, he returned with all possible
speed, and levying seven thousand Soldiers, he hasted to relieve Cicero that
was in great distress. The Gauls that besieged him, hearing of Caesar's coming,
arose, and went to meet him, making little account of his small number: Caesar
to entrap them, still drew back, making as though he fled from them, but still
lodging in places of safety, and commanded his men that they should not stir
out to skirmish with them, but rather to raise the ramparts of his Camp, and to
fortify the Gates, as men afraid, that their Enemies might the less esteem
them: But at length, he took the opportunity when the Enemies came in a
disordered manner to assault his Camp, He beats the French.
and then sallying out, he routed, and slew a great number of them.

This Act suppressed all the rebellions of the Gauls in those parts: Himself
also went in the midst of Winter in those places where they did Rebel: for now
he had a new supply out of Italy of three whole Legions to fill up the rooms of
those that were slain, of which Pompey lent him two, and the other Legion was
raised about the River Po. Shortly after there brake out the greatest and most
dangerous War that ever he had in Gaul, which had been long designed by the
chiefest and most Warlike People in all that Country, who had a very great
Army, leavying multitudes of men, and much Treasure to fortify their strong
holds: The Country where they were was very hard to come into, especially then
in the Winter when the Rivers were high, and the Woods and Forests covered
with Snow, the Meddows drowned with Floods, and the Snow so deep that no ways
could be discerned, all which might have discouraged Caesar from setting upon
them; the rather, because many Nations joined in this conspiracy, of whom the
chief were the Vernians, and the Carnutes, who had chosed Vercingentorix for
their Captain. He divided his Army into diverse places, under diverse Captains,
and drawn into his assistance all the Nations as far as to the Adriatic Sea:
So that if he had tarried a little longer till Caesar had been engaged in his
Wars with Pompey, he had put all Italy into great fear and danger.

But Caesar, who knew his advantages, and how to take the best opportunities,
as soon as he heard of this Rebellion, The French rebel.
he hasted toward them, intending to let them know, that they had to do with
an Army that was invincible, and which they could not possibly withstand,
seeing they had marched with such speed in so hard a Winter. This made them
wonder when they saw him burning and destroying their Country, when they
thought him far off. Such Towns and strong Forts as yielded to him, he received
to mercy. But the Hedui, who used to be styled the Brethren of the Romans,
taking Arms against him, much discouraged his men: wherefore Caesar went
through the Country of the Lingones to enter into Burgundy, who were
consederates with the Romans. Thither the Enemies followed him, endeavoring to
compass him in on every side. Caesar tarried their coming, and then fighting
with them a long time, Caesar overcomes them.
he at last overcame them. Of those which fled, most of them together with
their King got into the City of Alexia, which Caesar presently besieged, though
it seemed inexpugnable, both in regard of the hight of the Walls, and the many
hands to defend them. During this Siege Caesar fell into a very great danger:
For three hundred thousand of the best Soldiers amongst the Gauls came against
him, besides those within the City, who were seventy thousand fighting men, so
that finding himself to be shut in between two such mighty Armies, he was faign
to fortify himself with two Walls: One against those within Alexia, and the
other against those without. And truly the Battle which he wan at this place,
gat him more honor than any other that ever he fought before. For in this
extreme danger he showed more Valor and Wisdom, and courage than in any other.
And this was wonderful, that they within the City never heard of their Friends
that came to assist them, till Caesar had overcome them: Yea, Caesar's own men
that guarded the Wall against the City, knew nothing of the Battle till they
heard the cries and lamentations of those in the City, when they saw the Romans
bring into their Camp such a number of Shields glistering with Gold and Silver,
such store of bloody Corslets, and Armor, such a deal of Plate, and movables,
and such a number of Tents, and Pavilions of the Gauls which the Romans had
gotten of their spoils. Thus the greatest part of this huge Army were slain:
and as for those within the City, when they had done and received much hurt,
they at last yielded, and Vercingentorix, went out of the City richly Armed,
and his Horse furnished with brave, and glittering Caparisons, and rode about
Caesar who sat in his Chair of State. Then allighting, he took off the
Caparisons, and stripped himself of his Armor, and prostrated himself on the
Ground, and then went and sat down at Caesar's feet, speaking never a word.
Caesar after a while committed him to Prison to be led in his Triumph at Rome.

Now Caesar had long since projected the destruction of Pompey, Non vult
Caesarve priorem, Pompeiusve parem.
as Pompey had done the like for him. Nothing kept Caesar from being the
Greatest Person but Pompey the Great, and nothing kept Pompey from being
supreme but Caesar. Hitherto Pompey had set light by Caesar, thinking that he
could crush him when he pleased: But Caesar went more cunningly to work: for to
attain his end, he procured to be sent into Gaul, where he exercised and and
hardened his Army, and by his valiant deeds purchased fame and honor: so that
now he lacked nothing but an occasion to put his design in practice, which
Pompey partly gave him, and the iniquity of the times much furthered it. For
such as sued for honors and Offices, bought the voices of the People
shamefully, who therefore came to the Marketplace, not to give their voices,
but with Bows, and Slings, and Swords: and the Assembly seldom brake up, but
the Pulpit for Orations was besprinkled with the blood of the slain, Disorders
at Rome.
so that many Wise men believed, that there was no other cure of these evils
but by putting the supreme authority into one man's hand; and many wished that
Pompey were the man: But he seemed to decline it, though cunningly underhand he
labored to be chosen Dictator.

Cato smelling his drift, persuaded the Senate rather to make him sole Consul,
thereby to satisfy his ambition: Pompey sole Consul.
This was done accordingly, and the time also for the Government of his
Provinces was prorogued: they allowed him also a thousand Talents yearly out of
the public Treasury wherewith to pay his Soldiers. Hereupon Caesar took
occasion to send his men to Rome, to sue in his name for the Consulship, and
for the prolonging of his Government. This was too indiscreetly opposed by
Marcellus and Lentulus, and many things were spoken in his disgrace. They took
away also the freedom from the Collonies which Caesar had granted them. And
when Marcellus was Consul, he caused one of those Senators to be whipped, saying,
that he gave him those marks, that he might be known to be no Citizen of Rome;
and bad him go and tell Caesar of it.

Shortly after Caesar opened his Treasures which he had got in Gaul, and gave
it freely among the Magistrates of Rome. He set Curio the Tribune, clear out of
debt: He gave to the Consul Paul fifteen hundred Talents, wherewith he built a
stately Theater. Pompey now beginning to fear, labored to have a successor
sent to Caesar, and withal sent for his two Legions, which Caesar returned to
him, bountifully rewarding every Soldier: and they which brought these Legions
back, disgraced Caesar all they could, and told Pompey that if Caesar's
Soldiers did but once see him, they would all forsake Caesar and cleave to
him. Pompey deluded.
This made Pompey more secure, that neglected to prepare for War. One of
Caesar's Captains coming to Rome, and moving the Senate to have his government
prorogued, they delaying their answer, he laid his hand upon his Sword, and
said, Since you will not grant it him, this shall give it him. Caesar seemed to
be very reasonable in what he requested, For he said, that whilst they required
him to lay down Arms for fear of a Tyranny, and yet permitted Pompey to keep
his, they went about to establish a Tyranny.

Curio in the name of Caesar moved before all the People, that both should be
commanded to lay down Arms, which motion was entertained with great joy and
clapping of hands by the People, who threw Nose-gays, and flowers upon him for
it. Factions (...) Rome.
Then Anthony one of the Tribunes, brought a Letter from Caesar, and read it
before the People in spite of the Consuls, wherein he desired that they would
grant him Gaul on this side the Alps, and Illyria with two Legions only, and
then he would desire no more: But Scipio the Father in Law of Pompey, moved in
the Senate, that if Caesar did not dismiss (...) Army by a day appointed, that
then he should be proclaimed an Enemy to Rome, Marcellus also added, that they
must use force of Arms and not Arguments against a Thief; whereupon the Senate
rose without determining any thing, and every one put on his mourning apparel
as in the time of a common calamity. Cicero being newly come from his
Government in Cilicia, took much pains to reconcile them together, and
persuaded Pompey all he could, who told him that he would yield to whatsoever
he desired, so he would let him alone with his Army: But Lentulus the Consul
shamefully drove Curio and Anthony out of the Senate, who were in such danger
that they were faign to fly out of Rome to Caesar, disguised in a Carriers
coat. This gave Caesar great advantage, and much incensed his men, when they
saw and heard how his Friends were abused.

Caesar at this time had about him but five thousand Foot, and three thousand
Horse, Caesar goes against Pompey.
having left the rest of his Army on the other side of the Alps, to be brought
after him by his Lieutenants: Judging it better suddenly to steal upon them at
Rome, then to assail them with his whole Army, which would require time, and
give his Enemies opportunity to strengthen themselves against him. He therefore
commanded his Captains to go before, and to take in the City of Ariminum (a
great City on this side the Alps) with as little bloodshed as might be. Then
committing the rest of those Soldiers which he had with him, to Hortensius, he
spent a whole day in seeing the Sword Players exercise before him. At Night he
went unto his lodging, where having bathed himself a little, he came into the
Hall, and made merry with those whom he had bidden to Supper. Then rising from
the Table, he prayed his Guests to be merry, and he would come again to them
presently: howbeit he had secretly before directed his most trusty Friends to
follow him: not all together, but some on way, and some another. Himself in the
mean time took a Coach that he had hired, and pretending at first to go another
way, he suddenly turned toward Ariminum.

But when he came to the River of Rubicorn, which divides the hither Gaul from
Italy, he suddenly made a stop (for if he once passed that, there could be no
hope of peace) considering with himself of what importance this passage was,
and what miseries would ensue upon it. Some say that he spoke thus to his
Friends: Doubtless if I forbear to pass over this River, it will be the
beginning of my ruin; if I pass it, the ruin will be general: Then turning
toward the River. he said, it is yet in our power to turn back, but if we pass
the River we must make our way with our Weapons. Some say, that Caesar standing
thus doubtful, he was encouraged by the apparition of a man of very great
stature, piping upon a Reed, whereupon many of the Soldiers and some
Trumpeters went near to hear him, and that he catching one of their Trumpets,
leaped into the River, sounding to the Battle with a mighty blast, and so
passed on to the farther side of the River: Whereupon Caesar, with a furious
resolution, cried out, Let us go whether the Gods, and the injurious dealing of
our Enemies do call us. The Dice are cast. I have set up my Rest, Come what
will of it: He passes Rubicon.
After which he set spurs to his Horse, and passed the River his Army following
him.

Caesar having passed the River and drawn his Army together, he made an Oration
to them, shedding some tears, and tearing his Garment down the Breast, laying
before them the equity of his cause, and craving their assistance. To whom,
having with a general applause and consent made answer; that they were ready to
obey his will, he presently marched on and came the next day to Ariminum, upon
which he seized. The like he did to all the Towns and Castles as he passed on,
till he came to Corfinium which was held by Domitius, who in a factious tumult
had been nominated for his successor in the Government of Gaul. This being
taken, he pardoned the Soldiers, and Inhabitants, and used Domitius kindly,
giving him leave to depart (who went straight to Pompey) by which clemency he
purchased to himself much honor. These thirty Cohorts he kept with him.

Caesar's resolution being known at Rome, it troubled Pompey, amazed the Senate,
and terrified the common People. Pompey now found himself deceived, who before
could not believe that Caesar would thrust himself into so great danger, or
that he could be able to raise sufficient forces to resist him: but the success
proved otherwise. For though Pompey had authority from the Consuls and Senate
to leavy Soldiers, to call home his Legions, and to send Captains for the
defense of those Cities in Italy by which Caesar should pass, yet all this was
not sufficient to resist his fury; and the power that he brought with him. The
fame of Caesar's coming increasing daily, Pompey, with the whole Senate left
Rome, Pompey flies and the Senate.
going to Capua, and from thence to Brundusium, a Sea Town seated at the mouth
of the Gulf of Venice, where he ordered the Consuls to pass to Dyrrhachium,
(now Durazzo) a Sea Town of Macedonia, there to unite all their Forces, being
out of hope to resist Caesar in Italy, who had already taken Corfinium, where,
having drawn Domitius's thirty Cohorts to serve him, he marched on, and hearing
that Pompey and the Consuls were at Brundusium, he hasted toward them with his
Legions with all possible speed. But Pompey, Caesar pursues him.
though he had fortified the Town sufficiently for his defense, yet when Caesar
began to invest the Town, he embarked himself and his men in the night time,
and so passed over to Dyrrachium, to the Consuls. Thus Caesar enjoyed Italy
without opposition, yet was he doubtful what to resolve on: He would gladly
have followed Pompey but wanted Shipping, and it being Winter, he knew that
Ships could not be procured so soon as was requisite: and considering with all,
that it was not safe to leave an Enemy behind him, which might cause an
alteration in France, or Italy; he resolved first to go into Spain, which held
for Pompey, and where he had his best Legions under the command of Petreius and
Afranius, saying to his Friends, Let us go against an Army which wants a
Captain, and afterward we will go against a Captain that wants an Army. For
Pompeys Soldiers in Spain were very valiant, and had been long exercised in
Arms, but their Commanders were neither Politic, nor expert in War. But on
the contrary, Pompey was a most Wise and Valiant Captain, but his Soldiers
were newly levied, and of small experience.

Caesar returning from Brundusium, He is Lord of all Italy, And went to Rome.
in sixty days space became Lord of all Italy, and when he came to Rome, the
People were in great fear, remembering the miseries they had suffered under
Sylla: But Caesar using his accustomed clemency, hurt no man, high nor low: He
called the Senators together which remained there, comforting them with mild
and good words; and laying the whole fault upon Pompey, he sought to justify
his own cause, declaring how much he desired Peace, with all, requesting that
Ambassadors might be sent to Pompey to procure the same: And causing himself
present to be chosen Consul, he opened the Treasury, though Metellus, one of
the Tribunes of the People, opposed him, and the Treasure which he took from
thence, which was very great, he distributed amongst his Soldiers.

Then was he desirous to go into Spain, first taking order for the civil
Government: and making choice of the Legions which should go with him, he left
the rest in Brundusium, and Otranto, and other strong places upon the Sea
Coast, to keep Pompey from landing if he should attempt to return into Italy.
He also made Hortensius, and Dolabella his Captains to provide Shipping to be
brought into the Port of Brundusium, there to be in a readiness against his
return from Spain: Quintus Valerius he sent with a Legion into Sardinia against
Marcus Cotta which held the same for Pompey. To Sicily he sent Curious, and
Marcus Cato, with direction that having taken the same, he should pass over
into Africa. Lepidus he sent to Rome, as Prefect thereof, and Mark Anthony he
made Governor of all Italy: And resolving to leave Lucinius Crassus in France,
He went into Spain.
with his accustomed celerity he went on his Journey, finding no resistance,
neither in Italy nor France, till he came to Marcelleis, which held for Pompey,
This City he besieged, and to avoid loss of time, left Decius Brutus, and Caius
Trebonius with sufficient Forces, who endured much in the siege: himself hasted
into Spain, where, being expected, Afranius and Petreius attended him with four
Roman Legions, and the aid of their Friends, between whom, and Caesar the War
continued for some while, chiefly about the City of Lerida.

At first Caesar was in great danger and much distressed chiefly for want of
Victuals, as also for that the Winter was come on, which troubled him with the
swelling of Rivers, before and after which, there passed many great skirmishes
between the two Armies. And conquered Pompeys men.
And Caesar, watching his opportunities, at last brought his adversaries to
such distress that they perished with hunger, and were forced to come to a
composition, which was, that the Legions should have liberty to go whither they
pleased: and so part of them took pay of Caesar, the rest departed, and
Petreius, and Afranius went to Pompey.

This War being ended, and the Spring come, Caesar, that he might leave no
Enemy behind him, marched into the Province of Betica (now Andaluzia) with part
of his forces, commanding the rest to march whither he had appointed, and there
to stay for him, because Marcus Varro held that Province for Pompey against
Caesar with one good Legion: But he, not daring to oppose Caesar, And other
places.
delivered up the Legion to him, together with that Country, and all was
pacified there. From thence Caesar went to Cordova, where he called a
Parliament of all the States of that Province, in which he highly commended
them, and those of Sivil for taking his part, and so marching forward, he came
to the Isle of Cadez, where having gotten Ships in readiness, he left Quintus
Cassius with four Legions in that Province, and so embarking, he went to
Taragona, commanding his Legions to march by Land thither, where having settled
his affairs, he advanced with his Army toward Narbona, He takes Marcelleis.
and from thence to Marcelleis, which now yielded to him, having endured many
calamities during the Siege: Caesar respecting the antiquity and fame of this
City, would not destroy it, nor the Inhabitants, but leaving a strong Garrison
in it, he ordered his Legions to march for Italy, and himself, with a
sufficient guard, and some of his Friends took passage by Sea to Rome.

Though all things succeeded thus well with Caesar, His Captains had ill
success.
yet some of his Captains had ill success. For Caius Antonius, whom he left
with Dolabella for to command his Navy, was overthrown and taken Prisoner in
the Gulf of Venice by Octavius, Lieutenant to Pompey. In which overthrow this
was very remarkable: Anthony was faign to put his men into long Boats for want
of Ships, which were taken by a Strategem as in a toil, by the Pompeians, with
Ropes under the Water. One of them which had in it a thousand valiant young
men, being thus ensnared, was assaulted by the Enemies whole Army, against
which they defended themselves bravely from morning till night, and in the end
being oppressed with the multitude, by the persuasion of Valteius, their
Colonel, they all slew one another, rather than they would fall into the
Enemies hand. Dolabella was likewise overthrown near to the Island of Corcyra
(now Corfu:) and Curious, who went with his two Legions into Africa, though at
first he had good success, yet afterward he was overthrown, and most of his
men slain by Juba, King of Mauritania, Pompeys Friend.

Caesar being come to Rome and made Dictator, new Consuls were chosen, whereof
he being one, laid aside his Dictatorship, and provided Praetors for the
Provinces as himself pleased. He sent Marcus Lepidus into Spain: Aulus Albinus
into Sicily: Sextus Peduceius into Sardinia; and Decius Brutus into France; and
taking such further order as he thought good, he departed from Rome in December
toward Brundusium, whither he commanded all his Forces to march, there to take
passage for Macedonia, where he knew that Pompey staid with his Army: who all
that whole year that Caesar spent in his journey to Spain, Pompey prepares for
War.
busied himself to provide a Navy wherein to return into Italy, and in
gathering Treasure, and levying Soldiers, having made an exceeding great
provision of all things. For there came unto him, Ships, money, and men from
sundry Kingdoms and Provinces both of Asia, and Greece: as from Syria, Pontus,
Bithynia, Cilicia, Phoenicia, Cappadocia, Pomphilia, Armenia Minor, Egypt,
Greece, Thessaly, Baeotia, Achaia, Epirus, Athens, Lacedemonia, the Isles of
Creet, and Rhodes, and from many other Countries. There came also to his aid
King Deiotarus, and Aribarzanes, of all which together with those which he
brought with him from Italy, he compounded a very great Army by Land, and a
very great Fleet of Ships and Galleys by Sea.

It being now the depth of Winter, Pompey presuming it improbable, if not
impossible for Caesar to pass the Seas to him; having also intelligence that
Caesar was in Rome, he disposed of his Army to their Winter Quarters in
Macedonia and Thessaly; and himself retired farther from the Sea, commanding
his Sea-Captains (of whom Marcus Bibulus was chief) to guard the Seacoast. But
Caesar knowing that in the speedy execution consisted his greatest hopes of
Victory, and that occasion once lost could hardly be recovered, he departed
from Rome, and came to Brundusium, though all his Legions were not as yet come
to him. There he embarked seven of his best Legions in such ships as were
ready, sending a Command to the rest which were coming, to hasten to
Brundusium, whither he would send for them with all possible speed. Caesar goes
against him. Now Brindez.
And so departing, he crossed the Seas with a prosperous gale of Wind, and the
third day after arrived upon the coast of Macedonia, before Pompey had any
intelligence of his embarking. There he safely landing his men in dispite of
Pompeys Captains, and commanded his Ships and Galleys presently to return to
Brundisium to fetch the rest of his Army. Presently after his first landing, he
seized upon the Cities of Appallonia, and Erico, driving from thence Lucius
Torquatus, and Lucius Straberius, who held them for Pompey.

Pompey hearing of Caesar's arrival, sent for his Troops which were nearest hand
with all speed possible, with whom he marched toward Dirrachium, where his
Victuals, ammunition, and other provisions for the War lay, lest Caesar should
go and surprise them, which indeed he attempted but in vain, the situation of
the place making it inexpugnable.

Pompey being come, their Camps were lodged within a few furlongs each of
other, Skirmishes betwixt them.
where he passed many adventurous skirmished, and also some Treaties of Peace,
offered by Caesar, but rejected by Pompey, so consident he was of his own
power. In the interim Caesar daily expected the coming of the other Legions,
who staying longer than he expected, he resolved in Person, with three
confident Servants, secretly to embark himself in a Brigandine, and to pass
that straight of the Sea and to fetch them, hoping to perform the same without
the knowledge of any. And accordingly, passing down the River to the Sea, he
found it so troublesome and tempestuous that the Master of his Brigandine (not
knowing whom he carried) durst not adventure forth, but would have returned.
Then Caesar discovering his face, said, Perge avdacter: Caesarum enim fers, and
fortunam Caesaris: Caesar's rashness.
Bear up bravely, and boldly against the Winds and Waves: for thou carriest
Caesar, and all his Fortunes. The Master herewith encouraged, strove all that
possibly he could to proceed in his Voyage: but the force of the Tempest was so
great, and the Wind so contrary, that do what possibly they could, they were
driven back again.

When Caesar's Army heard of these passages, they much wondered, grieved and were
troubled at it: Commending him more for his Valor, than for his Wisdom: But
within few days after M. Anthony arrived with four of those Legions which were
left behind in Italy, presently returning the Ships back for the rest. Anthony
after some adventures, joined with Caesar's Army near to Dirrachium where we
lately left him. Frequent skirmishes still continued between the two Armies,
and many were slain on both sides, and one day the skirmish was so hot,
supplies being sent from both sides, that it almost came to a just Battle,
Caesar is beaten.
wherein Caesar's men were so beaten, that they fled before the Enemies, and
could not be made to stand by any entreaties, or menaces, till they were come
into their Camp, which they had strongly fortified: yet many durst not trust to
that, but fled out of it: But Pompey either because he imagined their flight to
be feigned to draw him into an Ambush, or because he thought there needed no
more to be done, and that Caesar could no more resist him, he neglected to
prosecute his Victory, causing a retreat to be sounded without assaulting
Caesar's Camp, which, probably, he might have taken, and made an end of the War
that day. Whereupon Caesar said to his Friends: Truly this day had ended the
War, if our Enemies had had a Captain that had known how to overcome.

At this time Caesar lost a great number of his men, amongst whom were four
hundred Roman Knights, ten Tribunes (or Colonels) and thirty two Centurions
(or Captains) and his Enemies took from him thirty two Ensigns. Upon this
Victory Pompey sent news thereof to diverse parts of the World, holding himself
for an absolute Conqueror. Caesar much blamed some of his Captains and Ensign
bearers for their cowardice, and his Army were so grieved and ashamed, that
they much importuned him to lead them forth again to Battle: But he thought it
not fit so soon to lead them forth against a Victorious Army. Caesar's policy.
He therefore sent his sick and wounded men to the City of Apolonia, and
departed by night with as great silence as could be from the place where he
was, and marched toward Thessaly, intending there to refresh and encourage his
Army, and to draw his Enemies farther from the Sea coast, where their chief
strength lay, and where their Camp was well fortified, and victualled, or at
least he intended to attempt the overthrow of Scipio, who (as he heard) was
coming to join with Pompey.

Pompey finding Caesar was departed, followed him for some few days; and then
taking Council what to do, Pompeys good resolution.
he resolved to leave a lufficient Navy to guard the Seas, and with the rest to
return into Italy, and to seize upon it, together with France and Spain, and
afterwads to go against Caesar: But the Roman Lords that were with him, and the
importunity of his unskilful Captains and Soldiers, forced him to alter his
determination, and presently to pursue Caesar, who made an Alt in the Fields of
Pharsalia, which are in Thessaly, making his retreat with so much prudence, and
in so good order, that upon all occasions that were offered he ever had the
better; till at length seeing his men full of resolution and courage, he
resolved no longer to defer the Fight. Concerning which Battle: the ordering,
and event of it: Pompey beaten and slain.
the flight of Pompey into Egypt, and how basely, and barbarously he was
murdered there, see it before in the Life of Pompey the Great.

Julius Caesar having obtained this great and glorious Victory, used therein
his accustomed Clemency, Caesar's clemency.
not suffering any Roman either to be slain or hurt after the Battle was ended,
but pardoned all those that were either taken in the Fight, or found in the
Camp, amongst whom was Marcus Tullius Cicero. After which, He pursues Pompey.
being informed which way Pompey was fled, he pursued him with the lightest,
and swiftest of his Army, and in the way subduing all the Cities, he at last
came to the Sea side, where he gathered together all the Ships and Galleys that
possibly he could, together with those whom Cassius had brought, he therein
shipped as many of his men as they could contain, and passed into the lesser
Asia, where, being advertised that Pompey had been in Cyprus, he presumed that
he was gone into Egypt; wherefore he steered the same course, taking with him
two Legions of old Soldiers only. He comes into Egypt.
When he arrived at Alexandria, he understood that Pompey presuming upon the
many benefits, and good entertainment which the Father of this King Ptolomy had
received in his House, had sent to this Ptolomy to harbor and assist him:
which accordingly the King promised, and Pompey coming upon his safe conduct,
in a small Boat, was by the false Kings commandment basely murdered, thinking
thereby to win the favor of Caesar. He understood likewise that Cornelia the
Wife of Pompey, and his Son Sextus Pompeius were fled from thence in the same
ship wherein they came.

Caesar being landed, and received into the City, they brought him for a
present the Head of the Great Pompey; but he turned away and would not see it,
and when they brought him Pompeys Ring with his Seal of Arms, he wept, Vanity
of vanities.
considering the end and success of the great adventures and properties of
Pompey, who with such honor and fame had Triumphed three times, and been so
many times Consul in Rome: and had obtained so many Victories abroad.

When Caesar was landed in Egypt, he found the Country imbroiled in Civil
Wars: there being great discord between young King Ptolomy, and his Sister
Cleopatra, about the division and Inheritance of that Kingdom, wherein Julius
Caesar (as being a Roman Consul) took upon him to be an Arbitrator. For which
cause, or because their guilty consciences accused them for the treacherous
murder of Pompey, Fotinus the Eunuch, who had contrived the said murder, and
Achillas, who had been the actor of it, fearing that Caesar inclined to favor
Cleopatra, sent for the Kings Army that lay near the City, consisting of twenty
thousand good Soldiers, purposing to do by Caesar as they had done by Pompey,
so that within a few days, there began between Caesar and his small Army, both
in the City, and in the Harbor where the Ships and Galleys lay, the most
cruel, and dangerous encounter that ever Caesar met with: His Wars i^^ Egypt,
for he was often forced to fight in his own Person, both within the City
(whereof the Enemies held the greater part) and also in the Harbor with his
Ships, and was sometimes in so great peril and danger, that he was forced to
leap out of the Boat into the Water, and by swimming to get one of the Galleys;
His danger.
at which time he held his Commentaries in one hand above Water, and carry his
Robe in his teeth, and to swim with the other hand. But when his other Forces
were come to him from Asia, and other parts, he at the end of nine months (for
so long these Wars lasted) became Victorious, His Victory.
as in all other his enterprises he had been, and the young King Ptolomy was
slain in fight. In this War Caesar did such exploits, and behaved himself so
gallantly, that for the same only he well deserved the fame and name of a brave
Captain.

The Pride of the Egyptians being thus tamed, Caesar put to death the
murderers of Pompey, and established the fair Cleopatra, the Queen and
Governess of Egypt, whom, during his stay there, he entertained for his
Friend, and had a Son by her called Caesarion. And when he had quitted and
settled all things in Egypt, He passes into Asia.
he departed thence into Asia, and traveled through Syria (now Soria) being
informed, that during his troubles in Egypt, King Pharnaces, the Son of that
mighty King Methridates, thought it a fit time, whilst the Romans were
embroiled in Civil Wars, to recover what his Father had lost: For which end
having overthrown Domitius, whom Caesar had sent to govern those parts, and
having taken by force of Arms the Provinces of Bithynia, and Cappadocia,
expelling thence King Ariobarzanes (a Friend and Subject of Rome) and beginning
to do the like in Armenia the less, which King Deiotarus had subjected to the
Romans: Caesar (I say) being informed hereof, went with his Army sooner than
Pharnaces imagined, though he expected him, and had intelligence of his
appproach; so that in few days they came to a Battle, in which the King was
soon overthrown, Overcomes Pharnaces.
and put to slight, with great slaughter of his People, yet himself escaped.

Caesar was very joyful for this Victory, because of his earnest desire to
return to Rome; where he knew that many scandals were raised, and many
insolences were committed for want of his presence: He knew also that Pompeys
eldest Son had seized upon a great part of Spain, and had raised great Forces
of those which Marcus Varro had left there, and of his Fathers Troops. He also
understood, that in Africa many Principal Romans, who had escaped from the
Battle of Pharsalia, were gathered together, whereof M. Cato (surnamed
Uticensis) was the chief, and Scipio, Pompeys Father in Law, and that these
went thither with the greatest part of the Ships and Galleys which belonged to
Pompey, and with the greatest power that they were able to leavy; and that
joining with Juba King of Mauritania, they had subdued all that Country, and
had a great Army in a readiness to oppose him, having chosen Scipio for their
General, because that Cato would not take that office upon him, and for that
the Name of Scipio had been so fortunate in Africa.

Caesar having intelligence of all these things, within the space of a few
days, with great celerity and diligence recovered all that Pharnaces had
usurped, and chasing him out of Portus he regained all those Countries: and so
leaving Celius Minucius for General, with two Legions to guard that Province,
pacifying the controversies and contentions in the rest, and rewarding the
Kings, and Tetrachs which continued firm in their Leagues and amity with the
Romans, without any longer abode, he departed out of Asia, and in a short space
arrived in Italy, He comes to Rome.
and so passed to Rome, within little more than a year after he went thence,
which was a very short time for the performance of so great matters, and so
long a Journey.

Presently after his coming to Rome, he caused himself to be chosen Consul the
third time, and reforming (so much as the time and his leisure would permit)
all disorders in Rome, being troubled and not able to endure that his Enemies
should possess Africa, with great expedition he prepared all things necessary,
and from Rome took his way toward Africa, commanding his Army to follow him.
He passes into Africa.
First he went into Italy, from whence taking Ship, he passed over into Africa,
and though neither his Navy, nor his Army arrived with him, trusting to the
valor of those that he had with him, and his own good Fortune, he landed with
small Forces, near to the City of Adrumentum, and from thence marched to
another City called Leptis, into which he was received, and after some
conflicts that passed, his Legions being come to him, and certain other Troops
of Horse, and Companies of Foot, he began the War which continued four months.
He first began with Petreius and Lubienus; and then with Scipio and King Ju^a,
who brought to those Wars eight thousand men, the one half whereof were Horse.

In this War were many encounters and Battles, in which Caesar was in great
danger: but at last (his good Fortune, still attending him) he overcame them in
a great Battle, wherein there were slain of the Enemies ten thousand, He
overcomes Scipio.
and Caesar remained Master of the Field, and in a short time after, subjected
all the Country to him. Scipio, and all the chief Captains, with him died
sundry deaths, and Juba escaping by flight from the Battle, finding no place of
security, Afranius and he resolved to dye fighting one against the other, in
which combat, King Juba being the stronger man, slew Asranius, and then
commanded one of his Salves to kill him, and so he died desperately.

Marcus Cato, Cato kills himself.
who was in the City of Utica, hearing that Caesar was marching thitherward,
though he knew that he would not put him to death, but but rather had a desire
to pardon him and to do him honor; yet, resolving neither to receive life nor
honor from his Enemy, he slew himself: In whose death there passed many
remarkable accidents recorded by Historians: Florus says thus of it. Cato
(says he) hearing of the death of his Partners, he dallyed not at all, but
joyfully hastened his end: For after he had embraced his Son, and his Friends
and bad them good night, and then rested a while upon his bed, having first
perused Plato's Book of the immortality of the Soul: then about the relieving
of the first watch he got up, drew his Sword, and therewith thrust himself
through: after which the Phisicians applied plasters to his wounds, which he
endured whilst they were in the room, but then he pulled them away, and the
blood following abundantly, he left his dying hand even in the wound. Scipio,
who had been General in this War, escaped also from the Battle by flight,
entered into some Galleys, which being met with by Caesar Navy, that he might
not fall into his Enemies hand, after he had given himself some wounds, he
threw himself into the Sea, and so was drowned.

Caesar having obtained so great and absolute a Victory, spent some few days in
settling and ordering the Provinces of Africa, making the Kingdom of Juba a
Province, He returns to Rome.
and then marched to Utica, where he embarked June the third, and came to the
Isle of Sardinia, and after some short stay there, he arrived at Rome the
twenty fifth day of July. At his coming thither there were granted unto him
four Triumphs: His Triumphs*
First for his conquests and Victories in France, in which were carried the
Portraictures of the Rivers of Rhodanus, and the Rhine wrought in Gold. The
second Triumph was for the conquest of Egypt, and of King Ptolomy, where
were set the River of Nilus, and the Pharus burning. The third was for the
conquest of Pontus, and of King Pharnaces, wherein, in regard of his speedy
Victory, was placed a vvriting with these words, Veni, Vidi, Vici: I come, I
savv, I overcame. The fourth Triumph was for the Province of Africa, wherein
King Jubas Son was led Captive: and in this Triumph were given Jewels, and
Arms to Octavius, Caesar's Nephew, who succeeded him in the Empire. As for
the Battle wherein he conquered Pompey, he would not Triumph, because it was
against a Citizen of Rome.

These Triumphs being ended, he gave great rewards to his Soldiers, and
entertained the People with Feasts, and bountiful gifts, and then caused
himself to be chosen the fourth time, Consul. And so, to the end that there
should be left no place wherein he would not be obeyed, he resolved to go for
Spain, hearing that Gneius Pompeius, the Son of Pompey, was retired with the
rest of the Army which had escaped out of Africa, to go to his Brother Sextus
Pompeius, who was in possession of a great part of Spain, as we heard before,
together with the famous Cities of Sivil, and Cordova, and many others of those
parts: many Spaniards also coming to their aid.

Caesar in this Journey carried with him his most valiant, He goes into Spain.
and most experienced Soldiers, and made so good speed, that in few days space
he arrived in Spain, in which Journey his Nephew Octavius followed him.
Entering into Spain he came to the Province of Betica (now Andaluzia) where
were Sextus Pompeius, with his Brother Gneius, and such Legions and Soldiers
as they had gotten together; and there began betwixt Caesar and them a most
cruel and bloody War, the end whereof was, that near to the City of Munda,
Caesar, and Gneius Pompeius (for Sextus was then at Cordova) joined Battle, A
cruel Battle.
which was one of the most obstinate, and most cruel fights that ever was in
the World. For Caesar being a most excellent Captain, and the Soldiers which
he brought with him most brave and valiant men, and fleshed with so many
Victories, held it out with great resolution; and on the other side, the
bravery and courage of young Pompey and his men was such, and they fought in
such manner, as Caesar's Squadrons began to give ground, and were ready to
forsake the Field, and at the very point to have been wholly overthrown: and
the matter came to this issue, that Caesar was about to have slain himself
because he would not see himself overcome. Yet taking a Target from one of his
Soldiers, he rushed into the midst of his Enemres, saying with a loud voice,
If ye be not ashamed, leave me and deliver me into the hands of these Boys;
For this shall be the last day of my Life and of your Honor: with which words,
and his example, his Soldiers took heart in such manner, that recovering the
ground which they had lost, the Battle became equal, which lasted almost a
whole day without any sign of Victory to either party, sometimes seeming to
incline to the one, sometimes to the other side; until at the length Caesar and
his men did so great exploits, as that the evening being come, his Enemies
began to faint, and fly, His Victory.
and the Victory was apparently Caesar's. There died of the Enemies above thirty
thousand in this Battle, and Caesar lost above a thousand men of account
besides common Soldiers.

Caesar esteemed so much of this Victory, and so gloried in the danger which he
had escaped, that ever after he used to say, That in all other Battles he had
fought for honor and Victory, and only that day he fought for his life. Young
Pompey, after he had performed all the offices of a Prudent General and Valiant
Soldier, was foreed to fly, and wandering through many places, was at last
taken and slain by some of Caesar's Friends, who carried his head to Caesar. His
other Brother Sextus Pompeius, fled from Cordova, and afterward forsook Spain:
Caesar recovered Sivil, and Cordova, and all the rest of the Country; after
which, He returns to Rome.
ordering his affairs in Spain after his pleasure, he returned to Rome, and
Triumphed for these Victories, which was his fifth and last Triumph.

Caesar now came to be the most mighty, the most redoubted, and the most highly
esteemed man in the World, His power.
having conquered and subdued the greatest part thereof, in as little time, as
it might seem that another man might be able to travel through those Countries
by reasonable Journeys. He then made himself perpetual Dictator, and so without
opposition, he finished the making of himself the Sovereign Lord, and Monarch
of the Empire of Rome, within less than five years after he first attempted the
same. And this was the Original and beginning of the Roman Emperors. For
Julius Caesar would not be called King (that Name being odious to the Romans
above all things, ever since Kings were first driven from Rome) but contented
himself to be called Perpetual Dictator, and Emperor, which Title was usually
given to the Roman Generals upon their obtaining any signal Victory. But after
Julius Caesar, all his successors took that Title, glorying to be called
Emperor, which has ever since been held for the highest Title, and Dignity in
the World.

Caesar having now attained to that absolute power which he had so ambitiously
sought after, His clemency, and Magnanimity.
he showed in all his Deportment much clemency, and Magnanimity, honoring and
rewarding his Friends, and easily forgiving, and very cheerfully pardoning all
those that had been his Adversaries: Thus he pardoned Brutus, Cassius, Cicero,
Marcellus, and many others: Yea, some of them he admitted to his company, and
private familiarity, and to Offices and Dignities; and amongst the many virtues
wherewith he was endued, his clemency and liberality were most glorious. But
all this prevailed not with the Romans to quench their desires after the
recovery of their lost liberty, neither to assuage the hatred and malice
conceived against him by his adversaries, as aft^rwards appeared.

And notwithstanding many were discontented, yet some for love, others for
fear, Discontents arise.
and out of dissimulation, both Senate and People, yea all in general gave him
Names, preheminences and Titles of Honor, such as never had been given to any
other man before him, neither ought to have been accepted by him; and many were
the more offended, because they knew that he affected and desired them. They
gave him the name of Emperor, Father, Restorer, and Preserver of his Country.
They made him perpetual Dictator, and Consul for ten years: and perpetual
Censor of their manners. His Statue was erected and set up amongst the Kings of
Rome: and a Chair, and Throne of Ivory was set up for him in the Temple, and in
the Senate House, and an high Throne in the Theater, Base flattery.
and in the place where the Senators did use to sit. His Pictures and Statues
were set up in the Temples, and in all public places. Some Titles they gave
him, and he accepted of, which were peculiar to the Gods. The month formerly
called Quintile, they called Julius after his name. They also built, and
consecrated Temples to him, as they did to Jupiter and the other Gods, and gave
him certain Honors which they held proper for their Gods, and did him many
other honors exceeding all measure.

Julius Caesar enjoying such honor and power, so that he had no equal, no
second in the World with whom he might contend, it seemed that he would contend
with himself, and attempt something wherein he might excel himself: For he was
not contented with all the Victories which he had obtained, neither to have
fought fifty several Battles, in all which he was Victorious, save in that one
at Dyrrachium against Pompey: neither to have slain in the Wars and Battles
which he fought a Million, ninety, and odd thousands of men, besides those that
were slain in the civil Wars. But being of a most haughty mind, His great
projects.
he sought to do greater matters, if greater could be.

For first he resolved to pass into the East, there to conquer and subdue the
fierce Nations of the Parthians, and to revenge the death of Marcus Crassus;
and from thence to pass through Hyrcania, and other Countries till he should
come to the Caspian Sea, and so through all the parts of Scithia, Asiatica; and
passing the River Tanais, to return through Scithia into Europe, and in his
retreat to come into Germany, and other Conntries bordering thereupon,
conquering and subjecting all to the Roman Empire. For which end he presently
caused to be levied in several places ten thousand Horsemen, and sixteen
Legions of chosen Footmen, and appointing the time wherein he intended to begin
his Journey, he commanded them to repair to their Rendevouz. He sought also not
only to subdue all Nations, but to correct and reform even nature it self: For
he purposed to have made an Island of Peloponnesus (now called Morea) by
cutting the neck of land between the Egaean, and the Jonian Seas. He purposed
also to have altered the courses of the River Tiber, and Anian, and to have
made their new Channels, capable of bearing great Ships. He ordered the digging
down and levelling many high Hills and Mountains, in Italy, and to dry up and
drain great Lakes and Marshes therein. He corrected the computation of the
year, reforming it according to the course of the Sun, and brought it into that
order wherein it now is. He did the like about the course of the Moon, and her
conjunctions and oppositions to the Sun: and this was attributed to him for
Tyranny by those that hated him.

Many others things Caesar did, which were very remarkable, in reforming the
Laws, customs, and Offices. He re-edified the ruined City of Carthage, in
Africa, and sent thither Colonies, and Roman Citizens to Inhabit it: the like
he did by Corinth. But all these works with his high conceits and undertakings,
were prevented, by his unexpected, and immature Death, which within a few Days
after ensued. A few men, and those unarmed bereft him of his Life, whom no
former forces could resist. For five months only he lived as Sovereign Lord in
Peace; when those in whom he reposed greatest trust conspired his Death.

Some say that Caesar was counseled to have a Guard about him always; to
which he answered, that he would have none: for that he had rather die once,
than live continually in fear. They which conspired his death, were stirred up
thereto, either out of hatred to his Person, or desire of Liberty, accounting
him for a Tyrant: or out of suspicion that he would have made himself a King, a
thing in the highest degree hateful to the Romans: His Pride.
and lastly, because he began to contemn others: For he used to say, that the
Commonwealth was but a Voice and Name without a Body, or Substance; and that
Sylla was a Fool for resigning his perpetual Dictatorship. All the whole Senate
coming one Day to the Temple of Venus where he was, he sat still, and rose not
up as formerly he used to do. His Friends also and Favorites began to report,
that in the Books of the Sybils (which in Rome were had in great Veneration) it
was written, that the Parthians could never be overcome but by a man that
should have the Title of a King, and therefore he labored that Caesar should
take upon him that Title before his Parthian War; and though he seemed to be
displeased at it, yet they suspected the contrary; and their suspicion was
increased, for that, whereas the Tribunes of the People had caused a man to be
imprisoned, who had set a Crown upon the Head of one of Caesar's Statues, he was
so incensed against the Tribunes that did it, that he deposed them from their
Office: His dissimulation.
And not long after, when Mark Anthony (who was his great favorite, and that
year his fellow Consul) being at some public Games, came to Caesar, and put a
Crown upon his Head; though he threw it down, yet they all imagined, that Mark
Anthony would not have presumed to have done it without his good liking; and
that he did it but to prove the People how they would like it; these, and such
like passages, gave them occasion to desire and design his Death.

They were also father encouraged hereunto, for that in sundry public places,
certain writings were set up, which did entice and animate them to conspire
against him: as upon the Statue of Brutus, who in ancient times did chase the
Kings out of Rome, were written these words, Would to God thou were now living,
Brutus. And upon the Image of Marcus Brutus, who then was Praetor, and
descended from the former Brutus, were these words: Thou sleep long, Brutus.
Truly, thou art not Brutus. And again, Thou art dead, Brutus: Would to God thou
were living, Thou art unworthy of the succession from the Brute. Surely thou
art not descended from the good Brutus: and such like other writings were set
upon these Statues.

So as for these, A Conspiracy against him.
and such like reasons, there were seventy of the most eminent men in Rome that
conspired to murder Caesar: of which the principal were Decius, Marcus Brutus,
Caius Cassius, Gaius Casca, Attilius Cimber, Servius Galba, Quintus Ligarius,
Marcus Spurius, etc. who, after diverse consultations, concluded to kill him
upon the Ides of March, which was the fifteenth day of that month, in the
Temple where the Senators were to sit that day: Yet Brutus was held to be
Caesar's Son, and had received great honors, and many favors from him. This
conspiracy was kept so secret, notwithstanding the great number of them, that
there was not any one found that discovered the same. His Death foretold.
But there were so many signs and Prodigies, and to himself there happened so
many fore-warnings, that (without knowing any cause) all men were of opinion
that Caesar's Death was near at hand. Spurina also, who was his Southsayer,
forewarned him, to look to himself till the Ides of March were past: for that
his Life was in great danger. And Caesar's own Wife entreated him upon her
knees, that he would not that day go to the Senate; For she had dreamed that he
lay dead in her lap. These and such like warnings prevailed so far with him,
that he was about to send to Mark Anthony to make his excuse, and to put off
the Senate to another day. But what God has determined must come to pass; and
therefore Brutus being present, advised him by no means to discover any such
fear, and so he resolved to go.

Caesar made small account of Death, and said, That as for himself he had won
power and fame, and glory enough, and that at no time he could die with greater
honor. And some discoursing the night before he was slain, what Death was
best, Even that (quoth he) which is sudden, and least prepensed. The fifteenth
of March being come, he went from his house in a Litter, toward the Senate;
and as he passed along the street, there was a Petition delivered to him,
wherein was set down in Writing all that was concluded in this conspiracy; and
he which gave it, prayed him to read it presently, which he began to do: but
there came so many to speak to him, that he could make no farther progress, and
this Paper was found in his hand when he was dead. As he passed on, he met with
Spurina the Southsayer, and pleasantly jesting, he said to him, Do thou not
know Spurina, that the Ides of March are come? Yea (answered Spurina) and I
know that they are not yet past.

When he came to the Temple where the Senators met, he alighted from his Litter
and went in, and having first done Sacrifice (according to the custom) which
all that saw presaged to be fatal and unfortunate, He sat him down in his
Chair, and Brutus Albinus entertaining Mark Anthony at the door with discourse,
one of the Conspirators, whose name was Celer, came to Caesar, under a pretense
to intrcat him to release a Brother of his from Banishment, and presently all
the rest of the Conspirators drew near to his Chair; which when Caesar saw,
thinking that they had all come for the same purpose, he said unto them, What
force is this? And at that instant one of them whose name was Casca, beginning,
they all drew their poyniards, and Swords which they had privately under their
Gowns, and began to wound him. The first blow he received, Casca gave him in
the throat; at which Caesar said aloud, What do thou Traitor Casca? and
wresting the Poyniard out of his hand, he arose and stabbed Casca through the
Arm, and being about to strike him again, he was prevented by the many wounds
which the others gave him, whilst with great force and courage he leaped from
one side to the other to defend himself: But when he saw Marcus Brutus with his
drawn Sword in his hand, wherewith he had already wounded him in the Thigh, he
was much amazed, and said in the Greek Tongue, Why how now Son Brutus? And thou
also? He is slain.
And having so said, seeing so many weapons bent against him, and that no body
came to his rescue, he remembered to keep the honor of his Person, with his
right hand he covered his Head with part of his Robe, and with his left hand
girt himself, and settled his clothes about him, and being so covered, he fell
down to the ground, having received three and twenty Wounds; and it happened
that his fall was at the foot of the seat on which Pompeys Statue stood. His
Character.
So in this manner died one of the most Mighty, Worthy, Valiant, Wise, and most
successful Princes and Captains that ever was in the World. For, his
Excellencies, Abilities, Invincible Mind, Incomparable Courage, the Battles
which he fought, and Victories which he obtained; the Provinces, Kings, and
Nations which he subdued; His Counsels, Policies, and Stratagems, and bold
attempts: His Magnanimity, Clemency, and Bounty, both to the Conquered and
Conquerors; the great Designs which he proposed to himself a little before he
was slain, being all weighed and considered, it will plainly appear, that in
none of those things aforesaid, nor in any other that may be said of him, there
has been any Heathen King or Captain that ever excelled him. And setting apart
his Ambition and desire of Rule, he was only noted, and blamed for being too
much given to Women.

Caesar was thus slain in the fifty sixth year of his Age, a little more than
four years after the Death of Pompey, in the seven hundred and tenth year after
the building of Rome, and about forty and two years before the Incarnation of
our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Caesar left behind him neither Son nor Daughter legitimate at that time of his
Death: For though he had been four several times married, yet he had but one
only Daughter, named Julia, that was married to Pompey, and died before him.
His Will.
Wherefore by his last Will, he adopted for his Son, and made his Heir in the
Dodrant, that is, in nine parts of twelve of his goods, his Nephew Octavius
Caesar, afterward called Octavianus Augustus, who was the Son of Acia, his
Niece, and of Octavius Praetor of Macedonia, which Octavius at this time, was,
by the commandment of his Uncle, in the City of Apollonia, in the Province of
Epirus, where he applied himself to his studies, staying for him there, thence
to go with him to the Parthian War, being now about seventeen years of age.

Caesar being thus slain, the news of it ran presently all over the City, and
the tumult therein was so great, that no man knew what to do or say. All
Offices ceased, the Temples were all shut up, and every man was amazed. Caesar's
Friends were afraid of those that slew him, and they as much feared his
Friends, Brutus, Cassius, and the other Conspirators, and others that joined
with them, seeing the great tumult, durst not go to their Houses, nor prosecute
their other designs, for fear of Mark Anthony and Lepidus, whereof the one was
Consul, and the other General of the Horsemen, but presently from thence they
went to seize upon the Capitol, crying by the way as they went, Liberty,
Liberty, and imploring the favor, and assistance of the People. The rest of
that day, and all next night, Mark Anthony, and Lepidus (who took Caesar's part)
were in Arms, and there passed sundry messages, and treaties between them and
the Conspirators: At last it was agreed that the Senate should sit, whither
Brutus, and Cassius came, M. Anthonies Sons (by the persuasion of Cicero, a
great lover of Liberty) remaining as Hostages for them.

In the Senate they Treated of Peace and concord, Peace concluded.
and that all that was past should be buried in perpetual oblivion; whereunto,
Anthony who was Consul, and the whole Senate agreed: and the Provinces being
divided, there was a great likelihood of Peace. For the Senate approved, and
commended the murder, and the People dissembled their thoughts: For on the one
side the authority of Brutus and Cassius, and the name of Liberty, seemed to
give them some content: and on the other side, the hainousness of the fact, and
the love they bare to Caesar, did move, and excite them to hate the murderers,
and so all was quiet for the present. But Mark Anthony (who affected the
Tyranny) took every opportunity to incense the People against them: and Caesar's
Testament being opened, wherein (besides the adopting of his Nephew Octavius,
and making him his Heir) besides other bequests, he bequeathed to the People of
Rome, certain Gardens, and Lands near to the River of Tiber, and to every
Citizen of Rome, certain Gardens, and Lands near to the sum of money to be
divided amongst them, which being known, much increased their love to Caesar,
and made his death more grievous to them.

Caesar's Funeral being agreed upon, his Body was burnt with great solemnity in
the Field of Mars, and Mark Anthony made the Funeral Oration in his Praise, and
took the Robe wherein Caesar was slain, being all bloody, and showed it to the
People, using such Speeches as provoked them both to wrath, and commiseration,
so as before the Funeral solemnity was fully finished, they all depart in great
fury, A tumult.
taking Brands in their hands from the fire wherein Caesar was burned, and went
to burn the Houses of Brutus, and Cassius, and if they could have found them,
and the rest of the Conspirators, they would certainly have slain them; and in
their fury they unadvisedly slew Elius Cinna, by mistaking him for Cornelius
Cinna, who was one of the Conspirators.

This tumult put Brutus, and Cassius, and their confederates, into such fear,
that they all sled from Rome into several parts: and though the Senate (having
appeased the tumult) inflisted punishment upon some of the seditious, and had
already committed some of them to Prison, yet Brutus, and Cassius durst not
return to Rome, but after a while went into Greece, to Govern those Provinces
which Caesar in his Life time had allotted unto them, which were, Macedonia to
Brutus, and Syria to Cassius. And truly this was very remarkable, that within
the space of three years all the Conspirators died, and not one of them a
natural death.

Caesar in his fifth and last Consulship made an Edict, that thanks should be
returned to Hyrcanus, He favored the Jews.
the High Priest and Prince of the Jews, and to the Nation of the Jews, for
their affection to himself and the People of Rome. And decreed also, that the
said Hyrcanus, should have the City of Jerusalem, and repair the Walls of it
which Pompey had beaten down, and should Govern it as he pleased himself. He
also granted to the Jews, that every second year there should an abatement be
made out of their rents, and that they should be free from Impositions, and
Tributes.

His Name of Caesar was so honorable, that all his successors to this present
day, have assumed it into their Title, and esteemed it an honor to be called
Caesar's.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF OCTAVIANUS AUGUSTUS In whose Reign our LORD CHRIST WAS
BORN.
Octavius Caesar, His Parentage.
who was afterward called Octavianus Augustus, was by the Fathers side
descended of the Ancient Family of the Octavij, which was of great account in
Rome even from the time of Tarquin their King: By the Mothers side he was
descended from the Regal Line: His Mother was Accia the Daughter of Accius
Balbus, and Julia, the Sister of Julius Caesar, which Accia was married to the
Father of Octavius. He was born in the year of the Consulshp of Cicero, and
Caius Antonius. He was but four years old when his Father dyed: and at twelve
years old he made an Oration at the Funeral of his Grandmother Julia.

When his Uncle Julius Caesar, was Warring in Spain against the Sons of Pompey,
His first employment.
Octavius (though he was but young) followed him thither through many and great
dangers: and when that War was ended, Julius Caesar intending to take him with
him to the Parthian War, sent him before to the City of Apollonia, where he
plied his Book very diligently; and on a time having a mind to see Theogenes, a
learned Astronomer, he calculated his Nativity, and promised him great matters,
which made Octavius conceive great hopes of himself, and in memory thereof he
caused certain Medals to be coined, and would often boast of what Theogenes had
told him.

Octavius in the sixth month after he went to Apollonia, having intelligence
from his Mother of the Death of his Uncle Julius Caesar, He comes into Italy.
he hasted out of Epirus to Brundusium, where he was received by the Army that
went to meet him as the adopted Son of Caesar, and without any further delay he
assumed the name of Caesar, and took upon him to be his Heir, and that so much
the rather, because he had brought with him good store of money, and great
forces that were sent him by his Uncle: and so at Brundusium, adopting himself
into the Julian Family, he called himself Caius Julius Caesar Octavius.

To this very Name, as though he had been his true Son, there came great store
of, Many resor: to him.
partly of his Friends, partly of freed-men, slaves, and Soldiers, by whom
being more strengthened and imboldned by the multitude of them that flocked to
him, and by the authority of the Caesarian name, which with the common People
was in great reputation, he took his journey toward Rome with a great train,
which daily increased like a Flood.

On the fourteenth Kalends of May he entered into Naples, where he gave Cicero
a visit. He comes to Rome.
From thence as he was going to Rome there met him a vast company of his
Friends, and as he entered the City, the Globe of the Sun seemed to compass his
Head round like unto a Bow, as it were, putting a Crown upon his Head, who
afterward was to be so great a man: and at night, calling together his Friends,
he commanded them to be ready the next morning, with good store of followers,
to meet him in the Marketplace, which was done accordingly; and he going to
Caius, the City Praetor, and Brother to Anthony, he told him that he did accept
of the Adoption. For it was the Roman custom in Adoptions to interpose the
authority of the Praetor: which acceptance being Registered by the Scribes, from
thence he presently went to Mark Anthony the Consul, M. Anthony's Pride,
who behaved himself proudly toward him, and scarcely admitting him into
Pompeys Gardens, gave him time to speak with him.

Octavianus had a great mind to revege the Death of Julius Caesar; but by his
Mother, and Philip his Father in Law he was advised to conceal his purpose for
a time, both because the Senate had approved his Death, and because Mark
Anthony, who was principally to assist him therein, did not show himself very
friendly to him. Octavianus understanding that Mark Anthony had in his custody
all the Treasure that was left by Julius Caesar, he desired him to command it
to be delivered to him, therewith to pay his debts, and to distribute it as
Caesar had appointed in his Will: But Anthony with greater Pride than
Octavianus could well bear, not only refused what he demanded, but reproved him
for desiring it; whereupon discords presently arose betwixt them: and
Octavianus strengthened himself with the Counsel of Cicero, a great Enemy to
Anthony, and one whose authority at that time, by reason of his Wisdom and
Eloquence, was very great.

Anthony being Overseer of those things which Caesar had commanded to be done,
And falsehood.
what by corrupting the Notes, and changing them at his pleasure, did what
himself listed, as if it had been the appointment of Caesar; by this means,
gratifying Cities and Governors, and heaping vast sums of money to himself,
selling not only Fields and Tributes, but freedoms and immunities even of the
City of Rome, and that not only to particular Persons, but to whole Provinces,
and of these things there were Tables hung up all over the Capitol.

Octavianus being nineteen years old, Caesar raises (...)
at his own charges gathered an Army, and sought the favor of the People, and
prepared Forces against Anthony for his own and the Commonwealths safety. He
allo stirred up the old Soldiers, who by Julius Caesar had been planted in
Colonies: so that Anthony being afraid of him, by the mediation of Friends, had
a conference with him in the Capitol, and they were for the present reconciled,
but within a few days, through the whisperings of some, their enmity brake out
again, and Anthony, not thinking himself strong enough, and knowing that the
Legions of Macedonia were the best Soldiers, and six in number, with whom also
were many Archers, light harnessed men, and Horsemen, these he sought to draw
to himself, who, because of their neerness, might presently be brought into
Italy: and thereupon he caused a rumor to be spread, that the Getae wasted
Macedonia by their inrodes; and upon that occasion he demanded an Army of the
Senate, saying, that the Macedonian Army was raised by Caesar against the
Getae, before he intended the Parthian War, whereupon he was chosen General of
those Forces, and he obtained a Law for the change of Provinces, whereby his
Brother Caius Anthony challenged Macedonia, which before by lot fell to Marcus
Brutus.

On the seventh of the Ides of October Anthony went to Brundusium, Anthony
leaves Rome.
there to meet four of the Macedonian Legions, whom he thought to draw to
himself by money. Thither also Octavianus sent his Friends with money to hire
these Soldiers for himself, and himself posted into Campania, to engage those
Soldiers which were in Colonies to take his part; and first he drew to him the
old Soldiers of Galatia, then those of Casilinum on both sides of Capua,
giving to each man five hundred pence, by which means he gat together about ten
thousand men, who marched with him under one Ensign as a guard.

In the mean while the four Legions of Macedonia, accusing Anthony for his
delays in revenging Caesar's Death, without any acclamations conducted him to
the Tribunal, as it were, to hear an account of this matter, and there
continued silent. Anthony taking this ill, upbraded them with their
Ingratitude, and complained that they had not brought to him some disturbers of
the Peace, who were sent from that malapert young man (for so he called
Octavian) and to ingratiate himself with them, he promised an hundred pence to
each of them, which niggardly promise was entertained with laughter, which he
took so ill, His Parsimony.
that being returned to his Quarters, in the presence of his most covetous, and
most cruel Wife Fulvia, he put to death some Centurions out of the Martian
Legion.

When those of Caesar's party, that were sent to corrupt the Soldiers, saw that
they were more exasperated by this deed, Caesar's Policy.
they scattered Libels about the Army, wherein they disgraced Anthony, and
extolled the liberality of Caesar. And when some sided with Octavian, and
others with Anthony, the Army, as if it had been set to sale at an outcry,
addicted themselves to him that would give most. And because that Decius
Brutus, who commanded Gallia Cisalpirea (now Lombardy) opposed Anthony, he went
to besiege him in the City of Mutina (now Modena) which being known in Rome,
Cicero his authority and credit in the Senate was such, that Mark Anthony was
declared an Enemy to the State, Anthony declared an Enemy.
and the new Consuls, Hircius and Pansa were sent against him, and with them
was Octavian sent with Ensigns of a Consul, and Title of a Pro-praetor, having
been first admitted into the Senate though so young, which was done by the
procurement of Cicero, though he afterward requited him ill for it.

Octavian with the Consuls, drew near to Mark Anthony, Cicero remaining to
command in chief in all matters at Rome: and between the two Armies there
passed many skirmishes and encounters, and at last they came to Battle, wherein
the Consuls and Caesar had the Victory, Caesar overcomes him.
but Hircius was slain in the Battle, and Pansa was so wounded, that he died
within few days after, and both the Armies of the slain Consuls obeyed Caesar.
By this means D. Brutus was freed from his siege, and Anthony was forced to
forsake Italy by a dishonorable flight, leaving his baggage behind him. In
this service Octavian made mavelous proof of himself, being but twenty years
old, performing the Office, not only of a good Captain, but also of a stout
Soldier: For seeing the Standard Bearer sore wounded and ready to fall,
Octavian took from him the Eagle, and bare it a great while till he had lodged
it in safety.

Mark Anthony after the Battle, He flies into France.
gathering the remainders of his Army, passed tho Alps and went into France,
soliciting the Friendship of Lepidus, who was there with an Army ever since
the Death of Julius Caesar, whom after some treaties he made his Friend: and
Octavian after the Victory obtained, presently sent to the Senate to require a
Triumph for his Victory, as also the Consulship for the remainder of the year
in the room of the dead Consuls, with their succession in their charge, and
command of the Army. But the answer of the Senate was not according to his
desire: For the Friends and Kinsmen of those that had murdered Caesar began to
fear him, and to suspect his power, wherefore they prevailed to delay that
which he required, and in the end they resolved to assign the Army to Decius
Brutus, and temporizing with Octavian, they granted him a Triumph, but denied
him the Consulship, whereat he was much discontented, and therefore secretly
treated of friendship with Mark Anthony, and having drawn to himself the
affection of the Army, he therewith marched toward Rome, and approaching near
to the City, in dispite of the Senate, he caused himself to be chosen Consul
being not fully twenty years old. Caesar makes himself Consul.
Then did he cause accusations to be exhibited against Brutus, and Cassius, and
the rest of the Conspirators; and in their absence, having none that durst
defend their cause, they were condemned. After this was done he left the City,
and with his Army marched toward Anthony, and Lepidus, who were already entered
into Italy.

Decius Brutus hearing of the Treaties and League that was made between
Octavian, Lepidus and Mark Anthony, not daring to stay in that Country,
departed with his Army, which soon forsook him, some going to Caesar, others to
Mark Anthony, whereupon he fled, but being at last taken, he was brought to
Mark Anthony, who caused his Head to be cut off. The Armies of these Captains
drawing near together, to whom Affinius Pollio, and Planeus, with their Legions
were joined, these three Octavian Caesar, Mark Anthony, and Lepidus, meeting,
after three days debate, they concluded their accursed Peace; A Triumvirate
efected.
and these firebrarnds of sedition entered into a Tiumvirate, with several
intents and designs. Lepidus was covetous, and sought riches by troubling the
State. Anthony was by nature an enemy to Peace, and to the Commonwealth,
desiring an opportunity to be revenged of those who had declared him an Enemy
to the State. And Octavian sought revenge upon Brutus, and Cassius, and those
who had slain his adopted Father. And to bring these things to pass, Octavian
put away his Wife who was Daughter to Servilius, and contracted himself to
Claudia, Daughter in Law to Anthony by his Wife Fulvia, who was now a child,
and from whom he was afterward divorced by reason of the discord that arose
between Anthony and him.

In this League which they made, besides dividing the Provinces amongst
themselves, Many proscribed.
they agreed to Proscribe and kill each of them his Enemies, and the one
delivered them into the others hands, having more respect to be revenged upon
an Enemy than to save a Friend; and so there was made the most cruel and
inhumane Proscription, and Butchery that ever was before heard of, giving and
exchanging Friends, and Kinsmen for Enemies. For Mark Anthony gave up his
Fathers Brother: and Lepidus his own Brother, Lucius Paulus: Ingratitude.
and Octavian, M. T. Cicero, whom he called Father, and who had entreated and
honored him as a Son. And besides these, they Proscribed and condemned to die
three hundred other Principal men of Rome, amongst whom were about one hundred
and forty Senators, besides two thousand Romans of the order of Knighthood.

This agreement being made, they all three went to Rome, where they took upon
them the Government of the Commonwealth by the name of Triumvirat, the time
being limited to five years, though they never meant to leave the same. And
presently after, those who were condemned and Proscribed, were by their
commandment put to death, being sought out in all parts and places; their
Houses were ransacked, and their goods confiscated.

Cicero understanding that his name was in the Catalogue amongst the
Proscripts, Cicero flies.
only because he had been a lover of Roman Liberty, he fled to the Sea, where
he embarked himself, but so hard was his hap, that by contrary winds he was
driven back to the shore, whereupon, returning to some possessions of his near
Capua, not far from the Sea, as he lay sleeping there, he was awakened by some
Crows which with their bills plucked his clothes from his back. His servants
being moved with this ill presage, put him into his Litter, and again carried
him toward the Sea: but being overtaken by the murderers, And is slain.
he put his neck but of his Litter, and they cut off his Head, and his right
hand, wherewith he had written his Orations against Mark Anthony called
Philippicks: And thus was he slain by one whom he had defended, and delivered
from death. Anthony joyfully received his ^and, and caused it to be nailed up
in the place where he was wont to plead, to which all the People repaired to
behold so woeful and miserable a spectacle, of whom there was not any one but
was heartily sorry for the Death of so great a Personage, and so fervent a
lover of his Country. Salvius Otho, a Tribune of the People, invited his
Friends to his last Supper, and as they were sitting, in came a Centurion, and
in the presence of them all, struck off his Head. Minutius the Praetor was
slain, Horrid cruelty.
sitting in his seat of Judgment. L. Villius Annalis, who had been Consul,
flying from the murderers, hid himself in the Suburbs in a little House of one
of his clients, Sons unnatural.
but his own Son betrayed him to the murderers, who slew him there; but
shortly after this Particle being drunken, quarrelling with the same Soldiers,
was slain by them. C. Terentius also being betrayed by his own Son, was slain,
who in a few days having consumed his Patrimony, was condemned for Theft, and
banished into a place where he died miserably.

Quintus* Cicero was hid by his Son, whom they could never make to confess by
any torments where his Father was; Sons dutiful and good.
but the old man, not being able any longer to endure that they should torment
so virtuous a Son, came and presented himself to the Murderers: whereupon the
Son entreated them to kill him first, but they killed them both together. The
Egnaces; the Father and Son, embracing one the other were both run through and
slain. C. Hosidius Geta, was put into a grave by his Son as dead, who sustained
and kept him till the danger was over. Aruntius, after he had comforted his
Son, delivered up himself to the murderers, but his Son for grief famished
himself. Some other Children carefully hid, and preserved their Parents.

Tanusia was such an importunate suitor to Caesar for her Husband T. Junius
Wives good.
that she preserved his life: He was in the interim hidden by Philopoemen, his
bondmen enfranchised, whom Caesar afterward Knighted for his fidelity to his
Master. Q. Ligurius having been concealed by his Wife, was discovered by a
slave, and killed, whereupon his Wife pined her self to death. Lucretius
Vespilio, having passed many dangers whilst he sought to hide himself here and
there, at last came to his Wife Shuria, who hid him between the Cieling and the
top of the House, till she had begged his Life of the Triumvirs. Apuleius was
saved by his Wife, who fled away with him. Antius his Wife wrapped him up in
Coverlets, and caused him to be carried to the Sea side, as a pack of Stuff,
where he embarked, and sailed into Sicily. Coponius was saved by his Wife, who
lent her Body to Anthony for one night, to save him whom she preferred before
her honor.

But the Wife of Septimius, Wives bad.
having shamefully given her Body to one of Anthonies Familiars, caused her
Husband to be put into the number of the Poscripts, that she might the more
freely continue her Adulteries, and her Husband was slain by her means. Q.
Vettius Salussus was hidden in a very secret place, but acquainting his Wife
with it, she betrayed him to the Murderers. Fulvius was discovered by one of
his slaves and his Concubine, though he had made her free, and given her goods
wherewithal to maintain her self.

P. Naso was betrayed by his slave enfranchised, Servants bad.
with whom he had been too familiar, but he revenged himself upon his slave,
whom he killed, and then held forth his neek to the cut throats. L. Lucceius
had put into the hands of two of his Freed men, as much as would have relieved
him in his Banishment, but they ran away with all; whereupon he delivered
himself to the Murderers. Haterius, who had hid himself in a very secret
place, was sold and betrayed by his slave, and killed. Cassius Varus, who was
betrayed by a slave made free, had his Head struck off. Caius Plotius was
hidden by his slaves, but being given to Perfumes, the scent thereof discovered
him; Servants good.
yet when the Soldiers could not find him, they cruelly tormented his Servants
to make them confess where he was, which yet they would not do: But the Master
pitying his faithful Servants, came out of his secret place, and delivered
himself to the murderers.

Appius Claudius changed his Gown with his slave, who in that habit presented
himself to the murderers, and was slain by them instead of his Master. Another
slave of Menius did the like: for he went into his Masters Litter, and offered
his neck to the murderers, who cut off his Head, and so his Master escaped
into Sicily. The slave of Urbinus Panopio, hearing that the murderers were
coming to his Masters house, took off his Gown and his Ring, and gave him his
own apparel, and put him out at a back door: then he went up and lay upon his
Masters Bed, where he boldly attended them that killed him for Panopio. The
slave of Antius Restio, though his Master had soundly beaten him a few days
before for some knavish tricks, yet to save his Master, meeting an old man by
the way, he struck off his Head, and showing that, with his whippings to the
murderers, he made them believe that thus he had revenged himself of his
Master, with whom he shortly after fled into Sicily. The slaves of Martius
Censorinus kept their Master secretly, till he had opportunity to escape into
Sicily, to Sextus Pompeius.

Q. Oppius, A good Son.
an honorable old man, being very near taking, was rescued by his Son, who
conveying him out of Rome, carried him upon his shoulders, and sent him into
Sicily, where all the poor distressed Romans were courteously entertained by
S. Pompeius, who sent forth Ships and Galleys to lie upon the Coast of Italy,
ready to receive all them that fled to him; doubly rewarding those that saved
any that was proscribed: He gave also honorable Offices to all that had been
Consuls, and comforting the rest with singular courtesy. Many others fled into
Macedonia, to Brutus and Cassius: others into Africa to Cornisicius. Statius
Samnis, an honorable Senator, being about eighty years old, that those Thieves
might have no part of his Goods, he gave them for a prey to whomsoever would
take them; then setting his House on fire, he burnt himself in it. Aponius
having been long concealed by his slave, grew weary of that confinement, came
out into the Marketplace, and yielded his neck to the murderers. Cestius
being in the like condition, caused his slaves to make a great fire, threw
himself into it, and died: Sulpitus Rufus, who had been Consul, was murdered,
because he would not sell an Isle of his to Fulvia: A Jezabel.
also Ampius Balbus was slain, because he would not give her a pleasant place
of his.

M. Anthony put into the number of Proscripts, Base Covetousness.
a Senator called Nonius Struma, only to get from him an Emerald esteemed
worth fifty thousand Crowns: but Nonius found a means to escape with his
Emerald, to the great grief of Anthony. Some valiantly defended themselves, as
Atteius Capito, who killed many Soldiers, Valor.
who came rudely running upon him, but being at last oppressed with multitudes,
he was slain. Vetulinus, assisted by his Son, valiantly repulsed the
murderers, but at last was slain. Sicilias Coranas hoping to escape, put
himself amongst the Mourners that followed a dead Corpse, but being discovered,
was slain.

The Triumviri caused the Goods of the Proscripts to be sold by the Drum, at
such prizes as the Soldiers pleased, yet most part of them was spoiled, and
given away. They promised also to Widows their Joyntures, and to Sons, the
tenth part of their Fathers Patrimony, and to Daughters the twentieth part; but
few or none had any benefit by this promise: yea, on the contrary, they sacked
many of them that demanded these rights. They exacted great sums of money in
Rome, Oppression.
and all over Italy; and to encourage the Soldiers, they gave them
unmeasurable gifts, and granted them daily new pillage. The Legions they
Wintered in the richest Cities upon free Quarter. To be short, men by fear and
custom were so inured to slavery, that they became more slaves than the
Tyrants would have had them.

These three men having done what they would in Rome, and knowing that Brutus
and Cassius had a very great Army in Greece, who called themselves the
Deliverers of their Country saying, that they would go and set Rome at liberty
from Oppression: Cassius having overthrown and slain Dolabella in Syria: and
being informed, that by the assistance of their Friends, they had gotten
together eighteen Legions; hereupon Mark Anthony and Octavian resolved to go
against them which the greatest Army that they could possibly make, of old
Soldiers, and that Lepidus should stay to guard Rome: and accordingly they
departed, They go against Brutus and Cassius.
and arrived in Greece, and marching on, they drew near to the place where
Brutus and Cassius were encamped, which was in Macedonia in the Philippick
Fields.

Before they came to join Battle, Prodigies.
there were sundry Prodigies: for Fowls of prey hovered about the Camp of
Brutus, as if it had been their own already: and as they marched out to Battle,
a Blackmoor met them, which they accounted an ill Omen. Brutus being alone in
his Tent at night, a man sad and ghastly appeared to him, A Spectrum.
and being asked what he was, he answered, I am thy evil Genius, and so
vanished: But on the contrary, Birds and Beasts promised good success to
Caesar. These Armies lying so near together, had frequent skirmishes, and at
last came to a Battle, where the Victory was strangely divided: For Brutus on
the one side of the Field, did beat Octavian, and put his Battalion to rout,
Brutus beats Caesar.
pursuing them into the Camp, where many of them were slain; M. Anthony. beats
Cassius.
and while Brutus was following his Victory, his partner Cassius was overthrown
by Mark Anthony, though he did all that was possible to encourage his men, and
by reason of the clouds of Dust, knew nothing of Brutus his Victory, whereupon,
retiring to an high ground, he there pitched his Tent: and so standing and
looking about, he saw Brutus his Troops coming to his aid, and to relieve him;
but he imagining that they came flying before their enemies, commanded a slave
of his, whom he had made free, to kill him, who did it accordingly.

Octavians men that escaped by flight, retired to Mark Anthonies Camp, and had
not Brutus his men busied themselves in ransacking Octavians Camp, they had
that day obtained an entire Victory: for they might in due time have rescued,
and relieved Cassius, and both of them being joined together, might easily have
overthrown Mark Anthony: but God had otherwise determined. The Victory being
thus divided, the Generals of either party gathered their Forces together, and
of Brutus side were slain eight thousand men, and of the Enemies side a far
greater number. Brutus did his best to encourage and comfort his Soldiers, and
the Gentlemen which followed Cassius: and the next day, though both Armies were
put in battle Array, yet they fought not; but a few days after, Brutus, by his
Soldiers, was forced to come to another Battle, who was of himself willing
rather to delay and prolong the War, knowing that his Enemies wanted Victuals,
and many other necessaries, and because he reposed no great trust in the Forces
of Cassius: for he found that they were fearful, and hard to be commanded,
because of their late overthrow. When they came to the second encounter, Brutus
did all the Offices of an able General, and of a Valiant Knight, Brutus beaten.
yet in the end his men were broken, and overthrown by the Enemy. Brutus having
gathered his scattered Troops together, found himself unable to make any
farther resistance, and being advised by some of his Friends to fly, he told
them, That so he would, yet not with his feet, Kills himself.
but with his hands; and thereupon, taking a Sword from a Servant of his called
Stratus, he slew himself. Thus Octavian and Mark Anthony remained Victors, and
Masters of the Field, and all things succeeded according to Caesar's desire, for
whom, God in his secret Counsel had reserved the Monarchy of the whole World,
which for the present was divided between three.

These Wars being ended, and the Legions of Brutus and Cassius reduced to the
obedience of the Conquerours, Octavian and Mark Anthony agreed, and resolved,
that Anthony should remain to govern Greece, and Asia, that Lepidus should go
into Africa, and that Octavian should return to Rome: and accordingly Mark
Anthony went into Asia, Anthony with Cleopatra.
where he gave himself up to sensuality and delights, with the fair, but wanton
Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, and Octavian, though with some hindrances, by
reason of his health, at last came to Rome.

Not long after, Troubles in Rome.
there arose new Wars and troubles, for though Octavian was at peace with
Lepidus, who was now in Africa, Octavian having under his command, Spain,
France, part of Germany, Italy, and Illyricum, yet Lucius Antonius, who at this
time was Consul, being provoked thereto by his Sister in Law Fulvia, Wife to
Mark Anthony, began to oppose himself against Lepidus and Octavian, seeking to
overthrow the Triumvirat; which contention brake out about the division of
Fields which Caesar had made to the Soldiers which had served him in his Wars.
Some say that Fulvia made this stir, that she might procure the return of Mark
Anthony to her, of whom she was jealous, hearing of his familiarity with
Cleopatra. The discord in Rome grew to that height, that they came to Arms; and
Lucius Antonius went from the City, and levied an Army against Octavian, who
also marched toward him with his Forces. But Lucius not daring to join Battle,
shut himself up in Perugia, where Caesar immediately besieged him, and Divorced
himself from Claudia the Daughter of Fulvia, and was married to his third Wife
Scribonia, by whom he had one only Daughter. Octavian being about twenty three
years old, so strictly besieged Perugia, Caesar's Victory.
that Lucius and his men were brought to such straits for want of Victuals,
that he was forced to yield up himself to Octavian, who pardoned him, and used
him kindly; and thus this War was ended without bloodshed. And so Octavian
returned to Rome, of which he was now sole Lord: and from hence some reckon the
beginning of his Empire, which was about four years after the Death of Julius
Caesar, and about thirty eight years before the Incarnation of our blessed Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

Caesar being now in quiet, Fulvia, by Letters, and false Informations, sought
to stir up her Husband Mark Anthony against Octavian, with which resolution she
left Italy, and went toward him; and at the same time Mark Anthony departed
from Alexandria in Egypt, and came to the Isle of Rhodes, where he was
informed of all that had happened to his Brother Lucius. From thence he went
into Greece, Anthony comes into Italy.
and at Athens he found his Wife Fulvia sick, yet vehemently inveighing against
Octavian: wherefore leaving her there, he went with two hundred Galleys into
Italy, and landed at Brundusium, where the Wars began between him and the
Forces of Octavian, who was yet at Rome. But news coming of Fulvia's death,
some Friends interposed to reconcile them, and at last it was agreed, that
Arbitrators should be chosen to compose their differences. Octavian chose
Mecoenas, and for Mark Anthony was Asinius Pollio, and these brought it to this
issue, that Mark Anthony should have all the East from Italy, beginning from
the Jonian Sea, which is the entry into the Venetian Gulf, unto the River of
Euphrates, wherein were included all the Provinces of Graecia and Asia, with
all the Islands within these limits. Peace made betwixt them.
To Octavian was allotted from the said Jonian Sea to the Western or Spanish
Sea, wherein were contained Spain, France, Italy, Germany, and Britain. To
Lepidus was confirmed Africa, where he then was, with all the Provinces
thereof. And for the strengthening of this League, Mark Anthony, now a Widower,
was to marry with Octavia, the Sister of Octavian by the Fathers side, formerly
married to Marcus Marcellus, by whom she had one Son, called also Marcellus,
whom Octavian adopted. And this marriage was dispensed with by the Senate,
because in Rome Widows were not permitted to marry, till they had lived ten
months in Widowhood, which she had not done.

This being concluded, Anthony marries Octavia.
Octavian and Mark Anthony went to Rome, where the Wedding was solemnized, and
they were seemingly good Friends; but their Peace was disquieted by the
Neighborhood of Sextus Pompeius, who commanded the Seas from Sicily where he
lived, and with his Ships and Pirates he disquieted Caesar's Friends, who
thereupon resolved to ruin him: But at the request of the Senate, and of Mark
Anthony, he hearkened to Peace, and by the mediation of Friends, They are
reconciled with Sextus Pompey.
it was agreed, that all matters past should be forgotten, and that they should
live like good Neighbors and Friends, and that Sextus Pompey should enjoy
Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica, which he had in possession, and that he should
clear the Seas from Pirates, that Merchants and Passengers might pass safely,
and that he should furnish Rome yearly with a certain quantity of Corn. This
being concluded, they agreed upon a meeting of all three upon the Sea side in
the Straight of Messina, in a Fortress built for that purpose, which reached
into the Water, whither Sextus Pompey might come with his Galleys and be in
safety: which accordingly was performed with great joy and solemnity; and
Sextus Pompey feasted them in his Galleys, and they likewise him by Land.

From hence Sextus Pompey returned into Sicily, and Octavian and Mark Anthony
to Rome, where for a while they remained in great Familiarity: and then Mark
Anthony preparing for his journey into the East, sent Venditius before him with
a great Army against the Parthians, wherein he had so good success, that he
overcame and defeated Pacorus, The Parthians beaten.
the Parthian Kings Son, and slew twenty thousand of his men, and thereby
sufficiently revenged the Death of Marcus Crassus, for which he afterward
Triumphed at Rome.

Mark Anthony departed from Rome with his new Wife, and wintered with her in
Athens. Octavian in the mean time in Rome growing mighty, and in high esteem,
was yet very pensive, being troubled at the Neighborhood of Sextus Pompey in
Sicily, attending an occasion to War against him: for which purpose he prepared
a great Fleet, Caesar envies Sextus Pompey.
pretending that Sextus with his Ships, and Galleys hindered the coming of Corn
into Italy. These Sicilian Wars continued for some years: in the beginning
whereof Octavian had ill success, yet more from storms and tempests than from
the force of his Enemies: and if Sextus Pompey had been as prudent and able to
offend his Enemy as he was to defend himself: and as he was Valiant, if he had
been as Wise and Politic, he might have greatly distressed Octavian in all
matters concerning Italy: yet the matter was so handled, that at Octavians
request Mark Anthony came twice out of the East into Italy to assist him in
these Wars. The first time he came to Brundusium, where, not finding Octavian
according to appointment, he returned without seeing him, upon some jealousies
which grew betwixt them. But Octavian having lost most of his Fleet in a storm,
he sent his entire Friend Mecenas to Mark Anthony, at whose entreaty he
returned into Italy with three hundred Ships and Galleys, giving it out that he
came to Caesar's aid. And though there were some difference between them, yet
Octavia so labored between her Husband and Brother, that she reconciled them,
and so they met in the mouth of the River near Tarentum, where Mark Anthony
gave to Octavian one hundred and twenty of his Galleys for his Wars, and
Octavian gave to him some of the Italian Soldiers, and they renewed their
Triumvirat for other five years. Which done, Mark Anthony returned to the East
to prosecute his Wars against the Parthians, his Wife Octavia and her Children
remaining in Rome.

Anthony being gone, Wars against him.
Octavian resolving to prosecute the Wars against Sextus Pompey with all his
Forces, armed two Navies, whereof Agrippa was the Admiral of the one, and
himself of the other: He sent also to Lepidus entreating his aid, who
accordingly came and brought with him a thousand Ships, little and great, and
eighty Galleys, wherein he transported five thousand Horse, and twelve Legions
of Foot Soldiers. Sextus Pompey hearing what great preparations were made
against him, did strongly fortify all the Seacoasts of Sicily, and on the
frontiers of Africa, near to Lilibaeum, he placed Plinius, a good Captain with
good Companies of Soldiers, and his whole Fleet by Sea he drew into the Port
of Messina, purposing to manage his Wars by Sea, having neither experience,
nor power to do it by Land, and so he attended the coming of his Enemies.

Lepidus loosing with his whole Fleet from Africa, was encountered with a
tempest, wherein with the loss of a great part of his Navy, he, with the rest
landed at Lilybaeum, and took in certain places thereabout, but having small
judgment, and experience in the Wars, he made a greater noise then did hurt to
Pompey. Octavius also being at Sea in a tempest, lost thirty of his Galleys,
besides small Ships, and with much difficulty returned to Italy: and Taurus,
who commanded the Galleys which Anthony left, landed at Tarentum, though with
great loss and danger. Octavian was so grieved at these losses, that he had
thoughts of giving over the War for that year: but changing his mind, he
repaired his Fleets, and ordered Agrippa, with one of them to pass into Sicily,
and there to make War both by Sea and land: and himself following with the
other Fleet did the like.

About this time Octavian divorced himself from Scribonia, though he had a
Daughter by her called Livia, Caesar marries Livia.
and then he married Livia Drusilla, Wife to Tiberius Nero, by whom she had a
Son called also Tiberius; hereupon Tiberius was forced to leave her to please
Octavian, though at this time she was with Child of a Son. This Livia he loved
dearly, and continued with her till his Death.

Agrippa assaulted and took in some places in Sicily, which Pompey hearing of,
departed from Messina with one hundred and seventy five Galleys, to relieve
them, and Agrippa being advertised of his coming, prepared to meet him, his
Galleys being almost equal in number, and so they joined Battle, which for a
time seemed to be equal, Pompey beaten.
but at last Agrippa prevailed, and Pompey retreated in time, his Galleys and
Foists withdrawing themselves into some Rivers near at hand, whither Agrippa
with his bigger Vessels could not follow them. In this fight Pompey lost thirty
of his Galleys. Agrippa the next day went to a City called Tindaria, thinking
to surprise it by reason of intelligence which he had with the Citizens: and
Pompey in the Night gave secret order to his whole Fleet to retire to Messina.

Octavian in the mean time embarked a great part of his Army, which he landed
in Sicily, and set them on shore under the command of Cornificius, little
thinking that Pompey had been so near, who if he had taken this opportunity,
might have defeated Octavian. But loosing it, Octavian imbarking again,
intended to determine the quarrel by a Battle at Sea, leaving Cornificius with
his men fortified on the Land. Then did Pompey sail out of Messina with his
whole Fleet, Caesar beaten.
and neither Parties refusing it, they came to a Battle, in which Octavian was
overcome, and all his great Fleet scattered and lost, and himself driven to
fly into Italy in a Brigandine, where through many dangers, he at last came to
the Army, whereof Mesalla was General, and being nothing discouraged with this
loss, he presently took order for all that was needful. To Rome he sent his
entire Friend Mecenas, to take order that this news should breed no alteration
there, and then presently sent to Agrippa, the Admiral of his other Fleet, that
he should with all speed succor Cornificius and his Army in Sicily, and to
Lepidus he sent to desire him to make his present repair to the Isle of
Lippari, which is between Sicily, and Calabria.

His diligence and good order about these affairs was such, that in a short
time, by the help of Lepidus, and Agrippa, in dispite of Pompey, he landed all
his Forces in Sicily, and joining with Lepidus, he encamped near to Messina,
where began a most cruel War both by Sea, and Land, wherein the power and
sufficiency of Pompey did wonderfully appear, in that he was able to grapple
with so potent adversaries. Yet seeing himself oppressed, he sent a challenge
to Octavian, that to avoid the further effusion of blood, he would try it out
with him in a Naval fight, so many Ships and Galleys against so many. Octavian
delayed him at the first, but afterward they agreed that with three hundred
Ships and Galleys on either side, they would meet in such a place, and there
fight it out, and accordingly they prepared for the Battle.

Octavian leaving Lepidus with his Land Army, embarked himself in his Fleet,
and Pompey did the like, and so they joined Battle, which was one of the
cruellest that ever was, considering the Commanders and the strength on either
side, where Pompey, after he had performed all the Offices of a good and
Valiant Captain, Pompey beaten.
and after the slaughter of multitudes on both sides, was overcome by Octavian,
and all his Fleet was burnt and sunk, or taken, saving sixteen sail which
escaped by flight, and he in one of them, and these entered into the Haven of
Messina. And though the City was sufficiently fortified, and Pompey knew that
Plinius, his General was coming to his rescue, yet in a dark night he embarked,
And flies.
and with those sixteen Ships which had escaped, he fled into the East to Mark
Anthony, hoping to find relief from him: But after much toil, And is slain.
and many accidents which happened to him, he was slain by one Titius at the
command of Mark Anthony, and in him failed the House and memory of his Father
Pompey the Great.

In this War Octavian escaped many dangers. For having transported part of his
Army into Sicily, Caesar's dangers.
and sailing back to fetch the rest, he was suddenly surprised by Demochares,
and Apolaphanes, two of Pompeys Captains, from whom he escaped with much
difficulty with one only Ship. Then traveling by Land to Rhegium, he saw some
of Pompeys Galleys near to the Shore, and supposing them to be his own, he went
down to the Sea side, where he had like to have been taken by them; and then
seeking to escape by unknown passages, he met with a slave of Aemilius Paulus,
who remembering that he had proscribed his Master Paulus, Father to this
Aemilius, he attempted to kill him.

Octavian having obtained this great Victory aforesaid, though with very great
loss, he went to Land with the remainder of his Ships and Army, commanding
Agrippa to join with Lepidus, and to go to Messina, whither Pliny, Pompeys
General had retired himself. But not thinking good to stand upon his defense,
now that his Master was fled, he yielded himself to Lepidus with all his
Legions: He falls out with Lepidus.
This made Lepidus so proud, that affecting to have Sicily to himself, he
contended with Octavian about it: and entering into the City of Messina, he
placed a Garrison in it, to hold it for his own use: The like he did in many
other places of the Island: and when Octavian came, he desired to speak with
him, greatly complaining of his proceedings.

But in Rule, and Dominion equallity is intolerable, whilst either of them
coveted this Isle for himself they fell at variance, and Octavian made his Navy
to draw near to the shore: So that both Armies began to stand upon their guard,
the one against the other, and many messages passed between them, yet could
they not agree. But Octavian was far better beloved and esteemed by the men of
War, for his many virtues, and Nobility, and for his Namesake [ Julius Caesar,]
then the other, and the Soldiers began to lay all the fault upon Lepidus.

Octavian understanding this, Caesar's Policy.
labored secretly to corrupt Lepidus his Soldiers, to draw them to himself:
and one day, with a great Troop of Horse, he rode near to Lepidus his Camp, and
parlying with his Soldiers, justified himself and laid all the fault upon
Lepidus, insomuch that many of them began to come over to his side. Lepidus,
being informed hereof, caused an Alarm to be given, and commanded his men to
sally out against Octavian, but when they came forth, Lepidus overcome.
most of them joined with him: so that Lepidus seeing himself in danger of
being forsaken of his whole Army, yielded himself unto Caesar, and putting off
his Generals Robe, he went to his Tent, and submitted to him. Octavian received
him as if he had never offended, very courteously, and honorably, but restored
him neither to his State nor power, and sent him with a good company to Rome,
without any Office but the High Priesthood, which he had held ever since the
Death of Julius Caesar: and so this difference was ended without bloodshed.

Octavian now retaining Sicily to himself, and having divested Lepidus of the
Triumvirat, he appropriated to himself the Province of Africa, and remained
General of the three Armies, to wit, of Lepidus, of Pompey, and of his own;
wherein were forty five Legions of Footmen, and twenty five thousand Horse, all
well armed, besides many other Numidians. He had also upon the Sea, six hundred
Galleys and many Ships, and Brigandines. And now waited only for an opportunity
to fall out with Mark Anthony that he might make himself Lord of all. Yet for
the present he paid his Soldiers as well as he could, and gave Coronets,
Honors, and Arms to those who had deserved well in these Wars. He then
dispersed his Armies, sending them to their own homes, laden with many fair
promises. He also left, and sent Praetors and Governors into Sicily and
Africa, Caesar returns to Rome.
and so hasted toward Rome, where he was received with Ovation (which was
little less than a Triumph) with incredible joy and honor: and was so
exceedingly beloved, that in many places they erected Temples and Altars to
him, as to their Gods: and he reformed such things as by reason of the Wars
were grown out of order.

At this time Mark Anthony, who was in the East, though he had no great success
in his Parthian War, yet was he still of great power, very Rich, and well
obeyed in the Provinces of Greece, Asia, and Egypt, and in the rest of his
Governments. Anthony besotted with Cleopatra.
But he was so besotted with the love, and company of Cleopatra, the Queen of
Egypt, that he thought of nothing but how to saitsfie her humor, in the mean
time neglecting, and forgetting his Wife Octavia, the Sister of Octavian, who
in beauty and Wisdom was nothing inferior to Cleopatra, and in virtue and
goodness did far excel her.

The Monarchy of the World being thus divided between these two, the one in the
East, the other in the West, yet, as though each of them had not enough, they
studied each of them to supplant, and destroy the other Chiefly Octavian,
Caesar seeks a quarrel with him.
who seeing that Anthony neglected his Sister, and did not send for her, he
continually advised, and urged her to go to her Husband, that he might have a
fair occasion to fall out with him if she were not well entertained: But she,
not well understanding his design, that she might prevent all controversies
between her Brother and her Husband, departed from Rome, carrying with her many
Jewels, and Presents which she had gotten together therewith to present Mark
Anthony. But he, having fixed his heart upon Cleopatra, wrote to her by the way
that she should go into Greece, and stay at Athens, till he returned from the
Parthian War, yet did he never go against them, Cleopatra hindering him.
Notwithstanding Octavia sent all those things which she had brought, to her
Husband, and all this not prevailing to procure her acceptance, she went full
of grief to Rome.

Then did Octavian begin openly to complain of Mark Anthony, and to declare
himself his Enemy, and Mark Anthony, entered into a League with the King of the
Medes, the better to strengthen himself, causing Cleopatra (besides the Title
of Egypt) to be called Queen of Syria, Lybia, and Cyprus, and jointly with
her, a Son of hers called Caesarion, of whom Julius Caesar left her with Child
when he was in Egypt: and to two Sons which himself had by her, called
Ptolomy, and Alexander, he gave the Title of Kings, to Alexander, of Armenia,
and Parthia: and to Ptolomy, of Cilicia, and Phoenicia; hereupon the enmity
between Octavian and him greatly increased: yet was the War deferred because of
other Wars which Octavian had in Illyricum, and Dalmatia. The People of these
Countries, Caesar's new troubles.
seeing the Romans engaged in Civil Wars, rebelled, together with those of
Austria, Hungary, and Bavaria, who joined with them. This War Octavian
undertook in his own Person, which was very cruel and dangerous: wherein he was
twice wounded, and gave great proof both of his Wisdom and Valor: yet in the
end, he not only subdued and tamed Illyricum, but both the Panonnia's, and all
the neighboring Nations with had joined with them.

Then did Octavian return Victorious to Rome, and though a Triumph was granted
him, yet would he not Triumph as then, so great was his desire to make War
against Mark Anthony, who was no better affected toward him. For he levied
Soldiers, procured Friends, and Armies against him, and promised Cleopatra to
bring her Triumphing into Rome. Yea, she requested of him, the Rule and Empire
of Rome, and he promised it her.

Matters standing upon these terms, Mark Anthony sent his Wife Octavia a Bill
of Divorce, according to the custom of those times, commanding her to go out of
his House, Quarrels betwixt them.
wherein she dwelt in Rome. This, and other indignities Octavian imparted to
the Senate, complaining against Anthony, and in his Orations to the People, he
accused him for that (the second five years of his Triumvirat and League being
expired) yet came he not to Rome, neither respecting the authority of the
Senate, nor of the People, but held his place, and kept possession of the East
and of Greece: and by such suggestions he incensed the People against him.

Mark Anthony, on the other side by Letters and Messengers, complained that
Octavian had often broken the Peace, and had cast Sextus Pmpey out of Sicily,
retaining that, and other places which he held to himself: and that therein he
had no respect of him, nor had given him any part thereof: and that he detained
the Galleys which he had lent him for that War. As also that he had deprived
Lepidus of his Government, and kept all those Provinces, and all the Legions
which were his, without imparting any share thereof to him: and that he had
divided all the Lands in Italy to his own Soldiers, not assigning any part
thereof to his. Thus the one accused the othet, either pretending that they
were forced to undertake the War; whereas the truth is, it was their Ambition,
and insatiable desire to Rule that pricked them forward to it. Hereupon they
called diverse Nations to their aid, so as the whole World in a manner,
Preparations for War.
either of one side or other, was in Arms. Those in the West for Octavian, and
those in the East for Anthony: at least, the best and choicest men of them all.

Anthony was first in the Field, and came with a great Army to the famous City
of Ephesus in Jonia, a Province of Asia the less, whither he had sent for his
Navy to transport him into Europe. And he had in readiness eight hundred
Galleys and Ships of burden: two hundred whereof Cleopatra gave him, together
with all the Ammunition, and Victuals necessary for the Fleet: He also took her
along with him, contrary to the advice of all those which were of his Counsel.
Then sailed he to the Isle of Samos, to which he had appointed all the Kings,
Tetrarchs, and People which served under him in this War, to come by a day
prefixed. The Kings that met him there, were Tarcondemus, King of the upper
Cilicia: Archalaus, of Cappadocia: Philodelphus, of Paphlagonia; Methridates,
of Comagena, and others: Besides those which sent there Forces, as Herod, King
of Judaea: Amyntas, of Lycaonia: and the Kings of Arabia: Of the Medes: and
Palemon, King of Pontus with some others. So that he had one hundred thousand
well trained Footmen, and twenty two thousand Horse, besides his Navy by Sea,
which consisted of five hundred Galleys, besides Ships of burden which carried
his Ammunition, and Victuals.

If Anthony, thus furnished, had presently passed into Italy, he had put
Octavian into great hazard: For then he had not sufficient Forces to have
withstood him, nor other necessary Provision for the Wars. But Mark Anthony,
Anthony: imprudence.
delaying the time at Athens, let slip the opportunity, and gave Octavian
leisure to provide all things necessary from Italy, France, Spain, and all
other his Provinces, from whence he levied eighty thousand choice Soldiers,
and above twenty thousand good Horse: and seeing that Anthony stayed so long,
Caesar's message.
he sent him word, that seeing he had Ships, and other fit provision, he should
come for Italy, where he staid in the Field to give him Battle, promising to
afford him good Ports and Havens, where he might safely land without
interruption. Anthonys answer.
To this Anthony answered, that it would be more honorable if he would
determine this quarrel in Person against him, body to body, which he would
willingly accept, though he was now old and crazed, and the other young and
lusty: and if he liked not of this challenge, he would stay for him with his
Army in the Fields of Pharsalia, in the same place where Julius Caesar fought
with Cneius Pompey.

These Messages passing between them without effect, Anthony drew his Army by
Land, and his Navy by Sea toward Italy, and Octavian, embarked his Legions at
Brundusium, and crossed the Sea to a place called Torma, in the Province of
Epire (now called Romania) and after some notable exploits performed, the two
Armies drew near together, They meet.
as also did the Navies. Octavians Navy consisted of two hundred and fifty
Galleys, but better armed, and swifter than were Mark Anthonies, though his
were more in number. And Mark Anthony, being persuaded by Cleopatra (who in
this also was the cause of his ruin, thereby to have the better means to fly if
the Battle should be lost) would needs try his Fortune in a Sea fight, though
his Army by Land had a great advantage over the other.

Anthony chose twenty thousand out of his Army and put them aboard his Fleet,
They prepare to fight.
and Octavian, who refused not the Sea Fight, made his provision also, and so
shipping himfelf in his Galleys, he committed the charge of his Land Army to
Taurus, and Anthony left his Land Forces with Canidius: and in the sight of
both the Armies, these two brave Captains, with the best Navies in the World,
took the Seas where they fought, for no less than the Empire of the World. Yet
was the Fight deferred for three days in dispite of both Parties, the Seas
rising so high that they could not Govern their Vessels. The fourth day they
came to an encounter at a Cape called Accius, in Epire, not far from the place
where their Land Armies stood.

The Battle was one of the most cruellest that ever was heard of, and lasted
ten hours before Octavian obtained the Victory, A Battle.
though Mark Anthony staid not so long in the fight. For Cleopatra in the
greatest fury of the Battle, fled away in her Galley, whom seventy of her other
Galleys followed: and unfortunate Mark Anthony, who all his life time hitherto
had been a valiant and brave Captain, seeing Cleopatra fly, on whom he had
fixed his eyes and heart, Anthony flies.
shifting out of his own Galley into a lighter, followed her, without regard of
his Armies either by Sea or Land, and overtaking her, went aboard her Galley,
wherein he sailed three days without either seeing or speaking with her, being
confounded with shame for showing so much weekness, and at last they arrived in
the Port of Alexandria in Egypt.

His Navy which he left fighting, His men's fidelity.
though now Headless and without a Captain, yet continued to make gallant
resistance till five thousand of them were slain: and at last they were
overcome, rather for want of a Commander then through any force of an Enemy,
though Octavians light and swift Galleys were a great help to him: and so he
remained Conqueror, and granted life, and pardon to the conquered, getting
into his hands three hundred of their Galleys. In Anthonys Army by Land there
wanted neither courage nor constancy to theit General, though he had so
unworthily deserted them: and therefore they continued seven days in their
Camp, ready to give Battle, without accepting any composition from the Enemy,
and they would have staid longer, had not Canidius their Captain abused his
trust, flying secretly from the Camp to seek Anthony, whereupon, the Army being
destitute of a General, yielded to the Enemy; His Army yields to Caesar.
who admitted them into his own Army, being nineteen Legions of Foot, and
twelve thousand Horse. The Senators, Knights, and Noble men, that had served
Anthony, many of them he fined in great sums of Money, many he put to death,
and some he pardoned.

Then did Caesar sail to Athens, and being pacified with the Greeks, he
distributed the Corn that was left in the War, to the Cities that were
afflicted with Famine, and that were dispoiled of their Money, Servants, and
Horses. And Anthony being arrived in Egypt, chose out one good Ship of good
burden, and fraught with store of Treasure, and rich Plate of Gold and Silver,
and gave it to his Friends, entreating them to divide it amongst them and to
shift for themselves, and he wrote to Theophilus, the Governor of Corinth,
that he would provide them an hiding place till they might make their Peace
with Caesar. And Caesar, of the spoils of the Enemy dedicated ten Ships to
Apollo Actius.

Anthony being come into Africa went into a desert place, Anthony lives
privately.
wandering up and down, only accompanied with two Friends; and after a while he
sent to the General of the Army which he had formerly raised for the defense of
Egypt, but he slew his Messengers, and said that he would not obey Anthony,
whereupon he had thought to have killed himself, but being hindered by his
Friends, he went to Alexandria, and after a while he built him an House in the
Sea by the Isle of Pharos, and there lived from the Company of all men, saying,
That he would live the life of Timon the Man-hater, because he was abused by
his Friends, and had experience of their ingratitude, and he called this House
Timonion. Yet at length he left this place, and went to the Palace, where he
spent his time in Feasting and jollity. And Cleopatra got together diverse sorts
of deadly poisons of poysonsome Creatures, whereof she made trial upon many
condemned persons, and amongst all, she liked the biting of the Aspe best: for
it brought a sleepiness without any contraction of the members, or groaning,
only causing a gentle sweating of the face, and a languishing stupidity of the
senses.

At Rome many things were decreed in honor of Caesar for this Victory at Sea:
Casar highly honored.
First a Triumph was granted him for Cleopatra: and a Triumphal Arch was
erected at Brundusium, and another at Rome. The base of the Julian Temple was
adorned with the Beaks of the Ships he had taken: There were Plays decreed to
be kept every fifth year in honor of him: Processions were always to be made
on his Birth day, and on the day wherein the news of his Victory was first
brought. That the vestal Virgins, the Senate, with their Wives and Children
should go and meet him at his return: that all the Ornaments of Anthony should
be demolished and cast down: that his Birth day should be accounted unlucky:
and that none of his Family should ever have the forename of Marcus.

About this time Anthony and Cleopatra sent Ambassadors to Caesar into Asia.
Cleopatra demanded the Kingdom of Egypt for her Children, and without
Anthonies knowledge, sent him a Scepter, Crown, and Chair, all of Gold, as it
were, delivering her Kingdom over to him: and Anthony demanded that he might
live a private life at Athens if he might not continue in Egypt. Caesar
accepted of Cleopatra's gifts, accounting them as good Omens: but he would
afford no answer to Anthony; and privately he promised impunity and her Kingdom
to Cleopatra if she would kill Anthony. They sent also a second Embassage to
Caesar, and Cleopatra promised him a huge mass of Money; and Anthony minded him
of the former friendship and alliance that was between them, and what acts they
had done together: he delivered also to him Terullius, a Senator, and one of
Caesar's murderers, whom he put to death: he proffered also to kill himself to
obtain security for Cleopatra, yet Caesar would give him no answer.

Anthony and Cleopatra hereupon prepare for War, Anthony prepares for War.
and Caesar at last marched against them, and sent Cornelius Gallus before with
four Legions, who suddenly seized upon Paraetonium, the prime City of Egypt,
toward Lybia. Anthony being informed hereof, marched toward Paraetonium,
hoping to draw Gallus his Soldiers to own him, but when on the contrary he had
received great loss both by Sea and Land, he returned to Alexandria. Presently
after Caesar took Pelusium, by the Treachery of Cleopatra, who caused Selucus
the Governor to deliver it up to him, hoping to draw his love to her, yet did
she disown it to Anthony.

Cleopatra had Storehouses, and Monuments, admirable both for sumptuousness
and highth, which she had built by the Temple of Isis, and thither she had
brought the most precious things of all her Royal Treasure, as Gold, Silver,
Emeralds, Pearls, Ebony, Ivory, and Cinnamon, as also store of Lamps, and Flax:
whereupon Caesar fearing that she would set fire of them, whereby he should
lose such Treasures, he, to prevent despair, gave her hopes of favor, whilst
he marched toward the City, and she privately forbad the Citizens of
Alexandria to sally out against him; whereas openly she seemed to encourage
them to oppose him.

Caesar being come before the City, Caesar pursues him into Egypt.
Anthony sallied out, and fought valiantly with him, and routed his Horse, and
drove them to the very Camp, of which, at his return, he boasted to Cleopatra,
and she to reward him, gave him an Headpiece, and Armor all of Gold. The next
day Anthony dispersed tickets amongst Caesar's Soldiers, promising them fifteen
hundred Drachmaes a piece, if they would come over to him: These Caesar read to
his Soldiers, rendering Anthony more hateful to them thereby, and they being
exceeding angry that their fidelity was tempted, fought so valiantly at the
next encounter, that Anthony was driven back out of the Field. After this,
Anthony challenged Caesar to a single Duel, who answered, That Anthony had more
ways to die. He therefore considering that he could not die any way more
honorably than in Battle, resolved to set upon Caesar both by Sea and Land.

Many Prodigies fore-ran the bondage of Egypt. Prodigies.
In some places it rained blood. Armies appeared in the Air. A huge Dragon was
seen amongst the Egyptians, which hissed horribly. A Comet appeared, and the
Images of the Dead. The Statues seemed to mourn: and Apis lowing heavily, shed
some tears.

On the Kalends of August, Cleopatras treachery.
Anthony, early in the morning, went down to the Haven, to order his Fleet. But
Cleopatra caused them to revolt from him, and to join with Caesar's Fleet:
Whilst Anthony beheld this, he was also forsaken by all his Horsemen, who
revolted to Caesar, and his Foot were beaten back into the City: whereupon he
cried out, that he was betrayed by Cleopatra. She fearing his anger, fled to
her Monument, with one Eunuch, and two Maids, and sent Anthony word that she
was dead: This he believing, desired his faithful servant Erotes, according to
his former promise, to kill him: Erotes drew out his Sword, as if he would do
it, but Anthonies back being toward him, he slew himself; who falling at his
feet, Anthony said, Noble Erotes, thou have taught me what to do, but could
not endure to do it thy self; So taking the Sword, Anthony kills himself.
he thrust it into his Belly: yet after a while, the blood stopping, he desired
those about him to dispatch him, but they all fled, which caused a great tumult.

Cleopatra from the top of the Monument perceiving it, (for the Gate was so
made, that being shut it could not be again opened) she sent her Secretary to
bring him into the Monument to her: Anthony was carried to the foot of the
Monument, and being tied in a Pulley, was with great pains drawn up by
Cleopatra and her two Maids. It was a sad sight to see him thus drawn up,
besmeared with blood, and ready to give up the Ghost. When he came to the top,
he stretched forth his hands to Cleopatra, who receiving him in, laid him on a
bed, tearing her head tire, breast and face with her own hands, so that she was
all gore blood: He labored to comfort her, and advised her to look to her
affairs, and to save her life, if she could do it without dishonor, and that
amongst all Caesar's Friends, she should most trust Proculeius, and so gave up
the Ghost.

In the mean time Dercetaeus, one of Anthonies Guard, stole his bloody Sword,
and ran away with it to Caesar, Caesar bewails his Death.
telling him what had happened: Caesar then going into the inmost room of his
Tent, much bewailed Anthony, his Kinsman, and Colleague, and who had been his
companion in many Battles, and in the Government of the Empire. Then sending
for Proculeius, he commanded him, by all means, if it were possible, to save
Cleopatra alive, fearing to lose her Treasures, and that she might adorn his
Triumph. Proculeius, and one Epaphroditus, coming to the Monument, labored to
persuade Cleopatra to come forth: and at last by a wile, Proculeius seized upon
her, yet granted her some days to embalm Anthonies Body, after which they
brought her into the Palace, diminishing nothing either of her wonted train, or
honor, that so she might do no mischief to her self.

Caesar having conquered Alexandria, Caesar pardons the A^gyptians.
ascended into a Tribunal, and calling the Citizens before him, who for fear
fell upon their knees, he told them that he freely pardoned them for their
great God Serapis his sake. He also pardoned the rest of the Egyptians, being
unwilling to put so many men to death, which formerly had done so good service
for the Romans. Of those that favored Anthony, some he put to death, and
others he pardoned, either of his own good will, or at the intercession of
Friends. And whereas Anthony had with him many children of Kings, some as
Hostages, others upon false accusations, some of them Caesar sent home, others
he joined together in marriage, and some he kept by him. Coming to view the
Tomb of Alexander the Great (which as Strabo reports, was of Glass) Caesar
put a Crown upon it, and strewed flowers over it, and worshipped it: and being
asked whether he would see the Bodies of the Ptolomies? He answered, That he
would see a King, not the dead. Neither would he go to see their God Apis,
saying, that he used to worship Gods, not Oxen.

Many great Kings and Captains desired to bury the Body of Anthony, but Caesar
would not take it from Cleopatra, who buried it splendidly and Magnificently,
and Caesar suffered her to take what Treasures she would for his Funerals.
Cleopatra, through her much sorrow, fell into a Fever, and her Breast was
troubled with inflammations and Ulcers, through the blows which she had given
her self, yet by the care of Caesar, and the skill of her Physician, she was
recovered: after which she delivered to Caesar an Inventory of all her
Treasures: and when Scleucus, one of her Treasurers, accused her for concealing
some things, she leaped up, and taking him by the hair, she buffetted him
soundly; at which Caesar smiling, reproved her; to whom she answered, Is it not
a great matter, Cleopatras Passion.
O Caesar, seeing thou please to come and visit me in this condition that I
am in, that I should be accused by my own Servant? If I have reserved some
Jewels, not for my self, poor wretch, but that I might present Octavia, and thy
Lyria, that by their intercessions I might find the more favor with thee, I
hope it is no fault. Caesar was glad at this, hoping that now she had a mind to
live, but she deceived him.

Shortly after she wrote a Letter, and sealing it up, she sent it by
Epaphroditus to Caesar, wherein she desired to be buried with Anthony: then
adorning her self in her best apparel, She kills her self.
she set an Asp to her left Arm, by the biting of which, she presently died, as
in a slumber. As soon as Caesar had read her Letter, he sent some in all haste
to her to see what was done, who when they came, found Cleopatra dead upon a
bed of Gold, in all her Royal Robes, and her two waiting Maids dead at her
feet. Caesar being informed hereof, admired, and pitied her, and grieved that
he was deprived of the chief honor of his Triumph; and buried her in the same
Sepulcher with Anthony, finishing the Tomb which she had begun: and her waiting
Women by his command were buried honorably: She lived thirty nine years, and
reigned twenty two.

Caesar having settled his affairs in Egypt, Caesar's Triumpas.
passed through Syria into Asia, and from thence into Greece, and so to Rome,
where he Triumphed three days, first for his Dalmatian, secondly, for his
Accian, and thirdly, for his Egyptian Victory, which was the most sumptuous,
and set forth with the greatest preparations, wherein was carried in a Bed the
Image of Cleopatra, and an Asp biting her Arm. After which, Caesar enriched the
Temple of his Father Julius with the Egyptian spoils: He also consecrated many
things to Jupiter Capitolinus, Juno, and Minerva: He brought into the Cell of
Jupiter Capitolinus sixteen thousand pound weight of Gold, beside Pearls and
precious Stones, valued at fifty Millions of Sesterces, and Rome was so
enriched with the Riches of Alexandria, that the prizes of every thing were
doubled, and Interest fell from ten to four per Cent.

Thus Caesar, in the space of about sixteen years, erected the Monarchy, which
his Uncle Julius had begun, and though the means whereby he obtained it are not
justifiable, yet afterward he Governed it justly, and wisely, and was one of
the best Princes in the World: Caesar's commendations.
Gentle, Just, Merciful, Liberal, Valiant, and endued with many other Virtues;
happy and successful in his affairs, and much beloved of all: and the People
and Senate of Rome gave him a new Name, which before that time was never heard
of, calling him Caesar Augustus, a Name which they held for holy, venerable,
and of Great Majesty, and which appertained to the Gods and their Temples,
concerning which Ovid thus writes, Sed tamen humanis celebrantur honoribus
omnes,
Hic socium summo cum Jove nomen habet, etc.
Fastorum.
All common Persons have their common Fame,
But He with Jove enjoyes an equal Name,
Of old most sacred things Augusta were*
Temples that Name, and hallowed things do bear:
Yea, Auguri depends upon this word,
And whatsoever more Jove does afford:
Let it enlarge his rule and life, let all
Our Coast be guarded with a fenced Wall.


The Senate also by Oath approved all his acts, Flat^^ry.
freed him from all tie of Laws, and that he should have as absolute power as
the Laws, and that he might do all things, or not do them, according to his
pleasure. And now, because the Books of the Sybils through age were worn out,
Augustus gave charge to the Priests, with their own hands to write them out,
and that no other should read them.

Caesar Augustus (for so now we must call him) seeing himself in quiet, and
without War, Janus Temple shut up.
caused the Temple of Janus to be shut, whereas they religiously observed, that
during the time of War it should stand open: It had never before been shut
since the foundation of Rome but twice: Once in the time of Numa Pompilius, the
second King thereof, and the other after the second Punick War, when Titus
Manlius was Consul. Augustus shut this Temple three times, whereof this was the
first: And now living in Peace and prosperity, he omitted no part of his care
in the Government of the Roman Commonwealth, and the Provinces thereof: Sending
thither Praetors, Pro-consuls, and other Governors, which were excellent men,
and fit for those dignities: and himself gave direction, and was very diligent
in all things touching Justice, Customs, Religion, and public buildings, so
as in all things his Reign was happy, peaceable, and quiet, during all his Life.

Yet in this so happy a time, some People and Nations still affecting Liberty,
labored to shake off the Roman yoke, New troubles.
and thereby molested, and disquieted the Empire, as the Spaniards, the
Inhabitants of Illyricum, and the Pannonians. In Spain, the Cantabrians, the
Asturians, and part of Gallicia, passing their bounds, began a War against the
Empire. Augustus being informed hereof, judging it to be a doubtful War, and of
importance, commanded the Temple of Janus to be opened: and determined to go
against them in Person, and to send other Captains to follow his other Wars.
And accordingly Augustus went into Spain, and with three Armies made War
against the People aforementioned, which proved very doubtful and desperate,
and lasted five years: and though he suppressed the Cantabrians, and Asturians,
and drove them to their Rocks and Mountains, yet before he could wholly subdue
them, he was fain to bring a great Navy upon the Coast of France, to invade the
Sea coasts of Cantabria and Galizia, by which means he drove them to such
extremities by Land, that they were at last forced to submit to his obedience.

Augustus his great favorite Agrippa served him faithfully in this War, whom
therefore he married to his Daughter Julia, who was the Widow of his Nephew
Marcellus, Spain subdued.
the Son of his Sister Octavia. And thus he brought all Spain into subjection
to him, above two hundred years after the Comans began to make their first Wars
there. So as no Province cost Rome more Treasure, more blood, nor more time
than Spain.

This long and doubtful War being so happily finished, Augustus was so pleased
with it; that he gave commandment that the Temple of Janus should again be
shut, and came to Rome in great Triumph. But this Temple continued not long
shut, for some Nations of the Germans rebelled, so that it was again opened.
These were the Inhabitants of Noricum (now Bavaria) and the Pannonia's, (now
Austria and Hungary) and the two Missia's, (now Bulgary and Servia) as also
Illyricum, (now Sclavonia) and the Province of Dacia, (now Transylvania and
Walachia) and some others, though at several times.

Against these, Augustus sent his Generals and Armies, amongst which were his
Sons in Law, the Sons of Livia, Tiberius Nero, who succeeded him in the Empire,
and his Brother Drusus Nero, of whom Livia was with child when Octavian married
her: and these two Brothers (though the War lasted somewhat long) vanquished
those Nations, and obtained great Victories in Germany, and the confines
thereof: especially Tiberius, who in three years space subdued the Pannonia's,
Illyricum, and Dalmatia; for which Victories he afterward entered into Rome in
an Ovation Triumph with great Pomp and Honor. Marcus Crassus also overcame and
put to flight the Missians, a People who had never seen the Romans before. And
when they were ready to give Battle, they said, Tell us who you are that seek
to molest and disquiet us? We are (said they) Romans, the Lords of Nations;
whereupon they replied; It shall be so if you overcome us; which fell out
accordingly.

But Augustus obtained not these Victories without some crosses. Augustus his
crosses.
For in these Wars died his Son in Law Drusus, who was highly esteemed for his
Noble acts, and great Victories; for the loss of whom, both Augustus and Livia
were much afflicted: But yet his grief was greater for the mishap which befell
Quintilius Varro, who was General of three Legions in Germany, and being
careless, was surprised by the Almans, and himself, his Legions, and all his
Auxiliaries were slain, and two Standards with the Imperial Eagles taken; for
which he was so immoderately grieved, that he knocked his Head against the
Wall, and cried out unadvisedly, Quintilius Varro, Give me my Legions again:
For certain months also, he suffered the hair of his Head and Beard to grow
carelessly. And the very day of this unhappy accident, he did every year observe
mournfully, with sorrow and lamentation.

Of his Son in Law Drusus there remained two Sons, Germanicus and Claudius,
which he had by Antonia, Augustus his Niece, and Daughter of his Sister Octavia
and Mark Anthony; of which Claudius was Emperor: And Germanicus married
Agrippina the Daughter of Julia, Augustus his Daughter, by whom he had Caius
Caligula, who also was afterward Emperor. Augustus after many notable
Victories, compelled his Enemies at length to sue for Peace, whereupon again he
commanded the Temple of Janus to be shut up, and from thenceforth all things
succeeded prosperously with him.

The Subjects of the Empire were now very obedient to him, Many Ambassadors
come to him.
and all other sent their Ambassadors seeking his Favor and Friendship. The
Indians in the remotest parts of the East, and the Scythians that inhabited the
North: and the Parthians, an untamed People, sent their Ambassadors to him,
giving security to keep the Peace, and restoring to him the Standards and
Eagles which were taken when Marcus Crassus was slain. There came also Kings,
who were Friends and Subjects to the Roman Empire, to do him Homage, laying
aside their Ensigns, and Royal Robes: and many of them bult Cities to his
Name, and for his Honor, calling them Caesaria. So did Herod the Great in
Palestine, King Juba in Mauritania, and others.

The World being thus at Peace and quietness, forty and two years being expired
since that Augustus, after the Death of Julius Caesar, came to Rome; In the
time of this general Peace, was the Prince of Peace, our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ born in Bethlem, Our Savior Christ born.
of the Virgin Mary, Herod being King of Judea, placed there by the Romans, of
whose blessed Life and bitter Death, as also of the order of his Ministry, and
Miracles, see his Life, published by me, Anno Christi 1664. At which time there
came forth a command from Caesar Angustus, that all the Roman World should be
taxed, which taxing was first made, when Cyrenius was Governor of Syria, Luke
2. 1. Out of which, a little Book was made by Augustus, in which all the
public riches were contained: as also how many Citizens, and Allies in Arms:
what Navies: How many Kingdoms and Provinces: what Tribute and Customs there
were: what necessary charges and Pensions went out. Shortly after, Augustus was
called Lord by the People, but he did not only refuse that Title, but forbad it
by a public Edict.

Augustus enjoying so great prosperity, His Prudence and Justice.
was yet nothing altered in his qualities and behavior, as often it happens in
other Princes; but rather became more mild, just, and affable, more courteous,
liberal, and temperate. He established very good Laws and Orders for the
reformation and abuses, and evil customs. He erected both within and without
Rome many stately and sumptuous Edifices, which made him to boast concerning
Rome, Latericiam inveni, Marmoream reliqui: I found it built with Brick, and
left it built with Marble. He bestowed great gifts and favors upon all sorts
of People. He delighted the People with Feasts, and Plays of sundry kinds,
going himself in person to honor them: He sent Colonies into sundry parts and
Provinces: He made excellent good Orders for the Governors and Government of
the whole Empire: The like he did also for the Wars, and Martial Discipline. He
showed himself loving and sociable to his Friends and Familiars, whom he
honored and loved much, Some conspiracies against him which were discovered,
he punished without rigor, being more prone to pardon than to punish. Of
murmurings and defamatory Libels, he never desired to know the Authors; but
answered them with gravity, giving satisfaction, and purging himself from those
things which were charged upon him. He was much addicted to, and affected with
Learning, and himself was very Learned and Eloquent, and compiled some notable
Books. He much honored and rewarded Wise and Learned men: yet he escaped not
the tainture of some Vices, His Vices.
growing through humane frailty, and his great liberty: especially he was much
given to Women, though in his diet, apparel, and ornaments, he was very sparing
and modest. He gave himself also excessively to play at Dice, and other Games
then in use.

Thus, His Crosses.
though in many things he was very happy, yet, besides his troubles and
dangers, he was very unhappy in his Children and Successors. For by his four
Wives to whom he was married, he had only one Daughter called Julia, by his
third Wife Scribonia, and she proved exceeding wanton, and unchaste, yea, she
left nothing undone in Luxury and Lust, that was possible for a Woman to do or
suffer, accounting every thing lawful that pleased her. Yea, she came to that
height of lasciviousness, that she kept her Feasting even in the Courts of
Justice, abusing those very places with lascivious acts, in which her Father
had made Laws against Adulterers. Hereupon her Father was so enraged, that he
could not contain his anger within his own House, but published these things,
yea, and communicated them to the Lords of the Senate. He kept himself also a
long time from company, for very shame: He had thoughts of putting his Daughter
to death; but at last he banished her into Pandataria, an Island of Campania,
her Mother Scribonia, of her own accord, accompanying her in her banishment.
Julia being at this time thirty eight years old.

For want of Sons to succeed him, Augustus first adopted his Nephew Marcellus,
the Son of his Sister Octavia, to whom he first married his Daughter Julia: and
Marcellus dying without Issue, he then married her to his Favorite Agrippa:
who also left her a Widow, but yet he had by her three Sons, and two Daughters:
Two of these Sons having been adopted by Augustus, died before him: whereupon
he adopted the third, who bore his Fathers Name, Agrippa, the which adoption he
afterward revoked, for some displeasure conceived against him: and lastly, he
adopted his Son in Law Tiberius Nero, and made him his Heir, whom also he
married to his Daughter Julia, the Widow of Agrippa: yet this he did more
through the importunity of his mother, than for any good liking that he had of
him, being sorry that such an one should succeed him.

Not long after, the first Letter of his Name, that was upon the Inscription of
his Statue that was set up in the Capitol, A Prodigy.
fell down, being struck with a flash of Lightning; whereupon the Southsayers
foretold that he should live only one hundred days after, which was denoted by
the Letter C. and that he should be Canonized for a God, because Aesar, which
remained of his Name, in the Hetruscan Tongue, signified a God. Hereupon he
wrote a Catalogue of his doings, which he appointed to be engraven in Tables of
Brass, and to be set over his Tomb.

Things being thus done, Caesar Augustus being now seventy six years old, and
odd days, having Reigned above fifty six, and being the best beloved, and the
best obeyed Prince in the World, Death overtook him, which was occasioned by a
Flux, which held him for some days: and so Augustus died at Nolla in Campania,
His Death.
in the same House and Chamber wherein his Father Octavius died, being the
nineteenth day of August, upon which day he was first made Consul: and in the
fifteenth year after the birth of our Savior Jesus Christ.

He was generally lamented, and there was a universal sorrow and heaviness over
the whole Empire for him. For he did wisely and uprightly Govern that Monarchy
which he had gotten by force and fraud. His Character.
He was of a mean stature, of a very good shape and proportion of Body, of an
exceeding fair face, mixed with modesty and gravity: His eyes were very clear
and bright: He was very advised in his speeches, and loved to speak quick, and
briefly. His last Will and Testament was written a year and four months before
he died, and left in the custody of the Vestal Virgins.

In his life time he was very desirous to reform abuses in Rome, and in the
first place he corrected some disorders in the Senate, whom he reduced to the
number of six hundred. He reformed what was amiss in their Plays and Games,
in the Knights, and in their manner of suing for public Offices. He set Fines
upon their Heads that would not marry, and bestovved much upon those that had
Wives and Children. He was a Friend to marriage.
He gave unto Hortensius twenty five thousand Crowns, to procure him to
marry, that he might raise up issue to that Noble Family of the Hortenses. He
ordained that Maids should be at least twelve years old before they married:
and suffered them to kill Adulterers, that were taken in the fact, and
condemned the Sodomites without pardon. He gave order that none should be put
in nomination for Offices, but such as were virtuous, His temperance.
and of good repute. He tied not himself to any certain hours for his meals,
but used to eat when he was hungry, and that which he fed upon was neither
dainty nor delicate, and he drank little Wine: Instead of a Looking-glass, he
used to read or write whilst his Barber was trimming him. He never spoke to the
Senate or people, or to his Soldiers, but what he had first written and
premeditated, though he had words at command.

He delighted to read good Authors, His Prudence.
but gathered nothing more than sentences teaching good manners, and having
written them out word for word, he gave Copies thereof to his familiar Friends,
and sent them about to the Governors of Provinces, and to the Magistrates of
Rome. He was too much addicted to Divinations, and was marvellously afraid of
Thunder and Lightning. Our Savior christ being born, all the Devils Oracles
ceased, and the Oracle of Delphos was fain to confess it, The Devils Oracles
dumb.
and ever after remained Dumb: whereupon Augustus being astonished, caused a
great Altar to be set up in the Capitol, with an Inscription, signifying, that
it was the altar of the God first born. To prevent the great abuse of Usury,
which undid many Families, he put into the Exchequer twenty five hundred
thousand Crowns, His Charity.
and suffered private men to take of it for three years, without Interest,
putting in good security for the paying back of the principal: and condemned
such Usurers as had taken more than the Law allowed, to pay four times as much
to those who had been oppressed by them.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF TAMERLANE THE GREAT, WHO FLOURISHED ANNO CHRISTI 1400.
TAMERLANE was born at Samercand, the chief City of the Zagatajan Tartars; His
Parentage.
His Father was called Zain-Cham, or, as others will, Og, Prince of the
Zagatajans, of the Country Sachithays (sometimes part of the famous Kingdom of
Parthia) third in descent from Zingis, the great and successful Captain of the
Tartars; which Og being a Prince of a peaceable nature (accounting it no less
honor quietly to keep the Countries left him by his Father, His Fathers
peaceable disposition.
than with much trouble and no less hazard to seek how to enlarge the same)
long lived in most happy peace with his Subjects, no less happy therein than
himself; not so much seeking after the hoording up of Gold and Silver (things
of that Nation not regarded nor valued) as contenting himself with the increase
and profit of his Sheep and herds of Cattle, then, and yet also the principal
revenues of the Tartar Kings and Princes; which happily gave occasion to some,
ignorant of the manner and customs of those Northern Nations and Countries, to
account them all for Shepherds and Herdsmen, and so also to have reported of
this mighty Prince, as if he had been a Shepherds Son, or Herdsman himself,
vainly measuring his Nobility by the homely course of life of his People and
Subjects, and not by the honor of his House, and Heroical Virtues, hardly to
be paralelled by any Prince of that, or the former Ages.

His peaceable Father now well stricken in years, and weary of the World,
delivered up his Kingdom to this his Son (not yet past fifteen years old)
joining unto him two of his most faithful Councillors, He resigns his Kingdom
to his Son.
Odmar and Ally, to assist him in the government of his State, whom Tamerlane
dearly loved whilst they lived, and much honored the remembrance of them being
dead.

The first proof of Tamerlanes Fortune and Valor, Tamerlanes war against the
Muscovites.
was against the great Duke of Mosco, or Emperor of Russia, for spoiling of a
City which had put it self under his protection, and for entering his Country,
and proclaiming War against him: His Victory.
whom he in a great Battle overthrew, having slain twenty seven thousand of the
Muscovites Footmen, and between fifteen and sixteen thousand Horsemen, with the
loss of scarce eight thousand Horsemen, and four thousand Footmen of his own.
After which Battle Tamerlane beholding so many thousands of men lying dead upon
the ground, was so far from rejoicing thereat, that turning himself to one of
his familiar Friends, he lamented the condition of such as command^ over great
Armies, His merciful disposition.
commending his Fathers quiet course of life, accounting him happy in seeking
for rest, and such most unhappy, which by the destruction of their own kind,
sought to procure their own glory, protesting himself even from his heart to be
grieved to see such sad tokens of his Victory. Alhacen in his Arabic History
of Tamerlane, makes this Narrative of the Battle. The Muscovites (says he) had
a great Army, His Battle with the Muscovites.
which he had gathered together out of sundry Nations: and Tamerlane intending
not to put up such wrongs and indignities, assembled all his Forces, and those
of his Allies. The Muscovites forces were such as had been well trained up in
the Wars: For having lately concluded a Peace with the King of Poland, he had
from thence ten thousand very good Horsemen: There were also with him many
Hungarian Gentlemen, under the conduct of one Uladislaus, who brought with him
more than eight thousand Horse; so that he had in his Army about eighty
thousand Horse, and one hundred thousand Footmen. Tamerlane had in his Army
about one hundred and twenty thousand Horse, and one hundred and fifty thousand
Foot, but not so good Soldiers as the Muscovites; for his Subjects had been
long trained up in peace under his peaceable Father; and though they had been
sometimes exercised, yet they wanted the practical part of War.

Tamerlanes order in his march was this, He caused all his Army to be divided
into Squadrons, each consisting of six thousand Horse, save his own, which
consisted of ten thousand; so that he made eighteen Squadrons besides his own.
The Avantguard was conducted by Odmar, who led eight Squadrons which were
flanked by forty thousand Footmen, divided on the right and left sides, who
shot an infinite number of Arrows. The Battle was conducted by Tamerlane, who,
with his own, led ten Squadrons, and fifty thousand Footmen, the best and
choicest Soldiers of his whole Army. The Prince of Thanais, his Kinsman, led
the Arereward with six Squadrons of Horse, and forty thousand Foot; his forlorn
Hope consisted of some three thousand Horse, adventurers. The Muscovites fought
by double Ranks with Lances, and they seemed to be a greater number than
Tamerlanes, making a great noise: but Tamerlanes skill and multitude at length
overcame the force and valor of the Muscovites, His Victory.
the Victory bending to the Parthians side, which they pursued hotly. He is
wounded in the Ba^tel.
In this Battle Tamerlane was hurt on the side of the left Eye, and had two
Horses slain under him: and indeed that day Odmar was the safeguard of the
Prince, Ally slain* Tamerlanes Piety.
but he lost Ally, who was slain with an Arrow. The Battle being ended,
Tamerlane returned thanks to God publicly for his Victory, and the next day
reviewing his Army, he found that he had lost between seven and eight thousand
Horsemen, and between three and four thousand Footmen. The Muscovites lost
about twenty seven thousand Foot, and fifteen or sixteen thousand Horse.

The Prince slacked no time after so great a Victory, but marching on, came
into the borders of the Muscovites, whom he enforced this agreement. That they
should become his Tributaries, The Article^ of Peace.
paying yearly one hundred thousand Ducats: That the great Duke should defray
all the charges of the Wars, amounting to three hundred thousand Ducats: That
he should withdraw his Army, and send back all the Prisoners: and that for the
performance hereof, he should give pledges; which should be changed every year:
All which being agreed to, he returned with great content and glory to his
Father.

Shortly after, the great Cham of Tartary (his Fathers Brother) being grown
old, and out of hope of having any more Children; moved with the Fame of his
Nephew after this Victory, sent him diverse presents; and withal, offering him
his only Daughter in Marriage, sent him word that he would proclaim him Heir
apparent to his Empire, as indeed in right he was, being his Brothers Son, and
the Daughters not using to succeed in those Empires: Which so great an offer
Tamerlane gladly accepted, His marriage to the great Chams Daughter.
and so the marriage was afterward with great Triumph at the old Emperors
Court solemnized, and consummated, and our Tamerlane according to his Uncles
promise, and his own right was proclaimed Heir apparent of that great Empire.

Thus was Tamerlane made Great, being ever after this marriage, by the old
Emperor his Uncle and now his Father in Law, so long as he lived, notably
supported, and after his death he succeeded him in that so vast, and mighty an
Empire. Before his marriage Tamerlane would needs be crowned, to the intent
that none should think that the Crown came to him by the right of his Wife, His
Prudence*
but by his own right; and during his abode in the City of Quavicai, where the
old Emperor was, he was entertained with all kind of Triumphs, His agility and
strength.
wherein he always carried away the Bell, whether in shooting in the Bow, in
changing of Horses in the midst of their courses, in Tiltings, and in all
other exercises which required agility or strength; and so after two Months he
returned with his Wife to Samercand; in which City he delighted exceedingly to
remain, because the situation thereof was fair, and being watered with a great
River, was a place of great Traffic, whereby it was made richer than any other
in that Country: And whenever be received intelligence from the Emperor his
Uncle, he still imparted the same to Odmar, whom he used at his right hand in
all his great affairs: There was also in his Court a Christian whom he loved
much, and every one greatly respected, called Axalla, His Piety.
a Genovois by Birth, brought up from his youth about his Person, for he
countenanced all that worshipped one only God that was the Creator of all
things. And about this time the old Emperor sent to him to stir him up to War
against the great King of China, who styled himself, Lord of the World, and Son
of the Sun, who had exceeded his bounds, and incroached upon the Tartarian
Empire: This was no small enterprise, and therefore before he would begin the
same, His Justice.
he sent Ambassadors to the King of China to demand restitution of his Lands,
and the passages of a River called Tachii, which were within the Tartarian
Border, and on this side that stupendous Wall builded on purpose by the Kings
of China for the defense of their Country against the incursions of the
Tartars: and whilst he attended for the return of his Ambassadors, His
preparations against the King of China.
expecting a Negative answer, he caused his forces to be assembled together
from all parts, appointing their rendezvous to be in the Horda of Baschir: The
old Emperor also assembled for his aid, two hundred thousand fighting men,
wherein were all the brave men of his Court that were accustomed to the Wars:
For this Emperor had greatly increased his limits, and conquered a great
Country, so as all these men were well trained up in the Wars, and had been
accustomed to travel and pains; These were to join with Tamerlanes Army in the
Deserts of Ergimul at a certain day. In the mean time Ambassadors which were
sent, return and inform the Prince that this proud King of China wondering how
any durst denounce War against him, The King of China's Pride.
making this lofty answer: That Tamerlane should content himself with that
which he had left him, which also he might have taken from him, etc.

This answer being heard, our Prince marched directly to his Army, gave orders
for conveiance of Victuals from all parts, sent to hasten forwards his
Confederates, imparted the answer to the old Emperor, caused the insolence of
the King of China to be published, that all the world might know the justness
of his cause; His Piety toward his Father.
yet before his departure, he went to take leave of his own Father, who endued
with a singular and Fatherly affection, kissed him a thousand times, made
solemn Prayers for his prosperity, drew off his Imperial Ring, and gave it him,
telling him that he should never see him again, for that he was hasting to his
last rest; and calling Odmar, bad him farewell, requiring his faithfulness to
his Son.

The Prince having performed this duty, returned to Samercand, where the
Empress his Wife remained, whom he took along with him in this journey, as the
manner of that Country is, and so presently departed, committing the charge and
care of his Kingdom in his absence to one Samay, a man well practiced in State
affairs, who also had had the charge of our Prince in his youth. These things
being dispatched, he marched forwards in the midst of his Army, which
consisted of fifty thousand Horse, and a hundred thousand Footmen, relying
principally on the Forces of the great Cham his Uncle: yet he left order that
the rest of his Forces should be ready to advance upon the first command, His
sickness.
as soon as he should be joined with his Uncles Army. In his march he was
stayed by the way in regard some distemper of his body, contracted by reason of
his change of the air, yet the Forces which Catiles, Captain of the Army of the
great Cham conducted, went daily forwards. Now the news of his distemperature
was bruted abroad in all places, His Policy.
yet did he not neglect ot send to the great Cham, and often to advertise him
of the state of his health, to the end that the same should not cause any
alteration which might arise in that great Empire whereunto he was lately
advanced: For he was very suspicious of a great Lord, named Calix, who was
discontented with his advancement, and had not yet acknowledged him, as all
other his Subjects had: The Rebellion of Calix.
and indeed it was not without cause that he suspected him, for Calix being
informed that the Forces of the great Cham were advanced beyond the Mountains,
having passed the River of Meau, and were encamped at Bouprou, and that
Tamerlane was sick, he thought it a fit time for his enterprise, and thereupon
assembling the greatest part of his most faithful followers, he told them that
now was the time for them to shake off the yoke of the Parthians, who otherwise
would enslave them; and seeing that now their Prince was so badly minded as to
translate the Empire to Tamerlane of his own mind, without calling them to
Council which had interest in the election, that this was the only means to
assure their liberty, which otherwise was like to be lost: He caused also a
remour to be spread, that Tamerlane was very sick, the Emperor old and crazy,
The Rebels subtilty.
and that his Forces were far separated from him; yet like cunning Traitors,
they dispatched away a Messenger to the great Cham, to assure him that they
bended not their Forces against him, but were his faithful and obedient
Subjects; and they only armed themselves because they would not be governed by
the Parthians, their ancient Enemies.

As soon as our Prince was advertised of the pretenses of Calix, he marched one
days journey forward, to the end that he might approach unto Calibes, who, what
face soever he set on the matter, yet hearkened what would become of Calix,
that he might likewise make some commotion. This Calibes was by Tamerlane made
Commander of his Avantguard, Tamerlanes Prudence.
which consisted of Parthians, yet he had joined with him the Prince of
Thanais, without whom he could not do any thing. Tamerlane also gave special
commandment, that the passages (which were not many) should be diligently
guarded, to the end that the King of China should not be advertised of these
tumults: and so giving to Odmar the leading of his Avantguard, he hasted
forwards; His march against Calix.
And surely it was high time for him so to do, or else all had been revolted:
for Calix having assembled a hundred thousand fighting men, presented himself
before the great City of Cambalu, chief of the Province of Cathai, the
Inhabitants whereof came out to meet him, receiving him with all the joy that
might be.

Tamerlane in his March went to Caindu, and from thence to Calatia, where he
expected to meet with the forces of his native Country of Sachetai, yet did he
not neglect to send forward his Army toward Cambalu, which caused the
Inhabitants, to their great terror, to think that all his forces were already
on their neck. Calix perceiving that the Citizens began already to repent his
entertainment, Calix leaves Cambalu.
thought it not safe to remain amongst them, and therefore, withdrawing
himself, he sent for his forces from all parts, resolving to meet Tamerlane in
the Field, and to put all upon the event and hazard of a Battle. He drew out of
Cambalu fifty thousand men, whereof twenty thousand were Citizens, the other
thirty thousand were the Garrison-Souldiers, placed there by the old Emperor,
Calix having corrupted their Leaders, and so procured them to join with him in
this revolt. In short, having assembled all his forces, The number of Calix
Army.
his Army consisted of fourscore thousand Horse, and one hundred thousand
Footmen, which he gathered from all parts.

In the mean time Tamerlanes Army marching forward, his Scouts, which were two
thousand Horse, had news of the Army of Calix, which came forward directly
toward them, of which they speedily advertised the Emperor, Tamerlanes
Prudence.
who thereupon presently sent two thousand Horse more, to the end that they
should keep the passages of a certain River called Brore, by which River
Victuals were conveyed to his Army: as also to win time, the Prince well
knowing that the motions of a Civil War are furious at the beginning, and that
therefore it is best to resist slowly, always drawing them out at length, if it
be possible. For when means, money, and victuals fail, the people use to be
sensible of their faults, and to return home.

The old Emperor sent to him to adventure all upon a Battle, delivering up
into his hands the safety of his life and estate, that thereby he might end his
days in peace: By this means forces came to Tamerlane on all hands, whose Army
daily increased; whereas on the contrary the Enemies Army was then in its
chiefest force, and began to feel the want of Victuals.

Calix was about forty years old, a Captain renowned with the great Cham, and
one of the chiefest in dignity and place about him, so that many of the Tartars
had always respected him as a Person most worthy of the Empire, if the glory of
Tamerlane and his reputation had not so far exceeded.

The Armies began to be in view one of another about eight a clock in the
morning, The Battle between Tamerlane and Calix*
and many skirmishes began betwixt them before they came to the main Battle,
The place wherein they met at that time, was a great Plain, with like advantage
on either part. Odmar led the Avantguard, wherein were forty thousand Horse,
and eighty thousand Foot, which he divided into three Squadrons; the first
whereof he sent before him to begin the Battle. Tamerlane marched in the same
order, but his Squadrons were much stronger. The Footmen of both made the right
and left Wings. Tamerlane had drawn out six thousand Parthian Horsemen, and two
thousand Tartarians for his Arearguard, which he committed to his faithful
Servant Axalla; a man of great judgment, quick of conceit, and in great esteem
amongst the Soldiers, although, he being a Christian, worshipped God in
another manner than they did; and he had many other Christians with him, whom
he had drawn from the Georgians, and the Euxine Sea, who fought with great
agility.

Calix on the other side, who was a well spoken man, was exhorting and
encouraging his Soldiers to fight for his Fortune, and the Liberty of their
Nation; He divided his Army into three main Battles, himself remaining in the
midst, Calix beaten and taken prisoner.
encompassed with his Footmen, and so the Battles joined, where, after a
terrible fight, Calix fell into Axalla's hands, being taken fighting valiantly,
which Axalla caused to be presently proclaimed through the Army, to the
overthrow of the courage of all the Adversaries, who hereupon immediately fled.
Calix condemned and executed.
Calix was kept till the next day, and then by a Council of War was adjudged to
death; whereupon Tamerlane caused his head to be stricken off, the which he
sent as a present to the Inhabitants of Cambalu: The like he caused to be done
to all the chief Leaders, not out of a cruel disposition, but enforced thereto
by necessity, knowing very well that the way to cut off the foot of Civil War,
is to punish the Heads of the same, which, as Hydra's, grow up too fast.

After this, Tamerlanes march into Cathay.
Tamerlane with his Army marched into the Kingdom of Cathay, a Country rich in
grass, and all kind of pastures, abounding with great quantity of beasts and
people, which knew not what War meant, and the Prince gave command that they
should not be used as Enemies, but as his good Subjects; and whereas diverse
Cities had adhered to Calix, they came now and humbled themselves before him,
craving pardon, which he gave them, enjoining them only to provide victuals for
his Army, which also they willingly did. This example of Lenity of was no small
importance for the appeasing of others, which had put all their hope in
extremity, resolving to sell their lives dear, and especially the Inhabitants
of Cambalu had taken this resolution, but being informed of the Emperors
clemency, Cambalu yielded to him.
they changed their purpose: Yet as the Army daily approached nearer, their
fears increased, but Tamerlane was daily informed by his Friends in the City,
that the Inhabitants resolved to obey the Conqueror, and therefore leaving his
Army at Gonsa, he only sent thirty thousand to the City, which was the ordinary
Garrison, and within two hours after, entered the City himself, where he was
received with great magnificence: yet would he not pronounce their pardon, but
referred all to the old Emperor, and to the ordinary course of Justice: For
which end he sent one of his Favorites to the old Emperor, to certify him of
his Victory, of the death of Calix, and that the chief of his Faction remained
Prisoners with him; as also to know what Justice he would appoint to be
inflicted upon those Citizens which were the authors of the revolt of this
City, His departure from Cambalu.
and so after eight days he departed, and not many days after, he had
intelligence that the great Cham, His Policy.
his Uncle, had caused justice to be done on the chief movers of sedition in
Cambalu, so that the People complained of the old Emperors cruelty, but
commended the mercy of Tamerlane.

When he came back to his Army, he was received of all his Soldiers with loud
acclamations, calling him, Most Great Emperor, and most Victorious. Amongst
his Captains he discoursed of the beauty and greatne^s of the City of Cambalu,
and afterward asked Odmars advise whether it were not best for him to visit
the old Emperor, and with his Emperess to spend the Winter with him at
Quinsay? Odmar, Odmars good Counsel.
remembering the honor which he had received there, easily perceived his
inclination to that journey, yet by all means dissuaded him from it: To which
Tamerlane answered, that he had always found his fidelity and love to him,
which he was sorry that he could not recompense to the full; But (says he)
whereas I had thought to give my self some ease: I perceive that instead of the
delicacies, and pleasures of Quinsay, I must make the deserts of Cipribit my
resting place after my travels in this new Victory: yet a rumor being spread
that the Prince intended to visit the Emperor, every man began to desire to
return into his own Country, hoping to enjoy the sweetness of his native soil:
which Tamerlane being informed of, calling his Army to a Rendevouz, Tamerlanes
Speech to his Army.
he thus spoke unto them, We have (my faithful Soldiers) begun an enterprise
against the King of China, who has of late repulsed even beyond the Mountains,
the Tartarian name, but were hindered to our great grief by the foolish rashness
of Calix, and were driven to turn the bridle to punish him, wherein you have
all assisted me. It grieves me that I cannot as well boast of the fresh spoils
of a stranger, as I may (by the means of your weapons) of those of our
unfaithful Subjects, and as in times past of the fierce Muscovites, against
whom, with your assistance, I made trial of my first Arms: but for this last
Victory being against our own Subjects, I cannot speak of it without shedding
tears; desiring to bury such Victories in oblivion, together with all the glory
and honor gotten thereby. Neither do I recount these things to you, but to
show that I forget not your faithfulness, and the great travel you have endured
for my sake: We must not therefore be weary, but must turn our weapons against
those which imagine us to be full of troubles, whereas we are indeed
Victorious: Our companions, and all our ammunition is advanced near to our Enemy
already, we must in that place (my Soldiers, and friendly Followers) pass over
the rest of Winter; Our Companions look for us; our Enemies are secure, and
look not for us at this season of the year, and know that our Army that is
already there, is not sufficient for offense, but only for defense. You shall
receive double pay, the better to furnish you against the injury of cold; and
as we shall be apparelled with double garments, so I hope we shall be clothed
with double glory.

Having thus spoken, his Soldiers all cried, One God in Heaven, and one
Emperor on Earth, showing their willingness to obey his commands.

The Prince after this, remained there eight days longer, sending back Zamai
with twenty five thousand Horse, and fifty thousand Foot to Sachethay, for the
safety of his estate in those parts: His Piety.
and so after solemn and public Prayers, the Army began to march forwards: He
forgot not likewise to dispatch away a Messenger to the Great Cham, to acquaint
him with all his purposes, which he approved very well of: By the same
Messenger he also beseeched him in the Spring to send him fifty thousand men to
recruit his Army, and some moneys for the payment of his Soldiers, which also
he granted; sending also good store of warlike munition, and plenty of
Victuals, knowing how much the success of the War would advance the Tartarian
greatness and profit.

The Army being upon their March, in thirty eight days came to Cipribit, yet
met with many inconveniences by the way. His march toward China.
There they had news of Calibes, who was glad to hear how businesses had
passed, and came to visit the Prince, who entertained him very courteously,
acquainting him with his purpose, and also understood by him how all things
passed in the Kingdom of China. The next day the Prince came to Pazanfou, where
Calibes Forces were, who had often fought with, and tried the valor of the
Chinois, but found it much inferior to their own: There the Prince took a
general Muster of all his Army, caused them to be paid, took notice of their
countenances, whilst they all cried out, God save the victorious and invincible
Emperor, according to their custom.

The Prince of Thanais, who commanded the Army with Calibes, had diligently
viewed the Wall, and the ways by which he might forcibly enter into China, and
had sent many Spies by certain ways through the Mountains into that Country, by
whom he was advertised of all their proceedings: He had also gained by his
courtesy, a Lord of those Mountains, called the Lord of Vauchefu, that
commanded over a great Country, who being desirous of a new Master, and to
submit to Tamerlane, had told the Prince of Thanais, that he was able to do
Emperor good service, and to help him much in his Wars against the Chinois: A
Chinois Lord comes to Tamerlane.
This the Prince of Thanais discovered to Tamerlane, who was very desirous to
speak with this Lord; whereupon a day was appointed, and Tamerlane without
moving of his Army, went to the Tents of the Prince of Thanais, where this
aforesaid Lord met him; and the Emperor having heaped upon him many gifts of
fair Horses, and rich Furs, and other rare things; this Lord spoke thus unto
him, Know, my Lord, that it is but lost labor for you to think that with your
Armies you shall be able to force this Wall, His Speech to Tamerlane.
made by the Chinois to hinder the incursion of your Subjects: the Defendants
have too much advantage therein; I doubt not of your Soldiers valor and
courage, I know you have conquered many Nations with them, and that whatsoever
you command them, they will effect it, or die in the enterprise: I know that
you have great and wise Captains with you, and that you, of all Persons in the
World, are most worthy to command them: But all this will be but in vain
against the Wall of the Chinois, where, I assure you, are fifty thousand men to
keep it; neither can you stay there so short a time, but there will come fifty
thousand more to assist them, led by one Xianxi, who had already received such
a commandment: The King of China will himself follow, who will give you Battle
with two hundred thousand Horsemen, and as many Foot; and though happily your
Fortune, and valor may carry away the Victory, yet I believe it will cost you
dear: But to show you how much the reputation and courtesies of your Servants
have prevailed with me, I will direct you in a way whereby fifty thousand of
your men may go into China, whom I my self will conduct, and they shall come
upon those which guard the Wall, in a manner before they are discovered. In the
mean time you shall lead your Army to a place which I will direct you to, where
you may win easily a Mountain which will give you great advantage against the
Chinois. For I assure my self, that when they shall perceive your men to be
passed; they will lose their courage, so that you may easily win the passage to
assist your Army, which shall be led by me amongst them; and to assure you of
my fidelity, I will deliver into your hands my Wife, my only Son, and two
little Daughters. I have also one Brother, who, I assure my self, will follow
me to do you service.

The Emperor having heard this, much rejoiced at it, hoping that his affairs
would succeed happily, and kept this very secret, no revealing it to the Prince
of Thanais himself, none being present at the discourse but the Lord and his
Interpreter, and so heaping new favors upon him, he was conducted back by the
Prince of Thanais with all the honor that might be.

Then the Emperor returned to his Quarters, and the next day imparted the
whole matter unto Odmar; and then calling Calibes, he asked what he had learned
concerning China during his abode there: To which Calibes made this Answer,
Calibes speech to Tamerlane.
Know, my Lord, that I am your slave to obey you; but seeing you command me to
give you an account of all I know concerning the Kingdom of China, for that I
have remained these six months upon the borders; I can assure you, that the
King of China who now reigns, is of great reputation, and has increased the
Limits of his Kingdom more than any of his Predecessors: His strength
consists in this wall, opposed against us, which he has made to prevent the
inrodes of our Nation: I believe there are above fifty thousand to defend it,
and that of his best trained Soldiers, and I know no good means to force this
Wall without much hazard, and great loss of your men.

To this Tamerlane answered, Tamerlanes confidence of success.
I hope that the great God, whose honor I will defend against those Idolaters,
will find out means to effect it; and so dismissing Calibes, he appointed his
Army to remove to a certain place, where he meant to choose out fifty thousand
men, whom he would deliver to the Prince of Thanais, and Axalla; which
accordingly he did, and directed them to follow this Chinois Lord, who was now
again come to him, and to do as they should be directed by him: In the mean
time himself, with all the rest of the Army approached the Wall directly over
against Quaguifou.

The Army, Forces sent into Chini,
led by the Prince of Thanais, having marched ten Leagues by the conduct of the
Chinois Lord, entered without resistance, and after a short repast, they marched
directly toward those that guarded the Wall, who suspected no such matter, but
only had an eye to those which came to force the Wall. The wall forced.
But it fell our far otherwise, for just as Tamerlane with his Army came to the
Wall, they saw Axalla with twenty thousand, being followed by the Prince of
Thanais, His first victory in China.
with thirty thousand choice Soldiers more, who, without any words, fell upon
the Chinois; and Odmar, who gave the first assault upon the Wall, easily in
that distraction brake through, and so the Chinois were cut off between the two
Armies: and Axalla, before the Prince of Thanais came up to him, had routed
them; Great riches were gotten that day, and the King of China's Cozen was
taken Prisoner; much Gold was found, as well on their Arms, as on their Horses
Furniture, but they showed no great valor.

The news of this overthrow being carried to the King of China, The King of
China's fear.
who was now at Quantifou; it brought great astonishment to him, for that he
judged it impossible to have been effected, so that every one was filled with
tears, fears, The King of China's superstition.
and lamentations for their friends. Yet the King gathers forces from all
parts, calling also the Priests, and such as had the charge of his unholy
holies, to come unto him, commanding them to offer sacrifices to their gods,
whereof the Sun is principal, requiring the same to be observed through all the
Cities; and then that every one that was able to bear Arms, should mount on
horseback, and speedily repair to the King at Paguinfou, whither he suspected
that Tamerlane would march, for that it was one of the Cities nearest to the
borders. The wall beaten down.
In the mean time Tamerlane beat down the Wall, the better to assure his
return, as also the Forlresses upon all the passages, all which, upon his
Victory, were easily surrendered to him. He showed himself very courteous to the
people upon the Mountains, and gave to the Lord that had conducted his Army, a
Country which bordered upon his, Tamerlanes courtesy.
wherein were seven or eight good Towns, who came and delivered the Keys to
him: He gave him also the Government of the Frontier-Province of Xianxi,
showing himself to be a Prince of his word, His gratitude.
and reserved the rewarding of his Brother till he had farther opportunity.

Whilst he was thus employed, news was brought him, that the King of China had
assembled his Forces, and was marching forward, himself being there in person;
as also that he had strengthened the Garrisons in all his Cities, which of
themselves were well fortified. Upon his intelligence, Tamerlane called a
Council of War, His Policy*
and having heard the opinions of all his Captains, he resolved to take in some
famous City, that thereby his Army might be better provided for, and then to
give the King of China battle in the field. For the effecting of the first, he
resolved to assault Paguinfou, which was a great City, strongly fortified, and
well replenished with people; and for this end, he sent Odmar with forty
thousand Horse to summon it, and to prevent the farther victualling of it, and
to hinder the driving away of the cattle out of the Champion-countrey about it,
He besieges Paguinfou.
which might nourish his Army: He also caused the Lord Axalla (whom now he had
made Lieutenant General of all his Foot) to follow Odmar with all his Foot,
which were near a hundred and fifty thousand men, well trained, and expert in
War, himself marching immediately after with all his Horsemen, Artillery,
Engines, and other Ammunitions belonging to the War, directly to Paguinfou.

Odmar made such haste that he arrived unexpected by the Citizens, who rather
looked for their King than for an Enemy: and having taken much cattle,
vvherevvith that Country abounded, he pitched his tents on the farther side of
the City: There he continued two or three days, giving the City many Alarms,
till the Infantry, led by that brave Christian Genuois, showed themselves in
the Plain of Paguinfou: Then was the City summoned, but they returned answer,
That they were resolved to live and die in the service of their Prince. By the
way you must understand, that about forty years before, the Father of this
present King of China had conquered this City and Country from the Tartars,
Formerly taken from the Tartars.
and had so planted the same with new Colonies, that but few of the Tartarians
remained, except only in the flat Country, and some small walled Towns, who
all came with their Keys, and willingly submitted to Tamerlane, whereby he had
great plenty of victuals in his Army, which made him hope for good success;
there being nothing that does sooner overthrow great Armies, than the want
thereof.

Thus was Paguinfou besieged round, the footmen lying within a flight-shoot the
Walls, the Citizens and Soldiers using their best endeavor for their defense,
and Tamerlane doing the like for their offense.

Axalla having viewed a great Suburb, which was in length almost half a League,
supposed that the Citizens kept no watch there, and therefore acquainting the
Emperor with his purpose, in the first watch of the night, his men being all
ready with scaling Ladders, A Suburb taken by storm.
he assaulted the same in sundry places, and after a great fight entered, and
cut in pieces at least eight thousand men, which were within the same; yet on
one side, where they expected to be assaulted, he lost many of his men. The
taking of this Suburb did greatly astonish the Citizens, who observing the
valor of the Tartarians, began to suspect their own safety: By this Suburb
there ran a River, which being now under the command of Axalla, he stopped all
provision from going to the City.

In the mean time the King of China's Army approached, which was very great;
whereupon the Emperor determined to go in person, and meet him, with the
greatest part of his Horsemen, but to leave most of his Foot to continue the
siege, being very desirous to take the City; for the accelerating whereof, he
caused his Engines for battery to approach, as Rams, and such like; so that the
City was assaulted on two sides very courageously, and in the end, through the
valor of Axalla, who gave an assault with twenty thousand of his best
Soldiers, The wall won.
he won the Wall, and at the command of the Emperor lodged there, who desired
rather to have the City by Treaty than storm, the City being great and rich,
and the Enemy but thirty Leagues from thence, Tamerlanes Prudence.
and therefore he feared lest his Army should be found in disorder, and knowing
also that rich Soldiers never fight well. Besides, he intended to draw out of
that wealthy City such things as he stood in need of, and to make it his
Magazine for the time to come. Yet though the Wall was won, the Enemies wanted
not heart to defend themselves valiantly, hearing that their King was coming
for their relief: but it so happened, that an Engine shooting a bullet, slew
the Governor; whereupon the Citizens were so discouraged, The City surrendered.
that they resolved to yield, saving their lives, and the Soldiers to march
away with Horse and Arms. The conditions were admitted, and there came out of
the City eighteen thousand Soldiers, almost all the Inhabitants remaining
behind: This siege had lasted two months, and the City had in it at first,
thirty thousand Soldiers. Axalla had the honor of winning this City, and
therefore was made Governor of it, and all the Country belonging to it,
Axallas modesty.
but he beseeched the Emperor to bestow it upon some other Person, reserving
for himself the hope of his Master, in whose fortune he would take part: This
gave great content to Tamerlane, who much desired the service of Axalla; and
upon his refusal, the charge was conferred upon the Prince of Thanais, with the
Title of Viceroy: Then did Tamerlane give notice of his affairs to the old
Emperor, and having paid his Soldiers, and settled all things in the best
manner he could, he marched forward; and taking a general Muster of his whole
Army, Horse and Foot, he found them to be diminished ten thousand men only. And
so with his Army he spent one whole day in Prayer, Tamerlanes Piety.
calling upon the immortal, invisible, invincible, and incomprehensible God,
and then went directly to meet the Enemy, who was at Sintehu with all his own
and the forces of his Allies, and as soon as he received news that Tamerlanes
Army was advanced over the River of Chulifu, the King of China marched directly
toward them with great magnificence: The riches of the Chinois.
There was nothing to be seen in his Army, but Gold and precious Stones: He
himself usually rode in a Chariot whereof every part shone with Gold, Pearls,
Rubies, and Diamonds. He was of the age of about three and thirty, and had been
brought up in pleasures, and not under the bloody Ensigns of Mars: So that he
was very insolent in threatenings, brava* does, and defying to the Battle: He
often accused Tamerlane for surprising him before he was ready, not giving him
warning, etc.

The rumors of his riches so fired the spirits of the Tartarians, that they
longed to be at the Battle: and so both sides hasted forwards, and in the way,
there was a City, called Tunichevoy, surrendered to Tamerlane, which afforded
him much refreshing for his Army: And thus the two Armies drawing near
together, Tamerlane Tamerlane prepares for the Battle.
made choice of a place in his judgment most advantageous for the Battle; and
having set down to Odmar the Order which he would have to be observed, he
longed to see his Enemy; Then did he send before him five or six thousand
Horse, as Scouts, under Calibes, and himself went with them, and having viewed
the great confused Army of his Enemies, which came continually forward, he
commanded Calibes to retire himself so soon as they drew near to him. And bring
(says he) this great cloud to me, which I hope soon to disperse: and so
retiring to his Army, he encouraged them, assuring them of the Victory. He
placed all his Footmen, which were about a hundred and twenty thousand, along
a Mountain, planting great store of Artillery for their guard; Many of his
Foot-Souldiers were armed after the Christian manner, who were all commanded by
Axalla: His Horsemen were in a Battalia in a great plain, who upon any
disadvantage could retire to the assistance of the Footmen: the Horsemen were
eighty thousand; Calibes with the Scythians were in the Avantguard, being
thirty thousand Horse, who were to receive Odmar when he should retreat from
the Enemy, as he was commanded; thirty thousand more were appointed for Odmar,
and Tamerlane himself remained in the Arrear at one of the Wings of his
Footmen: His purpose was to let that sixty five thousand Horse under two such
Gallant Captains, to break the force of the Enemy, hoping after them to have a
good market, causing his Foot to march forward, and reserving with himself
twenty thousand of his best Horse, who of themselves were able to make a new
Battle if any mischance should befall the former: For he understood that it was
the custom of the Kings of China to enclose themselves in the midst of their
Chariots with their Footmen, and not to hazard their Persons, but upon
extremity.

The Chinois failed not to march directly unto Calibes, The Battle begins.
the whole Army following and setting upon him: Calibes with his six thousand
Scythian Horse, after their usual manner, in retreating gave many charges,
giving and receiving hurt. The King of China marched with much gallantry with
his Army, which seemed to be twice so big as that of Tamerlanes: He had very
many armed Chariots, wherein he put his principal trust; they had much Gold and
Silver, as well in the trappings of their Horses, as on their Armor, which
gistred exceedingly against the Sun, to the Admiration of the Tartars.
Tamerlane, who with a Troop of Horse beheld the Chinois marching after Calibes,
commended greatly the drawing forth of their men to compel Calibes to fight,
endeavoring to discover and note with his eye the place whereabouts the Kings
person was, having by him the Chinois Lord to instruct him, who knew well the
manner of their fight. They had no Avantguard, but were all in a gross,
commanded by the King, enclosed within his Chariots, which being showed to
Tamerlane by this Lord, he turned to those Captains that were near him; and
said, Yet must we disperse this gilded cloud, and the King of China and my
self must make a partition thereof.

Thus having sufficiently viewed the Enemy, and observed their manner of
marching, he thought it not convenient to suffer them to take breath, nor to
rally, being something disordered in their march, whereupon he sent to Calibes
to will him to begin the fight; and when those that were with him should be
weary, to retreat to him: But as soon as his Scythians heard this word Fight,
The Scythians charge the Chinois
they required the first charge, with a young Lord that commanded over them
called Ziochabanes, making it to appear to the Chinois, to what end their
former flight was, charging very furiously upon the foremost of the Enemies,
which occasioned the first beginning of the Battle: And indeed there could not
be seen a more Gallant onset, wherein the Scythians desired to manifest the
valor of their Nation, and to procure honor to their Prince. This fight
endured a long hour before they had overthrown Calibes: Tamerlane beheld all
patiently, Tamerlanes Constancy.
saying, that the great multitude (how disorderly soever they were) would at
length carry it away from the order and valor of his Soldiers; yet could
there not be discerned any alteration of his countenance, adversity and
prosperity being both alike so indifferent to him.

Calibes being wounded, Calibes wounded retreats.
retired himself near to the Emperor, having with him two thousand Horse that
were rallied again, many more flocking to him: The Emperor viewed his wound,
causing him to be conducted behind his Footmen, and care to be taken for the
dressing of his wound, and of such others as were wounded with him. Calibes
with his thirty thousand Scythians was not able to charge through the Chinois,
but when they retreated, Odmar with his Parthian Horsemen advanced forward, and
used them more roughly, The Parthians chargethorow.
for he ran clean through them, and returned by the right wing of the Army,
where he fought most valiantly, and having beaten them within the Kings
Chariots, he thought he should not do wisely to attempt the breaking of such
Forces.

The King of China coming forwards, and the Horsemen that had been broken by
Odmar, joining themselves to him, Odmar sent to Tamerlane, desiring him that
the Footmen and Artillery might advance forward, sending him word that he might
assure himself of the Victory. The Foot charge.
Hereupon Tamerlane commanded Axalla to advance with fifty thousand Foot, and
part of the Artillery, requiring him to set upon the Chariots, and to make an
entrance. The Artillery marching in the first place did greatly astonish the
enemy; for the Governors of the Horses belonging to the Kings Chariots could
not rule them; it made also a great spoil. Axalla perceiving the disorder,
hasted forwards till they came to hand-blows. The King of China had yet about
his Person a hundred and fifty thousand men: Yet Axalla, full of courage,
fought so valiantly, Axalla valor.
that they never beheld any man to do more bravely. During this fight, Odmar
again charged the Horsemen that were retired to the Kings aid, and put them to
flight. Then did Tamerlane himself march forward with the rest of the Footmen
for the aid of Axalla, Tamerlane charge.
and brake through, even to the Person of the King of China, who as yet was
enclosed within a second rank of Chariots, with about thirty or forty thousand
men, and after he had fought two or three hours, The King of China beaten.
the Horse assisting the Foot, and they principally whom the Prince had kept as
a reserve, the King at length remained wounded, in the power of Tamerlane: The
battle being won, and the enemies Camp forced: The fight endured eight hours,
and the night coming on, saved the lives of many of the Chinois. There were
slain two Kings, Allies to the King of China. Inestimable riches were gotten in
golden Vessels, precious stones, and as fair and rich Chariots as could
possibly be seen.

The Emperor would not see the captive King till the next day: but being
mounted on horseback, he rode about the field to stay the slaughter, and to
rally his men, that the accustomed watch might be kept, whereof he gave the
charge unto Axalla, commanding him also to keep the King of China in the midst
of his Soldiers, who was dressed of the wound which he had received in his
right arm. It was a strange sight to see the diversity of the Enemies Weapons,
and the variety of their Streamers and Ensigns, which seemed afar off as
beautiful, as the diversity of colors plentiful. The King of China's Army was
very great, consisting of a hundred and fifty thousand Horse, and two hundred
thousand Footmen: but the greatest part of them were rude and barbarous people,
far inferior to Tamerlan's in Valor, who suffered themselves to be slain one
upon another, not marking their advantages, and having little skill in warlike
affairs.

Tamerlane continued on horseback till about two a clock in the morning,
Tamerlanes temperance.
when as they brought him a Tart, and his Water, for he never drank Wine, and
then lying down upon a Carpet, he passed the rest of the night until morning.
His humility and modesty.
After this so great a Victory, there was never the least boasting or vaunting
heard to proceed out of his mouth. His Piety.
The next day, after the burial of the dead, he publicly gave thanks to God
for his Victory. Then caused he the wounded to be cured, and amongst others,
Calibes, who, more through the distemperature of the air, than from the danger
of the wound, found himself very ill, yet would he not omit his duty in
commanding the Van, which was very grateful to Tamerlane, for that he being a
Scythian, was greatly beloved of his Nation.

These things being dispatched, he sent unto Axalla to bring forth his
prisoner, the King of China; and when he approached, the Emperor issued out of
his Tent, The King of China brought before him.
and went to receive him. This King came with a very proud and haughty
countenance, and approaching near to the Emperor, he, by his Interpreter,
asked of Axalla, which was he? and being showed him, he spoke in an haughty
language after this manner; The King of China's proud speech.
The gods whom I worship, being provoked against my Nation and People, have
conspired against my good fortune, and made me this day thy prisoner: But
forasmuch as it is reported over all the world, that Tamerlane makes war for
the honor of his Nation, thou should be content with this thy glory, that
the Lord of the world and child of the Sun, is in thy power, to receive such
Laws as thou please to subscribe unto him. This he spoke in a brave manner,
Tamerlane's Courtesy.
without any other humbling of himself: The Emperor on the other side saluting
him very courteously, led him into his Tent.

This King of China was a great Prince, having two hundred famous Cities within
his Kingdom; The riches of China.
which also is a fruitful and plentiful Country, wherein are Mines of Gold and
Silver, much Musk and Rliubarb: It abounds in Fish and Fowl, and has much Silk
and Porclane, with Cotton and Linen, etc.

Then did Tamerlane assemble his Captains to consult about the disposal of the
King, and how the Victory should be best improved. At the same time he received
news by Odmar, that the Kings Brother, who escaped out of the battle, was at
Quantou, which he had strongly fortified, and that great store of forces began
to adjoyn themselves to him: Hereupon he commanded two thousand Parthian horse
to convey the King to Paguinfou, and from thence to Burda, Quantou besieged.
where he was to be kept carefully. Then did he resolve upon the besieging of
Quantou, and if it were possible to shut up the Kings Brother therein, it being
one of the principal seats that belonged to the King of China. It was forty
Leagues from the place where the battle was fought. Thither therefore he sent a
good party of his Army under Odmar, who pitched his Tents about the City: But
the Kings Brother was gone. The Emperor in the mean time summoned, and took in
many lesser Cities, which yielded wholly to his mercy, making great lamentation
for their captive King, yet the gentleness of the Conqueror made them to take
all their losses with patience, and the rather, because they heard that he used
their King courteously. The Kings brother also sent Ambassadors to Tamerlane,
craving leave to see the King, and to know of his health, which the Emperor
willingly assented to.

Now the Kings brother hearing of the estate of the besieged in Quantou, he
resolved either to relieve it, or to fight a battle, for which end, he advanced
strait unto Porchio, Odmars policy.
making a bridge of Boats to pass over the River: But Odmar being informed that
about fifty thousand of his men were come over, he suddenly set upon them,
being out of order, and not informed of their enemies approach; also to prevent
the coming over of the rest to their assistance, he sent a fire-boat down the
stream, against their bridge of Boats, which brake it in sunder, and where it
was resisted, set all on fire; and so in a great battle overthrew them; The
King of China's brother overthrown.
The King of Cauchin-China, who was amongst them, fighting valiantly, was
slain. The Kings Brother, who was on the other side of the River (not yet come
over) saw his men slain and drowned, and could not relieve them. This second
overthrow was of no small importance, though it was but the third part of the
Kings brothers Army. For the Citizens of Quantou hearing of it, and despairing
of relief, sent out some Proposals for their surrender.

Axalla which received them, presently dispatched away a faithful messenger to
the Emperor to know his pleasure therein: This was more welcome news to him,
than the overthrow of his Enemies; wherefore he referred all to the sufficiency
and fidelity of Axalla: So that upon Treaty, the City was surrendered to Axalla,
Quantou surrendered.
who caused the Garrison to come out, and received the inhabitants into the
Emperors protection, and all that would might continue in it unarmed:
afterward he entered into it, and was received with great signs of joy by the
Inhabitants, who resolved to entertain the Emperor with all the solemnity that
might be. Axalla put thirty thousand men into it for a Garrison, injoyning the
Citizens to pay the Emperors Army four hundred and fifty thousand Crowns:
Presently after he received a command from the Emperor to stay in the City
himself, and to send all the rest of his Footmen unto him, which he commanded
the rather, because he understood that Ambassadors were coming to him from the
Kings Brother to treat of Peace, Tamerlanes Policy.
and he presumed the sight of all his Army together ready to march, would
strike such a terror into them, as would cause them the readilier to assent to
good terms.

The Ambassadors sent by the Kings Brother, were of their chiefest men, whom
Tamerlane entertained with all humanity, causing his greatness to appear to
them, as also the activity of his Horsemen, whereby they might discern that it
would tend to the destruction of their Country if they agreed not with him:
Then did the Ambassadors deliver their message, which consisted of two
branches: One was for the delivery of their King, the other, for the
preservation of their Country: The Emperor answered, that they should deliver
their message in writing, The Ambassadors proposals.
and he would give a speedy answer: Their Propositions were, that they would
leave Paguinfou, and all the Country beyond it, with all the Fortresses of the
mountains in Tamerlanes possession: That they would pay all the charges of his
Army from that day forward: And that they would give two millions of gold for
the ransom of their King. To this the Emperor answered, Tamerlane's proposals.
that he would keep that which he had conquered within the Country, being his
own, as taken by his arms: That he would have the River by which his Army was
now encamped, and so along to the Sea, to be his Frontiers: That the King of
China should pay him yearly two hundred thousand Crowns, which should be
delivered at Paguinfou, for acknowledgment of his submission to his Empire:
That he should pay five hundred thousand Crowns in ready money for the charge
of his Army: That the King of China should be delivered, and that all the other
Chinois prisoners should pay ransomes to particular men that took them, except
those which carried the names of Kings, who should pay ten thousand Crowns for
their liberty and peace: And that no Chinois should be kept for a slave, nor
sold for such hereafter, being under the Emperors obedience: That Traffic and
intercourse of Merchants should be free between both the Nations: That the King
of China should deliver his Brother, and two other called Kings, with twelve
principal men of the Country, for Hostages to secure the Peace: These
conditions, Peace concluded.
after they had consulted together, were accepted of, hoping that time would
restore again their ancient liberty, and in the mean time they must bear the
yoke of the Conqueror. The King of China delivered.
Then did Tamerlane send two thousand Horse to fetch the King of China, that
being at liberty, he might solemnly sweat to the Peace; which accordingly he
did, delivered the Hostages, and so went into his Kingdom to perform the other
Articles, where he was almost worshipped as a God, and received with all the
joy that might be.

Thus Tamerlane, Odmar made Governor.
having settled his affairs, and provided for the assurance of his new Conquest,
left Odmar to govern the same, leaving with him thirty thousand Horse, and
fifty thousand Foot, to furnish all the Fortresses and strong places, giving
him in charge to make his chief residence at Quantifou, to fortify well the
passages, and to build a new Fort at Dermio, the better to strengthen his
borders: Tamerlane's gratitude.
He also left him all necessaries, and commended to him the Lord of the
mountains, who had been so serviceable to him; His Brother he took with him,
giving him large preferment in Zachethay: He also carried along with him many
of the new conquered people, to plant them in his own Country, His Prudence.
sending other Colonies in their stead, which he did, because he found them a
light people, and such as affected novelty.

Tamerlane sent to acquaint the old Emperor with all these things, His
possessions in China.
having two of the greatest and fairest Cities in all China in his possession,
and an hundred Leagues of Land, extending his borders to a River, by which he
might go to the Enemy, but they could not come to him without passing over the
same: He desired also above all things, that all the Idols which were within
his Conquest should be beaten down, and commanded the worshipping of one God.

Then did his Army, His return into Tartary.
wherein was much sickness, begin to march, and Tamerlane hearing of more
Forces that were coming toward him out of Tartary, he sent to stop them,
commanding them to march to Cambalu, whither himself also was going, hearing
that the old Emperor intended to meet him, and to entertain him with great
magnificence in that City.

Odmar being thus severed from Tamerlane's side, all his favor was turned to
Axalla, of whose Prudence, Valor, and Fidelity, he had such large experience
in these Wars, so as the report of his Valor did fly through all the Empire.
In the retreat Calibes led the Avantguard, and Axalla was in the Battle near to
the Emperor, His liberality.
who bestowed upon him two hundred thousand Crowns yearly, to maintain his
ordinary expenses. And thus, after certain days journey, news was brought of
the old Emperors arrival at Cambalu: wherefore Tamerlane, leaving his Army to
Winter in a fair and fertile Country, and dismissing many of his Soldiers, he
hasted thitherwards, and when he was arrived within four Leagues of Cambalu,
His entertainment at Cambalu.
all the Princes of the Emperors Court came to receive him there, together
with all the chiefest Citizens, to congratulate his admirable success: The
Prince received every one according to his wonted courtesy, yet retaining
convenient Majesty, and was beheld by all with great contentment: He had with
him the Empress his Wife, who had not left him in all his journey: And the next
day the old Emperor honored him so much as to come to meet him, with all the
magnificence that might be. His presents to the old Emperor.
Tamerlane presented him with all the richest Chariots, and fairest Horses that
he had won: and the old Emperor being very desirous to see his Daughter, her
Chariot was uncovered, and he caused her to enter into his own: But the Prince
remained on horseback, whom the eyes of all the people could not be satisfied
with admiring. Tamerlane also presented Calibes to the Emperor, making a
recital of all his faithfulness; whereupon the Emperor gave him an hundred
thousand Crowns for the increase of his pension: He also presented Axalla to
the Emperor, who being informed of his Valor, gave unto him a hundred
thousand Tartarines of Gold in a Principality, that he might declare how much
he esteemed his fidelity.

During Tamerlane's abode at Cambalu this Winter, He is stirred up against
Bajazet.
complaints came to him that Bajazet the Great Turk had attempted to join the
Empire of Greece to his own, resolving also upon the siege of Constantinople,
whereupon the Emperor of Greece sent to him to crave his aid. Axalla, who was
of kin to this Emperor, Paleologus, being desirous to maintain the Christian
Religion in Greece, He sends Ambassadors.
stirred him up much to this War: Whereupon he sent Ambassadors to Bajazet, to
warn him in his name, not to molest the Greek Emperor, who was his
Confederate: Bajazets proud answer.
But Bajazet answered them very proudly, asking them what their Master had to
do therewith? and that he should content himself with injoyning Laws to his own
Subjects, and not to meddle with him who was none of them.

This answer being returned, by Axalla's means, was very ill taken, so that
Tamerlane resolved to hinder this enterprise of the Ottomans: Tamerlanes
preparations against him.
for which end, he obtained of the Emperor his Uncle, an hundred thousand
Footmen, and eighty thousand Horsemen, hoping to have as many from his own
Country of Sachetai, besides the Lords who would accompany him to win glory,
from whom he made account of fifty thousand men more that they would bring
along with them. Thus he departed from Cambalu, taking his leave of the old
Emperor, his Father in Law, and of the Princess his Wife, (then left behind
him for the comfort of her aged Father) and departed toward Samercand, the
place of his Birth, and seat of his Empire, leaving the Forces granted him by
the Emperor, to come after him to Ozara, where he had appointed the general
rendezvous of his Army. This his departure was very grievous to the old
Emperor, but more grievous on the Princes part toward his Wife, who had never
left him since they were first married: But nothing could withhold this brave
Prince, where honor was to be purchased, or where he might be profitable to
his oppressed Friends, Tamerlanes speech.
For he would often say, That he was born to this end, and that all his other
employments were but by the By, God having appointed and called him to punish
the pride of Tyrants.

He was accompanied with Calibes, and made the Prince of Thanais Colonel of
all his Footmen, which place Axalla had left, whom now he made Lieutenant
General of all his Army, with command to lead his Avantguard, and Calibes the
Arearward. Forces came to him from all parts; and the Chinois Lord, being
licensed by Odmar, marched toward him with twenty thousand men of his Subjects
newly conquered, being desirous to show his forwardness to the Emperor, as
also to learn the manners and fashions of strange Countries. His entertainment
at Samercand.
When Tamerlane came near Samercand, Zamay went to meet him, and near a million
of people, blessing and praising him with all manner of Songs: There he
remained about a month; In which space Axalla had rendezvouzed his Army at
Ozara, from whence also he advertised Tamerlane of the proceedings of Bajazet.
Then did Tamerlane send for him to Samercand, to confer with him about the
setting forward of his Army. For although he was still accompanied with
renowned Princes, and famous Captains; yet were they no body in comparison of
Axalla, whose sound Judgment and Counsel had won him such credit with his Lord
and Master, as by his advice he did all things, and without him nothing, which
his so great Authority and Favor with his Prince wanted not the envy of the
Court; Envy attend^ virtue.
but that his great Virtues, and rare-found Courtesy (in so great fortune)
together with so many great services as he had done, supported him against the
malice of the same. He upon this command from Tamerlane, leaving the charge of
the Army at Ozara with the Prince of Thanais, came to Samercand, and there
discoursed with him at large concerning the estate and order of his Army; and
so, shortly after, they all departed to Ozara, where a new consultation was
held, by which way he should conduct his Army: as whether it was better to lead
them by the coast of the Muscovite, directly toward Capha, or on the other
side of the Calpian Sea, by the skirts of Persia; and after much discourse and
sundry opinions, with their reasons delivered, it was resolved, (although the
way were the longer) to pass by the Muscovite, so to come to the Georgians, and
to Trepizond, and from thence to enter into the Ottamans Kingdom.

This being resolved on, His march toward Bajazet.
they marched forward, till at length they came to Maranis, where he stayed
three days, looking for the China Forces, whereof they received news; There
also Tamerlane mustered, and paid his Army; He had also news of fifteen
thousand Horsemen sent him by the Muscovite, His Auxiliaries.
with a sum of money, with leave for him to pass through so much of his
Territories as should be necessary, being glad that he set upon others; rather
than on himself; and that such great preparations should fall upon them, whose
greatness was as dreadful and dangerous to him as any other.

Tamerlane caused a great quantity of Victuals, His Prudence.
and most part of the furniture of his Army to be sent along the Caspian Sea,
which was a great case and commodity to his men, which, marching by Land, was
of necessity to pass some twenty Leagues through places destitute both of
Victuals and Water; Himself all the way coasting along the Seashore, passed
his time in Hunting and Hawking, to make the journey less tedious, his Army not
coming near him by ten Leagues, which was so great, that it extended it self
full twenty Leagues.

Coming to the River Edel, he stayed at Zarazich, whilst his Army passed the
River at Mechet, and over two other Bridges that he had caused to be made of
boats for that purpose. Now the Circassians and Georgians hearing of the
approach of Tamerlane with his huge Army, by their Ambassadors offered him all
the help and assistance they could afford him in his Journey, as he passed that
way. The Georgians assist him.
These Georgians were, and yet are Christians, a great and Warlike people, of
long time tributaries to the Greek Emperors; and afterward sometime
tributaries, and sometimes confederates to the Persians; but alvvayes enemies
to the Turks, and therefore glad they were of Tamerlanes coming against them.
Of these Warlike people Axalla drew great numbers to the service of his Prince,
who not a little esteemed of them, being all tall men, very beautiful, of great
strength and courage, and withal, most expert soldiers, as having many times
resisted the power of the Ottoman Kings, by reason of the advantage of their
Country, which was rough, mountainous, and hard to come to. His strict
Discipline.
These people every where kindly entertained Tamerlane, and plentifully
relieved his Army with all necessaries. In passing through which, and other
Countries, he took such order with his Soldiers, that none of the people by
whom they passed were any whit injured by them, insomuch that if a soldier had
taken but an Apple or any other trifle, he died for it. And one of his
soldiers having taken a little milk from a Countrey-woman, and she thereof
complaining, he caused him presently to be hanged, and his stomach to be ripped,
where the milk that he had lately drank being found, he paid the woman for it,
who had otherwise without mercy died for her false accusation: Which his great
severity was indeed the preservation of his Army, being so great, as that it
was thought impossible to provide it with Victuals, whereof yet there was no
want, nor of any other thing necessary for the relief of man: his Camp being
still as a most populous and well-governed City, stored with all manner of
things, whereunto both Artificers and Merchants resorted from far Countries
with their Commodities, as to some famous Mart: and the Country people from
every place, without fear, brought in their Country-commodities, for which they
received present money, and so departed in peace.

So marching on, he at length came to Bachichich, where he stayed to refresh
his Army eight days, and there again took a general muster of them, finding,
His huge Army.
as some write, four hundred thousand Horse, and six hundred thousand Foot; but
others that were present with him, say, three hundred thousand Horse, and five
hundred thousand Footmen of all Nations: There also he generally paid them,
and as his manner was, made an oration to them, informing them of such Orders
as he would have observed, with much other Military Discipline, whereof he was
very curious with his Captains.

In the mean time, Bajazets Pride.
Bajazet would not believe that Tamerlane durst once look toward him, yea, so
exceeding barbarous was he, that he would not so much as suffer any man to
speak of him, or his Army to him, by reason of his pride: He also strictly
forbad all the bordering people to make any Vows or Prayers for Tamerlanes
prosperity: But he was soon after awakened out of this Lethargy, as we shall
presently hear. Indeed Tamerlane could hardly be persuaded, that Bajazet,
having subdued the greatest part of Grecia, and much distressed the Greek
Emperor, and having so great means to recover whatsoever he should lose in
Asia, would be so adventurous as to come over the streights out of Europe, to
try the fortune of a battle with him: but rather warily to protract the time,
to weary him with wants, that in a strange Country, drew such a world of people
after him: wherein yet he found himself much deceived; for when he had passed
the Georgian Country, and was come to Buisabuich, Axalla (whom he had not seen
in eight days before, because he commanded the Avantguard of the Army) came to
him with such news as he knew would be most grateful to him: Bajazet advanced
toward him.
Which was, that Bajazet had raised his siege before Constantinople, to come
and defend his new Conquests in Asia, and that he was certainly resolved to
come to a pitched Battle with him, not so much trusting to the multitude of his
men, as to the experience and valor of his soldiers, being long trained up in
the Wars. At which unexpected news Tamerlane greatly rejoiced, yet without
insolency and vaunting, but rather with the countenance of such an one as
judged the event of Battles to be always doubtful; Tamerlanes moderation.
saying sometimes, That a small number well conducted, did carry away the
victory from the confused multitude. Three days after he stayed at Buisabuich,
causing his soldiers continually to march forward, who, He passes the River
Euphrates.
at two places, passed over the River Euphrates, which he did the rather to
maintain his Army upon the spoil of the Enemies country, choosing rather there
to attend Bajazets coming, then amongst his friends and allies. All the Cities
that yielded to him in the way as he marched, he favorably received; the other
that refused to submit themselves to his obedience, he used with all extremity,
especially the great and strong City of Sebastia, where certain of the
forerunners of his Army, Turkish Pride.
were by the Turks that kept Garrison in it, cut off and slain, and to despite
him the more, the City gates were set open in contempt of him: Whereupon being
justly offended, he sent out certain Tartarian Horsemen, charging them upon
pain of his displeasure so to behave themselves against their Enemies, that at
his coming up to them he might find either the City taken, or at least the
Gates shut up against him: And he had his men at so great command; that no
danger was unto them more dreadful than his displeasure, neither did he punish
any thing so severely as cowardice. Now the Turks in Sebastia seeing these
Tartarian Horsemen marching toward the City, making little account of them,
because their number was not great, issued out to meet them, where they were so
furiously charged by these few Horsemen, that they were glad to retire, and for
have to shut the Gates against some of their own men, lest the Enemy should
have entered pell mell with them, Turks beaten
which Turks were there slain at the Gates of the City. Shortly after came
Tamerlane with all the rest of his Army, and sat down before the City, where he
lay still seven days not making any show of violence at all. The defendants,
because the City was of great strength, thought that his purpose was by a long
Siege to distress the same: But about the eighth day, the Towers, and Walls
being undermined in sundry places, suddenly fell down, leaving large breaches
for the Enemy to enter; wherewith the Turks being dismayed surrendered the City
to Tamerlane in hope so to have saved their lives, Sebastia taken.
but he caused them all to be buried quick, and the City utterly to be razed:
and then calling the Governor, whose life he had spared for that end, he bade
him go and tell his Master what had happened to his strong City of Sebastia,
and what himself had seen there; of which Tragical action, when the Governor
had made report to Bajazet, he demanded of him whether of the two Armies he
thought bigger or stronger; for he had now assembled a mighty Army of three
hundred thousand Horse, and two hundred thousand Footmen; whereunto the
Governor, having first craved pardon, answered: That it could not be in
reason, but that Tamerlane had the greater Army, for that he commanded over far
greater Countries: wherewith proud Bajazet being offended, replied in great
Choler; Bajazets arrogance.
Out of doubt the sight of the Tartarian has so affrighted this coward, that
he thinks every Enemy to be two. As Bajazet marched forward he heard a Country
Shepherd merrily pleasing himself with his homely Pipe as he sat on the side
of a Mountain feeding his small flock, whereupon he stood still, and listened to
him to the admiration of many, and at last brake forth into these words, Note.
O happy Shepherd, which had no Sebastia to lose! bewraying therein his own
coffeehouse, and yet withal, showing that worldly bliss consisted not so
much in possessing of much, subject unto danger, as in enjoying content in a
little, devoid of fears.

The rest of the Cities as Tamerlane marched forwards, warned by the
destruction of Sebastia, yielded to him, the Citizens whereof he used
courteously, especially the Christians, Tamerlanes favor to the Christians.
whom he set at liberty for the Greek Emperors sake, whom he sought therein to
gratify.

But Tamerlane had not gone far into the Turks dominions before he was
certainly informed that Bajazet was coming against him with a mighty Army,
Bajazets approach.
and was now within thirty Leagues of him, which caused him from thence forward
to march with his Army more close together. Axalla leading the Van, sent forth
Chianson, Prince of Ciarchan, with four thousand Parthian Horsemen, to get
knowledge of the Turkish Army, and where Bajazet lay, as also what manner of
Country it was beyond Sennas, and if he could learn any thing thereof, to make
relation of it to him. This Prince of Ciarchan was Tamerlanes near Kinsman, a
man of great reputation, and next to Axalla, in whose absence he had the
command of the Avantguard, who also sent before him another Parthian Captain
with five hundred Horsemen: who having advanced about ten Leagues and surprised
Sennas, Sennas surprised by Tamerlane.
was certainly informed there of the state of Bajazets Army, which was now at
Tataeia, and so marching forward; which Tamerlane being informed of, commanded
him not to retire from that place till he saw the arrival of the enemy, and
thereof to give him advertisement every hour, resolving himself to pass on no
further, being encamped in a fair large plain, His Policy.
which was very advantageous for him, his Army being bigger then Bajazets,
which made him make choice of those large plains. His Army also being
compounded of sundry Nations, he considered that he was not to fight against
the Chinois, a soft effeminate people, as of late; but against the Turks, a
most warlike Nation and well acquainted with all manner of fights and warlike
stratagems, and therefore he judged it necessary to proceed warily against
them. Upon this consideration he presently sent for Axalla, with him to view
the said place, and to have his opinion whether it would be advantageous for
him to stay there or no? Axalla not misliking his choice of the place, yet
withal advised him to keep Sennas as long as possible he could: and accordingly
he sent word to them at Sennas, that when they could keep the place no longer,
they should set fire on it, and so retreat, and this he did, that the Enemy
should have no desire to encamp there, but to march forward to those plains
where Tamerlane desired to fight, the rather because he was stronger in Horse
than Bajazet.

Accordingly the Prince of Ciarchan sent out a hundred Horse toward the Turks;
then divided he the rest of his Forces into two parts, commanding the former,
that as soon as they perceived the Enemy to pursue the hundred Horse, whom he
had commanded to fly disorderly before them, that they should receive them into
their Squadrons, and so retire altogether: He in the mean time with the other
part stood close in a Valley near unto a Wood-side, An Ambush.
wholly unseen; where having suffered two thousand of the Enemies Horse (the
Vant-curriers of the Turks Army) to pass by him, he following them in the tail,
charged them home, the other also which before retired, now turned again upon
them; so that the Turks seeing themselves thus beset and hardly laid to both
before and behind, Two thousand Turks overthrown.
as men discouraged, fled: but in their flight were most of them slain, the
rest of them were taken Prisoners. This was the first encounter between the
Turks and the Parthians. All the Prisoners taken were by the Prince sent as a
Present to Tamerlane, and amongst the rest, The Bassa of Natolia taken.
the Bassa of Natolia, who led those Troops; of whom Tamerlane earnestly
demanded what caused his Master Bajazet so little to esteem him, as to show so
great a contempt of his Army: Which (says he) he shall find strong enough to
abate his Pride? To this the Bassa answered: That his Lord was the Sun upon
Earth, His Speech to Tamerlane
which could not endure any corrival: And that he rather was astonished to see
how he, from so far a Country, had undertaken so dangerous a journey to hinder
the fortune of his Lord, in whose favor the heavens (as he said) did bend
themselves to further his greatness, and unto whom all the world subjected it
self; and that he committed great folly in going about to resist the same. Unto
this proud Speech Tamerlane replied, That he was sent from heaven to punish his
insolency, Tamerlanes reply.
and to teach him that the proud are hated of God, whose promise is to pull
down the mighty, and to advance the lowly. As for thy self (said he) thou have
already felt (though I pity thy mishap) what the valor of my Parthian Horse is
against thy Turkish: and I have already caused thy Master to raise his Siege
before Constantinople, and to look to his affairs here in Asia. He also asked
him whether his Master did come resolved to give him Battle? Assure your self
(said he) that there is nothing that he more desires, and would to God that I
might acknowledge your greatness in giving me leave to assist my Lord in that
Battle? Good leave have thou (said Tamerlane) go thy ways, His release.
and tell thy Lord that thou have seen me, and that in the Battle he shall find
me on Horseback, there where he shall see a green Ensign displayed. The Bassa
thanked him, and swore that next unto his Lord, he vowed unto him his service.
And so returning, he related unto Bajazet how he had seen Tamerlane, and
reported to him truly all that he had willed him to say, He commend^ Tamerlane.
not forgetting above all, to praise his courtesy and bounty: who besides that
he had frankly set him at liberty, had also given him a very fair Horse, well
furnished, although he well knew that he was to serve against himself: To this
Bajazet answered no more, but that he would shortly make trial of him, and that
he doubted not but before he had done with him, he should make him acknowledge
his folly.

The next day the two Armies drew near together, and encamped within a league
the one of the other; Preparations for the Battle.
where all the night long you might have heard a noise of Horses which filled
the heavens with their neighings, and the air with sounds; and every man
thought the night long that they might come to the trial of their valors, and
the gaining of their desires. The Scythians (a people no less greedy, than
needy) talked of nothing but the spoil; the proud Parthians of attaining
honor; the poor Christians of their deliverance from an insulting adversary;
all which was to be gained by the next days Victory. Every man, during the
nightime, speaking according to his humor. All which Tamerlane (walking
privately up and down in the Camp) heard, and much rejoiced to see the hope
which his Soldiers had already conceived of the Victory: and so after the
second watch, returning into his Pavilion, Tamerlanes prudent practice.
and there casting himself upon a Carpet, he purposed to sleep a while; but his
cares not suffering him so to do, he then (as his manner was) called for a
Book, wherein was contained the Lives of his Fathers and Ancestors, and of
other valiant Worthies, which he used ordinarily to read in, as then also he
did: not vainly to deceive the time, but to make use of it, by imitating that
which by them was worthily done, and declinining such dangers as they by their
rashness, or oversight fell into. After which, having slumbred a little, he
commanded Axalla to be sent for to him, who presently came, accompanied with
diverse other Great Lords and Captains of the Army, with whom after he had
consulted a while about the order of the Battle, himself presently mounted on
Horseback, and sent each of them to their charge to see their orders put in
execution: At which very instant he received intelligence that the Enemy was
marching forwards, and come to choose his Ground for the Battle, whose order of
marching Tamerlane was very desirous to see, that so he might marshal his own
Army accordingly. For (said he) I do not so much trust to the Lions skin
wherein I wrap mine arm, His prudent Speech.
but that withal I will make use of the Foxes, therein to wrap my head, which
my Grandfather neglected to his overthrow in a Battle against the Persians: For
being in a place of advantage, he went out of it to seek his Enemy that was
lodged strongly, contrary to the advice of all his Captains, which proved his
ruin.

Then did he cause three thousand Horsemen to advance forward, with charge to
begin the skirmish, himself following after to lodge every part of his Forces in
such places as he had foreseen to be fittest for his advantage: And seeing the
Turkish Janissaries marching in a square Battle in the midst of the Army, and
upon the two Frons, two great squadrons of Horsemen, which seemed to be about
thirty thousand, and another which advanced before, and covered the Battalion
of the Janissaries, he thought this their order to be very good, and hard to be
broken, and therefore turning himself to Axalla, he said, I had thought this
day to have fought on foot, but I see that it behooves me now to fight on
Horseback, His direction for the Battle.
to encourage my Soldiers to open that great Battalion of the Enemies. And my
will is that my men come forwards to me so soon as may be; for I will advance
forward with a hundred thousand Footmen, fifty thousand upon each of my two
wings, and in the midst of them, forty thousand of my best Horsemen: and my
pleasure is, that, after I have tried the force of these men, they come back
into my Avantguard, of whom I will dispose, and fifty thousand Horsemen more in
three bodies, whom thou shall command, which I will assist with eighty thousand
Horse, wherein shall be mine own person, having an hundred thousand Footmen
behind me, who shall march in two Squadrons: and for my Arearward I appoint
forty thousand Horse, and fifty thousand Footmen, who shall not march but to my
aid: And I will make choice of ten thousand of my best Horse, whom I will send
into every place where I shall think needful within my Army, for to impart my
commands.

Over the first forty thousand Horse, the Prince of Ciarchan commanded, over
the foremost Footmen was the Lord Synopes, a Genovois, Kinsman to Axalla and his
Lieutenant over the Footmen, a Captain of great estimation: The Prince Axalla's
charge consisted of five Squadrons of Horsemen: Bajazet's Army also being fair
and great, The Battle begins.
came bravely still on forwards toward their Enemies, who stirred not a whit
from the place which they had chosen for the Battle, except certain
light-Horsemen, Scythians, Parthians, and Muscovites, who being sent out as
loose men, hotly skirmished between the two Armies. Tamerlane was informed by a
spy, that Bajazet was on foot in the midst of thirty thousand Janissaries, his
principal men of War, and greatest strength, amongst whom he meant that day to
fight, and in whom he had repoled his greatest hope. His Battle of Horse was
very fair, amounting to the number of one hundred and forty thousand, all old
Soldiers: the Sultan of Egypt also had sent to his aid thirty thousand
Mamelukes, Bajazets great Army.
all excellent good Horsemen, with thirty thousand Footmen; so that his Army
marching all in a front, in the form of a half Moon, seemed almost as great as
Tamerlanes: These Turks, with infinite number of horrible cries, still advanced
forwards, Tamerlanes Soldiers all the while standing still with great silence.
Never was there a more furious charge than the Turks gave upon the Prince of
Ciarchan, who was commanded not to fight till the Enemy came unto him, neither
could there have been chosen a fairer Plain, and where the skilful choice of
the place, gave less advantage either to the one or to other only Tamerlane had
a River on the left side of his Army, serving him to some small advantage. Now
this young Prince of Ciarchan, with his forty thousand Horse, was in the first
encounter almost wholly overthrown; yet having fought right valiantly, and
entered even in the midst of the Janissaries (where the Person of Bajazet was)
putting them into disorder, The Prince of Ciarchan slain.
he was himself there slain. About which time Axalla set upon them with his
squadrons, but not with the like danger: for having overthrown one of the
Enemies Wings, and cut it all to pieces, and his Footmen coming to join with
him, as was appointed, he faced the Battalion of the Janissaries, who right
valiantly behaved themselves for the safety of their Prince. A furious Battle,
This furious fight continued an hour, and yet you could not have seen any
scattered, but the one still resolutely fighting against the other. You might
there have seen the Horsemen like mountains rushing together, and infinite
numbers of men dying, crying, lamenting, and threatening all at the same instant.

Tamerlane had patience all this while to see the event of this so mortal a
fight: but perceiving his men at last to be begin to give ground, he sent ten
thousand of his Horse to join with the ten thousand appointed for the Rereward,
commanding them to assist him when they saw that he had need, and so himself
gave a furious Charge, Tamerlane himself charge.
and made them to give him room, causing the Footmen also to charge, over whom
the Prince of Thanais commanded, who gave a gallant charge upon the Battalion
of Janissaries, wherein was yet the Person of Bajazet, who before had sustained
a great burden. Now Bajazet had in his Army a great number of Mercinary
Tartars, called Destenses, with many thousands of other Soldiers taken up in
the Countries of the poor exiled Mohammedan Princes, in whose just quarrel, and
the Greek Emperors, Tamerlane had chiefly undertaken that War. These
Tartarians and other Soldiers, seeing, some their friends, Many revolt to
Tamerlane.
and other some their natural and loving Princes in Tamerlanes Army, stricken
with the terror of disloyalty, and abhorring the cruelty of the proud Tyrant,
in the heat of the Battle, revolted from Bajazet to their own Princes, which
much weakened Bajazets Forces: who nevertheless with his own men of War,
especially the Janissaries, and the help of the Christian Soldiers brought to
his aid from Servia, and other places of Europe, with great courage maintained
the fight: But the multitude rather than true valor prevailed; for as much as
might be done by valiant and courageous men, was by the Janissaries, the
Mamelukes, and the rest performed, both for the preservation of their Prince,
and for gaining the Victory: But in the end the Horsemen with whom Tamerlane
himself was, The Turks overthrow.
giving a fresh charge, and his Avantguard being rallied and joining with him,
he with much ado obtained the Victory.

Bajazet himself being wounded, Bajazet wounded.
when he saw all desperate, mounted on Horseback, thinking to have escaped: but
falling into Axalla's hands, he yielded himself to him, Bajazet taken.
supposing him to have been Tamerlane, neither did Axalla for a while know him,
but took him for some great Commander in the Turks Army. Musa, surnamed Zelabi,
or the Noble, one of Bajazets Sons, with diverse other of his great Captains
were there taken also; and amongst the rest, George, Despot of Servia, who,
notwithstanding his misfortune had that day by his valor gained the reputation
of a great and valiant Captain, insomuch as Tamerlane in the very heat of the
Battle marvelled to see him and his Servians, and the other Christians that he
had brought to the aid of Bajazet, The valor of the Christians.
to fight so valianty; whereupon turning to some of his Captains that were near
him, he said, See how valiantly these Religious fight, supposing them by their
strange attire to have been some of the Turks superstitious Votaries. But the
Despot being now taken, and afterward brought to Tamerlane, he was by him
courteously entertained; yet withal reproved, for that he had assisted Bajazet
against him, who was come in favor to the Christian Emperor, and the other
poor oppressed Princes, such as the Despot himself was: who thereupon boldly
answered, The Despot of Service Speech.
That indeed it was not according to his profession, but according to the
prosperity of Bajazet, unto whom it seemed that all the world should bend, and
that he did it for his own safety: Whereupon Tamerlane excused him, and without
any more ado, Tamerlane releaseth him.
gave him liberty at his own pleasure to depart.

Bajazet himself Being afterward brought to Tamerlane as a Prisoner, was by
him courteously entertained, who never showed any token of submission at all,
but according to his proud nature, without respect of his present state,
answered him presumptuously to whatever he demanded of him: Bajazets proud
behavior.
Wherewith Tamerlane being somewhat moved, told him that it was in his power to
take his life from him; whereto he answered no more, but Do it, for that loss
will be my greatest happiness: Then Tamerlane demanded of him, what made him so
proud as to enterprise to bring so noble a Prince as the Greek Emperor into
his subjection? He answered, Even the same cause which moved thee to invade me,
namely the desire of glory and sovereignity. But wherefore then (said
Tamerlane) do thou use such cruelty toward them whom thou overcomest,
without respect of Age or Sex? That did I (said he) to strike the greater
terror into mine Enemies.

Then did Tamerlane ask him if he had ever given thanks to God for making him
so great an Emperor? Leoncla, in edit. Annal. Turk.
No (said he) I never so much as thought upon any such thing. Then said
Tamerlane, Its no wonder that so ungrateful a man should be made a spectacle of
misery. Note.
For you (says he) being blind of an Eye, and I lame of a Leg, was there any
worth in us, that God should set us over two such great Empires, to command so
many men far more worthy than our selves? But, said Tamerlane, what would thou
have done with me if it had been my lot to have fallen into thy hands, as thou
art now in mine? I would (said Bajazet) have enclosed thee in a Cage of Iron,
Lex Talionis.
and so have carried thee up and down in Triumph through my Kingdom. Even so
(said Tamerlane) shall thou be served: And so causing him to be taken out of
his presence, turning to his followers, he said, Behold a proud and cruel man,
who deserves to be chastised accordingly, and to be made an example to all the
proud and cruel of the World, of the just wrath of God against them. I
acknowledge that God this day has delivered into my hands a great Enemy, to
whom therefore we must return thanks, Tamerlanes Piety.
which he also caused publicly to be performed the same day; for the Battle
was ended about four a clock, and there were diverse hours yet of daylight. The
next day he caused the dead to be buried, where amongst the rest was found the
body of the Prince of Ciarchan dead in the midst of the Janissaries, where he
lay enclosed with their dead bodies, shwing that he died not unrevenged, whose
untimely death Tamerlane much lamented, causing his dead body to be Embalmed,
and with two thousand Horse, and diverse Turkish Prisoners chained together, to
be conveyed to Samercand until his coming thither. The dead buried.
All other dead bodies were, with all honor that might be, buried at Sennas.

This great bloody Battle was fought in the year of our Lord, 1397. not far
from Mount Stella (where formerly the great King Methridates was by Pompey the
Great, in a great Battle overthrown.) It continued from seven a clock in the
morning till four in the afternoon; victory as it were all the while hovering
with doubtful Wings over both Armies, as uncertain where to light, until at
length the fortune of Tamerlane prevailed: Tamerlanes Policy.
whose wisdom, next unto God, gave him the days Victory; for that the politic
tiring of the strong Forces of Bajazet, was the safeguard of his own: whereas
if he had gone unto the Battle in one front, assuredly the multitude finding
such strong opposition, had put it self into confusion; but this successive
manner of aiding his men, made them all unto him profitable. The number of the
slain is variously reported. The Turks themselves say, that Bajazet lost there
his noble Son Mustapha, with two hundred thousand of his men, and Tamerlane not
many fewer: The number of the slain.
Others say, that the Turks lost about sixty thousand, and Tamerlane not past
twenty thousand. But likely it is, that the carnage was very great in so long a
fight between two such Armies as probably never before met in a field together.

By this days event is plainly seen the uncertainty of worldly things, The
uncertainty of worldly greatness.
and what small assurance even the greatest have in them. Behold, Bajazet the
terror of the World, and (as he thought) superior to fortune, in an instant
by the event of one Battle thrown into the bottom of misery and despair, and
that at such a time as he thought least of it, even in the midst of his
greatest strength. It was three days before he could be pacified, but as a
desperate man still sought after death, and called for it. Neither did
Tamerlane after he had once spoken with him, at all afterward use him
courteously, but as of a proud and insolent man, made small account of him. And
to manifest that he knew how to curb the haughty, he made him to be shackled in
fetters and chains of Gold, Bajazet kept in a Cage.
and so to be shut up in an Iron Cage, made like a grate, that he might be seen
on every side, and so carried him up and down as he passed through Asia, to be
made a scorn and derision to his own people, over whom he had before
Tyrannized. And to his further disgrace, upon Festival days he used him for a
footstool to tread upon when he mounted on Horseback, and at other times
scornfully fed him, like a Dog with fragments that fell from his Table. A rare
example of the uncertainty of worldly honors and greatness, that he, unto
whose ambitious mind Asia and Europe, two great parts of the World, were too
little, should now be carried up and down, cooped up in a little Iron cage,
like a dangerous wild beast: How might he have taken up that speech of Hecuba
in Seneca? Quicunque Regno fidit, and magna potens dominatur in aula, me
videat. -- Non unquam tulit Documenta Fors majora quam fragili loco starent
superbi.

Tamerlane used this severity, Pride goes before destruction.
not so much out of hatred to the man, as to manifest the just Judgment of God
against the arrogant folly of the proud. And when on a time he was requested by
one of his Nobles to remit some part of this rigor to so great a man, he
answered, I do not use this rigor against him as a King, but rather to punish
him as a proud amibitious Tyrant, polluted with the blood of his own brother,
and many other innocents.

This so great an overthrow brought such a fear upon all the Countries
possessed by Bajazet in Asia, Tamerlane prosecutes his Victory.
that Axalla being sent before Tamerlane with Forty thousand Horse, and a
hundred thousand Foot, without carriages, to prosecute the Victory, came
without resistance to Prusa, whither all the remainder of Bajazets Army was
retired with Bassa Mustapha; all places as he marched along still yielding to
him: Yea, the great Bassa, with the rest, hearing of his coming, The Turks fly.
and not thinking themselves in safety in Asia, fled over the straight of
Hellespont to Callipolis, and so Hadrianople.

Axalla coming to Prusa, Prusa taken.
had the City without resistance yielded to him, which by his Army was
plundered, and there, with other of Bajazet's Wives and concubines, he took
prisoner the fair Despina, Bajazet's best beloved Wife, to the doubling of his
grief.

Emanuel Paleologus now hearing of Tamerlane's coming to Prusa, The Greek
Emperor ^ends Ambassadors.
sent honorable Ambassadors thither before to Axalla, by whom they were
entertained till the coming of Tamerlane, who received them with all the honor
that might be, showing them all his magnificence, and the order of his Camp, to
their great admiration: For it resembled a most populous and well governed
City, by reason of the order that was therein, which brought it plenty of
victuals, and of all manner of merchandise, as well for delight as necessity.
By these Ambassadors the Greek Emperor yielded his Empire, together with his
Person, The Greek Empire yielded to Tamerlane.
unto Tamerlane, as his most faithful Subject and Vassal: Which (as he said) he
was bound to do, for that he was by him delivered from the most cruel Tyrant of
the World; as also for the long journey he had undertaken for his sake, and the
discommodities he had endured, with the hazard of his Person, and loss of his
Subjects, which could not be otherwise compensated, but with the offer of his
own, and his Subjects lives to him, which for ever he therefore dedicated to
his service, with all the fidelity and loyalty that so great a benefit might
deserve: besides, that his so many virtues, and rare endowments, which made him
famous through the world, did oblige him the more hereunto, and that therefore
he would attend him in his chief City, to deliver it into his hands, as his
own, together with all the Empire of Greece.

Now these Ambassadors expected no less than to fall into the bondage of
Tamerlane, judging that which they offered to be so great and delicate a
morsel, as that it would not be refused, especially of such a Victorious Prince
as was Tamerlane; and that the acceptance thereof in kindness and Friendship
was the best bargain they could make therein. But they received at answer from
this Worthy Prince far beyond their expectation: For he with a mild countenance
beholding them, It Is refused by him.
answered thus; That he was not come from so far a country, nor undertook such
pains for the enlargement of his Dominions, big enough already (too base a
thing for him to put himself into so great danger and hazard for) but rather to
win honor, and to make his name famous to future Posterities: And that he
would make it appear to the World, that he came to assist their Master as his
Friend and Ally at his request: and that his upright intentions therein were
the greatest cause that God from above had favored him, and made him
instrumental to bruise the head of the greatest and fiercest enemy of mankind
that was under heaven; and therefore to get him an immortal name, his purpose
was to make free so great and flourishing a City as was Constantinople,
governed by so noble and ancient a House as the Emperors. Tamerlanes fidelity.
That he had always joined Faith to his Courage, which should never suffer him
to make so great a breach into his reputation, as that it should be reported of
him, that in the color of a Friend, he should come to invade the Dominions of
his Ally. That he desired no more, but that the service he had done for the
Greek Emperor, might remain for ever engraven in the memory of his posterity,
to the end they might for ever wish well to him and his Successors, by the
remembering the good he had done for them: That he wished, that long might the
noble Emperor live, happily to govern his estate, and that before his return,
he would so well consider of the establishing of the same, as that he should
not lightly fall into the same jeopardy.

Easy it is to judge what joy the Ambassadors did conceive upon hearing this
so gracious an answer from the mouth of Tamerlane, who, rather than he would
break his Faith, refused an Empire offered him, together with one of the
stateliest and magnificentest Cities in the World. After the testification of
their joy and thankfulness, these Ambassadors were by the command of
Tamerlane, royally feasted by Axalla, having all the honor done to them that
might be. The Ambassadors dismissed.
And one of them being sent back to carry this unexpected news to the Emperor,
filled both him and all the City of Constantinople with exceeding joy and
gladness, which both he, and all his subjects testified, by making of
Bonefires, The Greek Emperor comes to him.
and other signs of joy and pleasure. And the Emperor, the more to show his
gratitude, by the advice of his Counselors, passed over the straight into
Asia, to see Tamerlane in Prusa, and in person himself to give him thanks; who
hearing of his coming, and being glad thereof, presently sent Prince Axalla to
meet him, and to certify him of the joy he conceived to have the good hap to
see him, as also to conduct him to Prusa, where those two great Princes with
the greatest magnificence that might be, met, and so spent one whole day in
conversing together; and the Greek Emperor the next daytaking his leave, was by
Tamerlane with much honor conducted out of the City.

Now had Tamerlane himself conceived a great desire to see the famous City of
Constantinople, Tamerlane goes to Constantinople.
from which he was not now far, yet would he not go thither as a Conqueror,
but as a private person: which by the means of Axalla was accomplished, and he
thereinto by the Greek Emperor privately received, and with all familiarity
possible entertained: the Emperor showing unto him all the rare and excellent
things that were contained therein; and the other Greek Princes devising all
the means they could to do him pleasure, and them that were with him, who were
all in a manner clothed after the Greek fashion. The Greek Emperor was
curious to show him all the beautiful Gardens along the Seacoast, and so
privately conducting him about, spent five or six days with all the mirth that
might be; He highly commended it.
Tamerlane by the way often saying, that he had never seen a fairer City; and
that of all others, considering the situation of it, it was right worthy to
command all the World. He wondered at the costly buildings of the Temples, the
fair engraven Pillars, the high Piramides, and the excellent Gardens;
afterward saying often, that it nothing repented him to have undertaken so
long and dangerous a journey, if it had been only to preserve so notable a City
from fire and sword. In the Greek Emperor he greatly commended his mild nature
and courtesy, who knowing that above all things he took pleasure in fair
serviceable Horses, gave unto him thirty of the fairest, strongest, and
readiest that were possibly to be gotten, all most richly furnished: He sent
likewise great Presents to all the Princes, and great Commanders of the Army,
and bountifully caused to be delivered to them all things which he thought
necessary for the Army: So after these great kindnesses, and a strict bond of
Friendship made, and by solemn Oath confirmed by these two great Princes,
Tamerlane with great contentment took leave of the Emperor, and returned to
his Army at Prusa, wherewith now at pleasure he spoiled and wasted all the
dominions of Bajazet in Asia, no man daring to make head against him.

The Winter now drawing on, He sends his Army to their (...) quarters.
Tamerlane dispersed his Army into diverse Provinces of the lesser Asia,
expecting daily when some of Bajazet's sons or great Friends, should make suit
to him for his deliverance; but none came, most fearing the fierce nature of
Bajazet, who, if he had been delivered, was like enough to have taken severe
revenge upon all that forsook him in the battle, and therefore they never
interceeded for him. Whereupon Tamerlane one day passing by him, Bajazets Pride.
said, I marvel that none of thy sons nor friends either come to see thee, or
to entreat for thee; it must needs be that thou have evil deserved of them, as
thou have of others. But what think thou, if I should set thee at liberty,
would they receive thee again as their Lord and Sovereign, or not? To whom
Bajazet stoutly answered, Were I at liberty, thou should quickly see that I
want neither courage nor means to revenge all my wrongs, and to make the
disobedient to know their duties better. This proud answer made Tamerlane to
keep a stricter hand over him.

In this great War, the Sultan of Egypt (as we said before) had aided Bajazet,
which Tamerlane took in so evil part, that he resolved revenge: For as to his
Friends he was most kind and courteous, so to his Enemies most terrible and
dreadful. Tamerlan's Justice.
Yet before his departure he restored to the poor Mohammedan Princes that had
fled to him for refuge, all their ancient Inheritances, with something more out
of bounty; as also he did diverse Cities and Countries of Natolia, to the Greek
Emperor, for the yearly Tribute of four hundred thousand Ducats of Gold, and
eight hundred thousand Franks of Silver. He marche^ toward Egypt.
And thus having enriched his Army with the spoils of the Ottoman Empire, he
turned his Forces against the Egyptian Sultan, and so passing through
Caramania, he entered into Syria, then part of the Sultans Kingdom; where near
unto Aleppo (before yielded to him) there was fought between them a great and
mortal battle, the Sultan having in his Army a hundred thousand Foot, and
seventy four thousand Horse; whereof there were thirty thousand Mamelukes,
accounted the best Horsemen in the World. In which Battle Axalla, with the
Avantguard of Tamerlane's Army, His battle with the Sultan.
was hardly distressed, and Axalla himself taken, but presently rescued by
Tamerlane, who, had he not by his coming on with fresh Forces speedily restored
the battle, that day was like enough to have put a period to his Fortunes: But
Victory, after a long and cruel fight (wherein were eighty thousand of both
sides slain) inclining to Tamerlane, the Sultan fled, The Sultan beaten, flies.
Tamerlane pursuing him for the space of three Leagues. After this Victory,
Tamerlane dividing his Army, sent Axalla with forty thousand Horse and fifty
thousand Foot to pursue the Sultan along the Seacoast of Arabia; The Sultan
made diverse Alts with four thousand Horse to have stopped Axalla, who having
the smallest Forces, followed him the nearest, whilst Tamerlane with sixty
thousand Horse, and two hundred thousand Foot, marched along those Coasts,
having all the Cities as he went surrendered to him: only the strong City of
Damasco refused to receive him, whereinto the Sultan had put the Prince
Zamudzen, with a strong Garrison, who did what might be done to defend the
same, but all in vain: For Tamerlane having by battery overthrown a great part
of the Wall, Damasco taken by storm.
took the City by storm, only the Castle yet remained, which was accounted
impregnable: but at the taking of the City, such a multitude pressed into it,
as that it was not possible for them long to subsist; therefore within a short
time, being pinched with hunger, and many already dead, the rest, upon promise
of their lives, offered to yield; But Tamerlane would not receive them to
mercy, to make them sensible what it was to hold out against him: So that most
of them dying of famine, the rest yielded at pleasure, and were most of them
put to the Sword for their obstinacy; which severity of his, caused all the
Cities within the space of thirty Leagues to bring their Keys to him in token
of their submission, whom he no way molested, otherwise than in contributing to
the charge of his Army.

From thence he turned directly toward Jerusalem, Tamerlane goes to Jerusalem.
at which time they of the City had turned out the Sultans Garrison, as had
almost all they of Judea, submitting themselves unto Tamerlane: at Chorazin was
a Garrison of six thousand, who at first pretended to defend the place: but
when they perceived that Tamerlane was resolved to have it, they submitted, and
found mercy. There Tamerlane left a Garrison of his own to repress the
Mamelukes, who with frequent incursions troubled his Army. Himself with some of
his Horsemen rode to Jerusalem, His Piety.
to visit the Sepulcher so much reverenced of all Nations: By the Inhabitants
he was joyfully received, and having sought out all the antiquities of that
ancient City, he would be conducted to all the places where Christ had
preached; and coming to the Sepulcher, he gave there many rich gifts, to the
great content of all, only the Jews much blamed him for so doing, but he
regarded them not, calling them the accursed of God: There had he news, that
the Sultan, having gathered together all his Forces, was fortifying his Cities
in Egypt, especially Alexandria, and the Grand Caier; whereupon Tamerlane
commanded his Army to march toward Egypt to Damietta, which strong City he
thought not good to leave behind him, though by some he was persuaded so to do,
for that it was thought impregnable, both by reason of the strong Castle, and
great Garrison placed therein by the Sultan: But he, He marches into Egypt.
whose Fortune nothing could hinder, would needs go thither: And having
commanded Axalla to attempt it, followed himself after with the rest of his
Army.

Now Axalla, having summoned the City, declared to the Inhabitants (who were
most of them Christians) the mildness, and courtesy of Tamerlane, as also who
himself, and of what Religion he was; causing many of his Greek Captains to
speak to them, and to tell them, what misery they endured under the Moors and
Mameluks, which so far prevailed with them, that they resolved to adventure
their lives to put the Mameluks out of the City; and the night after, Damietia
taken.
taking Arms, made themselves Masters of one quarter of the City, opening one
of the Gates to Axalla, whereby he entering, put all the Mameluks to the Sword,
or took them prisoners; and so became Master of that strong City: Whereof
Tamerlane hearing, hoped by so prosperous a beginning, to find an happy end of
his Wars in Egypt. For he knew that the Haven of Damietta might furnish him
with Victuals out of all parts of Greece, as the Emperor Emmanuel had promised
him, and wherein he nothing failed him. Then did Tamerlane enter the City,
leaving therein a Garrison of two thousand of the Emperor of Greece his
Soldiers, with a Governor, of whom he took an Oath for their obedience.
Tamerlane marched to Cair.
And having staid a while at Damietta, he caused his Avantguard to march
toward Alexandria, and having passed over the River, he suddenly turned
directly toward Grand Caire, to the great astonishment of the Sultan, who
provided for the defense of Alexandria, as nearest to the Enemy: But
understanding this news, used such diligence, that he entered into Caire, with
forty thousand Horse and sixty thousand Foot, even as Tamerlane's Army
approached to it. By this unexpected coming of the Sultan, the great City, that
before was ready to have revolted, was again confirmed in his obedience, to the
great prejudice of Tamerlanes affairs: For to remain long before it was
impossible, through want of Victuals for so great an Army in an Enemies
Country. Yet this discouraged not Tamerlane from approaching to it, Caire
besieged.
and with all his Army to encamp near unto the same, having caused a great
Trench to be made for the security of his Horsemen, and therein to lodge his
Army more safely: during which time, he caused diverse attempts to be made, as
well to try the enemies confidence, as to see how the people of the City,
especially the slaves (which in that populous City are in great numbers) were
affected toward him, who indeed were glad to see the state of his Army, and
the proud Mamelukes still put to the worst, but farther strirred not. During
this siege, he thought good one day to draw forth his Army before the City, to
try whether the enemy had any mind to come to a battle; as also to view his own
Forces, and so indeed to seek occasion to fight, hoping that if the Sultan
should come forth with his Army, some revolt might happen at the same time in
the City, as well by the slaves, unto whom by secret Spies, Tamerlanes policy.
he had promised liberty, as by the Citizens themselves, who were much
discontented with the insolency of the Mamelukes, and by whom Tamerlane by the
same Spies had made it known that he came not to hurt them, but to deliver them
from the tyranny of his, and their enemies: But standing thus in Battle array,
none stirred out of the City, neither was there any tumult raised within,
according as he expected: For the Sultan being plentifully provided with all
things in that rich City, resolved to weary out Tamerlane by lying still, and
not to put all to the hazard of a battle. Tamerlane perceiving his Design, yet
resolved not to depart till he was Victorious; whereupon he thought fit also to
attempt him in his greatest strength, and in the heart of his greatest City,
though it could not be done without great hazard, such confidence had he in the
Valor, and Multitude of his Army. Now his purpose was first to take one of the
Cities (for Caire is divided into three) and therein encamping himself, by
little and little to advance forwards, Caire stormed.
as he could find opportunity. Upon this resolution, he commanded a strong
assault to be given, and having conducted his Footmen to the place chosen by
him for the onset (for the City was not Walled, but only fortified with Ditches
and Trenches) he commanded the Prince of Thanais, with fifty thousand men, to
begin the Assault, even in the face of the Enemy, which he most valiantly
performed, which occasioned a great and terrible fight. Axalla in the mean time
deeming (as the truth was) that the Sultan had drawn the greatest part to his
Forces to that place, fetched a compass about, and in another part of the City,
with small resistance passed the Trenches, Axalla enters.
where he presently left thirty thousand men to fill up the Ditches, thereby to
make way for the Horsemens entrance, himself with the rest, advancing forwards
against twenty thousand sent by the Sultan to oppose his farther passage, the
Prince of Thanais being at the same time almost beaten back by the Mamelukes:
But the Ditches being presently levelled, ten thousand Horsemen entered, who
charged upon the backs of the Mamelukes, where the Sultan himself was; there
were likewise seconded by ten thousand more, Caire taken.
sent in by Tamerlane, himself following after with all his power: Hereupon the
Sultan retreated into a second strength which he had made in the next City.

This fight continued full seven hours, wherein were slain of the Sultans men,
above sixteen thousand, and of Tamerlane's between seven and eight thousand.
Tamerlane being well contented that he had dislodged his enemy, and gained one
of the Cities, caused a retreat to be sounded, hoping the next day to win all
the rest, as indeed he did. For the next morning the Prince of Thanais storming
the Trenches in one part, as Axalla did in another, The Sultan ^lyeth.
the Sultan after a great fight, finding himself hardly pressed by the
obstinate Enemy, and unable longer to hold out, retreated, abandoning the City,
and encamping himself along the River Nilus, resolving to retire to the City of
Alexandria his second strength, and only refuge, which Tamerlane suspecting,
Tamerlane pursues.
followed after him with his Horsemen, (who only were in order) and some few
Foot hardly drawn from the City, which their fellows were in plundering,
Tamerlane promising them both to regard, and reward their good service. Against
these, the Sultan, upon a narrow cawseway, had opposed twelve or fifteen
thousand men, to favor his passage, who being of his best Soldiers,
maintained their ground stoutly, the place being much for their advantage; yet
at length their enemies still increasing, and pressing hard upon them, they
were forced to cast themselves into the great River, A brave retreat of the
Mamelukes.
and made a most honorable retreat, every man having his Weapon in one hand,
and swimming with the other hand to the farther Bank. The Sultan flying with
about eighteen thousand Horse, (the rest being either drowned or dispersed) is
said to have comforted his flying men, by telling them, they were not men, but
gods that had vanquished them.

Diverse of the Mamelukes that were taken Prisoners, being brought before
Tamerlane, were by him courteously used, and asked if they would be content to
serve him, Fidelity rewarded.
seeing their Master was fled and gone? This they all utterly refused, whom
notwithstanding for their fidelity, Tamerlane set at liberty to go again to
their Master, being no less desirous to be admired by his Enemies for his
Goodness and Bounty, than to be feared for his Force and Valor.

The wonderful wealth of this so great and famous a City, Caire plundered.
became a prey to his Soldiers, who for the space of twenty four hours, had
the spoil thereof: At the end of which time, every man was straightly charged by
open Proclamation, to retire to his Quarters. Tamerlane would not suffer any of
the Citizens to be taken Prisoners and such as were, he released, and so
leaving ten thousand good Soldiers, with many others that followed his Camp,
for the Guard of the City, and taking with him all such persons as he thought
might hurt him, Tamerlane goes to Alexandria.
he caused his Army to pass over the River, and to follow the Sultan to
Alexandria, that so his Victory might be completed.

Axalla hasted before with the Avantguard, to hinder the Sultan from gathering
up his Forces together: The rest of the Army was conducted by the Prince of
Thanais, Tamerlane himself, with an infinte number of Boats, and many Soldiers
to attend him, went by Water, greatly delighting to behold that fair River of
Nilus, sometimes running with a swift course, other sometimes very calm, and
scarce moved. The Citizens of Alexandria hearing of his coming, and fearing the
issue, besought the Sultan to compassionate their condition, and to withdraw
himself into Lybia; whither Tamerlane could not follow him, by reason of the
barrenness of the Country: Resolving for their parts to submit to Fortune, and
to do as the time required; yet promising in heart to remain his, and to make
the same to appear to him, so soon as occasion should be offered. Hereupon the
Sultan, seeing all things desperate, The Sultan flies.
determined to retire, yet hoping that time might bring a change, for that
Tamerlanes numerous Army could not long remain there: And so departing out of
Alexandria, with Tears standing in his eyes, he often said, that God was angry
with him and his People, so that he must of necessity suffer the fatal
Overthrow of his Estate; yet, for his own part, he had done as much as in him
lay, according the Duty of his Place, and to satisfy the expectation that the
World had of him, for the upholding of the same. Notwithstanding he hoped to
return again, and to deliver his People from that bondage, which for the
present they were necessitated to submitto

Tamerlane coming to Alexandria (before yielded to Axalla) stayed there a great
while, Axalla pursues him.
sending Axalla to pursue the Sultan, being much grieved that he could not get
him into his hands, and therefore he still feared that some Innovation would be
raised by him after his departure, which made him to deal the more hardly with
them whom he suspected to favor him. Now the bruit of these Victories, having
with Axalla, passed into Lybia, brought such a fear, not only upon the
Countries adjoining to these Conquests, but also upon all Africa, supposing
(that Tamerlane followed with the rest of his Army) that twenty two of the
Moorish Kings sent their Ambassadors to offer their subjection, Many Kings
submit to Tamerlane.
and obedience to him: O^ the nearest of which Kings Tamerlane took Hostages,
but for such as were more remote, he contented himself with their faith given,
and with other Testimonies of their good wills. Axalla having long followed the
Sultan, who like a man forsaken of Fortune, still fled before him, Tamerlane
desires to return home.
seeing all his labor lost, returned to Alexandria. And Tamerlane, after his
long travel and pains taken, was now more desirous than ever to return into his
own Country: The rather being moved thereunto by the earnest request of his
Wife, much longing for his return: He had news also of the sickness of the old
Emperor of Tartary, his Father in Law; and besides, Age it self began to bring
unto him a desire of rest. With his did the desires of the Soldiers well
agree, who were now weary of running so many and diverse Adventures. He secures
his new conquests.
His only stay was, that he expected the coming of Calibes, an old and faithful
servant of his, whom for his good desert he made choice of to govern all these
his new Conquests in Egypt and Syria: A great honor indeed it was, but not too
great for him that had so well deserved. And indeed Tamerlane was always so
mindful of the good deserts of his faithful servant, that he needed not by
others to be put in remembrance of them, were they never so far off, as now was
Calibes, who at this time was, with a third part of the Army, making way for
him along the River Euphrates, for the Conquest of Mesopotamia and Persia,
whose coming was longed for with great devotion by the whole Army, which was
now very desirous to return; but this expectation of theirs was not long
delayed, for Calibes being sent for, came speedily to Alexandria, where the
whole Army was by Tamerlane's command now rendezvouzed.

Upon the coming of Calibes, Calibes made Governor.
Tamerlane made the Prince of Zamalzan man of great reputation) Governor of
that place, as Lieutenant General under Calibes, whom Tamerlane (as was said
before) had made his Viceroy over all Egypt and Syria, together with the
Countries newly conquered in Lybia and Barbary: He gave him also six thousand
Horse, and ten thousand Foot to assist him therein: And so leaving Alexandria,
he took Calibes along with him to the great City of Caire, there taking the
best order he could for the securing of his new Conquests: He left with him
forty thousand Horse, and fifty thousand Foot: And having sufficiently
instructed him how he would have those Kingdoms governed, dismissed him, not
like a servant, but a companion, being very sorry to leave him destitute of his
presence: So setting forwards with his Army, Tamerlane goes to Jerusalem.
conducted by the Prince of Thanais, Tamerlane with a few of his Train, turned
again aside to Jerusalem, where he daily visited the Sepulcher of Christ, (whom
he called the God of the Christians) viewing the ruins of Solomon's Temple,
which he much admired, and at Jerusalem, the Seat of David's Kingdom, and that
of great Solomon, grieving that he could not see them in their former beauty;
And to show his Devotion and favor to this City, he commanded it to be free
from all Garrisons and Subsidies, and so giving great gifts to the Monasteries,
he departed from thence to Damasco; which great City, for that it was infected
with the Opinions of Jezides, (accounted an Arch-Heretick among the Mussulmen)
as also evil-affected to his Proceedings, he caused it to be razed, and the
bones of Jezides the False Prophet to be dug up, and burnt, and his
Sepulcher (which before by his Disciples was much honored, to be filled with
dung; and so marching on, and blasting the World before him, being victorious
which way soever he turned, he at last passed over the River Euphrates, where
he conquered Mesopotamia, with the great City of Babylon, and all the Kingdom
of Persia, and so at last laden with the spoils of the World, and eternized
for ever in his Fame, he returned to Samercand, the famous place of his Birth,
and Glorious Seat of his Empire.

Now had Bajazet (a little before one of the greatest Princes on earth, and now
the Scorn of Fortune, and byword to the World) with great impatiency lain two
years in most miserable thraldom, for the most part shut up in an iron Cage,
like a dangerous wild beast: and having no better means to end his loathed
life, violently dashed out his brains against the bars of the iron Grate
wherein he was enclosed, and so died about the year of our Lord 1399. His dead
body, at the request of his Son Mahomet, was by Tamerlane sent to Asprapolis,
from which it was conveyed to Prusa, and there lies buried in a Chapel built
for the purpose without the City Eastward: where also are interred the bodies
of his best beloved Wife Despina, and of his eldest son Erthogrul, and in
another little Chapel hard by, lies buried his brother Jacup, whom he had
murdered in the beginning of his Reign. Bajazet's Character.
This Bajazet had some Virtues, which were much obscured by his choleric and
wayward nature, which made him to exceed in cruelty and Pride: He was also very
covetous; which qualities made him indeed much feared, but little beloved of
his Soldiers and men of War, by whom therefore in his greatest need he was
forsaken. He used commonly to say, That his Treasures were his Childrens meat,
and not his Soldiers Pay; which, by way of reproach, was by a common Soldier
cast in his Teeth, when he raged to see himself by them forsaken in that great
battle against Tamerlane, telling him as he fled, That he run not away, but
went to seek his Pay, wherewith to provide his children bread.

Tamerlane, as we said before, having conquered Persia, used his Victory so
mildly, that as long as he lived, the people of that Country were always much
affected to him; which served him greatly, as well for the keeping of Syria, as
the Sultan of Egypts Empire: In his own Country he was received with all
Triumphs, and expressions of joy that might be; the chiefest prisoners marching
before him, and wheresoever he passed, the people assembled themselves by
thousands, Tamerlanes Devotion.
praising and singing his Victories. The Emperor having spent a month or two
in Feasts and Triumphs, according to his accustomed Devotion, he vowed a Church
and Hospital unto God, the most magnificent that might be devised: and to
beautify his City of Samercand, he searched out all sorts of Handicrafts-men,
He enlarges Samercand.
intending to make it as large again as it was, and one of the stateliest
Cities in the World: he peopled it also with so many several Nations as he had
brought along with him, unto whom he gave liberty to build houses, distributing
money unto them to do the same, giving them also all kind of Privileges and
Immunities for their encouragement therein: He caused also the streets to be
plotted out, and in one corner of it he built his Church and Hospital. His next
care was to preserve the good will and love of his famous Soldiers, His love
to his Soldiers.
whose names he caused to be Registered in a general Muster-Roll, which he kept
by him, and daily conferred honors and rewards upon them (they not thinking of
it) in recompense of their former good services; thinking that day lost wherein
he did not some good. Then did he declare the death of the old Emperor to his
Council, (of which he had received private intelligence) and forgot no Ceremony
due unto his honor, publicly expressing the grief he had conceived for his
death. Then did he, He goes toward Quinsay.
with his ordinary Court, consisting of forty thousand Horse, and sixty
thousand Foot, set forward toward Quinsay, where his Empress was. And when he
came to Cambalu, he had intelligence of a battle fought by Odmar against the
King of China's Captain General, Odmar's Victory in China.
and how he had pursued his Victory, having taken three or four great and rich
Cities, and that the Chinois did again desire Peace. Hereupon he sent them
these Articles; That the King of China should pay all the Arrears of his
Tribute; That he should come in person to do his homage, acknowledging himself
a Vassal of his Empire; That he should deliver up to him all his Cities saving
three, such as the Emperor should nominate; That he should pay all the charges
of the War, because he had broken the Peace; Tamerlane gives him his sister in
marriage.
which performed, things should be restored to the same state they were in
before the War. And to gratify Odmar, he sent to him with all Magnificence,
one of his Sisters to be his Wife.

When he first entered into Cambalu, he was received with all the expressions of
joy that might be, whereupon he restored to them their Privileges which he had
taken from them, for their Rebellion with Calix. The Empress being informed of
his being there (leaving Prince Axalla to govern at Quinsay) came to him: So
that he remained there near two months, giving order for all his affairs; the
rather, because it was near to Mount Althay, where the Scythian Emperors use
to be buried; The old Emperor buried.
And so causing the body of the old Emperor to be brought thither, himself
conducted it with all Pomp, honoring not only the Body, but all that he had
loved in the World; and though it was not the custom for Women to assist at
Funerals, yet he took his Empress along with him, who went near unto the Corpse,
till they came to the place where it was interred amongst his Predecessors.
After these Ceremonies finished, he returned to Cambalu, where he spent the
Winter in Tilts, Tournaments, Hunting, and such like Recreations: The rather,
because this plac^ was near to China, whereby he had the fitter opportunity to
hear how affairs passed there, purposing to go thither in person the next
Winter, if Odmar that Summer did not make an end of the Wars; and if the King
of China did not submit himself to his Obedience. The Mark he shot at now being
only to keep that which by his Valor he had won, desiring to spend the rest of
his life in reaping the fruits of his hard Travels, and former labors.

Now Prince Axalla governed at Quinsay, as well to the great contentment of the
Soldiery, as of the Inhabitants, who, out of their abundant love to the
Emperor, requested Prince Axalla to write importunately to him, that his Son
might be brought up amongst them, His Son brought up at Quinsay.
which at Axalla's request he consented to, making him in the absence of his
Son, the Governor of Quinsay, from Cambalu even to the Sea, which Country
contained in it about three hundred Cities, besides an infinite number of
Villages: all which was formerly under the Government of the old Emperor: He
delivered also into his charge the Government of his Son.

Shortly after, The King of China comes to him.
the King of China came to his Court, according to the Covenants offered to
him, where he once again swore obedience to the Emperor, who showed him his
greatness, the more to make him stand ^awe: for he knew that this Barbarian
would keep no promise longer than ^ should stand with his own interest. This
King of China was astonished to b^ hold so many Soldiers, and the Country so
well replenished with People: and above all, that they used so little curiosity
and riches in their apparel, especially wondering that the Emperor himself was
apparelled in mean cloth of one color, Tamerlane's ^lain apparel.
without curiosity.

Shortly after, Tamerlane went to Quinsay, and by the way was met by Prince
Axalla, and all the chief Lords and Citizens, who entertained him with all the
Magnificence that might be. Quinsay described. It was one hundred miles in
compass.
This City of Quinsay was the fairest, and one of the richest in the World, and
of the most wonderful situation, being divided by many channels of Water, upon
which are framed wonderful and stately buildings, having also an infinite
number of Bridges: It abounds with all kind of Spices, and Merchandises in
great quantity. The Citizens presented the Emperor with many rare things,
judged to be worth two Millions in Gold, with great variety of strange and
excellent things. Then did the Emperor call for his Son that was there
educated, who was now seven years old. His directions about the breeding of his
Son.
He forbade that thenceforward they should suffer him to wear any thing on his
Head, and hung a Bow about his neck, saying, That they which from their birth
were called to Sovereignty, should be used both to Cold and Heat, and should be
exercised to Arms betimes, and not be brought up idly and delicately:
reprehending those which brought him up, for using him so tenderly, asking
them, if they meant to make a Woman of his Son? They replying, that he was
tender. If he be not born (said he) to be strong and valiant, he will not be
worthy to succeed me; for he must not be an effeminate Prince that must
preserve the Parthian Empire. His second Son born.
About this time his Empress was brought to bed of another Son at Samercand,
for joy whereof, he made Feasts, with Tiltings and Pastimes fifteen days
together. Then did he visit all the Sea-Towns near to Quinsay, hunting all
manner of Games: yet often saying, Recreations rightly used.
That the Recreations which he used, were only helps to ease him in the pains
of his public affairs which God had called him to. And when Prince Axalla told
him, that that City was a fit place for his abode; O my friend (said he) it is
not so: His Prudence.
For it is a Maxim, that the Lord of this great City must not come to it above
once in ten years, and when he is here, he must temper his Actions as if he
were upon a stage, with Gravity, and a good grace before the people, who are
apt to receive good or evil impressions according as their Princed eporteth
himself.

Having settled his affairs in that part of his Empire, His return to Samercand.
he returned to Samercand, where three times a Week he administered Justice
publicly unto the meanest of his Subjects, His Justice.
as well as to the greatest; which made him much beloved of all over whom he
did command. On other days he gave secret audience, and disposed of the
affairs of his estate, which were concluded daily in his presence. In his
Council he used such severity that none durst deal untruly, or passionately in
his presence. Yet showed he such courteousness in his conversation, that he was
both beloved and feared of his people. He never changed his Servants, except
they committed some great faults against him. His love to his servants.
All the servants of the late Emperor his Uncle, he never changed one of them,
but increased their Pensions, making them sensible of his liberality in that
change: His bounty.
The like bounty he used to strangers, thereby to oblige them to him. He drew
great store of money yearly from the Muscovite, by way of Tribute, which yet he
distributed in the same Country to maintain his authority there, winning those
to him, who otherwise might have hurt him. His frugality.
He had great care of his Revenues, wherein he was so expedite, that in one
hours space he could see his Estate from three months to three months, together
with his ordinary and extraordinary expenses; they were presented to him so
well digested.

But after all his public affairs so well managed, and his private businesses
so well ordered, His Death.
Sickness arrested, and Death conquered this Great Conqueror, leaving his
Empire to Sautochio his Eldest Son, now nineteen years old, who was proclaimed
Emperor within two hours after his Fathers death.

Tamerlane, His Character
from his childhood, was well instructed in the Arabian learning, wherein he
was very studious, insomuch as when they thought him to be in the Baths,
wherein they are very curious in that Country, being their chiefest delight, he
was retired to the contemplation and study of Heavenly things. He had within
his eyes such a Divine beauty, and radiancy full of Majesty, that one could
hardly endure the sight of them without closing of his eyes, so that some that
talked with him, and beheld him, were stricken dumb for the present, which
caused him with a comely modesty to abstain from looking upon them that talked
with him. All the rest of his Visage was courteous, and well-proportioned: He
wore his hair long and curled, contrary to the custom of his Contrymen, who
used to shave their Heads: He went almost always bare-headed, saying, that his
Mother came of the Race of Sampson, who therefore advised him to honor long
hair. His hair was of a dusky color, inclining somewhat to a Violet, the most
beautiful that any eye could behold. His stature was of a middle sort, somewhat
narrow in his shoulders: He had a fair and strong leg; his bodily strength and
agility, was such, as none did surpass, and often on Festival days, he made
trial of them with the strongest; yet did he it with such a Grace mixed with
Humanity, that he whom he overcame held himself therein most happy, though it
was a great disgrace amongst the Tartarians to be thrown to the ground in
wrestling.

In the time of his Wars against the Turks, Note.
a Soldier of his found buried in the ground a great Pot of Gold, which he
brought to Tamerlane, who asked him if it had his Fathers stamp upon it; But
when he saw that it had the stamp of the Romans, he would not own, nor meddle
with it.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF CHARLES the GREAT, King of FRANCE, And Emperor of
GERMANY.
PEPIN, Pepins Children.
surnamed The short, the twenty third King of France, (a wise and valiant
Prince) had two Sons, Charles and Caroloman, and five Daughters: Birthe, who
was married to Milon Earl of Man's, by whom she had great Rowland: Hiltrude,
married to Rene Earl of Genes, by whom she had the renowned Oliver; Rohard,
Adeline, Idubergue, Ode, and Alix.

Pepin being toiled out with great Wars, much broken with the care of public
affairs, and now grown Old, that he might employ his last days in the
maintenance of Justice and Peace, the burden of War he laid upon his Eldest Son
Charles, a wise and valiant young Prince, of whose modesty and obedience he was
well assured: And then retiring to Paris, he was not long after surprised with
sickness, in which he recommended his two Sons to the Estates of France, Pepins
Death.
to give them portions at their pleasures, and so ended his days Anno Christi
768.

He was a Religious Prince, His Character.
wise, moderate, valiant, loving to his Subjects and beloved of them, happy in
his Father, and his Children, and in his Government; An excellent Pattern for
other Princes, who by his Example, hold it for an undoubted Maxim, That the
strongest Fortress, and best security for a Prince, is the love of his
Subjects, and the surest bond of his Authority, a respect gotten, and preserved
by virtue.

Pepin being dead, the Estates of France assembled together, and by their joint
consents, Charles made King.
divide the Kingdom betwixt his two Sons Charles, and Caroloman, by equal
portions. Brothers these were of diverse humors, who had certainly ruined each
other by this equality of power, had not the death of Caroloman, within three
years after, divolved the Government of the whole Realm upon Charles.

Charles was endowed with singular gifts both of Body and Mind, His Education.
which were much improved by the sedulous care of his Prudent Father,
manifested in the virtuous education of him: For which end he procured Paul of
Pisa, a learned man, to instruct him in the Greek and Latin Tongues, and one
Aymon to read to him Philosophy, and the Mathematics: Himself also trained him
up in Feats of Arms, and Warlike exercises. But above all, and as the ground
of all virtues, he was careful to have him trained up, and well instructed in
Religion, which all his life after he loved, and honored with great Reverence
the Church and Pastors thereof. He called the study of Humane Sciences his
Pastimes, and the companions of his Sword, and did sometimes recreate himself
therein. He loved Learning and learned men by Nature. He delighted in Poesy, as
some of his Writings do show; but especially in History, wherein he was
exceeding well read. Charity, Temperance, Equity, care of Justice to relieve
his Subjects, to keep his Faith and promise, both to Friend and Foe, and to use
a Victory modestly, were the notable effects of his excellent knowledge, as
remarkable in him as in any Prince that ever lived. The Universities of Paris,
and Pisa (either Founded, or endowed by him) witness the great love and honor
that he did bear to learning.

During the Life of his Father Pepin, His Valor and other virtues.
he showed how much he had profited in Arms under so good a Schoolmaster,
having great Commands under him, which he discharged with notable reputation;
and the improvement of his skill and ability after he came to his Kingdom, show
plainly, that there was never any Soldier that carried Sword with more valor,
nor great Captain that commanded with more obedience, or that performed Noble
Actions with greater success, or that used his Victories with more mildness,
and judgment. Neither did ever King or Prince rule with more authority, nor was
more reverently obeyed by this Subjects and Soldiers than our Charles; who
therefore well deserved the name of Charlemagne, or Charles the Great, by
reason of his great virtues. He was of a lively disposition, quick, active, and
vehement: Quicquid egit, valde egit: Yet modesty, and wisdom did so season, and
moderate his vivacity, and vehemence, as gave a great luster to both, and kept
them within their due bounds: And this mixture of diverse humors so tempered
with moderation, made him as admirable for his Judgment, as venerable in his
Person and countenance.

There appeared in him a grave, His Endowments.
sweet Majesty in a goodly Personage: His Body was large and strong: He was
very patient of labor: Had a quick spirit, was clear and sound, both in
apprehension, memory, and judgment: Resolution never failed him in
difficulties, nor a Reply in Discourses. Terrible he was to some, Amiable to
others, according to the Cause, Persons, and Occurrents: which virtues
purchased him such great esteem, as that he was beloved, respected, and
reverenced of all men, which effects the story of his reign will show: For
having received a great Kingdom from his Father, he enlarged it with wonderful
success; God having raised him up to be a Bulwork to Christians against the
inundation and rage of Barbarous Nations in the decay and ruin of the Empire.
And in prosecuting the Narrative hereof, I shall first set down his actions
during the Life of his Brother Caroloman, then what he did from the the time of
his death, till he was made Emperor, and lastly what his Deportment was from
thence to his Death.

Caroloman, Carolomans Envy.
being Crowned King at Soissons, as Charles was at Worms, began to be extreme
jealous of his Brothers greatness, whom, with grief, he saw to be beloved,
honored, and obeyed by all the French, and that deservedly for his singular
virtues and endowments both of Body and mind. This jealousy (too ordinary a
concomitant of Princes) made him seek by all means to undermine, and overthrow
the affairs of Charlemagne, whose Eyes were fixed upon Italy, as the fittest,
and most glorious Theater wherein to exercise his valor, and to maintain his
authority and power amongst Christians; and Caroloman did all that possibly he
could to cross his designs therein. But before I bring him upon that stage,
give me leave to show you what at this time was the State of Italy, and Rome.

Rome (sometimes the Head of the World) was of late become the Chios of The
State of Rome.
all confusion, the Randevouz of all Barbarous Nations, as if they had vowed
the ruin thereof by turns, having already sacked it three times. For under the
Empire of Honorious, Anno Christi 414. The Goths, under their King Alaricus,
after two years siege, took it, and sacked it, but did not dismantle it. Forty
five years after, during the Empire of Martian, Anno Christi 459. the Vandales,
under the conduct of Genserick their King, took it again, sacked it, spoiled and
disgraced it, leading the Widow of the Emperor Valentinian the third, away in
Triumph. And in the time of Justinian the Emperor, the Goths, under the
command of Totila, having weakened it by a long siege, took it, sacked, and
dismantled it. Thus Rome was no more Rome, but a spectacle of horrid confusion;
after so many devastations retaining nothing of her ancient beauty, but only
the traces of her old buildings, and the punishment of her Idolatry and
Tyranny; Afterward the Longobards, or Lombards held Italy, for the space of
two hundred years, till by our Charlemagne they were subdued, and expelled.

Presently after the Death of Pepin, the Church of Rome fell into great
confusions by the pactices of Didier King of Lombardy, who having corrupted
some of the Clergy, caused Constantine, Brother to Toton, Duke of Nepezo, to be
chosen Pope, Several Popes chosen.
which he persecuted with such violence, that he procured Philippicus, who ws
already Canonically chosen, to be deposed: But the better party, seeing
themselves contemned by the Lombards, assembled together, and by common
consent, chose Steven the third (a Sicilian by birth) Pope; who being conscious
to his own weakness, resolved to call in the King of France, and to oppose him
against his too-powerful enemies.

Charles being thus solicited by the Pope, sent twelve Prelates speedily to
Rome, that he might strengthen the Popes party against the other, intending in
a greater need to apply a greater remedy; and the matter succeeded according to
his desire. For a Counsel being assembled at Lateran, they confirmed Steven,
Steven confirmed.
lawfully chosen, and deposed Constantine, who was set up by disorder and
violence. But Didier would not rest satisfied with this affront, and seeing
that force had succeeded no better, he rosolved to try Policy, intending to
undermine Steven with fair pretenses; For which end he sent to congratulate his
Election, Didiers Policy.
purged himself in reference to the Antipope Constantine, now degraded:
accused both him and his Brother Toton of ambition, and protested to live with
Steven in amity; and to manifest this his good meaning, he desired him to be
pleased with his repair to Rome, that there he might confer with him in
private. The Pope (who never seeks to the French but in case of necessity) was
easily persuaded by Didier, who came to Rome, confered with the Pope, and made
great Protestations of his Obedience to him. But these his fair shows continued
not long.

There was at this time at Rome a Governor for the Eastern Emperor, called
Paul Ephialte, him Didier corrupted, and the administration of Justice being in
his hands, he made use of him so cunningly, as that in the presence of Pope
Steven, he caused him to seize upon two of his chief Secretaries, Christopher,
and Sergius (whom Didier accused of some pretended crimes) The Popes
Secretaries hanged.
and presently to hang them in an infamous manner. Their greatest offense was,
because they favored the French. Neither did he rest here, but caused all the
principal Citizens to be banished, whom he observed to be of the French
faction, that so, having removed all hindrances, he might be Master of Rome in
despite of the Pope.

Steven was not so dull but he discovered the Lombards practice exceedingly to
tend to his prejudice: The Pope sends for King Charles.
whereupon he sent to Charlemagne, beseeching him to prepare an Army against
Didiers force. This Charlemagne easily assented to, and fully resolved upon:
But Didier had provided a divertisement in France by the means of Caroloman, to
stop Charles his passage into Italy, making work for him in Guienne, where
there arose a perilous War upon this occasion.

Though the Country of Guienne depended upon the Crown of France, Troubles in
Guienne.
yet were there many Tumults raised by the practices of some Noblemen of the
Country, who frequently stirred up the people (mutinous enough of themselves)
to Rebellion. The cause of these Troubles, was the abuse of the former Kings
Clemency and Bounty, who suffered such people as he conquered, to enjoy their
privileges and liberties. Eudon (a Nobleman of Guienne) began first under
Martel, Jeffery and Hunalt his Children, and heirs of his discontent, had
continued it under Pepin; and Jeffery being now dead, Hunalt succeeded him with
the like hatred, which Caroloman fomented, that he might employ him against his
Brother Charles.

Guienne was a part of Charles his portion: But Hunalts design was, to withdraw
that Country wholly from the Crown of France, and for that end he pretended a
Title to the Dukedom thereof, laboring to procure the people to Elect him,
having the promise, and assistance of Caroloman to further him therein. Indeed
the countenance of Caroloman could do much; but the wisdom and courage of
Charlemagne prevailed more: For being advertised of Hunalts practice, and of
his Brothers secret designs, he armed with such speed, as that he surprised the
Towns of Poictiers, Xante, and Angoulesm, and all the Country adjoining,
Charles subdues Hunalt.
Hunalt (who had reckoned without Charles) finding himself thus prevented, fled
to a Noble man of that Country called Loup, whom he held, not only to be firm
to his faction, but also his trusty and affectionate friend.

Charlemagne being informed hereof, sent presently to Loup, requiring him to
deliver Hunalt into his hands, who was guilty of high Treason; and in the mean
time he built a Fort in the midst of the Country, Charles his Policy and
Glemency.
where the Rivers of Dordonne, and Lisle do join, which he called Fronsac, the
better to secure his Country against such Invaders. Loup, not daring to refuse,
delivered up Hunalt, and all his Family into the hands of Charles, who pardoned
Loup, and all that obeyed him; thus ending a dangerous War without blows: And
to Hunalt he granted life, and liberty, and the enjoyment of his goods; leaving
a memorable example to all Princes how to carry themselves in a Civil War,
preventing a mischief by prudence; and diligence, and not to thrust their
vanquished Subjects into despair by rigor.

Caroloman seeing his practices against his Brother to succeed so ill,
undertook a journey to Rome, with an intent to cause some alterations there,
which yet he covered with a pretense of devotion. He also took his Mother
Berthe along with him, and in their passage, they were hourably entertained by
Didier King of the Lombards, where Berthe treated, and concluded a marriage
between her Son Charlemagne, and Theodora, Sister, or Daughter to this Didier,
who was one of the greatest enemies to her Sons good fortune. Yet Charlemagne
(to please his Mother) received his Wife, Charles his marriage.
but soon after, put her away, as neither suiting with his affects, or affairs,
and so, that which was intended as a cause of love, bred a greater hatred
betwixt these two Princes. Caroloman having affected nothing at Rome answerable
to his desire, but only discovered his foolish, and malicious jealousy, too
apparent under his feigned devotion, Carolomans death.
returned into France, and there soon after died. Anno Christi 770. Leaving the
entire Kingdom to his Brother, who had how no Corrival.

Charlemagne having put away his Wife Theadora upon suspicion of incontinency,
Charles his second marriage.
he married Hildegard, or Ildegrade, Daughter to the Duke of Sueve, his Vassal,
by whom he had Charles, Pepin, and Lewis, and three Daughters, Rotrude, Berthe,
and Gille, who were the Nursery of his Noble Family. But Carolomans jealousy
died not with him, but survived in his Wife Berthe, who (being impatient of her
present condition, and thrust headlong with a spirit of revenge against her
Brother in Law, Charles) retired with her two Sons to Didier, King of Lombardy,
as to the most bitter, and irreconcilable enemy of her Brother Charles. Didier
entertained her and her Children very courteously, hoping by them to promote
his design: But it proved the leaven of his own destruction. His practice
(together with the Widows) was to procure the present Pope, Pope Adrian.
who ( Steven being dead) was one Adrian, a Roman Gentleman, to Crown, and
confirm the Sons of Caroloman for Kings of France, wherein the Lombard had two
designs. First, by this means to bring the Pope in disgrace with Charlemagne,
that he might the easilier suppress him, being destitute of the French aides,
whereon he chiefly relied; and Secondly to set France in a flame, by setting up
new Kings in it. Didier therefore earnestly besought the Pope to grant this
favor to the Sons of Caroloman for his sake: Didiers Policy.
besought the Pope to grant this favor to the Sons of Caroloman for his sake:
But Adrian (well acquainted with the Lombards humor) was so resolute in
denying his request, as that they fell into open hatred. And Didier being much
displeased with this repulse, took Arms, and with his Forces entered into the
Exarchy, He makes War against the Pope.
being a Signory under the Popes jurisdiction, and besieged Ravenna, the chief
City of the Exarchy: Whereupon the Pope sent his Nuncio to him, to expostulate
the cause of this so sudden War against his Subjects; desiring him to restore
what he had taken, and not to procced in this Hostile manner without any
reasonable cause, and that upon the pain of Excommunication.

At the same time there fell out a great occasion to increase the hatred
between Hunalts ingratitude.
Charlemagne and Didier: For that Hunalt (who had been before vanquished in
Guienne, and to whom Charles had showed so much favor) very ingratefully
retired himself to Didier, who did not only receive him courteously, but
honored him by making him General of his Army which he had raised against the
Pope. And Didier suffered himself to be so far abused by the insinuations, and
persuasions of Hunalt, touching the means to attempt something against the
Estates of Charlemagne, that holding Italy undoubtedly for his own, he plotted
a War, and assured himself of a certain Victory in France. Thus Ambition and
Covetousness hastens men's ruin. The Pope having no other defense to secure his
Estate but his Excommunication, which against Didier proved but Brutum fulmen,
a mere scarecrow, he was forced to have recourse to Charlemagne, The Pope
sends to Charles for aid.
as to his Sacred Anchor, or last Hope, entreating speedy aid from him in this
his great necessity. Charlemagne had great reason to Arm against Didier, who
had always crossed his affairs; fed and fomented his Brothers jealousies,
entertained his Widow, and Children, and labored to have them chosen Kings of
France, and all to trouble or ruin his estate. He had also received his
rebellious Subjects, and with their aid, practice to make a War against him.

The solicitation, and request also of the Roman Church was a great incentive
to induce him to Arm, against him, who professed himself to be an open Enemy to
the Christian Religion, Charles Arms against Didier.
whereof the former Kings of France had showed themselves Protectors, and
Guardians. But that he might not attempt any thing rashly, he first sent his
Ambassadors to the Pope, to assure him of his good will, and promising not to
be wanting to him in his necessity: Yet withal, to tell him, that he thought it
best, first to use mildness, before he attempted force against the Lombard. He
therefore sent also his Ambassadors to Didier to summon him to restore what he
had taken from the Pope, and to suffer him to live in Peace. Didier (who relied
much upon his Policy) gave good words to the Ambassadors, promising them to
perform all that Charles required, but in effect, he would have the Pope to
accept of conditions of Peace from him, and that the Children of Caroloman
should be declared Kings of France.

These demands were judged so unreasonable, that the Treaty was broken, and the
French Ambassadors returned home: And Didier prosecutes his War against the
Church more eagerly than he did before; Didier prospers in his Wars.
and having spoiled all the Territories of Ravenna, he took Faenza, Ferrara,
Comachia, Campagnia, and Romandiola, Towns of the six Governments, or Hexarchy.
Charlemagnes Ambassadors, upon their return, inform their Master, that the War
with the Lombard could not be avoided: and they found Charles in a Posture fit
to invade Italy: For he had Levied a goodly Army to suppress the rebellious
Saxons, who (impatient of the French yoke) revolted daily from his Obedience,
which Army was now ready to be employed against the Lombard.

Yet was not Charlemagne willing to attempt any thing in a matter of such
importance without the advice of his Estates, Charles calls a Parliament.
and therefore he presently summoned a Parliament, and (being loath to lose
time) in the mean season he caused his Army to march, and to make their
Rendevouz at Geneva, (a Town under his Obedinece, and in the way to Italy) and
having divided his Army into two Parts, he seized upon the Passages of Mount-
Cenis, and St. Bernard, which are the two entrances from France into Italy.

The Estates at their meeting having found the Causes of War against Enters
Italy, and heats Didier.
Didier, King of Lombardy, to be just, Charlemagne caused his Army to advance
with all speed, and to adjoyn near to Verceil. There Didier attended him and
gave him Battle: But at the first encounter he was vanquished by Charlemagne.
After which, the Lombard rallying, and re-enforcing his Army, fights him again,
and was again beaten, and so shattered were his Troops, that he was enforced to
suffer his Enemy to be Master of the Field; which proved an infallible
Harbinger to his total ruin. Thus having tumultuously trussed up what he could
in such haste, he sent his Son Aldegise to Verona, with the Widow and Children
of Caroloman: and cast himself into Pavia, which he had diligently Fortified,
as the Fortress, or Dungeon rather of his last Fortune.

Charlemagne pursues him at the heels, Charles besieges Pavia, and Verona.
and with all his Forces besieged him in Pavia, resolving to have it at what
price soever. And to make his resolution the more manifest, he sent for his
Wife and Children into Italy, to the end that the Italians (who hitherto were
doubtful to whom to adhere) might know his mind, and without attending any new
occurrents, might resolve to obey the Victor.

Having thus cooped up Didier in Pavia, and seized upon all the avenues, he
resolved to attempt Verona also, which they held to be the strongest place in
all Lombardy. So leaving his Uncle Bernard to continue the siege of Pavia, he
marched with part of his Army to Verona.

His beginnings being so successful, The Italians submit to him.
and this Check given to Didier, (who was now, as it were, shut up in Prison,)
gave a great alteration to the affairs of either party amongst these people of
diverse humors. The Spoletines, and Reatines, and those of Ancona, of Fermo,
and of Ossino (striving as it were, which should be first) yielded to
Charlemagne, and detested the wretched, and forelorn estate of Didier, as a
worthy reward of his Treachery, Injustice, and Violence. The Venetians (who
were Neuters, and Spectators of this Tragedy, and had never dealt in any sort
with Didier) offered amity and succors to Charlemagne, who desired them to
keep the Seas quiet, lest the Emperor of Constantinople should espouse Didiers
quarrel, and cause any new disturbance.

Charlemagne staid not long about Verona before the City began to think of
yielding: and Berthe, the Widow of Caroloman, was the chief Instrument to draw
them to a surrender, the French Forces being (as she said) very formidable.
Aldegise, the Son of Didier, seeing the Citizens so unanimous in their
resolutions to open their Gate to the Conqueror, and being unable to relieve
his Father, he secretly stole away, and fled to the Emperor of Constantinople.
Verona^ taken.
Then did Ver^na yield to Charlemagne upon composition, who received both the
Inhabitants, and Berthe to mercy, keeping his agreement punctually with them;
upon Berthe and her Children, he inflicted no punishment; but only blamed them
for their uncivil rashness, and enjoined them to return into France, there to
do better, and to live more honorably. This being about Eas^er, Charlemagne
took the opportunity to go to Rome, where yet he stayed only eight days to
visit the most remarkable places, and to confer with Pope Adrian. The Pope made
Charles a Patrician of Rome, which was a step to mount him to the Empire. From
thence he hasted, and came to Pavia, which had now been besieged for the space
of then months: and being pressed by War without, and by the Famine, and
Pestilence within, it at last yielded upon composition: and Didier (who had
hated Charles without cause, And Pavia.
and attempted War rashly) fell into his enemies hands, who yet showed himself
Prudent in undertaking the War, and mild and modest in his use of the Victory.

Thus Charlemagne having begun the War justly, and ended it happily, ruined the
Kingdom of the Lombards in Italy, Didier taken Prisoner.
carrying Didier Prisoner with him to Lions, or to Leeg; for Authors agree not
of the certain place. This was Anno Christi 776. A notable date to present the
Tragical end of so great a Kingdom, which had continued in Italy for the space
of two hundred and four years under Princes of diverse dispositions. But Pride,
Injustice and Tyranny, had provoked the wrath of God against them, so as whilst
they thought to take from another, they lost their own; To usurp the liberties
of others, they fell into ignominious slavery themselves; and their Subtily
proved the occasion, and hastener of their ruin. An excellent Pattern for
Princes and great States not to attempt an unjust and unnecessary War, nor to
usurp upon any other man's right, thinking to prevail over a good cause by Craft
and Policy.

Charlemagne (as was said before) used his Victory with great moderation
toward the conquered Nation, Charles his moderation.
which gave great content to all the Italians, who held it a gain to have lost
their old Master, and to be rightly made free by being subject to so wise a
Lord. For he left unto them their ancient liberties, and to particular Princes
(such as were Vassals to Didier) their Signiories. To Aragise, Son in Law to
Didier, he left the Marquisat of Beneventum. He placed French Governors in
conquered Lombardy, whom he ordered to treat these his new Subjects with the
like mildness, as he showed to those of his ancient Patrimony left unto him by
his Predecessors.

During the siege of Pavia, A Counsel at Rome.
Pope Adrian held a Council at Rome, in favor to Charlemagne, to give him
honors answerable to his merits of the Church, wherein it was declared, that
the right to give all Benefices throughout all Christendom did belong to him.

No sooner was Charlemagne returned into France, New troubles in Italy.
but Aldegise (the Son of Didier) sought to disquiet Italy, being assisted by
Constantine, the Emperor of Constantinople, and the practices of Rogand, to
whom Charlemagne had given Friul, who now revolted from his Obedience. But the
vigilance, and care of the Governors whom Charlemagne had set over his
new-conquered Subjects, But suppresed.
soon put an end to these Rebellions: and Rogand being taken, suffered
according to his demerits, being beheaded by the Kings commandment. Thus Italy
remaining quiet to him, and his, (as conquered by a just War) it was afterward
incorporated into the French, Monarchy in his posterity, being given in Partage
to the Children of France, whilst the good Government of the French Kings
maintained the dignity of the Crown.

But the end of this War proved the beginning of another in Germany, Charles
his Wars with the Saxons.
whereof the Saxons were the chief promoters, drawing other People of Germany
into their assistance. This War continued the space of thirty yesrs, yet not
without some intermissions: The Saxons having still a mind to oppose and Cross
Charlemagne in his proceedings, especially when he was busied in other affairs
of great consequence.

These Saxons were subject to the Crown of France, especially under Martel, and
Pepin his Son. The motives of this War were diverse: The impatiency of a People
desiring their ancient liberty, The cause of it.
and not able to bear subjection to a forreigner: the hatred and jealousy of a
Potent Neighbor, threatening them with servitude: A controversy about the
limits and bounds of their Lands: But the greatest, and most important cause
was, the diversity of Religion: For the Saxons were obstinate in retaining and
cleaving to their Pagan superstition, which they had received from their
Forefathers, and Charlemagne urged them to forsake their Paganism, and
Idolatry, and to make open profession of the Christian Faith; being moved with
Zeal to the general advancement of the Truth, and the private Duty of a Prince
to his Subjects, to provide for their souls Health. Upon this controversy
about Religion the Saxons fought eight times with Charlemagne: especially
taking advantage when they found him busied elsewhere, watching their
opportunities either to cross him in his designs, or to frustrate his attempts.
At such time as he was in Italy against Didier, they played Rex, not only in
rejecting the French command, but also in making War against those Cities in
Germany which obeyed Charlemagne. They had taken Eresbourg from the Crown of
France even upon his return, and besieged Sigisbourg, robbing, and spoiling all
the Country round about.

Charlemagne (who would never undertake any weighty matter without good advise)
assembled a Parliament at Worms, Charles calls a Parliament,
and by their Counsel and assistance, levied a great Army, to charge the Saxons
in diverse places at once. This resolution succeeded happily: For having
vanquished the Saxons twice in one month in a pitched Field, he soon reduced
them to their ancient obedience: Using his Victories with much modesty and
discretion; desiring rather to show them the power of his authority, then the
rigor of his Force. The chief amongst the Saxons was Widichind, and as
Religion was the chief motive of their frequent Rebellions; The Saxons overcome.
so Charlemagne, seeking the establishment of the Christian Religion in Saxony
with great Zeal, after much reluctance, happily effected it. For having
vanquished this widichind, by reason and humanity, he brought him to the
knowledge of the Truth; and by his grave and prudent conversation, he persuaded
him without any Violence, And converted.
to leave and forsake his Pagan Superstition, which force of Arms could never
have effected in him, nor in the Saxons. For men's souls are not to be compelled
with force of Arms, but with reason. And by the means and endeavors of this
widichine, the greatest part of the Saxons were brought to the knowledge of the
true God, and the obedience of the French Monarch: And the most obstinate were
forced, either to submit, or to abandon their Country. And indeed great numbers
of Saxons retired themselves into diverse strange Countries.

Thus the War with the Saxons was happily ended (which had been long and
dangerous) and the Conquered, by the Truth were the true Conquerours, by
attaining to the knowledge of the true God. Charlemagne was very careful to have
them well instructed in the Truth: For which end he appointed godly and learned
men in all places, and gave them honorable maintenance, whereby he showed that
his Piety was not inferior to his Valor, and happy success; and for a
president to Princes to make Religion the Sovereign end of their Arms and
Authorities.

This Widichine was very eminent, both for Wisdom, Valor, and Authority in his
Country; and from him are descended many famous Families: as the two Henry's,
the one called the Fowler, and the other of Bamberg; and the two Othos, all of
them Emperors: as also the Dukes of Saxony, the Marquesses of Misnia, the
Dukes of Savoy, and the famous race of Hugh Capet in France.

From this War of Saxony did spring up many others in the Northern parts, of
which we shall hear afterward; but because in the Interim their fell out great
Wars in Spain against the Sarazins, which (like a Deluge) threatened to overrun
all Christendom, I shall intermit the former, till I have spoken something of
this latter, that I may proceed with the more clearness in the remainder of
this History.

The motive of the Spanish War, Charles his Wars in Spain.
was more upon pleasure than necessity: But Zeal of Religion gave a color and
show of necessity to the Heroical designs of Charlemagne, who sought to enlarge
the limits of the French Monarchy by his Arms. But this his Spanish War, as it
was undertaken upon lighter grounds, so was it more painful, more dangerous,
and less successful then that of Italy, whereunto necessity and duty had drawn
Charlemagne; yet did his wise and wary proceeding in the action, warrant him
from all blame. The occasions which moved him to bend his Forces against the
Sarazins in Spain were, the assurance of good success, the quiet and peace of
his Realm, that he might have opportunity to employ his Soldiery, the hate of
the Spaniards against the Sarazins, and the general fear of all Christians,
least these Caterpillars should creep further into Europe.

This was the estate of Spain at this time. The Sarazins had conquered a great
part of it, and were divided under diverse Commands which had the Title of
Kingdoms. Yet these diverse Kings (being apprehensive of their common danger)
resolved to unite their forces against Charlemagne, their common enemy; and
foreseeing the Tempest, they sought to prevent it, and to cross the designs of
Charlemagne: For which end, they suborned King Idnabala, a Sarazin, being a
very subtle, and crafty man, to insinuate himself into the acquaintance, and
familiarity of Charlemagne, which stratagem prevailed more then all their power
and forces.

Charlemagne was much quickened to this War by Alphonso, Charles circumvented.
surnamed the Chaste, King of Navar, and by the A^turians, and Gallizians
(Christian People of Spain) who suggested to him that the War would be easy,
profitable, and honorable, and therefore most worthy the Valor, and Fortune
of Charlemagne. This Idnabala also (under a show of friendship) labored to
hasten him to the execution of this enterprise, from which he knew well he
could not divert him, that he might the better betray him by discovering his
Counsels to the Sarazins.

Charlemagne being well-affected of himself, Charles calls a Parliament.
and thus excited by others, assembled a Parliament at Noyon, and there
concluded a War against the Sarazins in Spain. The Army which he employed in
this action was very great, both for number of men, and Valor of Commanders,
and Chieftains, being the most choice and Worthy Captains in all Christendom:
amongst whom, His great preparations*
these were of the chiefest note, Milon Earl of Angers: Rowland the Son of
Milon, and Berthe, Sister to Charlemagne, Renald of Montaubon. The four Sons of
Aymon: Oger the Dane: Oliver Earl of Geneva: Arnold of Belland: Brabin, and
many others. The Valor of which Persons, has been fabulously related by the
Writers of those dark times (who for the most part were Friars, concerning whom
the Proverb was, A Friar, a Liar) with the addition of a thousand ridiculous
tales, so that the truth is hardly picked out from the midst of so much error:
Yet, what is most probable, and can be gathered out of the most authentic
Authors, shall here be set down. They say that Charlemagne, to make this
undertaking more honorable in show, did at this time institute the Order of
the twelve Peers of France.

Charlemagne being entered into Spain with his brave Army, His entry into Spain.
found no object for them whereon to exercise their Valor: For the Sarazins,
resolving to make a defensive, rather than an offensive War, had withdrawn
themselves into their Cities, which they had fortified strongly, The most
renowned of the Sarazin Kings at this time, were Aigoland, Bellingan, Denises,
Marsile, and Idnabala: But this last, as was said before, made show of much
Friendship to Charlemagne, and of open hatred against the other Sarazin Kings;
with whom notwithstanding he held secret and strict intelligence to betray
Charlemagne unto them.

The first City that the French attempted, Pampelune taken.
was Pampelune, in the Kingdom of Navarr, the which they took by force, but
with much pains, danger, and loss. Having sacked this City, and put all the
Sarazins in it to the Sword, they marched to Saragoce, which yielded to them
upon composition, as did also many other small Towns, being terrified with the
example of Pampelune. This prosperous beginning encouraged Charlemagne to
advance forward, relying on his wonted Fortune, and good success: But as he
passed through the Provinces of Spain, like a Victorious Prince, without any
opposition, he divided his Army, and gave part of it to be conducted by Milon
of Angers, his Brother in Law, who in his march near unto Bayon, was set upon
by Aigoland, the Sarazin King, who in this common danger had thrust an Army
into the Field, Milon defeated.
and now assaulted Milon, and his Troops, little expecting any Enemy, and took
him at such an advantage, as he defeated him.

This loss was very great; For Writers say, that forty thousand of the French
here lost their lives; Milon himself being also slain, for a confirmation of
the Sarazins Victory. Charlemagne was at this time afar off, and so not able by
any diligence to prevent the loss. Yet he suppressed his grief and trouble,
least he should discourage the whole Army: and so hastening thitherward, he
gathered up the remainder of those broken, and dispersed Troops, withal,
keeping the conquered Cities, and such as were Friends, in their due Obedience:
But after this, there fell out another accident.

Aigoland being puffed up with Pride through his late Victory, Aigoland entered
France*
marched with his Army into Gascoine, and besieged Again, to divert Charlemagne
from his pursuit, Charles returns.
and to draw him home to defend his own Country. So as Charlemagne, fearing
least his own absence, and the Sarazins late Victory should cause any
alteration in the minds of them of Guienne, being then Subjects of whom he had
no great assurance, he returned into France. Aigoland had now continued some
months at the siege of Again, yet had prevailed little, but only in
overrunning the Country, which he did freely (without any considerable
resistance) even unto Xaintonge; the Countrymen in the mean time retiring into
the Walled Towns, expected the return of Charlemagne their King: Aigolands Army
was very great, and puffed up with the remembrance of their late Victory: So as
Charlemagne returning with his Forces from Spain well tired, he maintained his
Countries more through his authority, than by present force; yet did he give
life to the courage of his Subjects with his presence, and bridled the proud
Sarazin, who could not be ignorant with whom he had to deal, nor where he was,
being environed with the enemies on all sides, and in an enemies Country.

Hereupon Aigoland, Aigoland's Policy.
pretending an inclination to Peace, gave Charlemagne to understand that he had
been the first Invader, and that his own coming into France was only to draw
his Enemy out of Spain, and to cause him to leave to the Sarazins their
conquered Countries free: and therefore (said he) the Treaty of an accord is
easy, seeing all the question is only to leave to every man his own, and to
suffer him to enjoy it quietly, the World being wide enough for us all. But to
the end this Treaty might take good effect, after many messages to and fro,
they resolve to come to a Parlee: and upon Charlemagne's Faith given, Aigoland
came to his Camp.

Charlemagne, either really moved with a zeal for Religion, or at least, making
it the color of his Actions, gave the Sarazin to understand, that he should
have his Friendship if he would leave his Pagan Superstition, be Baptized, and
make open profession of Christianity. The Sarazin, although he had a goodly
Army, yet not willing to hazard any thing, and content with his former revenge
upon Charlemagne, desired nothing more than to return quietly into Spain. And
being now in the midst of his Enemies Camp, to maintain his reputation, he made
no show at all of fear, but talking to his own advantage (as if no Force, but
only reason should move him) he entered into a serious and cunning discourse
with Charlemagne, showing, That unnecessary Wars were the ruin of Mankind, and
that he was grieved to see so much Blood spilt: That he had not begun, but
followed, being urged by necessity to defend himself and his Country against
the Forces of Charlemagne: That he was not yet so dejected, nor his Forces so
weak as to refuse the Battle: But for that it would be an infinite loss to
hazard the lives of so many men, he desired rather to make trial of the right
by some Troops, and they that vanquished, should be deemed to have the right,
and true Religion on their side: Protesting to yield to that Religion, which
should appear to be the best upon this trial. This Proposal and condition was
accepted by Charlemagne: The combat was fought, the proof made, and the
Christian Troop vanquished that of the Sarazin.

Then did Aigoland protest openly, Aigolands dissimulation.
that he would become a Christian, but in heart he had no such meaning, and
therefore took this opportunity to fly from his promise. He gives Charlemagne a
visit, and finds him at the Table, well accompanied with his chief followers,
(for then it was the custom of Kings not to sit and eat alone) but, casting
his eye aside, he saw twelve poor men, ill apparelled, sitting upon the ground,
near to the Table of the Noblemen, and demanded what those poor, miserable
creatures were, which did there feed apart? One answered, That they were the
servants of God: He then replied, Surely your God is of small account, whose
servants are so miserable and contemptible: And thereupon takes an occasion to
retire himself, having lost nothing, but made great advantage by this Treaty:
Having hereby qualified the force of Charlemagne, viewed his Army, made show of
his own courage and dexterity, and all without an Ambassador.

Charlemagne on the other side, Charles returns into Spain.
seeing himself thus deluded and affronted, was resolved to take revenge for so
notable a loss of men, and so bold an attempt of the Sarazin, so that with all
speed he raised an Army of a hundred and thirty thousand men, and being thus
fraught with Choler and indignation, he returned into Spain. His first entry
was prosperous: For in the encounter he defeated Aigolands Army near to
Pampelune, Aigoland overthrown and slain.
and for a Seal of his Victory, he carried away the head of Aigoland his Enemy,
who was slain by the hand of Arnold of Belange, a Noble and Valiant Knight: But
the sequel was not answerable to the beginning: For notwithstanding the
overthrow of the Sarazin Troops, all the rest in Spain were not vanquished,
where there were more Kings, and more men of War, who kept correspondence with
Amurath King of Babylon, which place was their Nursery and Storehouse.

Marsile and Belingand, The Sarazins rally.
two Brethren, were the chief of the remainder of the Sarazin Army, wherein
there was a great Babylonian Giant, called Ferragat, A Giant slain.
of an exceeding stature, him did Rowland slay, who was Nephew to Charlemagne;
after which, the Sarazins gathered together the relicts of their broken Troops,
and made a show of resolute men, vowing to sell their lives at a dear rate to
Charlemagne, being favored by many great and good Towns in the Country.
Charlemagne makes a sudden stop, and pursues not his Victory, God reserving to
himself a Sovereign power over all men's designs, yea, over the greatest, and
in matters of greatest consequence, to the end that all may learn to ask
Counsel and success of him, and it was his will and pleasure that the French
Forces should not conquer and possess Spain, the which he had reserved as a
portion for another Nation.

Thus Charles, A Treaty of Peace.
who should have prosecuted his late Victory vigorously, grew remiss, which
encouraged Idnabala the Sarazin (who had free access into the Camp) to make a
motion of Peace. He was a good Secretary of his own Companions minds, what show
soever he made of speaking of himself. Charlemagne (finding by his late
experience, that the event of War is uncertain and doubtful, and that this War
tended to the loss of his Subjects, who employed both their lives and goods for
the purchase of an uncertain Victory, and seeing himself overburdened with
great affairs in his other Estates, to the preservation whereof, reason did
summon him rather than to seek for new) he seemed not unwilling to hearken to
the motion of Idnabala, who assured him, that he found the Sarazins affairs to
be so desperate, that they would be glad to embrace his friendship at
whatsoever rate they purchased it. The Treaty hereupon began, and the chief
Article was propounded, which was, that they should embrace the Christian
Religion, and this Charlemagne seemed to urge with great vehemence: but finding
the Sarazins obstinate in their refusal, he was content to grant them peace,
paying him some great sums of money, as a token that they had been vanquished
by him.

And accordingly he sent a Noble man of his Court, A Traitor.
named Ganes, to treat with them, who (being by bribes corrupted by Marsile and
Belingand) undertook so to order businesses, that Charlemagne should return
into France, and by the way, should receive a notable disgrace: yet they seemed
to make such a composition and agreement, which in show, was very honorable
for Charlemagne: to whom they promised to pay (as an Homage, and acknowledgment
for the Peace he should grant them) what sums of money he would appoint, and
that thereupon he should retire with his Army into France; yet leaving such
Forces in Spain as he pleased, to see the condition which should be agreed
upon, performed. But Ganes had discovered to them, that Charlemagne upon other
accounts was necessitated to return, and therefore desired to leave the
smallest Forces that he could in Spain.

The Agreement being thus concluded, Charles returns into France.
Charlemagne departed with his Army, attending a better opportunity to effect
what he had designed: and he left his Nephew Rowland only with twenty thousand
men, to see the conditions performed. And to make his passage into France the
more easy, he commanded him to lodge in a place of advantage in the Pyrenean
mountains, called Ro^cevaux: and so the French Army marched backwards to
France, under the conduct of Charlemagne, who little dreamed of such an affront
as he shortly after met with.

Whilst the French Army were upon their retreat, Marsile and Bellingand slept
not, but gathering together all the Forces they could, they lodged them
secretly in the hollow Caves of those Mountains, being places inaccessible, and
wholly unknown but only to the Inhabitants of those Countries. They had
intelligence given them by Ganes, what number of men Charlemagne had left in
Spain, under the command of Rowland, to whom the reputation of his Uncle, and
the good will of the People of Spain in the chiefest Towns, was of more use
than his twenty thousand men, although they were the choice of all the Army.
Rowland had no fear of an Enemy, Rowland assaulted.
whenas returning to his Garrison, he was suddenly set upon by the Sarazins,
who were far more in number than the French, who seeing themselves thus
treacherously assaulted, and compassed in, defended themselves valiantly
against those miscreants: But still fresh Troops of Sarazins issued forth of
these Caves, on every side, in so great numbers, as that in the end, the French
(tired and spent in so long and painful a conflict) were oppressed by the
multitudes, rather than overcome by the Valor of their Enemies.

Rowland in so great and extreme a danger (gathering together the pieces of his
shipwreck) performed both the Duty of a good Commander, His Valor.
and of a valiant and resolute Soldier, fighting gallantly, and having beaten
down a great number where the Enemies were thickest, he at length came where
King Marsile was, whom he slew with his own hands. But Belingand, holding the
Victory absolutely his own, pursued the French with great violence; insomuch as
Rowland (not able to hold out any longer) retired himself apart; His Death.
and finding his Death approaching, he endeavored to break his good Sword
Durandall, but his strength failing him, he died of Thirst, through so long and
difficult a combat in that hot Country: and with him died Oliver, Oger the
Dane, Renald of Montaubon, Arnald of Belland, and other Noble Personages, who
are the subject of many fabulous stories: Yet the Fame of their singular
Virtues and Prowess, is engraven in the Original of true Histories, where it
shall never be blotted out.

Charlemagne having intelligence brought him of this great and unexpected loss,
Charles overcomes the Sarazins.
returned suddenly, to take his revenge upon the Sarazins, of whom ^he killed
an infinite number in several places: and being informed of the Treason of
Ganes, he caused him to be drawn in pieces by four Horses, as the only author
of this miserable defeat. And being transported with a just disdain and
indignation for this so base an affront, he had purposed to have passed on in
Spain to take further revenge. But the great and weighty affairs of his other
estates called him back into France, to attend upon them. Returns into France.
And so ended his Spanish Wars, with small success, having troubled Charlemagne
at diverse times, for the space of fourteen years. For God had appointed the
limits of his designs, as reserving to himself a Sovereign power over all men's
enterprises, even of the greatest.

Charlemagne made a Tomb for his Nephew Rowland, and honored the memory of
those other worthy Warriers (who died in the Bed of Honor) with Monuments:
after which he was necessitated to undertake diverse other Wars, both in Italy
and Germany, in all which it pleased God to give him better success. A
Rebellion in Italy.
Italy (during Charles his troubles in Spain) had rebelled, being provoked
thereto by Adalgise Duke of Beneventum, who endeavored to repossess the Race
of Didier: but that attempt was soon suppressed by Charlemagne, to the cost of
the Lombard Rebels: Yet shortly after ensued another War in Germany.

The like occasion also bred a War in Bavaria: His Wars in Bavaria.
For the King Tassillon, who was Son in Law to Didier King of Lombardy, (being
eagerly pressed by his Wife, and wonderfully discontented with Charlemagne)
shaked off the yoke of subjection, and betook himself to Arms: But Charlemagne
surprised him with such celerity, that Tassillon was forced to sue for Peace;
which Charlemagne granted upon condition of his subjection and loyalty: But
again Tassillon, not able to contain himself, raised a new War in another
place, as when we stop one breach, it finds vent by another. He stirred up the
Huns and Avars (a neighboring People to Austria, which was one of the Estates
of the French Monarchy) against Charlemagne, who yet suppressed them with happy
success; and Tassillon himself being again vanquished by Charlemagne, and found
guilty of Rebellion and Treason, was condemned to lose his Estate, according to
the Salique Law: and with him, the Kingdom of Bavaria ended, being now wholly
incorporated into the Crown of France.

The Huns and Avars (of whose names joined together, the word Hungary has been
made) were also punished by Charlemagne, and brought under the yoke of the
French Monarchy. They had formerly attempted by War to disquiet the Country of
Austria, whom Charlemagne had at diverse times opposed by his Forces, so that
the War, at times, had continued for the space of eight years, His Victories.
and the final issue was, that all the Country obeyed him: The Danes also, the
Sorabes, and Abrodites, and the Westphalians, (who had all joined in this War
of Hungary) were also brought under the obedience of Charlemagne. The limits of
the Northern Kingdom, called Austrasia, were so enlarged, that it was divided
into two Kingdoms, and the Realm of Austria which joins upon France, was called
Westriech, that is to say, the Realm of the West; and that which is toward
Danubius, was called Ostriech, that is, the Kingdom of the East, Austria being
then of a greater command than at this day. For it contained all Hungary,
Valachia, Bohemia, Transylvania, Denmark and Poland: Then was the French
Monarchy of a vast extent. But all these Nations have since, either returned to
their first beginning, or new Lords have seized upon them.

Thus the French Monarchy was greatly enlarged by the Prowess and His education
of his children.
Valor of Charlemagne: and his children were grown up, as in age, so in
knowledge and experience, through the careful education which their prudent
Father gave them; who framed them to the management of affairs, intending them
to provide, that they might first succeed him in his Virtues, and afterward in
his Kingdoms. But man purposes, and God disposes, France, Italy, Germany,
Spain, and Hungary, made the Roman Empire in the West, and Charlemagne, being
Master of these goodly Provinces, was in effect an Emperor, but only wanted
the Title, and the solemn Declaration of this dignity. And shortly after, the
Providence of God that gave him the former, ministered opportunity to him for
the enjoyment of the latter, which came thus to pass.

Leo was at this time Pope of Rome, A Sedition in Rome.
against whom there was strange Sedition raised by Sylvester and Campul, men of
great credit in the Court of Rome. These men (with their adherents) upon a
solemn day of Procession, seized upon Leo before St. Lawrence Church, whom they
stripped of his Pontifical Robes, cast him unto the ground, trod him under
their feet, and bruised his face with their fists, and having dragged him
ignominiously through the dirt, they cast him into Prison, where yet he stayed
not long, being freed by a Groom of his chamber called Albin: and so having
recovered St. Peter's Church, he sent to Vingise Duke of Spoleto, entreating him
to deliver him from this miserable Captivity. The Pope freed out of Prison.
Flies to Charles.
Vingise failed him not, but came to Rome, and carried the Pope along with him
to Spoleto; where yet he stayed not long, but from thence went to Charlemagne,
into France, whom he found full of troubles. He complained that many of the
Romans sought to usurp his Power into their hands, and advised the King to
exact an Oath of Fidelity of them. Paschalis was there soon after him, and
accused the Pope of Adultery, and other gross crimes. Charlemagne dismissed
them both, and promised to be at Rome within a few months, and accordingly
prepared for his Journey.

In December, Charles goes to Rome.
Anno Christi 800. Charlemagne was received in Rome with all shows of Honor,
and within eight days he went into St. Peter's Church, and in the presence of
all the People and Clergy, he asked, who had any thing to say against Pope Leo?
Paschalis, or Paschasires, and Campalus had published the Popes crimes by Writ:
but knowing how Charlemagne stood affected toward both parties, they appeared
not; so none prosecuting these crimes against him, the Pope was absolved upon
his Oath; wherein he swore by God and the four Evangelists, Clears the Pope
upon his Oath.
that all these things were false which they laid to his charge: Whereupon the
King declared him innocent, and condemned his accusers, and within few days
three hundred of them were beheaded in the Lateran Field for their presumption,
and affectation of liberty, on the eighteenth of December; and shortly after,
Charles was chosen Emperor: But before I speak of that, I must represent you
with a brief view of the present estate and condition of the Emperor of
Constantinople.

The seat of the Roman Empire, The State of the Eastern Empire.
since the time of Constantine the great, remained at Constantinople, a City of
Thrace, situated in a convenient place for the Guard of the Eastern Provinces:
After which, all the West being full of new Guests, who had expelled the
Romans, the name, authority and power of the Empire remained in the East, where
now the State was in a strange confusion, the Mother being banded against her
Son, and the People amongst themselves.

Constantine the Son of Leo the Fourth, was Emperor at this time, who from his
Infancy was governed (together with the Empire) by his Mother Irene: But being
now come to the age of twenty years, he assumed the Government into his own
hands. Contention about Images.
There was then a great division in the East, which had been continued from
Father to Son for fourscore years together, about bringing Images into the
Churches. The Bishops would needs bring them in: But the Emperors, together
with the greatest part of the People, opposed themselves against them. This
contention had its beginning under Philip Bardanes, was continued under Leo
Isaurus, and from him was derived to his Son Constantine, surnamed Copronimus,
and to Leo the Fourth, Son to the said Constantine. This filled all the East
with infinite scandals.

The same fire of contention continued in the minority of our Constantine, who
was yet governed by his Mother, a Woman of a violent spirit, who had undertaken
the protection of Images, A Counsel from them.
and held a Counsel of many Bishops for the defense thereof: But the people
growing into a mutiny, by force expelled them from Constantinople, where there
Assemhly was held. But Irene, being resolved to carry on her design, assembled
another Council at Nicea, City of Bithinia, honored for having entertained the
first general Council under Constantine the Great, the first of that name:
where it was Decreed, that Images should be placed in Churches for devotion.
But Charlemagne did not allow of this Decree, Charles against Images.
and either himself, or some other by his Command, did write a small Treatise
against this Council, the which bears this Title, A Treatise of Charlemagne,
touching Images, against the Greek Synod.

This crafty Woman made choice of the City of Nicea, that the name of the
ancient first Council held there, might honor this new invention with the
pretext of Antiquity: For there are some that confound the first Council of
Nicea with the second, and Constantine the fourth with the first.

Constantine continued in the hereditary hatred of his Father, and Grandfather
against Images, so as being of age, and in absolute possession of his Empire,
he disannulled all these new decrees, and caused the Images to be beaten down
in all places: Yet did he make all shows of respect to his Mother, yielding
unto her a good part of his authority and command: which respect was the cause
of an horrible Tragedy. For this Woman being transported for two causes (both
by reason of her new opinion, and for despite that she had not the whole
Government in her own power) grew so unnatural, that she resolved to dispossess
her Son of the Empire, and to seize upon it herself: And indeed the authority
which her Son had left her, and the free access which she had unto his Person,
gave her opportunity for the execution of her design. For having corrupted such
as had the chief Forces of the Empire at their command, An unnatural Mother.
and won them to her with her Sons Treasure, she seized on his Person, put out
his eyes, and sent him into Exile (where, shortly after, he died of grief) and
took possession of the Empire.

These unnatural and Tragic furies were practiced in the East, whiles that
Charlemagne, by his great Valor built an Empire in the West. Irene, in her Son
Constantines life time would have married him with the eldest Daughter of
Charlemagne: but this accident crossed that design.

After the Death of Constantine, Irene trears with Charles.
Irene sent to Charlemagne to excuse her self of the murder, disavowing it,
and laying the blame upon such as had done it (as she pretended) without her
command. And to win the good liking of Charlemagne, she caused him to be dealt
withal about marriage (for at that time Festrude was dead) with promise to
consent that he should be declared Emperor of the West, and that she also
would resign unto him the Empire of the East: But Charlemagne would not accept
of her profers. Irene hated and deposed.
The Nobility and People of the Greek Empire did so hate Irene, as having
suffered her the space of three years, in the end, they resolved to dispossess
her.

This Woman, the unnatural murtheress of her own Child, being thus publicly
hated and detested, Nicephorus succeeds her.
Nicephorus, a great and Noble man of Greece, assisted by the chiefest in the
Court, and with the good liking, and consent of the People, seized upon the
Empire, and took Irene, whom yet he only banished, to give her opportunity and
means to live better than she had done: And afterward he treated, and agreed
with Charlemagne, that the Empire of the East continuing under his command, the
other of the West should remain to Charles.

By this Transaction of Nicephorus, He treats with Charles.
and the consent of the Greeks, the possession of the Empire was ratified and
confirmed to Charlemagne, and now began the Division of the Empire into the
East and West. That of the West began in Charlemagne, and continued in his
Posterity, whilst they were Inheritors of their Fathers virtues: But
afterward it was translated to the Princes of Germany, who yet acknowledge
Charlemagne to have risen from a German stock, being born at Worms, Crowned at
Spire, and interred at Aix, all Cities of Germany. Hitherto we have
represented, what Charlemagne did whilst he was King of France only: Now we
are come to consider what happened to him, worthy of Memory, whilst he was
Emperor.

The deeds of Charlemagne after he came to the Empire. The Romanists do boast
that the Pope gave the Empire of the West unto Charlemagne: But the truth is,
the Popes had not yet come to that hight as to pretend to a power of disposing
of Empires and Kingdoms at their own pleasure: But the right of Charles came
another way. For before he came to Rome Anno Christi 800. he had all France
under his Government, together with Franconia, His large Dominions.
and Austrasia; He had subdued a great part of Spain unto the River Iberus,
from the Sarazins: As also Saxony, westphalia, Dacia, Hungary, Istria,
Dalmatia. He had likewise subdued all Italy, except Magna Graecia, and
therefore he was entitled, Charles by the Grace of God King of the Frenches,
Emperor of the Lombards, and Patricius of Rome: So he styles himself in his
Epistle to Alcwin: and Alcwin in an Epistle to him, styles him, The Glorious
Emperor [ Gallicarum] of France, and Rector and Defensor Ecclesiae: Both which
Epistles are in the second Part of Alcwins Works. His Coronation was by the
Decree and Prayers of the Roman People. Sigisbert in his Chronicon, shows the
time, and cause, saying: The Romans, who in heart were long before fallen from
the Emperors of Constantinople: Taking the opportunity that Irene had picked
out the eyes of her own Son the Emperor, with one General consent they
resolved to proclaim King Charles for their Emperor, and to Crown him by the
hands of the Pope: His Title to the Empire.
So on December. 25. Anno Christi 800. they Crowned him by the hands of Pope Leo,
as the Emperors were wont to be Crowned by the Bishops of Constantinople; and
the People cried thrice, Carolo Augusto, a Deo Coronato, Magno and Pacifico
Imperatori, Vita and Victoria, Naucler.
And the Pope anointed him: As also his Son Pepin, whom Charlemagne, by a
solemn Decree had made King of Italy. And the Pope knowing the dangers which
had often befaln himself and his Predecessors, entreated the Emperor that he
would be Protector of the Church of Rome.

Thus Charlemagne, the King of France, was advanced to the Empire, partly by
Inheritance, partly by the Sword, by dedition, and the Title was given him by
the People, and the Bishop of Rome: yet nothing was proper to the Bishop, but
the Coronation and other Ceremonies, which he performed in the name of the
People, according to the custom at Constantinople. At the same time also it was
agreed, An Agreement betwixt Charles and the Pope.
that all the chief men of the City, as well Ecclesiastical, as Secular, should
give their Oath of Fidelity unto the Emperor. Secondly, That the Emperors
Missus should reside in the Palace of St. Peter to decide Pleas amongst the
People: and that there should be allotted for his maintenance, a part of the
former Emperors Patrimony. Thirdly, That if any man's cause was perverted by
the ordinary Judges, and the wronged Person should implore the aid of the
Missus, or Emperors Commissioner, for Justice; and the Missus should adjure
the Judges, saying, By the Faith you owe unto my Lord the Emperor, I require
you to do this man Justice: Then none should dare to decline, either to the
right hand or to the left, although the wrong were done by any of the Popes
Kinsmen. Fourthly, That the Mulcts which should be imposed upon any guilty
person, should be equally divided between the Emperors Missus, and the Popes
Missus. Fifthly, That if any goods fell under Escheat, they should appertain to
the Church, without an express gift of the Emperor. Continu. Eutrop. Catal.
Test. Verit.

Yet all this right was not sufficient for Charlemagne, Charles is envied.
nor did he enjoy the Empire without contradiction. For he was forced to
overcome the envy of this assumed Title with great sums of money; Especially
the Emperor of Constantinople envyed it: but Charlemagne by his magnanimity
prevailed against their contumacy, wherein he excelled the Greeks: and he sent
many Ambassadors unto them: especially unto Irene, not only to treat for
Peace, but about her marriage, that thereby he might the better confirm his
Title: But before his Ambassadors came the second time to Constantinople
(Irene being sick) the People had Crowned Nicephorus on the first of November
Anno Christi 802.

Yet did Nicephorus renew the League with Charlemagne, which Irene had before
made with him: but ( as Sigonius says) with express condition, that Venice
should be free betwixt the two Empires. In the mean time Nicephorus was
molested by the Sarazins, Zonas.
and was forced to agree with them upon hard conditions: He was also molested
by the Bulgarians, over whom he obtained one great Victory; but when he refused
all conditions of Peace, they assembled together again to fight for their Lives
and Land, in which Battle they overthrew, Nicephorus is slain.
and killed Nicephorus, and his Son Stauracius was wounded in the fight, and
fled to Adrianople, where he was afterward declared Emperor. But after three
Months Michael Rangabis, his Brother in Law, shut him up in a Monastery. Then
were mutual Ambassadors sent between the two Emperors, and a perpetual Peace
was concluded betwixt them.

Charles the Great was Crowned Emperor in the thirty third year of his Reign,
upon the the 25th of December, and in the fifty eighth year of his Age. He
fought many Battles and was always victorious. He had (as was said before) Wars
with the Heathenish Saxons, which, by times, lasted thirty years: The Saxons
often rebel.
He oft-times overcame them, and granted them liberty, upon condition that they
would embrace the Christian Faith; but upon every opportunity their Duke
Wedekin, shaken off both Loyalty, and Christianity. At several times when
Charlemagne had obtained a Victory, his manner was to erect a new Bishopric:
Charles his Prudence. Crantz. in Saxon. Bishoprics erected.
So that he erected seven Bishoprics in that province, to which he annexed
Princely Power, knowing well, that such fierce People might sooner be tamed by
Religion then by Arms. The places where these were erected, were, Breme,
Verda, Minda, Paterborne, Osnabourg, Hildesem, and Halberstad. But though he
gave the Bishops power of Governing, yet the Nobles did not altogether loose
the power of administering in Public affairs. At last, because the Saxons
revolted again, he removed ten thousand of them, with their Wives and Children,
into Brabant, and Flanders, and sent some French to inhabit their rooms.

Charlemagne lived fifteen years after that he had united the Roman Empire to
the French Monarchy; yet not without many troubles. For Grimoald, Duke of
Beneventum sought to disturb Italy in the behalf of the Lombards: Troubles is
Italy.
but Charles prevented it betimes, employing against him his Son Pepin, a
worthy and valiant Prince: and Grimoald being vanquished, was entreated with
all mildness, and being restored to his Estate, he became afterward a very
affectionate, and obedient Servant to Charlemagne, who was a prudent
Conqueror, that knew as well how to use, as how to get a Victory.

After this it followed, War with the Venetians.
that for some attempts made by the Venetians against the Empire of
Charlemagne, in the behalf of the Emperor of Constantinople: or (as others
say) upon the false information of Fortunatus, Patriarch of Grado, that
Charlemagne commanded his Son Pepin, King of Italy, to make Wars against them:
which he acordingly began with great resolution, and took the Cities and
Fortresses which the Venetians held within the main land, and at length
besieged the City of Venice it self, both by Sea and by Land, to the relief
whereof the Greek Emperor sent a Fleet: about which Authors agree not; for
some say that Pepin wholly took Venice: Others say, that he only took some
Islands thereof, and that the place which is called Rioalte defended it self:
How ever it was, this War continued long, Obeliers, and Becur, two great
Personages, being the chief Commanders for the Venetians. At last Peace was
concluded betwix them, and the Venetians had liberty to live after their own
Laws and customs, and the Venetians won great reputation for being able to
defend themselves against so potent and victorious an Enemy. Charlemagne would
have the Country which he had conquered from the Lombards, to be called
Lombardy, that by retaining their Name, he might somewhat sweeten their servile
condition, in the ruin of their estate.

But now Charlemagne, Charles makes his Will.
finding himself old and broken, and his Children Valiant, Wise, and Obedient,
he resolved to make his last Will and Testament, wherein he divided his
Kingdoms between his three legitimate Sons, to wit, Charles his Eldest, Pepin
and Lewis: In which he made his eldest Son Charles King of the greatest, and
best parts of France, and Germany. To Pepin he gave the Kingdom of Italy, and
Bavaria, with some other Provinces. And to Lewis he bequeathed Provence, and
that part of France which bordereth upon Spain, together with some other
Provinces. But all succeeded after another manner than he attended, God the
Sovereign disposer of Kingdoms, having decreed otherwise to dispose thereof. He
endeavored also to reduce all his Kingdoms under one Law, making choice of the
Roman Laws above all others, both for the dignity of the Empire, and because
they seemed to him, to be most just and equal: But the French, being loath to
alter any thing in their customary Laws, He gives Laws to his Subjects.
desired, and obtained of him that they might be governed by the same: So as
Gaul, Narbonne, (which comprehends Daulphine, Languedoc, and Provence) do use
the written Laws (as the ancient Provinces of the Romans) and the rest of
France observe their customary Laws.

It afterward happened that a great Fleet of Infidels which inhabited Spain,
with the aid, and assistance of some Africans, invaded the Isles of Sardinia,
and Corsica in the Mediterranean Sea, for the defense whereof, the Emperor
Charlemagne sent commandment to his Son Pepin that he should send thither
against them a valiant Captain whose name was Bucaredus, who took so good order
as that he drove those Infidels out of those Islands, Infidels beaten.
and slew five thousand of them in one Battle. And with no less good success,
the Emperor undertook another War against the Dukes of the Bohemians, and
Polanders, And the Bohemians and Polanders.
which is a part of the ancient Sarmatia, who infested the Countries under his
Dominions, against whom he sent his Son Charles with great Forces of
Burgonians, Saxons, and Germans: And this young Charles, imitating his Father,
Warred valiantly, and with discretion against them, and coming first to a
Battle with the Bohemians, led by Leo their Duke, he overcame them, as he did
also at other times, and at last he slew Leo their Duke; the like success he
had also against the Polanders, so as at length they all became his Fathers
Subjects. And for these Victories of Charlemagne he was so much feared, and
renowned through the World, that a great King of the East; and Amurath, the
greatest of all the Mahomatists, sent their Ambassadors, with rich Presents
unto him, desiring peace, and friendship: and the like did all Christian Kings.

Charlemagne thus living with honor, His War with the King of Denmark.
and in tranquillity, Godfrey King of Denmark (which was a dependence of the
Realm of Germany, and part of Charles his Portion, as was hinted before) made
War against him. This Godfrey was a mighty Prince, and commanded over a large
mighty Dominion, and with great Forces came into Friesland and Saxony, where he
did great harm. Against whom, the Emperor addressing himself (though he was
now Old, and unweildy) speedily departed with a great Army: but by the way news
was brought him that King Godfrey was dead, and that his Army was returned into
their own Country. And upon the same day news came also, Pepin dies.
that his Son Pepin (who had reigned in Italy in great prosperity) was dead in
the City of Millan, which was an occasion of great grief to the old Emperor.
Then did he return to the City of Aken, or Aix, unto which place Ambassadors
came to him from Hermigius, who succeeded Godfrey in the Kingdom of Denmark,
humbly desiring Peace. The like came also to him from the Emperor of
Constantinople, and others also from Ambulat, a King of the Moors, who reigned
in a great part of Spain; to all which he returned gracious answers, and
granted their Petitions: withal, giving hearty thanks to God for that he was
generally so well esteemed of. But after this Sunshine, another storm returned,
as the Clouds return after the rain: And Charles.
For it pleased God to take away another of his Sons, called Charles, who lay
on the borders of Germany for the defense thereof; so as now his whole hope
rested in his third Son Lewis.

Thus man purposes and God disposes. Thus the Sons die before the Father.
Thus we see the greatest cannot free themselves from the common calamities of
mankind. Thus both great Kings, and great Kingdoms have their Period.

Crowns have their compass; Kingdoms have their date:
Fortune her frowns: Felicity her fate.
Thus Charlemagne lost his Children, and his great Empire her best support
under God: For these two Princes (like Stars of the greater magnitude) did
shine bright by inheriting their Fathers virtues, and Valor, leaving behind
them Lewis their Brother, with large Territories, and few virtues, to Govern so
great an Estate.

After the Death of these two great Princes, New enemies rise up.
many enemies rose up against old Charlemagne, who seemed (as it were) to have
lost his two Arms: as the Sarazins in Spain, the Sclavonians, and the Normans
in the Northern Regions: But he vanquished them all, and brought them into his
obedience and subjection, old and broken as he was.

Charlemagne all his Life time held the Church in great reverence, His love to
the Church.
and had employed his Authority to beautify it, and bountifully bestowed his
Treasure to enrich it: But this great plenty, joined with so long and happy a
Peace, made the Churchmen to live losely.

Charlemagne (being himself well instructed in Religion) knowing of what great
importance it was, to have such as should instruct others to be sound in the
Faith, He called five Councels.
and holy and exemplary in their lives, he at sundry times, called five
Councels in sundry Places of his Dominions (For as yet the Popes had not
challenged that power to belong to them) for the Reformation and good
Government of the Church: As at Mentz: at Rheimes: at Tours: at Chaalons: and
at Arles: and by the advice of these Ecclesiastical Assemblies, he made and
published many Orders for the good of the Church which were gathered together
in a Book called, Capitula Caroli Magni. A worthy President for Princes who
seek true Honor by virtue, whereof the care of Piety is the chiefest
Foundation.

In the Preface to this Book, His Ecclesiastical Constitutions.
he thus says, that he had appointed these constitutions with the Advice of
his Presbyters, and Counselors: and that herein he had followed the Example of
King Josias, who endeavored to bring the Kingdom which God had given him, to
the worship of the true God: Some of his constitutions are these. He commanded
to look to, and to try the learning and conversation of such as were admitted
into the Ministry. He forbad private Masses, Also the confusion of Diocesses,
requiring that no Bishop should meddle in another Diocese. He forbad that any
Books should be read publicly, but such as were approved by the Council of
Calcedon. He forbad the worshipping of Saints. He commanded Bishops not to
suffer Presbyters to teach the People other things then what are contained in,
or according to the holy Scriptures. And lib. 2. chapter 3. he says, Although the
Authority of the Ecclesiastical Ministry may seem to stand in our Person: Yet
by the Authority of God, and Ordinance of man, its known to be so divided, that
every one of you, in his own place and order, has his own power and Ministry:
Hence its manifest that I should admonish you all; and you all should further
and help us. He admonished Bishops especially, to teach both by Life and
Doctrine, both by themselves, and the Ministers that were under them, as they
would answer the contrary in their accounts at the Great Day. He Ordained that
the Bishop of the first See should not be called the Prince of Priests, or the
highest Priest, or have any such Title, but only should be called, The Bishop
of the first See. That none can lay another foundation, then that which is
laid, which is Christ Jesus, and that they which lay Christ for their
foundation, its to be hoped that they will be careful to show their Faith, by
bringing forth good Works.

He held also a great Council in the City of Frankfort, A Counsel at Frankfort.
of the Bishops of France, Germany, and Italy, which himself honored with his
own presence; where, by general consent the false Synod of the Greeks (they are
the words of the Original) untruly called the seventh, was condemned, and
rejected by all the Bishops, who subscribed to the condemnation of it. This was
that Counsel (spoken of before) called by Irene at Nice, wherein the bringing
of Images into Churches for devotion, was established. In a Word, if
Charlemagnes meddling with Italy, and his advancing the Pope, for confirming
that which he had taken, could be excused, he was unto all Princes a pattern of
magnificence, of Zeal in Religion, of learning, eloquence, temperance,
prudence, moderation, etc. Alcwin says of him, Charles was a Catholic in his
Faith, a King in power, a High Priest in preaching, a Judge in his equity, a
Philosopher in liberal Studies, famous in manners, His Temperance.
and excellent in all honesty. He was so temperate, that notwithstanding his
great revenues, he was never served at the Table with above four Dishes at a
Meal, and those of such Meat as best pleased his taste, which he used to the
same end for which God created them, which was for sustenance, and to support
his Body, not for show and pomp.

His ordinary exercise was hunting when he was at leisure, His Exercises.
in time of War: and in times of Peace, he attended to such as read Histories
to him, and sometimes he heard Music, with which he was much delighted, having
good skill therein himself: He was very charitable, and a bountiful Alms-giver,
and so careful to provide for the poor Cristians, His Charity.
that in Syria, in Africa, and in Egypt, and in other Provinces of the
Infidels, where Christians lived, he found means to have Almes-houses and
Hospitals erected, and endowed for those thar were Poor.

But there fell out a new accident, which drew out Great Charles again to Arms
in his old Age, His last Wars.
and that was this; Alphonso, King of Navarr, surnamed the Chaste, by reason of
his singular, and signal temperance in that kind, did inform, and advertise
him, that there was now a very fit opportunity, and means offered for him
utterly to subdue the Sarazins in Spain. Charlemagne (who infinitely desired to
finish this work, which he had so often attempted with no great success) gave
ear to the information and advice, whereupon he raises an Army, and marches
into Spain, relying on the Spaniards favor, and assistance, they being
Christians. Indeed Alphonso meant plainly, and sincerely, but so did not his
Courtiers, and Nobles, nor Associates, who feared Charles his forces no less
than they did the Sarazins, and if Charles prevailed, the most confident of
Alphonso's Servants and Officers doubted to be dispossessed of their places,
and Governments by a new Master: and therefore they labored to cross Alphonso,
and to countermand Charles; but the Lot was cast, his Army was in the Field,
and he was resolved to pass on: But when he was entered into Spain, he
encountered with so many difficulties, that being discouraged, he returned back
into France, and so concluded, and put a period to all his Warly enterprises;
embracing again the care of the Church, and of Religion, as a fit subject for
the remainder of his days.

Charlemagne was threescore and eight years old when he left the Wars, His
preparation for Death.
after which he spent three whole years in his study, to prepare himself for
Death, in which time, he read much in the Bible, and read over also St.
Augustines Works, whom he loved and preferred before all the other Doctors of
the Church: He resided also at Paris, that he might have opportunity of
conferring with learned men. There he erected a goodly University, which he
furnished with as learned men as those times could afford, and endowed it with
great privileges: For he had an exceeding great care to make it a Nurcery for
the holy Ministry, that from thence the Church might be supplied with able
Teachers, whence also grew so many Colleges of Cannons, with sufficient
revenues annexed thereunto.

Thus Charlemagne spent three years happily in the only care of his Soul,
leaving an illustrious example to all Princes, to moderate, and ennoble their
greatness with Piety, and so to enjoy their Temporal estates, as in the mean
time not to neglect their eternal concernments, and to think of their departure
out of this Life in time.

Foreseeing his Death (whereunto he prepared himself by these exercises) he
made his last Will and Testament, He makes his Will.
leaving his Son Lewis the sole Heir unto his great Kingdoms, and bequeathed to
the Church much Treasure. But all things and Persons in this World have an end:
His Testament was but the Harbinger to his Death; for presently after, he was
taken with a pain in his side, or Plurisie, and lay sick but eight days, and so
yielded up his Spirit unto God that gave it, Anno Christi 814. and of his Age
seventy one, and of his Reign forty seven, including fifteen years of his
Empire: His Body was interred in a sumptuous Church which he had caused to be
built in the City of Aquisgrave, or Aix la Capelle, where he was born, and his
memory was honored with a goodly Epitaph.

He was one of the greatest Princes that ever lived: His virtues.
His virtues are a pattern to other Monarchs, and his great successes the
subject of their wishes. The greatness of his Monarchy indeed was admirable:
His large Dominions.
For he quietly enjoyed all France, Germany, the greatest part of Hungary, all
Italy; and a good part of Spain. At the time of his Death he was in peace with
the other Kings of Spain, as also with the Kings of England, Denmark, Bulgary,
with the Emperor Leo of Constantinople, and with all the Princes of that time.

This Noble Prince was endued with so many excellent Virtues, His Character.
that we read of very few in ancient Histories that excelled him, so that he
may be justly compared with the best of them: For in Martial Discipline, in
Valor, in Dexterity, in Feats of Arms, there are none that exceeded him. He
obtained as many Victories, fought as many Battles, and subdued as many fierce
and Warlike Nations, as any one we read of, and that both before, and after
that he was Emperor. He was tall of Stature, very well proportioned in all his
members, passing strong: of a fair and grave countenance, valiant, mild,
merciful, a lover of Justice, liberal, very affable, pleasant, well read in
History, a great Friend of Arts and Sciences, and sufficiently seen into them,
and a man who above all, loved and rewarded Learned men. He was very charitable
in his Kingdoms, yea, in his very Court, he harbored and relieved many
Strangers and Pilgrims. In matters of Faith and Religion he was very zealous;
His Zeal.
and most of the Wars which he made, were to propagate and enlarge the
Christian Faith.

He (being misled by the darkness of the times wherein he lived)
superstitiously honored and obeyed the Church of Rome, and the Pope that was
Bishop thereof, together with other Bishops and Prelates, commanding his
Subjects also to do the like. He was also very devout, and spent much of his
time in Prayer, Hearing and Reading. In his Diet he was very temperate, and a
great enemy to riot and excess; and though he was Rich and Mighty, yet fed he
his Body with what was necessary and wholesome, not rare, costly, and strange.

And yet his Virtues were not without their blemishes (as the greatest commonly
are not without some notable Vices) For in his younger days he was much given
to Women, His blemishes.
adding Concubines to his lawful Wives, by whom he had diverse children: but
this was in the time of his Youth: For afterward he contented himself with his
Wife, and for a remedy of this imperfection, though he was three or four times
a Widower, yet he ever married again the Daughter of some great Prince or other.

To conclude all, he was an excellent Emperor, that loved and feared God, and
died when he was very Old, and full of Honor, leaving Lewis (the weakest of
his Sons) the sole heir of his great Empire, but not of his Virtues: So that
this great building soon declined in his posterity.

He had engraven upon his Sword, Pro Deo and Religione, For God and Religion:
He used to set his Crown upon the Bible, as our Canutus sometime put his Crown
upon the Rood, both of them thereby intimating, that as all honor was due to
God, so true Religion was the best Basis of Government, and that Piety was the
best Policy.

The Epitaph which I spoke of, was this; Sub hoc conditorio situm est Corpus
Caroli Magni, His Epitaph.
atque Orthodoxi Imperatorisqui Regnum Francorum nobiliter ampliavit, and per
annos Quadraginta septem foeliciter tenuit. Decessit Septuagenarius, Anno
Domini 814. Indicti, one 7. Quinto Calend. Febr.

Under this Tomb lies the Body of Charles the Great, The time of his Death.
and Catholic Emperor, who most Nobly enlarged the Kingdom of the French, and
most happily ruled it for the space of forty and seven years. He died in the
seventy and one year of his Age; In the year of our Lord eight hundred and
fourteen, the seventh Indiction, on the fifth Calend of February.

He had five Wives: the first was called Galcena, His Wives and Children.
the Daughter of the King of Galistria, by whom he had no Children. The second
was Theodora, the Sister, (or as others say) the Daughter of Didier King of
Lombardy; whom he kept not long, but repudiated her for sundry reasons. The
third was Hildebranda, Daughter of the Duke of Suevia, whom he loved
exceedingly, and had by her three Sons, viz. Charles his Eldest, whom he made
King of the greatest, and best part of France and Germany: Pepin his Second,
whom he made King of Italy, Bavaria, etc. Lewis his Youngest, to whom he left
the Empire entire, his Brothers being both dead in their Fathers Life time.
This Lewis was surnamed Debonaire, or the Courteous. He had also three
Daughters; the Eldest was called Rothruda; the Second Birtha; and the Youngest
Giselia, who would never marry. His fourth Wife he had out of Germany, called
Fastrada: And his fifth and last was also a German Lady, called Luithgranda, of
the Suevian Race, by whom he had no Children.

He showed his love to Religion, His Devotion.
by having one, during his Meal-times, that either read to him some part of the
Holy Scriptures, or else some part of Saint Augustines Books, especially that
De Civitate Dei: or some History. He was also a great Friend to Learning, and
therefore erected three Universities: One was at Padua in Italy; another was at
Boulognia; the third was that in Paris, whereunto he was excited by our
Countryman Alcwin, who was his Tutor.

His Sons he caused to be trained up in the Study of Liberal Arts; His care of
his Children.
and his Daughters to learn to sow, and practice good Huswifry. He always wore
a short Sword at his Girdle, in the Pummel whereof was engraven his Coat of
Arms, with which he sealed all his Laws, etc. And used to say, Behold the Sword
which shall defend my Laws, and that shall be drawn and employed against those
that break them. In the year eight hundred and four, the King of the Scots
entered into the first League which was between the two Kingdoms of France and
Scotland, His League with Scotland.
which was confirmed by succeeding Kings, which occasioned one of them to add
unto their Coat of Arms a double streak of Gules, with Flower de Lisses round
their Escutcheon, to show that their Alliance with France conduced much to the
support of their Kingdom.

FINIS.
ERRATA in the Lives of the Magni.
PAge 3. Line 43. read Daniel for David. p. 17. l. 6. r. being for before. p.
57. l. 50. r. unto for and. p. 77. l. 7. put out and had them very carefully.
p. 111. l. 13. r. proving for provoking. p. 119. l. the last, r. now for not.
p. 174 l. 32. r. of for Oar. p. 220. l. 44, 45. r. a certain sum of money to be
divided among them. p. 242. l. 31. r. of for and. p. 247. l. 18. put in from.
p. 282. l. 15. r. Chaos for Chios. l. 34. r. prosecuted for persicuted. p. 284.
l. 2. r. affections for affects.


