

The skilfull'st Physiognomers, who Scan
Each line and wrinkle in the face of man,
Can tell no more what Souls dwell there, then we
By Seeing Stars can tell what Angels be.
Then ask not at the door who it is: if so,
This Shadow cannot tell thee. Read and know.
A General Martyrologie, CONTAINING A COLLECTION Of all the greatest
PERSECUTIONS which have befallen the CHURCH OF CHRIST From the Creation to our
present Times, Both in England and all other Nations.

Whereunto are added two and twenty LIVES OF ENGLISH Modern Divines, Famous in
their Generations for Learning and Piety, and most of them great Sufferers in
the Cause of CHRIST.

As also the Life of the Heroical Admiral of France, slain in the Parisian
Massacre, and of Joane Queen of Navar, poisoned a little before.

By Sa. Clarke, Pastor in Bennet Fink, London.

The second Edition, Corrected and Enlarged; having the two late Persecutions
inserted: the one in Piemont: the other in Poland.

PSALM. 44.22. For thy sake are we ki^^led all the day long, we are accounted as
sheep for the slaughter.

Nihil crus se^tit in nervo, cum animus est in caelo,

Tertul. Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, for (...) and (...) in Saint Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-door. MDCLX.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER; Especially to the suffering Saints in these three
Nations.
Christian Reader.
THou have here presented to thy view that strange sight which so much
astonished Moses, Exodus 8.3. A bush burning with fire, and not consumed: A
lively Emblem of the Church, often times all on a light flame with the fire of
Persecution, Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae.
and yet so far from being consumed, that The blood of the Martyrs proves the
seed of the Church: And indeed she is the only, and true Salamander, that can
live in the fire: Yet this, not by any strength of her own, but because the
Angel of the Covenant, even the Lord Jesus Christ is in the bush, either to
slack the fire, or to strengthen the bush, and make it incombustible. In this
Book thou may see, as in a Mirror, what has been the lot and portion of
the Church and people of God from the Creation hitherto, viz. Act. 14.22.
Through many tribulations to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Here thou have
a certain and infallible mark of the true Church of Christ, viz. To be hated
and persecuted by the Devil and his instruments. Here thou may see what is
the constant concommitant of the Gospel, when it is received in the love and
power of it, viz. Persecution, according to that of the Apostle, Ye became
followers of us, and of the Lord, 1 These. 1.4.
having received the word in much affliction, etc. Neither yet is God an hard
Master in dealing thus with his faithful servants. He knows that heavy
afflictions are the best benefactors to heavenly affections: and that grace is
hid in nature here, as sweet water in rose leaves, which must have the fire of
affliction put under to distill it out. He knows that when afflictions hang
heaviest, corrupt affections hang loosest upon his children. Yet does not the
Lord afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men, to crush under his feet
all the prisoners of the earth: Lam. 3.33, 34
but he will hereby try who are his indeed and in truth, not in name and
profession only: For as the Eagle tries her young ones by turning their faces
to the sun beams, so those Christians that can outface the sun of Persecution,
are sincere indeed.

One thing is very remarkable in this History, that usually before any great
Persecution befell the Church, the holy men of those times observed that there
was some great decay of zeal, and of the power of godliness, or some mutual
contentions and quarrels amongst the people of God, or some such sin or other
that provoked God against them; and then, as the shepherd sets his dog upon his
sheep, when they go astray to bring them in, and then rates him off again: So
God lets loose wicked Persecutors upon his own children, but it is only to bring
them in unto him; and then, he not only restrains their rage, but casts the rod
into the fire. If judgment begin at the house of God, Isa. 10.12. 1 Pet. 4.17.
what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? Much excellent
use may be made of this History: As, teaching us,





looks the brighter for scouring. Like Glow worms, that shine best in the dark:
Like Juniper that smells sweetest in the fire: Like the Pomander, which becomes
more fragrant for chafing: Like the Palm tree, which proves the better for
pressing: Like the Camomile, which the more you tread it, the more you spread
it. Yea God knows that we are best, when we are worst, and live holiest, when
we die fastest; and therefore he frames his dealing to our disposition, seeking
rather to profit, then to please us.

That when God exposes us to Persecution, he expects our Lots Angels, will
soon away, when they have done their errand. Like plasters, when the sore is
once whole, they will fall off of their own acco^d.

That we should with patience submit to the afflicting I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him* Micha 7.9.
Considering also that impatience under affliction, makes it much more
grievous. As a man in a fever, that by tossing and tumbling, exasperates the
disease, and increases his own grief.

That all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution. 1 Timothy
3.12
from the creation hitherto. What son is there whom the Father chasteneth not?
One son indeed God had without sin, Heb. 12.7.
but not without sorrow; for though Christ his natural Son, was sine
corruptione, without corruption, yet not sine correctione, without correction;
though he was sine flagitio, with out crime, yet not sine flagello, without a
scourge. And if they did these things to the green tree, what shall be done to
the dry? And behold the wonderful wisdom of God herein? who by these
afflictions separates the sin that hates, from the son that he loves, Luke
23.31.
and keeps him by these thorns from breaking over into Satan's pleasant
pastures, that would fat him indeed, but to the slaughter.

In an Appendix to this Book, I have added the Lives of sundry of our Modern
Divines, which I conceive not to be heterogeniall to the rest of the Work; for
though they were not Martyrs, yet may they well be styled Confessors, in regard
of the great Persecution and Sufferings, which most of them met withal whilst
they lived here. And if any ask the reason why I have added no more? It is
because my intelligence comes in so slowely; and if such as are able, will take
the pains to inform me, I shall (if God spares life) add more to the end of
the next impression of my Lives of the Fathers, and modern Divines. I hope that
these my weak and poor endeavors will not prove ungrateful, nor be judged
unseasonable, considering the times wherein we live: For if the same sins
abound amongst us in these days, which have been the forerunners of
persecutions formerly; Praemonitus praemunitus.
we have cause to fear the worst, and to prepare for it; Forewarnd, forearmed.
The reading of this History will manifest what wonderful constancy and
patience the Saints have showed in their greatest sufferings: what has been
the power of Almighty God in their support: and what miserable ends many of
their Persecutors have come to. My hearty desire is, That by reading of this
Book, God may have the glory, and thy soul the comfort, and I shall be well
appaied for my pains, Who am,

Thine in the Lord SA. CLARKE.
From my study in Thridneedle-street, October. 10. 1659.
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).

(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
Thomas Dugard. A. M. Rector Barfordiae.

(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
Tho. Dugard.

To the Reverend, the Author of the Book, CALLED A General Martyrologie, etc.
WHat? yet more Books? what spirit now inspires
Your Pen to write of Torments, Wars and Fires?
What? Will that Pen that drew to the Life before,
Change style, draw Death, and speak of Life no more?
What blustering Boreas raised these stormy Winds,
Which blew down Churches, shook the steddiest Minds,
Sure Hell's broke loose, and Devils in the flesh
Are come out thence to try their wits afresh.
Who ever heard Troy's story with his ears,
And could restrain his eyes from shedding tears?
I quake to hear what Saints in former days
Never shook to feel, so they might win the Baies.
They conquered all; Their patient disposition,
Over came both Pope, and Spanish Inquisition.
They conquered Kings, and won the Crown at last;
Pressed toward the Prize, forgetting what was past.
The Story's sad; it is true, yet the Authors skill
Has made that pleasant which in it self is ill.
Away long-winded Volumes, Times disease;
This Author does our phansies better please.
Large Books are endless; but it is his design
T'enclose great Volumes in his single Line.
Eli. Awn:

To the Reverend Mr. Sa. Clarke, ON HIS MARTYROLOGIE.
OH, Welcome home, Divine Drake, welcome home,
First girdle of the World of Martyrdom.
Who seeks for more, can no new thing descry,
Y' have left no room for new discovery.
These Maps and Charts you bring, nay every letter
Makes you the worlds great Patron, it your Debtor.
To called a Map does but a Part imply,
It Is the whole Globe of Martyrologie.
Each Picture is a Map, each Figure breaths
A little history of the Martyrs deaths.
Pisgah's too far to see the Holy Land,
Stand here on Calvary, and view't at hand.
Let others brag at large, whose fancy it is
To say A SAINT by a Periphrasis.
Who does this Book of yours with theirs confer,
Finds Saint and Martyr in one Character.
Though (some there be) that differ from the rest
In judgment, and account short-writting best:
Those I am sure will praise you when they eye
Your skill in Tachyhagiography.
They Are many words make Volumes, do but look
And you shall see it is matter makes a Book.
All Volumes of this Subject here are set
As't were contracted in an Alphabet.
In characters, for brevity, it is good
That Vowels be by Cons'nants understood.
The least is best, if no essential be
Wanting to make it a perfect Entitie.
Man's but the World Epitomized, but this
Compendium of Saints and Martyrs is.
Its commendation is it self, it is best
Though It were without this my Probatum est.
J. C.

A Table of the Names of all those Martyrs that are mentioned in this book.
A
ABel Page 1 Aber 21 Achaz 22 Achilleus 36 J. Addis 385 Aegidio 257 Agathonica
39 Agapetus 48 Agatha 51 Agathon 52 Agnes 77 Agricol^ 75 Aimeri 147 Alcibiades
44 Alexander 36, 49 Algerius 270 Aloisius 271 Ammonarion 51 Andas 81 Anthimus
64 Andoclus 47 Andrew 29 G.J. Annick 303 Anthea 36 Apollonia 51 Apollonius 45
Areth 22 Arias 254 Arnald 263 Antemius 83 Armand 422 Asclepiades 47 Asyrius 59
Athanasia 75 Athanasius 85 Attalus 41 A. Audebert 320 Austin 290
B
BAbilas Page 49 J. Baker 261 Barbara 78 Barlaam 75 Bartholomew 75, 301
Baudison 293 Isa. Beard 390 de Beck 317 Benjamin 81 Bergerius 322 M. Bertino
422 Bertrand 292 D. Berto 361 Betkin 305 Biblides 42 de Bile 193 Blandina 41
Blondel 320 J. de Boisons 268 B. Bor 340 J. de Boscane 301 F. de Bossu 350
Bovellus 271 A. du Bourg 328 F. Bribard 318 P. Bruly 289 S. Brunes 317 W.
Burgate 261 W. Burges ib. N. Burton 260
C
CAcalla 235 Calepodius 48 Ja. Calvin 338 Campbel 351 A. Canus 316 de Cadurco.
316 G. Carpenter. 283 Carpus. 39 Jo. Castellane. 316 Cecilia. 47 Cheremon. 51
P. Chapot. 319 Charlin. 135 Chober. 195 J. Clarke. 315 Claudius. 317, 321 N.
Clivet. 326 J. Cobard. 318 V. Cockan. 194 Concordus. 40 C. Conink. 297
Constantino. 258 Martha Constantine 421 J. Coomans. 302 B. Copin. 131 J.
Cornon. 317 P. Coulogue. 305 J. Cowder. 351 H. Cowell. 391 Cronion. 50 Cyprian.
56 Cyrillus. 84
D
M. DImonet. 322 Dionysius. 35 Dionysia. 51, 98 Dominicus. 266 Domitius. 83 P.
Domo. 337 Dorotheus. 64 P. Dorzeky. 193
E
R. ECklin. 391 Eleazer. 19 Elutherius. 36 Emilianus. 83 Encenas. 264 J.
English. 319 Enraudus. 108 Epimachus. 51 J. Eseh. 278 Eulalia. 76 Eusebius. 45,
88 Eustachius. 36 Eustratius. 64
F
J FAber. 293 C. Fabri. 290 Fabian. 49 Faninus. 264 Faustinus. 36 Felicitas.
39, 47 Ferdinando. 251 H. Forest. 378 T. Forret. 365 Mr. Fournier. 331 Mis.
Frankland. 384 Fructuosus. 59 M. Fruen. 197
G
F. GAmba. 270 E. Garcino. 422 W. Gardener. 275 C. Gauderin. 303 P. Gaudet. ^16
George. 76 Germanicus. 39 Gervasius. 35 Glee. 335 C. Girard. 115 Girauda. 147
Gisbitzky. 197 Godfrid. 293 J. Gonsalvo. 250 M. Gonin. 317 Gordius. 73
Gorgonius. 64 N. Gourlay. 364 Granvelle. 326
H
P. HAmilton 363 P. Hamlin. 324 L. Harant. 192 B. Hector. 118 Hermes. 36
Hermogines. 76 Herwin. 299 An. Hill. 385 Hipolitus. 49 W. Hooker. 261 Hormisda.
81 M. Hostialek. 196 Hostius. 291 Mis. Howard. 384 Hubert. 320 de Hues. 302 J.
Huglin. 283 J. Husse. 170 W. Husson. 318
I
Jacob. 23 St. James. 27 James Justus. 29 N. of Jenvile. 324 Jerome of Prague
170 Jessenius. 195 J. Insperg. 286 Jobita. 36 John Bap. 26 John. 75 Irenaeus.
47 Isaiah. 4 Ischirion. 51 Judas Mac. 17, 21 Judas brother of James. 29 Julius.
45 Julianus. 50 Julitta. 78 Juliano. 251 Justin Martyr. 39, 44
K
C. KAplitz. 292 A. Kennedy. 366 L. Keyser. 284 J. Kutnaur. 196
L
S. LAloe. 322 La-moth. 337 Laurence. 56 de Lavoy. 317 Leonides. 46 J. Leon.
252 Lin. 386 Lollard. 165 M. Loquis. 172 C. Losada. 253 Will. Loverden. 386
Lucianus 69 Lucius. 40 Ludomilla. 168
M
MAcer 50 Maccabeus 20 Machir 21 Malchus 58 Mappalicus 54 Marchus Arethusius 83
Marcella 46 Mark 30 Marinus 59 Maris 84 Marlorat 336 Martin 287, 296. Martina
48 Mr. Jo. Mason 350 P. Masson 136 Tho. Mason 383 Matthew 29 Mathias ib. Maturus
41 Mauritius 67 J. Maxwell 388, 391 Menas 74 Mercuria 51 T. Messino 361 Metra
51 Metrodorus 39 L. Meulin 303 G. de Meyer 304 M. Michelot 319 Midleton 382 W.
Mill 378 P. Moice 289 Montgemery 390 J. Mollius 268
N
N. Nail 323 Nemesion 51 Nereus 36 Nicanor 30 Nicholas 285 Nicholson 389
O
L. of OBiers 352 Oguire 293 L. Hen. Otto 193
P
PAmachius 48 Pamphilus 63 Pampinian 91 J. Panane 316 Papilus 39 Paul 29, 31,
87 Peregrinus 85 Perpetua 47 Persival 286 Pescinus 165 Peter 31, 49, 64, 65, 69
Philip 29, 48 Phocas 36 Photinus 46 M. Pierrone 356 M. Pilot 422 Pionies 39
Pistorius 285 de la Place 345 Plutarch. 46 J. Pointer 316 S. Polliot 319
Polycarp 39 J. Pontio 249 Potentianus 45 Potichus 44 Potamiena 46 Priscus 58
Procopion 76 Protasius 35 Ptolemaeus 40 Pusices 80
Q
QUinta 51 Quirinus 36, 69
R
P. RAmus 346 Sara Rastignole 421 de Reux 316 Revocatus 47 Rhais 46 Ricetto 272
P. Roch 338 Rochus 234 J. Rogres 367 F. Roman 233 Romanus 71, 72 Rogues 338 L.
of Rugenice 394 J. Russel 334
S
SAlamona 24 Sanctus 41 Satyrus 47 G. Scherter 285 Schlick 391 Scoblant 302 W.
Scuch 282 Sebastian 75 Sega 273 Secundianus 53 Secundulus 47 Serena 64 Serenus
46 Serapion 52, 53 P. Serre 323 J. Shultes 195 Simon 34, 79 P. Simon 422 Simon
Zelotes 29 Silvanus 63, 64, 69 Sixtus 56 P. Spengler 281 F. Spinola 273 Starky
391 Stemback. 265 Steven. 27 T. Steffeck. 195 Jo. Stone. 384 D. Straton. 364
Suenes. 81 Sulpitius. 36 H. Sutphen. 279 S. Sussikey. 196 Symphorissa. 36
Syrus. 75
T
TAilor. 289 Tertullia. 47 Theodora. 52 Theodorus. 71, 83 Thiessen. 288 Thomas.
29, 321 Tiburtius. 47 G. Tilleman. 286 ^ Timothy. 35 Tiranion. 63 J. de Tour.
335 G. Trecius. 267
V
VAlerianus. 47 de Valougnes. 336 F. Venote. 320 Uetius Epagethus. 41
Vincentius. 45, 76 Vitalis. 75 H. Voes. 278 Urbanus. 47, 48 Usthazares. 79
W
A. WAllace. 377 Watson. 391 Wendelmutha. 284 Wenceslaus. 168, 191 William of
Nassaw. 273 G. Wiseheart. 367 N. Wodniansky. 196
Z
ZEchariah. 3 Zenon. 36 Zenobius. 64 Zepherinus. 47 D. Zervius. 194
The CONTENTS of the Chapters, CONTAINING The several Persecutions, together
with the Lives of such Persons as are mentioned in this Book.
THE Persecutions mentioned in the Old Testament Page 1 The Persecutions from
Nehemiah to Antiochus his time 5 The Persecutions under Antiochus Epiphanes 6
The Life of Judas Maccabeus 9 The Martyrdom of the Maccabees 18 The
Persecutions mentioned in the New Testament 26 The first primitive Persecution
under the heathen Roman Emperors 30 The second primitive Persecution 32 The
third primitive Persecution 35 The fourth primitive Persecution 39 The fifth
primitive Persecution 46 The sixth Primitive Persecution 48 The seventh
primitive Persecution 49 The eight primitive Persecution 56 The ninth primitive
Persecution Page 61 The tenth primitive Persecution 62 The Persecution of the
Christians in Persia 79 The Persecution of the Church under Julian the Apostate
82 The Persecvtion of the Church under the Arrian Heretics 86 The Persecution
by the Donatists 89 The Persecution under the Arrian Vandals in Africa 90 The
persecution of the Waldenses 102 The persecution of the Waldenses in Calabria
133 The persecution of the Waldenses in Provence 136 The persecution of the
Albingenses 140 The persecution of the Church in Bohemiah 167 The persecution
under Ferdinand 1617 180 The persecution of the Church in Spain 233 The
Original, Progress, and Practice of the Spanish Inquisition 236 The Life of Dr.
Aegido 256 The Life of Dr. Constantino 258 The Martyrdom of Nic. Burton in
Spain 260 The Persecution of the Church in Italy 263 The Life of Mr. John
Mollius 268 The Life of William Gardener 275 The Martyrdom of a Christian Jew
277 The Persecution of the Church in Germany 278 The Martyrdom of a Minister in
Hungary 284 The Persecution of the Church in the Low Countries 284 The
Persecution under the D. de Alva 297 The Martyrdom of W. of Nassaw 306 The
modern persecution of Germany 308 The Persecution of the Church in France 315
The Persecution in the Civil Wars in France 329 The History of the Massacre of
Paris 341 The Siege of Sancerre 352 The Siege of Rochel 354 The Persecution of
the Church in the Valtoline 359 The Persecution of the Church in Scotland 363
The Life of Mr. George Wiseheart 367 The Persecution of the Church in Ireland
379 A continuation of the History of the Waldenses from the year 1560. to our
time 397 The Marquisat of Saluces described, with its several troubles and
persecutions 401 The Artifices and wicked practices used to consume and destroy
the faithful in the valleys of Piemont 407 The motives of the late persecution
in the valleys of Piemont 411 A Narrative of the bloody cruelties lately
exercised there 418 A Narrative of the War between the Papists and Protestants
there 431 Who interceded to the D. of Savoy in the behalf of the Protestants
442 A Description of Piemont, and the valleys thereof 447 The late persecution
of the Church of Christ in Poland 451 The Destruction of Lesna 452 The cause of
Religion as it stands now in Germany 454
THE PERSECUTIONS Mentioned in the Old Testament.
CHAP. I. The Persecution of the Church in the first Ages of the World, and so
forward till the Incarnation of Christ.
THE first Murderer and Persecutor that was in the World, was the Devil, and
the first method and means that he made use of to carry on this persecution,
was by subtilty and large promises, that by eating the forbidden fruit, they
should have their eyes opened, Genesis 3.5.
and should be as gods knowing good and evil: and hereby he drew our first
Parents from their Obedience unto God, and cheated them of that blessed and
happy estate which God had created them in. Since which time his enmity against
the Church and Children of God has never ceased: but by his effectual working
in the Children of disobedience, he has provoked and stirred up one man to be
the Persecutor and Devourer of another: Thus he provoked Cain to rise up
against, and to slay his brother Abel, Genesis 4.8. Abel.
and though the Scripture be silent how the wicked Cainites, the sons of men,
behaved themselves toward the sons of God; yet doubtless they persecuted them
with the tongue, if they proceeded no further. Can we imagine that Noah, Noah.
that was a Preacher of Righteousness in the midst of a perverse generation,
could escape without hatred, scorn and contempt? How many jeers (think ye) had
he whilst he was building the Ark, as doting and dreaming (not of a dry
Summer, but) of a wet winter? the earth in his days was said to be corrupt and
filled with violence, Genesis 6.11.
which violence certainly was principally exercised against the Church of God:
And afterward when the world was reduced to a very small number, yet then
Satan had his cursed Ham that persecuted and mocked his own father, Genesis 9.22.
Lot. Isaac.
the righteous Noah. Was not Lot also persecuted and scoffed at in Sodom? Genesis
19.9. Isaac in Abraham's house mocked by Ismael? Jacob.
Genesis 21.9. Was not Jacob hated and persecuted by his brother Esau? Joseph.
Genesis 27.41. Joseph by his brethren? Genesis 37.4. and that because he brought
unto his father their evil report, verse 2. Was he not afterward cast into a
pit by them? ver. 24. Then sold to the Ishmaelitish Merchants, who carried him
into Egypt, ver. 28. There he was persecuted by his whorish Mistress, Genesis
39.17, 18. Cast into prison, where his feet were hurt with fetters, and he was
laid in irons, Psalm. 105.18. But these were but small persecutions in
comparison of those which followed.

The Israelites in Egypt.
For when the Children of Israel were multiplied in Egypt, Pharaoh King of Egypt
set over them Taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens, Exodus 1.11*
thinking thereby to eat up, and wear them out; and when that prevailed not,
they made them serve with rigor, and they made their lives bitter with the
hard bondage in Mortar, and in Brick, and in all manner of service in the
field; all the service wherein they made them serve, was with rigor, ver. 13,
14. And when this prevailed not, the King commanded the Midwives, Siphrah and
Puah, when they did the office of a Midwife to the Hebrew women, and saw them
upon the stools, if they were delivered of a son, they should presently kill
him, ver. 15, 16. and when these Midwives neglected his commands, he charged
all his people that every son that was born to the Israelites, should be cast
into the river Nilus, v. 22.

Moses.
Moses was persecuted by Pharaoh, who sought to slay him; which caused him to
fly into the Land of Midian, Exodus 2.15. And when God sent him back into Egypt
to deliver his people from the house of bondage, how did Pharaoh persevere and
proceed in his persecuting the people of God: he caused straw to be taken from
them, and yet the number of Bricks to be continued; and when the task was not
done, the Officers of the Children of Israel were cruelly beaten, ver. 14. And
when God had brought out his people with an high hand from under the Tyranny of
the Egyptians, and carried them into the wilderness, how did Satan stir up some
sons of Belial against Moses and Aaron, even Korah, and his complicies, two
hundred and fifty Princes, who cried out against them, Moses and Aaron.
Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy, even every
one of them, Numb. 16.3. Afterward when the children of Israel were settled in
the land of Canaan, they were often grievously oppressed, and persecuted by the
wicked and Idolatrous nations that lived amongst them, and round about them; as
first by Chushan-Rishathaim, King of Mesopotamia, who tyrannized over them
eight years Judge. 3.8. Then by Eglon King of Moab, who slew many of them,
Israel in the time of the Judges.
and oppressed them eighteen years, v. 13, 14. Then by the Philistines, v. 32.
Then were they mightily oppressed for twenty years together, by Jabin, King of
Canaan, Judge. 4.2, 3. Then did the Midianites persecute them with so much
cruelty, that they were forced to forsake their houses, and to make them Dens
and Caves in the Mountains, to shelter and hide themselves from them, Judge.
6.2. yea for seven years together they tyrannized over them; and when the
Israelits had sown their land, they came up in such multitudes, that they
destroyed the increase of the earth, and left no sustenance for Israel, neither
sheep, nor ox, nor ass, ver. 3, 4. Then the Philistines again, and the
Ammonites Lorded it over Israel, and brought them into great distress for
eighteen years, Judge. 10.^. After that the Philistines yet again oppressed
them for forty years together, Judge. 13.1. And afterward they slew of them in
two battles thirty four thousand, and carried away the Ark of God also, 1 Samuel
4.2, 10, 11. Then in Saul's time, these Philistines so distressed Israel, Jsrael
in Readiness time.
that the people were forced to hide themselves in caves and thickets, and in
rocks, and in high places, and in pits; yea some of them forsook their own
country, and fled beyond Jordan, 1 Samuel 13.6, 7. and the land was so enslaved
to them, that there was not a Smith to be found in Israel, but the Philistines
either slew them, or carried them away captives, so that the Israelites were
fain to go to the Philistines to have their instruments of husbandry set in
order, ver. 19, 20.

How David was persecuted by Saul all his time, David.
the Scripture does amply set forth, 1 Samuel 19. etc. and was not he persecuted
grievously, when cursed and railed upon by Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.5, 6, etc. The
Church of God was afterward persecuted under Rehoboams reign, by Shishak King
of Egypt, who took Jerusalem, 1 King. 14.25, 26.
and carried away the Treasures of the Lords house, and of the Kings house into
Egypt. And again under Asa, by Baasha King of Israel, 1 King. 15.16. and by
Zerah the Ethiopian, Judah under the Kings.
who came against Judah with an Army of a thousand thousand men, and three
hundred chariots, 2 Chronicles. 14.9. Yea so malicious and subtle is Satan that he
sometimes stirs up one Saint to persecute another; as he stirred up good King
Asa to persecute the Prophet of the Lord who dealt plainly and faithfully with
him, by casting him into prison, Asa persecutes a Prophet.
2 Chronicles. 16.10.

Michaiah also was persecuted and imprisoned by Ahab, Michaiah.
2 Chronicles. 18.25, 26. Under Jehosaphat the Church of God was persecuted by the
Moabites, Ammonites and Edomites, Gods judgment on Persecutors. Elijah. Elisha.
whom God destroyed by setting of them one against another, 2 Chronicles. 20.23.

Elijah was persecuted by Ahab and Jesabel, 1 King. 18.10. and 19.2. The
Prophets of the Lord were slain by Jesabel, 1 King. 18.13. Elisha was hated and
persecuted by Jehoram. 2 King. 6.31. in the reign of this Jehoram, the
Philistines and Arabians mightily oppressed Judah, 2 Chro. 21.16, 17. Then
Athaliah by murdering the Kings seed, usurpeth the Kingdom, and tyrannizeth
five years, 2 Chro. 22.10. Joash in his reign slays Zechariah for reproving
him, 2 Chronicles. 24.21. Zechariah.
The Church was oppressed at the same time by the Syrians, ver. 23. and
afterward also in the reign of Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.5. and about the same time
the King of Israel slew of Judah a hundred and twenty thousand, and carried
away captive two hundred thousand men, women and children. 2 Chronicles. 28.8.
Judah was also oppressed by the Edomites, ver. 17. and by the Philistines,
ver. 18. and by the King of Assyria, ver. 20. and chap. 32.1. Manasses
persecuted the Prophet Isaiah for reproving him, Isaiah.
and caused him to be sawn a sunder with a wooden saw. Josephus. Afterward
Pharaoh Necho tyrannized over Judah, 2 Chronicles. 36.3. and after him
Nebuchad^ezzar* v 6; etc. and so the sins of Judah being come to the full, the
good figgs were carried away captive to Babylon, Jer. 24.1, etc.
and the land afterward was wholly laid waste and destroyed: which being
foretold by the Prophet Jeremiah, the wicked Jews, Jeremiah.
first persecuted him with the tongue, Jer. 18.18. then was he smitten, and put
into the stocks, Jer. 20.2. then was he endanger of death by the Priests and
false Prophets, Jer. 26.8. then was he imprisoned by Zedekiah, Jer. 32.2, 3.
then he is beaten, and again put into prison, Jer. 37.15. and after that cast
into a dungeon, where he stuck in the mire, Jer. 38 6. then by the wicked
Captains he was carried into Egypt, Jer. 43.6, 7. What grievous afflictions the
Church and people of God endured about this time, see it set forth to the life
in the book of the Lamentations.

The 3 Children.
In the time of the Captivity, the three Children were persecuted by
Nebuchadnezzar, and thrown into the fiery furnace, for refusing to worship his
golden Image, Daniel.
Dan. 3.23. Daniel was persecuted by Darius his Courtiers, and cast into the
Lions den, Dan. 6.16. Mordecai was hated and persecuted by Haman, Mordecai.
and a Decree procured for the murdering of all the people of God in one day,
Esth. 3.13.

Israel after the Captivity.
After the return of the Jews from captivity, the people of the Land labored to
weaken the hands of the men of Judah, and troubled them in the building of the
Temple, and hired Counselors against them to accuse them to Cyrus, and
Ahasuerus: they wrote also against them to Artaxerxes, that they were a
rebellious people, and that if they should be suffered to build Jerusalem, they
would neither pay toll, tribute, nor custom to the King, Ezra. 4.4, etc. and
having by this malicious suggestion gotten authority, they came upon the poor
people of God, and enforced them to give over their work. Yea* and afterward,
when by the command of the Lord, the Jews had again set upon the building,
Tatnai and Shether-Bosnai came up to discourage and discharge them from it; and
when this prevailed not, they wrote against them to King Darius. Again, when
Nehemiah came to Jerusalem, and began to build the wall of the City, how were
they scorned and jeered by Sanballat, Tobiah and Geshem? Nehe. 2.19. and ^. 2
3*8.
And when the work prospered in their hands, and jeers would not prevail to
stop it, they then conspired to fight against Jerusalem, and so to hinder it;
but neither that prevailing, by reason of the prudent carriage of Nehemiah,
Nehemiah.
they then sought to entrap him, and by destroying him, to hinder the work,
Nehe. 6.2. Then they accused the people of God of treason and rebellion, ver.
6, etc. Then they hired a false Prophet to terrefie Nehemiah, ver. 10, 12. Then
they corrupted, and held intelligence with some of the Nobles of Judah to
betray him; notwithstanding all which designs, God preserves Nehemiah, and
the building of Jerusalem is finished. And thus far the sacred Scriptures of
the Old Testament have given us a certain Register of the Persecutions,
Martyrdomes and sufferings of the Church and children of God for the space of
about three thousand five hundred years; from the creation of the world, to the
Restoration of the Jewish Polity under Nehemiah.

CHAP. II. The Persecution of the Church from Nehemiah to Antiochus his time.
AFter the death of Eliashib the High Priest, Judas his son succeeded, and
after him John his son, which John had a brother called Jesus, who was much
favored by Bagoses, General of Artaxerxes, who promised him the Priesthood,
which made him take occasion to quarrel with his brother John, The Jews
persecuted by Bagoses.
who thereby was so much provoked against him, that he slew him in the Temple;
Bagoses being informed hereof, came with his Army to Jerusalem, and kept the
Jews in bondage seven years, making them tributaries, so that before they could
offer their daily sacrifice, they were compelled to pay for every Lamb, fifty
Drachmes. After the death of John, Jaddus his son succeeded in the
priesthood, in whose time Alexander the Great passed over the Hellespont, and
having overcome the Lieutenant of Darius, he conquered many countries in Asia
minor, intending suddenly to come upon Jerusalem. Jaddus being informed of his
intention, was sore afraid; he therefore offered sacrifice, Prayer in times of
danger.
and commanded the people to make their prayers unto God, for direction and
protection in this common danger: and when he heard that Alexander approached,
he caused the Priests and people to put on white garments, and himself, attired
in his Priestly robes, went before them; when Alexander espied them, he himself
marched before the rest of his company, and coming to the High Priest, he fell
down on his face before him: then did all the Jews circle him in round about,
and with one voice saluted him. Alexanders chief Commanders were wonderfully
astonished at this deportment of the King, and thought he was out of his wits:
and Parmenio stepping to him, asked him what he meant thus to adore the
High Priest of the Jews, when as all other men adored him; Alexander answered,
I do not adore him, but that God whom the High Priest worshipeth; for in my
sleep I saw him in such an habit when I was in Macedonia, consulting with my
self how I might conquer Asia; and he bad me to make no delay, assuring me that
he would both guide me and my Army, and would deliver the Empire of the
Persians into my hands: Then gave he the High Priest his hand, and went with
him to the City, and coming to the Temple, he offered sacrifice according to
the direction of the High Priest; then did Jaddus show him Daniels Prophecy,
wherein his victories over the Persians, and his Monarchy were foretold, which
much rejoiced Alexander: then did he command the Jews to ask some favors at
his hands; the High Priest requested only that they might live after the
Ordinances of their forefathers, and that every seventh year they might be
exempted from taxes and tributes, which he fully granted: they besought him
likewise that the Jews which were in Media and Babylon, might be permitted to
live after their own Laws, which he willingly promised, and so departed: this
was about the year of the world 3632. and before Christ's nativity 332.

After the death of Alexander, his Kingdom was divided amongst his Captains,
amongst whom Ptolemy the son of Lagus held Egypt, who falling out with
Antigonus that held Asia minor, there grew great wars between them, wherein
Ptolemy won from him all Syria, and going to Jerusalem on a Sabbath day under
pretense to offer sacrifice, the Jews suspecting nothing, he surprised the
City, carrying away many of the Jews into captivity into Egypt: but after his
death, his son Ptolemy Philadelphus at his own cost redeemed an hundred and
twenty thousand of them, paying twelve Crowns apeece for each of them, and sent
them back into their own country: He sent also by them fifty talents of gold
for the temple, and obtained of Eleazer the High Priest, the Law of the Jews,
and 72 Interpreters (out of every Tribe some) who translated it into Greek in
72 days: and having finished their work, Ptolemy returned them with great
rewards for themselves, and with many rich presents to Eleazer.

Antiochus and Ptolemy being at war each against other, the Jews suffered much
by them, Match. 1.

Collected out of Josephus. CHAP. III. The persecution of the Church of God
under Antiochus Epiphanes, before the nativity of Christ about 168 years.
Afterward the Jews being divided amongst themselves, one part of them went to
Antiochus, telling him that their purpose was to forsake the Religion and
Ordinances of their forefathers, Apostates.
and to follow that of the Kings, and to live after the manner of the Greeks,
entreating him to license them to live in Jerusalem; which Antiochus assenting
to, they went to Jerusalem, where they behaved themselves very wickedly, but
finding opposition from the other party of the Jews, they sent for Antiochus,
who led his army against Jerusalem, and encamped before it, and by his faction
within, had the gates opened, and the City betrayed to him, Antiochus entered
Jerusalem.
about the year of the world 3796. and before the nativity of Christ 168.

Being entered Jerusalem he slew many of the faithful Jews, and having taken
great spoils, he returned back to Antioch.

Two years after he came to Jerusalem again, and having seen what quantity of
gold was in the Temple, and what a huge number of Presents and precious
Ornaments were in the same, he was so overcome with covetousness, that he
violated all conventions and conditions formerly made, equally raging against
his own and the adverse party, sparing neither friend nor foe: then he spoiled
the Temple, and carried away the Vessels dedicated unto God, the golden Table,
the golden Candlestick, the Censers, Antiochus robs the Temple.
etc. leaving nothing behind him of any value; yea, he inhibited the godly Jews
from offering their usual and daily sacrifices to God; and having spoiled the
whole City, Forbideth the daily sacrifice.
he slew many of the Inhabitants, and carried the rest away into Captivity,
with their Wives and Children, to the number of ten thousand: He also burned
the fairest buildings of the City, and brake down the walls, and raised a
Fortress in the lower City, and having enclosed it with high walls, he planted a
Garrison of Macedonians therein, with whom remained the scum of the Apostate
Jews. He also caused an Altar to be erected in the Temple, on which he
commanded swine to be offered in Sacrifice, contrary to the Law.

He constrained the Jews to forsake God, and adore those Idols which himself
vvorshiped; he forbad them to circumcise their Children* His Cruelty.
and appointed Overseers to constrain them to fulfill his Commandments, so
that many for fear of punishment conformed themselves to his will; But such as
were of upright hearts, and valiant minds, little respected his menaces;
whereupon they were beaten, Christian courage.
and exposed to cruel punishment many days together, in the midst of which they
yielded up the ghost; for after they were whipped, and maimed in their bodies,
they were tortured and crucified; the women were strangled, and the
circumcised children were hung up about the necks of their parents; and where
any books of the sacred Scriptures were found, they defaced, and burnt them,
and such with whom they were found, The Scriptures burnt.
were put to most cruel deaths.

At this time there dwelled at Modin (a Village of Jury) one whose name was
Matthias, a Priest of the rank of Joarib, that had five sons, John called
Gaddis, Simon called Matthes, Judas called Maccabeus, Eleazer called Aaron, and
Jonathan called Apphas. This Matthias often complained to his sons of the
miserable state of their Country, of the sacking of their City, the
profanation of the Temple, Matthias his zeal.
and the miseries of the people, telling them, that it was better for them to
die for the Law, then to live in Ignominy. When therefore the Kings Commisaries
came unto Modin, and commanded the people to sacrifice according to the Kings
Edict; they first applied themselves to Matthias as to the most Honorable
person amongst them, requiring him first to offer sacrifice, that others might
follow his example, promising that the King would much honor him for it.
Matthias ansvvered that he would by no means commit that Idolatry, assuring
them, A noble Resolution.
that though all other Nations, either for love or fear, should obey the Edicts
of Antiochus, yet that he, nor his children could be induced to forsake the
Religion of their fathers: As soon as he had thus spoken, a certain Jew stepped
forth to offer sacrifice according to the command of the King, wherewith
Matthias, inflamed with zeal, was so displeased, that he and his sons fell upon
him, Zeal.
and with their swords hewed him to pieces; he also slew Apelles the Kings
Captain, and some other soldiers, who would have withstood him. Then he
overthrew the Altar and with a loud voice, he said, If any one be affected to
the Laws of their fathers, and to the service of God, let him follow me? and so
he retired into the deserts with his sons; the like did the rest, with their
wives and children, hiding themselves in caves and dens. The Kings Captains
having intelligence hereof, with the Garrison that was in the Citadel at
Jerusalem, they pursued them into the desert, and having overtaken them, they
first endeavored by persuasions to draw them to Idolatry; but the Jews
absolutely refusing to yield to their wicked wills, resolved rather to die then
to submit to them, and to commit such impiety; The Jews murdered, refusing to
fight on the Sabbath day.
whereupon these bloody persecutors assailed them on the Sabbath day, and
burned them in their caves, who neither resisted their enemies, nor closed up
the mouths of their Caves, supposing it to be a violation of the Sabbath, if
they should fight or work upon that day; some thousands of men, women and
children were there stifled; yet diverse escaped, who joined themselves with
Matthias, and chose him for their Captain. Then did he inform them, that they
ought to fight on the Sabbath day, if they were assailed by their enemies, and
prevailed with them not to be guilty of their own death, by their neglect to
defend themselves; and so having assembled a sufficient number, he destroyed
the Altars, and slew those that had forsaken their Religion: commanding others
to circumcise their Children, and driving those from every place, whom
Antiochus had set to see his Laws executed. But when he had thus governed one
year, he fell sick, and perceiving his end to approach, he called his sons, and
exhorted them to follow his steps in maintaining the Law of God, Matthias his
sickness.
and fighting for their Country, telling them, that then they should have God
for their Assister, who will not forsake those that love and fear him, but
taking pleasure in their virtues, will once more grant them favor to recover
their former peace and liberty; and says he, God will establish you in the
possession of your ancient Laws; His counsel to his sons.
and though our bodies be mortal, and subject unto death, yet the memory of our
virtuous actions is enfranchised by immortality; make therefore no difficulty
to hazard your lives in so good a cause: But above all things I exhort you unto
concord, and in whatsoever any one of you shall be found more naturally apt and
fitted then another, let him prosecute the same without any contradiction from
the rest: I charge you to obey your brother Simon (who is a Politic and
valiant man) in whatsoever he shall counsel you: but make Judas your Captain,
who is both valiant and strong, for he shall revenge the injuries and outrages
which have been done to our Nation, and shall put our enemies to flight; second
him therefore with men of valor, His death.
and such as fear God, and by this means you shall be sure to prevail.

CHAP. IV. The Life of Judas Maccabeus.
AFter Matthias his death, Judas took upon him the government of the wars, and
by the help of his brethren, and other Jews, he drove the enemies out of the
country, purg^ng the land of all the uncleaness that had been brought into it.
But when Apollonius, who was Antiochus his General in Samaria, heard of it, he
gathered his Army together, and invaded Judea, against whom Maccabeus went
forth, and after a terrible battle, overthrew him, Apollonius slain.
slew Apollonius and many of his soldiers; took his Camp, and therein a very
rich booty; and Judas gat Apollonius his sword for his part in the spoil. Then
Seron Governor of Caelosyria gathered all his forces together, and hired many
Apostate Jews to join with him, and so marched against Judas as far as
Bethoron: Judas also advanced toward him, but when he perceived that his
soldiers were unwilling to fight, by reason of the inequality of their
numbers, and for that they had eaten no meat, but had fasted for a long time,
he encouraged them, saying, that the means to obtain the victory, consisted not
in the greatness of their number, but in their devotion toward God; Judas
encouraged his soldiers.
whereof they had evident examples in their forefathers, who with a small
number, had often defeated many thousands of their enemies, etc. Hereby he so
prevailed with his soldiers, that, dreadless of the number of their enemies,
they all together ran upon Seron, and after a cruel fight, routed his Army, and
slew him together with eight hundred of the Syrians; Seron slain.
The rest escaped by flight.

Antiochus hearing of these things, was highly displeased, and therefore he
assembled all his forces, and hired many mercenaries, but having mustered his
Army, he found that his treasure failed him to pay so great a multitude;
whereupon he resolved, first to go into Persia, to gather up his tributes: and
in the mean time he made Lysias his Vicegerent, a man of great esteem with
him, and one that governed all the countries from Euphrates to the borders of
Egypt: with him he also left some Elephants, and part of his Army, commanding
him expressly, that when he had conquered Judaea he should make the inhabitants
thereof his slaves, Antiochus his ^rpel command.
and sell them to those that would give most for them, and that he should
destroy Jerusalem, and utterly abolish that race. Lysias having received this
commandment, sent Ptolemy, Nicanor, and Gorgias (men of great authority about
the King) with an Army of forty thousand Foot, and seven thousand Horsemen; to
invade Jury; who marching as far as the City Emmaus, encamped in the field; and
increased their Army with many Syrians, and Apostate Jews. There came also
diverse Merchants a long with them to buy the prisoners that should be taken,
bringing gieues along with them to manacle the prisoners withal. Judas having
viewed the Camp, and number of his enemies, encouraged his soldiers, exhorting
them to repose their confidence and hope of victory in God: he also appointed a
F^st, that they might humble themselves, and call upon God, by supplications
and prayers, Fasting and prayer before the battle.
for success in such an extreme danger. Then he told them that God would have
compassion upon them, and give them strength to stand against their enemies,
and to put them to shame. The next day he marshalled his Army by thousands, and
by hundreds, and sent away all that were newly married, or that had lately
bought pess^ssions, according to the Law. And t^en he said unto the rest: My
countrymen and companions, His exhortation to his Army
we never yet had any occasion more necessary, wherein we ought to express our
courages, and contemn dangers, then at this present; for now if you fight
valiantly, you may recover your liberties, which ought the more to be prised,
because thereby you may win opportunity to ser^e God, and so live an happy
life: but if ye prove cowards in the fight, you shall be branded with
perpetual infamy, and hazard the utter extirpation of our Nation. Think
therefore, that if you fight not, you must die: and on the contrary, assure
your selves, that in fighting for your Religion, Laws and Liberty, you shall
obtain immortal glory: be ready therefore, that to morrow morning you may bid
your enemies battle. Immediately news was brought him, that Gorgias with five
thousand foot, and a thousand horsemen, was sent forth under the conduct of
some fugitives, by night to fall upon him; whereupon he resolved the same night
to break into the enemies Army whilst they were thus divided. Having therefore
refreshed himself and Army, leaving many fires in his Camp thereby to deceive
the enemy, he marched all night to seek them out. Gorgias finding that the Jews
had forsaken their Camp, conceited that for fear they were fled into the
mountains, and therefore he resolved to search them out diligently. But in the
morning, ^udas accompanied only with three thousand men and those but ill armed
because of their poverty, showed himself to the enemies that were at Emmaus,
and having viewed their warlike discipline, and mighty number, and how well
they were encamped, he encouraged his followers to fight v^liantly, telling
them, that God would deliver their enemies into their hands, and thereupon
causing his Trumpets to sound, he rushed in upon his enemies with such fury and
resolution, as altogether affrighted and discouraged them; A wonderful v^ctory.
and having slain such as resisted, he pursued the rest as far as the plains
of Idumaea, etc. In this fight about three thousand of the enemies were slain;
yet would he not suffer his soldiers to take the spoil, telling them, that as
yet they were to fight with Gorgias and his Army, but so soon as they had
(through Gods mercy) with the lik^ val^ur beaten them, they might then securely
enrich themselves by the prey of all their enemies. Gorgias with his Army being
upon an hill, and discovering the flight of their friends, Gorgias flies.
and the Jews readiness to give them battle, were so affrighted, that they
also fled; whereupon Judas with his men returned to gather the pillage, and
having found great store of gold, silver, scarlet and purple, Thanksgiving.
he returned to his dwelling with joy, praising God for their happy success.

Lysias hearing of this overthrow was much enraged, and presently assembled
another army of near sixthy thousand chosen foot, and five thousand horsemen,
wherewith he went to invade Judaea and encamped in Bethsura: Judas hearing of
it, came forth against him with ten thousand men, and seeing the number of his
enemies so far to exceed his, he earnestly cried unto God, that it would
please him to fight with, and for him; Prayer.
and then charged the vanguard of the enemy with so great force, that he
discomfited, and slew about five thousand of them, Lysias perceiving hereby the
resolution of the Jews, Lysias beaten.
who would rather die then lose their liberty, he returned with the rest of his
Army unto Antioch, where he continued, and entertained many mercenaries, to
make a greater Army for the conquest of the Jews: In the mean time Judas
assembled the people, and told them, that having obtained so many victories,
through the mercy of God, they ought now to go up to Jerusalem, and purify the
Temple that was desolate, and to offer unto God the sacrifices that were
ordained by the Law. The Temple cleansed.
Then going up with a great multitude of people he found the Temple desolate,
the gates burned, and grass growing within the same: grieving therefore at so
sad a spectacle, he began to weep, and all the people that were with him, and
having chosen out some of his best soldiers, he commanded them to force the
garrisons which were in the fortresses, whilst himself purged the Temple. Then
he caused to be made a Table, a Candlestick, and Altar for incense, all of
gold; he put up a rail also, and set gates to the Temple: and having thrown
down the Altar of burnt-offerings that was profaned by Antiochus, The service
of God restored.
he built a new one of stones neither hewed nor hammered: Then on the twenty
fifth of Chasleu [September] were lights set in the Candlestick, perfumes laid
upon the Altar, loaves set upon the Table, and sacrifices offered upon the new
Altar, which was the same day three years wherein before the sacred service was
changed into profane and hateful impiety. Then did Judas with his countrymen
celebrate a feast unto the Lord for eight days, praising God with Hymns and
Psalms. He enclosed the City also with a wall, and built high Towers thereon,
in which he planted Garrisons against the incursions of the enemies. He
fortified also the City of Betsura, that it might serve as a Fort against the
enemy.

But the nations round about them, being greatly displeased with this
prosperity of the Jews, oppressed diverse whom they surprised by ambushes and
treachery; The Edomites overcome.
whereupon Judas warred against them to hinder their incursions: he slew many
of the Idumaeans, and brought away a great prey out of their country, and shut
up the sons of Baan* their Prince, who lay in wait for the Jews, and after a
siege, he overcame them, setting fire on their Towers, and killing all the men
that where therein. After this he made war upon the Ammonites, who had a
mighty Army under the conduct of Timotheus: The Ammonites overcome.
with these he fought and overcame them, and took their City of Jazor, and
burned it, leading their wives and children into captivity, and so returned
into Judaea: But the neighboring nations hearing of his departure, assembled
themselves together against the Jews in Galaad, who retiring into the sort of
Dathema, sent to Judas, requesting him to come and relieve them; and whilst he
was reading their Letters, other messengers came out of Galile, informing him
that they were assaulted by the inhabitants of Ptolomais, Tire, and Sidon, and
others there abouts. Hereupon Judas commanded his brother Simon to take three
thousand chosen men, and with them to relieve those Jews that were assailed in
Galile: and himself with his brother Jonathan, accompanied with eight thousand
fighting men, marched into Galaad, leaving the rest of his forces under two
other Captains, whom he commanded to have a watchful eye over Judaea, yet not
to join battle with any enemy till his return. Simons victories in Galile.
Simeon in Galile fought against his enemies, discomfited them, pursued them to
the gates of Ptolemais, and slew about three thousand; and having gathered
their spoils, he released many Jews that were prisoners, restored their goods
to them, and so returned home. But Judas having passed Jordan, and marched
three days journey, he met the Na^athians, who told him that his brethren were
besieged in their Castles and Cities, and some of them were already brought
into great exrteamity and penury: Hereupon he first assailed the Inhabitants of
Bosra, Judas takes Bozra.
took their City, set it on fire, and killed all the men that were able to
bea^ arms: then marching all night, he came early in the morning to the Castle,
where the Jews were besieged by Tymothies Army. The enemies were just then
raising their ladders to scale the walls, and applying their engines for
battery: Then did he encourage his men to fight valiantly for their brethren
that were in danger, and causing his Trumpets to sound, he distributed his
forces into three battalions, wherewith he assaulted the enemies, but they,
hearing that it was Mac^abaeus, Overcomes Timothy,
were struck with so great a fear, that immediately they fled: Judas with his
men pursuing them, slew about eight thousand, and then marching to Malla [a
City of the enemies] he surprised it, slew all the men therein, and burnt it
with fire; after which he destroyed Chaspomo, Bosor, and diverse other places.

Shortly after Timothy leavied another great Army, hired many of the Syrians,
and drew forth all his allies to his assistance; with these he marched to
Jordan exhorting them valiantly to oppose the Jews and to hinder their passage
over the river, telling them that if the Jews gat over, they were sure to be
put to the worst: Judas hearing hereof, marched hastily against his enemies,
and having passed the river, he presently set upon them, Timothy again overcome.
killing some, and grievously affrighting the rest, who casting away their
arms, immediately fled; some of them to save themselves fled into a Temple
called Carnain, but Judas having taken the City and Temple, slew them and burnt
the same. Then did he lead away with him all the Jews that lived in Galaad,
together with their wives, children and substance, and brought them into Judaea.

When he drew near to the town of Ephron, they had baricadoed up his way that
he could not pass: then did he send Ambassadors to them, to desire them to open
his passage; which when they refused, he besieged the City, took it by assault,
burned it down, Ephron destroyed.

Thanksgiving for victory. A miracle of mercy.


and slew all the men that were therein. After having passed over Jordan, they
came into Judaea with great joy and gladness, praising God, and offering
sacrifices of thanksgiving to him, for the safe return of his Army; for that in
all those battles and encounters, he had not lost one Jew.

But whilst Judas and Simon were gone upon these expeditions, the two Captains
which he had left to command the Garrisons of Judaea, Vainglory punished.
being desirous to obtain the reputation of valiant men, took their forces,
and went toward Jamnia; against whom Gorgias, Governor of that place, issued
out, and slew two thousand of them; the rest fled to Judaea. The Idumaeans
overcome.


Afterward Judas and his brethren warred against the Idumaeans, took diverse of
their Cities, and with a great booty returned home with great joy. Antiochus in
the mean time being in Persia, heard of a wealthy City called Elymais, in
which was a rich Temple of Diana, etc. thither he went, and besieged it, but
the inhabitants sallied out, and with great loss drove him from thence,
whereupon he returned to Babylon: there also news was brought unto him of the
overthrow of his Captains in Judaea, and that the Jews were grown strong; which
together with his former defeat, so wrought upon him, that he fell sick, and
finding no hope of recovery, he called his most familiar friends to him, and
told them that his sickness was violent and desperate, and that he was plagued
with this grevous affliction, for that he had tormented the people of the Jews,
destroyed their Temple, Antiochus his horrible death.
committed horrible sacrilege, and contemned the reverence of God; but now he
vowed, that if it would please the Lord to restore him, he would become a Jew,
and do many great things for the people of God; as also that he would go
through all the known world to declare the power of God. Notwithstanding which,
the Lord knowing his hypocrisy continued to plague him after a terrible
manner: he had a remediless pain in his bowels, and intolerable torments in
all his inward parts: His body bred abundance of worms, which continually
crawled out of the same: yea, he so rotted above ground, that by reason of the
intolerable stink, no man could endure to come near him, neither could he
himself endure the same: and thus this vile person who had formerly in a proud
and insolent manner protested that he would make Jerusalem a common burying
place, Gods judgment on Persecator^.
and the streets thereof to run with the blood of Gods people; by Gods just
judgment ended his life in extreme misery: but before his death, he called
Philip one of his chief Captains, and made him governor of his kingdom,
requiring him to be very careful of his son Antiochus.

Then was Antiochus proclaimed King, and surnamed Eupator: Antiochus Eupa^tor.
About which time the Garrisons, and Apostates that were in the Fortress at
Jerusalem, did much mischief to the Jews; for setting unawares upon those that
came to the Temple to worship, and to offer their sacrifices, they slew them:
Hereupon Judas resolved to cut off these Garrisons, and to that end he assembled
all the people, and besieged them, and having made certain Engines, and raised
diverse Rams, he earnestly prosecuted the siege: but diverse of those Apostates
escaping by night, went to Antiochus, desiring him not to suffer them to
perish, who for his fathers sake, had forsaken their Religion, etc. Then did
Antiochus send for his Captains, commanding them to raise a mighty Army, which
accordingly they did, gathering together a hundred thousand footmen, and twenty
thousand horsemen, and thirty two Elephants; with these Forces he departed out
of Antioch, and made Lysias General of his Army: Bethsura besieged.
Then did he besiege Bethsura, a strong City, but the inhabitants valiantly
resisted him, and sallying out, burned his Engines which he had prepared for
battery. The King continuing the siege for a long time, Judas hearing of it,
raised his siege from before the Castle of Jerusalem, and marched toward
Antiochus his Army, and when he came near to the enemies Camp, he lodged his
Army in certain streights, called Beth-zacharia.

The King hearing thereof, raised his siege from Bethsura, and marched to wards
the straight where Judas with his Army was; The King first caused his Elephants
to march through the straight; about each Elephant were a thousand Footmen, and
a hundred Horsemen for his guard, each Elephant carried a Tower on his back,
furnished with Archers: the rest of his Forces he caused to march two ways by
the mountains, commanding them with huge shouts and cries to assail their
enemies, and to uncover their golden and brazen bucklers, that the reflection
thereof might dazzle the eyes of the Jews; yet was not Judas at all amated, but
entertained the Army with a noble courage, slaying about six hnundred of the
forlorn hope: But Eleazer, Judas brother, seeing a huge Elephant armed with
royal trappings, supposing that the King was upon him, he ran against him with
a noble courage, and having slain diverse that were about the Elephant, he
thrust his sword into the belly of the beast, Eleazer slew, and is slain by an
Elephent.
so that the Elephant falling upon him, slew him with his weight.

Judas seeing the great strength of his enemies, retired back to Jerusalem; and
Antiochus sent back part of his Army against Bethsura, and with the rest, he
marched on toward Jerusalem. The Bethsurites despairing of relief, and their
provisions failing them, surrendered their City, Bethsura surrendered.
having the Kings oath that no outrage should be offered to them, yet he
thrust them out of the City and placed a Garrison in it. He spent also along
time in besieging the Temple at Jerusalem, they within defending it gallantly;
The Temple besieged.
for against every Engine that the King erected, they set up a contrary Engine:
Their only want was of victuals, because (it being the seventh year) the Land
had not been tilled; whereupon diverse of them fled away secretly, so that very
few remained for the defense of the Temple. But behold the good providence of
God! just then came tidings to Antiochus, A special providence.
that Philip coming out of Persia, intended to make himself Lord and Master of
the country, Antiochus concluded to give over the siege and to march against
Philip; but first he sent an Herald to Judas, promising them peace, and
liberty to live according to their Religion, which conditions Judas accepting
of, took an oath from the King for performance, and so surrendered up the
Temple. Whereupon Antiochus entered the same, and seeing it so impregnable a
pl^ce, Perfidiousness.
contrary to his oah he commanded his Army to level the wall that environed
it, and then he returned to Antioch, leading away with him Onias, surnamed
M^nalaus, the High Priest, whom, by the counsel of Lysias, he put to death, A
just judgment.
because he had advised his father to enforce the Jews to forsake their
Religion: A just reward for so wicked a fact.

Antiochus finding that Philip had already conquered much of his country, went
strait against him, fought with him, and slew him.

Presently after Demetrius the son of Seleucus took possession of Tripolis in
Syria, and setting the Diadem upon his own head, he leavied an Army, and
invaded the Kingdom of Antiochus. The people generally submitted themselves to
him, and laying hold of Antiochus and Lysias, they brought them both to
Demetrius, Antiochus slain by Demetrius
who caused them to be slain.

To this new King, diverse Jews (banished for their impiety) together with
Alcimus their High Priest, resorted, a^cusing their Nation, The wickedness of
Apostates.
and in particular Judas and his brethren for killing their friends, and
banishing such as were friends to Demetrius. Demetrius was much moved with
these reports, and therefore he sent a great Army under Bacchides, a valiant
and experienced Captain, Bacchides sent against Judas.
with commission to kill Judas and his confederates. Bacchides with his Army
marched into Judea, sending an Herald to Judas and his brethren, pretending
peace, when he intended to surprise them by subtilty and treachery. But Judas
seeing that he came with so great an Army, found out his drift, and would not
trust him: yet many of the people were deceived with his Proclamation of peace,
and therefore submitted to live under his government, first having received an
oath from him, that neither they, nor any of their followers should be
endamaged: but when they had committed themselves to him, he falsified his
oath, Perjury. Perfidiousness.
and slew sixty of them.

Then removing his Army from Jerusalem, he came to the village of Bethzeth,
where, apprehending many of the Jews, he slew them all, and commanded the rest
in the country to obey Alcimus, with whom he left a part of his Army, and so
returned to Antioch unto demetrius.

Alcimus by his feigned and familiar deportment, drew many more of the wicked
Jews to join with him, Alcimus his subtilty and cruelty.
and then he went with his Army through the country, and slew all that took part
with Judas. Judas perceiving that hereby many upright men, and such as feared
God were slain; he also with his Army went through the Land, and slew all the
Apostates that were of Alcimus his faction. Whereupon Alcimus repaired to
Demetrius, and made grievous complaints against Judas; who fearing that if
Judas prospered, it would be prejudicial to his estate, Nicanor sent against
Judas
he sent Nicanor to make war against him, and having furnished him with a
sufficient Army, he commanded him that he should not spare any one of that
Nation.

Nicanor coming to Jerusalem; offered no act of hostility, endeavoring to
entrap Judas by subtilty, His subtility.
sending him a peaceable message, wherein he protested that he would do him no
injury, and that he came only to express the good affections of Demetrius to
the Nation of the Jews.

Judas and his brethren being deceived with this glozing message entertained
him and his Army. Nicanor then saluted Judas, but whilst he was conferring
with him, he gave a sign to his soldiers to lay hands on him; Judas in danger.
but Judas discovering the treason, brake from him, and escaped to his Army.
Then did Nicanor resolve to make open war upon him, and bad him battle near to
a Borough called Capar-salama, where he obtained the victory, and constrained
Judas to retreat into the Fortress at Jerusalem; Judas forced to retreat.
there did Nicanor besiege him for a while, and then retired; at which time
certain of the Priests and Elders met him, and having done their reverence,
they showed him those sacrifices which they intended to offer to God for the
Kings prosperity; but he blaspheming, threatened them, that if they did not
deliver Judas into his hands, Nicanors blasphemy.
he would destroy the Temple at his return. Hereupon the Priests wept
abundantly, praying unto God to defend the Temple, together with those which
called on his Name therein, from the outrage of their enemies.

Nicanor coming near to Bethoron, received a great supply of soldiers out of
Syria. Judas also was about thirty furlongs distant from him not having above a
thousand men, yet he exhorted them not to fear the multitude of their enemies,
but to set courageously upon them, expecting help from God; A terrible battle.
and so encountering with Nicanor, there was a very doubtful conflict, yet
Judas had the upper hand, and slew a great number of the enemies. Nicanor
himself also fighting valiantly, was slain; whereupon his Army fled: but Judas
speedily pursuing, made a great slaughter, Nicanor slain.
and by sound of trumpet, giving notice to the neighboring places, the
inhabitants thereof betook themselves to their weapons, and meeting those that
fled, they slew them, so that no one escaped from this battle, though they were
at least nine thousand men.

Then ensued a little peace to the Jews. Shortly after Alcimus the High Priest,
intending to beat down an old wall of the Sanctuary, was suddenly stricken by
God, became speechless, and fell to the ground, and having endured many
grievous torments for many days, A just judgment.
he died miserably. Then did the people by a general consent give his place to
Judas: who hearing of the great power and victories of the Romans, sent two of
his intimate friends to Rome, to entreat the Romans to be their Allies and
Confederates, Judas sends to the Romans.
and to write to Demetrius to give over his wars against the Jews.

The Ambassadors coming to Rome, were entertained by the Senate, and friendship
concluded betwixt them, upon these conditions; That none under the Romans
should war against the Jews, A league between the Jews and Romans.
nor furnish their enemies with Victuals, Ships or Silver: That if any enemies
should assail the Jews, the Romans should succor them to the uttermost of
their power; that if any made war upon the Romans, the Jews should succor
them; that if the Jews would add or diminish any thing from this Association,
it should be done with the common advice of the Romans; and that what should
so be ordained, should remain irrevocable.

Nicanors death, and the discomfiture of his Army being reported to Demetrius,
he sent another Army under Bacchides, who coming into Judaea, and hearing that
Judas was encamped at Bethzeth, Bacchides sent against Judas twenty thousand.
he marched against him with twenty thousand footmen, and two thousand
horsemen. Judas had not in all above two thousand men, who seeing the
multitude of Bacchides Army, were afraid, so that some, forsaking the Camp,
fled away, insomuch as there then remained with Judas but eight hundred men.
His enemies also pressed so upon him, that he had no time to re-assemble his
Forces, yet he resolved to fight with those eight hundred men, whom he
exhorted to be of good courage, and to fight valiantly: but they answered, That
they were not able to make head against so great an Army, and therefore they
adviced him to retire, and stand on his guard, till he had gathered more
Forces: Judas replied, Judas his resolution.
God forbid that the Sun should see me turn my back upon the enemies; though I
die, and spend my last blood in this battle, yet will I never soil my former
worthy actions by an ignominious flight. And so having encouraged his
soldiers, he commanded them without apprehension of danger, to bend themselves
altogether against the enemy. Bacchides drew out his Army, arranged them in
battle, placing his horsemen in the wings, his Archers, and light-armed men in
the front, and then the Macedonian Phalanx, and so causing his Trumpets to
sound, and his Soldiers to shout, he charged his enemies. Judas did the like,
and encountered Bacchides, so that there was a most cruel conflict, which
continued till Sunset. A terrible battle.


Judas perceiving that Bacchides, and the flower of his Army fought in the
right wing, he chose out the most resolute of his Soldiers, and drew them
toward that quarter, and set upon them, brake their squadron, and thrusting
into the midst of them, he forced them to fly, and pursued them as far as to
the mount Aza; but the left wing followed Judas, and so enclosed him on the
back part. He seeing himself thus enclosed, resolved with his followers to
fight it out to the last. He slew a great number of his enemies, till at last
he was so wearied, that ^he fell to the ground, and was there slain: His
soldiers seeing him dead, betook themselves to flight. Simon and Jonathan his
brothers, by entreaty recovered his body, carried it to Modim, Judas slain.
where they interred it, all the people weeping diverse days for him; and
Jonathan his brother succeeded him in the Government.

CHAP. V. The Martyrdom of the Maccabees.
WHilst Antiochus Epiphanes was living, he thrust out Onias the High Priest
from his Office, and put into his room Jason his brother, whereupon Jason
promised to pay him yearly three thousand six hundred and sixty Talents of
silver. This wicked Jason presently forced all the people to forsake their
Religion, and to build Baths: He hindered the defense and building of the
Temple. Hereat God was very wroth, and stirred up Antiochus to go to Jerusalem,
where he was gallantly entertained by the Jews. Then did he presently make an
Edict, That whosoever of the Jews refused to offer Sacrifice to the gods,
Antiochus his cruel Edict.
he should presently be broken to pieces on the wheel. But those that were
godly did little esteem that Edict.

Antiochus perceiving that the rigor of his Edict prevailed little, and that
many chose rather to die, Constancy.
then to forsake their Religion, he sitting in an eminent place, and calling
all the Jews together, caused swines-flesh to be sacrificed on the Altar, and
to be offered to every Hebrew to eat. Amongst the multitude thus assembled,
there was one Eleazer, a Priest a man that feared God, and one who was very
aged, of a reverend countenance, Subtilty.
and famous for his virtue; To him Antiochus said, Be advised by me, holy old
man, to avoid those torments which are prepared for the obstinate; preserve thy
reverend age, and contemn not the benefit of life; take the sacrifice, and eat
of the swines-flesh, for no wise man will credit the Jews opinion to refuse
that meat which nature has ordained for man's use, as well as any other: Why
should this beast be more abominable then others? etc. Or, suppose your Laws
are to be observed, yet will they excuse thee, seeing thou sinnest not
voluntarily, but by compulsion? To whom Eleazer answered; Courage.
We, O Antiochus, follow not vanity, but the verity of Religion, and fear of
torments cannot make us embrace another: but suppose that the Religion left us
by our forefathers had no firm ground, yet should not torments make me forsake
it. Do not esteem it a small matter to eat forbidden meat, and to taste of that
which is sacrificed to Idols; for it is a profane thing to touch things that
are profane, and we are taught by our Law to suffer with patience whatsoever,
for Gods cause, is inflicted upon us, etc. And therefore I refuse this profane
meat, well knowing what I ought to eat, as warranted by Gods Law, which I have
learned to obey, etc. and herein will I persist, though with tyrannous hand
thou pluck out mine eyes, or with a sharp knife rip up my entrails. Think not
that because I am old, my body is feeble: If I must be sacrificed for Gods
sake, thou shall find me as lusty, and constant as a young man, and most
joyful in torments. Prepare an extraordinary fire, or what else thou please,
thou shall find me more constant in the midst of all torments, then I am now
before they come, etc. The chaste, and pure company of Fathers shall receive me
into their number, where I shall not fear (O impious King) thy threats, etc.

Whilst Eleazer spoke thus boldly, Eleazer cruelly beaten.
the soldiers haled him to be tortured, and stripping him naked, they hanged
him up, and whipped him: and whilst on either side he was thus beaten, one
cried, Obey the Kings pleasure and command. But this worthy man was not
overcome by torment, but suffered as though he had been in a sleep: and fixing
his venerable eyes upon Heaven, he knew in whom he believed, and to whom he
sacrificed his life, and beholding the flesh on each side of his body rent and
torn with stripes, and the blood issuing out abundantly, he admired his own
patience, and thanked God the author of it: At last finding his own frailty,
scarce able to endure such torments, he fell upon his face, which with stripes
was all rent, and torn, His admirable patience.
still glorifying God, as he did before: Then a soldier, to gratify the King
like a mad man, did spurn, and tread upon him, to increase his sufferings: but
Eleazer, strong in body and mind, like a Champion of the true God, did never
shrink at those pains, but by patience overcame the cruelty of his tormentors;
so that his torturers admired that he should be able to bear them: Then the
Kings Officers said, How long will thou forbear to obey the King? eat Swines
flesh and free thy self from all that thou endurest. Eleazer, though hitherto
he had been silent in all his torments, yet could he not hear such profane
counsel without answering, whereupon he cried out; We Hebrews are not so
effeminate as to forsake the way of salvation wherein we walk to our old age,
His zeal.
neither are we taught for fear of contumely, which will not long endure, to
give others an occasion, and example to sin, etc. Will thou, O Tyrant, esteem
of us if we should yield unto thee? nay, thou might justly reprove our
inconstancy: Then did the soldiers, by the Kings command, cast him into the
fire, and poured stinking, and loathsome liquors into his nostrils, all which
he patiently suffered, till he was consumed in the flames: Yet when nature
began to fail, lifting up his dazzled eyes to Heaven, he said, Thou, O God, art
he from whom life, and salvation proceeds: Behold I die for observing thy
Laws: Be merciful to this thy Nation, His prayer at death.
and forsake not them whom hitherto thou have protected in thy bosom, and under
the shadow of thy wings, let my death end all misery, etc. and so he joyfully
yielded up the ghost.

Antiochus was but more incensed hereby, and therefore he caused seven Children
of the Hebrews to be brought to Antioch, who being young, and therefore, as he
thought, weak, and unable to endure torments, he presumed that either by
persuasion, or fear, he should enforce them to forsake their Religion.

Then he commanded these seven, together with their mother Salamona now aged,
to be brought before him: They were of excellent beauty, and worthy children of
so virtuous a mother. The Tyrant beholding them, with a merry countenance,
craftily spoke unto them: I wish your good, O admirable young men, do not
therefore like mad men resist my commands: Antiochus his subtilty.
Avoid not only torments, but death also: I desire not only to exalt you to
honor, but to increase your riches, and possessions: Contemn therefore your
own superstition, and embrace our Religion: If you refuse this (as I hope you
will not) I will devise all torments, that by a lingering, and painful death, I
may consume you: And to terrify them the more, he caused all sorts of
Instruments for torment to be brought forth before them, as Wheels, Rods,
Hooks, Racks, Cauldrons, Cages, Gridirons, etc. with Engines to torment the
fingers, and hands, as Gauntlets, Auls, Bellows, Brazen-pots, and Frying-pans,
etc. Then said he, Obey me, O prudent young men, for if I command that which is
a sin, yet do not you offend, being compelled to it.

But these holy young men, inflamed with a divine spirit, contemned these
torments, and despised both threats and flateries, denying to eat of the
sacrificed Swines flesh, and saying: Wherefore, The seven brethrens courage
O Tyrant, do thou persecute us that are innocent? We desire to die, and
will, till death expels life, firmly keep that which God commanded and Moses
taught us: and therefore seek not, O Tyrant to seduce us by protesting thy
unfeigned love: Thou lover of in justice, master of cruelty, deviser of
iniquity, the pardon thou proferrest is more painful to us then punishments:
We contemn death, and esteem not thy words, our master Eleazer having taught us
to despise them. Why do thou expect such pusillanimity in us young men, when
of late thou foundest such courage in an old man? Thou can not know our minds
except by tearing our bodies thou searchest them out: We will willingly for our
God suffer any thing, and expect Heaven, whilst thou for thy cruelty to
innocents, shall be reserved to eternal fire.

The Tyrant greatly moved herewith, caused them to be beaten with Buls-pizels:
first commanding Maccabeus the eldest to be stripped, and stretched out upon a
Rack, Maccabeus his torments.
and his hands to be bound, and so to be most cruelly beaten, who so wearied
his tormentors by sufferring, that they rather desired to give over, then he
requested it: Then was he put upon a Wheel, and a weight hanged at his feet,
and so stretched round about it, that his sinews and entrails brake, yet all
this while he called upon God: His resolute speech.
and then said to the Tyrant: O bloody Tyrant, who persecutest the Majesty of
God; I whom thou thus tormentest, am no witch, nor murderer, but one who dies
for observing Gods Law: And when the tormentors, overcome with compassion,
willed him to submit to the Kings pleasure, he said; O ye wicked ministers of
Tyranny! Your Wheels are not so sharp and cruel, that I thereby will be forced
to forsake Heaven, whereon my mind is fixed: Tear my flesh, yea if you please,
roast it at the fire: torture each parcel of my body with several cruelties,
yet you shall not be able to force us young men to impiety.

His Martyrdom.
As he thus spoke, a fire was kindled, and he thus racked on the Wheel, was
thrown into it, and by flames was so burned that his bowels appeared, yet was
his mind unmoved, and in the midst of his torments he cried thus to his
brethren; O beloved brethren, make me your example; despise the alluring baits
of this world; obey God rather then this Tyrant, His speech at death.
who can if he please humble the proud and mighty, and exalt the dejected: Then
was he taken from the fire; and slain alive; his tongue was pulled out of his
head, and he put into a frying pan, and so he departed out of this life, to the
admiration of his enemies, and the joy of his mother, and brethren.

Then was the second brother, called Aber, haled by the soldiers; and the
Tyrant showed him all those instruments of torment, and asked him if he would
eat of the sacrifice? which he, denying to do, Abers torments.
his hands were bound with iron chains, and being hanged up thereby, the skin
of his body was slain from the crown of his head to his knees, so that the
entrails in his breast were seen: Then was he cast to a cruel Libard, greedily
thirsting after blood, but the beast smelling at him, Or Leopard.
forgot his cruelty, and went from him, without doing him any harm: This
increased the Tyrants rage, and Aber by his torments grew more constant, crying
aloud, O how pleasant is that death to me, which is caused by all sorts of
torments for Gods sake! yea, H^s speech at death.
the more pleasant, because I know I shall be rewarded in heaven; Let these
torments, O Tyrant, satisfy thy cruelty, for my pain is not increased by them,
but my pleasure, as thou shall find by my patience in these sufferings; I am
more willing to suffer, then thou to punish, yet my pain is less in suffering,
then thine by inflicting: I am tormented for keeping the Law, thou by Gods
Justice shall be banished from thy Regal seat, yea, eternal torments are
prepared for thee, which neither thy profane mind is able to endure, nor thy
power to decline, etc. And so shortly after he yielded up his soul to God.

Then Machir the third son was brought, whom all pitied, Machir brought forth.
and exhorted by his brothers examples to forsake his opinion, and so decline
the punishment; but he being angry at such Counsel, replied, One Father begat
us, one Mother bore us, one Master instructed us, His courage.
etc. Therefore no longer prolong the time in vain; I came to suffer, not to
speak, use all the Tyranny that possibly you can against my body yet have you
no power over my soul. This so moved the Tyrant, that he devised new torments
beyond the reach of humane wit; and commanding a globe to be brought, he caused
him to be tied about it in such sort, that all his bones were put out of joint,
His torments.
hanging one from another in a most pitiful manner; yet was the holy Martyr
nothing dismayed; then the skin of his head and face was pulled off, and then
was he put upon the wheel, but he could be racked no worse, for all his bones
were dislocated before; the blood issuing from him abundantly, he said, We, O
Tyrant, endure this torment for the love of God, and thou the Author of such
cruelty, His speech at death.
shall be punished with everlasting pain; Then was his tongue cut out, and he
being put into a fiery frying pan, resigned his spirit unto God.

Next followed Judas the fourth brother, whom all the people persuaded to obey
the King: Judas his courage.
But he said, Your fire shall not separate me from the Law of God, nor from my
brethren; To thee, O Tyrant, I denounce destruction, but to such as believe,
salvation: Try me thou cruel wretch, and see if God will not stand by me, as he
did by my three brethren now in glory, etc. The cruel Tyrant hearing this, was
so enraged, that he leaped down from his chair to torment this Martyr
himself; His torments.
He commanded also his tongue to be cut out, to whom Judas said, Thy cruelty
will nothing avail thee, our God needs not by voice to be awaked, His speech at
death.
etc. he hears such as call upon him with their hearts, and know's our
thoughts afar off, etc. Cut out my tongue if thou please, would thou would so
sanctify all the parts of my body, etc. and think not that thou shall long
escape unpunished: Then was his tongue cut out, and he bound to a stake, was
beaten with ropes ends, which torments he bore with admirable patience: After
which he was put upon the wheel, where he ended his life, and went to the rest
of his brethren.

Then spoke Achas the fifth brother, Behold, O Tyrant, I come to be punished
before thou command me, Achas his courage.
therefore hope not to alter his mind that desires to be tormented: The blood
of my innocent brethren has condemned thee to hell, I shall make up the fifth,
that by it thy torments may be increased: What offense have we committed that
thou thus ragest against us? etc. All that thou can allege against us is,
that we honor God and live in obedience to his Laws, and therefore we esteem
not punishment, which is an honor to us; though no part of us be left
untormented, yet we shall be the more rewarded by God. Then at the command of
the Kings the executioner cast him into a brazen pot, His torments.
where he was pressed down with his head to his feet, and afterward he sufferred
all the torments inflicted on his brethren, but he was so far from being
discouraged, that suddenly starting up, His speech at death.
he said, Cruel Tyrant, how great benefits do thou (though against thy will)
bestow upon us! yea the more thou ragest, the more acceptable to God shall thou
make us; therefore I shall be sorry if thou show me any mercy: by this
temporal death, I shall go to everlasting life. And having thus finished his
sufferings, he died.

Then was Areth the sixth brother brought, to whom the Tyrant proferred the
choice of honor, Areth his courage.
or punishment; But he being grieved at this profer, said, O Tyrant, though I
be younger in years then my brethren, yet the constancy of my mind is not
inferior; as we have lived, so we will die together in the fear of God: Hasten
therefore thy torments, and what time thou would spend in exhorting me,
spend it in devising torments for me. Whereupon Antiochus in a rage, commanded
him to be tied to a pillar with his head downwards: Then caused he a fire to be
made at such a distance, His torments.
as might not burn, but roast him: Then he made them prick him with awles, that
the heat might pierce the sorer: In these torments much blood, like froth,
gathered about his head and face; His speech at death.
yet said he, O noble fight! O valiant war! O strife between piety and
impiety! My brethren have past through their Agonies, whose crown of Martyrdom
is the punishment of their Persecutors. I willingly follow them, that as by
blood I am conjoined to them, so by death I may not be separated from them.
Devise, O Tyrant, some new torment, for I have overcome these already: O Master
of cruelty, enemy of piety, and persecutor of Justice! we young men have
conquered thy power, thy fire is cold, and heateth not: thy weapons are bended,
and blunted in our bodies; our God gives us more courage to suffer, then thou
have to punish, etc. As he thus spoke, they pulled out his tongue with an hot
pair of tongs, and lastly frying him in a frying pan, he gave up the ghost.

There being now only the youngest brother left, called Jacob, he, Jacob
brought forth.

Antiochus his subtilty.


presenting himself before the Tyrant, moved him to some compassion, wherefore
he called the Child to him, and taking him aside by the hand, he said, By the
example of thy brethren thou see what to expect if thou disobeyest me;
therefore deliver thy self from these torments, and I will give thee what
honor my Kingdom can afford: thou shall be a Ruler, General of my Army, my
Counceller etc. But when this prevailed not, he called his mother, who coming,
and standing by her son, the Tyrant said to her, O worthy woman, where now are
all thy Children? yet thou have one remaining; advise him therefore not to
ruin himself, and to leave thee childless by his obstinacy, etc. The mother
bowing her self to the King, said to her child in Hebrew, that she might not be
understood of others, Pity and comfort thy sorrowful mother, O my son, His
mother encourages him.
who bare thee nine months in my womb, gave thee suck with my breasts three
years, and with great care have brought thee up hitherto. I pray thee, dear
son, consider the heavens and earth, and remember that God created them all of
nothing, etc, fear not therefore these pains and torments, but imitate thy
brethren, and contemn death, that in the day of mercy I may receive thee with
thy brethren again in heaven. Then did he desire to be unbound, which being
granted, he immediately ran to the torments, His noble courage.
and coming where was a frying pan red hot, he said to the King; Cruel Tyrant,
I now know thee, not only to have been cruel to my brethren, but even cruelty
it self. Wretch that thou art, who gave thee these purple robes? who exalted
thee to thy Kingdom? Even he whom thou in us do persecute, whose servants
thou tormentest and killest, for which thy self shall suffer eternal torments;
though thou art above others, yet he that made other men, made thee also of the
same nature, for all are born, and must die alike. He that kills another,
shows that he himself may be killed; thou tearest and tormentest thine own
Image all in vain? In thy fury thou killest him, whom God created like thy
self, etc. thou pullest out our tongues, tearest our bodies with flesh-hooks,
and consumest us with fire; but they that have already suffered, have received
everlasting joys, and everlasting punishments attend thee. Think not that I
expect any favor, I will follow my brethren, and remain constant in keeping
Gods Law. The Tyrant herewith enraged, caused him to be tormented; but his
mother comforted him, and with her kind hands held his head, when through
violence of the torturers, His torments.
the blood issued out of his mouth, nose, and privy parts; the tormentors not
ceasing till his life was almost spent; but then giving over, God gave him
strength to recover, and to endure more then any of his brethren had done. At
last his hands and arms being cut off, with his eyes lift up to heaven, he
cried, O Lord. His last words.
Adonai. be merciful unto me, and receive me into the company of my brethren.
etc. Then was his tongue pulled out, and he of his own accord going into the
fiery frying pan, to the great admirarion of Antiochus, died.

Salamona's zeal.
The mother seeing all her Children dead, was inflamed with a holy zeal to
suffer Martyrdom also; and despising the Tyrants threats, she offered her
motherly breast to those torments which her Children had suffered before her.
Indeed herein she excelled them all, in that she had suffered seven painful
deaths, before she came to suffer in her own person, and feared in every one of
them, lest she should have been overcome. She alone with dry eyes did look upon
them whilst they were torn in pieces, yea, she exhorted them thereunto,
rejoicing to see one torn with flesh-hooks, another racked upon the wheel, a
third bound and beaten, a fourth burned, and yet she exhorted the rest not to
be terrified thereby; and though her grief in beholding their torments was
greater then that which she had in childbirth, yet did she frame a cheerful
countenance, as if it had been one triumphing, wishing rather the torments of
their bodies then of their souls; for she knew that nothing was more frail then
our lives, which are often taken away by Agues, Fluxes, and a thousand other
ways. Therefore when they were first apprehended, she thus exhorted them in the
Hebrew tongue, O my most dear and loving Children, Her speech to her Children.
let us hasten to that Agony which may credit our profession, and be rewarded
by God with eternal life. Let us fearlesly present our bodies to those torments
which aged Eleazer endured. Let us call to mind our father Abraham, who having
but one only son* willingly sacrificed him at Gods command, and feared not to
bring him to the Altar, whom with many prayers he had obtained in his old age.
Remember Daniel, the three Children, etc. Antiochus being enraged against her,
caused her to be stripped naked, Her torments and death.
hanged up by the hands, and cruelly whipped: then were her dugs and paps pulled
off, and her self put into the red hot frying pan; where lifting up her eyes
and hands to heaven, in the midst of her prayers she yielded up her chaste soul
unto God. But God suffered not the cruel Tyrant to escape unpunished, for in
his wars against the Persians, See more of this before.
the Lord struck him with madness, his intrals were devoured with worms, and
stinking like a Carrion, in the extremity of his torments he gave up the ghost.

Concerning this Antiochus, Daniel, chap. 8.9, 10. etc. saw in the vision, that
there came forth a little horn, which waxed exceeding great toward the south,
and toward the East, and toward the pleasant Land, and it waxes great even
toward the host of heaven, and it cast down some of the host, and of the stars
to the ground, and stamped upon them: Yea, he magnified himself even to the
Prince of the host, and by him the daily sacrifice was taken away, and the
place of the Sanctuary was cast down. And an host was given him against the
daily Sacrifice by reason of transgression, and it cast down the truth to the
ground, and it practiced and prospered. Which afterward is thus interpreted by
the Angel unto Daniel, verse 23. etc. In the latter time of their Kingdom, when
the Transgressors are come to the full, a King of fiery countenance, and
understanding dark sentences shall stand up, and his power shall be mighty, but
not by his own power, and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and
practice, and shall destroy the mighty and holy people: And through his policy
also he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand, and he shall magnify himself
in his heart, and by peace shall destroy many: He shall also stand up against
the Prince of Princes, but he shall he broken without hand.

Collected out of Josephus, and the Books of the Maccabees.

Here place the first Figure.

CHAP. VI. The Persecution of the Church from Christ's time to our present Age;
and first of those mentioned in the New Testament
HErod the great, hearing by the wise men of one that was born King of the
Jews, and being informed by the chief Priests and the Scribes, that the place
of his birth should be Bethlehem of Judah, Mat. 2.2, 5, 16.
he sent forth soldiers, and slew all the Children that were in Bethlehem, and
in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, hoping thereby to have
destroyed Christ: for which cruel fact the Lord gave him over to such a spirit
of frenzy, that he slew his own wife, his Children, Gods Judgment on
Persecutors.
and nearest kins-folks, and familiar friends. And shortly after Gods heavy
Judgment fell upon him by a grievous sickness, which was a slow and slack fire
in his inward parts; and withal, he had a greedy appetite after food, and yet
nothing sufficed him; he had also a rotting in his Bowels, and a grievous flux
in his fundament; a moist and running humor about his feet, Herod's miserable
death.
and the like malady vexed him about his bladder; his privy members putrified,
engendring abundance of worms which continually swarmed out. He had a short and
stinking breath, with a great pain in breathing; and through all the parts of
his body such a violent cramp, as humane strength was not able to endure. Yet
longing after life, he sent for Physicians from all parts, by whose advice he
went to the hot bathes of Calliroe; but finding no ease thereby, his torments
still increasing, he sought to lay violent hands upon himself, if he had not
been prevented by his friends, and so in extreme misery, he ended his wretched
life.

Then Herod the less having married the daughter of Aretas, King of Arabia, put
her away, and took Herodias, who had forsaken her husband Philip, brother to
Herod; for which incestuous and adulterous marriage, John Baptist plainly
reproved him; whereupon at the instigation of Herodias, John Baptist behe^ded.
Mat. 14.10.
Herod first imprisoned him, and afterward cut off his head: but the Lord left
not this murder long unpunished, for Aretas raising an Army against Herod, for
that ignominious dealing with his daughter, in a pitched battle wholly
overthrew him, and cut off all his host, Gods Judgments on Herod for it.
not long after Herod falling into disgrace with the Roman Emperor, he, with
his incestuous Herodias were banished to Vienna in France, Caius Caligula.
where they ended their wretched lives with much shame and misery.

After the ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, Peter and John, having cured a
man that was born lame, and preaching Jesus to the people, upon that occasion
they were apprehended, and cast into prison by the Priests and Captain of the
Temple, who the next day, Act. 4.1, 17.
having examined them, threatened to punish them, if they spoke any more in that
name, and so dismissed them. Yet afterward the Highpriests and the Sadduces
again laid hands on the Apostles, and cast them into the common prison; but in
the night time the Angel of the Lord opened the prison doors, and released
them, Ast. 5.18, 19. The next day, as they were preaching to the people, they
were again apprehended, The Apostles beaten.
and carried before the Counsel, ver. 26, 27. at whose command they were
beaten, and so dismissed, ver, 40.

Then were false witnesses suborned against Steven, who accused him for
speaking blasphemous words against Moses, and against God, Act. 6.11. for which
being apprehended and brought before the Council, he was there condemned, led
out of the City, and stoned to death, Steven stoned.
chap. 7.58.

After this there was a general persecution raised up against the Church of
Christ in Jerusalem, whereby all the faithful were scattered abroad throughout
the Regions of Judea and Samaria, except the Apostles, chap. 8.1. Saul also
made great havoc of the Church, entering into every house, haling both men and
women, and committing them to prison, verse 3.

Then Saul, after his Conversion, preaching Christ boldly, the enraged Jews
took Counsel, and lay in wait to kill him, Paul persecuted.
watching the Gates of Damascus, where he then was, both day and night; but the
Disciples took him by night, and let him down over the wall in a basket,
whereby he escaped, Act. 9.23, etc.

Then rose up a third Herod, called also Agrippa, who, not taking warning by
his predecessors calamities, fell to persecuting the Church of Christ, and
sending for James, the brother of John, before him, he condemned him to be
beheaded: Concerning whom Clemens reports, Act. 12.1, 2.
that he which drew James before the Tribunal seat, when he saw him so
cheerfully embracing the sentence of death, was exceedingly moved therewith,
and voluntarily confessed himself to be a Christian, and so was condemned to be
beheaded with him: A Persecutor converted.
As they went in the way to execution, he requested the Apostle James to pardon
him, who after a little pause, turning to him, said, Peace be unto thee; and
kissed him, and so they were beheaded both together. Herod seeing that the
death of James pleased the Jews, he took Peter also, James beheaded.
and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him in prison,
intending after the passover to put him to death; But the night before he
should suffer, as he was sleeping, bound with two chains to two soldiers, and
the Keepers watching before the prison doors, an Angel came and awaked him,
causing his chains to fall off, and so going before him, he led him out of
prison, causing the iron gate to open to them, and having brought him out of
danger, left him. But this cruel persecuting Herod escaped no better then his
Predecessors had done, Peter escapes death.
for being arraied in glistering and royal apparel, and sitting upon his
Throne, he made an Oration to his people, who like flattering Court Parasites,
gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a God, and not of a man: Whereupon the
Angel of the Lord immediately smote him, Gods Judgment on Herod
and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost, verse 21, etc. in the fifty
fourth year of his age, and the seventh of his reign, and under Claudius Caesar.

Then the wicked Jews stirred up the Gentiles against Paul and Barnabas at
Iconium, Paul and Barnabas persecuted.
so that being in danger to be stoned to death, they fled into Lycaonia, Act.
14.2, 5* 6.

Again at Ly^tra they stirred up the Gentiles against them, whereupon Paul was
stoned and drawn out of the City, Paul stoned.
and left for dead, but it pleased God that he revived, and so escaped to
Derbe, ver. 19.20.

Afterward Paul and Silas, for casting a spirit of divination out of a Damosel
at Philippi, Paul and Silas whipped.
were dragged before the Rulers, who caused them to be whipped, and cast into
prison. But the Magistrates afterward hearing that they were Romans, were much
afraid, as having done more then they could answer, and therefore they came to
them, released them out of prison, and besought them to depart out of their
City, Act. 16.2^, 39.

Presently after at Thessalonica, the Jews again stirred up the people against
Paul and Silas, Paul and Silas again persecuted.
and raising up an uproar, they sought for them in the house of Jason, and not
meeting with them there, they drew forth Jason himself, and some brethren
before the Rulers, who giving security for their forthcoming, Act. 17.5, 13,
14.
were dismissed. Yet these wretched Jews followed Paul to Berea also, and there
stirred up a persecution against him, whereby he was forced to depart. At
Corinth also they made an insurrection, caught Paul, and brought him before
Gallio, Deputy of Achaia, Sosthenes beaten.
and when he would be a Judge of no such matters, they took Sosthenes the chief
Ruler of the Synagogue, and beat him before the Judgment seat, Acts 18.12, 17.

Afterward at Ephesus, Demetrius that made silver shrines for Diana, raised an
uproar, and having caught Caius and Aristarchus, Paul's companions, they with
them rushed into the Theater; but this tumult being allayed by the wisdom of
the Town-Clark, Paul hasted away into Macedonia, cap. 19.29, etc. Paul at last
returning to Jerusalem, the Asian Jews finding him in the Temple, stirred up
all the people, and laid hands on him; but as they were about to kill him, he
was rescued by the chief Captain of the Romans, chap. 21.31, 32. Then being
brought forth before the Counsel of the Jews, he was first smitten by the
Command of the High Priest, chap. 23.2. And afterward being in danger of being
pulled to pieces, Paul in danger
he was again rescued by the Captain, ver. 10. Then above forty of those
desperate Jews, bound themselves under a curse, that they would neither eat
nor drink till they had killed him, ver. 12, 13. Hereupon he is sent to Faelix
at Caesarea, who kept him in prison till his Accusers came, ver. 24, 35. Then
being accused by Tertullus, Acts 24.27.
he clears himself; yet because he would not bribe Faelix, he is kept prisoner
still. Festus succeeding Faelix, the Jews importune him also for sentence
against Paul, or that he might be sent for to Jerusalem, laying wait in the way
to kill him, chap. 25.3. but when that was denied them, they went to Cesarea to
accuse him there, whereupon he is forced to appeal to Caesar, ver. 11. Then he
was sent to Rome, and there committed Prisoner to the Captain of the Guard,
chap. 28.16. where he continued prisoner at large for two years, and then being
released, he visited the Churches of Greece and Asia. Afterwads he preached in
Spain and France, and at last returning into Italy, he was again apprehended,
and imprisoned at Rome, Paul's Martyrdom.
where also he suffered Martyrdom, as afterward you shall hear.

The Jews being much displeased that they could not reak their teen upon Paul,
turn themselves against James the brother of Christ: him therefore they bring,
and set them in the midst of them, requiring him publicly to renounce the
faith of Christ: but he on the contrary made a bold and open confession of
Jesus to be the Son of God, and the Savior of the world. Then did they set him
upon a Pinnacle of the Temple, again requiring him in the audience of all the
people, to tell them which is the way of Jesus crucified; to whom he answered,
Why ask you me of Jesus the son of man, when as he sits at the right hand of
God in Heaven, and shall again come in the clouds of the air? this so enraged
the Scribes and Pharisees, that they threw him down headlong; but he not being
dead with the fall, gat upon his knees, and said, Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do: Then one taking a Fullers Club, struck him on the
head, and brained him. The Martyrdom of James.


This James was surnamed Justus, of whom Aegesippus writes, that his knees were
as hard as Camels knees, His constancy in prayer.
by reason of his continual kneeling in prayer. But shortly after his death,
Vespasian came into Judea, and subdued the Jews: and his son Titus destroyed
Jerusalem, and the Temple.

Andrew the brother of Peter, preached the Gospel to the Scythians, Andrews
martyrdom.
Sogdians, and Aethiopians, and was at last crucified by Aegeas, King of Edessa.

Philip preached the Gospel in Phrygia, and at last was crucified at
Hierapolis. Philips Martyrdom.


Bartholemew preached to the Indians, and (as some say) was beaten with Cudgels
to death: or as others, he was flaid alive, Bartholemew.
and then beheaded.

Thomas preached unto the Parthians, Medes and Persians, etc, and in Indian he
was slain with a dart. Thomas.


Matthew preached to the Aethiopians, and at last by the command of the King,
was ran through with a sword. Matthew.


Simon Zelotes preached in Mauritania and Africa, and at length was crucified
under Traian, being above 112 years old. Simon Zel.


Judas the brother of James preached to the Edesseans, and at last was slain by
the command of the King. Judas.


Matthias preached first in Macedonia, Matthias.
and afterward coming into Judea, he was by the Jews first stoned, and then
beheaded.

Mark the Evangelist preached in Alexandria, and the neighboring Regions, Mark.
and afterward was burnt by the furious Idolaters.

Nicanor.
Nicanor, one of the Deacons, was martyred, together with two thousand other
faithful Christians.

Collected out of the New Testament, and Dorotheus. THE PERSECUTION OF THE
CHURCH UNDER THE Heathen Roman Emperors.
CHAP. VII. The First Primitive Persecution which began An. Christi, 67.
THis first Persecution was begun by Domitius Nero, the sixth Emperor, Anno 67.
or thereabouts: the occasion whereof was this; Quinquennium Neronis.
Nero having passed over the first five years of his reign somewhat plausibly,
he then began to fall to all manner of prodigious impieties: and amongst other
wicked designs, he had a great desire to consume the stately imperial City of
Rome with fire; pronouncing King Priamus an happy man, because he beheld the
end of his Kingdom and Country together; yea, said he, let not all be ruined
when I am dead, but whilst I am yet alive: Nero sets Rome on fire.
and for the effecting of this villainy, he sent diverse to kindle the fire in
sundry places; yea, some of his own bedchamber were seen to carry Flax, Toe,
Torches, etc. to further it: and when any attempted to quench it, they were
threatened for it; others openly hurled firebrands, crying, They knew what they
did, there was one would bear them out. This fire first began amongst the
Oyl-men and Drugsters; The night-watch and Praetorian guards did openly cherish
it; and when it was thoroughly kindled, Nero went up to the top of Maecenas
Tower, which over-looked the whole City, where he fed himself with the sight of
infinite burnings, and sang to his harp, the burning of Troy.

The Circus burnt down.
Amongst other stately buildings that were burned down, the Circus, or race-yard
was one, being about half a mile in length, of an oval form, with rows of seats
one above another, capable to receive at least a hundred and fifty thousand
Spectators without uncivil shouldrings: but the particulars were innumerable,
the damage inestimable; besides which, many thousands of people perished; the
flame and smoke smothered some, the weight of ruins crushed others, the fire
consumed others; others threw themselves into the fire out of sorrow and
despair, and villains slew many.

But Nero finding that this fire, which continued burning nine days, brought a
great Odium upon him; to excuse himself, he transferred the fault upon the
Christians, as if out of malice they had done it, Nero charged it upon the
Christians.
and thereupon he raised this first persecution against them. For there was at
this present a flourishing Church of Christians in Rome, even before St. Paul's
arrival there, Raises the first Persecution.
and Nero's own Court was secretly garnished and enriched with some of those
Diamons, whose salutations the Apostle remembers in his Epistle to the
Philippians. But whilst Nero with their blood, sought to quench and cover his
own infamy, he procured to himself new envy; whilst many that abhorred
Christians for their Religion, commiserated their sufferings as undeserved.
Some he caused to be sewed up in the skins of wild beasts, and then worried
them to death with dogs: some he crucified, others he burnt in public, Several
kinds of torments.
to furnish his evening sports with Bonefires. Many he caused to be packed up
in paper stiffened in molten wax, with a coat of sear-cloth about their bodies,
bound upright to Axletrees, many of which were pitched in the ground, and so set
on fire at the bottom, to maintain light for Nero's night-sports in his
gardens. Some of them were gored in length upon stakes, the one end fastened in
the earth, the other thrust into their fundaments, and coming out at their
mouths.

Nor did this Persecution rage in Rome alone, but it was extended generally
over the whole Empire, Beastly cruelty.
insomuch that a man might then have seen Cities lie full of men's bodies, the
old lying there together with the young, and the dead bodies of women cast out
naked in the open streets, without all reverence of their sex. Yea his rage and
malice was so great, that he endeavored to have rooted out the very name of
Christians in all places. Whereupon Tertullian said, That it could be no
ordinary goodness which Nero condemned; and, says he, We glory on the behalf
of our sufferings, that they had such a dedicator as he: Tertullians speech.
but this great Persecution, like a blast, did spread the Religion that it
blew, and having continued four years from the first rising, is expired in two
most shining blazes, viz. in the Martyrdom of the two great Apostles Peter and
Paul: Peter was crucified with his head down-wards, which manner of death
himself made choice of, and whilst he thus hung upon the Cross, he saw his wife
going to her Martyrdom, whereupon he much rejoiced; and calling her by her
name, he bad her remember the Lord Jesus Christ. At the same time, also Paul,
before Nero, made a confession of his faith, and of the Doctrine which he
taught; Peter and Paul martyred.
whereupon he was condemned to be beheaded, and the Emperor sent two of his
Esquires, Ferega and Parthemius, to bring him word of his death: they coming to
Paul, heard him instruct the people, and thereupon desired him to pray for them
that they might believe; who told them, that shortly after they should believe
and be baptized: then the soldiers led him out of the City to the place of
execution, where he prayed, and then gave his neck to the sword, and so was
beheaded. This was done in the fourteenth, which was the last year of Nero.

Collected out of the life of Nero Caesar, Eusebius, and the Book of Martyrs.
CHAP. VIII. The second Primitive Persecution, which began Anno 96.
AFter the death of Nero, there succeeded, first Vespasian, and then his son
Titus in the Empire, under both whom the Church had rest, but Titus associating
to himself his brother Flavius Domitian in the Government of the Empire; This
wicked Monster, first slew his brother, and then raised the second persecution
against the Church of Christ. Domitians character.
His pride was so great, that he commanded himself to be worshipped as God; and
that Ima^es of gold and silver should be set up for his honor in the Capitol.
His cruelty was unmeasurable. The chiefest Nobles of the Roman Senators, either
upon envy, or for their goods, He destroys David's seed.
he caused to be put to death. Having also heard some rumors of Christ's
Kingdom, he was afraid, as Herod had been before him; and thereupon commanded
all of the lineage of David to be sought out and slain; At last two poor
Christians that came of Judas, the brother of Christ according to the flesh,
were brought before Domitian, and accused to be of the Tribe of Juda, and of
the line of David: Then did the Emperor demand of them what stock of money and
possessions they had; To whom they answered, that they two had not above thirty
nine Acres of land, out of which they paid Tribute, and relieved themselves by
their labor and industry, withal showing him their hard and brawny hands, by
reason of their labor. Then did he ask them of Christ, and of his Kingdom; to
whom they answered, that Christ's Kingdom was not of this world, but spiritual
and celestial; and that he would come at the last day to judge the quick and
the dead. Hereupon he despised them as simple and contemptible persons, and so
dismissed them. He punished an infinite company of Christians that were famous
in the Church, with exile, and loss of their substance. Under this persecution
it was that St. John, the beloved Disciple, St. John put into boiling oil.
Banished into Patmos.
was first put into a vessel of boiling oil, and coming safe without hurt, out
of the same, he was then banished into the Isle of Patmos, Anno 97. where he
continued till after the death of Domitian, but was released under Pertinax: At
which time he returned to Ephesus, where he lived till he was a hundred and
twenty years old. During his abode there, he was requested to repair to some
place not far off, to order their Ecclesiastical affairs; and being in a
certain City, he beheld in the Congregation a young man, mighty of body, An
excellent story ^f a young man.
of a beautiful countenance, and fervent mind; whereupon calling the chief
Bishop unto him, he said, I commend this man unto thee with great diligence, in
the witness here of Christ and of the Church. The Bishop having received this
charge, and promised his faithful diligence therein, John spoke the like words
to him the second time also, after which he returned unto Ephesus. The Bishop
having received this young man thus committed to his charge, brought him home,
kept, nourished, instructed and Baptized him; and the young man so profited
under him, that at last he was made the Pastor of a Congregation. But having by
this means more liberty then before, some of his old companions began to resort
unto him; who first drew him forth to sumptuous and riotous banquets; then
enticed him to go abroad with them in the nights to rob and steal, and to much
other wickedness. And he being of a good wit, and stout courage, ran like an
unbridled horse to all manner of disorders and outrage: And associating to
himself many loose and dissolute companions, he became their Head and Captain,
in committing all kinds of murder and felonies. Not long after, upon some
urgent occasions, St John was again sent for into those parts, where having
decided those controversies, and dispatched those businesses for which he came,
meeting with the aforementioned Bishop, he required of him the pledge, which
before Christ and the Congregation he had committed to his custody. The Bishop
herewith amazed, supposing that he meant it of some money committed to him,
which yet he had not received, not daring to contradict the Apostle, he
thereupon stood mute: Then John perceiving that he was not understood, said,
The young man, and the soul of our brother committed to your custody, I do
require. Whereupon the Bishop with many tears said, He is dead: To whom John
replied, How, and by what death? The Bishop answered, He is dead to God, for he
is become a wicked and vicious man, and a thief, and now he does frequent these
mountains, with a company of thieves and villains like himself, etc. The
Apostle, rending his garments with a great lamentation, said, I left a good
keeper of my brothers soul; get me an horse and guide presently; which being
done, he went strait to the mountains, and was no sooner come thither, but he
was taken by the thieves that watched for their prey, to whom he said, I came
hither for this cause, Lead me to your Captain: and so being brought before
him, the Captain all armed, looked fiercely upon him, and soon coming to the
knowledge of him, he was stricken with such shame and confusion, that he began
to fly, but the old man followed him as fast as he could, crying, My son why
do thou fly from thy father? an armed man from one naked? a young man from
an old man? Have pity upon me my son: and fear not, there is yet hope of
salvation, I will answer for thee to Christ, I will die for thee if need be, as
Christ died for us, I will give my life for thee; Believe me, Christ has sent
me. He hearing these things, first as in a maze, stood still, lost his courage,
cast down his weapons, then trembled, and wept bitterly, and coming to the old
man, he embraced him with many tears, only his right hand he kept hid and
covered. Then the Apostle, after he had promised and assured him that he should
obtain pardon of our Savior, falling upon his knees, he prayed for him,
kissing his murdering right hand, which for shame he durst not show before,
and then brought him back to the Congregation, where he fasted and prayed
continually for him, comforted and confirmed him with many Scripture-promises,
and left him not, till he had restored him to his former Office, and made him a
great example of Gods Mercy to repentant sinners.

Sim^on crucified.
In this Persecution Simeon Bishop of Jerusalem, after many torments, was
crucified to death: and an innumerable company of Martyrs suffered for the like
testimony of the Lord Jesus, amongst whom was Flavia, Flavia banished.
the daughter of Flavius Clemens, a Roman Senator and Consul, who amongst many
others was banished into the Isle of Pontia.

A cruel death.
This Law also was made by the Roman Senate, Non debere demitti Christianos,
qui semel ad tribunal venissent, nisi propositum mutent, that Christians should
not be let go, that were once brought before the Tribunal seat, except they
renounced their Religion. Yea, that which stirred up the Emperor more to
persecute the Christians, were those abominable lies, and malicious slanders
raised against them by the Heathen Idolaters, as that they were a people that
lived in incest, that in their nightly meetings, Christians slandered.
putting out the Candles, they ran together in all filthy manner; that they
killed their own Children, and used to eat man's flesh: that they were
seditious and rebellious, and refused to svvear by the fortune of Caesar;
Charged with Sedition and Rebellion; and the causers of all public Calamities.
Christianos ad Leones.
and would not adore his Image in the Market place, and in brief, that they
were pernicious to the Roman Empire: yea, whenever any thing happened amiss
to the City of Rome, or to her Provinces, either by famine, pestilence,
Earthquakes, Wars, unseasonable Weather, etc. it was presently imputed to the
Christians. Besides, also there were a number of wicked Promoters and
Accusers, that for lucre's sake, to have the possessions of the Christians,
accused and persecuted them to the death. Also when the Christians were
brought before the Magistrates, they gave them an Oath, The Oath ex officio.
requiring them to declare the truth, whether they were Christians or no, and
if they confessed; then by the Law, sentence of death was passed against
them. Yet were not these Tyrants content by death to destroy their bodies, but
the kinds of death were diverse and horrible; whatsoever the cruelty of man's
vvitty and wicked invention could devise for the punishment of man's body, was
practiced against the poor Saints of God; Variety of torments.
Imprisonments, Stripes, Scourgings, Rackings, Tearings, Stoning* plates of
iron burning hot, laid to the tenderest parts of their bodies, deep Dungeons,
strangling in Prisons, the teeth of wild Beasts, Gridirons, Gibbits and
Gallows, Tossings upon the Horns of Bulls, etc. And when they were thus killed,
their bodies were laid on heaps, and dogs left to keep them, that none might
come to bury them; Burial denied them.
neither could any prayer or entreaty obtain leave that they might be interred.
Notwithstanding all which horrible punishments, the Church of Christ daily
increased, being deeply rooted in the Doctrine of the Apostles and Apostolical
men, and watered plenteously with the blood of the Saints.

Also in this persecution, Protasius and Gervasius were martyred at Millaine.
Timothy was stoned to death at Ephesus, Protasius. Gervasius. Timothy and
Dionysius martyred.
by the Worshippers of Diana. Dionysius Areopagita was slain with the sword at
Paris, etc.

CHAP. IX. The third Primitive Persecution, which began Anno Christi, 108.
DOmitian being slain by some of his own servants, Nerva succeeded him, who was
a good and merciful man, stayed the persecution against the Christians, called
them home from banishment, so that the Church enjoyed peace in his time, but he
reigning only thirteen months, Trajan a Spaniard succeeded him, Trajans
persecution.
who in the tenth year of his reign, raised the third persecution against the
Church, which was far more cruel then either of the former; inasmuch as Plinius
Secundus, an heathen Philosopher, Pliny writes in the Christians behalf.
seeing the lamentabte slaughter of the Christians, moved with pity, he wrote
to Trajan concerning the same; that whereas there were many thousands of them
daily put to death, there were none of them which did any thing contrary to the
Roman Laws worthy of persecution, saving that they used to gather together in
the morning before day, and sing Hymns to a certain God that they worshipped,
called Christ; in other things they were godly and honest; and for proof
hereof, says he, I caused two Maidens to be laid on the rack, and with
torments to be examined about the same; but finding nothing in them but only
lewd and immoderate superstition, I resolved to surcease further enquiry, till
I received further instructions from you about this matter. Christianity
accounted superstition.
etc. Trajan having read this Epistle; returned answer, that it was his mind,
that the Christians should not be sought after, but if they were brought and
convicted, that then they should suffer execution: Tertullians speech.
whereof Tertullian, speaking, says, O confused sentence! He would not have
them sought for as men innocent, and yet would have them punished as men
guilty: Now though upon this act, the rage of the persecution was somewhat
abated, yet many evil disposed men, and cruel Officers there were, which
ceased not to afflict the Christians in diverse Provinces: especially if any
commotion was raised in any of them, then presently were the Christians blamed
for it. Trajan sent a command to Jerusalem, that whosoever could be found out
of the stock of David, should be enquired for, The stock of David sought for.
and put to death; hereupon some Sectaries of the Jewish nation, accused Simeon
the son of Cleophas, to come of David's line, and that he was a Christian: of
which Accusers it happened, that some of them were taken to be of the stock of
David, and so most righteously were executed themselves who sought the
destruction of others. In this Persecution suffered Phocas Bishop of Pontus, A
just reward.
whom Trajan, because he would not sacrifice to Neptune, Phocus Martyr.
caused to be cast into a hot lime-kilne, and afterward to be put into a
scalding bath, where he ended his life in the cause of Christ: As also
Sulpitius Servilianus, and Nereus, and Achilleus suffered Martyrdom in Rome,
Sulpitius, Nereus and Achilleus Martyrs.
Sagaris in Asia; Then also Ignatius Bishop of Antioch was apprehended and sent
to Rome, where he was devoured of wild beasts, and besides these, many thousand
others.

Adrian Emp. Alexander, Herenes and Quiri^us martyrs. Zenon.
After the death of Trajan, succeeded Hadrian, who continued this third
persecution against the Chrstians; at which time, Alexander Bishop of Rome,
with his two Deacons, as also Hermes and Quirinus with their families suffered
Martyrdom. Also about this time, Zenon a noble man of Rome, with above ten
thousand more were slain for Christ's sake. Ten thousand crucified.
Also in mount Ararath were ten thousand Christians crucified, crowned with
thorns, and thrust into the side with sharp darts, after the example of the
Lords passion. Eustachius, a noble Captain, Eustachius Martyr.
who Trajan had sent out to war against the Barbarians; after (through Gods
Mercy) he had valiantly subdued his enemies, was returning home with victory:
Hadrian for joy, went to meet him, and to bring him home with triumph: but by
the way, he would needs sacrifice to Apollo, for the victory obtained, willing
Eustachius to do the same with him; but when by no means he could be persuaded
thereto, coming to Rome, he with his wife and Children suffered Martyrdom; by
the command of the ungrateful Emperor. Monstrous ingratitude.

Faustinus and Jobita Martyrs.


Also Faustinus and Jobita, Citizen of Brixia, were martyred with many
torments; which caused one Calocerius, beholding their admirable patience in
the midst of their cruel torments, to cry out, Vere magnus est Deus
Christianorum, Verily great is the God of the Christians; whereupon being
apprehended, More.
he was made Partaker of their Martyrdom. Also Eleutherius Bishop in Apulia,
Eleutherius, Anthea, and Symphorissa Martyrs.
was beheaded, together with his mother Anthea. Also Symphorissa, a godly
Matron, was often cruelly scourged, afterward hanged up by the hairs of her
head: at last had a huge stone fastened to her, and so thrown into the river;
after which her seven Children in like manner, With her seven sons.
with sundry and diverse kinds of torments were all of them martyred by the
Tyrant. These seven Children of Symphorissa, were fastened to seven stakes,
then racked up with a pully, and afterward thrust through; Crescens in the
neck, Julianus in the breast, Nemesius in the heart, Primitivus in the navil,
Justinus was cut in every joint of his body, Statteus run through with spears,
and Eugenius cut asunder from the breast to the lower parts, and then all of
them were cast into a deep pit; Adrian being at Athens, sacrificed to the Idols
after the manner of the Grecians, and gave free leave to whomsoever would, to
persecute the Christians, which should refuse it: whereupon Quadratus bishop of
Athens, a man of admirable zeal, and famous for learning, Quadratus his Apology
for the Christians, and Aristides, and Serenus.
exhibited to the Emperor a learned and excellent Apology in defense of the
Christian Religion: The like also did Aristides, an excellent Philosopher in
Athens. There was also one Serenus Granius, a man of great nobility, who writ
pithy and grave Letters to Hadrian; showing that it was neither agreeable to
right nor reason, that the blood of innocents should be given up to the rage
and fury of the people, and be condemned for no other fault but for their
opinions; Hereupon the Emperor became more favorable to them, writing also in
their behalf to Minutius Fundanus, Proconsul of Asia, that if they had no other
crime objected against them, but their Religion, they should not be put to
death. Yet notwithstanding all this, the rage of the heathen multitude did not
disquiet and persecute the people of God; imputing to them whatsoever mischief
and judgments befell them; yea, they invented against them all manner of
Contumelies, Christians falsely accused.
and false crimes to accuse them of, whereby many in sundry places were
molested and put death.

After Hadrian, succeeded Antoninus Pius, An. Pi. Emp. shows them ^avour.
who being informed of the cruel sufferings of the Christians, vvrote this
Letter to his Commons of Asia, forbidding them to persecute the Christians any
further, which Epistle he thus concludes, If any hereafter shall offer any
vexation and trouble to Christians, having no other cause, but because they are
such, let him that is appeached, be released, and freely discharged, An
excellent Law.
and let his Accuser sustain the punishment, etc.

By this means then the tempest of persecution began in those days to be
appeased, through the merciful providence of God; who would not have his
Church to be utterly overthrown and rooted up thereby: The rod of the wicked
shall not always rest upon the lot of the righteous, Psalm 125.3.

Here place the second Figure.

CHAP. X. The fourth Primitive Persecution, which began Anno Christi, 162.
AFter the death of that quiet and mild Prince Antoninus Pius, his son M.
Antoninus Verus succeeded in the Empire, a stern and severe man by nature, who
raised the fourth persecution against the Christians; wherein a great number of
them, who truly professed Christ, suffered most cruel punishments and torments
especially in Asia and France, amongst whom was Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, who
was burnt at a stake at Smyrna, together with twelve others that came from
Philadelphia. Also Germanicus a young man, Polycarp martyr.
did most constantly persevere in the Doctrine of Christ, whom when the
Proconsul of Asia desired to remember his age, and to favor himself,
Germanacus. Constancy.
he would by no flatteries be withdrawn from his stedfastness, but remaining
constant, was thrown to the wild beasts, whom he allured and provoked to come
upon him, and devour him, that he might be the more speedily delivered out of
this wretched life. Also in this persecution suffered Metrodorus, a Minister,
who was consumned by fire; Metrodorus. Pionus Apollggy and Martyrdom.
and Pionius who after much boldness of speech, with his Apologies exhibited,
and his Sermons made to the people in defense of the Christian faith, and after
much relieving and comforting such as were in prisons and distress, at last was
put to cruel torments, and then burned in the fire, Also at Pargamopolis in
Asia, suffered Carpus, Papilus, and Agathonica, a woman, who after their most
constant and worthy confessions, Carpus, Papilus and Agathonica.
were put to death.

At Rome, Felicitas with her seven Children were martyred, whereof her eldest
son, after he was whipped and grievously scourged with rods, Felicitas and her
seven children.
was pressed to death with leaden weights: the two next had their brains beaten
out with mawls: the fourth was thrown down headlong from an high place, and
brake his neck: the three youngest were beheaded; and lastly, the mother was
slain with the svvord.

Also Justin Martyr, a man that excelled in learning and Philosophy, and a
great Defender of the Christian Religion, who had delivered to the Emperor and
Senate, Justin Ma^tyas Apology and Martyrdom.
an Apology in defense of the Christians, suffered Martyrdom in this
persecution.

There was in Egypt a certain woman married to a husband that was given much
unto laciviousness, whereunto she her self also had been formerly addicted; but
being instructed in the Christian Religion, she became a chaste and godly
Matron, and endeavored to persuade her husband also thereunto: But he
continuing in his filthy life, she resolved to be divorced from him; yet at the
request of her friends: she forbore, to try if by any means he would be
reclaimed: But he going to Alexandria, and living more licenciously then
before, she sued out a bill of Divorce, and so was separated from him; then did
this malicious wretch accuse her to be a Christian, Malice.
which was no less then death, whereupon she being in great peril, delivered
up a supplication to the Emperor, craving but so much favor, that she might
go and set her family in order, and then she would be ready to answer to all
such crimes as should be objected against her: This petition the Emperor
granted; Her husband perceiving that he was frustrated of his expectation, went
and accused Ptolemaeus (who was her instructor in the faith of Christ) that he
was a Christian. Ptolemaus.
Ptolemaeus loving the truth, and not thinking it good to hide his profession,
confessed it: Therefore being brought before Vrbicius the Judge, he was by him
condemned to die; Lucius.
Whereupon one Lucius a Christian, standing by, said to the Judge, What reason,
I pray you, or equity is this, that this man, who is neither Adulterer,
Fornicator, Murderer, nor Felon, nor guilty of any other crime, should he
condemned for his name, and profession of Christianity? These manner of
Judgments (O Urbicius) are neither honorable for the Emperor, nor for the
estate of the Senate of Rome: Then said Vrbicius, Note.
Methinks thou also art a Christian, which Lucius confessing, the Judge without
any further delay, commanded him also to be had away to the place of Execution;
to whom he answered, I thank you with all my heart, that hereby you release me
from most wicked governors, and send me to my good and loving Father, who is
God of gods, and King of Kings. Also a third man coming to the Judge, and using
the like liberty of speech, had the like sentence of death, and was crowned
with the same crown of Martyrdom.

Concordus.
Also one Concordus, a Minister of the City of Spoleto, because he refused to
sacrifice to Jupiter, and did spit in the face of the Idol, after diverse cruel
torments sustained, was beheaded with the sword.

Many others also suffered Martyrdom at the same time, because they sharply
reprehended Idolatry, and refused at the Emperors command, to offer sacrifice
to Idols, for which they were beheaded.

Persecutions in France.
Many Christians also suffered in France, the History of whom was written, and
set forth by their own Churches, and directed to the brethren of Asia and
Phrygia; wherein they write, that Satan's Instruments were so maliciously active
against them, that they could not be safe any where, neither in the Markets,
Shops, nor their own Houses. Yea, they were forbidden to come into any public
places: But God in Mercy took out of the Tyrants hands, Gods Providence.
such as were weak amongst the Christians, and sets up others, as Pillars, who
are able to abide all sufferings, and valiantly to withstand the enemy,
notwithstanding all the opprobrious punishments they could devise; Patience.
yea, by their admirable patience they showed that all the sufferings of this
present time were not to be compared with the glory which they expected to be
revealed in them. First they suffered whatsoever the frantic multitude could
inflict upon them, Diverse torments*
by railings, scourgings, drawings and halings, flinging of stones,
imprisonment, etc. Then were they led to the Marketplace, where the Captain
and other City-Officers, commanded them to prison, after they had made
confessions of their faith publicly, till the return of the chief Governor:
Who being come back, he used all extremity that possibly he could against them.
At which time a noble young man, called Vetius Epagathus, Vetius Epagathus his
zeal.
being replenished with fervent zeal and love, both to God and the brethren,
could not suffer the wicked Judgment which was given against the brethren:
Whereupon he desired the Governor to hear what he had to say in their behalf,
in whom was no impiety found: But the people cried out against him, and the
Justice denied his lawful request, withal, asking him whether he himself
were not a Christian? unto which, with a loud and bold voice he answered, I
am a Christian; And thus was he received into the fellowship of the Martyrs* By
this worthy example the rest of the brethren were more animated to suffer
Martyrdom: Yet some there were as yet weak, and not so well prepared for
sufferings, of whom there were ten that fainted, which filled the rest with
great heaviness. Humane frailty.
Their example also caused such as were not yet apprehended to be less forward
in adventuring themselves; yet every day were some apprehended, which were
worthy to fill up the number of them which were fallen.

Against the Christians were their heathen servants examined, and being
threatened with extreme torments, they were enforced to confess against their
Masters, Christians slandered.
that at their meetings they kept the feasts of Thiestes, and incest of
Oedipus, and many other such like crimes, not fit to be named, which things
being bruted abroad, every one began to exercise their cruelty against the
people of God; yea, their familiar friends disdained and waxed mad against
them.

Then was all manner of cruelty used against them, especially against Sanctus,
Deacon of the Church of Viena, and Maturus, but a little before baptized, but
yet a worthy soldier of Christ. Sanctus. Maturus. Attalus. Blandina.
Also against Attalus and Blandina, concerning whom we were all afraid,
especially her Mistress, lest through weakness she should not stand to her
profession; but, through Gods Grace, she was so admirably replenished with
strength and boldness, A miracle of Mercy.
that they which had the tormenting of her by course from morning till night,
for very vveariness gave over, and fell down, confessing that they could do no
more against her, marvelling that she yet lived, having her body so torn and
rent as it was: Tormentors, wearied.
professing that any one of those torments alone had been sufficient to bereave
her of life. But this blessed Virgin became stronger and stronger in her
sufferings, and as often as she spoke these words, I am a Christian, and have
not committed any evil, she was wonderfully comforted. Note.


Sanctus also, who in his torments had endured more pains then the nature of
man was able to stand under, when the wicked* thought to have heard him utter
some blasphemous words, through the intollerableness of his pains, abode
notwithstanding so constant in mind, that they could neither extort out of him*
what Countryman he was, where brought up, what his name was, whether a
bondman, or a free, but to every question he answered, Admirable constancy.
I am a Christian: When therefore they had used all other kinds of torments,
they clapped plates of brass red hot to the tenderest parts of his body,
wherewith, though he was grievouslly scorched, yet shrunk he not for the
matter; yea though his body was all drawn together with the scorching fire, so
that he retained not the proper shape of a man, yet did he draw comfort from
Christ, so as to rejoice in these tribulations. After a while they brought him
again to new torments, hoping thereby to enforce him to a recantation; at which
time his body was so sore and swollen, that he could not suffer a man to touch
him: but contrary to their expectation, his body in these latter torments was
so suppled and restored, that he recovered the former shape and use of his
members, A miracle of Mercy.
so that these second torments, through the Grace of Christ, proved a sovereign
medicine to him.

Satan also now thinking that he was sure of Biblides, who was one of those
that had denied Christ, and hoping to prevail with her, a weak and feeble woman
in the faith, Biblides.
to damn her soul by blaspheming God, brought her to the place of Execution;
but she in the midst of her torments returning to her self, and by those pains
remembering the torments of hell, said to her tormentors, How should we
Christians eat our own Children (as you report of us) when we eat not the blood
of any beast? and so confessing her self to be a Christian, she was martyred
with the rest.

Yet here did not the rage of the enemies cease; for when the Christians were
cast into prison, they were shut up in dark and ugly dungeons, and drawn by the
feet in a rack, even unto the fifth hole: some of them were strangled and
killed in the prisons; others remaining in prison, destitute of all humane
help, were so strengthened by the Lord, both in body and mind, that they were a
great comfort to the rest: The younger sort, whose bodies had not yet felt the
lash of the whip, were not able to endure the sharpness of their imprisonment,
but died under the same.

Photinus, Deacon to the Bishop of Lions, about eighty nine years old, Photinus.
weak and feeble, by reason of age and sickness, yet of a lively spirit and
courage, by reason of the great desire which he had of martyrdom, being brought
to the Judgment seat, and being there demanded of the chief Ruler, What was
the Christian-mans God? he answered, If thou be worthy to know, thou shall
know: the Ruler being enraged herewith, caused him to be extremely beaten: also
such as stood next him, did him all the despite they could, beating and
kicking him without any regard to his reverend gray hairs; others that were
further off, threw at him whatsoever came next hand; and thus whilst he was
gasping after life, they threw him into prison, where after two days he died.

They also which in the first pesecution had denied Christ, were apprehended,
cast into prison, and made partakers of the others afflictions; yea, they had
twice so much punishment as the other had: and whereas they which had been
constant, Danger of Apostasy.
were refreshed with the joy of Martyrdom, with the hope of Gods Promises, and
with the love of Christ, and his holy Spirit; the other Apostates being full of
guilt, went out to death, with dejected and ill-favored countenances, and were
filled with shame, so that the very Gentiles reviled them as degenerous
persons, and worthy to suffer as evildoers: whereas in the mean time, they
which had remained constant, went to their Martyrdom with cheerful
countenances, adorned with glory and grace: yea, their very bonds wherewith
they were tied, set them out as brides when they are decked in gorgious array:
and withal they had such a redolent smell, as if they had been anointed with
some sweet balm: by which sights the rest were confirmed, and being
apprehended, confessed Christ without any staggering.

The Martyrdom of the Saints was of diverse kinds, as the offering to God a
Garland decked with sundry kinds of colors and flowers.

Maturus, Attalus, and Blandina, were again brought forth to the public
Scaffold, where Maturus and Sanctus suffered again all manner of torments, as
if they had suffered nothing before: They were scourged, torn of wild beasts,
set in red hot iron chairs, in which their bodies were dried as on a grid-iron,
and their tormentors raged more and more against them, laboring to overcome
the patience of the Saints: yet could they get nothing out of Sanctus's mouth,
but that he was a Christian: These holy men having been thus made a spectacle
all the day to the people, were at last slain. Then Blandina being fastened to
a stake, was cast to the wild beasts, but they, as being more merciful then
men, would not come near her: then they cast her again into prison, where she,
though a weak woman, yet armed with invincible courage by Christ, mightily
encouraged her brethren. Then was Attalus brought forth with this inscription,
This is Attalus the Christian, against whom the people were much enraged, but
the Governor understanding that he was a Roman, remanded him to prison till
^he understood the Emperors pleasure: Many that had before denied Christ,
through Gods Grace, recovered themselves again, Recovery after falls.
and tasted the sweetness of him that desired not the death of a sinner, etc.
and of their own accord came to the Judgment seat to be examined; then did the
Judge, when a great concourse of people was met together, s^nd for all the
Christian prisoners, and as many as were Freemen of Rome he beheaded, the
Residue he gave to be devoured of wild beasts, amongst whom also they which had
before denied Christ, joyfully suffered Martyrdom. Whilst the Christians were
examining at the Bar, one Alexander, a Physician, by signs, and becks,
Alexander.
persuaded those which were examined, boldly to confess Christ, which the
people taking notice of, accused him to the Judge: who asking him what Religion
he was of, he answered, I am a Christian: whereupon he was immediately adjudged
to be devoured of the beasts.

The next day was Attalus and this Alexander brought forth to the Sca^fold,
where they had all manner of torments inflicted upon them, and having endured
the greatest agony that possibly they could be put to, they were at the last
slain: Alexander never so much as sighed, but prayed to, and praised God all
the while he was tormented: Attalus, when he was set in the iron chair, and the
frying savor of his burning body began to smell, Note.
said to the people, Behold! this which you do is to eat man's flesh: for we
neither eat men, nor commit any other wickedness: And being demanded what was
the name of their God, he said, Our God has no such name as men have;
Blasphemy*
then said they, Let us see whether your God can help you, and take you out of
our hands. Then was Blandina again brought forth, Ponticus a boy of fifteen
years old.
and with her one Ponticus, a youth of fifteen years old, who defying their
Idols, and constantly cleaving to Christ, were put to all the torments their
enraged enemies could devise: the youth having suffered all kinds of torments,
at last gave up the ghost: Blandina was first pitifully whipped, then thrown to
the wild beasts, then tormented upon the grid-iron, then put into a net, and
thrown to the wild Bull, and when she was tossed, gored, and wounded with his
horns, she was at last slain, but was so filled with ravishing joys of the H.
Ghost, that she felt no pain during all her torments. Joy unspeakable.
Such as were strangled in prisons, were afterward thrown to dogs, and had
keepers both day and night set to watch them, lest their bones and members
should be buried. In the mean time the Gentiles extolled their Idols, mocking
and flouting the Christians, saying, Where is your God that you so much boast
of? Blasphemy.
and what helps this your religion for which you give your lives? The bodies
of the Martyrs were thus made a gazing-stock for six days in the open streets,
and then were burned, and their Ashes thrown into the River.

Justin Martyr. Alcibiades.
Also in this persecution Justin Martyr, through the malice of Crescens the
Philosopher, suffered Martyrdom. Also one Alcibiades a man of a strict life,
eating only bread and water, was cast into the prison where Attalus, and other
Christians lay; and Alcibiades continued the same strict diet in prison: but it
was from God revealed to Attalus, that he did not well in refusing the other
good Creatures of God, and that it was scandalous to his brethren: whereupon he
reformed, and ate of all things boldly with thanksgiving.

About this time Clandius Apolinaris, Bishop of Hieropolis, and Melito Bishop
of Sardis, Clau. Apolinaris and Melito Apologize for the Christians.
eloquent and learned men, delivered to the Emperor excellent Apologies
written by them in defense of the Christian Religion, whereby they prevailed
with him somewhat to stay the rage of his Persecution: which also was furthered
upon this occasion: Marcus Aurelius, and Marcus Antonius the Emperors, going to
War against the Quades, Vandals, Sarmates and Germans; their Army, by the
multitude of their enemies, was coopt up in some strait, dry and hot places,
where the soldiers having been destitute of water for five days together, were
all like to perish. Hereupon a Legion of Christian soldiers being in the Army,
The thundering Legion.
withdrew apart from the rest, and falling prostrate upon the earth, by ardent
prayer, obtained of God a double relief: for the Lord sent the Romans such
showers, as satisfied their necessities, and flashed such lightnings against
their enemies, that thereby they were discomfited and put to flight. This
Miracle so pleased the Emperor, that ever after he used the Christians gentler,
writing also to diverse Rulers, commanding them to give thanks to the
Christians, as for their victory, so for the preservation of himself, and his
Army. His letters was to this purpose, That whereas himself and Army, were
environed with nine hundred seventy five thousand fighting men, and were like
to perish for want of water, the Christians praying to a God, that he knew not,
obtained relief for him, and by hail and lightning, Destruction to his enemies;
whereby he perceived their God to be a mighty God. Hereupon he decreed that
none should be punished for the Christian Profession, being guilty of no other
crime, A good Edict.
and that the Accusers of the Christians should be burned alive: Which degree
he commanded to be recorded in the Senate House, proclaimed publicly in the
Court of Trajan, and sent diligently into all his Provinces, that all might
take notice of the same.

Yet not long after, Apollonius a noble Senator of Rome, was accused by his own
servant before the Judge, for being a Christian; Apollonius.
The Accuser, according to the the Decree, had his legs broken, and was put to
death. A just reward of treachery.
But Apollonius having rendered an accocnt of his faith before the Senate, was
condemned to be beheaded, notwithstanding the Decree, because there was an old
Law, that any that was arraigned for professing Christ, without a recantation,
could not be released.

Commodus the Emperor upon his birthday, calling the people of Rome together,
in a great royalty, clothed in his Lions skin, sacrificed to Hercules causing
it to be proclaimed, that Hercules was the Patron of the City: whereupon
Vincentius, Eusebius, Peregrinus and Pontentianus, learned men, and Pastors of
the Congregations, being stirred up with zeal, Vincentius, Eusebius, Peregrinus
and Potentianus. Zeal,
went about from place to place, converting the Gentiles to the faith of
Christ, and hearing of the madness of the Emperor and people, they reproved
that Idolatrous blindness, exhorting them to believe in the true and living
God, and that forsaking the worshipping of devils, they should honor God
alone. The Emperor hearing thereof, caused them to be apprehended, and required
them to sacrifice to Hercules, which they refusing to do, he caused them to be
grievously tormented, and at last to be pressed to death with weights of lead.

Julius a Roman Senator, Julius.
having been converted by the preaching of these men, afterward sent for
Ruffinus a Minister, by whom himself and all his family were baptized, and
burning with holy zeal, Zeal.
he made an open profession of the faith of Christ, praying that he might not
only believe, but that he might have the honor to suffer for his Name. The
Emperor hearing that he was become a Christian, sent for him, to whom he said,
O Julius, What madness possesses thee thus to forsake the Religion of thy
Forefathers, to embrace a new and fond kind of Religion of the Christians?
Hereupon Julius made before him a free and open profession of his faith,
affirming that the Roman gods were false gods, and that they that worshipped
them, should be punished with everlasting damnation. The Emperor hearing that
he despised his gods, was much enraged, and committed him to Vitellius, a cruel
and fierce man, to compel him, either to sacrifice to Hercules, or to slay
him: But Julius nothing discouraged, and persuading Vitellius to acknowledge,
and serve the true God, was at his command with Cudgels beaten to death.

CHAP. XI. The Fifth Primitive Persecution which began An. Christi, 205.
COmmodus being dead, Pertinax succeeded in the Empire, under whom the Church
enjoyed peace, and flourished exceedingly, so that many of the Nobles of Rome
embraced the true faith, together with their whole households.

Pertinax being dead, Severus succeeded, and in the first ten years of his
reign he was very mild and gentle to the Christians: Severus Emperor.
But afterward, through sinister suggestions, and malicious accusations; he
was so incensed, that by his proclamations he commanded that no Christians
should any more be suffered to live. Hereby great pe^secution was stirred up on
every side, and an infinite number of Martyrs were slain. The crimes objected
against the Christians were sedition, Christians charged with sedition and
rebellion, etc.
rebellion against the Emperor, Sacrilege, Murdering of Infants, incestuous
pollutions, eating raw flesh, worshipping the head of an Ass, etc. but
especially that they would not worship their Idols. The Places where this
persecution most raged, were Africa, Capadocia, Alexandria and Carthage. The
number of them that suffered, was innumerable, amongst whom was Leonides the
father of Origin; with whom Origin his son, Leonides father of Origin.
being but seventeen years old, would have suffered, (such a fervent desire he
had of Martyrdom) had not his mother privily in the night conveyed away his
shirt and cloths, whereupon, Zeal.
more for shame to be seen, then for fear to die, he was constrained to remain
at home.

Origin was afterward a Professor of Divinity at Alexandria, and out of his
school, Plutarch. Serenus. Potamiena. Marcella and Rhais.
one Plutarch suffered Martyrdom, as also Serenus his brother, who was burned,
and another Serenus who was beheaded. Potamiena also, who was tormented with
boiling pitch poured upon her, and afterward with her mother Marcella, and
Rhais burned in the fire. This Potamiena being a beautiful Virgin, was
committed to Captain Basilides to see execution done upon her, and as he led
her to the place of Execution, he repressed the rage of the multitude, who
followed her with many railings and revilings, whereupon, to requite his
kindness, she prayed to the Lord for his Conversion to the true faith, and so
with admirable patience she suffered Martyrdom.

Shortly after Basilides being required to give an oath in the behalf of his
fellow soldiers, he denied the same, B^silides his strange conversion.
plainly affirming that he was a Christian, and therefore he could not swear
by the Idols, etc. They which heard him, thought that he jested at first, but
when he had constantly affirmed it, they had him before the Judge, who
committed him to ward: the Christians wondering at it, went to him, and
enquiring the cause of his Conversion, he told them that Potamiena had prayed
for him, and so he savv a Crown put upon his head, adding that it should not
be long before he received it, and accordingly the next day he was beheaded.

As many suffered death in this persecution, so others there were, who through
Gods providence, suffered great torments; and yet escaped with life, of whom
there was one Alexander, who for his constant confession, and torments
suffered, was afterward made Bishop of Jerusalem. Also Narcissus, Narcissus.
False Witnesses plagued by God.
against whom three wicked persons conspired to accuse him, binding their
accusations with oaths and curses, one vvishing to be destroyed with fire, if
it were not true; another to be consumed with a grievous disease; the other
to lose both his eyes; Narcissus being unable to vvith-stand so wicked an
accusation, retired himself into a desert: In the mean time Gods vengeance
follovved these perjured Wretches: for the first, by a small spark of fire,
was himself with all his family, and goods burned: the second was taken
with a grievous sickness which tormented him from the top to the toe, whereof
he died: the third, being warned by these Judgments, confessed his fault, but
by reason of his abundant sorrovv and weeping, he lost both his eyes:
Narcissus being hereby cleared from their false accusation, returned home, and
was received into his Congregation again. Also one Andoclus was sent by
Polycarp into France, who because he spread there the Doctrine of Christ,
Andoclus.
was apprehended by the command of Severus, and first beaten with staves and
bats, and afterward beheaded. Asclepiades also, afterward Bishop of
Antioch, Asclepiades.
suffered much in this Persecution. Then did Irenaeus, and many others with
him suffer Martyrdom; and shortly after Tertullian also. Perpetua and
Felicitas, Irenaeus. Tertullian. Perpetua. Felicitas. Revocatus. Satyrus.
Secundulus.
two godly women, with Revocatus their brother, and Satyrus, were thrown
to the vvild beasts, and devoured by them. Saturninus was beheaded: Secundulus
cast into prison, where he died: all these suffered Martyrdom at Carthage.

Also Zepherinus, and after him Urbanus, both Bishops of Rome, were martyred
in this Persecution: Zepherinus. Urbanus.
This Urbanus by preaching and holiness of life, converted many heathens unto
Christ; amongst whom were Tiburtius and Valerianus, two noble men of Rome,
who both suffered Martyrdom: Also Cecilia a Virgin, who was espoused to
Valerian* was apprehended and carried to the Idols to offer sacrifice,
Tiburtius. Valerianus. Cecilia.
which she refusing to do, should have been carried to the Judge to receive
the sentence of condemnation; but the Sergeants and Officers beholding her
excellent beauty and prudent behavior, began with many persuasions to
solicit her to favor her self, etc. but she so replied with wisdom and godly
exhortations, A great Conversion.
that by the grace of Almighty God, their hearts began to relent, and at length
to yield to that Religion which before they persecuted; which she perceiving,
desired leave to go home; and sending for Urbanus the Bishop to her house, he
so grounded and established them in the faith of Christ, that about four
hundred persons believed, and were baptized; amongst whom was Gordianus a noble
man. Afterward this blessed Martyr was brought before the Judge, by whom she
was condemned; then she was enclosed in an hot bath for twenty four hours, yet
remaining alive, she was there beheaded.

Agape^us a boy of fifteen years old.
At Preneste in Italy was one Agapetus of fifteen years old apprehended, and
because he refused to sacrifice to Idols, he was first scourged with whips,
then hanged up by the feet, and had scalding water poured on him, then he was
cast to the wild beasts; but because they would not hurt him, Gods judgment on
a persecutor.
he was lastly beheaded. Antiochus that executed these torments on him,
suddenly fell down from his judicial seat, crying out that all his bowels
burned within him, and so he died miserably.

Calepodius, a Minister of Christ in Rome, was first dragged through the
streets, Calepodius.
and after cast into Tyber.

Pamachius, a Senator of Rome, with his wife and Children, and other men and
women, Pamachius.
to the number of forty two, were all beheaded in one day, together with
another noble man, all whose heads were hung up over the gates of the City* to
deter others from the profession of Christianity. Martina.
Also Martina, a Christian Virgin, having suffered many other bitter torments,
was at last slain with the sword.

CHAP. XII. The sixth Primitive Persecution, which began Anno Christi, 237.
THe Emperor Maximinus raised the sixth persecution against the Christians,
Maximinus Emperor.
especially against the Teachers and Leaders of the Church, thinking that if
these Captains were removed out of the way, he should the easilier prevail
against the rest. In the time of this Persecution, Origin vvrote his book De
Martyrio, which being lost, the names of most that suffered Martyrdom in those
times, are buried in oblivion, yet were they very many: Amongst whom Urbanus
Bishop of Rome, Urbanus and Philip.
and Philippus, one of his Ministers were banished into Sardinia, where they
both died.

About this time one Natalius that had formerly suffered great persecution for
the cause of Christ, was seduced by Asclepiodotus and Theodorus, Sectaries
dangerous.
two Sectaries, to be the Bishop of their Sect, promising to pay him a hundred
and fifty crowns of silver every month, and so he joined himself to them; Note.
but the Lord in mercy not intending to lose him that had suffered so much for
his sake, admonished him by a vision to adjoin himself to the true Church
again, which the good man for the present, blinded with lucre and honor, did
not regard as he ought to have done: The night after he was scourged by Angels,
whereupon in the morning, purting on Sackcloth, Probably it was by the terrors
of his own conscience.
with much weeping and lamentation, he went to the Christian Congregation,
praying them for the tender mercies of Christ, that he might be received into
their Communion again; which request was accordingly granted unto him.

Hippolitus was drawn through the fields with wild horses till he died; Many
others were martyred and buried by sixty in a pit.

CHAP. XIII. The seventh Primitive Persecution, which began Anno Christi, 250.
DEcius the Emperor raised this seventh terrible persecution against the
Christians, Decius Emp.
which was first occasioned by reason of the treasures of the Emperor, which
were committed to Fabian the Bishop of Rome, who thereupon, by the command of
Decius, was put to death, Fabian Martyr.
and moreover his Proclamations were sent into all quarters, that all which
professed the name of Christ, should be slain. A cruel Edict.
In the time of this Persecution Origin suffered many and great torments for
the cause of Christ, by Rackings, Dungeons, etc.

Nicephorus, who writes of this persecution under Decius, declares the
horribleness of it to be so great, and that so many Martyrs suffered, That,
says, he, it is as easy to number the sands of the sea, as to set down the
names of all those whom this persecution did devour.

Alexander, Bishop of Jerusalem, who was very aged, having governed the Church
forty years, was from thence carried to Caesarea, Alexander Martyr.
where after a bold and constant confession of his faith, made before the
Judge, he was cast into prison, and there died. Babilas Bishop of Antioch also
died in prison, Babilus.
and forty Virgins were martyred there about that time. And one Peter in the
Country of Phrygia, being apprehended by the Proconsul, Peter.
suffered most bitter torments for the name of Christ, the like did diverse
others in Troada. From Babylon diverse Christians were led away by Decius into
Spain, and there exceuted; the like sufferings had many in Caesarea,

Dionysius Alexandrinus, writing of the Martyrs that suffered in Alexandria,
says thus, This Persecution began about a year before the Emperors
Proclamation came forth, by reason of a wicked South-sayer, A South-sayer stirs
up a persecution.
who coming to the City, stirred up the multitude of heathens against the
Christians, persuading them to uphold their Idolatrous services; wherewith the
people being inflamed, obtained full power to prosecute their wicked purposes,
conceiving all Religion to consist in the destruction of the Christians. And
first of all they fell upon a Minister, Metra Martyr.
called Metra, whom they would have enforced to blaspheme Christ; which when he
refused, they laid upon him with staves and clubs, and with sharp Reeds they
pricked his face and eyes; and then, bringing him to the Suburbs, they stoned
him to death. Quinta.
Then they took an holy woman, called Quinta, and bringing her to the
Idol-Temple, would compel her to worship there; which she constantly refusing,
they bound her feet, and drew her through all the streets upon the hard-stones,
whipped her with Whips, dashed her against Mil-stones, The Christian houses
plundered.
and lastly stoned her to death. Then the enraged multitude breaking into the
Christians houses, plundered them of all they had; the rest of the lumber they
carried into the marketplace, and burned it: The Saints in the mean time
taking patiently and joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing that they
had a more enduring substance in heaven.

Then they took an ancient Virgin, called Apollinia, whom they brought forth*
Apollinia leaps into the fire.
and dashing all the teeth out of her head, they made a great fire, threatening
to cast her into it, unless she would blaspheme and deny Christ; whereupon she,
after a little pause, leaped into the fire, and so was burned. Then they took
Serapion out of his house, whom they assailed with all kind of torments,
Serapion.
broke almost all the joints of his body: and lastly throwing him down from an
high loft, killed him. The poor Christians could no where shelter themselves,
nor rest day nor night, the multitude crying out, that unless they would
blaspheme Christ, they should all be burned. But, through Gods Mercy,
Persecutors divided amongst themselves.
the miserable wretches at last fell out amongst themselves, turning their
cruelty, formerly exercised against the Christians, upon their own heads,
whereby the Church had a little breathing time.

The danger of riches.
Shortly after came forth the cruel Edict of the Emperor, which so terrified the
Christians, that some, especially the rich, partly through fear, and partly by
the persuasion of their Neighbors, came to those impure and idolatrous
sacrifices: Zeal.
Others came boldly to the Altars, declaring publicly, that they were not of
that Religion: Of the rest some ran away, others were taken, enduring bands and
torments constantly: Others again, after long imprisonment, and sundry
torments, Apostasy.
renounced their faith, whilst others more strong in the faith, valiantly
endured Martyrdom: Amongst whom was Julianus, a man diseased with the gout, and
not able to go, and Cronion, who were laid upon Camels, Julianus Martyr, and
Cronion.
and there scourged, and at last thrown into the fire, where, with much
constancy, they were consumed. As Julianus went to Martyrdom, a certain
soldier took his part against those which railed upon him; Whereupon the
people crying out against him, he was apprehended, and being constant in his
profession, was presently beheaded.

Macar. Epim^chus.
Also Macar a Christian Lybian was burned alive. Epimachus and Alexander, having
been long imprisoned, Alexander. Ammonarion. Mercuria.
after innumerable pains and torments, with rasors and scourges, were with
four women, consumed with fire: Ammonarion a Virgin, Mercuria an aged Matron,
and Dionysia, a mother of many Children, Dio^ysia.
whom yet she loved not above the Lord, these, when they could not be overcome
by any torments inflicted on them by the cruel Judge, but rather were
unsensible of them all, were at last slain with the svvord.

Also three Egyptians, and a youth of fifteen years old, were brought before
the Judge, who first began with the Child, by fair words, A boy of fifteen
years old.
seeking to entice him, then by torments to constrain him, which not
prevailing, when he had tormented the other also he condemned them all to the
fire; But the Judge wondering at the wise answers, and grave constancy of the
child, dismissed him.

Nemesion also an Egyptian, Nemesion.
was first accused to be a companion of thieves, but being purged from that,
he was accused of Christianity, tormented and scourged extremely, and then
amongst other thieves, burnt to death.

A certain Christian being examined before the Judge, and through fear being
ready to shrink back, there were by, Humane frailty.
certain soldiers of the degree of Knights, and an aged man named Theophilus,
who were ready to burst for grief, making signs to him, Zeal.
by their hands and gestures, to be constant; which being observed by the
Bystanders, they were ready to lay hold of them, but they of their own
accord, pressing up to the Judge, professed themselves to be Christians,
Courage.
which much imboldened the weak Christian that was before the tribunal, and
terrified the Judge. This being done they departed away, rejoicing for the
testimony that they had given of their faith.

In other Cities many Christians were torn in pieces by the heathen.

Ischirion, a servant to a noble man, Ischirion.
was commanded by his Master to sacrifice to the Idols, which when he
refused, and would by no means be persuaded to, his Master took a pike, and
ran him thorovv. Multitudes of Christians vvandring in deserts and mountains,
were devoured by hunger, thirst, cold, sickness, thieves and vvild beasts, The
miseries of Christians. Cheremon.
amongst whom was Cheremon, Bishop of the City of Nilus, and his wife, who
flying into the mountains of Arabia, were never heard of more. Dionysius also
says of himself, I speak the truth before God, and lie not, I having no regard
of my own life, Dionys^us.
and not without the motion of Gods Spirit, did fly, A miracle of Mercy.
and avoid the danger of this persecutian: Yea, and before that, when one was
sent from the Governor te seek me, I remained three days at home to tarry for
him; The messenger in the mean time narrowly sought for me by all ways, fields,
floods and corners, where he thought I might hide my self, God striking him
with such blindness, that he could not find my house. After these three days,
Flight in persecution.
the Lord God willing and commanding me to fly, and marvellously opening to me
the way, I with my Children, and many other brethren, went out together, and
so escaped.

Also Agatha, a godly Virgin of Sicilie, suffered diverse and bitter torments of
imprisonment, with beatings, famine, racking, as also rolling naked upon sharp
shells, and hot coals, and having her breasts cut off her body. Also forty other
Virgins, by sundry kinds of torments, were put to death about the same time.

Decius erecting a Temple at Ephesus, compelled all in the City to offer
Sacrifice to Idols, but there were seven Christian soldiers of his own
Retinue, who refused, neither could the Emperor, by persuasions or threats,
Courage of seven soldiers.
induce them to it, yet he gave them respite till his return from the Wars; in
the mean time they hid themselves in a cave in the mountain Celius. At the
Emperors Return he made great inquisition for them, and at last hearing where
they were, he caused the mouth of the cave so to be closed up, that they could
not get out, and so they were famished there.

There was also one Nicetas, a Christian soldier, whom when the Praetor could
not by any torments remove from his stedfastness, he took another course with
him, Nicetas his ra^e chastity.
for he brought him into a most fragrant garden, flowing with all manner of
pleasures and delights, where he laid him upon a bed of down, softly enwrapped
in a net of silk, among the Lillies and Roses, the delicious murmr of the
streams, and the sweet whistling of the leaves moved with a gentle wind, and so
departed: presently in comes a beautiful strumpet, and uses all the
abominable tricks of her impure Art, and whorish villainies, to draw him to
commit wickedness with her; whereupon the young man fearing that he should now
be conquered by folly, who was Conqueror over fury, bites off a piece of his
tongue with his own teeth, and spits it into the face of the whore, and so
prevented the hurt of sin by the smart of his wound.

At Antioch, Theodora, a godly Virgin, refusing to sacrifice to the Idols,
Theodora condemned to the Stews.

Her strange deliverance.


was condemned by the Judge to the Stews, which sentence being executed, there
were many wanton young men ready at the door to press into the house where she
was, but one of the brethren, called Didymus, putting on a soldiers habit,
would have the first admittance, and coming in, he persuaded her to change
garments with him, and so she, in the soldiers habit, escaped away, and
Didymus was left to the rage, and wondering of the people, when he was found a
man: hereupon he was presented to the President, to whom he presently confessed
the whole matter, professing himself to be a Christian, and so was condemned;
which Theodora hearing of, thinking to excuse him, she came, and presented her
self to the Judge, as the guilty party, desiring that she might be condemned,
and the other excused: but the cruel Judge, neither considering the virtue of
the persons, Cruelty.
nor the innocence of the cause, most inhumanely condemned them both, first to
be beheaded, and then burnt, which was accordingly executed.

Agathon, a man at arms in Alexandria, rebuking some lewd persons who
scornfully used the dead bodies of the Christians, Agathon.
was accused to the Judge, and lost his head.

In Troada, two Christians being delivered by the Proconsul to the people, were
first scourged, then drawn out of the City, and there trodden to death. Two
Ministers with a Deacon were martyred in Rome, Two Ministers.
and two noble men were brought and accused to Decius for burying the dead
bodies of the Christians, and being by him commanded to sacrifice to the Idols,
and they refusing, he caused them to be cast to the wild beasts, but when they
would not touch them, they were beheaded with the sword.

Also Secundianus was accused to be a Christian, which he affirming, was
commanded to prison; Secundianus. Zeal.
by the way two Christians cried to the soldiers, asking them, whether they
carried the innocent man, whereupon being apprehended and examined, they
confessed themselves to be Christians, and were condemned; first they were
beaten with cudgels, then hung up, and tormented with the gibbet, having fire
set to their sides, and lastly were beheaded: But some of their tormentors were
taken with evil spirits; others of them fell down suddenly, and died. Gods
Judgment on persecutors.


But the number of Martyrs of all ranks that suffered in this persecution was
so great, that it is impossible to set them down all; Bishops, Ministers,
Deacons, etc. young, old, men, women, etc.

Yet amongst this great number, some there were that fell away, as Serapion an
old man, that for a long time had lived a sincere and godly life, who
afterward repenting of his Apostasy, Serapions Apostasy,
desired to be readmitted into the Church, but that was not granted: Shortly
after he fell sick, and in it having remained dumb, and Recovery.
and bereaved of his senses for twenty four hours, the day after, he began a
little to recover, and calling his Nephew to him, he said, How long, how long
do you detain me here? make haste that I may be absolved: Call me hither some
of the Ministers, etc. and so being absolved, he presently after died.

In Troada, Nicomachus being grievously tormented, cried out, I am no
Christian; and so being let down from the Engine, he had no sooner sacrificed
to the Idols, but being possessed by the devil, he was thrown on the ground,
where he bit off his own tongue, and immediately after died; Many others which
showed the like cowardice, Danger of Apostasy.
were taken and tormented with wicked spirits: One was struck dumb: A maid
taken with a wicked spirit, tore out her own tongue, and died with grievous
torments in her belly, and inward parts: But though some did thus fall away,
yet others there were, whom neither fear, Constancy.
nor pain could remove from their stedfastness, but they continued glorious
Martyrs to the end.

Cyprian relates a story of one of his fellow-Ministers, who in the midst of
his torments began to faint, being greatly afraid of death, and desired to be
released: A Vision.
at which time there appeared to him a young man of admirable beauty, and so
bright, that man's mortal eye could scarce endure to behold him, who angerly
said to him, Pati timetis, exire non vultis, quid faciam vobis? To suffer you
dare not, to go out you will not, what would you have me do unto you? The
beginning of the Novatian schism.


In this Persecution there sprung up the Novatian Schism, which made a great
disturbance in the Church. This Novatus being a Minister under Cyprian in
Carthage, by stirring up discord and factions, bred much trouble to the Church,
seeking to withdraw certain of the brethren from the Bishop: And afterward
Novatus going to Rome, set up himself as a Bishop, Pride the cause of schism.
against Cornelius, the then Bishop of Rome; And to further his design, he by
subtilty allured to him three or four holy men that had been Confessors; Then
he entised three weak Bishops that lived in Italy, to come to Rome, and there
persuaded them by imposing hands upon him, to make him Bishop; for which fact,
two of them afterward were suspended, and the third upon his repentance was
readmitted. Novatus being thus made a Bishop, grew proud, and sought by all
means to withdraw the people from Cornelius to himself; yea, he made many of
them to swear that they would not leave him to go to Cornelius. But the holy
Confessors before mentioned, when they perceived the crafty subtilty of
Novatus, left him, and much grieving for their sin, were reconciled to
Cornelius again. Novatus held this opinion, that they which once renounced the
faith, and for fear of torments had offered incense to the Idols, although they
repented, A Synod against Novatus.
yet could never be readmitted into the Church of Christ again. To suppress
this error, there was a Synod called at Rome of sixty Bishops, Anno 255. who
condemned it.

Cyprian also relates of Aurelius, a godly and valiant young man, who for his
constancy in the cause of Christ, Aurelius.
suffered great and many torments, and afterward was banished. And of
Mappalicus, who the day before he suffered, Mappalicus.
in the midst of his torments told the Proconsul* Videbis cras agonem, to
morrow you shall see the running for a Wager, and accordingly the next day
being brought forth to his Martyrdom, he with no less constancy then patience,
endured faithful unto the death.

But Decius the Author of this persecution, escaped not the revenging hand of
God, for warring against the Goths, and being overcome by them, Gods Judgment
on persecutors.
lest he should fall into their hands, he leaped with his horse into a
whirlpit, where he was drowned, and his body was never found after. Yea, God
avenged the blood of his Saints upon the whole Roman Empire, by sending a
general plague of pestilence upon it, which continued ten years together; and
Dionysius says, that in Alexandria, where he was Bishop, A terrible plague.
there was scarce any house clear; and though some Christians died in this
plague, yet it fell most heavy upon the Gentiles. The Christians also in this
plague showed much brotherly love each to other, by visiting, comforting, and
relieving one another. Whereas the Idolaters, The brotherly love of Christians.
being stricken with extreme fear of the plague, none considered his Neighbor,
but every man shifted for himself, and of those that were infected, some they
cast out of doors half dead, to be devoured of dogs and wild beasts, some they
let die in their houses without all succor; others they suffered to lie
unburied, and durst not come near them, A special Providence.
notwithstanding which, the pestilence followed them whithersoever they went,
and miserably consumed them; so that the most part of the Inhabitants were
consumed by it in every Country, especially in those Provinces, where had been
the greatest persecutions raised against the Christians.

After the death of Decius, there succeeded Gallus and Volusianus in the
Empire, Anno Christi 255. who continued this persecution against the
Christians; which fell most heavy upon the Pastors and Ministers of the
Congregations: for about this time Cyprian, and many other Ministers were
banished: others were put into the metal Mines, to whom Cyprian wrote an
Epistle consolatory, wherein he writes thus, Wounds and scars are an Ornament
to a Christians breast, Cyprians consolatory letter.
such as bring not shame, but honors them before the Lord; and though in the
Mines there be no beds for their bodies to rest on, yet they have rest in
Christ; and though their weary bones lie on the cold ground, yet it is no pain
to lie with Christ. Their feet are fettered with chains, but he is bound of
man, whom the Lord Christ does loose; he lies tied in the stocks, whose feet
thereby are made swifter to run to heaven; neither can any man tie a Christian
so fast, but he runs so much the faster for his garland of life. They have no
garments to save them from cold, but he that puts on Christ is sufficiently
clothed. Does bread fail to their hungry bodies? Man lives not by bread alone,
but by every Word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Your deformity shall
be turned to honor, your mourning to joy, your pain to pleasure, and felicity
infinite. And if this grieve you, that you cannot serve God in your places as
formerly, yet your daily sacrifice cease not, which is a contrite and humble
heart; and though your travel be great, yet shall your reward be greater; for
God beholding them which confess his name, approves their willing minds, in
their strivings helps them, in their victory crowns them, rewarding that in
us which he has performed, and crowning that which he has in us perfected.
Again he tells them that they are now in a joyful journey, hasting apace to
the mansions of the Martyrs, there to enjoy, after darkness, durable light, and
comfort above all their sufferings, etc. About the same time also, Lucius
Bishop of Rome was banished.

After the death of Gallus and Volusianus, there succeeded Valerianus, who
ceased the persecution, and carried himself exceeding friendly to the
Christians; so that his whole Court was replenished with holy Saints and
servants of Christ, whereby his house seemed a Church of God. But the Devil
envying the peace of the Church, by the means of an Egyptian Enchanter, (who
was hindered from doing his feats, by the presence of the Christians) stirred up
the Emperor against them, who grew to such impiety himself, Persecution stirred
up by a Sorcerer.
that he sacrificed young infants to his Idols, quartered their bodies, divided
the Entrails of young Children new born, etc. as hereafter follows.

CHAP. XIV. The eighth Primitive Persecution which began An. Christi, 259.
VAlerianus being seduced by the Egyptian Inchanter, as is before related,
stirred up the eighth persecution against the Church of Christ; Sin the
Forerunner of persecution.
concerning which Cyprian writes thus; We must confess that this great
calamity which has wasted for the most part all our Churches, and still daily
consumes us, arises chiefly from our own wickedness, while we walk not in the
way of the Lord, nor observe his precepts as we ought, whilst we are full of
lucre, pride, emulation, dissension, void of simplicity and faithful dealing,
renouncing the world in word, but not in deed, every man pleasing himself, and
displeasing others; and therefore we are thus worthily scourged: For what
stripes do we not deserve, when the Confessors themselves do keep no
Discipline; etc. Concluding, Non venissent fratribus haec mala, si in unum
fraternitas fuisset animata; These evils had not happened to the brethren, if
they had joined together in brotherly unanimity. A little before this
persecution began, God by a vision revealed it to Cyprian, saying to him, Be
quiet and of good comfort, for peace will come; A Vision.
albeit a little stay there is for a while, for that some remain yet to be
proved and tried, etc.

The crimes and accusations that were laid to the charge of the Christians,
Christians charged as the causes of all plagues.
by the Persecutors, were, that they refused to worship Idols, and the
Emperors; and that they professed the name of Christ: Yet besides, all the
calamities and evils that happened in the world, as wars, famine, pestilence,
etc. were imputed only to the Christians: But Cyprian and Tertullian confuting
those slanders, Confuted by Cyprian and Tertullian.
proved that the special cause of all those miseries which befell the Empire,
proceeded from the cruel shedding of the innocent blood of the Christians. In
this persecution, Cyprian was at last condemned to have his head cut off,
Cyprian Martyr.
who patiently and willingly submitted his neck to the stroke of the sword.

Also about this time, Sixtus Bishop of Rome, with his six Deacons, were
accused for being Christians, Sixtus and his Deacons.
whereupon being brought to the place of Execution, they were all beheaded.

Laurence also another of his Deacons, following Sixtus as he went to his
Execution, complained that he might not suffer with him, but that he was
secluded, as the son from the father: To whom the Bishop answered, that within
three days he should follow him, bidding him in the mean time to go home, and
if he had any treasures, to distribute them amongst the poor: The Judge hearing
mention of treasures, supposing that Laurence had great store in his custody,
commanded him to bring the same to him: Laurence craved three days respite,
promising then to declare where the treasure might be had: In the mean time he
caused a good number of poor Christians to be gathered together, The courage
and constancy of Laurence.
and when the day of his answer was come, the persecutor strictly charged him
to make good his promise; then valiant Laurence stretching out his arms over
the poor, said, These are the precious treasures of the Church, these are the
treasure indeed in whom Christ has his mansion,, etc. But oh! what tongue is
able to express the fury and madness of the Tyrants heart! how he stamped,
stared, ramped, The rage of Tyrants.
and fared like one out of his wits: his eyes glowed like fire, his mouth
foamed like a boar, like a hell-hound he grinded his teeth: then he cried,
kindle the fire, make no spare of wood: has this Villain deluded the Emperor?
away with him, whip him with scourges, jerk him with rods, buffet him with
fists, brain him with clubs: Jesteth the Traitor with the Emperor? pinch him
with fiery tongs, gird him with burning plates, bring out the strongest chains
and fire-forks, and the grate of Iron, set it on the fire, bind the Rebel hand
and foot, and when the grate is red hot, on with him, roast him, broil him, toss
him, turn him upon pain of our high displeasure, do every man his Office, O ye
tormentors. Immediately his command was obeyed, and after many cruel handlings,
this meek lamb was laid, I will not say upon a bed of fiery iron, but on a soft
downbed; so mightily God wrought for his servant, so miraculosly did he temper
this Element of fire, that it was not a bed of consuming pain, but of
nourishing rest unto Laurence. Not Laurence, but the Emperor seemed to be
tormented, the one broiling in the flesh, In all these things we are more then
Conquerors.
the other burning in his heart: when this triumphant Martyr had been pressed
down with fire-forks for a great space, in the mighty Spirit of God he spoke to
the Tyrant thus;

This side is now roasted enough, turn up* O Tyrant great,
Assay, whether roasted or raw thou think the better meat?
By the constant confession of this worthy and valiant Deacon, a Roman soldier
was converted to the same faith, and desired to be baptized, whereupon he was
called before the Judge, scourged, and afterward beheaded.

About the same time Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, with his three Deacons,
were brought before Emilianus, Dionysia. banished.
who told them of the clemency of the Emperor, and therefore required them to
sacrifice to his gods, etc. to whom Dionysius answered, Diverse men worship
diverse gods, but we, only that one God who is the Creator of all things, making
our prayers to him uncessantly for the health of the Emperor, etc. Then said
the President, Why can you not worship your own God and ours also? Dionysius
replied. We worship only one God, as we have said; the President said, I see
you are ungrateful persons, and regard not the Emperors clemency, therefore I
banish you to Cephro in Lybia, and charge you that you convent no more your
assemblies, nor be found out of that place at your peril, and though Dionysius
was sick, yet would he not grant him one days respite before his departrue.

In Cephro he had a great Congregation, as well of those that followed him in
his banishment, as of others that resorted to him out of Egypt; yea, though at
first he was persecuted there, and stoned, yet afterward a great number of the
Inhabitants forsook their Idols, The power of the Word of God.
and were converted unto God by his Ministry; and having accomplished his
Ministry there, the Lord removed him to another place. For (says Dionysius)
Emilianus translated us from thence to a sharper place of Lybia, commanding us
to meet all together at the City Mareota; intending to separate us into several
villages, or rather to take us by the way; when we came thither, I was
commanded to Colluthion, a place which I had never heard of; yet was it some
solace to me that the brethren told me it was near to the City Paretonium: for
as my being at Cephro gat me the acquaintance of many brethren of Egypt, Gods
Providence.
so I hoped that the vicinity of that place to the City, might procure me the
concourse of certain loving brethren from it, as it came also to pass, etc.

He writes moreover that the number of those which suffered Martyrdom about
that time was great, men, women, young men, maidens, old wives, soldiers, and
men of all sorts and ages; of whom some with scourgings, The cruel torments of
the Christians.
and fire, and some with the sword, obtained the victory, and gat the Crown.
Neither (says he) to this day does the President cease cruelly murdering such
as be brought before him, tearing some with torments, imprisoning others, and
commanding that no man should come to them: yet God with the daily resort of
the brethren does comfort the afflicted.

In Palestine, Priscus, Malchus, and Alexander, three godly men, seeing the
valiant courage of the Christians so boldly to venture, Priscus, Malchus,
Alexander
constantly to stand, and patiently to suffer in this persecution, as grieved
with themselves, Zeal.
began to accuse their own sluggishness and cowardice, to see others so zealovs
and valiant, and themselves so cold and faint-hearted, in laboring for the
Crown of Martyrdom: whereupon, agreeing amongst themselves, they came to
Caesarea, and stepping to the Judge, they declared themselves to be Christians,
and so they were sentenced, and given to the wild beasts.

A certain woman also in the same place, formerly a Marcionist, being brought
before the President, obtained the same Martyrdom.

In Carthage three hundred Christians being brought before the President, Three
hundred Christians put into a lime-kiln.
were put to their choice, either to offer sacrifice, or to go into a
lime-kiln: whereupon by mutual consent, they all chose the lime-kiln, in which,
with the smoke of the lime, they were smothered.

In another part of Africa, three godly Virgins had first vinegar and gall
given them to drink, Three Virgins cruelly tormented.
then were they scourged, then tormented upon the gibbet, and rubbed with lime,
then were they scorched upon the fiery grid-iron, then cast to the wild beasts,
which would not touch them, therefore lastly they were beheaded.

In Italy a godly man was first tormented with the rack, then cast to the wild
beasts, which not hurting him, he was burned in the fire. Fructuosus a Bishop
in Spain, with his two Deacons, having witnessed a good confession, were all of
them burned in the fire. Fructuosus.
But this cruel Emperor Valerian, who thus persecuted the Saints of God,
Valerian Em^peror.
shortly after felt the revenging hand of God: for in an expedition that he
made against the Persians, he was taken prisoner by Sapores the King, who made
a footstool of him, every time that he gat upon his horse; Gods Judgment on
persecutors.
and at last by the command of the King he was flaied alive, powdered with
salt, and so ended his wretched life. Also Claudius, a President and Minister
of his persecutions, was possessed by the Devil, and biting off his tongue in
small pieces, he ended his wretched life. Also there were great and terrible
Earthquakes, and many commotions and Rebellions in sundry parts of the Empire,
insomuch as Galienus, the son of Valerian, and his fellow Emperor, began to
relent toward the Christians, and set forth some Edicts in their favor:
notwithstanding which, some there were that suffered in sundry places; amongst
whom was one Marinus, a noble man, and valiant Captain in Caesarea, Marinus.
who stood for an honorable office which of right fell to him, but his
Competitor to prevent him, accused him to the Judge to be a Christian. Hereupon
the Judge examined him of his faith, and finding that indeed he was a
Christian, he gave him three hours to advise and deliberate with himself; then
the Bishop of the place finding that he stood doubtful in himself what to do,
took him by the hand, and led him into the Church, and laid before him a sword
and a New Testament, bidding him take his free choice, which of them he would
have. Marinus immediately ran to the New Testament, and chose that, and so
being animated by the Bishop, he presented himself boldly before the Judge, by
whose sentence he was beheaded.

About the same time there was in Caesarea, Asyrius, Asyrius.
a noble Senator of Rome and a Christian, and whereas the Gentiles in that
place used to offer sacrifice by a fountain side, which sacrifice by the
working of the Devil, used suddenly to vanish out of their sight, to the great
admiration of the deluded multitude; Satan's subtilty
Asyrius pitying their miserable ignorance, came amongst them, and lifting up
his eyes to heaven, prayed to God in the name of Christ, Power of prayer.
that the people might no longer be thus seduced by the Devil, whereupon the
sacrifice was seen to swin upon the fountain, and ever after that false miracle
ceased.

After the death of Galienus there succeeded Claudius, a quiet Emperor; and
after him Quintilianus his brother, Peace in the Church.
both which reigning nineteen years, the Church enjoyed peace in their time.

Here place the third Figure.

CHAP. XV. The ninth Primitive Persecution which began An. Christi, 278.
AFter the death of Quintillian, succeeded Aurelian in the Empire, who was by
nature severe and rigorous, and a strict punisher of dissolute manners, so that
it grew into a Proverb, That he was a good Physician, saving that he gave too
bitter Medicines. In the beginning of his reign, he was a moderate and discreet
Prince, and no great disturber of the Christians, whom he neither molested in
their Religion, nor in their Councels. But afterward, through sinister
suggestions of those which were about him, his nature being before inclinable
to severity, he was altered to plain Tyranny, which he first showed in the
death of his own sisters son, and afterward he raised the ninth persecution
against the Church of Christ; but when he was about to sign a Proclamation or
Edict for that persecution, it pleased God that a thunderbolt fell so near him,
that all men thought he had been slain, and the Emperor was so terrified
thereby, A special Providence.
that he gave over his Tyrannical purpose, so that he rather intended, then
moved persecution. Having reigned about six years, he was slain.

After whose death diverse other Emperors succeeded, in whose time the Church
had peace for about the space of forty four years. During which time it did
mightily increase and flourish: Yea, the more the Christians had suffered, the
more they were honored; P^ace causes the Church to flourish.
Insomuch as some of the Emperors did singularly favor them, preferred and
made them Governors of Provinces.

Dorotheus, with his Wife, Children, and whole family, were accepted, and
highly advanced in the Emperors Court. Yea, Gorgonius, and diverse others, for
their Doctrine and Learning, were with their Princes in great estimation. The
Bishops were also in great favor with the Rulers and Presidents where they
lived; so that innumerable multitudes and Congregations assembled together in
every City, and there were great concourses of such as daily flocked to the
public places of prayer.

But through this great prosperity, the Christians, by reason of the corruption
of their natures, and the temptations of Satan, Sin the Forerunner of
persecution.
began to degenerate, and to grow idle and delicate, striving and contending
amongst themselves, upon every occasion, with railing words bespattering one
another in a despitefull manner; Bishops against Bishops, and people against
people, moving hatred and sedition each against other: Besides, cursed
hypocrisy and dissimulation increased more and more; by reason whereof Gods
Judgments brake forth against them, which began first to fall upon those
Christians which were soldiers; but that touched the other very little,
neither did they seek to appease Gods wrath, nor to call for Mercy, but
thinking that they should escape well enough, they heaped iniquities daily more
and more, Contention amongst Christians.
one upon another. The Pastors being inflamed with mutual contention each
against other; Then did the Lord raise up adversaries against his people, that
rased their Churches to the ground, burnt the sacred Scriptures in the open
Market places, made the Pastors of the Church to hide themselves, and some with
great shame were taken Prisoners, and were mocked of their enemies, and put to
open reproach.

CHAP. XVI. The tenth Primitive Persecution, which began Anno Christi, 308.
DIoclesian and Maximian having many wars, associated to themselves two
Caesar's, Galerius, who was sent into the East against the Persians; and
Constantius, who was sent into Britain, where he married Helena, the daughter
of King Coel; a Maiden excelling in beauty, and no less famous for her Studies
and Learning, by whom he had Constantine the Great.

These two Emperors having obtained many victories, were so puffed up with
pride, that they ordained a solemn Triumph at Rome. After which, Dioclesian
would needs be worshipped as God, saying, that he was brother to the Sun and
Moon, and adoring his shoes with gold and precious stones, P^ide.
he commanded the people to kiss his feet. Then also did he raise a great and
grievous Persecution against the Church of God: and the Feast of Easter drawing
nigh, he commanded all the Churches of the Christians to be spoiled, and cast
down, and the books of the holy Scriptures to be burnt, Bibles burnt.
which was executed with all rigor and contempt that might be.

Then he sent forth his Edicts for the displacing of all Christian Magistrates,
Cruel Edicts.
and put all others out of their Offices, imprisoning such of the common people
as would not abjure Christianity, and subscribe to the heathen Idolatries.

Then were cruel Edicts sent abroad for the imprisoning of the Elders and
Bishops, and constraining them by sundry kinds of torments to sacrifice to the
Idols; whereupon insued a great persecution against the Governors of the
Church, amongst whom many of them manfully passed through exceeding bitter
torments: Horrible torments.
Some were scourged all over their bodies with whips: some with racks and
tearings of their flesh, were exceedingly cruciated: some one way, others
another way were put to death.

Some were violently drawn to the impure sacrifices, and as though they had
sacrificed, when indeed they did not, were let go. Others neither coming to
their Altars; nor touching any piece of their sacrifice, yet were born in hand
by those which stood by, that they had sacrificed; and so being defamed by
their adversaries, were let go. False Accusations of Christians.
Others as dead men were carried out, and cast away, being but half dead.

Some were cast down on the pavement, and trailed a great space by the legs,
and the people made to believe that they had sacrificed; Others with-stood
them, stoutly affirming with a loud voice, that they had not sacrificed; withal
saying, that they were Christians, and glorying in the profession of that name.

Some cried that they neither had, nor ever would be partakers of that
Idolatry, Courage.
who were buffetted on the face and mouth by the soldiers, that they might
hold their peace. But if the Saints seemed never so little to do what their
enemies would have them, they were made much of; Humane infirmity.
yet none of these devices prevailed against the constant servants of Jesus
Christ; but of the weaker sort, through frailty, many fell at the first brunt.

When these Edicts were first set up at Nicomedia, a Christian, a noble man
born, moved with an holy zeal, ran, and took them down, Zeal.
and tare them in pieces, though the Emperors were present in the City; for
which he was put to a most bitter death, which with great constancy and
patience, he endured to the last.

These furious Tyrants, Dioclesian in the West, and Maximian in the East, raged
exceedingly against the poor Saints of Christ. But Dioclesian proceeded more
subtly, Subtilty.
first beginning with the soldiers in his Camp: to whom the Marshal of the
field proposed that they should either offer sacrifice, or leave their places
and offices, and lay down their arms; whereunto the Christians resolutely
answered, that they were not only ready to lay down their weapons, but to
suffer death, if it was imposed upon them, Constancy.
rather then so to sin against God.

In the beginning of this persecution, few were tormented, but afterward the
Emperor grew to greater cruelty. It cannot be expressed what number of Martyrs
suffered; what blood was shed through all Cities and Regions for the name of
Christ.

In Tire certain Christians were given to the most cruel wild beasts, which
would not hurt them; and the Lions, Bears and Leopards, A miracle of Mercy.
which were kept hungry for the purpose, would not touch them: Yet did they
vehemently rage against those that brought the Christians into the stage, who
though they stood, as they thought, without their reach, yet were they caught,
and devoured by them. Afterward these Martyrs were slain with the sword, and
cast into the sea.

Silvanus, Bishop of Gazenses, with thirty nine more, were slain in the
Mettal-Mynes. Pamphilus of Caesarea, dyed a glorious Martyr. Silvanus.
Pamphilus.


In Syria, all the chief Pastors were first cast into prison, together with the
Bishops, Elders and Deacons: Tiranion.
Tiranion was thrown into the sea. Zenobius.
Zenobius a Physician was slain with Brickbats.

At Antioch two young Maidens were thrown into the sea. Also an aged Matron,
and her two beautiful daughters, being sought after, and at last found, rather
then they would be drawn to do sacrifice, threw themselves headlong into a
river. Sylvanus.
Sylvanus Bishop of Emissa, with some others were thrown to the wild beasts.

The Christians in Mesopotamia were tormented diverse ways: some of them were
hanged up by the feet, and with the smoke of a small fire strangled. So
out-ragious was the Emperor in the beginning of this Persecution, that in
Nicomedia he slew the chiefest Princes of his Court, whom a little before he
prized as his own Children.

Also one Peter was hoisted up naked, and so beaten, and torn with whips, Peter.
that his bones might be seen; then they poured upon him salt and Vinegar, and
lastly roasted him with a soft fire. Dorotheus and Gorgonius, Dorotheus.
Gorgonius.
men of great Authority under the Emperor, after diverse torments were strangled
with an halter. Anthimus, Bishop of Nicomedia, with diverse others, Anthimus.
having made a good confession, were beheaded. Yea, Serena, Dioclesian's wife.
Serena, the wife of Dioclesian the Emperor, was martyred for her Religion.
Some others were bound hand and foot to a post, and so burnt.

Also many Christians of all ages and sorts, being met together in a Church, to
celebrate the memorial of Christ's Nativity, Maximian the Emperor sent some to
fire the Church, and burn them all; But first they commanded a Crier to
proclaim, that whosoever would have life, should come out, and sacrifice to
Jupiter, otherwise they should be all burnt; then one stepping up boldly, in
the name of all the rest, said, We are all Christians, and believe that Christ
is our only God and King, and we will sacrifice to none but him; hereupon the
fire was kindled, and some thousands of men, women and children were burnt in
that place. Christians burnt in a Church.


In Arabia many Martyrs were slain with Axes. In Phrygia, the Emperor sent his
Edicts to a City, commanding them to sacrifice to the Idols: but the Major, and
all the Citizens professed themselves to be Christians, whereupon the Emperor
made his Army environ the City, and set it on fire, A Christian City burnt.
whereby all the inhabitants were burnt together in it.

Eustratius an Armenian, and skillful in the Greek tongue, highly honored and
advanced by the Emperor, Eustratius, a Persecutor converted and martyred.
who also had executed many Christians; beholding the mavelous constancy of
the Martyrs, privately learned the Christian Religion, burned exceedingly with
a desire of Martyrdom, and not staying for Accusers, professed himself to be a
Christian, openly execrating the vanity and madness of the heathens; Being
therefore apprehended, he was tied up, and bitterly beaten; afterward he was
parched with fire put to his bowels, then basted with salt and vinegar, then
scraped and bemangled with sharp cutting shells, that his whole body seemed to
be but one wound, yet afterward, through Gods goodness, it was restored again
whole. And lastly was he burned.

In Alexandria, Peter the Bishop, Peter.
and his Deacons constantly suffered Martyrdom: as also many other Bishops in
Egypt, together with many famous and excellent men, suffered about the same
time.

A whole legion of Christian soldiers, that lay at Thebes in Egypt, under
their Christian Col* Mauritius, A legion of Christians martyred.
because they refused to sacrifice to Idols, were first tithed over by the
Emperors command, once, and again and afterward, by the exhortation of
Mauritius, they died all together constant Martyrs.

The persecution raged not only in Asia and Africa, but also in Italy, France,
Spain, etc. in all which countries an innumerable company of Christians were
martyred by sundry kinds of death. In Trevers were so many Christians slain,
that their blood ran like small brooks, and discolored great rivers; yet this
sufficed not the Tyrant, but he sent abroad his horsemen to command all those
which had apprehended any Christians, immediately to put them to death.
Inhumane c^uelty.


At Collen also, and in Rhetia many were martyred: yea, this persecution
extended into our Britan, where all the Christians were put to death.

Besides the kinds of death, the punishments were so great and horrible as no
tongue is able to express: as whippings, scourgings, Cruel torments.
rackings, horrible scrapings, sword, fire, shipboats, whereinto many were put
and sunk into the sea: Also hanging upon crosses, binding some to the bodies of
trees with their heads hanging downward, hanging others by the middle upon
gallowses till they died of hunger: throwing others alive to Lions, Bears,
Leopards, wild Bulls, etc. Pricking others with bodkins and talons of beasts
till they were almost dead.

In Thebaide, they hanged up women naked by one of their feet, the rest of
their body hanging downwards, with many other sorts of punishments most cruel
to be thought of: Some were bound to the boughs of trees, and had their members
torn asunder, others were mangled with axes, some choked with smoke over a
slow fire, some had their hands, ears, and feet cut off, others were scorched
and broiled upon coals, yet not to death, but had the torment renewed every day.

In Pontus the Martyrs had other horible torments inflicted on them, Some had
their fingers-ends under the nails thrust in with bodkins: Some were sprinkled
all over with boiling lead, having their necessary members cut from them,
others suffered most filthy and intolerable torments in their bowels, and privy
members: what the outrage of this persecution was in Alexandria, Phileas a
Bishop thus writes,

Because (says he) every man might torment the holy Martyrs as he listed, some
beat them with cudgels, some with rods, some with whips, Hellish cruelty.
some with thonges, some with cords, some having there hands bound behind them
were lifted upon timber-logs, and with certain instruments had their members
and joints stretched out, where their bodies hanging, were subjected to the
will of the tormentors, who were commanded to afflict them with all manner of
torments: on their sides, bellies, thighs, legs, they scratched them with the
claws of wild beasts: some were hanged but by on hand one the engine, that
they might feel the more grievous pulling out of the rest of their members:
Some were bound to pillars, having no stay under their feet, that with the
weight of their bodies being drawn out, they might feel the greater torment:
and these torments endured all day long; the Judge commanding that they should
not be let down, till either by the extremity of torment, or by the cold, they
were near death; and then they were let down, and haled upon the ground.

They devised also another greater torment, for when the Christians were
lamentably beaten, they had a new kind of rack, wherein they lying upright,
were stretched by both the feet above the fourth hole, with sharp shells strawed
under them. Others were cast down upon the pavement, where they had so many
torments inflicted upon them, that their sufferings cannot be imagined what
they were: In the midst of which torments some died, Admirable patience.
their enemies being confounded with their singular patience.

Some half dead were thrust into prisons, where, with their wounds and pain
they ended their lives: Others being cured of their wounds, were again put to
their choice; whether they would sacrifice to the Idols, and have their
liberty, or have the sentence of death pass upon them, who did willingly choose
death for Christ's sake, rather then to sin against him.

In Nicomedia, a Christian pulling down, and tearing the Emperors Edict, was
stripped and beaten till the bones appeared, and then washed in salt and vinegar,
under which torments he died. Yet notwithstanding the horribleness of these
tortures, the Christian Martyrs were so far from being dismayed, Courage and
constancy.
that they were confirmed and strengthened thereby, merrily and joyfully
undergoing whatsoever was inflicted upon them.

Eusebius says, that himself saw the cruel Persecution in Thebade, where the
swords of the Persecutors were blunted with the great slaughter of the
Christians, Tormentors wearied.
and they sat down with weariness to rest them, whilst others took their
places. Yet still the Christians showed their willingness, and with courage,
joy and smiling, received their sent^nce of death from the Judge, and to the
last gasp, sang Psalms and Hymns of praise to God.

In Alexandria the holy Martyrs led with the love of better rewards, did not
only bear the menaces of the cruel soldiers, wherewith they threatened them,
but also whatsoever torments they could devise for their destruction: Yea says
Sulpitius; then the Christians with more greedy desire pressed and sought for
Maryrdom, Humane infirmity.
then now they do for Bishoprics. Yet some through infirmity in this
Persecution fell back, for which they were excommunicated by the Church.

Damasus and others witness, that there were slain in thirty days, seventeen
thousand persons, besides a great number that were condemned to the
Metall-mines and quarries, with the like cruelty.

In Alexandria were slain with axes three hundred: The story of Mauritius and
his legion.
At Collen three hundred. Mauritius with his Christian legion, six thousand six
hundred sixty six, whose story, deserving perpetually to be remembered, is this:

Maximian sent for his Mauritius with his legion of Thebane soldiers, under a
pretense of employing them against his enemies: When they came to Rome,
Marcellus, the Blessed bishop, labored to confirm them in the truth, to whom
they promised perseverance in the faith unto the death. Then they followed they
Imperial army into France, and when they were cow thither, Maximian offered
sacrifice to the devils, and called all his soldiers to the same, strictly
charging them to fight against his enemies, and against the Christians which
were enemies to his gods. These Christian Thebans resolved rather to die* then
to sacrifice, or to bear arms against the Christians, wherewith the Tyrant
being enraged, commanded every tenth man of the legion to be put to the sword,
hereupon they strove who should submit their necks to the stroke. Mauritius
encouraged them greatly hereunto, and being called before the Emperor, he
said; We, O Emperor, your soldiers, and yet the servants of God, owe thee
service of war, A most Christian speech.
but to him innocence; of thee we receive wages, but of him life; therefore we
cannot obey thee to deny God our Lord and yours also, will ye nil ye: We are
ready to obey you, if you enforce us not to disobey him: Otherwise we will
rather obey him then you: We offer here our hands against any other enemies,
but to defile our hands with the blood of innocents, we may not: These hands of
ours have ^kil to fight against wicked enemies, but not to murder godly
friends, etc. We have engaged our faith to God, we cannot be true to you, if we
break covenant with him, etc. We see our brethren and fellows in arms, cruelly
put to the sword, which we rejoice in, that they have been counted worthy to
suffer for Christ's sake, etc. Behold here we cast down our weapons, and had
rather to be killed, then to kill, and to die guiltless then to live guilty:
We are ready to suffer what more you shall appoint, yea b^th fire, sword, or
any other torments. We confess our selves, to be Christians, we cannot
persecute Christians, nor sacrifice to your devilish Idols. The Emperor being
highly incensed with this answer commanded the second time the tenth man to be
slain, which being accomplished, when the Christian soldiers would not yet
condescend to his mind, he set upon them with his whole host, both of foot and
horse, charging them to kill them all; the Christians made no resistance, but
throwing down their arms, offered their naked necks to the persecutors, and so
were all slain.

At that time, one Victor, an old soldier, that for his age was dismissed,
coming to the Army, as they were banqueting and making merry with the spoils
of the Martyrs, was bidden to sit down with them, but he asked them what was
the cause of there mirth, and understanding the trut^, he detested them, and
refused to eat with them; Christian courage.
and being thereupon demanded whether he were a Christian? he answered that he
was and ever would be. Then they rushed upon him; and made him partaker, of the
lik Martyrdom and honor.

When Dioclesian and Maximian, notwithstanding all the slaughter which they
made, saw the number of Christians rather increased then diminished, so that
they were out of all hope of utter rooting them out, and having now even their
fill of blood, they ceased at last of their own accord from putting any more
Christians to death: The mercies of the wicked are cruelty.
Yet of a great multitude, they thrust out their right eyes, and maimed their
right legs at the ham, with a searing iron, condemning them to the Metal-mynes,
not so much for their labor, as desirous to afflict them thereby: and so
having reigned together about one and twenty years, Dioclesian divested himself
of the imperial Dignity, and lived a private life, and the like did Maximian
also, resigning the Empire to Galerius Maximinus, and Constantius.

Maximinus was of a cruel Nature, a great Enchanter, vicious in his life, and a
great enemy to the Christians, and therefore continued the Persecution of them,
yet at length was revoked from his cruelty by the just Judgment of God upon
him; For he was suddenly taken with an horrible and filthy disease, Gods
judgments on persecutors.
which first began outwardly in his flesh: and then proceeded more inwardly:
his privy members putrified with a botchy corrupt boil, and a fistula
consuming, and eating up his Entrails, whence swarmed forth an innumerable
company of lice, with such a pestiferous stink, that no man could abide him; he
being also very gross, his fat putrified, and stank intollerably; and because
his Physicians could not abide the stink, he commanded them to be slain: others
of them, because they could not cure his incurable disease, he put them to
cruel deaths.

At last being told that his disease came from God, he began to bethink himself
of all the cruelty which he had showed to the Saints, confessed his offenses to
God, and gave command that the Persecution against the Christians should cease;
requiring his Officers likewise to re-edifie their Temples, Hypocrisy.
and requesting them to pray to their God for him.

This Edict much comforted and refreshed the Christians, who thereupon gathered
together in every City, called their Synods and Councels; yea, the Infidels
themselves extolled and magnified the true God of the Christians.

But this Tyrant Maximinus scarce suffered this peace to continue six months
together, but again he forbad the Christians to meet, and privately stirred up
the Athenians to petition him that none of them might be suffered to live in
their City: Also a Conjurer in Athens made an Image of Jupiter, which uttered
these words, Jupiter commands the Christians to be banished out of this City
and Suburbs, because they are enemies to him. Also certain harlots were
suborned to say, that they formerly were Christians, and privy to the wicked
and lascivious acts which they exercised amongst themselves, upon Sabbath
days, etc. And thereupon the Emperor commanded that they should put them to
death by all means possible. Then did the Persecution grow as great as ever it
was, and the Governors of every Province fell upon the Christians* banishing
some, and putting others to death.

Silvanus Bishop of Emissa, a very old man, and three others with him, were
condemned to death. So was Lucianus, Silvanus. Lucianus. Peter. Quirinus.
an Elder at Antioch. At Alexandria, Peter the Bishop was beheaded. Quirinus
Bishop of Scescanus had an hand-mill tied about his neck, and was thrown
headlong into a river: where yet he floted a great while, exhorting the
lookers on not to be dismayed with his punishment, and so with much ado, was at
last drowned.

At Rome, many Bishops, Ministers and Elders were put to death. In sundry other
places very many others suffered martyrdom with fire, wild beasts, drowning in
the sea, etc. Some were crucified, some were slain with the sword; Cruel
torments
some endured the cutting and burning of their members; some had their eyes
thrust out; some were starved in prisons, and whatsoever other cruelty the
Magistrates could devise; All which the people of God endured, rather then they
would offer sacrifice to the Idols. The like miseries did the women also
endure, for being enticed to the filthy use of their bodies, some rather chose
banishment, and others to prevent it, killed themselves.

Neither could Christians live safely in the wilderness, but even from thence
they were drawn to torments and death.

And whereas the Tyrant in his Edict had boasted of the plenty and prosperity
of all things in the time of his persecuting of the Saints, God to confute him,
presently sent great drought, Gods judgments on persecutors.
famine and pestilence, besides the wars with the Armenians; by which
calamities, the people were miserably wasted; corn was sold at an unreasonable
rate, so that exceeding great multitudes died of hunger in the Cities, but far
more in the villages; most part of the husbandmen dying of famine and the
pestilence. Diverse brought out their best treasure, A terrible famine.
and gave it for any kind of sustenance, though never so little. Others having
sold their possessions for food, fell into extreme misery: Some did eat grass,
others fed upon unwholsom herbs, whereby they hurt and poisoned their bodies:
Many women were driven to leave the Cities, and beg up and down through the
country: some through faintness fell down in the streets, and holding up their
hands, cried miserably for some scraps or fragments of bread, being ready to
give up the Ghost; and being able to say no more, they cried, Hungry, hungry.

Some of the richer sort being tired with serving such multitudes of beggars,
began to grow hard-hearted, fearing lest themselves should fall into the like
misery: By reason whereof the Marketplaces, streets, and lanes, lay full of
dead corpses, and naked bodies were cast out unburied, many of which were
devoured by dogs, whereupon they which lived, fell to killing of the dogs, lest
running mad, they should fall upon them, and kill them.

The pestilence also scattering through all houses, killed very many,
especially those of the richer sort, which escaped the famine, whereby
innumerable Magistrates, Pestilence.
Princes and Presidents were quickly dispatched, so that all places were filled
with mourning, and nothing was seen or heard but weeping and wailing every
where. Death so reigned in every family, that two or three dead bodies were
carried out of one house together. But notwithstanding that these miscreants
had been so cruel to them, Charity of Christians*
yet the Christians were very diligent and charitable to them in all their
extremities, traveling every day, some in curing the sick; some in burying of
their dead; others called the multitude together, which were ready to famish,
and distributed bread unto them, whereby they occasioned them to glorify the
God of the Christians, and con^essed them to be the true worshippers of God, as
appeared by their works: and hereby the Lord wrought wonderfully for the peace
of his Church, for after he had corrected them, he again showed them mercy.

Constantine succeeding his father, overcame Maxentius the Tyrant in Rome, and
he together with Licinius set forth Edicts in favor of the Christians: See
Constantines life in my second part of lives. Yet Maximinus continued his
persecution in the East, whereupon Constantine and Licinius wrote to him to
favor the Christians, and he finding that he was too weak to encounter with
them, sent forth his Edicts to stop the persecution: yet afterward he picked
new quarrels with them, and began to persecute them again: whereupon Licinius
went against him, and overthrew him in a battle: Then did Maximinus kill many
of his enchanters and conjurers that had encouraged him, and promised him
victory.

Shortly after the Lord striking him with a grievous disease, he glorified the
God of the Christians, Gods judgments on persecutors.
and made a Law for the safety and preservation of them: yet not long after by
the vehemence of his disease, he ended his life.

Hypocrisy.
Licinius, that for a long time had pretended to the Christian religion, and
lived in great familiarity with Constantine, who had given him his sister
Constantia to be his wife, began afterward to discover his hypocrisy, and the
wickedness of his nature, secretly conspiring the death of Constantine: but
the Lord discovering and preventing his conspiracies, he then fell out with
him, and manifested his hatred of the Christian religion, being puffed up with
the victory that he had got against Maximinus.

He quarrelled with the Christians, because as he said, they prayed not for
him, but for Constantine: and thereupon he first banished them all from his
Court: then he deprived all the Knights of their honorable order, Wicked Laws.
except they would sacrifice to devils: then he commanded that the Bishops
should have no meetings to consult about their Ecclesiastical affairs: nor that
any Christians should come to the Churches, or hold any assemblies: then that
men and women should not meet together to pray, that women should not hear the
Bishops, but choose out women to instruct them: then that none should help or
succor those that were in prison, nor should bestow any alms upon them, though
they should die for hunger, and that they which showed any compassion to those
which were condemned to death, should suffer the like punishment themselves;
then he persecuted the Bishops, and slew those which were the most eminent of
them: the flattering officers also which were about him, thinking to please him
thereby, slew many Bishops without any cause: yea many of their bodies they cut
into gobbets, and threw them in to the sea to feed fishes: Some were banished,
Cru^lty.
others had their goods confiscated; many noblemen and gentlemen were privily
made away: and Licinius gave their unmarried daughters to wicked varlets to be
defloured, himself also violated many women, both wives and maidens.

This cruelty made many godly persons voluntarily to forsake their houses, and
to live in woods, mountains, and deserts: He caused Theodorus to be hanged upon
a cross, to have nails thrust into his armpits, Theodorius.
and afterward to be beheaded: Diverse other Bishops had their hands cut off
with a fearing iron. In Sebastia forty Christian soldiers in the vehement
cold winter were cast into an Horse-pond, where they ended their lives: the
wives of these forty men were carried to Heraclea, where, together with a
Deacon of that place, after they had suffered innumerable torments, they were
slain with the sword.

Constantine being informed of all this wickedness, raised an Army, went
against him, overcame him twice, and at last caused him to be put to death, as
you may see in Constantines life in my second part: whereby the Church obtained
a general peace.

Yet in this tenth Persecution many other eminent Christians suffered
Martryrdom, besides those before-named.

Galerius in his time invaded Antioch, intending to force all Christians to
renounce Christ, at what time they were assembled together, whereupon one
Romanus ran to them, declaring that the wolves were at hand, which would devour
them, yet he exhorted them not to fear by reason of the peril; and, through
Gods grace, the Christians were greatly encouraged by him, so that old men and
matrons, fathers, mothers, young men and maidens were all of one mind, being
willing to shed their blood in defense of their profession: A band of armed men
were sent against them, which were not able to wrest the staff of faith out of
their hands: hereupon they sent word to their Captain, that they could not
enforce the Christians to deny their faith, by reason of Romanus who did so
mightily encourage them: then did the Captain command that he should be brought
before him, which was done accordingly; What (says the Captain) art thou the
author of this sedition? art thou the cause that so many lose there lives? By
the Gods I swear thou shall answer for them all, and shall suffer those
torments that thou encouragest them to undergo; Romanus answered, Thy sentence,
O Emperor, I willingly embrace, I refuse not to be sacrificed for my brethren,
Romanus's noble courage.
and that by as cruel torments as thou can invent. etc. The Captain being
much enraged with this his stout Answer, commanded him to be trussed up, and
his bowels drawn out, whereupon the Executioners said, Not so Sir, this man is
of noble parentage, and therefore he may not be put to so ignoble a death:
Scourge him then (quoth the Captain) with whips with knobs of lead at the ends:
but Romanus sang Psalms all the time of his whipping, requiring them not to
favor him for nobilities sake; Not the blood of progenitors, (says he) but
the Christian profession makes me noble: True nobility.
then did he earnestly inveigh against the Captain, and derided their Idol
gods, etc. but this further enraged the Tyrant, so that he commanded his sides
to be lanced with knives, till the bones were laid open: yet still did the holy
Martyr preach the living God, and the Lord Jesus Christ to him: then did the
Tyrant command them to strike out his teeth, that his speech might be hindered;
also his face was buffeted, his eyelids torn with their nails, his cheeks
gashed with knives, the skin of his beard pulled off by little and little, Note.
etc. yet the meek Martyr said, I thank thee O Captain, that thou have opened
to me so many mouths as wounds, whereby I may preach my Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: look how many wounds I have, so many mouths I have, lauding and
praising God: The Captain astonished at his constancy, bad them give over
tormenting him: yet he threatened to burn him, reviled him, Blasphemy.
and blasphemed God, saying, thy crucified Christ is but a yesterdaies God, the
gods of the Gentiles are of greatest antiquity: But Romanus taking occasion
from hence, declared to him the eternity of Christ, etc. withal saying, Give
me a child of seven years old, and thou shall hear what he will say; hereupon a
pretty boy was called out of the multitude, to whom Romanus said, Tell me my
pretty babe, whether thou think it reason that we worship Christ, and in Christ
one Father, or else that we worship infinite gods? the child answered, that
certainly what we affirm to be God must needs be one, which with one, is one
and the same; and inasmuch as this one is Christ, of necessity Christ must be
the true God: for that there be many gods, we children cannot believe: The
Captain amazed at this, said, thou young villain and traitor, where, and of
whom learned thou this lesson? of my mother, said he, with whose milk I
sucked in this lesson, that I must believe in Christ: The mother was called,
and she gladly appeared: the Tyrant commanded the child to be horsed up, A
child tormented.
and scourged: the standers by beholding this merciless act, could not refrain
from tears; the joyful and glad mother alone stood by with dry cheeks, yea,
she rebuked her sweet babe, for desiring a cup of cold water, charging him to
thirst after the cup that the babes of Bethlem once drunk of; She willed him to
remember little Isaac, who willingly proferred his neck to the ^int of his
fathers sword, etc. Then did the cruel tormentor pull off the skin, hair and
all from the crown of the childs head: the mother crying, Suffer my child,
anon thou shall pass to him that will adorn thy head with a crown of eternal
glory: thus the mother councelleth and encourages, the child is encouraged,
and receives the stripes with a smiling countenance. The Captain seeing the
child invincible, and himself vanquished, commands him to be cast into the
stinking prison, whilst the torments of Romanus were renewed and increased:
Then was Romanus brought forth again, to receive new stripes upon his old
sores, the flesh being torn, and the bare bones appearing: yet the cruel
Tyrant raging like a mad man, quarelling with the tormentors for dealing so
mildely with him, commanding them to cut, prick, and pounce him: and then he
passed sentence upon him, together with the child to be burned to death: to
whom Romanus said, I appeal from this unjust sentence of thine to the righteous
throne of Christ, that upright Judge, An appeal to Christ.
not because I fear thy cruel torments, and merciless handling, but that thy
Judgments may be known to be cruel and bloody.

When they came to the place of execution, the tormentors required the child
of his mother, for she had carried it in her arms from the prison; The childs
Martyrdom.
She kissing it, delivered it to them, and as the executioner was striking off
his head, she said, farewell my sweet child:

All laud and praise, with heart and voice,
O Lord we yield to thee:
To whom the death of all thy Saints,
We know most dear to be.
The childs head being cut off, the mother wrapped it in her garment, laid it to
her breast, and so departed. Then was Romanus cast into a mighty fire, which
being quenched with a great storm, the Tyrant commanded his tongue to be cut
out, and afterward caused him to be strangled in the prison.

Gordius, a Centurion in Caesarea, in the heat of this persecution, left his
charge, living a solitary life in a wilderness for a long time: Gordius.
at last when a solemn feast was celebrated to Mars in that city, and
multitudes of people were assembled in the Theater* to see the games, he came,
and gat up into a conspicuous place, and with a loud voice said, Behold, I am
found of those which sought me not, etc. the multitude hereupon looked about to
see who it was that spoke this, and Gordius being known, he was immediately
brought before the Sheriff, and being asked who, and what he was, and why he
came thither? he told him the whole truth, professing that he believed in
Christ, valued not their threatenings, and chose this as a fit time to manifest
his profession in: then did the Sheriff call for scourges, gibbets, and all
manner of torments: to whom Gordius answered, that it would be a loss and
damage to him, Courage.
if he did not suffer diverse torments and punishments for Christ and his cause:
the Sheriff more incensed hereby, commanded all those torments to be inflicted
on him: with which Gordius could not be overcome, but sang, The Lord is my
helper, I will not fear what man can do unto me: and I will fear no evil,
because thou Lord art with me, etc. then did he blame the tormentors for
favoring him; provoking them to do their uttermost: Flattery.
then the Sheriff not prevaling that way, sought by flattery to seduce him,
promising him preferment, riches, treasures, honor, etc. if he would deny
Christ: but Gordius derided his foolish madness, saying, that he looked for
greater preferment in heaven, then he could give him here upon earth: then was
he condemned, and had out of the city to be burnt: Multitudes followed him,
Constancy.
and some Kissing him, with tears entreated him to pity himself, to whom he
answered, Weep not I pray you for me, but for the enemies of God, which fight
against the Christians; weep I say for them which prepare a fire for us,
purchasing hellfire thereby for themselves in the day of vengeance: and cease
I pray you thus to molest my quiet and settled mind: for truly for the name of
Christ I am ready to suffer a thousand deaths, etc. Others persuaded him to
deny Christ with his mouth, and to keep his conscience to himself* My tongue
(says he) which by Gods goodness I have, cannot be brought to deny the author
and giver of the same; for with the heart we believe unto righteousness, and
with the tongue we confess unto salvation: and thus persuading and encouraging
the people to be willing to die in the like cause, with an unappalled
countenance, he willingly gave himself to be burnt.

Menas
Also Menas an Egyptian, and a soldier by profession, in this persecution,
forsook all, and went into a desert, where he gave himself to fasting, prayer,
meditation, and reading of the Scriptures: at last returning into the city of
Cotis, when the people were at their pastimes, he with a loud voice proclaimed
himself to be a Christian, and thereupon was carried before the President, and
being demanded of his faith, he said, Convenient it is that I confess God in
whom is light, and no darkness; for with the heart we believe to
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation: Then was he
pinched and excruciated with sundry torments: Note.
But (said he) there is nothing in my mind that can be compared to the Kingdom
of heaven, neither is all the world, if it were weighed in a balance,
comparable to the price of one soul; and further said, Who can separate us from
the love of Christ? can tribulation, or anguish? etc. and again, I have learned
of my Lord Christ not to fear them that can kill the body, and have no power
to kill the soul, etc. Having endured manifold torments, he received the
sentence of death, and at the place of execution, he said, I give thee thanks,
my Lord God, which have accepted me to be a partaker of thy precious death, and
have not suffered me to be devoured of my fierce enemies, but have made me
constant in thy true faith unto the end: and so he lost hi^ head, but found a
crown.

Basil relates a story, that the Emperors officer brought the Edict against
the Christians to a place to be published, and then privily suborned some to
detect and accuse the Christians: then he caused the sword, gibbet, wheel, and
whips to be brought forth, at the sight whereof the hearts of all the beholders
did shake and tremble: Some for fear fled, others stood in doubt what to do:
Some again for fear denied their faith, Humane infirmity.
others suffered cruel torments, but at last vanquished by the intolerable
pain, they made shipwreck of their consciences, and lost the glory of their
confession.

Forty young gentlemen.
Amongst others, forty young gentlemen that were soldiers, freely and boldly
confessed themselves to be Christians, declaring to the Marshall their names,
who amazed at this their boldness, stood in doubt what to do: then he assaied
with fair words and flatteries to win them, persuading them to consider their
youth, and not to change a pleasant life for a painful and untimely death,
Tenta^ion of flattery.
promising them honor, money, etc. But they boldly answered, that they neither
desired, money, honor, nor life, but only the celestial Kingdom of Christ,
for the love of which they were ready to endure the wheel, cross, fire, etc.
The Marshall being much offended herewith, devised a new torment; for spying a
pond in the street that did lie open to the Northen wind, it being in the cold
winter time, he caused them to be put into it all night; but they being merry,
comforted one another as they put off their clothes, saying, We put not off now
our cloths, but our old man, corrupt with the deceit of concupiscence, for
which we bless and praise God: for by means of the serpent we once put on the
old man, but by the means of Jesus Christ we now put him off: and being brought
naked to the place, where they felt the vehement cold, they were put into the
pond, so that all their members were stark and stiff with it: and as soon as
it was day, they having breath yet remaining in them, were brought to the fire,
wherein they were consumed into ashes, which ashes were thrown into the flood.

It happened that one of the company being more lively, A mother encourages
her son to die.
and not so near death as the rest, the executioners pitied him, and delivered
him to his mother who stood by, to save his life: but she led him to the piles
of wood where the other starved creatures lay ready to be burnt, admonishing
him to accomplish the blessed journey he had taken in hand, which accordingly
he did, and was burnt with his companions.

Syrus a Physician of Alexandria, in this persecution fled into Syria, where he
lived a private life, Cyrius. John. Athanasia.
unto whom one John a soldier adjoined himlelf: but not long after one
Athanasia with her three daughters, being virgins, were cast into prison at
Canope in Egypt for the profession of their faith: Cyrus being of their
acquaintance, fearing lest through infirmity they should fall, he together with
his partner John went thither to the prison to comfort and confirm them, for
which he was accused to the President, who thereupon condemned them all, and so
they were beheaded.

Sebastian also borne in France, and Captain of the avaunt-guard of the
Emperor, Sebastian
encouraged many Martyrs by his exhortations unto constancy, and kept them in
the faith, for which being accused to the Emperor, he caused him to be brought
forth into the open field, where by his own soldiers he was thrust through
with arrows.

Basil also makes mention of one Barlaam, Barlaam:
who having endured all sorts of tortures to the point of death, was then by
the tormentors laid upon the altar, and they put fire and frankincense in his
right hand, hoping that the burning of the fire would have forced him to
scatter the incense upon the altar, and so to have sacrificed: but his hand,
enduring the fire, remained steady, the Martyr in the mean time singing,
Blessed be the Lord my God which teaches my hands to fight, etc.

Ambrose mentions one Agricola and Vitalis his servant, who agreed betwixt
themselves, to give their lives, with other Martyrs, Vitalis*
for the name of Christ; Vitalis first offering himself to Martyrdom, the
persecutors labored by all means to draw him to deny Christ, but not
prevailing, Constancy.
they exercised upon him all sorts of torments, so that he had no whole skin
left on all his body: Vitalis in the midst of his sufferings, having by prayer
commended himself to God, gave up the ghost. Then was Agricola set upon by the
tormentors, whose virtuous life and gentle conditions, Agricola.
had won him such respect, that they delayed tormenting of him, but he
provoking them to make quicker speed, they fastened him to the cross, where he
finished his Martyrdom.

Augustine writes of one Vincentius a Spaniard, who by Dacianus the President
was first laid upon the rack, Vincentius.
till all the joints of his body cracked, then were all his members slasht and
indented with deadly wounds; then they miserably scratched all his body with
iron combs, filed very sharp; Horrible cruelty.
then they laid his body, being all out of joint, upon an iron grate, opened it
with iron hooks, seared it with fiery plates, and then besprinkled it with hot
burning salt: lastly they drew him, and cast him into a vile dungeon, the
floor whereof was thick-spread with the sharpest shells, his feet were fast
locked in the stocks, and so left him without all wordly comfort; Joy
unspeakable.
but the Lord his God was with him, the holy Spirit of God, whose office it is
to comfort the afflicted, filled his heart with joy unspeakable; so that he
there ended his life with much comfort.

Procopius.
Also Procopius in Palestine, after his conversion, brake his Images of gold and
silver, and distributed them amongst the poor; whereupon he had all sorts of
torments inflicted on him, racking, cording, tearing of his flesh, firing,
goring, stabbing, and lastly had his head cut off.

Georg. Zeal.
George, a young man of Cappadocia, stoutly inveighing against the impious
Idolatry of the Emperor, was apprehended, torn with hooked irons, burnt with
hot lime, stretched out with cords, after had his hands and feet cut off, and
lastly was beheaded.

Hermogenes.
Hermogenes the President of Athens, being converted by beholding the patience
and constancy of two Martyrs in their torments, suffered himself for the same
faith.

In Portugal a noble virgin named Eulalia, not much above twelve years old,
Eulalia.
had profers of great marriages made unto her, but she seeing the f^rious rage
of this Persecution, had a great mind to join her self to the number of the
Martyrs, for which end she poured out her heart in prayer to God for strength
and faith to enable her thereunto: But her godly parents fearing that her ready
mind to die for Christ's cause, might make her guilty of her own death, they
kept her close at their country house, a great way from the City; there she
lived quietly for a while; but at last, detesting to make such dealy, she stole
out of her fathers house in the night, and traveled all alone through bywaies,
with much difficulty and weariness toward the City, whither she came in the
morning, and going before the Judge* she with a loud voice said, Zeal.
I pray you, What a shame is it for you thus wickedly to kill men's souls, and
to break their bodies in pieces, to compel them to deny the omnipotent God?
Would you know what I am? I am a Christian, and an enemy to your devilish
sacrifices, I spurn your Idols under my feet, I confess God omnipotent with my
heart and mouth, etc. Go to therefore thou hangman, burn, cut and mangle these
my earthly members; thou may easily break a brittle substance, but thou can
not hurt my inward mind by any thing thou can do. The Judge enraged
herewith, said to the hangman, Take her and pull her out by the hair of her
head to torments, let her feel the power of our gods, and know what we can do:
But yet, O sturdy girl, I would fain have thee, before thou die, Tentation.
to revoke thy wickedness: Remember the honorable house of which thou art
come, and thy friends tears; Will thou kill thy self in the flower of thy
youth, so near honorable marriages? Does not the glistering pomp of the
bride-bed move thee etc. Behold here the engines prepared for thy death; either
thou shall be beheaded with the sword, or torn with wild beasts, or consumed
with fire to ashes, etc. yet this thou may escape if thou will; What great
matter is it for thee, with thy fingers to put a little incense into the
censers? yet thereby thou shall be delivered.

To this Eulalia answered not, being in a great passion, Eulalia.
but spit in the Tyrants face, and spurned abroad the heap of inc^nse.
Whereupon without further delay, the hangmen with both their strengths pulled
out her joints, scratched her with the talons of wild beasts to the hard
bones, she singing and praising God in the mean time; saying, Horrible cruelty.
Beh^ld O Lord, I will not forget thee: What a pleasure is it for them, O
Christ, that remember thy triumphant victories, to ataine to these high
dignities! etc. Yea, when as out of a warm fountain, her fair and white skin
was discolored with the purple blood that flowed from her torn members, she
wept not, but cheerfully sang praises unto God; then they gored her mangled
body with the iron grate, terribly harrowed her flesh, and burned her breast
with flaming torches, then setting fire to her long hair, which covered her
naked body, when it came to her face, she opened her mouth, and sucked in the
flame, and so peaceably slept in the Lord.

Also Agnes a young virgin being accused for a Christian, was brought before
the Judge, who first labored by flatteries, Agnes. Tentation.
then by threatening her with cruel torments, to draw her to the denial of her
faith; but she being strengthened by Christ, Courage.
told him that she feared not his torments, which she was willing to undergo,
yea and death it self for Christ's sake; then said the Judge, if it be so easy
with thee to undergo torments, yet I know that thou prizest thy virginity
therefore it is fully determined, that except thou sacrificest to the gods,
thou shall be put into the common Stews. Then did many youths flock together,
craving that Agnes might be exposed as a prey to there filthy lusts, to whom
she said, Christ is not forgetful of those that are his, neither will he leave
me destitute of his help, Faith.
nor suffer my unspotted chastity to be defiled by you, etc. you shall
willingly bathe your swords in my blood, but you shall not defile my body with
filthy lust for any thing that you can do. Then the Judge commanded that she
should be ^et naked at the corner of a street; whereupon the multitude
sorrowed, and were ashamed to see so shameless a sight, turning away their
face, and so departing, A remarkable judgment.
but one amongst the rest looking upon her in a shameless manner, behold a
flame of fire, like a flash of lightining struck out both his eyes, and he
falling down wallowed in the kennell dirt, whereupon Agnes sang praises unto
God. Then the cruel Tyrant enraged hereby, commanded the executioner to draw
out his sword, and dispatch her: She seeing a sturdy soldier coming toward
her with a naked sword, rejoiced saying, This, O this is he that I love, I will
make have to meet him; Faith.
and no longer protract my longing desires; I well willingly receive the length
of his sword into my breast: O eternal father, vouchsafe to open the gates of
heaven to my soul that seeks thee; and so kneeling down, and praying unto
Christ, the executioner with his bloody hand, finished her hope.

Julitta An excellent story.
Basil in one of his Orations, relates a story of one Jullitta, from whom one
of the Emperors officers took all her goods, lands and servants, contrary to
all equity; whereupon she complained to the Judges, and a day of hearing was
appointed, where the spoiled woman lamentably declared her cause: But the
wicked villain that had robbed her, said that her Action was of no force, for
she was an outlaw, for not observing the Emperors gods, and that she was a
Christian: His allegation was allowed, incense was prepared for her to offer to
the gods, which if she refused, she should neither have protection nor benefit
of the Emperors Laws, nor continue her life. She hearing this, Strength of
Faith.
in the mighty strength of God, said, Farewell riches, welcome poverty,
farewell life, welcome death* All that I have were it a thousand times more,
would I lose, rather then speak one wicked word against God my Creator. I yield
thee most hearty thanks, O my God, for this gift of grace, that I can contemn
and despise this frail and transitory world, esteeming the profession of Christ
above all treasures: And thenceforth when any question was proposed to her, her
answer was, I am the servant of Jesus Christ. Tentation. Constancy.
Her kindred and friends earnestly solicited her to change her mind, but she
constantly refused, with detestation of their Idolatry. Then did the cruel
Judge condemn her to be burnt, which sentence she embraced joyfully, as a thing
most sweet and delectable; and so she addressed her self to the flames, in
countenance, gesture and words, declaring the joy of her heart, coupled with
singular constancy, and so embracing the fire, she sweetly slept in the Lotd.

Barbara.
Barbara a noble woman in Thuscia, after miserable imprisonment, sharp cords,
and burning flames put to her sides, was as last beheaded, together with many
others.

Here place the fourth Figure.

CHAP. XVII. The Persecution of the Christians in Persia, under Sapores, about
the same time.
THE Idolatrous Magicians in Persia, Magit^a^s st^r up persecution.
taking counsel together against the Christians, accused them to Sapores for
keeping correspondence with, and favoring the Roman Emperor, which was
Constantine the Great.

The King being much moved herewith, took occasion to oppress them with taxes
and tributes, to their utter undoing, and killed there Ministers with the
sword. Simeon.
Then he called before him Simeon their Bishop, who remaining constant and
valiant, he commanded him to be led forth to torment, yet did he neither shrink
for fear, The Persion King requ^^ed Divine worship.
nor make any humble suit for pardon, which the King being offended at,
required him either to worship him after the country manner, or else he would
destroy him and all other Christians in his land: But Simeon, neither allured
with promises, nor terrified with threatenings, could be induced to the
Idolatrous worship, for which cause he was sent away to prison, and as he was
going, there was sitting at the Court-gate an Eunuch, an old Tutor of the
Kings, named Usthazares, once a Christian, but now fallen from his profession,
who seeing Simeon led by, Usthazares.
rose up and did him reverence; Simeon on the contrary, rebuked him, crying out
against him for revolting from his profession: Whereupon, Zeal.
the Eunuch burst forth into tears, laid aside his costly apparel, and put on
black mourning weeds, and sitting at the Court-gate weeping, he said to
himself, Woe is me, with what face hereafter shall I look upon God, seeing
Simeon disdaineth with one gentle word to salute me? Recovery after fall.
This being carried to the Kings ears, he was exceeding angry, and sending for
him, he first with gentle words and large promises, spoke him fair, and asked
him why he mourned? Whether there was any thing in his house that was denied
him? etc. Whereunto Usthazares answered, Tentation.
that there was nothing in that earthly house that was detained from him: Yea*
said he, O King, would God any other grief or calamity in the world had
happened to me, rather then this for which I justly sorrow: Repentance.
For this is my grief, that I am alive this day, who should have died long
since, and that I see this sun, which dissemblingly, to pleasure you, I have
seemed to worship, for which I have deserved a double death: First for
dissembling with you; secondly for that thereby I have denied Christ: withal
vowing that he would never hereafter forsake the Creator to worship the
creature, etc.

Sapores was much astonished hereat, and doubted whether to use him gently or
with rigor, but at last in his mood; he commanded him to be beheaded: But as
he was going to execution, he requested an Eunuch that attended on the King, to
desire him for all the old and faithful service that he had done to his father
and him, that he would cause it to be proclaimed openly at his death, that he
was beheaded, not for any treachery against the King or Realm, but for that he
was a Christian, and would not deny his God; this the King yielded to, and so
it was performed; and this he desired, because by his former Apostasy he dad
discouraged many Christians, and therefore he sought by his profession and
example to encourage them to the like sufferings. His Martyrdom.


Simeon in prison hearing of his death, much rejoiced and praised God for it,
Simeon beheaded.
and the very next day, he, with above an hundred more Christians were beheaded
likewise. There was present at their Martyrdom one Pusices an officer to the
King, who beholding an aged Minister to tremble when he saw the others beheaded
before him, Pusices.
said unto him, O father! shut thine eyes for a little moment, and be strong,
and shortly thou shallt see God in glory. Hereupon Pusices was apprehended, and
carried before the King, His Martyrdom.
in whose presence he made a bold confession of his faith, for which cause they
made a hole in his neck, and pulled out his tongue backward, and so he was put
to death, together with one of his daughters that was a virgin.

The year after, when the Christians were met together to celebrate the
memorial of Christ's passion, Sapores sent forth a cruel Edict, that all they
should be put to death that professed the Name of Christ; and this he did at
the instigation of the wi^ked Magicians, whereupon an innumerable company of
Christians, Magicians authors of persecution.
both in Cities and Towns were slain by the sword, some being sought for,
others offering themselves willingly least they should seem to deny Christ: In
this Persecution many of the Kings own Court and houshold-servants suffered
Martyrdom; amongst whom was Azades, an Eunuch, whom the King entirely loved,
insomuch as hearing that he was slain, he was so offended and grieved, that he
commanded that thenceforth no more Christians should be slain, but only the
Doctors and Teachers of the Church.

About this time the Queen fell very sick, upon which occasion the wicked Jews
and Magicians accused two of Simeons sisters, which were godly virgins, Simeon
sisters.
that by charms and enchantments they had procured her sickness to revenge the
death of Simeon: Slanders.
This accusation being believed, they were both condemned, and with a Saw cut
in sunder by the middle, whose quarters were hung upon stakes, the Queen going
betwixt them, thinking thereby to be freed of her sickness.

Then ensued a great Persecution against the Bishops and Ministers, who were
daily dragged forth to the slaughter; Bishops and Min^ste^s persecuted.
but first they cruelly scourged them, and put them to other great torments,
because they would not worship the Sun.

Miserable and almost innumerable were the slaughters under this Sapores, of
Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, and other religious men and holy virgins, so that
the Persians themselves reckon up above sixteen thousand men and women that
suffered Martyrdom.

The report of the miserable condition of the Christians coming to the ears of
Constantine the Great, put the good Emperor into great heaviness, who studying
how to relieve them, it so fell out, that about that time there came
Ambassadors to him to Rome, from Sapores, whom he entertained courteously, and
granted all their requests, and then by them wrote his Letters to Sapores in
the behalf of the Christians, whereby he did something mitigate the heat of the
Persian Persecution: Yet afterward it was renewed again: at which time
suffered Andas the Bishop, and Hormisda a noble man's son of great reputation
amongst the Persians, Andas. Hormisda.
whom when the King understood to be a Christian, and resolute in his
profession, he condemned him to keep his Elephants naked: afterward the King
looking out, and seeing him all swart, and tanned with the sun, he commanded
that a shirt should be put upon him, and that he should be brought before him;
Then did the King ask him if he would yet deny Christ? Hormisda hearing this,
tare off his shirt, and cast it from him, saying* if you think that I will deny
my faith for a shirt, have here your gift again. Constancy.
etc. whereupon he was banished the Country.

Also Suenes, a noble man that had under him one hundred servants, because he
would not deny his Christian Profession, was so hated by the King, that he made
the worst of his servants Lord over him, and over all that he had, and coupled
his wife to him, and made Suenes himself to serve him. Suenes.


Also Benjamin a Deacon was thrust into prison, where he was kept two years,
but at the length, at the request of the Roman Ambassadors, Benjamin.
he was released, yet afterward, when contrary to the Kings Commandment, he
preached and taught every where the Gospel of Christ, he was again apprehended,
and miserably tormented, having twenty sharp reeds thrust under the nails of
his fingers and toes, but he laughing at it, had a sharper reed thrust into his
yard, with horrible pain, and lastly, and a long ragged thorny stalk thrust
through his fundament into his bowels, whereof he died.

These Primitive Persecutions are collected out of Eusebius, Socrates Scholast.
Evagrius, Nicepho. Theod. the Imperial History, and the Magd. History. CHAP.
XVIII. The Persecution of the Church under Julian the Apostata, Anno Christi,
365^
Julian was Nephew to Constantius the son of Constantine, and was by him made
Caesar, and sent against the Germans, where after some smaller victories having
overcome his enemies in a great and bloody battle, he was by his Army made
Augustus, and after Constantius his death, succeeded in the whole Empire, both
of the East and West. He was brought up in the Christian Religion, and was
endowed with excellent parts; His Apostasy.
but when be came to the Empire, he Apostatized from his former profession, and
turned Heathen, and became a deadly enemy to the Church of Christ, and a great
persecutor of it.

The first thing that he did, was to open the Idol Temples; shut up by his
Predecessors, and to suffer the Gentiles to commit their superstitious
Idolatries, and publicly to adore their Idols: Then his next design was to
supplant the true Christian Religion, being induced thereto by the devil and
his own wickedness: And the better to effect the same, he practiced a means
never before used by any, which was to show himself pitiful, and not cruel;
perceiving that by means of the torments inflicted on the Martyrs, Devilish
subtilty.
the holy Christian Faith was greatly increased; and therefore he took a
contrary course, and sought by gifts, favors, flatteries, and by bestowing
offices and dignities, to draw them to renounce the Christian Faith, and to
sacrifice to false gods, and by this means there were not a few, who being
covetous and ambitious, desiring to be rich and honored, fell from their
Christian profession.

Then did he make Laws and general Decrees, that no Christian should be Master
of any Arts or Sciences, Christians might not study.
neither should study in any Schools, that so through the desire of Learning
they might turn Idolaters, or else they should remain ignorant and illiterate,
and so be insufficient to preach the Christian faith.

He also ordained that no Christian should have any charge, or hold any office
of Justice, They may be in no Offices.
neither should be a Captain in the Wars, nor enjoy any other dignity. Thus he
used all the inventions that possibly he could devise, to make War against
Jesus Christ, without shedding any Christian blood, that so he might take the
Crown from the holy Martyrs, The most dangerous persecution.
which they formerly obtained by the persecution of the sword: and indeed this
was the greatest and most dangerous Persecution that ever the Church endured.

Amongst other of his subtle devises to bring Christianity into contempt,
Christ^ans made the object of scorn.
this was one; He entertained about him many witty, but wicked persons, who
made it their business to scoff at, and deride the Christians with all manner
of base jears; and those which excelled most in this wicked practice* he most
loved and honored, advancing them to offices, both in his Court and Army.

During his short reign, though himself put none to death, as is before
specified; yet the heathen Idolaters, in sundry places, proceeded far
otherwise; especially in Palestine, where they burnt many Christians alive,
others they stripped naked, and tying cords to their feet, dragged them up and
down the paved streets, Barbarous cruelty.
till their flesh was torn from their bones; Upon others they poured scalding
water: Some they stoned, or beat out their brains with clubs: and having thus
murdered them, they burnt their bodies, and then took their bones, and mingled
them with the bones of Camels and Asses, that they might not be known for men's
bones.

The Christians in Alexandria were most cruelly used by the Ethnicks, or
Pagans: Some were slain with the sword, some were fastened to the Cross, some
brained, some stoned; and such was their rage against Christianity, that one
brother spared not another, nor parents their children, nor children their
parents.

Emilianus was burned in Thracia. Domitius was slain in his cave. Theodorus for
singing a Psalm at the removing of the body of Babilas, Emilianus. Domitius.
Theodorus.
being apprehended, was examined with exquisite torments, and so cruelly
excruciated from morning till almost noon, that hardly he escaped with life,
and being afterward asked by his friends how he could endure such extreme
torments, he said, that at first he felt some pain, but afterward there stood
by him a young man, A miracle of Mercy.
who as he was sweating with the pain, wiped away his sweat, and oft-times so
refreshed him with cold water, wherewith he was so delighted, that when he was
let down from the Engine, it grieved him more then before.

Artemius also, a Captain of the Egyptian soldiers, Artemius. Two brethren
Martyrs.
was beheaded for his Religion, though other causes were pretended. Two
Christian brethren were dragged through the streets, and murdered by the
Idolatrous people of Gaza.

But the cruelty of the wicked Arethusians exceeded against the Christian
Ministers and Virgins, Barbarous cruelty.
whom they set forth naked before the multitude to be scorned by them. Then did
they cover them with hogs-meat, and ripping up their bellies, put barley into
them, and so caused their bowels and flesh to be devoured by their hungry swine.

Their cruelty most raged against Marcus Arethusius, Marcus Ar^thusius.
the Christian Bishop of that City, who formerly, by the command of
Constantine, had pulled down their Idol-Temple, and set up a Church for the
Christians in the room thereof; The Arethusians knowing how Julian hated him,
accused him as a Traitor and enemy to the Emperor: Whereupon at first he
prepared himself to fly, but when he perceived that some of his friends were
apprehended in his stead, he returned, Courage.
and of his own accord offered himself to those that thirsted for his blood:
Whom when they had gotten, neither pitying his old age, nor reverencing his
holy and blameless Conversation, they stripped him naked, and pitifully beat him;
then they cast him into a foul, filthy sink: then they caused Boys to thrust
him in with sharp sticks to augment his pain: Barbarous cruelty.
Lastly, They put him into a basket* anointed him with honey and broth, and so
hung him abroad in the heat of the sun, to be meat for wasps and flies to feed
upon; and this they did to enforce him, either to build up their Idol-Temple
again, or to give them money to pay for the doing of it, but he stoutly
refusing both; they proffered to forgive one half, if he would pay the other;
which he still refusing, and contemning all their torments, they at last
demanded of him but a small sum of money, but he answered, It is as great
wickedness to confer one halfpenny in case of impiety, as if a man should give
the whole. Whereupon, despairing to prevail, they left him, and went their ways.

Cyrillus
Also Cyrillus, a Deacon in Hieropolis, who in Constantines time had broken in
pieces the Images of the Gentiles, they took him, ripped up his belly, drew the
liver out of his body, which with barbarous inhumanity they chawed with their
teeth: But the Lord suffered not this brutishness to go unpunished, God's
judgment on Persecutors.
for their teeth shortly after fell out of their jaw-bones, and their tongues
rotted in their mouths, and they fell stark blind.

Julian when he came to Constantinople, offered sacrifice in the Cathedral
Church to the Goddess Fortune; about which time Maris, Bishop of Chalcedon in
Bythinia, being blind, caused himself to be led to the Emperor, Maris ^oldly
reproves Julian.
whom he rebuked sharply, calling him an impious person, an Apostate, and an
Atheist; he on the contrary called the Bishop, Blind fool, saying further, Thy
God of Galilee will not restore thee thy sight again! Blasphemy.
Maris replied, I thank God which made me blind, lest that ever I should set
mine eyes upon so ungracious a face as thine is.

In the Marketplaces of the Cities, Julian set up his own Image, amongst the
Images of the heathen gods, to the end that whosoever should do civil reverence
to his Image, Devilish subtilty.
might also seem to worship the gods of the Gentiles; and that they who would
not bow to the Idols, might seem to refuse due reverence to the Emperor. When
he distributed gold to his Captains and soldiers, he erected an Altar near to
his Throne, with coals burning upon it, and incense on a Table by, and none
might receive the gold before he had cast incense on the coals upon the Altar,
by which subtilty he circumvented many, who discerned not his purpose to
entangle them with the rites of Idolatrous services.

All about Antioch he dedicated all the fountains to the goddesses of the
Gentiles, and caused all the Victuals that were sold in the Market to be
sprinkled with heathenish holy water: Christian wisdom.
yet did the Christians without scruple drink of the water, and eat of the meat
according to that rule, Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, and ask
no question for conscience sake, etc.

Juventius and Maxentius.
Juventius and Maxentius, two brave Captains, used much boldness and liberty in
reproving him for his heathenish superstition, which so enraged him, that he
caused them to be put to death.

In Caesarea, the Inhabitants being most Christians, had formerly overthrown
the Temples of Jupiter and Apollo; and now in Julians time, they overthrew the
Temple of Fortune, which so enraged him, Christian courage.
that he disfranchised them, exacted of them three hundred pounds weight of
gold, and compelled their Clergy to serve in War-fare, threatening further to
put to death all the Inhabitants thereof at his return, but it pleased God that
his own death prevented it.

About this time, Julian going to enquire of the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos,
there came down fire from heaven, and destroyed the Temple, and beat the Image
of Apollo in pieces, Apollo's Image broken with lightning.
like to the smallest powder or dust.

When he came to Antioch, there was a noble woman, called Publia, who had the
Education and government of diverse young virgins, these she caused, as Julian
passed by her house, to sing with a loud voice, The Idols of the heathen are
silver and gold, the works of men's hands, etc. This so angered the Emperor,
that he sent them a command to sing no more as he went that way; but Publia was
so far from fearing him, that the next time he came, she made them sing the
same verse, and to add to it, Let God arise, and his enemies shall be
scattered, etc. This so incensed Julian, that he sent for her to him, scoffed
at her, and caused her to be clapped on the cheeks in a disgraceful manner; but
she looked upon it as a great honor thus to suffer reproach for Christ's sake;
and coming home, she caused her maids still to sing Psalms of the Emperors
fury and madness.

Afterward the Emperor intending to war against the Persians, Christians
fined.
set a great fine upon every ones head that would not sacrifice to the Idols,
whereby he much enriched himself by the spoil of the Christians.

Then were false Accusations forged against Athanasius, so that he was forced
to fly; yet he thus comforted himself and friends, Athanasius driven away.
Nubecula est, cito pertransibit, This persecution is but a little cloud, and
will soon pass away.

In his flight, he took a ship upon the river Nilus to fly to Thebais, but
Julian sent an Earl after him, to bring him back again, who pursuing him with
sails and ores, had almost overtaken his ship, whereupon the Mariners would
have run her ashore, and fled into a wilderness that was hard by, to whom
Athanasius said, Quid turbamini filii? Courage.
quin in occursum eamus persecutori nostro, ut intelligat, quia long major est
qui nos defendit, quam qui persequitur: My sons, why are you thus affrighted?
Let us rather turn and meet our pursuer, that he may know, that he is greater
which defends us, then he that follows to apprehend us. Hereupon the Mariners
turned back again, and the Earl supposing nothing less then that Athanasius was
in the ship that came toward him, he only called to them, A special providence.
and enquired whether they had not heard of Athanasius? they answered, that
they had seen Athanasius a little before; whereupon he hastened forward to
overtake him, and Athanasius in his ship returned back privately into
Alexandria, where he lay hid till that persecution was over.

Julians Officers in exacting the fines of the Christians, demanded more then
they were assessed at, and sometimes tormented their bodies also, of which
wrongs when they complained to the Emperor* he scoffingly answered them,
Blasphemy.
Its your part, when you are injured, to take it patiently, for so your God
commands you.

At Meris in Phrygia, the Governor Commanded the Idol-Temple to be set open and
cleansed, and began himself to worship the Idols: Whereupon some Christians,
inflamed with zeal, in the night time, brake into the Temple, threw down the
Idols, and stamped them to powder. Zeal.
The Governor being wonderfully incensed herewith, purposed to execute some
Christian Citizens which were innocent and guiltless; whereupon the Authors of
their own accord, presented themselves before him, choosing rather to die for
the truth, then that others should suffer for their sakes; Courage.
Thereupon the Governor commanded them to sacrifice to the Idols, or else he
would severely punish them; but they, setting at naught his threats, prepared
themselves to suffer what he could inflict; Then did he assay them with all
kinds of torments, and at last laid them on the grid-iron, and broiled them to
death, to whom they said, If thou long, O Tyrant, for broiled meat, turn up the
other side, lest in eating, the blood run about thy teeth.

When Julian went against the Persians, of very malice and hatred against the
Christians, whom scornfully he called Galilaeans, he made a vow, that if he
obtained the victory, he would sacrifice to his gods the blood of those
Christians which would not sacrifice to the Idols: But what the issue of that
exepdition was, See in my second part, in the Life of Jovianus.

Collected out of the imperial History, and Socrates Scholasticus, Theodor. and
the Magd. Hist. Cent. 4. CHAP. XIX. The Persecution of the Church under the
Arrian Heretics, which began, An. Christi, 339.
COnstantine the Great, dying, divided his Empire amongst his three sons,
Constantius, Constans and Constantine. Constantius that governed the East, was
seduced by an Arrian Presbyter, who had been in his fathers Court, with his
Aunt Constantia; So pernicious a thing it is to have deceitful Heretics
lurking in Princes Courts, Note.
and Ladies Chambers.

This Presbyter complained to Constantius that the Return of Athanasius from
banishment was very dangerous to the peace of the Commonwealth: Yea, he so far
incensed the Emperor against him, Athanas^us accused of sedition.
that he sent a Captain with five thousand armed men to slay him; but the Lord
delivered him miraculously out of their hands, for the armed soldiers being
placed round about the Church where he was, he went safely through the midst of
them undiscerned, His miraculous deliverance.
though many Arrians were present on purpose to point him out to the soldiers,
as a sheep ordained for the slaughter.

But neither in banishment could he enjoy peace and safety, for this Arrian
Emperor sent to all the officers in his Army to search him out, wheresoever he
was, His banishment and danger.
proposing a great Reward to those that could bring Athanasius to him, either
alive or dead; whereupon he was forced to hide himself in a deep pit, where he
lay six years never so much as seeing the light of the Sun, till at last a Maid
that used to carry him his food, was corrupted by those which sought for him,
to betray him to them; His miraculous deliverance.
but it pleased God by his Spirit to reveal to him his danger, whereby he
escaped a little before they came to apprehend him.

Afterward Constans forced his brother Constantius, though much against his
will, to restore Athanasius to his Church at Alexandria: He is restored for a
time, and again banished.
But after the death of that good Emperor Constans, Constantius drove him into
banishment again; yet the Lord stirred up a godly woman to hide him in her
house, till the death of Constantius.

In Alexandria in the room of Athanasius, was George an Arrian Bishop placed,
who also was furnished with armed soldiers to assist him in his devilish
devices. Thereupon he caused a great fire to be made, took many Christian
Virgins, caused them to be stripped naked, requiring them to renounce their
faith, or else they should be burned: but when the sight of the fire could not
terrify them, Christian virgins shamefully abused.
he caused their faces to be so dashed with strokes, that their countenances
were disfigured; yet like patient soldiers of Christ they endured all kind of
rebuke for his names sake.

Thirty Bishops, of Egypt and Lybia, were slain in the fury of this Arrian
Persecution. Fourteen Bishops were banished, The Arrians cruelty.
whereof some of them died in the way, the rest in exile. Forty Orthodox
Christians in Alexandria were scourged with rods, because they would not
communicate with the Arrian Bishop George, and so pitiously handled, that some
pieces of the rods were so deeply fixed in their flesh, that they could not be
drawn out, and many through excessive pain of their wounded bodies, died.

The like cruelty did the Arrians exercise in Constantinople. Paul the good
Bishop was banished to Cucusus, B. Paul banished.
where he was strangled by the Arrians. Macedonius a notable heretic was
placed in his room, who used no less cruelty in forcing men to communicate with
him, then was used formerly to force them to sacrifice to Idols.

These Heretics used also great diligence in procuring Councels to Subtilty.
establish their Errors. But not long after the Emperor died, sorrowing much
that he had changed the form of the Nicene faith.

After the death of Jovian, Valentinian succeeded in the Empire, who associated
to himself his brother Valens, An. Christi 364
and made him Emperor of the East. This Valens was an Arrian, and raised up a
cruel Persecution against the Orthodox: Persecution raised by Valens.
Concerning which Greg. Nazianzen in his Oration of the praise of Basil, thus
writes, Insurrexit repent nebula grandine plena, and perniciose stridens,
quae omnes Ecclesias in quas incidit, cont^ivit, and postravit, Christi Cultor,
pariter and os^r, qui post persecutorem persecutor fuit, He succeeded Julian.
and post Apostatam, non quidem Apostata, sed nihilo tamen meliorem se
Christianis praebens: Christi nomen prae se ferens, Christum mentiebatur.
Miletius Bishop of Antioch he banished to Armenia. Miletius. Eusebius. Pelagius.
Eusebius Bishop of Samosata, to Thrace. Pelagius Bishop of Laodicea, to Arabia.

He was exceedingly filled with wrath against the Bishops assembled in the
Counsel of Lampsacum, because they adhered to the Nicene faith. In
Constantinople he banished all the Orthodox. In Edissa, he commanded them all
to be slain as they were assembled together in the Church. The Lieutenant that
had received this charge from him, being more merciful then his Master, gave
private notice to the Christians, An admirable story.
that they should not assemble at that time; but they, neither regarding his
advice, nor fearing his threats, flocked to the Church in great companies: and
whilst the Lieutenant, with many armed soldiers, hasted thitherward to fulfill
the Emperors command, a woman leading a child in her hand, all in haste, brake
the ranks, and thrust into the armed troops; the Lieutenant being moved
therewith, called the woman before him, saying, Thou fond and unfortunate
woman, whither runnest thou so rashly? Thither (said she) whither others
hasten; Have thou not heard (said he) that the Lieutenant will slay as many as
he finds there? I heard it (said she) and therefore I make the more haste to
the place. Courage.
But whether (said he) leadest thou this child? That he also (said she) may be
accounted in the number of Martyrs. Hereupon the Lieutenant returned back to
the Emperor, and told him that all the Christians from the highest to the
lowest prepared themselves to die in the defense of their faith, Gods
Providence.
and withal he showed him what a rash thing it was to murder so great a
multitude, etc. and so with his reasons persuaded the Emperor, that he
appeased his wrath, and prevented the mischief at that time.

In Constantinople the Arrians, favored by the Emperor, crowed insolently over
the Christians, they scourged, reviled, imprisoned, amerced, and laid upon them
all the intolerable burdens they could devise. Hereupon eighty godly
Ministers, in the name of all the rest, addressed themselves to the Emperor,
complaning of the outrages that were done to them, Eighty godly Ministers
burned.
craving some relief: But this cruel Tyrant commanded Modestus the General of
his Army, to embark them all in a ship, as if he would have sent them into
banishment, but secretly he gave direction to the Mariners, to set the ship on
fire, and to retire themselves into a boat, and so these holy Martyrs glorified
the Name of Christ, by patient suffering of a double death, burning and
drowning.

In all the Eastern parts he tormented many with sundry sorts of grievous
torments, put many to death, drowned many in the sea, Cruelty of heretics.
and in rivers.

About this time he consulted with Necromancers, to know who should succeed him
in the Empire: The devil answered ambiguously, that his name should begin with
Th. Whereupon he put to death as many as were called Theodorus, Theodotus,
Theadosius or Theodulus.

Athanasius being dead at Alexandria, there succeeded him a godly and holy man,
named Peter, Peter.
but the Emperor presently sent soldiers, which clapped him in prison, and the
rest of the Ministers were banished, some to one place, some to another.

After this he sent forth an Edict for the persecuting of all the Orthodox in
Egypt: Whereupon many were stripped of their raiment, Cruelty.
scourged, fettered in prisons, crushed in pieces with stones, beheaded, driven
into deserts, where they wandered in sheeps-skins and goats-skins, destitute of
aid and succor; Many hid themselves in mountains, in dens, caves and hollow
rocks.

Terentins and Trajan, two worthy Captains, used some liberty in admonishing
the Emperor to abstain from persecuting of the innocent; but the Lord was
minded to destroy him, The Emperor refused admonition.
and therefore he could receive no wholesome admonition; For many of the Goths,
whom he entertained as soldiers to assist him against his enemies, turned
against himself, so that he fled, and was overtaken in a village, which the
Goths set on fire, whereby he died miserably, Gods judgment ^n persecutors.
leaving none to succeed him, and his name a curse and execration to all ages.

Collected out of Magd. Hist. Socrates and Theod.

The Persecution by the Donatists.
ABout the year of our Lord 410. there sprang up in Africa the Donatists and
Circumcellions, who first made a great Schism in the Church, and afterward
raised up a great persecution against the Orthodox: concerning which, St
Austine complains in sundry places; And in his 50. Epistle to Earl Boniface, he
thus writes of it, In hoc labor multi Catholici, and maxim Episcopi, and
Clerici horrenda and dura perpessi sunt, quae commemorare longum e^t, etc. In
this disturbance, Bloody schismatics.
the Orthodox, especially the Bishops and Ministers, suffered hard and horrible
things, the particulars whereof are long to recite; for some of them had their
eyes put out: Some Bishops had their hands and tongues cut off, and some were
slain outright. To speak nothing of the cruel slaughter of others that were
sound and sincere: of the plundering of their houses, of the out-ragious
burning, not only of their private habitations, but of their Churches also;
yea, so vile and violent were they, that they sticked not to burn the sacred
Scriptures.

Profane Schismatics.
Optatus in his second book tells us, that when Julian the Apostate came to the
Empire, the Donatists preferred a petition to him, wherein they desired leave
to return to their places in Africa, from whence formerly they had been
banished. Julian knowing what furious and turbulent spirits they were of, and
how prejudicial their Return would be to the Catholic Church, easily assented
to their petition, and so they returned full fraught with malice and revenge,
and presently employed all their abilities, partly by subtilty to seduce the
common people, partly by violence to oppress the Orthodox Bishops and
Ministers, Turbulent Schismatics.
of whom, some they thrust out of their Churches, others they slew.

Some of their chief Bishops, taking armed soldiers with them, went to the
Castle of Lemella, where finding the Church shut against them, they commanded
their attendance to get upon it, to uncover the roof, and so having broken into
it, they set upon some Deacons, whom they found there, wounded some, and slew
two of them outright. In all places where they came, they profaned all holy
things; The Sacramental bread they threw to their dogs; but behold the just
judgment of God against these profane schismatics; those very dogs shortly
after running mad, Profane Schismatics.

Gods Judgment on them. Impure schismatics.


fell upon their own Masters, and tore them in pieces.

Virgins they defloured, and wives they defiled. So usual a thing it is for
those which adulterate the holy truths of God, to be given over to corporal
uncleanness.

These furious persons dispersed themselves all over Africa, and would not
suffer the Orthodox to preach the truth against their Errors: By their violent
assaults, thieveries, rapines, burnings and murders, they destroyed many, and
afrighted all, etc.

CHAP. XX. The Persecution of the Church in Africa, by the Arrian Vandals,
which began Anno Christi, 427.
THE cruel Vandals, passing out of Spain into Africa, under Genserick their
Captain, finding the Province peaceable and quiet, set upon the flourishingest
part of the land, wasting and destroying all before them with fire and sword,
not sparing so much as the shrubs and bushes which bare fruit, lest they should
minister relief to those poor Christians which hid themselves in dens, in
mountains, and steep cliffs: Profane Heretics.
But especially they raged against the Churches and Temples of the Saints,
burning all them to the ground, and where they found any of them shut they
brake them open with their Maces. Cruelty of Heretics.
The Bishops and Ministers they destroyed especially, with many kinds of
torments, seeking by tortures to force them to deliver up whatsoever gold and
silver they had of their own, or belonging to the Church; and where they gat
any, they still tormented them afresh, to enforce them to confess more.

The mouths of some they wrested open with iron, thrusting into them stinking
mire and dirt: Prodigious
Some they tormented by wresting their foreheads and legs with bow-strings,
till they cracked again; Into the mouths of others they poured seawater,
vinegar, with the dreg^ of oil and grease; and neither weakness of sex, nor
respect of nobility, nor reverence of their Ministry, mitigated their cruel
minds; yea, their fury most abounded where there appeared any dignity or
worthiness.

Many of the Ministers and Nobles they loaded with mighty burdens, as if they
had been Camels or Horses, Ministers laden with burdens.
and made them carry them after them; and if they went slowly, they hasted them
with iron pricks and goads, so that some of them under their burdens, gave up
the ghost. Reverend gray hairs found no privilege of Mercy; guiltless Infants
felt their barbarous rage, whom they dashed against the ground, Cruelty to
Infants.
violently pulling little ones from their mothers breasts to brain them; of
others, by wide stretching of their tender legs, they tore them in pieces, from
the fundament; the stately buildings they burnt down, and levelled with the
earth: The chief Churches in Carthage they employed to their own heretical
worship. Where any strong Castles were held against them, they brought
multitudes of Christians, slew them, and left their bodies lying about the
Castles, that by the stench thereof they might force them to surrender.

Who can express the number of Ministers that were by them tortured! Pampinian.
Pampinian the Bishop of Mansuetus was tortured with burning plates of iron all
over his body. The Bishop of Urice was burnt to death.

Then did they also besiege the City of Hippo, where St. Augustine was, Hippo
besieged.
who before that time had compiled two hundred thirty two Books, Epistles
innumerable besides his Expositions on the Psalms and Gospels, and his Homilies
to the people. See more of this in my first part of lives in the life of St.
Austine.

When they had taken the Regal City of Carthage, they enslaved the Citizens and
Senators, publishing a decree that they should presently bring forth whatsoever
gold, silver, precious stones, or rich apparel they possessed, and thereby
dispoiled them of all in one day; Then did they take the Bishop and all the
Ministers of that City, and thrust them naked into weather broken-ships, and so
banished them, whom yet the Lord of his great Mercy directed, and brought in
safety to the City of Naples. A special providence.
The Senators and Nobles they first banished from the City* and then drove them
beyond sea. The dead bodies of the Christians they would not suffer to be
buried but in the night, and without any solemnity.

The Bishops and Ministers through all the Province, being dispoiled of all
their substance, and turned out of their Churches, assembled together, and
presented a petition to Genserick, that they might, at least in private, Pride.
be suffered to instruct their people to whom he proudly answered, I have
decreed that none of your profession shall remain in the country, how then
dare you prefer such a request? and withal, he would at that instant have
drowned them all in the sea, but that the importunity of some about him, stopped
him.

There was also a noble Earl, called Sebastian, a man of great wisdom and
courage, whom Genserick much feared, and therefore sought occasion to put him
to death: which that he might the better effect, he moved him to be rebaptized
by one of his Priests, and to turn Arrian: the Earl therefore requested him to
call for a fine manchet, which being done, he said, This loaf, that it might be
fine and white, has been boulted from the bran, A noble Earl martyred.
moistened with liquor, and baked: but if you now cause it to be broken in
pieces, steeped in water, kneaded and baked again, if it come out better, I
will do as you would have me. Genserick understanding his meaning, could not
tell what to answer for the present, yet afterward he caused him to be put to
death.

If any Minister in his Sermon occasionally did but mention Pharaoh,
Nebuchadrezzer, An evil conscience.
Herod, etc, presently it was laid to his charge that he meant it by the King,
and thereupon he was banished.

Yet notwithstanding all this cruelty, the people of God stood fast in their
holy profession, Constancy.
and rather increased then otherwise.

Afterward at the request of Valentinian the Emperor, Genserick suffered the
Orthodox in Carthage to choose them a Bishop, which they did; and not long
after Genserick with his Vandals took the famous City of Rome, Rome sacked.
carrying away with him, not only all the treasure that of a long time had been
stored up there, but many of the people also; who, when they were brought into
Africa, were shared between the Vandals and the Moors, so that husbands were
separated from their wives, parents from their children; which this godly
Bishop hearing of, he caused all the gold and silver vessels belonging to the
Church, to be sold for their Redemption, Charity.
that so married persons, and parents, and children might enjoy the comfort of
their relations: Then also did he provide food and lodging for them, and night
and day went amongst them himself, to see how they did, to minister to their
wants, and comfort them; But this procured him such hatred amongst the Arrians,
that they sought to slay him; but the Lord about this time took him to himself,
whereby he escaped their malice.

Gods providence.
One of the Gensericks Colonels, having some Christian slaves, and a beautiful
and a godly Virgin amongst them, he took occasion to vex them with fetters and
torments, thereby to force them to re-baptization, which they constantly
refusing, he caused them to be stripped, and beaten with ragged cudgels till
their flesh was torn in pieces, etc. At last they were banished to Capsur, an
heathen Kingdom of the Moors, where it pleased God so to bless their labors, A
special Providence.
that many of them were converted, and sending for an Orthodox Minister, Moors
converted.
were baptized.

This coming to Gensericks ears, he commanded these servants of God to be drawn
at a Chariots tail through thickets of thorns, Cruelty of Heretics.
till they were torn in pieces, and these newly converted Moors, he caused
their naked bodies to be haled backwards and forwards, through bushes and
brambles, and others of them to be tied to wild beasts, and so to be rent in
sunder; the poor Christians saying thus each to other, O brother pray for me,
God has fulfilled our desire, O this is the way to the kingdom of heaven.

Genserick further raging against the Orthodox, sent one Proculus into the
Zeugian Province, to dispoil all the Churches of their Ornaments, and the
Ministers of their books, that thereby they might be disabled to holy services;
which command was executed with all rigor: and whereas the Bishop of Habensa
refused to deliver them up, he was expelled the City, The Bishop of Habensa.
and all men at great penalty were forbidden to harbor him, so that, being
above eighty years old, he lay naked for a long time, under the open sky.

About Easter, when the Christians were met together in a Church, to celebrate
the remembrance of Christ's Resurrection, the Arrians with a great power of
armed men, set upon this innocent company, who with their naked swords slew
many: The Minister that was preaching, they shot through the throat with an
arrow: Christians murdered at a Sermon.
and such of them as escaped death, were by the command of the King, executed
by sundry kinds of torments.

In other places, when the Christians were administering the Sacrament, the
Heretics rushed in amongst them, taking the bread and wine, and trampling them
under their profane feet. Horrible profaness.


Then did Genserick command, that none but Arrians should bear any office,
either about himself or his children: And a Bishop called Armogastes, they
took, and first nipped his forehead and legs with bowstrings; then did they
hang him up by one foot, Armogastes tormented.
with his head downward, yet did he seem to all men as if he slept in a
feather-bed, which so enraged Theoderick the Kings son, that he commanded him
to be beheaded, but some about him dissuaded him from it, A special providence.
because said they, he will be accounted a Martyr. Then was he banished to dig
in Mines; yet afterward he was sent for again, and made a Cow-heard near to
Carthage, that he might be a continual object of scorn.

There was also one Saturus, a noble man, eminent for holiness, whom the Tyrant
much labored to draw to the Arrian profession, but he refusing, the King told
him, that if he presently consented not, Saturu's noble courage.
he should forfeit his house and goods, that his Children and slaves should be
sold, and his wife should be given to the Camel-driver: Yet no menaces could
shake his faith. His wife hearing of her doom, went to her husband as he was
praying, with her garments rent, her hair disheveled, her Children at her
heels, and a sucking infant in her hands, whom she cast at her husbands feet,
and took him about the knees, Tentation.
saying, Have compassion (O my sweetest) of me thy poor wife; and of these thy
Children; look upon them, let them not be made slaves; let not me be yoaked to
a base Marriage, etc. that which thou art required to do, thou do it not
willingly, but by constraint, and therefore it will not be laid to thy charge:
He gave her an answer in the words of Job, Thou speak like a foolish woman:
Resisted.
thou actest the devils part; if thou love thy husband, thou would never
seek to draw him to sin, which will procure the second death. I am resolved
therefore as my Lord commands me, to forsake wife, children, lands, house, etc.
that I may be his Disciple; and accordingly he was dispoiled of all, and turned
out a begging, yet all were forbidden to harbor him.

Gensericks death.
Genserick having reigned thirty seven years and three months, died.

Genserick being dead, his son Hunrick succeeded him, who at first was more
moderate to the Christians, insomuch as they began to hold their meetings as
before time. The Manichaean Heretics he sought out, and though most of them
were of his own Religion, yet he burnt some, Manichaeans punished.
and banished others.

At the request of the Emperor Zeno and Placidia his wife, he suffered the
Church of Carthage to choose their own Bishop, having been destitute of one for
twenty four years. Then they chose Eugenius, an humble, Eugenius chosen Bishop.
holy and charitable man, whose fame increasing, the Arrian Bishops much envied
him, and put into the Kings head to forbid him to preach, and not to suffer any
to enter into the Church, that were attired after the manner of the Vandals;
Envy.
To which command Eugenius thus answered, The house of God is free for all:
those which enter, no man may drive forth. The King being incensed with this
answer, placed tortures at the Church door, who when they espied any man or
woman in a Vandals habit, about to go into the Church, clapping flesh-hooks on
their heads, and twisting them in their hair, with a strong twitch they pulled
off hair, Cruelty of Heretics.
scalp and all, whereby some lost their eyes, and some their lives.

The women, besides these torments, they carried through the streets, to be made
a public laughing stock, yet could they not force them to altar their
Religion. Constancy.


Then did Hunrick ordain, that none of his Countries which dissented from his
Religion, should receive their ordinary pensions and salaries. Then did he send
many of them who had been delicately brought up, to Utica, in the parching heat
of the sun, to dig the land for corn; yet they went cheerfully, and comforted
themselves in the Lord.

Then did he command that no man should be a Knight, or bear any public office
except he turned Arrian: whereupon very many with invincible courage, Constancy.
forsook their honors and offices, rather then their faith.

Barbarous cruelty.
Many Virgins he caused to be proved by the Midwives in a most shameful manner;
hanging them up from the ground with mighty weights at their feet, and putting
to their sides; breasts, back and bellies, red hot plates of iron, to compel
them to confess that their Bishops and Ministers lay with them, that so he
might from thence have an occasion to persecute them. Many of these died under
the pain, and others remained lame and crooked all their lives after, yet would
they not confess any such thing.

Then did he banish into the wilderness, of Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, and
other Members of Christ, four thousand nine hundred seventy six; some of them
being lame with the gout, others blind with age: Multitudes banished.
Amongst whom also was Foelix Bishop of Abiris, possessed with a dead palsy,
and therefore unable, either to go or ride; Foelix.
which the cruel King being informed of, and requested that he might be
suffered to stay; he answered, if he be not able to ride, let wild bulls be
coupled to drag him to the place appointed: So that they were fain to carry him
on a Mules back across, as if he had been a sack.

Then were all these holy Confessors, brought to the City of Sicca, where the
Moors were to receive them, and transport them thence to the wilderness.
Thither came two Arrian Earls, Tentation.
and with great subtilty sought to withdraw them from their stedfastness,
saying, What mean you to be so obstinate, as not to obey the Kings Laws,
whereas by complying with him, you may be preferred to honor? Then did they
all cry out, We be Christians, we be Catholics, we believe, and confess the
Trinity in Unity. Hereupon were they shut up in a grievous prison.

Many mothers also voluntarily followed their little children, much rejoicing
that they had born Martyrs: Others sought to draw them to rebaptization by the
Heretics but, through Gods grace, they could not prevail. Constancy.


As they passed on the way traveling more by night then by day, because of the
excessive heat, a woman hasted after them, An excellent story.
leading in her hand a little child, encouraging him, saying, Run Sir, see
thou all the Saints how merrily they go forwards, and hasten to their Crown?
One of the company rebuked her, and asked her whether she went? To whom she
answered, Pray for me, I go with this little boy, my nephew, to the place of
banishment* least the enemies finding him alone, should seduce him from the way
of truth into the way of Error.

The enemies being more enraged because of their constancy, when they came to
their lodgings, penned them up in narrow places. Then was denied to them all
the comfort of access of their friends, for permitting whereof formerly, their
Keepers had been beaten with staves. These blessed Saints were tumbled one upon
another, as grains of corn, Cruelty of Heretics.
neither could they have means of stepping aside to ease nature, so that the
stink of their excrements exceeded their other pain.

Then were they brought forth, their garments, heads and faces besmeared with
dirt in a pitiful manner, and by the clamorous Moors they were hastened
forward in their journey; yet they went singing with great joy unto the Lord,
Lo, This honor have all his Saints. Then came to them the blessed Bishop
Cyprian, Cyprians sympathy.
who to their singular consolation, comforted every one of them with fatherly
affection, and with streams of tears was ready to lay down his life for the
brethren, and would fain have accompanied them, if he might have been suffered:
Charity.
He bestowed all that he had amongst them, for which he afterward suffered
imprisonment and much hard-ship, and at last had his hearts desire in being
banished.

There came great multitudes from sundry Countries and Cities, to behold these
servants of God, and many casting their Children at their feet; cried thus, To
whom will you leave us wretches whilst you go forward to your Crown? Who shall
baptize our infants? instruct and administer the Sacraments to us? our hearts
serve us well to go with you if we might. But now none were suffered any more
to go with them for their comfort, but they were pressed forwards, and made to
run.

When any of the aged, or tender Children fainted, they were first punched
forwards with staves: Barbarous cruelty.
Then were the Moors commanded to tie ropes to the feet of such as were unable
to go, and to hail them through the rough places, so that first their garments
were rent, then their flesh, and their heads were dashed against the sharp
edges of rocks, whereby very many of them died.

The rest that were stronger came at last to the wilderness, where, like
beasts, they had barley given them for their food; there were also abundance of
venomous serpents and scorpions in that place, whose sting was deadly, yet,
through Gods great Providence, none of these servants of Christ gat any hurt
thereby. A special providence.


Hunrick in the seventh year of his reign, directed his Mandate to Eugenius
Bishop of Carthage, and told all other Bishops in Africa, that they should by
such a day meet at Carthage to defend by disputation their faith against the
Arrian Bishops; Subtilty of Heretics.
but withal, by the tenor of the decree, they perceived that he would not
suffer any of them to live within his dominions, which caused great heaviness
amongst them. Eugenius returned answer, that since it was the common cause of
all the Christian Churches, it was but equal that Bishops out of other
Countries should be requested to be there present also; and this he did, not
because they suspected their own abilities to defend the truth, but because he
knew that strangers might use more liberty of speech then they could, and that
other Bishops might be witnesses of their sufferings, but this request did but
more enrage this unreasonable Tyrant.

The appointed day approaching, many Bishops resorted to Carthage, worn out
with afflictions and sorrows, yet for many days after their coming, there was
no mention of disputing, till in the mean time the King had singled out the
learnedest and skilfullest of them, that by sundry Calumniations he might make
them away: Amongst whom was Laetus, a stout and learned man, whom he first
imprisoned, and then burnt him in the fire, that so he might strike a fear into
the rest.

At last the Disputation began, and the Orthodox, to avoid tumult, chose out
some to answer for all the rest. The Arrians placed themselves upon lofty
Thrones, Pride of Heretics.
whilst the Orthodox stood below upon their feet; Whereupon they said,
Conference is to be taken in hand, not where proud superiority of power bears
sway, but where, by common consent, the Disputants upon equal terms debate the
controversies, that truth may come to light, etc. Then were all the Catholics
commanded to have an hundred strokes a piece with a cudgel, given them for this
speech: Unjust cruelty.
Whereupon Eugenius said, The Lord from heaven behold the violence which we
suffer, and consider the tribulation which we sustain from our persecutors.
Then did the Orthodox Bishops desire the Arrians to propound what they
intended; But the Arrian Bishops seeing them ready to dispute with them, sought
out tergiversations, and declined the dispute. Hereupon the Orthodox drew forth
a declaration of their faith, excellently well penned, and exhibited it with
this Protestation, If you be desirous to know our belief, A confession of ^aith.
the faith which we hold is herein comprised. The Arrians stormed exceedingly
at this, giving them outrageous language, and presently by false Calumnies they
accused them to the King, and so incensed him, that by an Edict in one day he
caused all the Christians Churches through Africa to be shut up, A wicked Edict.
giving to the Arrians all the goods and Churches of the Orthodox.

Then did he command that all those godly Bishops that were met together at
Carthage, Cru^lty of Heretics.
should be spoiled of all that they had in their lodgings, and so driven out of
the City-gates; having neither servant, nor beast, nor garment to s^ift them
in, left unto them; and all men were forbidden either to harbor them, or give
them any sustenance, the King threatening to burn him and all his family that
should relieve them.

The Bishops being thus turned out, lay in the open fields round about the
Walls: and when the Tyrant went forth to the fish ponds, they met him, saying,
Why are we so afflicted? what evil have we done? If we be called to dispute,
Why are we spoiled of all we have? Why are we slandred? Why are we forced to
remain here amongst the dung-hills, afflicted with hunger and nakedness, far
from our Churches and houses? Herewith the Tyrant was so enraged, that he
commanded his horsemen to ride over them, whereby many of them were sore
bruised and wounded, especially the aged and weak men: Then did he command them
to meet him at the Temple of Memory: and when they came thither, they had this
writing delivered to them; Our Lord King Hunrick, lamenting your obstinacy in
refusing to obey his will, and to embrace his Religion, yet intends to deal
graciously with you, and if you will take this oath, he will send you back to
your Churches and houses: Then they all said with one consent, We are all
Christians, and Bishops, and hold the Apostolical and only true faith; and
thereupon they made a brief confession of their faith; Devilish subtilty.
But the Kings Commissioners urged them without any further delay to take the
oath contained in that paper; Whereupon they answered, Do you think us bruit
beasts, that we should so easily swear to a writing, wherein we know not what
is contained? Then was the Oath read unto them, which was this, You shall swear
that after the death of the Lord our King, his son Hilderick shall succeed him
in the Kingdom, and that none of you shall send letters beyond the seas. If you
take this oath, he will restore you to your Churches.

They that were plain-meaning men amongst them, were willing to take it; but
others that saw further into the subtilty of it, refused it. Then were those
which would take it, commanded to separate themselves from the other, which
being done, a Notary presently took their names, and of what Cities they were:
he did the like also by the Refusers; and so both parties were committed to
ward, and shortly after the King sent them word; first to those that would have
taken the oath: Because that you, contrary to the rule of the Gospel, which
says, A wicked sentence.
Thou shall not swear at all, would have sworn: The Kings Will is, that you
shall never see your Churches more, but shall be banished into the wilderness,
and never perform any Ministerial office again; and there you shall till the
ground: But to the Refusers of the oath, he said, because you desire not the
reign of our Lords son, you shall therefore be immediately sent away to the
Isle of Corse, there to hew timber for the ships.

He also sent abroad through all Africa, his cruel tormentors: So that no
place, no house remained free from lamentation, screeching and outcries. They
spared neither age nor sex, but only such as yielded to their will. Some they
cudgelled with staves; some they hung up, others they burned. Women, and
especially gentlewomen, they openly tortured stark naked without all shame:
Amongst whom was Dionysia, whom when they saw bolder, and more beautiful then
the rest, Dionysia.
they first commanded her to be stripped naked, and made ready for the cudgels,
who spoke boldly to them, saying, I am assured of the love of my God, Impudence
of Heretics.
v^x me how you will, only my woman-hood disclose you not; But they, with
greater rage, set her naked upon an high place for a public spectacle: Then
did they whip her till the streams of blood flowed all over her body: Whereupon
she boldly said, Ye Ministers of Satan, that which you do for my reproach, is
to me an honor. And beholding her only son, Courage.
that was young and tender, and seemed fearful of torments, checking him with
a motherly Authority, she so encouraged him, that he became much more constant
then before. To whom in the midst of his terrible torments, she said, Remember,
O my child, She encourages her son.
that we were baptized in the name of the holy Trinity: Let us not lose the
garment of our salvation, least it be said, Cast them into outer darkness,
where is weeping* and wailing and gnashing of teeth: For that pain is to be
dreaded, that never ends; and that life to be desired, that always lasts:
The youth was so encouraged hereby, that he persevered patient in all his
sufferings, till, in the midst of his torments, he gave up the Ghost. Many by
her exhortations and example were gained to God, and animated in their
sufferings. The benefit of good examples.


Not long after, Cyrillas the Arrian Bishop at Carthage, stirred up the Tyrant
against the Christians, Slanders.
telling him, that he could never expect to enjoy his Kingdom in peace, so long
as he suffered any of them to live, Hereupon he sent for seven eminent
Christians from Capsa to Carthage, Tentation.
whom he first assaulted with flattery and large promises of honor, riches,
etc. if so be they would embrace his faith: But these servants of Christ
rejected all those profers* crying out, One Lord, one faith, one Baptism;
saying also, Courage and constancy.
Do with our bodies what you please, torment them at your will, its better for
us to suffer these momentary pains, then to endure everlasting torments.

Hereupon they were sent to prison, loaded with great iron chains, and thrust
into a stinking Dungeon: But God stirred up the hearts of many godly persons
(by great bribes to the Jayler) to procure daily access to them, and by their
exhortations, Gods Mercy.
they were so corroborated in the faith, that they much desired to suffer the
like things for Christ with these men, and would willingly have laid down their
necks to the Persecutors swords.

The Tyrant hearing of it, was exceedingly enraged, caused them to be kept
closer, laden with more chains, and to be put to great torments. Then did he
cause a ship to be filled with combustible matter, commanding that these holy
Martyrs should be put into it, Many burned in a ship.
and fast bound in the same, and fire to be set to the ship in the sea, that
they might be burned to death.

When they were brought out of the prison, the multitude of Gods people
accompanied them to the ship, who as innocent Lambs were led to be sacrificed,
looking upon their weighty irons, as rare Jewels and Ornaments. With
cheerfulness and alacrity they went toward the place of execution, as if they
had gone to a banquet, Admirable courage and comfort.
singing with one voice unto the Lord, as they went along the street, saying,
This is our desired day, more festival then any fe^^ivity: Behold, now is the
accepted time, behold, now is the day of salvation! when for the faith of our
Lord God, we endure death, that we may not loose the garment of obtained faith.
The people also with one voice cried; Fear not, O servants of God, neither
dread the threats of your enemies: Die for Christ, who died for us, that he
might redeem us with the price of his saving blood.

Amongst these was a pretty boy, to whom a subtle Seducer said, Why hastest
thou, my pretty boy, unto death: let them go, Tentation.
they are mad; Take my counsel, and thou shall not only have life, but great
advancement in the Kings Court: To whom the lad answered, You shall not get me
from the fellowship of these holy men, Constancy of a boy.
who bred me up, with whom I lived in the fear of God, and with whom I desire
to die; and with whom I trust, I shall obtain the glory to come. And so being
all put into the ship, they were burned together.

After the death of Hunrick, Gundabund succeeded in the Kingdom, who continuing
in the steps of his cruel predecessors, afflicted the Christians grievously by
sundry kinds of persecution, during the space of twelve years, at the end
whereof he died, and Thrasamund succeeded him, a man that excelled all his
Predecessors in magnanimity and courage.

His manner was by persuasions, flatteries, promises and rewards, to seek to
draw the Christians to his Arrian Heresy; but they which would not be
prevailed with hereby, he no way punished or molested them.

In his time there were great Wars between the Moors and Vandals, the Moors had
one Cabaon for their General, who commanded all his soldiers to use abstinence
in their diet, An excellent example of an Heathen.
and to abstain from women, and from all Injury and wrong-doing. The women he
enclosed within trenches by themselves, commanding that under pain of death no
man should have access to them. Then did he send forth a certain company of
Moors, commanding them privately to follow the Camp o^ the Vandals, and that
wheresoever the Vandals profaned any Church of the Christians, presently after
their departure, they should follow and purge the same; For (says he) if the
Christians God be a good God, then will he assist them that are devoted to him,
and punish the Blasphemers. These men in counterfeit base attire, followed the
Vandals Camp; and whereas the Vandals where ever they came, took up the
Christians Churches for their Horses and Beasts of burden, Profaness of
Heretics.
carrying themselves very insolently against God and his House: beating and
abusing the Ministers and Church Officers, making them to attend upon them as
their slaves. After their departure the Moors on the contrary, cleansed the
Churches, carried out the dung* kneeled down to, and reverenced the Ministers,
and distributed money to the poor, and thus they did continually.

Then did Cabaon prepare to give his enemies battle; and whereas the Vandals
were all Horsemen, and very well mounted, their Horses were so afrighted at
the sight of the Moors Camels, that they were presently put into disorder, and
the Moors with darts and arrows did so pelt them, that they put them to flight,
and slew many of them, whereupon Thrasamund shortly after died of grief.

Then did Ilderick the son of Hunrick succeed in the Kingdom, who was equally
mild and gentle, both to the Vandals and Christians, and one that kept very
fair correspondence with the Emperor Justinian. But Gilimer, a cunning and
ambitious man, deposed him, and usurped the Kingdom to himself. Whereupon
Justinian sent against him that brave and gallant General Billisarius, The
destruction of the persecuting Vandals.
who overcame him in several battles, took him prisoner, freed the Christians
from persecution, and subverted the Empire of the Vandals in Africa, after they
had reigned there for the space of ninety years, wherein for the most part they
had been cruel persecutors of the true Church of God.

Sin the forerunner of persecution.
Salvian, who was Bishop of Masilia, and lived at the same season, complains,
that before these brutish Vandals came into Africa, the Church of God there was
much degenerated from its ancient purity, and the power of Godliness was much
decaid; insomuch as they which lived exactly according to the Rule of Gods
Word, were hissed at as they went in the streets, as if they had been monsters:
Whereupon, says he, the passage of the Vandals into Africa, was not to be
imputed to Gods rigor, but to the Africans wickedness, etc.

Collected out of a Book written by Victor Bishop of Utica, who lived at the
same time, and was himself a Sufferer under this persecution.

Here place the fifth Figure.

THE PERSECUTION OF THE CHURCH UNDER THE PAPACY.
CHAP. XXI. The Persecutions of the Waldenses, which began Anno Christi, 1160.
WHen the darkness of Popery had overspread the Christian world, so that Kings
and Princes employed their Authority to establish the Romish Idolatry,
appointing to slaughter such as denied Transubstantiation, Adoration of the
Host, bowing the knees before it, etc. this occasioned many Christians to
detest this superstition as unknown to the Apostles and primitive Church. The
f^^st Reformers*
And first of all God raised up Berengarius, presently after the year one
thousand, who boldly and faithfully preached the Truth, and against the Romish
Errors, continuing his Ministry, till about the time that William the Conqueror
came into England, whereupon the Gospellers were called Berengarians, till
about the year 110. At which time common notice being taken of their separation
from the Church of Rome, and their disagreeing from so many of their Tenants,
they were branded with the odious name of Heretics, And twenty years after,
when they were grown into a very great multitude, they had one Peter Bruis for
their most famous Preacher, who taught long, and publicly at Toulouse, under
the protection and favor of a noble Earl, called Hildephonsus, whereupon in
those parts they were called Petro-Brusians. For Peter Bruis, Anno Christi,
1120. published their Tenants in a book called Antichrist, wherein he declared
both the ground of their Doctrine, and the causes of their separation from the
Romish Church.

Twenty years after this, they were grown into a mighty multitude about Anno
Christi, 1140. whereupon the Popes of Rome now began to lay about them for
their Extirpation: For which end he stirred up his most learned followers to
write against them; and warned Princes to take heed of them, and to banish them
out of their Territories.

Anno Christi, 1147. they had Henry of Toulouse for their most eminent
Preacher, whereupon they began to be called Henericians; and because they were
well red in the Scriptures, especially in the Epistles of St. Paul, whom by way
of eminency they called the Apostle, alleging Texts out of him, nnd would
admit of no Testimonies for the proof of Religion, but only out of Scripture,
they were called Apostolicks. And shortly after God raised up Peter Valdo a
Citizen of Lions in France, Peter Valdo.
who showed himself most courageous in opposing the Popish inventions, withal
taxing diverse other innovations which were crept into the Church of Rome, and
he was the more eagerly hearkened unto, Charity.
because he was in high esteem for his Learning and Piety, and his liberality
to the poor; for besides the nourishing of their bodies, he did also feed their
souls, by exhorting them to seek Jesus Christ, and salvation by him. The
Archbishop of Lions being informed that Valdo used thus to instruct the
people, Popish malice.
boldly taxing the vice, luxury, and pride of the Pope, and his Clergy, forbad
him the same upon pain of Excommunication, and proceeded against him as an
Heretic; Valdo replied, Christian courage.
that he could not be silent in a cause of so great importance, as the
salvation of men's souls, wherein he must obey God rather then man: Then did the
Archbishop seek to have him apprehended, but could not effect it, Valdo having
many great friends, and being generally beloved, whereby he continued (though
closely) in Lions three years.

Pope Alexander the third being informed that diverse persons in Lions
questioned his sovereign Authority over the whole Church, cursed Valdo, and his
Adherents, Pope Alexander raises persecution.
commanding the Archbishop to proceed against them by Ecclesiastical censures
to their utter extirpation; whereupon they were wholly chased out of Lions.
Valdo and his followers were called Waldenses, which afterward spread
themselves into diverse Countries and Companies.

The opinions of these Waldenses for which they were so declaimed against, and
cruelty persecuted by the Romanists, were these.

1. That holy oil is not to be mingled in Baptism.

2. That all such prayers are superstitious and vain which are made over the
oil, salt, wax, incense, boughs of Olives and Palms, Ecclesiastical garments,
calices, Churchyards, and such like things.

3. That time is spent in vain in Ecclesiastical singings, and saying the
Canonical hours.

4. That flesh and eggs may be eaten in Lent, and that there is no merit in
abstinence at such times.

5. That when necessity requires, all sorts of persons may marry, Ministers as
well as others.

6. That auricular confession is not necessary.

7. That Confirmation is not a Sacrament.

8. That Obedience is not to be performed to the Pope.

9. That Ministers should live upon Tithes and Offerings.

10. That there is no difference between a Bishop and a Minister.

11. That it is not the dignity, but deserts of a Presbyter that makes him a
better man.

12. That they administer the Sacrament without the accustomed form of the
Roman Church.

13. They say that Images are to be taken out of Churches, and that to adore
them was Idolatry.

14. They contemned the Popes indulgences, and say, that they were of no virtue.

15. They refused to take any oath whereby they should be enforced to accuse
themselves, or their friends.

16. They maintained their Ministers out of their own purses, thinking it
unreasonable that such should be diverted from their studies, whilst they were
forced to get their livings with their own hands.

17. They held that the Miracles done in the Church of Rome, were false
Miracles.

18. That the Religion of the Friar Mendicants was invented by the Devil.

19. That the Pope of Rome was not to be obeyed.

20. That whoredom and stews were not to be permitted under pretense of
avoiding Adultery and Rapes.

21. That there is no Purgatory wherein the souls of the deceased are to be
purged before they be admitted into heaven.

22. That a Presbyter, falling into scandalous sin, ought to be suspended from
his office till he had sufficiently testified his Repentance.

23. That the Saints deceased are not to be worshipped, and prayed unto.

24. That it matters not for the place of their burial, whether it were holy or
no.

25. They admitted no extreme unction amongst the Sacraments of the Church.

26. They say, that Masses, Indulgences, and prayers do not profit the dead.

27. They admitted no prayers, but such as did correspond with the Lords
prayer, which they made the rule of all their Prayers.

28. Lastly, Though their adversaries charged them with holding, that every
layman might freely preach to the people, yet they had Bishops, and orders
amongst themselves; as the Order of Bulgarie, the order of Druguria,; and they
who were their Ministers were ordained thereunto, though they were not of the
Romish Institution, as Nicolus Viguierius, and others report of them.

God^ Providence. Persecution spreads the Gospel. King of France persecutes
them.
Valdo himself went into Dauphiney, conversing in the mountains of the same
Province with certain rude persons, yet capable of receiving his belief: his
Disciples also spread into Picardy, whence they were called Picards: against
whom afterward K. Philip (enforced by the Ecclesiastical persons) took arms,
and overthrew three hundred gentlemen's houses that followed their part, and
destroyed some walled Towns, pursuing them into Flanders, whether they fled,
and causing many of them there to be burnt to death.

This persecution caused many of them to fly into Germany, and Alsatia, where
they spread their Doctrine; and shortly after the Bishops of Mayence and
Strasburg, raised up a great persecution against them, causing five and thirty
Burgesses of Mayence to be burnt in one fire, and eighteen in another* who with
great constancy suffered death.

At Strasburg eighty were burnt, at the instance of the Bishop; yet multitudes
of people received such edification by the exhortations, constancy, and
patience of the Martyrs, that Anno 1315. in the County of Passau, and about
Bohemia, there were above eighty thousand persons that made profession of the
same faith. Many burnt.


Anno Christi 1160. some of them came into England, and at Oxford were punished
in the most barbarous and cruel manner as ever were any Christians for
Religion-sake before the time, The spreading of the Gospel.
as you may see in my English Martyrologie. And three years after in the
Council of Turon, or Towers in France: viz. 1163. Pope Alexander the third,
made a decree, that these Gospellers, and all their favorers should be
excommunicated, and that none should sell them any thing, or buy any thing of
them, according as it was fore-prophesied, Rev. 13.17.

But notwithstanding all these devises they had goodly Churches in Bulgary,
Croatia, Dalmatia, and Hungary. Malicious slanders.
The Popish Monks to make them odious, and to have the better occasion to
persecute them, raised up many foul slanders of them, as they were sorcerers,
buggerers, etc. that they assembled themselves in the night time, and that the
Pastors commanded the lights to be put out, saying, Qui potest capere, capiat,
catch who catch can, whereupon they committed abominable incest, the son with
the mother, the brother with the sister, the father with his daughter,
Vindication.
etc. they charged them also with many foul and false opinions: from which
accusations they by a public Apology and vindication cleared themselves, which
they published both in French and their own language.

Rainerus the Monk says of them, that amongst all those which have risen up
against the Church of Rome, the Waldenses were the most dangerous, in regard of
their long continuance, for some say, that it has continued from the time of
Pope Silvester; and some say, from the Apostles time; and because this Sect
(says he) is more general, and there is scarce any Country in which it has
not taken footing: and because it has a great appearance of piety, for they
carry themselves uprightly before men, and believe rightly touching God in all
things, holding all the Articles of the Creed, only they hate and revile the
Church of Rome, The great enc^ease of the Waldenses.
and therein (says he) they are easily believed of the people.

Cesarius says, that this Heresy so increased, that in a short time it
infected usque ad mill civitates, a thousand Cities. Parsons says, that they
had an Army of seventy thousand men to fight for them; yea, they were so spread
in Germany, that they could travel from Collen to Milan in Italy, and every
night lodge with Hosts of their own profession.

Hereupon the Pope has always used all his art for their utter extirpation, by
his Thunderbolts, Curses, Canons, Constitutions, Decrees, and whatsoever else
might make them odious to Kings, Princes, and people, Popish rage and malice.
giving them over to Satan, interdicting them all Communion and society with
others, making them incapable of any charges, honors, profits, to inherit
lands, to make wills to be buried in Churchyards, yea, confiscating their
goods, dis-inheriting their heirs, and where they could apprehend any of them,
they condemned them to be delivered to the secular power, their houses to be
razed, their lands and goods to be confiscated, commanding Kings, Princes,
Magistrates, Consuls, and people, to make an exact inquisition, to shut the
City-gates, to ring the Toll-bell, to arm themselves, to apprehend, kill, or
use any other violence to them, giving to their Accusers a third part of their
Estates, condemning all favorers of them to the same punishment.

Anno Christ, 1163. came some of these godly persons to Collen in Germany out
of the parts of Flanders, where they secretly remained for a time in a barn
near the City: Five burnt at Collen.
But the diligence of the Popish Clergy found them out by their not coming to
their Church, and so caused, them, to be apprehended, and brought before them;
and after examination because they constantly adhered to the truth, and would
by no means be brought to recant the same, they condemned them, and delivered
them to the secular power: who carrying them out of the City, (being four men,
and one young woman) they first bound the four men to a stake, and set fire to
them: The people much pitied the young woman, and would fain have saved her,
hoping that the burning of her companions would have wrought her to a
recantation; but she perceiving their drift, strugled out of the hands of those
that held her, and voluntarily leaped into the fire, whereby she was burned
with them. Godfridus Monachus.

A bloody Edict against the Waldenses.
Anno Christi, 1194. Aldephonsus King of Arragon (probably by the instigation
of Pope Celestine, and misinformation of his Clergy) published this evil Edict
against them.

Aldephonsus by the grace of God King of Arragon, etc. to all Archbishops,
Bishops, and the rest of the Prelates of the Church in his Kingdom, to Earls,
Vicounts, Knights, and all the people of his Kingdom, and to all that are in
Authority, health, etc. Because God would have us to be over his people, it is
a worthy and just thing that we take continual care as far as in us lies of the
salvation, and defense of them: Wherefore being imitators of our Predecessors,
and in obedience to the Canons, we judge that all Heretics cast out of the
sight of God and of all Catholics, are to be condemned, and persecuted every
where, namely the Waldenses, or poor men of Lions, whereof there is no number,
who being cursed by his holy Church: We also command to depart, and fly from
all our Kingdoms, and places within our power, as enemies to the Cross of
Christ, our selves, and this Kingdom. Therefore from this day forward shall
presume to receive the foresaid Waldenses into their houses, or to hear their
doleful preaching, or to give them meat, or any other relief, let him know,
that he has incurred the indignation of God, and of us, and that he shall be
punished as a Traitor, and all his goods shall be confiscated without remedy or
appeal. And this our Edict we command to be published upon Sundays by Bishops,
and all Rectors of Churches, etc. through all our Dominions. And we command
that the foresaid punishments be inflicted upon all Transgressors of it by our
Bailyffs, Justices, etc. And if any of the foresaid naughty, people whether
noble, or ignoble, shall presume to stay three days after the publication
hereof, and not have their removal, we will, and command all men to bring upon
them all mischief, disgrace, and agrievance (except death, or cutting off their
members) which shall be grateful and acceptable to us, neither shall they fear
any punishment for the same, etc. But this same Aldephonsus that made this
cruel Edict by the just retribution of God, the very next year lost part of his
Kingdom to the Moors, and his son having also fifty thousand of his men slain
in one battle. Hoveden.

The Popelings exercising such cruelty against the Gospellers, They defend
themselves by Arms.
they began to defend themselves by arms, repelling force with force: and when,
being overpowred by multitude, they could defend themselves no longer, they
left their places, and became soldiers abroad, and many of them became very
helpful to our King Henry the second in his Wars, when he was molested about
Archbishop Beckets death: Also our King Richard the first at his return out of
the Holy land, (as they called it) made good use of them (who though they were
cursed by the Pope, yet were they blessed by God) for the recovery of his
right, and for the defense of his people.

Valdo notwithstanding all the curses of the Pope, continued to publish, that
the Pope was Antichrist, the Mass an abomination, Valdo's Zeal and Courage.
the Host an Idol, and Purgatory a fable: whereupon Pope Innocent the third,
Anno, 1198, seeing that the other remedies were not sufficient to suppress
these Heretics, as he called them, authorized certain Monks Inquisitors, who
by process should apprehend and deliver them to the secular power, by a far
shorter, but much more cruel way then was used formerly; for by this means the
people were delivered by thousands into the Magistrates hands, and by them to
the Executioners, whereby in a few years all Christendom was moved with
compassion, to see all those burnt and hanged, that did trust only in Christ
for salvation.

The Pope seeing that this suppressed not, but rather increased the number of
his enemies, Sang^i^ Martyrum, semen Ecclesia.
sent certain Bishops and Monks to preach in those places of the Waldenses, but
their preaching converted not any of them from their former opinions.

Amongst those Monks was Dominick, who was a zealous persecutor of these Saints
of God both in word and deed, Dominicans instituted.
who seeing himself to be in Authority* instituted an Order of begging Monks,
called after his name Dominicans, which order was confirmed by the Pope, for
their zealous assisting of him against the Waldenses, and this Dominick
labored in the inquisition with such contentment to the Popes, that from that
time forward the Monks of his order have always been employed in the
inquisition.

The power of these Inquisitors was without limitation, they could assemble the
people by the sound of a bell when they pleased, proceed against the Bishops
themselves, Inquisitors begun, An. Chri. 1176^
they could imprison and release without control: Any accusation was
sufficient with them: A sorcerer* a whore was a sufficient witness in the case
of pretended Heresy: It mattered not who accused, or whether by word of mouth,
or ticket thrown in before the Inquisitors: for process was thereby framed
without party, Injustice.
without witness, or without other Law, then the pleasure of the Inquisitors.

To be rich was a crime near to Heresy, and he that had any thing to lose, was
in the way to be undone, either as an Heretic, or as a favourer of them: yea,
bare suspicion stopped the mouths of parents, kinsfolk, and friends, that they
durst not intercede each for other. If any did but convey a cup of cold water,
Prodigious cruelty.
or a pad of straw to the poor Saints that lay in stinking dungeons, he was
condemned as a favourer of the Heretics, and brought to the same or worse
extremities.

No Advocate durst undertake the defense of his nearest kinsman, or friends: no
Notary durst receive any Act in his favor; yea, death it self made not an end
of their punishment, for sometimes they passed sentence against the bones of
the dead, to dis-inter and burn them, it may be thirty years after the death of
the party accused.

Such as were heirs had nothing certain, for if their fathers or kindred were
accused they durst not undertake the defense of their own right, possess their
own inheritance, without the crime or suspicion of Heresy. The greatest and
richest amongst the people were constrained even to adore these Monks
Inquisitors, and to give them great sums for the building of their Convents and
houses, for fear to be accused of Heresy.

And the better to keep the people in aw, these Inquisitors would sometimes
lead in Triumph their prisoners in their processions, enjoining some of them to
whip themselves, others to go in their shirts barefoot and bare-headed, having
a With about their necks; and a torch in their hands for the greater terror to
the beholders, seeing persons of all estates and sexes in so miserable a
condition.

Some of these accused persons were sent into the holy Land, or enrolled for
some other expedition against the Turks and Infidels, where they were to serve
for a certain time at their own charge: in the mean time these Fathers
Inquisitors took possession of their houses and goods, and when they returned
home, they must not so much as enquire whether these Monks had in their absence
lain with their wives, lest they would be condemned as back-sliders, and
unworthy of favor.

Anno Christi, 1201. A gallant Knight that was one of these Waldenses, called
Enraudus, whom Henry, Earl of Nivers had made Gonour of his land, A Knight
burned.
was accused of Heresy, and brought before the Popes Legate, who called a
Common Council at Paris against him, consisting of the Archbishop, Bishops,
and Ministers of Paris, who after examination of witnesses, condemned him for
an Heretic, and so delivered him to the secular power, by whom he was burned
in the flames. Chron. Roll. Altissiodorensis.

In Octo. Anno Christi, 1207. in the Town of Mont-royal near Carcasson in the
Earldom of Toulouse, A Disputation between the Popelings and the Waldenses.
there was held a famous disputation between Didacus Bishop of Oxon, a
Spaniard: Friar Dominick; Peter of the New Castle, the Popes Legate, and Raph
his Colleague on the one party, and Arnold Hot, Pastor of the Albingenses, with
some other of his fellow laborers on the other party: The Arbitrators were two
noble men, viz, Bernard de villa nova, and Pernail of Arras; and two Plebians,
viz. Raimond Godius, and Arnold Riberia, The Questions disputed upon were
these: First, that the Church of Rome is not the Spouse of Christ, nor an holy
Church, but an impure one, and instructed by the Doctrine of Satan. Secondly,
That their Ecclesiastical Polity is not good, nor holy, nor established by
Jesus Christ. Thirdly, That the Mass, as it is celebrated therein, was not
instituted by Christ, or his Apostles. The Bishop undertook to prove the
contrary: but after three days disputation, he desired fifteen days to commit
his Arguments to writing; and Arnold Hot required eight days to put in his
Answer.

At the day appointed the Bishop brought in a very long writing; and Hot
desired to answer by word of mouth, entreating his Auditors that he might not
seem troublesome to them, if he were long in answering so long a discourse; and
it was granted that he should be heard with patience without interruption, and
so he discoursed for diverse hours four days together, to the great admiration
of all that heard him, and so ready was he therein, that all the Bishops,
Abbats, Monks, and Priests, wished themselves elsewhere: For he framed his
answer to each point in order, as it was set down in the writing, and that with
such plainness and perspicuity, that he gave all that were present to
understand, that this Bishop, though he had written much, yet had he concluded
nothing that might truly turn to the advantage of the Church of Rome against
his Assertions: Then did Arnold request, that forasmuch as the Bishops, and
himself in the beginning of the conference, were bound to prove whatsoever they
affirmed by the Word of God only, it might now be imposed upon the Bishops, and
Priests to make good their Mass as they sing it, part by part, to have been
instituted by the son of God, and so used by the Apostles, etc. But the Bishops
were not able to prove that the Mass, or any part of it was so ordained or
used, whereupon they were much discontented, and ashamed. Arnold proceeded to
prove that it was not instituted by Christ or his Apostles. The Popelings
bafled.
For (said he) if the Mass were the holy Supper instituted by our Savior,
there would remain after the consecration, that which was in the supper of our
Lord, viz. Bread: But in the Mass there is no bread; For by transubstantiation
the bread is vanished, therefore the Mass is not the holy Supper of the Lord:
etc. The Bishops, Legates, Monks, and Priests having nothing to answer to these
things, retired themselves: not being willing to here any more: and fearing
least these Gospellers should work such an impression on the hearts of those
that were present, as might shake their belief touching the Mass, they
dessolved the Assembly. Nich Vignerius.

Between the years 1176. which was the time when this Inquisition was first
erected, to the year 1228. there was so great a havoc made of poor Christians,
that the Archbishops of Aix, Arles, and Narbonne, being assembled at the
request of the said Inquisitors, to confer with them about diverse
difficulties in the execution of their offices, Horrible cruelty.
had compassion of the great number that were accused and cast into prison,
saying, We hear that you have apprehended such a multitude of the Waldenses,
that it is not only impossible to defray the charge of their food, but to
provide lime and stone to build prisons for them, we therefore advise you to
forbear this rigor till the Pope be advertised, and direct what he will have
done in this case, etc. Yet notwithstanding all this cruelty, there was in the
year 1260. according to the report of George Morrel in his memorials, The
number of the Waldenses.
p. 54. above eight hundred thousand persons that made profession of the faith
of the Waldenses.

Besides the Churches that they had in Valentinois, where their faith was
propagated from the father to the son, their religion spread also beyond the
Alps into the valley of Pragela, within the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of
Turin, from whence were peopled the Waldensian Valleys of Piedmont, La Perouse,
S. Martain, Angrogne, etc. This valley of Pargela was one of the safest
retiring places that the Waldenses had, being environed on all sides with
mountains almost inaccessible, into the caves whereof they retired themselves
in the times of persecution: and though they were weakened on all sides,
environed with enemies, and in danger of being apprehended if they looked but
forth of their doors; yet was there never any wordly respect that had power to
alter their holy resolution from the father to the son, Their godly lives.
to serve God, taking his Word for the rule of their faith, and his Law for the
rule of their obedience: yea, no sooner were the infants weaned from their
mothers breasts, but their parents took a singular delight to instruct them in
the Christian faith.

Good Pastors.
There Pastors also did not only preach to them on the Sabbath days, but went
in the week days to instruct them in the villages and hamlets, not sparing
themselves for the roughness of the rocks, the coldness of the air, and the
cragginesse of the country, where they were fain to climb up high mountains to
visit their flocks.

There was also holy Discipline exercised amongst them: The people prayed with
fervency at night when they went to their rest, and in the morning before the
went about their labor: They had Schools wherein their children were taught
and nurtured.

B^t whilst they thus busily sought the advancement of Gods glory and their
own salvation, Persecution raised.
the devil raised up a persecution against them. Anno 1380. by a Monk
Inquisitor, called Francis Boralli, who had a commission to enquire after the
Waldenses in Aix, Arles, Ambrun, Viene, Geneva, Aubone, Savoy, the Venetian
County, the Principality of Orange, the City of Avignion, etc. which commission
he received from Pope Clement the seventh.

This Monk cited to appear before him at Ambrun, all the Inhabitants of
Frassiniere, Argentire, and of the valley Pute upon pain of excommunication:
but they appeared not, whereupon they were condemned of contumacy, and
excommunicated: Popish cruelty*
and for the space of thirteen years, as he caught any of them, he delivered
them up to the secular power to be burnt at Grenoble, the number of whom was an
hundred and fifty men, diverse women, with many of their sons and daughters;
besides about eighty persons of Argentire.

The Inquisitors also adjudged to themselves two par^s of all their goods* and
the third part to the temporal powers: they forbad all their bordering
neighbors also to assist, receive, visit, or defend them or to converse with
them in any sort upon pain of being attainted, and punished as favorers of
Heretics, etc.

The Waldenses of the valley of Pragela, In Pragela.
Anno 1400. were assaulted by their enemies on the side of Susa in Piedmont:
but most of their assaults proved in vain, because these Waldenses retired into
the high mountains, hiding themselves in the caves and hollow places thereof,
from whence they much endamaged those that came to assail them. Their enemies
seeing this, came upon them in the depth of winter, when those poor people never
suspected it, all the mountains being covered over with snow: Popish malice.
and thereupon they retired into the highest mountain of all the Alps, together
with their wives and children, the mothers carrying some in their cradles, and
leading others by the hand: yet the enemy followed them till night, and slew
many before they could recover the mountain: and they which were so slain had
the better bargain: for night coming on, these poor people being in the snow,
without any means to make a fire for their infants, many of them were
benumbed, Infants starved to death.
and in the morning above eighty of them were frozen to death in their cradles,
and most of their mothers died also, and divrese others were giving up the last
gasp: The enemies lay all night in these peoples houses, which they ransacked
and pillaged, and so returned to Susa, but by the way, meeting with a poor
Waldensian woman, Popish cruelty.
they hanged her upon a tree, and so departed.

The Waldensis of the valley of Frassiniere, Frassiniere*
were greatly persecuted by the Archbishop of Ambrun, Anno 1460. who made a
Monk called John Vayleti his Commissioner against them, which Monk proceeded
with such diligence and violence, that scarce any person could escape his
hands, but that he was either apprehended for an Heretic, Popish cruelty.
or a favourer of them, whereby many Papists suffered amongst the rest, which
caused them to petition King Lewis the eleventh of France, by his authority to
stay the course of that persecution: The King forbids the persecution.
and thereupon the King wrote his Letter to the Governor of Dauphine,
signifying, that whereas the Inquisitors had daily sent forth their process
against many poor people in those parts without reasonable cause, putting some
to the rack, and condemning them for matters whereof they were never guilty,
and which they could not prove by any witness: and of others they had exacted
great sums of money, and diverse ways had unjustly vexed, and molested them: he
therefore decreed that for the time to come all such process should be void,
and of none effect, nor any wrong done to them in body, goods, or good name,
except there were any that obstinately maintained and affirmed any thing
against the holy Catholic Faith.

Yet the Archbishop continues it.
But the Archbishop was so far from ceasing the persecution upon this Edict,
that he grew more violent by reason of the last clause, pretending that he did
not any thing contrary to the Kings precept, seeing they which were cited,
appeared not to justify themselves, etc. He also suborned many Priests, which
were his own Officers, to depose, that all they which had petitioned the King
were Waldensis: Popish malice. Slanders.
He also hired one John Pelegrin to accuse them for assembling themselves in
dark places to commit whoredom, etc. and then he sent to the Court to justify
himself from the complaint made to the King against him, that he had persecuted
the Waldenses rather out of covteousness to get their goods, then out of zeal
to the Catholic Faith: but this single witness prevailed but little, seeing
there were many other who deposed, that they had never seen any such villainy
amongst the Waldenses, nor any the least appearance of the same.

Yet did not the Archbishop cease to prosecute them to the uttermost of his
power, so that he caused most of them to fly away, only one James Pateneri
stood to it, averring before the Court that he was unjustly vexed, Ja Pateneri
contrary to the Kings Letters, demanding a copy of the proceedings, that he
might right himself by Law: ^hereupon the Archbishop left him, and fell upon
those that wanted the like courage, citing the Consuls of Frassiniere to answer
for themselves, and all the inhabitants of their valley: But they refused,
saying, that they had nothing to say before the Archbishop, seeing their cause
was now depending before the King and his Council, The Archbishops cruelty.
protesting against the Archbishops power, and demanding a copy of the Kings
Letter: But the Archbishop, notwithstanding this protestation, sent them to the
fire, without any other indictment.

Yet the Lord left not this cruelty long unrevenged, for shortly after the
Archbishop died by the stroke of Gods justice, Gods judgment on persecutors.
and so ended his Persecution* Anno Christi 1487.

One villainy of the Inquisitor Valeti may not be forgoten, which was this: When
he examined any of the Waldenses, Whether he believed that the bread in the
Sacrament, after the consecration, was changed into the real and natural body
of Christ which hung upon the cross? If the Waldenses answered, No; he set
down his answer thus, That he believed not in God. When he asked, Whether we
ought not to pray to Saints? Popish lies.
If they answred, No; he set down, That the railed upon, and spoke evil of the
Saints. When he enquired, Whether we ought not to pray to the Virgin Mary in
our necessities? If they answered No; he set down, That they spoke blasphemy
against the Virgin Mary, etc. Gods providence.
And by Gods providence these Records were kept in the Archbishop of Ambruns
house, till the City and their Records fell into the hands of the Protestants
an hundred years after, and so God brought all their knavery to light.

Anno 1488. Pope Innocent the eight sent Albert de capitaneis, Archdeacon of
Cremona against these Waldenses, who craved aid of the Kings Lieutenant of
Dauphine, against them. This Lieutenant for his service levied troops of men,
and at the Archdeacons request, Popish subtilty
led them against the Waldenses in the valley of Loyse, and to color his
proceedings with a pretense of justice, he took a Counselor of the Court
along with him. But when they came to the valley, they found no inhabitants,
for they were all retired into their Caves in the high mountains, having
carried their little children, and all their provision of food with them. Then
did this cruel Lieutenant cause much wood to be laid to the mouths of the
caves, and set it on fire, Barbarous cruelty..
so that some were choked with smoke, others burnt with the fire, others cast
themselves headlong from the rocks, and were broken in pieces; and if any
stirred out, they were presently slain by the soldiers.

In this Persecution, A girevous persecution.
there were found within the Caves four hundred infants stif^ed in their
cradles, or in the arms of their dead mothers: and in all, there perished above
three thousand men and women at that time, so that there were no inhabitants
left in all that valley: And to prevent the coming of any more of them thither,
the Lieutenant gave all their goods and possessions to whom he pleased.

Then did he march against the Waldenses of Pragela, and Frassaniere, but they,
providing for their own safety, attended him at the passages and narrow straits
of their valleys, The Lieutenant repulsed.
so that he was forced to retire.

After a while Albert de Capitaneis, being called to another place, he
substituted a Franciscan named Francis Ploieri, who Anno 1489. began anew to
inform against the Waldenses of Fressaniere, citing them to appear before him
at Ambrun, and for non-appearing, he excommunicated them, and condemned them
for Heretics, to be delivered to the secular power, and there goods to be
confiscated; and in this judgment, their assisted one Ponce, a certain
Counselor of Dauphine. These men afterward caught two of their Pastors [
Francis Gerondin, and Peter James] who being asked why the Waldenses increased
so fast, and spread so far; they answered, Plain dealing.
Because the Popish Priests live so dissolutly, and because the Cardinals are
so covetous, proud and luxurious, it being commonly known that there is neither
Pope, Popish uncleanness.
Cardinal, nor Bishop, but keeps his whores, and few or none but had their
youths for Sodomy besides; And therefore it is easy for the Waldensian Pastors
to persuade the people, that their religion could not be good, whose fruits
were so bad, etc

This Persecution grew exceeding hot, the Inquisitor and Councellor sending as
many as they could catch to the fire without admitting any appeal: and if any
interceded for them, though the father for the child, or the child for the
father, he was presently committed to prison, In Dauphine.
and indicted as a favourer of Heretics.

Anno 1594. Anthoni Fabri, and Christopher de Salience had Comissions sent them
from the Pope, The weakness of a woman.
to commence suit against the Waldenses in Dauphine, who apprehending the widow
of one Peter Berand, they imprisoned, and often examined her, and thereby drew
from her whatever she knew of the Assemblies of the Waldenses, of the persons
that frequented them, and of the places and times of their meeting, which
afterward brought great trouble to the said Churches of Christ, and of gain to
the Inquisitors.

King Lewis the twelfth succeeding King Francis, Anno 1598. the inhabitants of
Frassaniere petitioned him to take some order for the restitution of their
goods, which by the Inquisitors were detained from them. The King referred it
to his Chancellor, who procured a Commissary from the Poppe, and Commissioner
from the King, to be sent down to examine the business; These accordingly,
having examined diverse witnesses against the Waldenses, The innocence of the
Waldenses.
and finding their innocence, did at last absolve them; the Kings Commissioner
publickely professing, that he desired to be but as good a Christian as the
worst of those of Frassaniere were: and returning to the King, they made report
to him of that which they had done: The King thereupon ordered that the goods
of the Waldenses should be restored*

When the Kings order came to Ambrun, it was the opinion of most men, that
seeing most of these goods were in the possession of the Archbishop, that
therefore he should give a good example in beginning to restore them, but the
Archbishop answered, that the goods which he held were annexed to his
Archbishopric, Popish subtilty and injustice.
and incorporated to his Church and, therefore it was out of the Kings
jurisdiction, and he did not believe that the King would meddle therein: Yet
being willing to please the King, he proffered to restore them their Vineyards,
provided that the Lords of Dauphine would restore the goods which they had; but
there was not one that would restore what they had so unjustly gotten, so that
the poor people where wholly frustrated of their expectation.

Then did the summon the Archbishop and those refusers before the King, but
these great ones having more friends and favor at Court, then the poor people
had, their excuse was admitted, which was, that they could not restore the
goods, before the Pope had absolved those of Frassaniere from the sentence of
excommunication. Anno 1560. The President of Provence made a speech to the
assembly of Estates to root out these Waldenses: Whereupon they raised an Army
for the effecting of it; but as soon as the men were in Arms, it pleased God, A
special providence.
by the death of King Francis, to put an end to that design, whereby the
Waldensian Churches in Dauphine enjoyed peace, and were well furnished with
godly Pastors, who held them in the exercise of religion, though they were in
continual danger of being persecuted to the death for the same.

The Waldenses in Dauphine, many years before being multiplied, so that the
country could not feed them, dispersed themselves abroad into diverse parts,
whereof some went into Piedmont, In Piedmont.
who lived in great love with those of Da^phine, and though they were always
oppressed with troubles, yet with hearty love and charity, they ever-succoured
one another, Love.
not sparing their lives and goods for their mutual conservation.

The first Persecution in Piedmont were occasioned by the Priests, who
complained to the Archbishop of Turin, Popish malice.
that these people lived not according to the manner and belief of the Church
of Rome; that they offered not for the dead, cared not for Masses, Absolutions,
or to get any of theirs out of the pains of Purgatory, etc. Hereupon the
Archbishop persecuted them, complaining of them to their Princes to make them
odious: But the Prince enquiring of their neighbors, heard that they were of a
good conversation, fearing God, without deceit or malice, loving plain dealing,
always ready to serve their Prince with alacrity, etc. He therefore purposed
not to molest them: But the Priests and Monks gaining nothing by their belief,
charged them with an infinite number of calumnies, Slanders.
and ever and anon catching one or other of them, they delivered them to the
Inquisitors, and the Inquisitors to the executioners, Persecution in Piedmont.
so that there was scarce a Town or City in Piedmont, wherein some of them had
not been put to death.

At Turin one of them had his bowels torn out of his belly, Cruelty.
and put into a basin before his face, and then was he cruelly martyred,

At Revel in the Marquisat of Saluces, one Catelin Girard being on the block
whereon he should be burnt, Cat. Girard.
requested his Executioner to give him two stones, which he refused to do,
fearing least he would throw them at some body, but he protesting the contrary,
at last they gave him two stones, which he held in his hands, and said, When I
shall have eaten these stones, then shall you see an end of our Religion, for
which you now put me to death, and so he threw them on the ground, and died
cheerfully.

Thus they burnt many of them in the fire, till Anno 1488. and then they
resolved to assault them by open force, because they saw that otherwise they
should never be able to extirpate them: besides, Popish malice.
their constant sufferings converted many to the faith. Hereupon they levied an
Army of eighteen thousand men, besides many inhabitants of Piedmont, who ran to
the pillage from all parts. These marched all at once to Angrogne, L^cerne, La
Perouse, etc. They raised also forces in Dauphine, where with they overran the
Valley of Pragela, so that they being put to defend themselves, could not
assist their friends in Piedmont. But the enemy by this division of his forces,
being weakened, was every where beaten, especially in the Valley of Angrogne,
where the VValdensians having been informed of the levies of their enemies
against them, prepared themselves to receive and resist them, keeping the
strait passages, where few men might defend themselves against many.

They defended themselves with long Targets of wood, whereby they covered
themselves from the hurt of their enemies arrows. Whilst they were thus
bickering with their enemies, the women and children upon their knees cried
out, O God help us. The enemies made themselves merry with this fight, Prayer.
and amongst them, one Capt. Saquet, who as he was imitating the woman,
Profaneness. A just judgment.
was slain, and tumbled down into a very deep valley.

Another Captain, crying out to the women in derision, was killed with the shot
of an arrow in the throat. Hereupon the soldiers betook themselves all to
their heels, and the greatest part slew themselves, by tumbling down from the
rocks.

Another providence of God was this, that the enemies approaching to the
stongest entrance by nature, might their have fortified themselves, A specall
providence.
and so made themselves masters of that Valley: But God sent so thick a cloud,
and dark a fog, that they could scarce see one another, whereby they wanted
opportunity to discover their advantage, and therefore departed: which the
Waldensis seeing, courageously pursued them, Gods judgment on persecutors
and by that means the enemy being dispersed, and not seeing which ways they
went, the greatest part fell headlong down the mountains, quitting their arms
and booty which they had gotten at their first entrance into the Valley, by
which means the Waldenses recovered it again,

Then it pleased God to move the Princes heart (which was Philip the seventh,
Duke of Savoy; and Lord of Piedmont) with pity toward these poor people, Gods
mercy.
saying, That he would not have that people which had been always true,
faithful and obedient to him, to be unjustly destroyed by Arms; being content
that twelve of the Principal should come to him to Pignerol to crave pardon
for all the rest, for taking arms in their own defense, without his authority:
These he entertained lovingly, forgiving all that was past, during the war.
And having been informed that all their children were born with black throats,
Slanders.
with four rows of teeth, and all hairy, he caused some of them to be brought
to him, and seeing them fair and perfect creatures, he was much displeased with
himself for believing so easily the reports which were brought to him against
them, giving command that none should hereafter molest them, but that they
should enjoy all the privileges which they rest of his subjects in Piedmont
did.

Notwithstanding which, the Monks Inquisitors daily sent out process against
them, lay in wait for them, and as they could aprehend any of them, delievered
them over to the secular power. This Persecution lasted to Anno. 1532. at which
time the Waldenses ordered that there exercises of religion should be performed
no more in covert, as formerly they had been, but in public, that every one
might know them, Zeole and courageth.
and that their Pastors should preach the Gospel openly, not fearing any
persecution that might happen unto them.

The prince being advertised hereof, was highly offended with them, and
thereupon caused one of his Commanders to have with his Troops into the said
Valleys, Persecution renewed.
which was performed with such diligence, that he was entered with five hundred
horse and Foot, before they were aware, ransacking, plundering and wasting all
before them. Then did the Waldenses leave their ploughs, putting themselves
into passes, and with their slings charged their enemies with such multitudes
of stones, that they were constraned to fly, and to abandon their prey, many
remaining dead upon the ground.

This news was presently carried to the Prince, and withal he was told, that
these people were not to be subdued with Arms, they knowing bettter the straits
of their Country, then the assailants, and that the skin of one of the
Waldenses would cost him the lives of a dozen of his other subjects: where upon
he used Arms no more against them, but as any of them was caught in Piedmont,
he put them to death, if they changed not their belief.

Notwithstanding with rigor, they persisted in their resolution, Constancy.
and that things might be carried on in the better order, they assembled out of
all their Valleys to Angrogne, Anno 1535. viz. the heads of all their families,
with their Pastors, where they heard that their brethren of Provence, and
Dauphine had sent two of their Pastors, George Morrell, and Peter Masson into
Germany, to confere with Oecolampadius Bucer, and others, about their relief,
which they had held from father to son, time out of mind. Where also the
Germane Divines acknowledged that God had been very merciful and gracious to
them, in preserving them undefiled, The antiquity of the Faith.
in the midst of so many superstitions which had defiled all Christendom under
the tyranny of Antichrist; encouraging and exhorting them not to bury those
Talents which God had given them: only they blamed them for delaying so long
to make a public profession of their adhering to the Gospel* and causing it to
be preached publicly, leaving the success to God, etc. Then were the Letters
of Oecolampadius and Bucer, which they sent to them, openly read, together with
the Propositions and Articles of Religion which they had agreed upon, which
were all approved, signed and sworn to by all the assistants with one consent,
to perform, Unity.
observe, believe and retain amongst them inviolably, as being conformable to
the Doctrine which they had been taught from their forefathers for many
hundred years, and all taken out of the Word of god.

When this Agreement came abroad to the ears of the Priests, they were much
astonished, despairing to see these people reclaimed and brought back to the
Church of Rome; whereupon they retired from amongst them without speaking a
word.

The Waldenses, because they had only the New Testament and some books of the
old, amongst them in the Waldensian Tongue, Zeal.
resolved speedily to send the whole Bible to the Press, all their books
hitherto being but Manuscripts, and those but a few. They sent therefore some
to Newcastle in Suitzerland, where they gave 1500. Crowns in gold to a Printer,
who brought to light the first Impression of the French Bible that was seen in
France. The first French Bibles printed.
They sent also to Geneva to make a large supply of books fit for the
instruction of the people; but their messenger, as he passed over the hill de
Gap, was apprehended for a spy by the Lord of Champelion, and as soon as they
knew him to be a Waldensian, they sent him to Grenople, where he was first
imprisoned; One of them drowned.
and then in the night drowned in the river, least he should speak of his
belief before the people.

Shortly after there happened wars between King Francis the first, and the
Princes of Piedmont, which, through Gods grace, turned to the great peace and
quiet of these poor people; A special providence.
which peace continued till Pope Paul the third solicited the Parliament of
Turin to persecute them as pernicious Heretics: Whereupon the Parliament
caused a great number of them to be burnt at Turin. The Pope stirs up
persecution.
Then these Waldenses petitioned the King that they might not be persecuted for
their Religion, in which they and their Ancestors had lived for many hundred
years. But the King rejected their petition, commanding them to live according
to the Laws of the Roman Church, upon pain of being punished as Heretics:
adding, that he did not burn the Lutherans through his whole Kingdom of France,
to let them amongst the Alps escape.

Hereupon the Parliament of Turin commanded them presently to send away all
their Ministers, and receive the Priests to sing Mass. etc. Courage.
To which they answered, that they could not receive any such commandment, it
being contrary to Gods Word, whom they would rather obey then men. A special
providence.
But through Gods mercy, the King had other imploiments elsewhere; whereby they
wanted leisure to prosecute these servants of Christ, and therefore they only
proceeded by the Inquisition, receiving such as the Monks condemned to the fire.

Bar. Hector.
Anno 1555. They increased the persecution, condemning to the fire Bartholmew
Hector a Stationer, to be executed at Turin, who died with admirable constancy,
and so edifying the spectators, that they wept and compassionated him,
justifying him in their speeches, and praying for him. Hereupon the Parliament
resolved wholly to extirpate them, and for that end sent two men with
authority, either to reform, or root them out.

These persons went first to Perouse, where by Proclamation in the Kings name,
they command all to go to Mass upon pain of loosing their lives. Persecution.
renewed.
Then they went to Pignorol, where they cited many to appear before them: and
amongst others, a poor simple laboring man appeared, whom the President
commanded to have his child re-bapzed by a Priest: The man requested respite
to pray to God before he answered him, Profaneness.
which with great laughter was granted: Then falling down on his knees, he
prayed unto God, and when he had done, he said to the President; I will cause
my child to be rebaptised, upon condition that you will give me a bill, signed
with your own hand, that you will discharge me of the sin which I shall commit
hereby, Prudence.
and bear one day before God the punishment and condemnation which should
befall me for the same, taking this iniquity upon you and yours: The President
hearing this, commanded him out of his presence, and pressed him no further.

The President framed diverse Indictments against sundry persons in the
Valleys, and collected whatsoever he thought might hurt them: and going to one
of their Churches, he caused a Monk, that he brought along with him, to preach
in the presence of the people; and when he had ended, the people desired that
some one of their Pastors there present might answer his discourse, but that
was denied by the President, whereupon there was such a murmur amongst the
people, that the President, without any more speech, gat him away to Turin,
where he reported all to the Parliament, and withal told them, that if they
sought by violence to reclaim this people, they were resolved to defend
themselves; and that the places of their abode, were of such strength, that it
was a work for a King of France to root them out. Thereupon, this report and
the Indictments were sent to the King, who having other occasions, returned no
answer that year: Only the Inquisitors proceeded as they could catch any, to
deliver them to the secular power.

At the years end, the King commanded the Parliament to cause them to do that
by force, Popish malice.
which they would not by words be brought to. Then did the Parliament send the
President again to Angrogne, where he commanded them in the name of the King,
to go to Mass upon pain of forfeiting their lives and goods; but they
answered, that they could not obey such commands against the command of God.
Then he commanded that twelve of the Principal of them, together with all their
Ministers and Schoolmasters, should presently yield up their bodies to the
prisons of Turin, etc. They answered, that they could not obey that command or
appear at Turin, because they should thereby endanger their lives. The
Parliament was so incensed at this answer, that as many as they could
apprehend, they burnt, amongst whom was Jeffery Varnegle Minister of Angrogne,
Anno 1557. by whose death the people that were present were much edified,
seeing his constancy of invocating God to the last.

The Protestant Princes of Germany hearing of this great Persecution,
interceded in their behalf to King Henry the second of France. The German
Prince interceds for them.
Who promised to have regard to this request of theirs, and indeed they enjoyed
peace afterward, till the peace was concluded betwixt the Kings of France and
Spain, and that the Duke of Savoy was restored to his Estate, which was Anno
1559. The year after, the Popes Nuntio reproved the Duke, for that with all his
power he had not persecuted the Waldenses, and that if he did not now endeavor
to reduce them to the Romish Church, or to root them out, his Holiness should
have cause to suspect that he was a favourer of them. Popish malice.
Hereupon the Duke presently commanded them to go to Mass, upon the pain of
their lives: But the not obeying him he set upon them by open force, and yet at
the same time, A great persecution.
he caused them to be pursued by the Monks Inquisitors also: So that a great
Persecution was raised against the poor Christians: Some were taken and burnt,
who showed invincible constancy in all their torments and death.

To recite all the outrages, cruelties and villainies practiced against them,
would be too tedious: Many fled, and their houses and goods were ransacked and
spoiled: One of their Ministers was apprehended, and put to a shameful and
cruel death, but he showed such admirable patience therein, as astonished his
very adversaries. Some also were taken and sent to be Gally-slaves: Yet some,
through weakness, yielded to the adversaries, and were more cruelly handled
then those that remained constant in the truth. Humane infirmity.


Three of the most cruel persecutors of these faithful servants of Jesus
Christ, were, first Thomas Jacomel a Monk, an Apostate, that had renounced the
known truth, and persecuted mortally and maliciously the poor Christians
against his own conscience: he was a whoremonger, and given over to all
villainies, and filthy living, a Sodomite, etc. his delight was to spoil, rob,
and torment the captives of these Waldenses. The second was a collateral,
called Corbis, who in the examination of the prisoners was very rigorous, and
burnt many of them: but in the end feeling a remorse in his conscience, he
protested that he would meddle with them no more: The third was the Provest of
Justice, who lay in wait in the high ways to apprehend them when they went
abroad in the morning, or as they went to the Market.

The Monks also of Pignorol vexed the Churches near about them grievously,
Popish malice.
some they took prisoners, and kept them in their Abbeys: then they assembled a
company of Ruffians, sending them to spoil the Churches, and to take prisoners,
men, women, and childen; of whom some by torments they forced to abjure, others
they sent to the Galleys others they burnt.

The gentlemen of the valley of S. Martin vexed their tenants grievously:
spoiling some of their goods, imprisoning others, and vexing them by all means:
Two of those gentlemen getting some Ruffians to them in the night time, set
upon a village called Renclaret, which the Inhabitants perceiving, fled into
the mountains covered with snow, naked, and without victuals: in the morning
these villains took a Minister of that Valley, who was coming to visit these
people of Renclaret, and burnt him: but three nights after they of Pragela,
pitying their friends of Renclaret, A special providence.
sent four hundred men against the Ruffians, who fought with them, and without
the loss of one man, put them to flight, and restored their friends to their
houses.

A year after, one of these gentlemen called Truchet, with a company of
Ruffians, arrested the Minister of Renclaret, as he was at his sermon: but the
people were so moved at his outrageous dealing, especially the women, that they
had almost strangled Truchet, and so canvased the rest of his company, that
they had no mind to come any more.

Shortly after they took another Minister as he was going to preach in a parish
a mile from his house, but the people hearing of it, speedily pursued them, and
recovered their Minister again; but when the villains saw that they were like
to lose their prey, they so wounded him, that they left him for dead. Treachery.


The Monks of Pignerol sent some Ruffians by night to the Ministers house of S.
Germain, who were conducted by a Traitor that knew the house, and formerly had
frequented it; this fellow knocking at the door, and the Minister knowing his
voice, opened the door, but perceiving himself to be betrayed, he fled at a
backdoor, yet was quickly taken, and sorely wounded, notwithstanding which,
they pricked him with halberds to hasten his pace, as they carried him away:
they also slew and hurt many others: The Minister, after sore imprisonment,
Prodigious villainy.
endured a cruel death with much constancy: at his death the Inquisitors caused
two poor women that they kept in prison, to carry faggots to burn him, and to
say to him their Pastor, Take this, thou wicked Heretic* in recompense of that
naughty Doctrine that thou have taught us: To whom he replied, A^ good women, I
have taught you well, but you have learned ill.

In brief, they so persecuted these poor people, that they forced them to
forsake their houses, and to fly into the mountains, loosing all their estates,
so that many that had lived well, and relieved others, were now fain to crave
relief and succor of others.

The Monks with their Troops of Ruffians continued thus to molest and persecute
these poor people, They asked of their Ministers, Whether it were not lawful
for them to defend themselves against such violence? The Ministers answered,
that it was, only they advised them to avoid bloodshed as much as might be.
This question being resolved, they of Luserne and Angrogne sent some to aid
their friends of St. Germain against the Monks.

In June, diverse of these Waldenses went out into the country to reap their
harvest, and in sundry places were all taken prisoners, A miracle of Mercy.
not knowing of each others calamity, but God so wrought, that miraculously
they all escaped out of prison, to the great astonishment of their adversaries.
At the same time also, others who had been long in prison, and longed for
nothing but death, through Gods providence, were delivered after a wonderful
sort.

In July, they of Angrogne being at their harvest on the hill side of St.
German, perceived a company of soldiers that were spoiling the inhabitants
of St. Germain; whereupon they made an outcry, upon which the people of
Angrogne ran presently thither-ward, some by the valley, others over the
mountain: they which went by the valley being above fifty men, met with the
spoilers, who were a hundred and twenty men well appointed, with whom they
fought, and gave them a great overthrow; some were hurt, others drowned, A
special providence.
and but few hardly escaped; not one of Angrogne being hurt in the fight.

The Monks were so affrighted with this defeat, that they ran away from their
Abbey to Pignerol, to save their Relics and Images, which they carried
thither; and if the Ministers would have suffered their people to have
attempted it, they might easily have freed their brethren which were imprisoned
in the Abbey. Popish subtilty.


After this these Monks, being assisted by a Captain, took many of the
inhabitants of the valley of Luserne prisoners, spoiling their goods, driving
away their Cattle; and in the end ransomed them for great sums of money.

About this time a Gentleman of Campillan promised his Neighbors that if they
would give him thirty Crowns, Popish dissimulation and perfidiousness.
he would secure them against trouble; but when he had got the money, he caused
some soldiers to come to his house, and in the night sending for the poor men
which suspected no danger, he traitorously endeavored to deliver them into the
hands of their mortal enemies: but God, who succors his in their greatest
necessity, discovered to one of them the danger they were in, whereby they all
fled, and escaped.

Then were strict commands sent through all the Country to banish all the
Waldenses, together with the Gospel, out of the mountains and valleys of
Piedmount; but the people still desired that they might have leave to serve God
purely according to the Rules of the Word.

In the end of October, a rumor was spread abroad, that an Army was raising
wholly to destroy them: yea, and such malefactors as were in prisons or
banished, were pardoned, upon condition that they should take arms to destroy
the Waldenses: Hereupon the Ministers met together to consult what was to be
done in so great an extremity. And first they enjoyed a general and public
Fast to seek unto God for Direction, Fasting and Prayer.
and in the end concluded that they should not defend themselves by arms, but
that forsaking their houses, and taking their best movables with them, they
should retire unto the high mountains, but if their enemies pursued them
thither, that then they should take such advise as God should please to give
them.

This Counsel all the people submitted to, and for eight days space, were as
busy as Ants in summer, to remove their goods and provisions, which though
they did in great danger, yet with great courage and alacrity, praising God and
singing Psalms, every one cheering up another. But other Ministers hearing of
this resolution, wrote to them that they thought it strange that in such an
extreme necessity, they should not rather resolve to defend themselves against
violence, proving that it was lawful for them so to do, to defend the true
Religion, and the lives of themselves, wives and children, knowing thar it was
not the Duke, but the Pope that thus stirred him up against them.

During this time, their Adversaries cried nothing, but To the fire with them,
to the fire with them, and presently by proclamations set up every where,
Angrogne was exposed to the fire and sword: The Army also approached to their
borders, and the people retired into the mountains: But when they saw some
horsemen not only spoiling their goods, but taking some of their brethren
prisoners, they came back, and set upon them, in which bickering some of the
enemies were slain, and the rest retired to their camp; not one of the
Waldenses was slain or hurt. But two of these horsemen that fled, galloping
away before the rest, when they came near to the Army, cried out, They come,
they come: Whereupon the whole Army was so astonished, A special providence.
that every man fled away, none pursuing, and the Captain could not all that
day get them into order again.

The next day the Army under the Lord of Trinity, was mustered in a meddow,
near to Angrogne; They of the Town had sent some to stop the passages that the
Army should not enter, and in the mean time they retired into the meddow of
Toure, not expecting the Army so soon, so that there were but few that kept the
Passages, but when those few perceived their enemies preparing themselves to
fight, they all fell down upon their knees, praying earnestly unto God to pity
them, and not to look on their sins, Power of Prayer.
but on the cause that they maintained, to turn the hearts of their enemies,
and so to work that there might be no effusion of blood, but if it were his
will to take them, their wives and infants out of this world, that it would
please him mercifully to receive them into his Kingdom. Their prayers being
ended, they perceived their enemies to come through the Vines to win the top of
the mountain: Whereupon the combat began in diverse places, and continued until
night: The poor Waldenses being but few, and only armed with slings and
cross-bows, were much oppressed by the multitudes of their enemies, so that at
last they retired to the top of the mountain, where they defended themselves
till night. But having found a place where they might withstand their enemies,
they turned again and slew diverse of them.

At Even the enemies began to encamp themselves, which the Waldenses
perceiving, they fell to prayer, desiring God to assist and succor them, for
which the enemies flouted and laughed them to scorn. Profaneness.
The poor people devised to send a Drum into a valley hard by; and as they were
at prayer, the Drum beat up in the valley; whereupon the Lord of Trinity caused
his soldiers to retreat, which was a great advantage to the Waldenses, who
were weary, thirsty, A special providence*
and in great peril if God by this means had not given them some rest: Of the
Waldenses there were but three slain, but many of their enemies, and more hurt,
of whom few recovered.

This combat much encouraged the Waldenses, and as much terrified their
enemies, who in their retreat, burnt many houses, and destroyed the Wines that
were in the Press.

Then did the Lord of Trinity encamp in the valley of Luserne, by a Village, the
people whereof had always hated the Waldenses, and much rejoiced at this hurt
that was now done to them, but they were paid back in their own coin, being all
destroyed by the Army. A just reward.


Then did the Lord of Trinity place four Garrisons in four several Fortresses,
so that the poor Waldenses found themselves in a sea of troubles: Whereupon
they first betook themselves to prayer, Prayer.
then sent to their friends for aid, who sent them all that they could make.
Then did the Lord of Trinity send his Army to Villars and Tailleret: The lesser
part went toward Villars; the people seeing their enemies approaching, called
upon God with fervent prayer, then set upon their enemies, slew some, hurt
others, and the rest fled. The other company going toward Tailleret, they of
that place were but few in number, yet making their prayers to God, and
commending their cause to him, they set valiantly upon their enemies; during
which bickering, they of Villars, encouraged by their late success, came to
help their friends, and set so lustily upon their enemies, that they put them
to flight: but in the pursuit of them they fell into an ambush, and were
environed by their enemies, yet, through Gods mercy, they all escaped without
the loss of one man; A special providence.
on the enemies side there were so many slain, that they were laid together by
whole Cart-loads.

Another party of the enemies going to spoil a rich man's house, some of his
neighbors, not being above seventy, set upon them, put them to flight, took
away their Drum, and recovered their booty from them.

Then did the Lord of Trinity send to them, telling them how much the Duke and
his Duchess favored them, Popish subtilty
and promised himself to mediate for them that they might live in peace: But
whilst by these pretenses, he sought to make them secure, he sent part of his
Army to get the hill of Tailleret, and another part had already gotten the way
that led to the meddow of Tour, whereby the Angrognians might have been easily
enclosed; but they perceiving it, immediately sent some to encounter with their
enemies, who gat the victory, pursued them to their camp, and slew very many of
them, without the loss of one man.

The Lord of Trinity cunningly excused this attempt, and sent to them to draw
up a supplication to the Duke, which was accordingly done, wherein they
promised to render all honor and reverence unto God, according to his Word,
and all due obedience to the Duk, etc. But in the mean time Trinity grievously
vexed them of Tailleret, Perfidiousness,
upon pretense that they had not presented themselves to treat of this
agreement, taking their arms from them, and causing them to ask pardon on their
knees.

But presently after news was brought them, that the enemies had gotten to the
top of the mountain, and had taken all the passages, whereat they were sore
amazed, and ran with all speed to defend their wives and children: some they
saved, but the most of their goods were already in the enemies hands, who at
this time did them much mischief.

Yet after this, the Lord of Trinity sent word again to them that were fled,
that if they would return, he would receive them to mercy: The poor people most
of them trusting to his promise, returned, but the next morning the enemies
came to apprehend them and their Ministers, Papist treachery
besetting the place on every side: Then they that were swift of foot, escaped,
all the rest were taken; yet God miraculously delivered them: for an old man
that could not run so fast as the other, was espied by a soldier, A notable
story.
who ran with a naked sword to have slain him, the old man seeing the iminent
danger, caught him by the legs, overthrew him, and drew him by the heels down
the hill; the soldier cried, Help, help, this villain will kill me; A special
providence.
hereupon his fellows ran to his rescue; but in the mean time the old man
escaped; and the rest seeing what the old man had done, though they had lost
their weapons, yet took heart of grass, and with stones and slings, drove away
their enemies, and thereby they all escaped.

The next day the soldiers went again to Tailleret, robbing, spoiling, and
carrying away all that they could find, but most of the people were retired
toward Villars; Then did the soldiers range all about, and took diverse
prisoners, whom they used cruelly, Barbarous cruelty.
and one soldier bit off one of their ears, saying, I will carry the flesh of
this wicked Heretic with me into my Country: They found also two women, the
mother and the daughter, in a cave, whom they wounded to death: and in another
cave, an old man of an hundred years old, with his granddaughter of eighteen
years old that fed him; the man they slew, the maid they would have ravished,
who flying from them, tumbled down the mountains, and died.

About the same time there was one John Martin that made his boasts every
where, that if he could meet with the Minister of Angrogne. he would slit his
nose; but shortly after a wolf met him, and setting upon him, bit off his nose,
whereupon he ran mad, and died miserably.

A certain soldier promised the Lord of Trinity to bring to him the Minister
of Tailleret, and accordingly never ceased till he found him, Gods judgment on
persecutors.
but as he was pursuing of him, some out of the mountains rescued the Minister,
and slew the soldier with stones.

These soldiers were so extreme abusive to women, that many Papists that lived
by, Uncleanness.
sent their daughters into the mountains to the Waldenses to preserve their
chastity.

Then did the Lord of Trinity promise, that if they would pay him eight
thousand Crowns, he would withdraw his Army, and be gone; They being desirous
of Peace, sold their Cattle to raise the money, Popish Perfidiousness.
but when he had received it, he continued his Army there still.

Then did the Lord of Trinity require them to send away their Ministers till
the matter were determined before the Duke, or else by his Army he would force
them to it; whereupon by mutual consent they agreed, that the Ministers should
withdraw for the present, Their Ministers sent away.
till the Army was retired, which was not done without great sighs, and
lamentations and tears. At that time there fell an extraordinary snow, so that
the people with great difficulty, were fain to make way for their Ministers to
pass. But the Army hearing that the Ministers were gathered together, they sent
out a company of harquebushers to apprehend them, who came but one hour too
late to have taken them: Then did they search every cave, house and chest, to
seek them; whereby they robbed the poor people of all their best things. Then
did they beset the Ministers house of Angrogne, to whom the Lord of Trinity had
promised safety, but it pleased God that he escaped; the soldiers pursued him
into the mountains, but could not overtake him; whereupon they plundered his
house, burnt his books and writings, and so returned.

The next morning command was given to the Rulers of Angrogne within twenty
four hours to deliver up their Minister, or else Angrogne should be put to fire
and sword; They answered that they knew not where he was, for the soldiers had
driven him over the mountains. Then did the soldiers burn houses, break the
mils, spoil the people, and do all the mischief they could, and so departed.

The Lord of Trinity left Garrisons in the Fortresses, and caused the poor
Waldenses to maintain them, who, not content with their wages, pillaged and
robbed all about them; and having taken fourteen men, they bound them, and were
leading them away prisoners, but their wives and children pursued them so
fiercely with stones, Cruelty.
that they were glad to let their prisoners go, and had much ado to save
themselves. Two others that they caught, they hung up by the heels and hands,
and having tormented them almost to death, at last released them for a great
sum of money. Another Garrison in the night went to Tailleret, brake in at the
windows and tops of houses, spoiling all, and took also fourteen prisoners,
whom they bound two and two together, and were carrying them to the Fortress,
but two of them getting loose, so valiantly assaulted the soldiers, and beat
them with stones, that they forced them to let go their other prisoners. Yet
two others they took, and carried them to the Fort; one was but a child, whom
the Captain strangled with his own hands; the other was sixty years old,
Barbarous cruelty.
whom they bound, and took a crature that lives in horse-dung, and put into his
navel, covering them with a dish, which in a short space did eat into his
belly, and killed him.

The Waldenses were in great perplexity, by reason of these Garrisons, but
especially for the want of their Ministers: whereupon they resolved to call
them back, yet to have preaching only in private, because they would not
imbitter the soldiers, till their messengers returned from the Duke. These
messengers were cruelly handled at the Court, and at last sent back with a
command that they should entertain Priests to say Mass, etc. When this Report
was made to their brethren that sent them, there was wonderful lamentation,
weeping and mourning. Then did they send two of their Ministers to the Church
of Pragela, to show them of the pitiful condition of the Churches in Piedmont,
and to ask their advice, how to prevent the danger: and in the next place they
all fell to prayer, Prayer in danger.
and having long called upon God for counsel and direction in so great a
strait; they resolved upon debate, that the people in Piedmont and Dauphine
should join in a League together, wherein they promised, through Gods grace and
assistance, to maintain the pure preaching of the Gospel, and administering the
holy Sacraments, to yield obedience to their superior, so far as they were
commanded by the Word of God, and one to be aiding and assisting to the other;
that none should conclude any thing touching the estate of Religion, A League.
without the consent of the rest of the Valleys.

During this Treaty, all the householders were required to be present at Mass,
and such as would do it, should live in peace, but such as refused should be
condemned to be burnt, or sent to the Galleys, so that the people were
constrained to fly, die, or renounce the Gospel: The first they would have
chosen, but could not do it by reason of the great snow; Whereupon they
exhorted one another saying, We shall be all called for to morrow, to renounce
God, and to return to Idolatry, let us therefore make a solemn protestation,
that we will live and die in the confession of Gods holy Word; let us in the
morning hear a sermon, and then cast down to the ground, all the Idols and
Altars: A good resolution.
and to this all agreed.

In the morning they put their resolutions into execution, beating down the
Images, and casting down the Altars: Then they went to Villars to do the like
there; but by the way they encountered with a band of soldiers, who where going
to spoil a village, Images demolished.
and to fetch away the inhabitants prisoners: These soldiers seeing them so
ill provided, mocked them, and discharged their guns at them; but they taking
courage, with stones beat the soldiers, pursuing them to the Fortress. Then
did they go to Villars, and having destroyed the Idols and Altars there, they
returned to besiege the fortress, demanding the prisoners that were therein.

The Judge, with many Gentlemen, came that day to enroll their names that would
go to Mass, but se^ing the resolution of the people, they fled into the
Castle, where they were besieged for ten days: Then did the Captain of To^r go
with a company of soldiers, thinking to raise the siege; but by those which
kept the passages, some of them were slain, the rest were driven back again:
Then came they back with three bands, which caused a furious fight, wherein
many of the soldiers were slain and hurt, and not one of the besiegers was
hurt. A special providence.


The Waldenses attempted often to have taken the Fortress; but without
Ordinance it was impossible: also the Lord of Trinity was come back with his
army, and the next day would have raised the siege: But it pleased God that
very night that the soldiers in the Castle, desired leave to depart, with bag
and baggage, which was easily granted to them: and the soldiers which before
had so cruelly persecu- the Ministers, were now fain to request them to protect
their lives, and to conduct them to a place of safty, which the Ministers did
willingly, and the soldiers were very thankful for it: that night the Fort
was razed to the ground.

The next day the Lord of Trinity cunningly sent to them of Angrogne, Popish
subtilty.
that if they would not aid the other, they should be gently dealt with, but
they knowing his fraud, agreed with the rest to defend their Religion with
their lives, and that no one should make an agreement with out the consent of
the rest. Then did the Lord of Trinity assay with his Army to enter into the
borders of Angrogne by certain streights, but the people having raised up some
breast-works, valiantly defended themselves and offended their enemies.
Trinities soldiers being weary, fresh ones were brought in their stead, so
that the fight endured until night, wherein many of the enemies were slain,
more hurt, and but two of the Waldenses; and so the battle ceased for the
present.

The next day the Army marched toward Angrogne five several ways, and there
were none to resist, but only a few that kept the Watch, who valiantly fought
for a space, but seeing themselves in danger to be enclosed, they retreated to
an high place, where the combat was renewed with greater fierceness then
before: The Lord of Trinity seeing the loss of many of his men, sounded a
retreat, and went to Angrogne, but the people were fled into the meadow of Tour;
therefore he burned and spoiled all before him: He also often set fire upon the
two Churches, where the word used to be preached, A special providence.
but could not burn them, and so he did to the Ministers house, and yet it
remained whole.

Amongst them of Angrogne, there were but two that were enemies to the word of
God, and they were both slain that day.

Then did the Lord of Trinity send some to burn Rosa; but the soldiers were
driven back four days together, by them that kept the passages; whereupon he
sent his whole Army, yet they valiantly withstood them from morning till night;
At last a party gat behind them, over a mountain, so that the poor people
seeing themselves environed, saved themselves by running through the midst of
their enemies, and others of them gat into the rocks. The enemies being entered
Rosa destroyed all with fire and sword: The people fled by secret ways toward
Luserne, wandering all night upon the mountains full of snow, laden with their
stuff, carrying their infants in their arms, and leading others by the hand
with great pain and travel: Gods Providence.
They of Luserne seeing them, ran to them, praising God for their deliverance;
and they all were very cheerful, notwithstanding their extremities.

Shortly after the Lord of Trinity went to Luserne by three ways; they which
kept the passages resisted their enemies valiantly, but when they saw
themselves assaulted on every side, they fled into the mountains. Then did the
soldiers sack and burn the houses, staying all they could find: When they
which were fled to the mountains saw their houses on fire, Joy in tribulations.
they praised God, and gave him thanks, that thus accounted them worthy to
suffer for his Name: Then did the soldiers pursue them to the mountains, but
after they had called upon God, a few of them beat back their enemies,
whereupon the Army retired.

They in the meddow of Tour, perceiving a company of soldiers burning the rest
of the houses in Angrogne, they sent six harque-bushiers against them, who from
the higher ground, discharging all their guns together, the soldiers ran all
away, when none pursued them.

Shortly after, as the Watch was hearing a Sermon, they spied a company of
souldeirs marching up the hill, whereupon they ran to encounter them, and
easily discomfited them: But whilst they pursued the chase, some cried to
them, that another company was entered into the meddow, whereupon they left the
chase: or else not one of their enemies had escaped.

Presently other companies came other ways, which the Ministers and people
seeing, were much discouraged, and therefore they fell to prayer, and ardently
called upon God, with sighs and tears until night. And whereas seven spies
were sent before the soldiers, Prayer in danger.
there went out five of the Waldenses against them, and took some, and chased
the rest: Then went out eight more against the whole company, and pursued them
with an undaunted courage from rock to rock, and from hill to hill, and then
went out twelve more, who joining with the other, made a great slaughter of
their enemies.

Another company from Luserne, having a Minister with them, as they used
always to have; after they had made their prayers to God, set upon another
company of soldiers, whose hearts were so taken from them, that they presently
fled: One of the Waldenses, a very young man, carried a great staff in his
hand, Special providence.
with which he laid so lustily at his enemies, that he brake his staff, and
slew many of them, he also brake four of their own swords, in pursuing of them:
Also, a boy of eighteen years old, slew the Lord of Monteil, Master of the
Camp, which much dismayed the enemies: Another threw down Charles Truchet, and
then leaped upon him, and slew him with his own sword; upon which all the rest
fled, and were pursued till night hindered.

The Minister seeing the great effusion of blood, and the enemies flying, cried
to the people that it was enough, and so exhorted them to praise God: They that
heard him obeyed, and fell to prayer. In this battle they gat much armor,
which was a great advantage to them afterward. Thanks were returned unto God
in every place, every one saying, Who sees not evidently that God fights for
us. Thanksgiving*


Presently after, the Lord of Trinity returned to burn the Villages, but
especially to pursue the poor people in the mountains. And one company with
many horsemen ascended the mountain of Comb by an unsuspected way, where were
no Warders; but they which were next, seeing them, called upon God for aid, and
though they were but thirty in number, yet they valiantly beat them back twice;
many of the enemies were slain, and not one of the Waldenses. Trinity seeing
his men thus beaten back, sent out most of his Army to assist them, A special
providence.
which were about one thousand five hundred men: And there came about a hundred
to help the Warders: The combat was very cruel; at last the poor men were fain
to retreat with the loss of two of their men; at this the enemies exceedingly
rejoiced, blowing their trumpets and triumphing: but the people crying all
together to the Lord, returned again, with greater violence, assaulting them
with their slings; So that the enemies being weary, rested themselves, and the
while the Waldenses betook themselves to prayer, which more affrighted their
enemies then any thing else. Prayer.


Then did the soldiers charge again furiously, but by the hands of a few they
were driven back; yea little children, fervently calling upon God, threw stones
at their enemies, as also did the women: Such as were unfit for war kneeled on
the ground with their faces toward heaven, crying, The enemies every where
beaten.
Lord help us. Then came one running that brought word, that the Angrognians
were coming to help them, which the enemies hearing, presently retreated.

Another party of the Army of an hundred and forty, went another way; but by
seven men they were strongly resisted and driven back: A third party was met by
the Angrognians and driven back.

The Lord of Trinity intending to be revenged upon them in the meddow of Tour,
assembled all the Gentlemen of the country, and an Army of about seven
thousand: and when the poor people saw them coming, glittering in their
harness, and so many in number, they were at first astonished, but pouring out
their prayers unto God to succor them, Prayer in danger.
and to have regard to the glory of his Name, etc. They marched to encounter
with their enemies, and seasonably by the way, they met with some aid that was
coming to them from Luserne, so that uniting themselves, they soon discomfited
their enemies.

The Captain of the enemies had in the morning promised to do great matters
that day, but in the evening he was carried back, weak and wounded, and not
like to live: Whereupon a Papist said to him, Monsieur, there religion is beter
then ours.

Another part of the Army set upon an house in a pass, wherein were but five
men, yet they lustily defended it, drove out their enemies that had entered, and
kept the place, till some of their friends came to relieve them.

Another half of the Army, assaulted another Bulwork on the side of the
mountain; And they within suffered them to come very near, but then with
slings and guns, they slew many of them, others rouled down great stones, which
killed diverse, so that when they had attempted all ways to take it, they were
forced to retire; the Lord of Trinity weeping to see his men slain so fast, and
at last, having lost very many of his men, he was forced to retreat; many of
the Army crying out, God fights for them, and we do them wrong.

In all that conflict there were but two of the Waldenses slain, and two hurt;
A special providence.
whereas they never shot at their enemies but they killed some, and sometimes
two at one shot: The soldiers confessed that they were so astonished that they
could not fight: Others said, that the Ministers by their prayers, conjured and
bewitched them. It was a wonderful work of God, that shepherds and cowherds
should encounter with so mighty a power of strong and brave soldiers* well
furnished with ammunition, and themselves having nothing but slings, stones,
and a few harquebushes, and yet should beat them, and in all those fights, they
lost not above fourteen men.

Shortly after a company of soldiers went to Angrogne to destroy the Vines,
etc. and mocking the Waldenses, they said, Scorners punished.
that they were valiant men behind their bulworks, but if they came into the
plain, how they would beat them: Then came thirty of the Waldenses, and set
upon them in the plain, and fought with them a long time, hand to hand, slew
many of them, and at last forced them to run away, and that with the loss of
one only man of their own.

The night after, some thought that it would have been an easy matter to take
the Lord of Trinity, and to have spoiled his whole Army, but the Waldenses
would not do it, least they should offend God, and pass the bounds of their
vocation, intending only to defend themselves.

Then did Trinity betake himself to his old shifts of entertaining a treaty for
agreement; but in the Interim, Subtilty. Per^idiousnesse.
he sent a company of Spaniards one way, and other companies other ways, to
surprise the meddow of Tour. The Spaniards were entered the meddow, before they
were perceived: but when the people spied them, The Spaniards ^epulsed.
they betook themselves to prayer, then winded their horns, and so prepared for
resistance: The first that opposed themselves were but twelve men, who yet
stoped them in a Pass, and others rolled down stones from the mountains upon
them, whereby many of the Spaniards were slain, the rest were forced to retreat.

Shortly after the Ministers and chief Rulers of the Waldenses, requested the
Lord of Raconis to deliver a petition, which they had drawn up to the Duchess
of Savoy, wherein they declared the equity of their cause, protesting all due
obedience, etc.* and at last, through Gods mercy, they came to a good
agreement, and according to the promise of God, all things turned to the best
to those that feared him, that were called according to his purpose.

After the death of the Duke and Duchess of Savoy, Charles Emmanuel their son
succeeded, Peace obtained
who maintained them in peace according to the treaty formerly made: Yet the
Inquisitors were always watchful to apprehend one or other of them: and
amongst others, one Bartholmew Copin of Luserne, being at Ast in Piedmont, with
his Merchandise, and at evening supping with some other company, Bar. Copin
one began to speak much to the disgrace of the Waldenses for their Religion.
Copin thought that he was bound not to be silent when he heard such
blasphemies: Whereupon he began to argue in their defense. Are you then a
Waldensian, said the other to him? he answered, Yea. Zeal.
And do you not believe that God is in the Host? No, said Copin* Fie upon you,
said the other, what a false Religion is yours? My Religion, said Copin, is as
true, as it is true that God is God, etc. The next morning Copin was called
before the Bishop of Ast, who told him, that he must either recant the opinions
he held over night, or be punished: Copin said, he had been provoked to that
discourse; yet he said nothing but what he would maintain with his life:
Adding that he had some goods, and a wife and children, yet he had lost the
affections that he bare unto those things, Christ best of all.
neither were they dear to him, to the prejudice of his conscience. Yet said,
that behaving himself honestly, he ought not to be molested* when he came about
his merchandise, the Turks and Jews being permit^ed to come to Fairs without
molestation. Notwithstanding which the Bishop presently sent him to prison. The
next day the Bishops Secretary went to him, professing great love, and telling
him, that except he acknowledged his fault, he was in great danger of his life:
Copin answered, That his life was in the hands of God, and he desired not to
preserve it to the prejudice of his glory; and having but a few paces to walk
in his journey to heaven, his hearty prayer to God was, to give him grace not
to turn back.

Some few days after he was examined by an Inquisitor in the presence of the
Bishop, who exceedingly tormented him with sweet and gentle persuasions,
Tentation.
by fair words seeking to draw him to an abjuration: But Copin always
convinced him by the word of God: alleging that if he should be ashamed of,
Constancy.
or deny Christ before men, Christ would be ashamed of, and deny him before his
heavenly Father. Then said the Monk, Go thy ways thou cursed Heretic to all
the devils in hell, and when thou shall be there tormented by them, thou will
remember this good and holy counsel that we have given thee, etc.

After many violent encounters, they caused his wife and son to come to him,
promising if he would confess his fault, he should have liberty to depart with
them; They suffered them also to sup together, which time he spent in exhorting
them to patience, His exhortation to his wife and children
telling them that God would be more then a husband and father to them: for his
own part he was not bound to love wife or child more then Christ; and that
they should esteem it their happiness, that God was pleased to do him the
honor to be a witness to his truth, with the loss of his life, etc. He
enjoined his wife to bring up his children in the fear of God: his son he
commanded to obey his mother, he desired them to pray for him, that God would
strengthen him against all tentations, and so taking leave of his wife, and
blessing his son, he dismissed them, his wife and son shedding fountains of
tears, and crying out in so lamentable a manner as would have moved the hardest
heart to compassion.

The Bishop knew not well what to do with him: If he let him go, he feared a
scandal, and that many would be encouraged by his impunity: If he punished
him, he offended against the agreement betwixt the Duke and the Waldenses. And
thereupon he sent his indictment to the Pope, to know his pleasure. Shortly
after Copin was found dead in prison, Copin murdered
it appearing manifestly that he was strangled: and after his death, he was
condemned to be burnt, which was accordingly executed.

CHAP. XXII. The Persecution, of the Waldensis in Calabria.
ANno Christi 1370. The Waldenses of Pragela and Dauphine grew so numerous,
that they sent their younger people to seek some other country to inhabit. In
their travel, they found in Calabria, some wast and untilled lands: yet
seeming very fertile, Gods providence.
fit for corn wine, oil and chestnuts, and that the hills were fit for cattle,
and to furnish them with fuel and timber; they came therefore to the Lords of
those places to treat with them touching their abode there.

The Lords received them lovingly, agreed to orders much for the advantage of
these new inhabitants; agreed about rents, tenths, tolls, penalties, etc. and
so assigned to them certain parts of the Country. Then did they return to
their parents, showing how it fared with them, and so receive what they pleased
to bestow upon them, and many of them marrying, they returned into Calabria,
where they built some Towns and Cities, as St Xist, la Guard, etc.

The Lords of those Countries thought themselves happy in that they had met
with such good subjects as peopled their waste lands, Their holy lives.
and made them to abound with all manner of fruits; but principally because
they were honest men, and of good conscience, yielding all those duties and
honors which they could expect from good subjects. Only the Priests complained
of them, that they lived not after their religion, made not their children
Priests and Nuns; loved not Tapers, Masses, etc. that they adorned not their
Churches with Images, went not on Pilgrimage, etc.

Hereupon the Lords feared, that if the Pope should take notice, that so near
his Seat, there were people that contemned his Laws, they might chance to lose
their subjects: They therefore persuaded the Priest to be silent, since in
other things they showed themselves honest men, enriched the Country, yea and
the Priests themselves, by their Tithes. These Lords also stopped the mouths of
their neighbors, who exceedingly murmured, because by no means they could draw
them into alliance with them, and because all that they had, Their godly
conversation*
prospered exceedingly: They were wise and temperate, not given to drinking,
dancing, swearing, etc. and living in a Country, where the inhabitants were
given to all manner of wickedness, they were as precious stones in a common
sink.

Thus they were preserved in peace by their Lords, till Anno 1560. At which
time these Waldenses resolving to make a public profession of their Religion;
sent for two Ministers from Geneva, who did much establish the exercise of
Religion amongst them.

The Pope persecutes them.
Pope Pius the fourth hearing of this, presently concluded their utter ruin and
extirpation, giving the same in charge to Cardinal Alexandrino, a violent man,
who chose two Monks Inquisitors of his own humor, and sent them, first to
begin with the inhabitants of St. Xist; There they assembled the people, gave
them good words, promising that they should receive no violence, if they would
accept of such Teachers as the Bishops should appoint, which if they refused,
they would lose their lives, goods and honors, and would be condemned for
Heretics: And further to prove them, they appointed a Mass to be sung: but the
people with their wives and children, presently quit their houses, and fled
into the woods.

From thence the Monks went to la Guard, where they caused the Town-gates to be
locked, and the people to be assembled, telling them that they of St. Xist had
adjured their Religion, Popish lies.
and went to Mass, etc. promising that if they would do the like, no man should
injure them. These poor people, believing what was told them, were content to
do what they would have them; but when they heard that their friends of St.
Xist refused to go to Mass, Humane frailty
and were fled into the woods, they were exceedingly grieved at their own
revolt, and resolved with their wives and children, to go to their brethren.

In the mean time the Monks sent two companies of soldiers after them of St.
Xist, Popish cruelty.
who ran after them as after wild beasts, crying, kill, kill, and so slew
diverse: but such as could get to the top of the mountain, called to the
soldiers, beseeched them to have pity on them, their wives and children,
telling them that they had been inoffensive in their conversations, etc. yet if
they would not suffer them to continue in their habitations, that at least they
would license them to depart, either by sea or land, that they might retire
themselves whether the Lord should be pleased to conduct them, beseeching them
also, for Gods sake, not to force them to defend themselves-

But this more enraged the soldiers, who presently violently assaulted them:
Then did they so defend themselves, that by Gods assistance, A special
providence.
they slew the greatest part of the soldiers, and put the rest to flight.
Hereupon the Inquisitors wrote to the Viceroy of Naples, speedily to send some
Companies of soldiers to apprehend the Heretics of St. Xist and la Guard,
whereby he should do a work very pleasing to the Pope, and meritorious for
himself.

Then did the Viceroy come himself with his Troops, in the mean time the
Waldensian women came home to seek for food for their husbands and children
that were in the woods-

The Viceroy proclaimed through all Naples, that all such banished persons as
would come to fight against the Heretics of St. Xist, should be pardoned all
their offenses: Whereupon great numbers resorted to him, and were conducted to
the woods, where they chased these poor people, slaying some, wounding others,
the rest fled into caves, Barbarous cruelty.
where most of them died of famine.

Then were they of la Guard cited before the Inquisitor, and many fair Promises
were made unto them if they would appear; but contrary thereunto, thirty of
them were apprehended, and put to the rack.

One Charlin was racked with such violence, that his bowels brake out of his
belly, and all to extort from him a confession, that in the night, the candles
being put out, they committed whoredom, and abominable incest, yet would he
never confess any such wickedness.

Another with extreme pain upon the rack, promised to go to Mass, the
Inquisitor seeing that he had showed such weakness, Prodigious wickedness.
urged him to confess the forementioned wickedness, which, because he
refused, he left him eight hours together upon the rack, yet could he not get
from his mouth so foul a slander.

Another was stripped stark naked, whipped with rods of iron, drawn through the
streets, and burnt with firebrands: One of his sons was killed with knives:
Another thrown down from an high Tower, because he would not kiss a Crucifix:
Another was condemned to be burnt alive, and as he went to the fire, he threw
to the ground a Crucifix, which the executioner had fastened to his hands, Zeal.
whereupon they covered him all over with pitch, and so burnt him.

The Inquisitor Panza cut the throats of eighty, Horrible cruelties.
as butchers do their sheep's; then causing them to be divided into four
quarters, he set up stakes for the space of thirty miles, and appointed a
quarter to be fastened to every stake. Four of the principal men of la Guard he
caused to be hanged. Another young man, because he would not confess himself
to a Priest, was thrown from an high tower.

The Viceroy passing by before he was dead, and hearing him implore Gods
mercy, kicked him on the head, saying, Is this dog yet living? take him and cast
him to the hogs. Sixthly women were racked so violently, that the cords pierced
into their arms and legs, and being then cast into prison, they died there,
only nine of the handsomest being delievered to the fathers of the Inquisition,
were never heard off after.

Many others were delivered to the secular power to be burnt, Their total
extirpation.
and if any interceded for them, he was presently put on the rack as a favourer
of Heretics.

Pope Pius the fourth sent the Marquess of Butiane, promising that if he would
wholly clear Calabria of these Waldenses, he would make his son a Cardinal:
But he was put to no great pains to do it, for the Inquisitors and the Viceroy
of Naples had by sundry deaths killed all the men, women and children that they
could light of.

One of their Ministers was famished in prison: Another was carried to Rome,
where he was condemned to be burnt; The Pope and his Cardinals would needs see
that pleasing spectacle: But the Minister spoke so many things out of Gods
Word, against the Pope, that the Pope gnashed his teeth for anger, wishing that
he had been some where else. And thus were these godly people wholly rooted out
of Calabria.

CHAP. XXIII. The Persecutions of the Waldenses in Provence.
THese came from Piedmont, when their valleys were over-peopled. The country of
Provence, at their first arrival, was a desert, but within few years, by Gods
blessing upon their labors, it-abounded with Corn, Wine, Oil, Chestnuts, and
other fruits.

There Habitations being near to Avignion (many times the Popes seat) they were
exposed to sundry persecutions, as Anno 1380. and at other times: but the
greatest of all began about the year 1360. in the time of King Lewis the
twelfth; who being informed that in Provence was a certain kind of people that
lived not according to the Laws of the Church of Rome, but were an accursed
people, committing all kinds of wickedness and villainies: Devilish slanders.
He gave Commission to his Parliament in Provence to take cognizance of it, and
to punish them according to their demerits.

The Court prosecuting this order with rigor; and the King hearing that
diverse innocent persons were put to death, he sent his Master of Requests, and
Confessor into Provence, to find out what kind of persons these were, who at
their return, certified him that all the former suggestions were untrue, that
they were neither Socerers, nor Whoremongers, but lived honestly, did hurt to
none; caused their children, to be Baptized, taught them their Belief, and the
ten Commandments and that they carefully kept the Lords day, and had the Word
of God purely expounded to them: Whereupon the King swore an oath, That they
were honester then himself, and his Catholic subjects. Upon this information he
sent and sta^ed the Persecution. Note.


Then did the Waldenses send two of their Ministers [ George Morrell and Peter
Masson] to Oecolampadius, Capito, B^cer and Haller, to confer with them about
matters of Religion, and to have there advice in many things.

In their return, Masson was apprehended at Dijon; where he was condemned and
put to death for a Lutheran. P. Masson martyred.
Morrell escaped with his Letters and Papers, and came safe to Provence, where
he much comforted and confirmed the Churches. Yet all this while did the
Parliament of Aix apprehend one or other of them, condemning some to the fire,
others to the gibbet; they which escaped best, returned with marks in their
forheads.

Anno Christi 1540. The inhabitants of Merindoll were summoned, and some of the
chief appearing for the rest, they were all condemned to be burned alive, their
children and families to be outlawed, and that the place of their habitation
should be laid waste, A cruel decree.
the woods cut down two hundred paces round about, and so left desolate.

The King being informed of the rigor of this Edict, K. Francis the first.
and of the innocence of the people, countermanded the execution of it: but his
Letters were suppressed, and the Cardinal of Tournon obtained for a great some
of money, the revocation of them.

Anno 1545. The President of Opede proclaimed war against them both at Aix and
Marseilles: Diverse companies of soldiers were listed, Called Mi^^irs
and five bands of the old soldiers of Piedmont were joined with them, and
presently they began to set fire on the Villages of Cabrieres, Pepin, etc. The
poor people without any resistance were slain, women and their daughters
ravished, some great with child murdered; Barbarous cruelty.
the breasts of many women were cut off, after whose death their poor infants
died of famine.

Opede also proclaimed, that on pain of death no man should give any relief or
sustenance to them. All their habitations were pillaged, sacked and burnt, and
none of their persons spared, but such as were reserved for the Galleys.

Opede coming to Merindol, found none there but one simple lad, who had
yielded himself prisoner to a soldier, and promised two Crowns for his
ransom; but Opede paid the money to the soldier, and caused the lad to be shot
to death; then he utterly razed the Town, and laid it level with the ground.

Then did he march against Cabrieres, and with the Cannon battered the walls:
There was within only about sixty poor sick Pesants, who sent him word that he
needed not to spend powder to batter the walls, for they were ready to open the
gates, and quit the Country, if they might but have leave with their wives and
children to go to Geneva, or Germany* and to leave all their goods behind them*

Opede entering the Town, Prodigious cruelty.
caused all the men to be brought into a field, and to be cut in pieces, the
soldiers striving who should show the best manhood in cutting off heads, arms
and legs: The women he caused to be locked in a barn with much straw, and so
put fire to it, where many women great with child were burnt: One soldier
moved with pity, opening a hole in the wall, that some of them might come out;
but Opede made them to be beaten back again into the fire with Pikes and
Halberts. Some of them that came forth he slew with his own hands, ripping open
their bellies, so that their children came forth, whom he trod under his feet:
many were fled into cellers and caves, whom he caused to be dragged out, had
into the field, stripped stark naked, and then slain. Others were bound by two
and two together, and slain by the Captains, who rejoiced in their bloody
butchery.

Then did this Tyrant (worse then Herod) command one of his Captains to go
into Church, into which many women, children and infants were fled; and to kill
them all, which the Captain at first refused, saying, that it was a cruelty
unbeseeming men of war: Whereat Miniers being displeased, charged him upon
pain of rebellion against the King to do it. The Captain fearing what might be
the issue, entered with his soldiers and destroyed them all, sparing neither
young nor old. Other soldiers that ransacked the houses, found many poor
persons who had hid themselves in secret places, whom they flew upon, crying,
Kill, kill, the soldiers without the Town killed all they could meet with, so
that above a thousand men, women and children were slain in this place.

Many persons which were escaped into the mountains, sent by some that had most
interest in Miniers, to desire him to give them leave to go whither the Lord
should please to lead them, with their wives and children, though they had
nothing but the shirts on their backs: to whom he answered, tha^ he knew what
he had to do, he would send them to dwell in hell amongst the devils.

A bloody speech.
Then did he send part of his Army unto Costa, which they overcame, and
committed there great slaughter: Many of the inhabitants fled into an Orchard,
where the soldiers ravished many women and maidens, and having kept them there
a day and a night, they used them so beastly, that the women with child, and
younger maidens died presently after.

Many of these Merindolians hid themselves in rocks and dark caves, where some
were famished, others were choked with fire and smoke set to their caves
mouths. Many more were the outrages and cruelties which this wicked Opede
committed: but the Lord found him out at last, Gods judgment on persecutors.
striking him with a strange kind of bleeding at the lower parts, neither was
he able to void any urine, so that by degrees his guts rotted within him: No
remedy could be found for this terrible disease, worms bred in his bowels,
which continually gnawed him. Then did he send to Arles for a famous
Chyrurgion, who cured him of his difficulty to make water, after which,
desiring all to depart the room, the chyrurgion in private exhorted him to
repent of his former cruelty and bloodshed, telling him that this his strange
bleeding was Gods just hand upon him for shedding so much innocent blood: But
these words pierced the impure conscience of this wicked wretch, and more
troubled him then the torments of his disease, so that he cried out to lay
hands on the Surgeon as an Heretic: Whereupon he conveyed himself away, and
returned to Arles.

Miniers his horrible death.
Yet not long after he was sent for again, and great promises were made for his
security: But when he came back, he found Miniers past cure, raging and casting
out most horrible and blasphemous words, feeling a fire within him which burnt
him from the navel upwards, which was accompanied with extreme stink of his
lower parts, and so he ended his wretched life.

In the beginning of this Persecution, there was one John de Rom^, a Monk, who
gat a Commission to examine those whom he suspected to be Heretics; whereupon
he afflicted the faithful with all kinds of cruelty: Amongst other horrible
torments that he used, this was one; he filled boots with boiling grease, and
put them upon their legs, tying them backwards over a form, and their legs
hanging down over a soft fire: Thus he tormented very many, and in the end most
cruelly put them to death.

Francis the French King being informed of the hellish cruelty of this wicked
Monk, sent to his Parliament at Provence that they should apprehend and condemn
him: but he being informed of it, fled to Avignion, where he hoped to enjoy all
that wealth which so mercilesly and unjustly he had extorted from the poor
Christians: But shortly after he was robbed of all that he had, by his own
servants; and then he fell sick of a most horrible and strange disease unknown
to the Physicians: He was intollerably tormented with pains all over his body,
so that no means could give him ease for one minute of an hour; Gods judgment
on persecutors.
neither was their any man that could tarry near him, no not of his nearest
friends; so great was the stink that came from him: Then was he removed to an
Hospital: but the stink and infection so increased, that no man durst come near
him no; nor he himself was able to abide the horrible stink of his own body,
full of ulcers and sores, and smarwing with vermin, and so rotten, that the
flesh fell from the bones by piecemeal. In these torments he often cried out
in great rage. O who will deliver me? Who will kill and rid me out of these
intolerable pains, which I know I suffer for the oppressions which I did to
the poor men? Oft-times he himself endeavored to destroy himself; but he had
not the power. In this horrible anguish, and fearful despair he miserably ended
his accursed life.

When he was dead no man would come near to bury him; till at last a young
novice caught hold of his stinking carcass with an iron hook, and so dragged
him into an hole that was made for him.

In the time of this Persecution the Bishop of Aix, with some other Bishops and
their courtizans, walking along the streets of Avignion, Popish uncleanness.
saw a man selling baudy Images and Pictures, with filthy rimes and ballades
annexed to them: All these goodly Pictures the Bishops bought up. When they had
gone a little further, there was a Bookseller that had set to sale certain
Bibles in French* which the Prelates were greatly moved at, saying to him,
Dare thou be so bold as to sell such merchandise in this Town? The
Bookseller replied, Is not the holy Bible as good as these goodly Pictures
that you have bought for these gentle-women? Then said the Bishop of Aix, I
renounce my part in Paradise, if this fellow be not a Lutheran, take him away
to prison. Profaneness.
Then did his attendants cry out, A Lutheran, a Lutheran, To the fire with him,
to the fire with him; and one gave him a blow with his fist, another pulled him
by the hair, another by the beard, A godly Bookseller burnt.
so that the poor man was all imbrued in blood, before he came to prison. The
next day he was brought before the Judge, where, by the instigation of the
Bishops, he was condemned to be burned the same day, and so was carried to the
fire with two Bibles about his neck, one before, and another behind, where he
made a most Christian end.

The Waldenses were dispersed also into several other Countries, as Bohemia,
Austria* Germany, Flanders, England, Poland, Italy, Spain, Dalmatia, Croatia,
Sclavonia, Grecia, Philadelphia, Livonia, Sarmatia, Bulgaria, etc. In all which
places at one time or other they suffered persecutions; concerning which there
is not much left upon Record, and something will be spoken again of it in other
places of this book, and therefore this may suffice for the present.

CHAP. XXIV. The Persecution of the Albingenses.
THese were the same with the Waldenses, differing only in name from their
habitation in the Country of Albi. Diverse of Waldo's disciples going into this
Country, and amongst them one Arnold (from whom they were called Arnoldists)
labored with so good success, that in a short time there was scarce any found
that would go to Mass.

Pope Alexander the third was much moved to anger, when he saw many great
Provinces to shake off his Antichristan yoke, and therefore he condemned them
for Heretics in the Council of Lateran: Yet did they so multiply, that Anno
1200. they possessed many and great Cities; yea, they had many great Lords that
took part with them, as Earl Remund of Toulouse, Remund Earl of Foix, the
Vicount of Bezieres, etc. Pope Innocent the third pretended a great desire to
reclaim them by preaching and conference; and thereupon there was a famous
Disputation at Montreall, wherein the Popish Doctors were shamefully baffled by
Arnold: But the Popes policy was thus to rock them asleep whilst he raised
Armies against them to destroy them: Popish subtlity
The pretended occasion whereof was this; There was one Friar Peter that was
slain in the dominions of the Earl of Toulouse; whereupon the Pope sent
preachers abroad through all Europe to assemble men together to take vengeance
on the Heretics, for the innocent blood of Friar Peter, slain amongst them;
promising Paradise to all that would come to this war, and bear arms for
forty days. This he called the holy war, and gave the same Pardons and
Indulgences to those that came to this war, as to those which went into the
Holy land against the Saracens.

Then did he thunder against Earl Remund, charging all Archbishops and Bishops
through their Diocese to pronounce him accursed and excommunicated, Popes rage
against Earl Remund.
and that with the sound of a Bell, and extinction of Candles every Sabbath and
festival day, for murdering of a good servant of God* He also absolved all
his subjects from their oaths of allegiance to him; commanding every good
Catholic to pursue his person, and to take and possess his land, etc. He also
wrote to all Christian Princes to stir them up to get this pardon, rather by
fighting against these Albingenses, then by going against the Turks. Earl
Remund hearing of all these preparations against him, sent to the Pope, humbly
beseeching him not to condemn him before he was heard, assuring him that he was
no way guilty of the death of Friar Peter, but that he was slain by a
Gentleman, who immediately fled out of his Country, otherwise he would have
severely punished him for it. But all was in vain, for presently came Armies of
crossed soldiers to pour down their vengeance on him and his lands.

Amongst these were many noble men, and Ecclesiastical persons, Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, etc. to all which the Pope promised Paradise, but gave them
not a penny.

The Earl of Toulouse perceived that he must either prepare for defense, or
submit; the latter he thought the safer, and therefore he went presently to the
Popes Legate at Valance; to whom he began to say, He goes to the Popes Legate.
that he thought it strange that so many armed men should be brought against
him, who used no other arms for his defense but his own innocence: And that
concerning the death of the Friar, they should first have enquired the truth of
the fact, before they thus moved heaven and earth against him; yea, if he had
been guilty, yet there was an ordinary course of justice to be used against
him, and not to wreak their anger on his innocent Subjects: and therefore Sir
(said he) since I come voluntarily to you, armed only with the testimony of a
good conscience, what further use is there of these armed Pilgrims? pray you
therefore counte^mand these soldiers before they go to make any further spoil
in my territories: for my own person may serve for a sufficient pledge, etc.

The Legate answered, that he had done well in coming to him, yet could he not
send back the soldiers, except he would put seven of his best castles into his
hands, which should serve for a hostage; Now did the Earl when it was too late
see his own folly in putting himself into the Legates hands, and thereby making
himself a prisoner, but there was no remedy, now he must take Laws from him
that had him in his power, and therefore be told him that both his person and
possessions were at his disposal, beseeching him that his Subjects might
receive no more damage by the Soldiers.

The Legate presently sent to put Garrisons in those seven Castles, commanding
all the Consuls of every City presently to appear before him: and when they
were come, he told them that Earl Remund had delivered up his Castles to the
Pope, and therefore they were to take notice of it, that so they might
acknowledge themselves lawful Subjects to his Holiness, in case the Earl
should falsify his Oath to the Pope.

The Consuls were much astonished thus to see their Lord divested of all his
possessions: but that which most afflicted them was, to see him led to S. Giles
to be reconciled to the Church, where the Legate commanded the Earl to strip
himself stark naked all but his linen drawers: The Earl whipped naked.
then did he put a cord about his neck, whereby he led him nine times about the
grave of Friar Peter, scourging him with rods all the while: The Earl demanded
satisfaction for so sharp a penance seeing he was not guilty of the fact: the
Legate answered, that he must submit if he would be reconciled to the Pope,
yea, he must be thus scourged before the Earls, Barons, Marquesses, Prelates,
and all the people: he made him also to swear to be obedient all his life to
the Pope and Church of Rome: and to make irreconcilable war against the
Albingenses, etc,

Then did the Legate make him General of the crossed Soldiers for the seige of
Beziers: The Earl knew not what to do: For to conduct an Army to fight against
the Albingenses, was to sin against his conscience, and if he should fly away,
it would furnis^ them with new matter of persecution against him and his
subjects.

In this extremity he stayed in the Army a few days, and then went toward
Rome to reconcile himself to the Pope.

Then did the Army come before the City of Beziers, and provided all manner of
Engines for battery, Beziers besieged.
reared up ladders for a general Escalado: this the Earl of Beziers beholding,
and judging it impossible to defend the City, he went out: and cast himself
down at the Legates feet, beseeching him not to punish the innocent with the
nocent, which must needs be, if the Town were taken by storm: he told him, that
there were in the City great numbers of good Catholics, which would be subject
to the same ruin with the Albingenses: he desired him also to commiserate him
now in his minority that was a most obedient servant to the Pope, and had been
brought up in the Romish Church, in which he would live and die: The Legate
told him that all his excuses prevailed nothing, and that he must do as he may:
The Earl returned into the City, assembled the people, and told them that he
could obtain no mercy from the Legate, except all the Albingenses would come and
abjure their religion, and promise to live according to the Laws of the Church
of Rome: The Popish party requested the Albingenses to yield to this, but the
Albingenses answered, that they would not forsake their religion for the base
price of their frail life: that God was able, if he pleased, to defend them,
but if he would be glorified by the confession of their faith* Faith and
courage.
it should be a great honor to them to die for his sake: that they had rather
displease the Pope, who could but kill their bodies, then God, who could cast
both body and soul into hell, etc.

Then did the Popish party send their Bishop to the Legate, beseeching him not
to include them in the chastisement of the Albingenses: and that the best way
to win the others was by gentle means, not by rigor: the Legate grew into
great choler at this, swearing that if all the City di^ not acknowledge their
fault, they should all taste of one cup without distinction of religion, sex or
age: and accordingly he summoned the City presently to yield to his discretion,
which they refusing, he caused that his Engines should play, and that a
general assault should be given.

It was impossible for them within the City to resist so great violence,
Beziers stormed.
being assaulted by above an hundred thousand Pilgrims: so that the enemies
entered, and slew a great multitude, and set the City on fire, Barbarous cruelty.
and burnt it to ashes: When the City was first taken, the Priests and Monks
came forth of the great Church with Banners and Crosses, singing, Te Deum
laudamus; but the Soldiers, who were commanded by the Legate to kill all, ran
upon them, made their heads and arms to fly about the streets, so that they
were all cut in pieces.

In this City of Beziers they slew sixty thousand persons, the Popes Legate
saying to the Captains and soldiers, Caedite eos omnes, novit enim Dominus qui
sunt ejus, Kill them all] Catholics and Hereticks] for the Lord knows who
are his.

Then were these Pilgrims presently conducted to Carcasson before the forty
days of service, which they had vowed to the Church of Rome, were expired.

The Earl of Beziers when he saw that he could obtain no favor of the Legate,
before the City was taken, left his charge to the Bishop, and went to
Carcasson, endeavoring to prepare and furnish it for a long siege: but the
Legates Army followed him presently, unto which there came a new supply of
crossed soldiers out of sundry Countries, so that his Army now consisted of
three hundred thousand fighting men.

Near to the City of Carcasson was a Town of the same name: the City was seated
on an hill, and fenced with a double wall; yet the Pilgrims thought to take it
at the first sight, Carcasson besieged.
and therefore ran with great violence upon the first Rampire, filling the
ditch with fagots, but they were beaten back with such courage, that the ground
was covered with their dead bodies: The young Earl of Beziers won much honor in
this first encounter, encouraging his men, and telling them, that it was better
to die fighting, then to fall into the hands of such cruel and merciless
enemies, etc. The Albingenses much encouraged hereby, swore to him that they
would spend their lives for the preservation of the City.

The next morning the Legate commanded a general assault to be made upon the
Town of Carcasson which was two miles from the City: and The people valiantly
defended themselves, but being oppressed with multitudes, the soldiers entered
the Town, Popish cruelty.
putting all to the sword and fire, as they had done at Beziers.

Then came the King of Arragon to the Camp, and told the Legate that he
understood that his kinsman the Earl of Beziers was in the City, and that with
his leave, he would go to him, not doubting but that he should prevail with him
to do his duty to the Pope and Church: The Legate gave him leave, and the King
approaching to the Rampire, called for the Earl, who came to him: then said the
King, that he desired to know of him what moved him to shut up himself in that
City against so great an Army of Pilgrims? the Earl answered, that it was to
defend his life, goods and Subjects: that he knew well that the Pope, under the
pretense of religion, resolved to destroy his Uncle Remund, and himself: that
he saw the cruelty which they had used at Beziers even against the Priests
themselves: adding also what they had done to the Town of Carcasson, and that
they must look for no mercy from the Legate or his Army: and that therefore he
rather chose to die, defending himself with his subjects, then to fall into the
hands of so inexorable an enemy as the Legate was: that though he had in his
City some that were of another religion, yet they were such as had wronged
none, and were come to his succor in his greatest extremity, and for their
good service he was resolved not to abandon them, and that his trust was in God
the defender of the oppressed, that he would assist them against that world of
ill advised men, A brave speech
who forsook their own houses to burn, sack, and ransack, and kill in their
houses other men without reason, judgment, or mercy.

The King returning to the Legate, told him, that his cozen was much
discontented with his former dealings against his Subjects of Beziers and
Carcasson, that he believed, seeing they spared not the Romish Priests, their
war was not for Religion, but a kind of theevery: that he would not yield
himself to the descretion of such merciless men, etc.

The Legate, after some debate, told the King, that for his sake he would
receive the Earl of Beziers to mercy, Popish cruelty, and unleannesse.
and that with him, twelve more might come out with bag and baggage, but for
the rest he would have them wholly at his discretion, and that they should all
come forth stark naked, men, women, maids, and children, without shirts,
smocks, or other covering, and that then they might hope well of his mercy, he
being the Popes Legate, etc.

The King much distasted this propositions, yet reported it to the Earl of
Beziers, Carcasson stormed.
who returned answer, that he would not come forth upon such unreasonable and
unjust propositions, but would defend himself and his Subjects, as God should
enable him.

Then did the Legate cause all his Engines to play, commanding, that they
should take the City by storm, The Pilgrims repulsed with great loss.
but he was little pleased when he saw the loss of a great number of his
Pilgrims: for they in the City threw down stones, fire, pitch, brimstone, and
boiling water, wherewith they so galled the assailants, that the earth^ ^s
covered, and the ditches filled with their deads bodies, which (...) a wondrous
noysom stink both in the City an Camp.

This overthrow caused diverse of the crossed soldiers, having accomplished
their forty days service, and thereby gained Paradise, to refuse to conquer
more after so fair a purchase, and therefore they returned home.

The Legate being much troubled to see his Army so decreased, thought of this
Stratagem, he sent for a gentleman, telling him that he might do a piece of
service, whereby he might not only merit heaven, but gain a great reward here:
which was by going to the Earl of Bezires, endeavoring to put him into great
fears, and then to persuade him to have recourse to the Legates mercy, and
withal that he should persuade him with great Oaths and Execrations (whereof
he could absolve him at his pleasure) to come with him to the Legate, Popish
Profaanenesse and perfidiousness.
with assurance that he should be dismissed safe and sound.

This Gentleman played his part so well, that he brought the young Earl with
him: The Legate presently told him, that he was now his prisoner till Carcasson
was taken, and till his Subjects had better learned their duty: the Earl
astonished hereat, The Earl made a prisoner.
cried out that he was betrayed, and that faith was violated with him, etc. but
this nothing prevailed, for he was presently committed to the guard and custody
of the Duke of Burgonne.

The inhabitants of Carcasson understanding this, A special providence.
brake forth into tears, and were so astonished, that they now thought of
nothing but how by flight to escape the danger, but that seemed impossible,
being environed with such an Army: at last one told them, that he heard some
old men say, that there was a certain vault under ground, great and large,
which went to the Castle of Cameret three leagues off: Then were all the
Citizens employed to search for this vault, and having at last found it, they
began their flight in the evening, with their wives and children, carrying with
them only some victuals for a few days. This departure was accompanied with
much sorrow thus to leave all their worldly enjoyments: The next morning they
came to the Castle, and from thence dispersed themselves, some to Arragon,
others to Catalonia, others to Toulouse, whether it pleased God to conduct
them. Carcasson taken


In the morning the Pilgrims were strangely astonished, hearing no noise nor
seeing any man stirring in the City, yet they approached the walls with much
fear, lest it should be but a stratagem to endanger them, but finding no
opposition, they mounted the walls, crying out, that the Albingenses were fled,
and thus was the City with all the spoils taken, Simon of Montfort made
General.
and the Earl of Beziers committed to prison in one of the strongest Towers of
Carcasson.

Then did the Legate call all the Prelates, and great Lords of his Army
together, telling them, that though it was requisite that there should be
always a Legate in the Army, yet it was likewise necessary that there should
be a secular General, wise and valiant, to command in all their affairs, etc.
This charge was first proffered to the Duke of Burgonne, then to the Earl of
Ennevers, and to the Earl of S. Paul: but they all refused it: Lastly, it was
proffered to Earl Simon of Montfort, who after some excuses, accepted of it.

The Earl being made general, settled himself at Carcasson with four thousand
Pilgrims, all the remainders of that huge Army.

After this Earl Remund of Toulouse, went to the French King for his Letters of
commendation to the Pope, to be by him fully cleared from the death of Friar
Peter, and the Pope thereupon received him courteously, gave him full remission
and absolution, and thereby declared him sufficiently justified.

Shortly after the Earl of Beziers died in prison, and Earl Simon was put into
possession of his lands, Eearl of Beziers dies.
whereupon all that bordered upon him began to fear him, for that he gave it
out that the Spring following he would have a great Army of Pilgrims, wherewith
he would chastise those that had not acknowledged his authority given him by
the Church. Upon this occasion Castris sent unto him the keys of their City;
the Castle of Pinies yielded to him, and so did all round about Carcasson: But
the King of Arragon secretly encouraged the Gentlemen of the Vicounty of
Beziers, The King of Arragon encourages the Albingenses.
telling them that his Pilgrims would be uncertain, and would not stay long
with him, and that if in the mean time they would but keep themselves in their
Garrisons, when he was weak by the departure of his Pilgrims, they might then
set upon him, and reduce him to reason.

These messages gave such encouragement to the Gentry, that the Earl Simon
being gone to Montpelliar, they took arms to shake off his yoke, besieging some
of his soldiers in a Tower near to Carcasson: the Earl hearing of it presently
returned to succor them, but the Tower was taken before he came, which affront
brought him into some contempt: Then Captain Boucard belonging to Earl Simon,
attempted to surprise the strong Castle of Cabe^et, making his approach thereto
as secretly as he could: Captain Roger commanding therein for Earl Remund, was
come forth with eighty horse to forage: Boucard on the sudden charged him: but
Roger doubled the charge in so furious a manner, that he overcame Boucards
party, and brought him prisoner into that Castle that he came to surprise.

Gerad of Pepios took part with the Albingenses, so that the war grew hot:
Earl Simons pride abated.
but all the men that Earl Simon took, he caused a great fire to be made, and
cast them into it: neither did his men escape scot-free, when they fell into
their enemies hands.

The City of Carcasson was hereupon stricken with great fear, having little
hope to defend themselves, but by flight, being environed on all sides by their
enemies. About this time Earl Simon wrote to all the Prelates through Europe,
that if in the Spring following they did not send him good store of Pilgrims,
Prodigious cruelty.
he could hold out no longer against his enemies, having since the last
departure of his Pilgrims, lost above forty Towns and Castles; And whilst
that he waited for these new succors, he surprised the Castle of Beron, where
he pulled out the eyes of above a hundred Albingenses, and cut off their noses,
leaving only one with one eye to guide the rest to Cabaret.

Anno 1210. Earl Simon being shut up in Carcasson for want of soldiers, heard
that his wife was coming from France with many Pilgrims, whereupon he went out
to meet her: These Pilgrims he employed against the Castle of Menerbe, Menerbe
taken.
which at last was yielded up to him for want of water. This Castle was
defended by Remund, Lord of Terms, and was situated in Narbonne: one argument
which Earl Simon used to stir up his crossed soldiers to fight manfully
against it, was, For (that says he,) there has been no Mass sung in it since
the year 1180. which is now thirty years, Upon the surrender of the Castle
they labored to draw this noble Lord to recant his religion, and turn Papist;
but finding him immovable, they shut him up in a straight prison, where shortly
after he died: they also took his wife, sister, and daughter, who was a maid,
and other Noble women, with whom they labored to withdraw them from the truth
both by flattery and frowns, by fair speeches, and cruel threats, but when
they saw that nothing would prevail, they made an huge fire, casting them into
the same, and burning them: God fridi Annals. Also after his taking of the
said Castle, he caused a Friar to preach to the people, and to exhort them to
acknowledge the Pope and Church of Rome: but they not staying till he had done*
cried out, Courage and constancy.
We will not forsake our faith, you labor but in vain, for neither life nor
death shall make us abandon our belief. Then did the Earl and Legate cause a
great fire to be made, and cast into it a hundred and fourscore men and women,
who went in with joy, giving God thanks for that he was pleased so to honor
them, as to die for his Names sake: They also told Earl Simon that he would one
day pay dear for his cruelties. All that saw their valor, and constancy were
much amazed at it.

Then did the Earl besiege the Castle of Terms, which also at last was taken
for want of water; yet they within the Castle, The Castle of Terms taken.
when they perceived that they could hold out no longer, one night quit the
place and passed away undiscovered. The Castle de la Vaur, was also besieged,
in which there were many godly people: Thither came many Pilgrims to the
Legate, from all Countries; and amongst others, Six thousand Pilgrims slain.
six thousand Germans, of whose coming the Earl of Foix hearing, he laid an
ambush for them, overthrew and slew them all, not one escaping but an Earl that
carried the news to Earl Simon. After six months siege the Castle of Vaur was
taken by assault, Horrible cruelty.
where all the soldiers were put to the sword save eighty Gentlemen, whom Earl
Simon caused to be hanged, and the Lord Aimeri on a gibbet higher then all the
rest, the Lady his sister was called Girauda, was cast into a ditch, and there
covered with stones.

And for the rest of the people a very great fire was made, and they were put
to their choice, whether they would forsake their opinions, or perish by the
flames: There were scarce any of them found that would do the first, but
exhorting one another, they went into the kindled fire of their own accord,
says Altisiodore, but more probably they were forced into the same, where
joyfully they resigned up their spirits unto God: Some say that they were about
four hundred persons that thus perished by fire.

After the return of the Earl Remund from the Pope, the Legate still fought to
entrap him, Popish subtilty
but the Earl would not come again within his reach. Then did the Legate send
the Bishop of Toulouse to him, who pretended a great deal of love and
friendship to the Earl, and by his subtilty at last prevailed with him to
profer his strong Castle of Narbonnes to them to lodge in as they passed that
way: but as soon as the Legate and his company were entered, they seized upon
it, and put into it a garrison, which was a continual vexation to all his
subjects.

Then did the Legate resolve upon the utter extirpation of Earl Remund, The
Legate dies.
and all his house, as the head of the Albingenses; but presently after this
Legate dying, Earl Simon was frustrated of this hope.

About this time the English who now possessed Guienne, which bordereth upon
the Earldom of Toulouse began to help the Albingenses, being stirred up thereto
by Reinard Lollard, The English help the Albingenses.
a godly, and learned man, who by his powerful preaching converted many to the
truth, and defended the faith of the Albingenses; for which they were so
eagerly pursued, and constantly suffered Martyrdom: And this they did the
rather, not only for their neighbour-hoods sake, or for that Simon Earl of
Lecester was a rebel, and traitor to their King, but because this Remund Earl
of Toulouse, whom they so cruelly whipped, and other wise abused, and had now
also excommunicated, was brother in law to King John. For his former wife was
Joane sometimes Queen of Sicilie, which Joane was King John's sister, and bare
to the Earl of Toulouse, Remund, who succeeded his father both in the Earldome,
and in his troubles. John le Maier much commends this Lollard, saying that he
foretold many things by Divine Revelation, which (says he) came to pass in my
time, and therefore he puts him into the rank of holy prophets: And for his
learning it is evident by his comment upon the Revelation, where he sets
forth many things that are spoken of the Roman Antichrist. This worthy man was
afterward apprehended in Germany; and being delivered to the secular power,
was burnt at Collen.

Anno 1211. A new Legate called Theodosius was appointed to succeed who
excommunicated Earl Remund, Popish pride
and the Bishop of Toulouse thereupon sent the Earl word that he must depart
out of the City, for that he could not say Mass whilst an excommunicated
person was in the City: The Earl returned this answer, being netled at his
insolency, Popish hypocrisy.
that he (the Bishop) should presently depart out of his Territories, and that
upon pain of his life: accordingly the Bishop departed, and took with him the
Canons of the Cathedral Church, with the Cross, Banner, and Host, and all of
them barefooted in Procession: Coming thus to the Legates Army, they were
received as persecuted Martyrs, with the tears of the Pilgrims, and general
applause of all.

Then the Legate thought that he had suffici^nt cause to prosecute Earl Remund,
as a relapsed and impenitent man; but first he sought by craft to get him into
his power, and with his fair flatering letters, he at last drew him once again
to Arles: The Earl had requested the King of Arragon to meet him there. When
they were both come, the Legate commanded them upon the pain of his high
indignation, that they should not depart, but with his leave: Whilst they were
there, the Earl was privately showed by a friend, The Articles of the Legate to
which he would enforce him to subscrib, Articles against Earl Remund.
which were these.

1. That the Earl of Toulouse should presently dismiss, and cashiere all his
men at Arms, not restraining one.

2. That he shall be obedient, and subject to the Church: and repair all the
costs, and damages which the Church has been at.

3. That in his lands, no man should eat of more then two sorts of flesh.

4. That he shall expel out of his territories all the Heretics, and their
allies.

5. That he shall deliver into the hands of the Legate, and of Earl Simon, all
those persons that shall be named unto him.

6. That no man in his lands whether noble, or ignoble, shall were any costly
apparel, but black course clokes.

7. That All his Castles of defense shall be razed to the ground.

8. That no Gentlemen of his shall live in any City, or Castle, but in country
houses, or villages only.

9. That he shall not levy in his land any taxes, or tolls, but such as in old
time were accustomed.

10. That every Master of a family shall pay yearly four Tholousian pence to
the Legate.

11. That when Earl Simon shall pass through his countries, he shall bear
their charges.

12. That after his performances of these things, he shall go into the Holy
land to fight against the Turk, and never return again into his own country,
but by the leave of the Pope, or his Legate.

Remund having read over these Articles showed them to the King, who advised
him presently to mount on horseback, least seizing upon him, they might the
better become masters of all his estate which accordingly he did. The Legate
was much troubled that he had thus lost his prey, and despairing to do any more
by subtilty, he resolved to set upon him by force: and thereupon he besieged
the Castle of Montferrand, where Baldwin, Earl Remund in danger.
the brother of the Earl of Toulouse was governor: Baldwin, at least
pretending inability to defend the place, yielded it up, and abjuring his
opinions turned Papist.

The Earl of Toulouse seeing himself thus betrayed by his brother, lamented
exceedingly: His brother betrays him.
but a greater mischief soon after befell him: For the Legate, and Earl Simon
won from him by their subtilty, the King of Arragon, his only prop under God:
and that by this means they agreed that the King of Arragons daughter should
be married to Earl Simon's eldest son, in consideration whereof the King of
Arragon invested Simon in the Earldom of Beziers: and now they intend jointly
to besieg Toulouse: For which end the Bishop of Toulouse was sent to levy
soldiers in France, and at his return hasted to Toulouse: which Earl Remund
hearing of, sallyed out of the City with five hundred horse, and some foot,
marching to the bridge which goes over the river of Garenne not far from
Toulouse, Toulouse besieged.
hoping either to gain it, or to break it down: but being overpowered by
multitude, he was forced to make a retreat, and the enemy pursued him to the
very gates of Toulouse: But Earl Remund seeing their insolency, sallyed out
again with a greater strength, and charged them so gallantly, that he beat
them back to the bridge, which being but narrow, he slew almost all of them
there: and took prisoner amongst them, The Pilgrims beaten.
Aimery the son of Earl Simon. Earl Simon hearing of this loss, hasted with all
his army to the City, and gave a furious assault to it, but the ditches were
soon filled with the dead bodies of the enemy beaten from their scaling
laddars: and the Earl himself was beaten from his horse. In the midst of
this assault, came the Earl of Campeigne soon enough to be well beaten for his
welcome, The siege raised.
Earl Simon finding such stout resistance from the Citizens, caused his
Pilgrims to spoil the Orchards, Gardens, and Vineyards about the city, which
being perceived; the President of Argeves issued out of the City suddenly, and
slew a number of the Pilgrims, and on another part, the Earl of Foix slew as
many as he could meet with.

The Earl of Bar seeing the disorder of the Popish Army cried out a Bar, a Bar,
but the Citizens of Toulouse charged him so bravely, that being discomfited, he
was faigne to fly amongst the rest. After this victory Earl Remund returning to
Toulouse caused public, and solemn thanks to be returned unto God, for the
same.

Earl Simon after this lead his Army into the country of the Earl of Foix, who
was now sick, where he took some towns: also the Legate with another part of
the army went to Roquemaur, and in his way took the Tower of Cassas; Popish
perfidiousness^, and cruelty.
and caused above an hundred men that were found therein most cruelly to be
burned alive, and levelled the Tower to the earth.

Earl Remund being much afflicted for the loss, and alienation of his ancient
friend the King of Arragon, studied how he might regaine him, and for that end
propounded a match between his only son, and heir, and the King of Arragons
daughter, which motion the King readily embraced, and so their amity was again
revived.

Not long after the King of Arragon sent a letter of defiance to Earl Simon,
who sent the same all over Christendom to stir up Pilgrims to assist him for
the destruction of the King who (as he said) was now become the Captain of the
Albingenses: and in the mean time the Popes Legate raising an army in France,
went speedily into the Earldome of Foix, and took some Towns, putting all to
the sword without distinction of sex or age, and taking also St. Anthonies, he
caused thirty of the principal men to be hanged in cold blood, after he had
granted them their lives.

Anno Christi 1213. Peter King of Arragon with a great army of Arragonois, and
Tholousians besieged Muret, a strong Town situated upon the river Garronne
near unto Toulouse: There was in his Army the Earls of Toulouse: Comminges, and
of Foix; but the night following, the Popish Bishops sent two Friars to him,
desiring him to take pity on the Church: and not to undertake the defense of
the Heretics, but they labored in vain, for the King would not desert them,
whereupon they prepared the next day to give him battle, and whilst Simon
Montfort was encouraging his soldiers, the Bishop of Toulouse carried a
crucifix in his hand, whereupon the Captains a lighting, adored it with and
humble kiss. Then the Bishop of Comminges, getting upon an high place took the
cross in his hand, and blessed the Army with it, promising forgiveness of all
sins to all that dyed in that quarrel: Hereupon Simon divided his army into
three Battalia's in the name of the Trinity, and so joining battle, they fought
very gallantly on both sides* till at length the King of Arragon was slain,
and so God (who does not always prosper the best cause) gave the victory to
the Popelings, and they were slain in the fight, and pursuit about two
millions of the Albingenses, as their enemies reported. The Albingenses
attributed this loss to Gods judgment upon the humane confidence of the King,
who trusted too much in his great numbers, and was feasting whilst his enemies
were plotting,

After this victory the Popes agents sent abroad their letters into diverse
countries for a new supply of Pilgrims utterly to root out the Heretics.

With this victory Earl Simon was so puffed up, that he summoned the Earls of
Toulouse, Foix and Comminges, and the Prince of Bearn, to deliver to him the
keys of those Cities and Castles which they possessed: They returned no
answer, but each of them betook himself to his own Territories, to provide the
best they could for their affairs.

Earl Remund retired to M^ntalbon, writing to them at Tholo^se, that
understanding that the Bishop of Arras was coming with a great Army of Pilgrims
against them, and that he was altogether disabled to defend their City, he had
advised them therefore that they should make the best terms they could for
themselves with Earl Simon, yet desired them to reserve their hearts for him,
till God should give him means to free them from those miseries. In the
interim, the Earls of Foix, Comminges, and the Prince of Bearn did what they
could to infest the enemies Armies.

Upon the former advice the Citizens of Toulouse sent some Deputies to Earl
Simon, to profer him the keys of their City, Popish perfidiousnesse.
whom he received honorably, and presently wrote to Lewis son of King Philip,
that the City of Toulouse was offered to him, but his desire was that he should
come and have the honor of taking it: The Prince went thither immediately, and
had Toulouse delivered to him: Yet the Legate resolved that the pillage of it
should be given to his Pilgrims, and the City dismantled, which was presently
executed, though contrary to the promise made to the Citizens, that no wrong
should be done to the City.

Then came there a new Legate of the Popes called Bonaventure with those that
had taken on them the Cross. Viz. the Earl of Saint Paul, the Earl of Savoy,
the Earl of Alenzon, the vicount of Melun, Matthew de Montmorency, Subtilty
and other great Lords. The Legate seeing so many Pilgrims, feared least Prince
Lewis should take upon him to dispose of diverse places held by the Albingenses,
to the prejudice of the Church: Whereupon he presently sent to all those places
Absolution and protection, so that when the Prince came against them, they
showed that they were under the protection of the Church: Yea the Legate told
the Prince, that since he had taken upon him the Cross, he was to be subject
to his commands; because he presented the person of the Pope, whose Pardons
(says he) you come to obtain by obeying the Church, and not by commanding as
the son of a King. The Prince dissembled his displeasure at this
audaciousnesse; and the poor Albingenses were so oppressed by new Armies of
Pilgrims, that they sunk under the burden of it.

Prince Lewis retires.
The Prince, when his forty days service were expired, retired himself, being
much discontented to see so much tyranny exercised against the Albingenses.

Then did Earl Simon besieg the Castle of Foix, but having lain ten days
before it, he found to his cost that the place was not to be won by him: For
where as Earl Simons brother quartered at varilles, the Earl of Foix dislodged
him, and slew him with his lance, putting to flight all his men. News hereof
being brought to Earl Simon he swore that he would drive the Earl of Foix
behind the Pyrenaean Mountains: Earl Simon beaten.
but presently he had intelligence that a great Army of the Arrogonois, and
Catalunians were come into the Earldom of Beziers, threatening to be revenged on
him for the death of their good King, where upon he levied his siege in have,
and marched thitherwards: But the Earl of Foix, who knew the passages better
then he, lay in ambush for him in a place fit for his turn, and suddenly
setting upon his Pilgrims, slew a great number of them: only Earl Simon with a
few others escaped, and went to Carcasson: but before he came thither, the
Arrogonois were gone, else might they easily have discomfited him, yet shortly
after they returned again, and Earl Simon was foundly beaten by them, so that
he was forced* to shut himself up in Carcasson till he had a new supply of
Pilgrims.

Shortly after came Remund the son of Earl Remund out of England, where he had
been bred under his uncle King John, Young Remunds success.
with an Army, and quickly made himself Master of the City of Beaucaire, and
almost famished them that held the Castle, so that they yielded it up to depart
with their baggage. There Earl Simon lost a hundred Gentlemen that he had laid
in ambush near unto the City, whom young Remund in a sally cut in pieces.

Earl Simon honored.
Anno 1214. The Legate called a Council at Montpelier, for renewing of the Army
of the Church, and to confirm the authority of Earl Simon; where they declared
him to be Prince of all the Countries conquered from the Albingenses, which
title was confirmed to him by the Pope also. Who styled him the active and
dexterous soldier of Jesus Christ, and the invincible defender of the Catholic
Faith. But whilst Earl Simon was in the Council receiving this his new honor,
a great rumor was heard in the City, and a messenger brought word that the
people, hearing that Earl Simon was there, betook themselves to their Arms,
purposing to kill him; whereupon he stole away by the walls of the City on
foot, without any company, and so escaped; so that in one hour he saw himself
honored as a God, and flying disguised, hiding himself like a base scoundrell,
And disgraced.
for fear of the rascal multitude. A Council against the Albingenses.


Anno Christi 1215. Their was a Council held by the Pope at Lateran, where
they gave the Inquisitors such power against the Gospellers, that poor people
were every where horribly tortured that were but suspected for Heresy, and (as
Tritemius says) Friar Conradus of Marpurg, Popish cruelty
the Popes Inquisitor, if he but suspected any as guilty of Heresy, used to
try them by the judgment of red hot irons, and such as were burned by the
irons he delivered as Heretics, to the secular power, to be burned in the
flames: whereupon most of those that were accused were by him condemned to be
burnt, few escaping the hot irons: In so much as Noble, Ignoble, Clerks, Monks,
Nuns, Burgesses, Citizens, and countrymen were under the name of Heresy (by
too headlong a sentence of the Inquisitor on the same day where on they were
accused) cast into the cruel flames, no refuge of appeal or defense doing
them any good*

By the same Lateran Council, Earl Simon had the forementioned lands of the
Albingenses confirmed to him, and thereupon he hastened to the King of France
to receive investiture, and as he went (says the Monk of Sernay) in every City
and town the Popish Clergy, and people met him, crying, Blessed is he that
comes to us in the name of the Lord, and every man thought himself happy that
could but touch the hem of his garment.

When he had recived his Investiture from the King of France, being attended
with an hundred Bishops that had preached the Cross in their Diocese, and with
an exceeding great Army of Pilgrims he hasted to make himself Lord of all those
countries, which the Pope had given him. So that all men trembled at his
reproach, and with this great Army of Pilgrims he took in diverse places, using
great cruelty, A new Army of Pilgrims.
putting men women and children to the sword. Then was he marching to Toulouse,
purposing to pillage and raze it to the ground: Cruelty.
But by the way his wife sent him word that he must speedily come to her
relief, being besieged in the Castle of Narbonnes, by the Earl of Toulouse; but
by this time many of his Pilgrims were returned into France.

Yet Earl Simon hasted to the relief of his wife, and being come before
Toulouse, the people by their frequent sallies made that place too hot for his
abode. A popish brag.
The Legate perceiving that he was much astonished at it, said unto him; Fear
nothing, we shall quickly recover the City, and then we will destroy all the
inhabitants; and if any of our Pilgrims are in the fight, they shall, as
Martyrs, immediately pass to Paradise. hereupon one of Earl Simons great
Captains said, Monsieur Cardinal, you talk with great assurance, but if the
Earl believe you, it will be little for his profit, for you, and other Prelates
have been the causers of all this evil, and will be of more, if he believe you.
Then was it resolved that the City should be besieged on the side of Gascon,
but the Citizens made such a blunt salley, that they put their enemies to
flight; and presently the Earl of Foix coming with new supplies, fell upon Earl
Simon* chased him to the river Garonne, E. S^mon bea^en
where many of his Pilgrims were drowned, and the Earl with his horse fell
into the river, and hardly escaped.

The Earl Remund caused public thanksgiving to God for this happy victory.
Thanksgiving.


Earl Simon being in great perplexity, a Bishop bid him be of good comfort, for
that the Cardinal had sent messengers throughout the world to raise him
succors, and so he was enforced to wait, with much impatiency, the coming of
these new supplies,

Anno 1218. There came to him a hundred thousand Pilgrims, and he was resolved
that they should earn their pardons, knowing that at the end of forty days
they would vanish: Whereupon the next morning they were ordered to give a
general assault to Toulouse: But Earl Remund perceiving in the night that they
were very secure, because of their great multitude, he sallied out upon them,
and that with so good success, that ere morning all the field was covered with
their dead bodies, Many Pilgrims slain.
and the Earl with his men being weary with killing, returned into the City to
give thanks unto God for his assistance.

Then did Earl Simon enter into the Castle of Narbonnes to see if he could
discern any way to enter into the City, but finding none, it much troubled
him, whereupon two Lords gave him Counsel to come to some honorable
agreement: yet the Cardinal Betrand told him that there was no need for him so
to do; To whom one of them answered, Monsieur Cardinal, pray you where find
you that you should take from Earl Remund, and his son that which belongs unto
them: If I had known as much as I know now, I had never taken upon me this
business.

After nine months siege the Citizens of Toulouse made another sally, killing
as many of the crossed soldiers as they encountered with; and Earl Simon
coming in to the relief of his men, had his horse shot in the head with an
arrow, which caused him to run away with him, which one of the Albingenses
seeing, with his Cross-bow he shot him through the thigh; E. Simon slain by a
woman.
Simon perceiving that he lost much blood, was laboring to get out of the
press, but just at that present, a woman discharging an engine from the walls
of Toulouse, a stone parted his head from his shoulders; and thus by Gods just
judgment, he that had been the deflourer and murderer of many women, was
himself slain by a woman.

Upon his death, the Legate and all the Bishops fled, never staying till they
came to Carcasson, the Pilgrims disbanded and returned to their homes, and Earl
Remund caused a public Thanksgiving to be returned to Almighty God for this so
signal a deliverance.

Afterwatds, at the instigation of the Pope, Prince Lewis of France went, and
besieged Toulouse, but finding the business too hot for him, he returned
without doing any thing of note: Prince Lewis his cruelty.
yet in this journey he took the town of Miromand, wherein he cruelly put to
the sword men, women, and children to the number of five thousand.

Upon his return the Legate Bertrand being weary of these wars, wrote to Pope
Honorius the 3. desiring to be recalled because of his age: yet with all, he
signified a necessity of continuing these wars Otherwise (says he) not only
the lands of the Albingenses will be lost, but the Church of Rome itself will be
ruined, the Doctrine of the Albingenses shaking the authority of the Popes
themselves: And (says he) this war has cost us very dear, for within less
then fifteen years there has dyed above three hundred thousand Crossed
soldiers: and therefore all will be lost, except these Heretics be utterly
destroyed.

This occasioned the Pope to send a new Legate [ Conradus Bishop of Portua] Also
he granted to all Crossed soldiers that fought against the Albingenses the same
in dulgences as to those that went to fight against the Saracens in the Holy
land: Moreover he took King, Philip of France into his protection, and made
peace betwixt him, and young King Henry the third of England: so that Philip
wholly bent himself to root out the Gospellers.

Anno Christi 1220. Earl Guido of Monfort, son, Earl Guido slain.
and heir to Earl Simon went against the Albingenses, but was soon after
slain by the E. of Sant Giles as he besieged a Castle in Toulouse: Then did
his brother Almerick besieg the same Castle, and swore that he would never
depart from it till he had taken it: But after a while, his hoped-for aides
failing him, he was faigne to leave the siege and depart. After whose departure
the Albingenses recovered many places.

Anno Christi 1221. the young Emperor Frederick, by the instigation of the
Pope, published a cruel, The Emperors cruel edict against them
and bloody Edict against the Gospellers with in his Dominions, where in he
damned them with perpetual ignominy, and declared them public enemies:
Commanding their goods to be confiscated, without redemption; and their sons to
be disinherited. As also that all of them that were apprehended by the
Inquisitors or others, should be kept in Prison, till they were killed with an
abomminable death: The like punishment he commanded to be inflicted on all such
as should aid, or assist them. Also he took away all benefit of appeal from
such as were receivers, or favorers of them. And further he commanded that
their houses, and the houses of such as should receive, defend, or favor them,
either where they have taught, or where they have laid on hands, should be
plucked down, The Gospellers dispersed
and never more repaired.

Also the same year some of these Albingenses going into Bosina and Dalmatia
drew many of the people to embrace their faith, whereupon the Bishop of Collen
was sent thither by Pope Honorius as his Legate, and required to force them to
return to the Catholic faith (as they called it) either by persuasion, or by
the arms of the Crossed soldiers, but where neither prevailed, he being a
weary of the work, left it to the Friar predicants to see if by arguments they
could convince and convert them, Persecuted.
Columminus the King assisting them: and (says mine Author) when they had got
footing, they burnt with fires those that were obstinate in their Heresies, and
purged the Churches which were defiled by them: Leander de viris illust.
ordinis praedicatorum.

Anno Christi 1223. Bartholmew, the Bishop of the Albingenses of Toulouse, The
Gospellers increase.
ordained a Bishop for Bulgary, Croatia, and Dalmatia, where their faith spread
so fast, that Bishops themselves were drawn to be of their opinion, whereupon
Conradius Bishop of Portua, the Popes Legate wrote to the Archbishop of Roan,
and his Suffragan Bishops, to meet, with others Bishops at a Council to be
held at Sens against the said Bartholmew: who (says the Legate) in his
letters, styles himself servant of the servants of God: and runs about,
Creating Bishops, and endeavoring perfidiously to gather Churches. Matthew Paris.

Anno Christi 1226. (says the same Author) the Cross was preached all over
France by Romanus the Popes Legate, The King of France against them.
against the Albingenses, where in he commanded all that were able to bear
arms to sign them selves with the sign of the Cross against the Earl of
Toulouse, and his people: and at his preaching, a great multitude of Prelates,
and Lay men took upon them the sign of the Cross, yet more for fear of the
King of France, and for favor of the Legate, then induced by the justness of
the cause. But the King of France being signed with the Cross, would not take
upon him the expedition, unless the Pope would forbid the King of England
under pain of excommunication to move war against him for any land that he
possessed at that present, either justly or unjustly: which accordingly the
Pope did, and our King Henry the third upon receipt of the Popes letters
assembled his Nobles to consult with them what he should do upon this
inhibition, at which time their was present one Mr William Perepund, skillful
in Astronomy, who constantly affirmed before the King; That if the King of
France took upon him this expedition, he should either never return alive, or
else should meet with as great confusion as might be, both of his person,
estate, and followers.

The King of France having thus settled his affairs at home, he together with
the Legate, appointed a Peremptory day for the Crossed-souldiers to come to a
rendevous with their horses, and Arms at Lions, from which at the time
appointed he began his expidition with an huge Army which was accounted
Invincible, whom the Legate followed with Archbishops; Bishops etc. In the
Army there were reckoned to be fifty thousand Knights, and men at Arms on
horsback, besides an innumerable company of footmen; and then did the Legate
publicly excommunicate the Earl of Toulouse, putting all his favorers, and
lands under Interdict.

The King thus marching with his glittering Arms; and terrible Army on
Whitson-Eve came to Avignion, the first City in Toulouse, purposing to destroy
the whole land of the Earl, from one end to the other, and utterly to root out
the Inhabitants thereof: yet very cunningly the King and the Legate sent to the
Citizens, only desiring passage through the City, that they might follow their
journey the nearest way; The Citizens consulting together, returned answer,
That they suspected fraud, neither would they admit them into the City, where
upon the King in a great rage, swore that he would not depart thence till he
had taken the City.

The Citizens valiantly defended themselves so that the sieg lasted long, and
the Earl of Toulouse being a skillful warrior, Avignion besieged.
before the coming of the French Army, had withdrawn all kind of victuals
together with the women, children, and cattle into places of safety: Hereupon
the Kings Army fell into great wants, so that multitudes perished by famine:
Their horses and beasts also were starved; for the Earl had caused all the
meddowes to be plowed up in the whole country so that they had no fodder but
what was brought out of France: And their wants daily increasing, many Legions
went out of the Kings Camp to seek for food, and fodder, A Famine in the Kings
Army.
but the Earl of Toulouse with a flying Army, many times lay in ambush for
them, and cut off multitudes of them. They also that lay in the siege before
the City were miserably wasted by darts, and stones shot in ingines from the
walls by the Citizens valiantly defending themselves; and a general famine
overspread all, but it raged most amongst the poorer sort, who had neither food
nor money: Also out of the dead carcasses of men, and beasts their bred
certain great, and blackflies, A dreadful Judgment
which coming into there tents by swarms with an horible humming, infected
their meat, and drink, and when they were not able to drive them from their
cupps, and dishes, many of the Pilgrims perished suddenly by their means. But
the King and Legate were especially troubled, and confounded to think what
reproach it would be to them, and to the Church of Rome, that so gallant, and
numerous an Army should undertake such an expedition, and be able to effect
nothing: Then the chief Princes, and Captains being weary of the long siege
amongst so many deaths, solicit that a general storm might be given to the
City, hoping by their multitudes to oppress the Citizens, which being resolved
upon, such a great multitude of Armed men thronged upon the bridge that goes
over the river of Rhodanus, that the bridge breaking under them, three thousand
of them were drowned in that swift river. Many of them drowned.


Presently after as the French were one day at dinner the Citizens discovering
there carlesness, suddenly sallied forth, The French beaten.
and violently setting upon them, suddenly slew Twenty thousand of them with
out any loss to themselves, and so retired: and the King of France commanded
the dead bodies to be thrown into the River affording them no other burial:
The King removes further from the City.
Then did he also remove his sieg to afarther distance, and to prevent the like
attempts, caused a great ditch to be cast up between the City and his camp: and
the Legate with his Prelates not knowing how otherwise to reveng themselves,
Anathematized the Earl of Toulouse, and all the subjects: But whom they cursed,
the Lord blessed: For shortly after he sent a very great plague into the French
camp, so that king Lewis, to escape the same, retired himself into the
neighboring Abbey of Monpensier, where he resolved to remain till the City
should be taken unto whom came Henry, A plague in the French Cam^
Earl of Compaigne, desiring to be dismissed, having now sereved his forty
days: but the King denied his request. To whom the Earl said, that having
performead what was enjoined, he neither might nor would be staid any longer:
The King being very angry hereat, swore that if he departed, he would wast his
whole land with fire, and sword: yet the Earl, according to his former
resolution, went his ways: and shortly after the Lord struck the King with
sickness whereof he dyed: The King of France dies.
The Legate, and great Captains concealed his death for a month together, and
in the interim sent messengers laboring to draw the Citizens to a composition,
and Commissioners, being sent to the Camp, the Legate persuaded them to resign
up their City to him upon promise, that they should enjoy their lives estates,
and liberties in a better manner then they had formerly: but they answered,
that they would not live under the power of the Frenchmen, whose pride, and
insolency they had often tried.

After along Parlee the Legate desired that himself and the Praelates, might be
admitted into the City, swearing with a great oath that he had continued the
sieg so long only that he might seek the salvation of their souls. The Citizens
giving credit to his promise, not suspecting his treachery, after mutual Oaths
given on either side, admitted him with the Praelates, and their followers into
the City: but contrary to their oaths the Frenchmen followed, violently rushing
into the City when the Gates were open, Av^gnion taken by treachery.
and seizing upon the Citizens they bound them, plundered their houses, and
slew many; and having thus by treachery made themselves Masters of the City,
they brake down the walls, and the strong towers of that noble City.

During this sieg their perished more then 22000. of the Pilgrims, by famine,
sword, pestilence, and other ways: and so the rest returned to their own
homes.

Anno Christi 1228. The Pope [now Gregory] being implacably bent to rout out
the Albingenses, stirred up the young King of France against them, who sent a
great Army into Provence utterly to destroy them, which Army hearing that the
Earl of Toulouse was in the castle called Saracen, The young ^ing of France
persecuts them.
they purposed to besieg him as being there shut up: But the Earl having notice
of their intent, with strong troops he lay in ambush in a wood through which
they were to pass: and when they were come to the place, he gallantly
assaulted them and after a bloody fight, slew many, took two hundred Knights,
His armies bea^en.
and about two thousand men at Arms: The Knights he imprisoned: but of the
other he caused some of their eyes to be pulled out, others to have their noses
cut off and so dismissed them. That summer the King of France sent three Armies
against them, all which were either put to flight or taken, and imprisoned by
the said Earl. Matthew Paris.

Yet the same year, Imbert of Beavim went against them with a great Army of
Crossed soldiers, amongst whom were three Archbishops, every one with the
Pilgrims of his Jurisdiction: And the Earl of Toulouse (being as it s^emes
unprovided) was faigne to shut up himself within the walls of Toulouse,
Toulouse besieged.
where he was strongly besieged by the Pilgrims, who also wasted, and spoiled
his country, and harvest, far and nere on every side: And the siege continuing,
the Citizens suffered great Famine, and when they were brought to this
extremity the Abbat of Grandsylue went from the Popes Legate to offer peace to
Earl Remund, and the Tholousians: A great Famine
Some of the Earls Captains dissuaded him from it, knowing the perfidiousnesse
of the Papists, but the cries of the hunger starved multitude prevailed, so
that a Truce was agreed upon for certain days, and Earl Remund upon the day
appointed went to the place where the peace should be concluded. But when he
came thither, the Abbat persuaded him that it was necessary that the agreement
should be perfected in the presence of the Queen Mothers, who was regent of
France, Popish treachery.
and pawned his faith to him, that if he would go to her, she should go; and
return in safety. The Earl overcome by these promises assented, and Meaux was
the place chosen by the Queen for their meeting. But as soon as Earl Remund
came thither, contrary to all oaths, and engagements, he was made a prisoner,
and had a guard set upon him that he might not start aside; and instead of a
treaty, he must submit to whatsoever should be enjoined*

It was a lamentable thing (says the Historiographer of Languedock) to see so
brave a man, that for so long a time was able to resist the whole power of
France, to come in his shirt, and linen breeches barefoot, and bare-leged to
the Altar in the presence of the Cardinals, and their to accept of such hard,
and unreasonable conditions as they were pleased to impose upon him: Amongst
which these were some: Unreasonable terms put upon the Earl of Toulouse.
that he should abjure the Heresy which hitherto he had defended; That for the
future he should be subject to the Church of Rome. That he should cast all the
Heretics out of his dominions: That he should give his only daughter Joane in
marriage to one of the King of France his brethren: That he should pay a yearly
stipend to six Popish Professors of the liberal Arts, and to two Grammarians
at Toulouse: That he should take upon him the Cross, and for five years wage
war against the Saracens, and other enemies of the Faith, and Church: And
lastly, that he should level with the ground the walls of the City of
Toulouse, and the walls of 30. other Cities, and Castles at the appointment of
the Legate, and fill up their ditches, and so remain a prisoner in the Louver
at Paris, till his daughter Joane was discovered to the Kings messengers at
Carcasson.

Pope Gregory's Counsels against them.
Anno Christi. 1229. diverse Councils were held against the Albingenses: One at
Toulouse, the Acts whereof were proclaimed in that City by Romanus, the Popes
Legate, another at Narbonne, where more, and more cruel decrees were made
against them. A third at Beziers exceeding in rigor both the former: and
amongst the rest an oath of abjuration, whereby all persons, Males at fourteen
years old, Females at twelve years old, were to abjure all Heresy as they
called it, and to swear that they would keep the Faith, and defend the
Catholic Church, and persecute all the opposers of the same: and that all that
took not this oath within fifteen daeis, should be held suspected of Heresy,
and proceeded against accordingly: also another Article was in these words:
Item we forbid the use of the Old, and New Testament to the Lay people:
Forbidding expressly that they have not the said books turned into the vulgar
tongue. Also the same year on Monday, Thursday, Pope Gregory proclaimed
Ecclesastical censures against them, and sent the prime Inquisitors of
Dominicks order into France to put the same in execution, he wrote also to
Lewis King of France to cast all those Heretics out of France, and to cause
the Earl of Toulouse to do the like in his Dominions, and to place new
counselors about him that might instruct him in the Catholic Faith, and
Manners, and to cast all such from about him as might corrupt him.

And whereas the Kingdom of Arragon was infected with Heresy, Pope Gregory
gave the Archbishop thereof, and his Suffragans power to erect an inquisition
against them.

Anno Christi. 1232. Died Fulco Archbishop of Toulouse, who had labored twenty
six years in extinguishing the Gospellers whom, Remund of Fulgaerio succeeded,
Persecution continued.
and so manfully behaved himself, that in his first year he caused nineteen of
the Albingenses to be apprehended and put to cruel deaths within his Diocese.

Anno Christi. 1233. Queen Blanch, and the Popes Legate, so over awed the Earl
of Toulouse, that they caused him to make cruel edicts against his own
subjects of the Albingensian Religion: A cruel Edict against them.
That they should be persecuted, searched out, and taken: That whosoever could
apprehend any one of them, should have a Mark for each of them so taken: that
all that were suspected to be of their Religion should be excluded from office
bearing, that all houses should be pulled down, wherein any of them should be
found, that all their goods and inheritances should be confiiscated: That the
like should be done to all that should aid or abett them, or that should
hinder, or not assist the Inquisitors in the execution of their office: That
whosoever should be suspected of their Heresy, should have an oath given him
to keep the peace, and the Catholic Faith: That the houses of such as should
be detected of Heresy after their death should be pulled down. That whosoever
should refuse to wear the Cross should have his goods seized on. etc.

The bones of one of them burnt.
The same year the Inquisitors were informed that in the territories of Brixia
there had lately lived one Guido de Lacha, who was much honored for his
austerity, and integrity of life, but that he dyed out of the communion of the
Church of Rome, having been infected with Heresy, whereupon they ordered his
bones to be dug up, and burned.

The Earl of Foix, and Comminges, and the Prince of Bearne yet remained to be
conquered: and the Popes Legate thought that the Earl of Toulouse was the
fittest person to deal with them, A brave answer
whereupon he caused him to write to them to persuade them to embrace the
Catholic Faith, etc. But the Earl of Foix returned answer; That he could not
forsake his faith in such a time wherein men might think that he did it rather
out of fear then from any good grounds, and that it was fitter for them to
convince him of the truth of their way then to allure him by promises, or force
him thereto by Arms: And that if they brought that world of Pilgrims against
him which they threatened, he trusted in God that he should make them know the
Justice of his cause, and repent of the rashness of their vow. But the Earls
subjects fearing that their Lord, being aged, and without wife and children,
should leave them to the mercy of the first Conqueror, entreated him to come to
a composition with the Legate, whereupon he began to treat, and at last yielded
up diverse Castles into the hands of the King of France, upon promise that he
would rule with justice and equity.

Anno Christi. 1234. the opinions of the Albingenses were much spread abroad in
the parts of Spai^^, and other adjacent countries: Albingenses in Spain.
and they had Bishops among them who boldly preached against the Romish errors,
and especially against Transubstantiation: whereupon a Croisado was preached
against them, and a very great Army of Pilgrims being assembled together were
by Pope Gregory sent against them, who slew them all with their Bishops,
Persecuted and destroyed.
seized of their City and plundered them, whereby (says Matthew Paris) they
returned rich, and joyfully into their own countries.

Also about the same time another Army of these Pilgrims went against others of
them on the borders of Germany, who retiring into a Fenny place for there
security, were their all slain.

But the same year the Lord raised up Trancavel, the natural son of the Earl
of Beziers deceased, who was encouraged, Trancavell and others defend them.
and assisted by a number of valiant Captains, as Oliver de Fumes, Bertrand
Hugon de Serrelong, Bertrand de villenense, and Jordaine de Satiat, who told
him that they would assist him to revenge the outrages done to his father, who
was deprived of his land, betrayed, imprisoned, and poisoned, whereupon he
resolved to recover by the sword what was so unjustly taken from him: and
before the enemies had notice of his design, he took in diverse strong
Castles, so that the Popes Legate, and Bishop of Toulouse were much astonished
to see these men stand up for the Albingenses, whom they supposed to have been
utterly suppressed.

Then did the Popes agents cause the cross to be preached, and the Bishop of
Narbonne animated the people of his Diocese to go against them, and to make an
end of the poor remainder of the Albingenses.

An army being raised, the Popes Legate led it to Toulouse, and when the
Citizens appeared upon their ramparts, he told them that he was come thither
for their preservation: They thanked him, but withal told him, that if he did
not instantly retire himself, they would give him the chase. He prevails
exceedingly.
And presently came Trancavell, who so bravely, and valiantly set upon the
Legates Troops, that he quickly overthrew them, and chased them to the very
gates of Carcasson, and the Legate had much ado to save himself, but that
which most angered the Legate was, that Trancavell found intertainement in some
part of Carcasson, so that the Pilgrims durst hardly peep out of the City
gates: and when he heard of any more Pilgrims coming to the Legate, he used to
meet them, to lay Ambushes for them, so that usually overthrowing them, their
designs were marred.

This man kept the field till the year 1242. and still prevailed against all
the crossed soldiers that came against him, whereupon Ameline the Popes Legate
wrote to the Pope, that if he caused not the cross to be preached in many parts
of Europe, the Church was like to sustain much damage by this enemy: For (says
he) he is more cruel, and subtle, then any before him.

But a little before the Bishop of Toulouse was informed of a certain Matron,
who having her children, brethren, and friends about her, was dying an
Heretic, whereupon he ran to her, and found it even so by the confession of
the woman her self: who desired to die in the faith of the Albingenses, and
doubted not to be saved: then did the Bishop condemn her, and delivered her to
the secular power, who presently carried her forth in the bed wherein she lay
sick, A dying woman burnt.
and burned her.

Anno Christi. 1235. Earl Remund getting from Paris, returned into his own
country, and forbad the Citizens of Toulouse to company with the Friars
predicant, and shortly after expelled them the City: And the Monastery of
Narbonne belonging to the same order of Friars was pulled down by the
Albingenses. Earl Remund escapes.
And in June following Pope Gregory the ninth made new Inquisitors against the
Albingenses in Arragon, and France.

Anno Christi. 1236. King Lewis of France wrote to the Pope that Earl Remund
had violated the Covenants which he had made with the Church: and had cast the
Bishops Clergy, and Friars out of Toulouse, He is forced to submit.
and brought Heretics into their rooms, whereupon he desired that he might be
reduced into order etc. And indeed by the power of the Pope, and King, he was
forced to recall the Popish Clergy, and to banish the Albingenses, and to take
upon him the sign of the Cross for the aid of the Holy land, by way of Penance
for his former deeds.

The same year many embracing the faith of the Albingenses bebeyond the Alps,
Inquisitors were sent against them; especially one Friar Robert, who caused
many of both sexes to be apprehended, and when they continued constant in the
true faith, Persecution in Italy.
and would not renounce the same, in the space of two or three months, he
caused fifty of them ( says Matthew Paris) either to be burnt, or burned alive.

Anno Christi 1239. the King of France having garisoned diverse Castles within
the country of Albingenses who greatly oppressed them, they betook themselves
to Arms, besieging those Garrisons, whereupon they sent to the King of France,
craving that present aid might be sent to them. 1240.
Then did the King of France send the Lord John of Bellemont, with a great Army
to aid them, who, Earl Remund prospers.
coming into that Country, besieged the strong Castle of Mont-reall, and at
last took it, together with diverse others belonging to the Albingenses, whereby
the were suppressed for that ^ime. But the year after the Earl of Toulouse took
Arms again, and assaulted the Earl of Provence, who presently sent to the
French King for aid: and the French that were about Avignion hasted to the
relief of the Earl of Provence, which the Earl of Toulouse hearing of, he lay
in Ambush in their way, Persecution in Millan.
and suddenly setting upon them, slew many, and dispersed the rest, and the war
so prospered in his hand, that in a short space he recovered to his former
dominion above 20. Castles from the French, and Earl of Provence, and sharply
punished his Rebels. Earl of Provence beaten


About the same time the Citizens of Millan, being provoked thereunto by the
Pope, and Emperor: burnt many of the Albingenses, who were their
fellow-Citizens.

Anno Christi 1241. The Earl of Toulouse continuing his wars against the Earl
of Provence, almost beat him out of his country, A great Persecution.
so that the Earl of Provence was feign to send to the Kings of England and
France (who had married his second daughters) to mediate for him, and they
writing to the Earl of Toulouse, obtained peace for their Father in law.

Anno Christi. 1242. the Bishops of Narbonne, and Albium, and the Seneschall of
Carcasson apprehended two hundred of the Albingenses in a certain Castle of
Toulouse, who had Bernard Martine of Cathavell, and Raimund Agulbuerus, for
their Pastors, and Ministers: All these upon examination, adhering constantly
to the true faith without wavering, were cruelly burnt in the flames. Vignier,
Hist. Eccles. And the year following there were 224. more of them burnt
likewise. Pope Urban Persecutes them*


Shortly after, it pleased God, that great contentions arose between the Pope,
and Emperor, whereby the Gospellers enjoyed some breathing time from their
former miseries: yet, Anno Christi. 1262. Pope Urban hearing that through that
peace their Doctrine was spread exceedingly, he made a Decree in this tenor.
Albeit we be bound by our office always to endeavor the rooting out the
deadly poison of Heretical pravity from all parts in the Christian world, yet
now in a special manner this duty is incumbent upon us, when we perceive this
plague to be grown up in our neighborhood through the iniquity of the times to
the detriment of the Catho-Faith. That therefore the office of the Inquisition
may be the more effectually executed against the Heretics in the province of
Lombardy: and parts adjacent, we enjoyne you, upon remission of your sins, that
you do your uttermost endeavors for the extirpation of it, and that you see
that all Papal and Imperial Laws be executed against them: and for my own
part I will implore the aid of Christian Kings, and Princes, that Heaven, and
Earth may be moved against them.

Anno Christi 1270 Petrus Cadarita, and Gulielmus Calonicus, were sent as
Inquisitors from the Pope into the Kingdom of Arragon, Another Persecution.
severely to punish those that had embraced the Faith of the Albingenses, and
amongst others they condemned Arnaldus Castlebonius the viscount, and his
daughter Ermesenda, Countess of Foix: They also decreed their memory to be
detestable, commanding their bones to be dug out of their graves, and to be
burned: They also called Roger the nephew of Ermesenda, into judgment for the
same crime.

Anno Christi. 1281. There was a great persecution raised against the
Gospellers in the Country of Albi, by one William de gurdon, Captain and
president of Carcasson under Phillip the French King, who by a proclamation
commanded all the Albingenses to be extirpated, and searched out of their dens
and lurking holes, A cruel Edict.
and all such as favored them to be utterly rooted out, as also that the
innumerable company of their children, which would not be reduced to the
Catholic faith, and unity of the Church of Rome, should not be admitted unto
the City of Realmont, or the territory thereof, nor to the place of any honor
or office: That such likewise as favored or concealed any of them, should be
banished forever from the City of Realmont, and their goods wholly confiscated,
and their children be excluded from all honors and dignities. Yet
notwithstanding the severity of this Edict, God hid and preserved many of them
even in Realmont it self, as Diamonds in dunghils, though many of them fled
into Arragon, and Sicily, where they might enjoy more freedom of Conscience.
They increase, and are persecuted.


Anno Christi. 1285. Gareldus and Segarellus of Parma, and Dulcinus of Noudria,
preached and spread the Doctrine of the Albingenses in Parma, and in many
cities of Lumbardy; whereupon Pope Honorius by a public Edict condemned their
Doctrine, and commanded them to be rooted out. Bzorius.

Anno Christi. 1300. Pope Boniface commanded Guido, the Inquisitor, to dig up
the body of Hermanus (one of the Albingenses) and to condemn and burn it in
Ferrara twenty years after his death.

Anno Christi 1315 The Friars Inquisitors raised a great persecution against
the Gospellers in Passaw in Austria, and burned many of them; who continued
very constant in the faith, and took their death very cherefully: Amongst the
rest one of them that was burnt at Vienna, confessed that their were eighty
thousand of them in Bohemia, and Austria at that time, their chiefest Ministers
were Bartholomew Faustus, James Iustus, Bononatus, William, and Gilbert: of
whom James was murdered between two walls by the Merciless Inquisitors;
Bononatus was burned alive, and William, Gilbert, and Bartholomew were
condemned after their death, the house where they used to preach was pulled to
the ground, and all that adhered to them were Anathematized.

Anno Christi. 1322. Lollard Walterus (from whom our English professors were
called Lollards) was taken at Collen, where he had privately preached, Lollard.
and through Gods blessings drawn many from ignorance and errors to embrace
the truth, and persisting constantly in his opinions, he was condemned, and
burned alive.

Yet notwithstanding all cruelties used against them, their enemies could never
prevail to a total extirpation of them, but they still lay hid like sparkles
under the ashes, desiring and longing to see that, which now through Gods grace
their posterity do enjoy, viz. The liberty to call upon God in purity of
conscience, without being enforced to any superstition and idolatry: and so
instructing their children in the service of God, the Lord was pleased to
preserve a Church amongst them, in the midst of the Romish corruptions, as a
Diamond in a dunghill, as wheat amongst chaff, as gold in the fire, till it
pleased God to disperse the Gospel in a more general and public way, by the
Ministry of Luther, and his associates and fellow laborers in the Lord, at
which time these Albingenses received with greediness the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and so became more eminent in their profession of piety then they were
formerly.

Laus Deo.

Collected out of a Book called Luthers Forerunners, and out of Cades
Justification of the Church of England, and diverse other Authors. Here place
the sixth Figure.

CHAP. XXV. The Persecution of the Church of God in Bohemia, which began Anno
Christi 894.
THe Bohemians were Heathens and Idolaters, till their Duke or Captain
Borivoius going into Moravia, Anno Cristi 894. by a strange providence of God
was converted to the knowledge and faith of Christ, whereupon he together with
thirty other Palatines was baptized; At his return into Bohemia, he took along
with him Methudius Bishop of Moravia, by whose Ministry, Christianity brought
into Bohemia.
Ludomilla the Dukes wife was converted and baptized.

Borivoius, busying himself in erecting diverse Schools and Churches, it
pleased God that in a short time a great harvest was gathered, many of the
Nobility and Commons being daily converted and baptized: but Satan envying the
progress of the Gospel, presently raised up persecution against the Professors
of it: For first of all Borivoius was banished by the wicked faction of the
Idolaters, and then compelled to resign his Dominion to his Eldest Son, who
being dead, his younger son Boratislaus succeeded, Persecution begun.
who was a very holy man yet was drawn to marry Drahomira, famous for nobility
and beauty, but a Heathen: yet she promised, after instruction, to be baptized,
and during her husbands life she cunningly concealed her hatred against
Christians, but he being dead, the grandmother Ludomilla educated the elder son
Wenceslaus, and Drahomira took the younger, Bolislaus, and usurped the
government, commanding the Christian Churches to be shut up, Tyranny.
the exercises of their worship to cease, prohibiting Ministers from
instructing the people, and Schoolemasters from teaching youth: such as
disobeyed were imprisoned, banished, and put to death.

At Prague, the Magistrates were changed, Persecution in Prague.
and cruel Idolaters substituted in the rooms of Christians, by whose
incitements the poor Christians were secretly, openly, and unworthily murdered
and abused: whilst the murderers went away with impunity: but if any
Christian killed a Heathen though in his own defense, ten Christians were
massacred for that one. Yet the insatiable cruelty of Drahomira was not
satisfied herewith, but that she might destroy all the Christians, she dealt
with one Balloius, a cruel wretch, whom she had set over the City of Prague,
earnestly entreating him by fraud or force to effect it, promising him a great
reward if he did it. He thereupon arms six hundred Conspirators at his own
house, A special providence.


with whom he hastens to those that were designed for slaughter: but the plot,
through Gods mercy, The Christians prevail.


being discovered to the Christians, four hundred of them met to defend their
own lives: the issue of the fight was victory to the Christians, Subtilty.
the streets being polluted with the blood of eight hundred that were slain.
Then did Drahomira pretend that she was much displeased with the tumult,
commanding that the Arms of both parties should be brought in to the City
magazine, severely forbidding any man to walk with dart or sword: the
Christians, though suspecting her fraud, yet that they might not seem
disobedient, brought their arms to the Magazine, the enemies pretending also to
do the like. 300. Christians slain.
This being done, Drahomira imploies her cutthroats in the night to set upon
the unarmed Christians, whereby above three hundred of them were slain in one
night; This Drahomira much rejoices at, but yet not satisfied, she commands
the Major of Prague to destroy all the Christians: whereupon he besets all the
streets, and passages, and slaies all that he meets withal: till the
Christians gathering themselves together, encounter with him, put him to
flight, and in the pursuit slew this wicked person. Gods judgment on
persecutors.
This so enraged Drahomira, that she commanded the two Churches to be burnt
down, in one of which her husband was interred. Whilst she thus raged against
the Christians, Wenceslaus now grown to years, by the advice of his
grandmother, and the Christian Nobility, Wenceslaus reigns
took upon him the government, and the better to establish peace, he assigned
the City of Bolislavia, and the adjacent parts to his mother, and younger
brother.

Drahomira yet laid not aside her hatred and bloody designs against the
Christians, which she first showed against holy Ludumella, substituting two
wicked villains in the night to murder her, these fellows finding her at her
prayers in her Oratory, strangled her: Some there were that much provoked
Wenceslaus to revenge that wicked act, Ludomilla murdered.
which he refused, because he judged it contrary to that duty which he owed to
a mother, and to the modesty and patience of a Christian. But he was shortly
after ill requited by this unnatural monster, who affecting domination, began
to defame Wenceslaus as sluggish and unfit for government, but when she
perceived that his subjects loved him exceedingly, she waited a fitter
opportunity, which thus fell out.

Bolislaus having a son, she invited Wenceslaus to the baptising of this his
Nephew at Bolislavia, he going thither, she entertained him with much
dissembled love: but in the night as he was making his prayers to God: His
brother Bolislaus assaults him, and being assisted with some other cutthroats
slew him, Wenceslaus murdered.
Anno 929. Bolislaus having by this fratricide obtained the government,
threatened imprisonment and death to all the Ministers and Christians if they
did not presently depart Bohemia: his mother added, that their dead bodies
should not be buried: Hereupon many fled, others were seized on, and tormented
to death diverse ways* but God suffered not Drahomira to escape his revenging
hand, Gods judgment on persecutors.
for in that place, where the ministers bones lay unburied, the earth opened of
it self, and swallowed her up alive with her Chariot, and all that were in it,
which place is to be seen before the Castle of Prague to this day.

Others also who were her instruments in massacring the innocent Christians,
some of them ran mad, and threw themselves down from high places, others slew
themselves with their own swords, wherewith they had murdered the innocent
men, and the place where Wenceslaus blood was shed, could never be washed off,
but remained as a perpetual witness of that villainy.

These things so affrighted Bolislaus, that he became more mild to the
Chistians.

Anno. 970. Woytich the second Bishop of Prague, laboring seriously in
converting the relics of the Gentiles, Woytich banished.
and reforming their wicked lives: they raised so great a sedition against him,
as enforced Woytich to a voluntary banishment: Then did the Pagans rise up
against his brethren, and murdered five of them, and then conspired against
their prince, but were overcome in battle, etc.

Not long after the Pope having usurped domination over other Churches, sought
to obtrude his superstitions upon the Bohemians also: but especially he
commanded that all their sacred service should be in the Latin tongue and that
they should not have the cup in the Sacrament: the Bohemians sent two
Ministers, and four others to Rome, The Pope usurps over the Bohemians.
Anno 977. to the Pope, desiring to be eased of these grievances, and at last
obtained their request.

Yet afterward they were again inhibited the use of their own language in
holy services, whereupon Urateslaus Duke of Bohemia (who shortly after for his
valiant service to the Roman Empire, was created King) sent Ambassadors to
Rome, requesting a confirmation of the Liberties formerly granted to them; but
the Pope [ Hildebrand] absolutely refused it.

Anno 1197. Pope Celestine sent a Cardinal into Bohemia, to inhibit Ministers
marriage, and to divorce such as were married, but the Bishop and Ministers
almost stoned him to death.

Also when afterward the cup was taken away in the Sacrament, there were many
that opposed that sacriledg, and amongst the rest John Melicius of a noble
family and fervent spirit, much honored for his rare learning and holiness of
life; John Melicius.
in his ministry he earnestly exhorted his auditors to a frequent communicating
in both kinds: at last he was much moved in spirit to go to Rome, and there to
testify that the great Antichrist was come, and did then reign.

He prayed unto God, with fasting and tears, The Pope Antichrist.
desiring that unless these thoughts came from Gods Spirit, he might be
delivered from them: but when yet he could find no inward quiet, he went to
Rome, and wrote upon the Cardinals doors, Antichrist is come, and sits in
the Church. He also in his conferences with many, asserted the same: For this
the Pope imprisoned him, and excommunicated both him, and his auditors.
Melicius imprisoned.


Mr. Mathias of Prague also, was a zealous defender of the Communion in both
kinds. Anno 1375. M. Mathias
He with some other learned men went to King Charles that then reigned,
requested him to call a Oecumenicall Counsel, for the reformation of the
Church. Charles sending to the Pope about it, he was so incensed at the
message, that he commanded the King to punish those rash and Heretical men:
Whereupon Mathias was banished the Kingdom; Mathias banished.
and then was the use of the Sacrament in both kinds prohibited through all
Bohemia: so that the godly could not administer and receive it but in private
houses, in woods and caves, and yet neither so, but with the hazard of their
lives: for they were set upon in the highways, plundered, beaten, and drowned
in rivers, so that at last they were necessitated to go together in companies,
and armed: and this continued to the days of John Husse. Concerning the
persecution of John Husse, John Husse, Jerome (...) Prague.
and Jerome of Prague, See in my first part their lives: But when these holy
men of God were so unjustly burned at Constance: the adversaries were not
satisfied with their blood, but took further counsel for the destruction of
the whole Nation: for when fifty eight of the chief Nobles of Bohemia, in the
name of all the Commons, Anno 1416. had sent Letters from Prague to the
Council, complaining that their Pastor, an innocent and holy man, and faithful
teacher of the truth was unjustly condemned: the Council instead of answering
them, wrote their Letters to some violent Papists who were in authority, to
assist their Legate in oppressing the Heretics.

Thus the Bohemians were incited more and more to mutual contentions: the
Priests daily from the Pulpits divulged their excomunications and execrations
against the Hussites, and to stir up the greater hatred against them, they used
lying signs; for, putting dirt about the wicks of their Tapers, when the flame
had burned the wax to the dirt, the Taper went out: Popish malice, and subtilty.
Then cried they out, That God by miracles declared his hatred of those wicked
Heretics, who were unworthy to enjoy the light: and thereupon they persecuted
them all manner of ways, and they used such violence, as raised a tumult at
Prague Anno 1419. wherein the enraged multitude threw twelve Senators of Prague
with the Mayor, out of the windows of the Senate House, who fell upon the
points of spears.

After this the Pope publicly excommunicated the Bohemians at Florence, The
Pope excommunicates the Bohemians.
exciting the Emperor, Kings, Princes, Dukes, etc. to take up Arms against
them, entreating them by the wounds of Christ, and their own salvation,
unanimously to fall upon them, utterly to extirpate that cursed generation,
promising universal remission of sins to the most wicked person, if he did but
kill one Bohemian: Hereupon great wars were raised against them but it pleased
God still to give them the victory under that brave Captain Zisca: Whereof see
more in my second Part, in Zisca's Life.

Yet still as the Popish party prevailed at any time, they exercised all manner
of cruelty upon the poor servants of Christ, insomuch that at Cuttenburg, where
were deep mettall-mines, Anno 1420. they threw into one of them a thousand and
seven hundred persons, Multitudes martyred.
and into another a thousand thirty eight, and into a third a thousand three
hundred thirty four persons.

Also a Merchant of Prague coming to Preslaw in Silesia, the Emperor and Popes
Legate being their, was in his Inn drawn into discourse, where pleading for
Husse, and the Sacrament in both kinds, he was cast into prison, the next day
a Student of Prague was cast into the same prison: The Merchant exceedingly
encouraged him, saying, Oh my Brother! What an honor is it, that we are called
thus to bear witness to the Lord Jesus? Let us undergo the trouble with
cheerfullnesse; Encouragment.
the fight is but short, the reward is eternal: Let us remember the Lord, what
a cruel death he under went for us, and with what guiltless blood we are
redeemed, and what torments the Martyrs have patiently endured, etc. But when
they were brought to execution, and the ropes by which the horses were to drag
them through the streets, were fastened to their feet; the Student affrighted
with the terrors of death, Apostasy.
and allured by the fair promises of the Legate, recanted: But the Merchant,
like an unshaken rock, told them, that their hopes of any recantation from him
were but vain; I am ready to die (says he) for the Gospel of the Lord Jesus:
And so being drawn slowly through the streets, Constancy.
he was brought to the place of execution, and there burnt, Anno 2420.

Pichel the chief Magistrate of the City of Litomeritia, having taken twenty
four of the chief Citizens, and amongst them his son in law, put them in an
high Tower, and at last he brought them out, half dead with hunger and cold,
and adjudged them to be drowned. When they came to the river Albis, their
wives, children, and friends greatly mourning; the Majors own daughter came
wringing her hands, and falling at her fathers feet, beseeched him to save her
husbands life; but he, harder then a rock, bad her give over, saying, What? can
you not have a worthier husband then this? Unnatural cruelty.
To whom she answered seeing his inexorablenesse, You shall never more espouse
me to any; and so beating her breast, and tearing her hair, she followed
amongst the rest. When the Martyrs came to the river, whilst Ferries were
preparing, they with loud voices call heaven and earth to witness their
innocence, and so taking their leave of their wives, children and friends,
exhorting them to constancy and zeal for the truth: Many drowned
they were carried and cast into the midst of the river, with their hands and
feet bound together and so drowned; and if any were driven to the banks, they
were stabbed with iron forks and pikes. The Majors daughter seeing her husband
thrown into the river, leaped in to him, caught him about the middle, but being
unable to draw him forth, they were both drowned; A loving wife.
the next day they were found embracing one another, and were both buried in
one grave, Anno 1421.

About the same time a company of soldiers going toward Prague, seized upon a
godly Minister, and four other men, and four boys, the eldest not being above
eleven years old, for administering, and receiving the Sacarament in both
kinds, and carried them to their Colonel, the Colonel sent them to the Bishop
who required, them to abjure, or else he would burn them; the Minister stoutly
answered, But the Gospel teaches otherwise, so that you must either approve
what we do, or blot it out of your Bible. Hereupon one of the troopers smote
him so violently on the face with his gantlet, that the blood ran out of his
mouth and nose. Cruelty.
The Bishop made this Minister the subject of his mirth and scorn all that
night, A Minister and others burned.
and the next day being the Sabbath, he burned them all in one fire; and when
the Bishop would have persuaded them to abjure the Cup in the Sacrament, the
Minister answered, That he would rather suffer a thousand deaths, then deny a
truth so clearly revealed in the Gospel.

Another Captain violently entering into a Church where many godly people were
met together, he killed some, and took others prisoners; and going to the
Communion Table, he took the Cup, being full of wine, Profaneness and
blasphemy.
and drunk to his horse, who having pledged him, he said, his horse was now one
of the communicants in both kinds.

About the same time also a Godly Tailor was burned at Prague. Also one Martin
Loquis should have suffered the like death, but his life was begged by the
Thaborites. Martin Loquis.
Afterward, taking another associate with him, he was traveling toward
Moravia, but by the way, they were taken by a Captain, who manacling them with
irons, examined them about the Sacrament: Martin answered, The body of Christ
is in heaven, and he has but one, not many bodies: Hereupon the Captain gave
him a box on the ear, as not enduring such blasphemy, and would have had him
presently burned. Then did a Priest beg him to see if he could convert him: but
when that succeeded not, he thrust them into a dark, stinking dungeon for two
months: Then did he torment them with fire, Prodigious cruelty.
till their bowels came forth, to extort from them who were their companions:
Afterward they were both shut up in a tub, and so burned Anno 1421.

A godly and eloquent Preacher in Prague, was, together with twelve more, Some
beheaded.
apprehended by a Captain, carried into the common hall, and there privately
beheaded, but their blood running out, caused a great tumult in the City,
wherein some of the Senators were slain, and others saved themselves by flight.

Not long after there sprung up a Schism amongst those that were called
Hussites, Schism.
for some of them began in other things to comply with the Pope, only they
insisted upon the Cup in the Sacrament, whence they were called Calixtines:
Calixtines.
Others of them stuck close to Husse his doctrine, and cried down all
superstition: And this contention was cunningly fomented and increased by some
that sought thereby the advancement of the Pope and Emperor: And to make the
professors of the pure Doctrine odious, Popish subtilty.
they branded them with the hateful name of Piccards, by which name the
Waldenses in Piccardy were called. Yet both these parties, when they were
assaulted by the Emperor, joined together in opposing him, and obtained many
great victories against him: Yet Anno 1444. the Thaborites were utterly
oppressed by fraud and force. Thaborites destroyed.


Anno 1459. There were diverse godly people in Bohemia, Ministers, Nobles and
Commons, who being much pressed in conscience about the superstitions in the
Church of Rome, Reformation begun.
obtained of their King [ George Pogiebracius,] a place in the hilly Country
near to Silesia to inhabit, where throwing off all superstious practices, they
applied themselves to the form of the Primitive simplicity, calling themselves
Brethren and Sisters.

The beginning of this Church displeased the Devil, and therefore he raised a
sudden and violent tempest to overthrow it: Popish malice.
For the same of it being spread abroad, the Priests in every pulpit stirred up
the hatred of the people against them, crying out, Blow out these sparks, blow
them out before they grow into a flame.

Anno 1461. One of their Ministers with some others of them coming to Prague,
to visit their friends, were betrayed, and some Officers coming to apprehend
them, said to them, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
persecution, therefore come forth, and follow us to prison, which they did. The
King believing the slanders that were raised against them, as that they were
attempting some sedition, etc. he commanded the aged Minister to be tortured, A
Minister racked.
but he falling into an ecstasy, felt no pain at all; the tormentors supposing
him to be dead, took him down from the rack, but after some hours, he came to
himself, and by the intercession of a friend, was dismissed.

Presently after their came forth from the King an Edict, A wicked Edict.
forbidding all Pastors to administer holy services without ceremonies: and
withal, threatening death to those that should administer to the brethren,
called now by the hateful name of Piccards. The brethren hereupon were brought
into great extremity, being like sheep destitute of shepherds. Yet presently
came forth a new Edict that none of them should be suffered to live either in
Bohemia, or Moravia. Hereupon they were dispersed amongst the woods and
mountains, dwelling in caves; Popish cruelty.
where yet they were scarce safe, so that they were forced to make no fire, nor
dress any meat, but in the night time, least the smoke should betray them. In
the cold winter nights, sitting by the fire, they applied themselves to the
reading of the Bible, and holy discourses. When in the snow they went ab^^ad to
provide them necessaries, they went close together, and lest their footsteps
should betray them, the hindermost of them did draw after him a great bough, to
cover the prints which their feet had made.

These brethren chose by suffrage, certain Elders, Elders chosen.
to whom they promised obedience: and by the advice of these Elders, the
chiefest of the brethen in Bohemia and Moravia, were called together in a
Synod, in the mountains to ordain Ecclesiastical Laws, whereby they should be
governed; A Synod.
they appointed also sundry days of Fasting and Prayer for themselves, and
their dispersed friends; taking counsel from Gods Word, concerning those
things which were required to the fuller Reformation, both of life and
doctrine. That which most afflicted them was for want of Pastors, not knowing
where they should have new ones, after those were dead, who then lived with
them; but after debate, they resolved, that Christ had given this authority to
his Church, that such as were ordained themselves, might ordain others: Yet
some scruple arose, whether such as were but Presbyters, might ordain without
a Bishop: For which cause they met together, and with fasting, prayers and
tears, they sought unto God to reveal his will to them in this difficulty; and
afterward making a scrutiny by lot, Ordination of Ministers.
the Lord answered them, that it was lawful for Presbyters to ordain
Presbyters, which occasioned great joy unto them.

Then did these Brethren deliberate among themselves, whether they should join
with the Waldenses in Moravia and Austria; The Waldenses^
and so be one people with them, and one Church: The purity of their Doctrine
and Christian Conversation did much please; but again, it much displeased them,
that they concealed the truth, not openly professing it as they ought, but to
avoid persecution, they frequented the Churches of the Papists, and so
communicated with Idolaters. Therefore they concluded to admonish them of this
evil; and for this end they sent some able men to them, Admonition.
to acquaint them with it: The Waldenses answered, that to be in unity with
them was very grateful, and for the evils objected against them, they were not
ignorant of them, nor would defend them, but rather would labor to amend them:
Concluding that they desired to have a sixth day of meeting with the Brethren,
in which they would take some further order about this business.

The Waldenses persecuted.
But before the time came, the Papists having some intelligence of it, raged so
violently against the Waldenses, that they burnt one of the chiefest of them at
Vienna, and so persecuted the rest, that they were fain to provide for their
own safety by flight.

Anno 1468. There came out a new Decree against these Brethren, requiring all
the Nobles of Bohemia, within their several jurisdictions, to apprehend as
many as they could, and to proceed against them.

Many therefore were apprehended and put into prison, where they were kept for
a long time: The Church increases.
But thr^^gh the wonderful working of God, the more the enemies labored to
put out this spark, the more it brake forth into a great flame, for many of
their Peers submitted to the Discipline of the Brethren, building Churches for
them in their Towns and Villages, so that Anno 1500. they had in Bohemia, and
Moravia about two hundred Churches.

After the death of Pogiebracius, Uladislaus, a Polonian succeeded in the
Kingdom, to whom the Brethren wrote an Apology, by reason of many foul
accusations that were carried to him against them: This so exasperated their
enemies, that they endeavored by a most impudent invention, to stir up the
hatred of all men against them. The way they used was this. Popish subtilty.
They suborned a wicked villain, to say that he came from amongst them, and
that he had been an Elder, but had therefore forsaken them, because in their
meetings they used to blaspheme God, the Virgin Mary, and the Saints, to
traduce the Sacraments, Slanders.
to mingle themselves incestuously, after the manner of the Adamites, to commit
murder* and practice witchcraft, etc. This man they led through the Towns and
Cities as a spectacle; they brought him to their Church, where he must abjure
his errors, and beseech the people to pray for him, a most miserable sinner,
and to take heed, by his example, of the wicked Piccards. They also published
his confession in writing, being confirmed with the seals and subscrip^ons of
some Deans and Priests, causing them to be read in the Churches to the people.

But the devil was befooled herein, for the Brethren, by public writings did
confute these lies; Confession.
and the villain trembling so often to forswear himself in the sight of the
people, confessed at last that he was suborned to do what he did, and that he
knew not any of the Piccards: Yet thus far it made for good, that some to make
experience of so great villainies, began privately and disguised, to frequent
the Assemblies of the Brethren, and finding it to be far other wise then it
was reported, did associate themselves with them, as with true Christians.

Anno 1488. Mathias King of Hungary, The Brethren banished.
banished the Brethren from Moravia, which caused some hundreds of them, taking
a Minister along with them, to go into Moldavia; Whereupon the Brethren in
Bohemia sent one of their Elders to them, to exhort them unto patience under
this persecution, which was for the truth.

Shortly after the restless enemies of God and his Church, Persecution.
raised another persecution against the Brethren in Bohemia; for some Bishops
consulting together, suborned the Queen, great with child, so that they
conceived that the King would deny her nothing in that state, to request of
him, that he would severely punish the Piccards: The King displeased at her
request, only nodded his head, but gave no answer at all: Yet the Bishops, in
his presence, began to draw up the Edict. Popish malice.
The King going into his chamber, fell down on his knees, and with tears
besought God to forgive the guilt of those bloody counsels, and to grant no
success to them: and God heard his prayers, and showed some examples of his
severe judgments on the Authors of this conspiracy.

The Queen who proposed to her fancy, Gods judgment on persecutors.
what grateful spectacles she should have in seeing the Piccards brought to
Prague, and there, some burnt, some beheaded, and others drowned in the water,
presently fell in travel, and when she was not able to bring forth, the
Physicians advised that the child should be cut out of the mothers womb, which
was accordingly done, whereby the child lived, but the mother died.

Two years after, the Bishops by their importunity prevailed with the King that
sharp remedies should be used against those growing evils, as they were pleased
to call them; Anno 1510. A cruel Edict.
whereupon an Edict was sent forth that all the Piccards, without distinction
of sex, age or quality, should be slain. This Mandate was brought to the
Assembly of States at Prague, by two Bishops, but diverse of the chiefest Nobles
opposed it, so that eighteen months were spent in debate, before any thing was
done; but at last, by the cunning artifice of the Chancellor, and his bloody
associates, it was confirmed by the greatest part of the Nobility, in the
presence of the King; and a mutual confederacy was entered into, Devilish
wickedness.
that it should be prosecuted with an armed power, but God following some of
the chief contrivers of it with sundry judgments, it almost came to nothing.

Yet in these troubles most of the Ministers were turned out of their places,
so that they durst not preach nor pray, but in private. And a certain Noble
man, having apprehended six of the Brethren, cast them into prison, and when
they were brought forth to be burnt, they went cheerfully to the fire; and when
the chief officer, taking affection to one of them, offered him his life, if he
would recant his error, profering him withal to give him a years time to
consider of it; he pawsed a while, Tentation resisted.
but by and by answered, It is too much by such a delay, to lose my Brethrens
company, and so going along with them, they were burned together.

Shortly after the Chancellor that had procured the passing of the Edict
against the Brethren, as he returned from the Parliament, visiting a certain
Noble man by the way, he with great pleasure reported to him what was agreed
upon against the brethren: The Noble man having a servant by, that was much
edicted to the discipline of the Brethren, asked him how he liked it; the
servant answered, that all were not agreed: The Chancellor suspecting some new
conspiracy, asked him who durst oppose the States of the Kingdom, etc? the
servant said, Gods judgment on persecu^ors.
In heaven there is one, who if he were not present at your counsels, you have
consulted in vain: The Chancellor replied, Thou knave, thou shall find that as
well as the rest: And rising up in fury, immediately a Carbuncle rose upon his
foot, which turned to a disease, called Ignis sacer, whereof he died miserably.

Another of the great sticklers in this business, returning homewards, as he
was a lighting out of his Chariot to make water, he struck his member on a
sharp nail that was in the boot, whereby he drew out his entrails with him, and
not long after he gave up the ghost.

Also D^ Augustine, who by slanderous libels had endeavored to stir up the
King against the Brethren, died suddenly as he was at supper.

Another Noble man of these persecutors, as he was hunting, his horse threw
him, and his arrow ran into his thigh, and came out at his loins, whereby he
died a most paineful death.

Many others of them felt the like judgments of God; so that it grew into a
proverb amongst them: If you be weary of your life, attempt something against
the Piccards, and you shall not escape a year to an end.

About this time God stirred up in Germany, undaunted Luther, the thunderbolt
against the Pope, Anno. 1523. Luther
which occasioned many of the Calixtines to resolve to embrace the purer
Doctrine of the Gospel, and to seek for the Ordination of their Ministers from
Wittenberg, rather then from Rome. But amongst these there was one Zahere, an
Apostate, Zahere an Apostate.
who to ingratiate himself with the King and Pope, would enforce the Pastors
and Citizens of Prague to subscribe to sundry Articles, or else they must be
proscribed. And first of all six Pastors were banished, then sixty five of the
chiefest Citizens: Then to color greater cruelty, a rumor was spread abroad
of a conspiracy made by the Brethren against the Calixtines; and to extort a
confession hereof, three Citizens were brought to the rack, who rather chose to
suffer all torments, then falsely to accuse the innocent: Popish lies and
slanderous.
Yet diverse were persecuted: Amongst others, a Cutler that had found an
Orthodox Book about the Sacraments, was whipped openly in the marketplace, and
banished: Another was branded in the forehead; a third was thrust into prison,
and there murdered.

Then in the Assembly of Estates it was decreed, Persecution.
that the Mandate of the King should be put in execution against the Piccards:
Whereupon a new persecution was raised against the Brethren, their Churches
being shut up, and their Exercises forbidden.

Anno 1526. A godly and learned man, together with his Hostess with whom he
lodged, a widow of sixty years old, Two burnt.
were both burnt in the fire for Picardism, together with the books that were
found about them.

Another godly woman being brought before the Magistrate, made a hold
profession of her faith, and then being required to prepare her garments to be
burnt in, she answered, They are ready, lead me away when you please. The
Crier declaring openly that she had bla^ph^med, A godly woman burnt.
she with a loud voice denied it, saying, It is false, I am condemned because I
deny the Real presence of Christ in the Sacrament; give no credit to these
Priests, they are dissembling Hyp^crites, Adulterers, Sodomites, Epicures, etc.
Being commanded to pray to the Crucifix, she turned her back to it, and lifting
up her eyes to heaven she said, There is our God, thither we must look, and so
cheerfully mounting the pile, she was burned, Anno Christi 1527.

The year after two German tradesmen were caught at Prague, accused by the
Monks of Lutheranism, and condemned to be burnt: Two godly men burnt.
As they went to execution, such gracious words proceeded out of their mouths,
as drew tears from the spectators eyes: When they came to the pile, they
exceedingly encouraged one another; on^ of them saying, Since our Lord Christ
has suffered such grievous things for us, let us cheerfully suffer for him,
Comfort in death.
and rejoice that we have found so much favor with him, that we are counted
worthy to die for the Law of God: The other said, I in the day of my marriage
found not so much inward joy as I do now. When fire was put to them, with a
loud voice they said, Lord Jesus, thou in thy sufferings prayedst for thine
enemies, therefore we also do the like. Forgive the King, the men of Prague,
and the Clergy, for they know not what they do, and their hands are full of
blood; and so they slept in the Lord. But one of their chief persecutors, Gods
judgment on persecutors.
who wished that all the Piccards were hanged, beheaded or burnt by his own
hands, had all these befall himself by Gods just judgment: For being much in
debt, he hanged himself, and when his friends had privately buried him; the
common people hearing of it, dug up his carcass, and cast it away, which by
the Magistrates command was ordered to be burnt; but when the woodstack was
consumed, and the carcass only scorched, his head was stricken off.

Zahera the Apostate, when under color of an Inquisition against the Piccards,
he raised up civil commotions, was by the King banished, where he died
miserably: The like befell another of those cruel persecutors.

Anno 1535. Ferdinand the first succeeding in the Kingdom, the Popish party
cunningly stirred up the Calixtines to persecute the Brethren: A new
persecution.
Whereupon, they suffering many grievous things sent a petition, together with
a confession of their Faith to Ferdinand at Vienna, subscribed by twelve Barons
and thirty three Knights, complaining how unjustly they were accused by their
enemies, and that the Priests ordinarily cried out that the Piccards might be
slain without control, and that a less sin was thereby committed, Popish
malice.
than if one killed a dog, Ferdinand returned answer, that he had not leisure
to consider of their Papers, yet promised that nothing should be done either
against law or equity, till he had further knowledge of the cause.

In the mean time the Brethren being much encouraged by letters from Luther,
Bucer and Capito, went on constantly, and through Gods mercy, a great nummber
was added to the Church, till that fatal year 1547. Charles the fifth wars
against the Protestants.
At which time Charles the fifth putting in execution the decrees of the
Counsel of Trent, raised wars against the Protestant Princes in Germany: At
which time his brother Ferdinand solicited the Bohemians for aid, but they
refused it in regard of their ancient league with the house of Saxony. But the
German Protestants being overcome in war, A great persecution.
Ferdinand entered Bohemia with an Army, seizes on Prague, imprisoneth the
principal Nobles, Barons, and Citizens, some he scourged, some he beheaded,
and upon others he laid grievous Fines, and of others he sequestered all their
Estates: Also he disarmed the City of Prague, took away their privileges,
banishing some, whilst others went into voluntary exile.

Then did the Devil raise up some to lay all the blame upon the Brethren, to
which malicious suggestions the King giving heed, first by open Proclamation
commanded all their Churches to be shut up, and then he took away their Peers,
and banished them all out of his Realms. When this Thunderbolt came abroad, the
brethren agreed amongst themselves that they would be more faithful to God and
their consciences then they had been: Persecution causes reformation.
and so by common consent, dividing themselves into three companies, they went
into Poland: and all of them had experience of an admirable divine protection
in their journey: escaping some that might, and would have robbed them, but
that they were restrained by God: A special providence.
as also in most places where they came, they found Christian commiseration and
liberality of men toward them, and courteous entertainment in Poland, though
most of them were Papists* Yet not long after the Bishop of that part where
they were, got a Mandate from the King to drive them away: Then were they
forced to go into the farthest parts of Prusia, Popish malice.
whereby D. Albert Brandenburg they had a place of habitation alloted to them,
and one Paul Speratus, a Protestant Bishop, having conferred with them about
their faith, was very courteous and charitable to them.

The next Edict that Ferdinand set forth against the brethren, was for the
apprehending of all their Ministers, Ministers persecuted.
whereupon some of them retired into Moravia, others, that they might be near
their flocks, hid themselves in private places, and in the nightime they
visited the faithful, which continued for some years, A special providence.
but at last three of them fell into their enemies hands: yet one of them,
through the admirable providence of God, escaped out of a deep dungeon in the
Castle of Prague, and fled to his brethren in Borussia, and he sometimes
passing through Polonia, and preaching the Gospel, through Gods mercy,
Conversion.
many of the Nobility, and others were converted by his Ministry: so that in a
few years he erected twenty Churches in Poland. John Augusta.


The enemies having imprisoned John Augusta, they much rejoiced at it, because
he was a chief Minister amongst the Brethren, and as Luther in Germany against
the Pope, so he, both by his Ministry and writings had mightily confuted the
Calixtines, and thereupon they laid to his charge his refusal to raise Forces
for the assistance of Ferdinand, and intentions of bringing in John Frederick,
Popish lies and slanders.
Elector of Saxony to be King in Bohemia, and for the discovery of this
pretended conspiracy he was cruelly racked three times, but when they could
draw nothing from him, they yet kept him in prison seventeen years.

Anno 1549. Ferdinand published another decree for the extirpating both of the
brethren, and Lutherans: A wicked Edict.

Two hundred Ministers banished.


and the Ministers that had received Ordination in Germany, or that were
married, were banished out of the Kingdom to the number of about two hundred.

Also the Baron of Schanow, a man of much experience and learning, being
apprehended under the pretense of some conspiracy against Ferdinand, was
imprisoned, examined, and then laid on the rack: The Baron of Schanow.
he with an heroical indignation cut out his tongue, and cast it away, and
being asked why he did it, he wrote on the wall, I did it because I would not
by any tortures be brought to say any thing falsely against my self or others.
He also in a writing taxed the Tyrannical proceedings against himself and
other innocents, citing the King and his Counselors to appear and answer it
before the Tribunal of God, and so shortly after died.

About that time Ferdinand brought Jesuits into Prague, Jesuits first brought
into Prague.
and built a stately College for them, who sought by all means to overthrow the
Church of Christ, and added fuel to the fire of persecution.

After the death of Ferdinand Maximilian succeeded Anno 1562. who being of a
peaceable disposition could by no means be induced that any should suffer for
their faith. Maximilian Emperor.


Rodulphus Emperor.
After him Rodulphus succeeded, Anno 1676. who treading in his Father steps, the
Church of Christ enjoyed peace under him, yea, pure religion so flourished
through the whole Kingdom, that there was scarce one amongst an hundred that
did not profess the Reformed Religion: But alas! with liberty of Religion, by
little and little men began to be licentious in their lives, Sin the forerunner
of persecution.
and carnal security so increased, that some began to presage that an horrible
tempest should again overwhelm them.

After the death of Rodulphus succeeded Mathias, who coming into Bohemia, Anno
1617. he called an Assembly of the States, but it being harvest time, Mathias
Emperor.
few appeared: To them that did appear, Mathias, complained, that since he had
no issue he would adopt Ferdinand for his son, commends his virtues, and
desires that he may be crowned: The Orders assembled, affirmed, that a matter
of that consequence could not be done in the absence of the united Provinces:
Caesar urged, that what Bohemia should do would be confirmed by all the rest,
that he grew faint, and it could not be deferred till another time. In brief,
the Oorders protested, that the Term of Receiving him King, was new, that he
ought first to be chosen, and then received: and some perceiving that there was
no place for a free voice, Ferdinand forcibly made King of Bohemia.
departed: others, partly allured by promises, and partly deterred by threats,
staid, and were present at the Cronation of Ferdinand, after which he presently
went into Moravia, Silesia, and Lusatia, requesting to be received for their
King.

The Persecution of the Church in Bohemia, which began Anno Christi, 1617.
FErdinand the second Emperor of Germany, being thus obtruded upon the
Bohemians for their King, contrary to the ancient constitutions and customs of
the Kingdom, and not lawfully elected thereunto, Ferdinand a Usurper.
as he ought to have been, retired presently into Germany: And thereupon the
enemies of the truth began to crow, and openly to threaten the Protestants: and
it appeared sufficiently that Ferdinand swear to the Orders with his mouth, but
in his heart to the Pope, and presently after his departure, the popish
Bishops, Clergy, and Nobles, began to vex his Subjects for Religion, contrary
to that assurance which the King had given to them: They attempted also the
like in Prague, the Jesuits daily threatening that their Liberty in Religion
should not last long. Popish malice. The first Artifice.
Then did they strictly prohibit the Protestants from printing any thing
unless licensed by the Chancellor of the Kingdom, themselves in the mean time
divulging their own slanderous pamphlets and dangerous writings against the
Protestants. The second Artifice.


Then instructions were given to the Captains and Judges that they should
suffer no meetings in Churches except themselves were present, and except they
had a Popish Priest to administer only in one kind.

Then the Burgrave, who had the custody of the Crown, The third Artifice.
and privileges of the Kingdom, was apprehended; because in the late
Parliament he had stood for the free election of a King, and delivered prisoner
to one of the bitterest enemies of the Protestants.

In other places they destroyed the Churches of the Protestants.

In the beginning of the year 1618 The Governors of the University and
Consistory met together, The fourth Artifice.
having formerly had power given them so to do, and choosing six persons, two
Barons, two Knights, and two Citizens: to consult what was best to be done in
this time of their enemies insolency; there presently came an injunction in
Caesar's name to inhibit them to call any together, and that if any man was
called, he should not dare to appear upon the pain of high Treason. The States
inhibited their meeting.


Notwithstanding which, the major part of the States met, and when as new
prohibitions and threats were spread abroad, and the States were informed that
those thunderbolts came not from the King, but from the castle of Prague, their
abused patience was turned into severity, and being guarded with a great Troop,
they went to the Castle, and apprehended two of the chief Authors of these
troubles, and threw them headlong out of the Castle windows, together with
their Secretary that was privy to all their designs: but God intending to
preserve them to be the Bohemians scourges, they caught no hurt in the fall,
falling upon the grass, and great store of papers.

Hereupon a great tumult was raised in Prague, The Jesuits banished by the
States.
but the States appeassed it; and the first thing they did was to banish the
Jesuits out of Bohemia, as the chief contrivers of these mischiefs: then did
they write to Caesar, that they had no intention against his Royal Majesty,
but only to bring to punishment the disturbers of the public peace, being
authorized thereto by his Majesty's Letter, and bound by their protestation:
yet he resolved to revenge this Treason (as he called it) by force of Arms, and
the Bohemians on the other side resolved to defend themselves, and for that end
they chose thirty Directors, An Army raised against the Bohemians.
and the Moravians and Silesians resolved to join with them, when they
perceived Religion to be the cause of the quarrel. And indeed this was that
which the enemies aimed at, and therefore they provoked the Bohemians by all
ways, that so they might make a conquest of Bohemia, and for this end an
Imperial Army presently entered the Kingdom under Dampier, and a Spanish Army
under Bucquoy.

In the mean time the States resolved not to admit Ferdinand to be their King,
who was so open an enemy both to their Religion and Liberties, and who was
obtruded upon them without a due election: They sent also Ambassadors to
Franckford, where the Electors were met together to choose a new Emperor,
desiring that Ferdinand might not be admitted amongst them as King of Bohemia,
notwithstanding which, he was admitted and chosen Emperor: The Bohemians in
the mean time choosing Frederick Elector Palatine, Frederick chosen King of
Bohemia.
for their King; This more enraged their enemies, so that, they sent another
Army under Maximilian of Bavarie, which took two Protestant Towns by storm, and
put all to the sword, and every where made great slaughter of the Protestants:
Then the Imperial Armies came to Prague, which being struck with a Pannick
fear, the Protestant Army being overthrown in a set battle under the walls, and
their new King fled, they delivered up the City to them, Anno 1620. November. 8*
Prague taken.
the Conqueror promising to keep Articles agreed upon, but performing nothing
less. For they did more mischief to the Church of Christ by their subtle and
slow proceedings, then lately by their outrageous fury, when the sword fire,
and wheel were the instruments of their rage against the faithful.

For a little before, when it was debated at Rome how they should deal with the
Bohemians, and Germans after the Conquest; it was agreed, that seeing their
former strong purges which they had used to expel Heretical humors, Anno
16^7. Popish subtilty
had not proved effectual: they therefore resolved not to put them to death
wherein they did glory as in Martyrdom, but rather to weary them and to change
the hateful name of Inquisition into the milder name of Reformation. The fifth
Artifice.


And whereas there was a debate amongst the Imperialists at Prague, whether all
the protestants should be presently banished, the negative was resolved on,
because they would then carry much away with them, and so spoil the Province,
The sixth Artifice.
and endure their banishment with greater ease, and therefore they concluded
that they must first be squeezed, and deprived of their goods: and for this end
the soldiers at Prague were authorrized to plunder the houses of Noblemen and
Citizens, yet this was done at several seasons, The seventh Artifice.
and mostly in the night, by which means, as the enemies boasted, they took
from the Protestants some millions of gold: For indeed hither were all their
riches brought in the time of war, as to a place of the greatest security: But
as this fell to the Commanders shares, so the neighboring places were exposed
to the fury of the rest, the common soldiers robbing and spoiling Villages,
Plundering.
Towns, and Churches, burning and killing without any restraint: The soldiers
that were placed in Garrisons would not only have Free Quarter, but extorted
money from their Landlords every day.

The eight Artifice.
Then were Comissions sent abroad, promising security to those Noblemen,
Knights, Corporations, and Ministers, that would bring in a good Sum of money
to pay the Army, which yet they would not receive as a free gift, but only
desired to borrow it. Caesar's protection was also promised to those that were
liberal, the rest were threatened to be plundered by the soldiers.

They set down also what sums they expected from every one within such a time:
The ninth Artifice.
they promised also that when that was paid, the Soldiers should be removed,
which made every one to bring in their Plate, Money, and Jewels the more
willingly.

The tenth Artifice.
Then were Commissioners sent to require certain Cities, that belonged to the
Protestant Noblemen, to mantaine the standing Forces of the Kingdom, and to
contribute corn for their public granaries: but whilst they were fed with a
vain hope of lessening and removing the soldiers, there were more listed,
which raised the taxes so high as was impossible for the people to pay:
Apostasy rewarded.
and where as some were allured to deny the truth that they might be eased of
taxes, and quarterings of soldiers, this was not performed, whereupon they
complained that promise was broken with them, but the Jesuits answered them,
that they had no cause to complain, for they had provided for their souls, and
therefore they ought cheerfully to help the King by contributions and
quarterings of soldiers, and that Heretics must be dealt with, Popish
perfidiousness.
as mad men and children, from whom ^f you desire to get a knife, you must show
them something else, though you never intend to give it them.

Thus the Kingdom being emptied of gold and silver, The eleventh Artifice.
counterfeit and adulterate money was coined in great abundance, that so the
common people might rejoice in their plenty; but in the mean time the soldiers
would rec^ive none but good money.

Gold and silver also was raised to ten times the price of it, and on a sudden
the Emperor diminished the value; The twelfth. Artifice.
making every piece of money to be worth but the tenth part: whereby the
Bohemians were more impoverished suddenly, then if they had lain under the
burden of an Army ten years.

Then was it ordered that the creditor should lose all the money that he had
lent in the time of the rebellion, as they called it, The thirteenth Artifice.
And thus they were first impoverished, after which the enemies insulted over
them by infamous books, insolent pictures, and proud words.

Then did they send abroad their Commissioners of Reformation, The fourteenth
Artifice.
who in every Town and Village endeavored to bring Protestantism into disgrace,
and highly to magnify and set abroad their own cause: The most eminent men
for honor and estates are invited to Apostasy, the inferior sort are either
fooled by their examples, or compelled by thre^tnings.

Then was there an High-Court of reformers set up, The fifteenth Artifice.
from which there was no appeal

In the next place the soldiers exercised barbarous Tyranny against the
Ministers of Jesus Christ. One aged minister lying sick in his bed, The
sixteenth Artifice.
they shot him to death as he lay: The next day they robbed and murdered
another; Another as he was preaching to his people, Ministers persecuted.
they came into the Church; and shot him to death. Another Nobleman, and a
Minister hearing of soldiers that were coming that way, conveyed themselves
away into a place of safety the soldiers when they came, caught a
Schoolmaster, and binding him in cords, examined him where the Lord of that
place, and the Minister were, and where they had hid their treasure; he
professed, that he knew neither the one nor the other, whereupon they beat him,
first with their fists, then with cudgels, Barbarous cruelty.
then stripping him naked, they so extremely singed him with fire, that at last
he promised to bring them where the treasure was, showing them a ditch full of
stones, which for greediness of gold they emptied, but finding nothing, they
beat him afresh, and when he professed that he knew of no treasure, though
through pain he had said so much, they cudgelled him, and with clods beat him
into the ditch, and buried him under the stones.

Presently after they lighted on another godly Minister, whom they so miserably
tortured that he ^ied within five days, shamefully abusing his daughters also
whom they led away with them.

Another godly Minister for a month together they excruciated with new
invented mockeries: they spit in his face, buffeted him with their fists,
exposed him to be beaten by every vile rascal: They with a knot^y cord twisten
about his forehead, with a stick so strained his head, that his very eyes were
ready to start out: Then they let loose a wild horse upon him, which yet
leaped quite over him, and did him no harm: at last, Gods providence.
with much ado he redeemed himself with five hundred Florences.

Another Pastor they lighted on, and because he had a better estate then the
former, they tormented him more, sometimes covering him over with hot burning
coals, sometimes with Ice, till they had forced him to pay a thousand five
hundred Florences for his ransom, though shortly after through extremity of
the pain, he died.

Another Minister they fetched from his house, and miserably tortured him by
twisting a cord about his head, then tied they his hands behind him, and his
legs with a small cord, intending the next morning to torture him with fire,
but in the night time as he was earnest at his prayers, repeating those words,
In thee O Lord is my trust, he perceived his hands and feet miraculously to be
loosned, A special providence.
Whereupon getting up, he went to the gate, where were three Watchmen, one of
them standing with his hand on his sword, yet he passed by them undiscovered:
When he came to the Town-gate, he was known by the Soldier that stood
Sentinel, but he, being a Bohemian, was overcome by entreaty, Cruelty to
Ministers.
and let him pass over the bridge, whereby he escaped. Another Minister
together with his wife they cruelly burnt: Another was hanged upon a
crosse-beam, and making a fire under him, they broiled him to death: Another
they cut into small pieces: Another Minister they sought for, but he being
escaped, they took a young man in his house, laid him on his back, Prodigious
cruelty.
filled his mouth with gunpowder, which setting fire to, they miserably tore
his jaws in pieces, and then killed him.

When some soldiers came to the house of another, he entertained them
courteously, and made good provision for them, but when they knew he was a
Minister, Ingratitude.
they first beat him cruelly, then killed him, stripped, and plundered his
house; they also burnt his Library, and would not suffer his body to be buried
for seven weeks, during their abode there.

Another aged Minister and his wife, were so sorely burned by a soldier that
demanded money of them, that presently after they died. Another was hung up by
the privy members, being seventy years old, and his own books burnt under him,
and at last was shot through, and slain.

Another was first assessed at seven hundred florences, then had his house
plundered, and lastly himself was murdered. Another they caught and wounded,
cutting his neck half through: but being afterward carried by some friends to
a Surgeon, he lived about two years, but in much pain and torment.

Another being above seventy years old, they carried into the marketplace,
where laying him upon a fire, they burnt him to death: Another was beaten so,
that he died three days after. Anno 1622.


The Jesuits laid wait for one Pescinus, a man eminent for learning and piety,
at last they suborned an Apostate to betray him, Pescinus*
who discovering him as he rode in a Coach with a Nobleman, forty horsemen
came suddenly, and took him away: but by the importunity of some Noblemen, he
was ransomed for four thousand Florences, and ended his life in banishment.
Another being bound to a Tree, was made a mark for the Musketeers to shoot at,
and though they did not hit him, yet by reason of the affrightment he died
within three days.

Another being met by a notable Papist, was ran through with a spear: But all
this was done through military licentiousness; Now we come to what was acted
by process of Law.

Anno 1621. The seventeenth Artifice
Six Articles were exhibited to the Protestant Congregations in Prague. 1. That
they should lend some thousands of pounds to Caesar for the payment of his
Army. 2. That they should publicly renounce the coming in of Frederick. 3.
That they should bring into the Church the Popish Rites and Ceremonies. 4. That
their Ministers should be ordained anew. 5. That the Ministers should leave
their wives, or get a dispensation from the Archbishop. 6. That such as would
renounce their Ecclesiastical functions, should have public promotions, and
the favor of Caesar. But they answered unanimously, that they would do
nothing against their consciences.

Then came forth an Edict, Ministers charged with treason.
wherein the blame of all the former rebellion (as they called it) was laid
upon the Ministers of Prague, because they had stired up, by their seditious
and lying Sermons (as they pleased to style them) and by their writings, not
only the common people, but the Nobles also against Caesar; and that they were
the authors of the choice of Frederick, and that they still labored to stir
up in the people an hatred against Caesar. Thereupon all the Ministers within
Prague, were required within three days to depart out of Prague, and within
eight days to depart out of all the Kingdom, and the Provinces belonging
thereto, and never to return again; and if any under what pretense soever,
should stay or return again, Ministers banished.
or if any should presume to harbor or conceal any of them, that both the one
and the other should suffer death: this was Anno 1621.

Then were their Churches in Prague given to the Jesuits. It can not be
expressed what lamentations and mournings there were amongst the people, The
eighteenth Artifice.
when thus they must leave their Pastors, and that for ever. Yet the German
Ministers, whereof there were two, were suffered to continue in favor to the
Duke of Saxony. Then did as many as understood Dutch, flock to their
Congregations, which so vexed the Jesuits, The German Ministers banished.
that they obtained, not a banishment, but a gracious dismission of them as
they would have it called. Multitudes of people followed them, with great
lamentations and tears, and in the field they heard their farewell sermon.

The next design was, to remove the Ministers out of other free Cities, and the
Commissioners of Reformation were employed herein: One of them with a Troop of
horse coming to Slana, and going to Church, the Minister (a godly and learned
man) was reading the Gospel: The Commissioner sent a soldiers to him to bid
him give over, but the Minister still going on, himself went to him with his
sword drawn, Blasp^emy.
crying out, Thou foolish Preacher, leave off thy babbling, and withal he
dashed the Bible out of his hand with his sword: The Minister with eyes, hands,
and voice lift up to heaven, repeated often, Woe, woe unto you, you enter not
into heaven your selves, and forbid them that would; Woe, woe, woe unto you.
But they mocking at these words, presently laid hands on him, justling him to
and fro, whereupon he said, I for the name of my Lord Jesus Christ am ready to
suffer all this, and what else you shall impose. The people were much
affrighted, but the chief Magistrates and many good women interceding for him,
he was at last dismissed, provided that he should depart the City within three
days; and thus was this faithful shepherd, not without the great
lamentations of his people, banished, where, about three years after he died.

In a neighboring City, the Minister for fear of these barbarous proceedings,
went a way of himself, yet the Commissioners extorted a great sum of money
from his Church, and banished him in his absence. In another place they
commanded the Minister to depart from his Parish within three days, and from
the City within eight days; he modestly asking the reason of his banishment,
they told him Caesar by conquest was Master of all the Churches, and that
therefore he would put into them whom he pleased.

But, into the rooms of these godly Preachers, were put in unclean men,
Illiterate persons put into the places of Christ's Ministers.
wicked, blasphemers, and men illiterate, and of no worth; and yet they could
not provide for all places: so that one of their hirelings supplied diverse
Churches, and in stead of the wholesome food of Gods Word, he fed them with
poison. Then brought the ignorant Monks out of Poland, unprofitable burdens to
the earth, yet fit enough to be scourges to unprofitable and common Gospellers.

Then a Commissioner, with some Troops of horse, entering into Ctutenburg, a
place famous for maintaining the Orthodox Faith, calls before him the Ministers,
casts them out of their places, and puts Jesuits into their Churches: And these
Jesuits urging it, the Ministers were commanded to depart out of the City gates
before break of day, and out of the Kingdom within eight days: Hereby were
twenty one Ministers driven away, many Citizens accompanying them: Twenty one
Ministers banished.
One of them at the parting, preached upon that Text, They shall cast you out
of the Synagogues; exhorting them to perseverance. All the multitude much
bewailed their loss, and with great lamentations, wailing and kissing each
other, they recommended themselves to the blessing and protection of the
Almighty.

In every place the Ministers were cast out of their livings, some imprisonned,
and after a while dismissed, and all commanded to depart the Kingdom, upon pain
of death. Some were stifled with stink whilst they lay in prison.

At last, Anno 1624. an other Decree came forth from the King, whereby all the
Ministers of the Gospel were commanded to depart the Kingdom, by a peremptory
day prefixed, because, as was alleged, Ministers charged with sedition.
they were seditious men, and seducers of the people: Yet herein they used this
Artifice, that in most places this Edict was concealed, till the time was
almost or altogether elapsed, so that by this means the Ministers not having
time to communicate their counsels together, went into several Provinces, and
some were faigne to hide themselves in caves and dens, and those either
returned privately, and visited their auditors, or comforted such as came to
them in the mountains and woods, preaching and administering the Sacraments to
them.

But as soon as the enemies understood it, they presently published a new
decree, wherein a punishment was preposed to those that should conceal the
Ministers, and a reward to such as should betray them: Whereupon some of the
Ministers were taken and cast into prison: Then by the Jesuits were they by all
ways solicited to Apostasy; and fear of death, hunger, cold, Tentation.
the stink of the prison etc. prevailed with some to renounce their Ministry:
But most bore up courageously against all storms, and at last some by paying
great fines, Constancy.
others by giving it under their hands, that they would never return into
Bohemia, were dismissed.

One godly Minister was examined by tortures, when, where, A Minister Martyred.
and to whom he had administered the Sacraments of Baptism or the Lords Supper,
etc. he answered, that he had neither laid down, nor slacked his Ministry,
which he received from Christ, and not from Caesar: Being profferred life if he
would change his Religion he answered, This body of mine is subject to
corruption, and now it begins to decay already, Why Would you have me hinder
it? Being brought forth to execution, the Crier with a loud voice proclaimed
that he was guilty of sedition: But he with a loud voice said, I suffer for the
truth of Christ. None of the Citizens were suffered to accompany him, yea they
were threatened to be shot, if they did but look out at their windows: And that
his voice might not be heard, the Drums and Trumpets sounded continually. As he
was passing on, he cheerfully said: This day shall my soul be with Christ: The
Captain said, With the devil in hell: The Martyr replied, But you with your
impious crew will run headlong thither, except ye repent. Then was his right
hand cut off, wherewith he gave the Cup in the Sacrament: Then was his head cut
off, his bowels taken forth, and wrapped in his shirt, his quarters set upon
four stakes, and his head upon the fifth. Popish cruelty.


Then did the Commissioners go into Moravia, to a Noble Baron called Charles de
Zerotina, a man for wisdom and virtue famous through all Europe, a constant
professor of Religion, and one who maintained twenty four Ministers of the
Brethren within his jurisdiction: They told him that they had an express
command from Cardinal Ditrichsteine to expel all those Ministers out of the
Country: The Viceroy.
He answered, That in matters of Religion he ought not to be subject to the
Cardinal* and therefore from him he appeals to Caesar. Then did they grant him
fourteen days to prosecute his appeal, but the Baron being not in health;
could not go in that time to Caesar, Then they came again to him, an told him
that it should be in his choice whether he would send them a way himself,
Courage and Constancy.
or suffer them to do it; the Baron answered, that he could not banish those
whom he knew to be the servants of Jesus Christ, nor could consent that they
should do it: Yet that night they sent abroad their citations to require all
the inhabitants of that Village to appear before them the next morning, at
which time the Minister and people came; then did they read to them Caesar's
Edict, asking them if they would submit to it; they answered that they wholly
relied upon the will of God, whom they served in the Gospel of his Son, and
therefore they were resolved to undergo what punishment they should inflict,
seeing they suffered only for the Name of Jesus Christ, and not for any ill
deeds: Then they demanded of them, whether the would forsake their heresy, and
return to the Catholic Church; which they unanimously denied. The
Commissioners would have given them time to consider of it, but they all
answered, that in so religious a cause as this, Cou^age, and Constancy.
they needed no deliberations; Hereupon in Caesar's name they banished them,
commanding them to depart within eight days: These godly persons obeyed, and
by the Baron, at his own charge they were conveyed into Hungary. The like they
did in other places, so that the Ministers of the Gospel through all Bohemia
and Moravia, were thrust out, and ignorant and illiterate persons set in their
rooms.

The nineteenth Artifice.

Summa Papavera.

The chiefest Nobles imprisoned.


The next design of the enemies was against the Nobles: The crime was for taking
up arms for Frederick their lawful King, against an Usurper: For though hope
of pardon was granted, if laying down arms they would submit to Caesar's mercy,
yet diverse of them were apprehended: And first they seized upon some that were
of the rank of Defenders of the Kingdoms Liberties, and then all those whom
they knew to have done any thing for the common good of Religion and Liberty;
or feared that they might be able to do for the time to come, and all such as
feared to break their faith given to Frederick. These were about the number of
fifty men, famous for learning, skill in military affairs, and prudence in
government, who were the light, delight and safeguard of their Country.

All of these in one night, and at one hour, were apprehended in their houses,
when they suspected no danger, and by the Captains were commanded to get up
into Wagons, and so some of them were carried to the Castle of Prague, others
to the Majors house. The next day Proclamation were issued out, requiring all
those that had hid themselves, or departed the Kingdom, to appear within six
weeks; but they not appearing, sentence was pronounced, that all such as were
guilty of Treason, should forfeit Goods, Honors and Lives, and then their
names were set upon the Gallows: The next day sentence was pronounced against
their Heirs, that all their Goods should be confiscate to the King.

Then did they proceed to the trial of the Noble men whom they had taken: The
Nobles examined.
Two Appostate Civilians were appointed to examine them, with some of the
Nobility, who tired them out with a thousand impertinent questions, laboring
to extort that from them whereof they were never guilty: Which one of them not
able to endure, renting his garments, and opening his breasts, said, Tear into
a thousand pieces this body, and search into my heart, and you shall find
nothing there but what is expressed in my Apology. A brave speech
The love of Religion and Liberty made us unsheath our swords; but seeing God
would have Caesar prevail, and has delivered us into your hand, his will be
done. Others of them also stoutly maintained that their cause was not the
worse, because of the success. Success no sign of a good cause


After some time when none of these Noble men would yield, or acknowledge
themselves in an error, or sue unto them for mercy, they proceed to execution;
their judgments were committed to such as were sworn enemies to the Gospel.

After sentence was passed, it was sent to Caesar to consider of it: And he was
so troubled, that he slept not that night, and the next morning calling his
Confessor, he said to him, I adjure thee upon thy conscience to tell me whether
I may with a safe conscience pardon these that are condemned, or whether I
should suffer execution to pass on them? The Confessor answered, O Caesar,
both are in thy power. Then did he with his pen pardon some, and left others to
execution, with a great addition of shame and ignominy.

Presently after they were brought out singly to hear their sentence, wherein
some were condemned to death, Their condemnation.
others to perpetual imprisonment, others to banishment, and some were
reserved to Caesar's further pleasure.

Then were each sort of prisoners carried to their several prisons; the Noble
men into the inward prison of the Castle, the Citizens to the Majors house; and
as they went, Profane blasphemy.
some villains were suborned to insult over them, saying, Why do they not now
sing, The Lord reigns?

Then did the wives, children and kinsfolk of the condemned persons, humbly
petition for their lives; but answer was made, that all the favor which could
now be granted to them, was, that they should have leave to bury the corpse of
their friends.

In the evening, the condemned men, which were twenty seven in number, had
notice given them of the day wherein they were to suffer; and therefore they
were advised to send for Jesuits, or Capuchins, or a Minister of the Augustine
Confession, for the good of their souls; but they must expect no Minister of
the Brethren, for that would not be granted to them. The Jesuits and Capuchins
not staying till they were called for, Tenta^^t^n resisted.
flocked to them, using many persuasions, promising life, etc. if they would
turn; but God so strengthened them, that all those endeavors of Satan's imps
were in vain. Then were some Ministers of the Augustine Confession sent for,
who spent that time which remained in Religious exercises, conferences, prayer,
and singing of Psalms, and lastly by administering the Sacrament to them.

They which were of the Brethren, willingly admitted these Ministers,
protesting that they acknowledged them for Brethren, though they differed from
them in some things; only two of them did not partake of the Sacrament for fear
of some false accusation, comforting themselves with that saying, Believe, and
thou have eaten. Creed quod habes and habes.


They which were prisoners in the Majors house, being called to supper, the
night before they were to suffer, comforted themselves, saying, that this was
their last supper on earth, but to morrow they should feast with Christ in his
Kingdom; whereupon a great Papist flouted, saying, Has Christ Cooks for you in
heaven?

Blasphemy.
When it was told them that the Noble men were coming to the Scaffold in the
Market place, where they were to suffer, they hasted to the windows, and
entertained their fellow Martyrs, with singing the 44. Psalm. The night after
they spent in Psalms, prayer, godly discourse, Joy in tribulation.
and mutual exhortations, that since it pleased God to call them before
others, to this honor of Martyrdom, they hoped by their constancy to confound
the world, to glorify Christ, and to leave a good example to others; and
singing the 68. Psalm, where in David prays to God, to show some token of good
upon him; one of them said, Show therefore some token of good upon us O God,
whereby we thy servants may be strengthened by thy goodnes^e, and our enemies
confounded: And being full of faith, he said further, Be of good cheer, for
even in this God has hard your voice, and to morrow he will show some
wonderful sign, Faith.
whereby he will witness that we suffer for his cause.

Early in the morning they washed their faces, and put on clean clothes, as if
they had been going to a wedding; and cut off the collars of their dublets,
that when they came to the Scaffold, there should need no new making ready.
Then did they earnestly pray to God, Prayer.
that he would be pleased to confirm and strengthen both themselves and the
people concerning their innocence.

Presently after the sun rising, a beautiful bow appeared, and compassed the
heavens, the Ministers, soldiers, and many others looking upon it: The Martyrs
looked out at the window, and saw a Rainbow of an unusual color, the heavens
being very clear, and no rain of two days before, whereupon falling upon their
knees, they lifted up their voices and hands, praising God for this sign that
he showed from heaven. Then presently was a Gun discharged, which was a warning
for their bringing forth to execution; whereupon those Champions of Christ
encouraged one another, Courage.
praying that each of them might be strengthened, etc. Then Troops of horse and
foot came to fetch them, the streets, marketplace and houses, being filled
with multitudes of spectators.

The Martyrs being called forth one by one, went to their death with and
undaunted courage, hasting as if they had been going to a banquet: When one was
called for, he thus took his leave of the rest, Farewell most loving friends,
God give you the comforts of his Spirit, patience and courage, that what
formerly with your mouths you have professed, The Martyrs mutual farewell.
you may confirm by your glorious death: Behold I go before, that I may see the
glory of my Lord Jesus Christ; you will follow me that we may together see the
face of our heavenly Father. At this hour all sorrow departs from me, and
joyful eternity shall succeed it. Then did the rest answer, God above to whom
you are going, prosper your journey, and grant that you may pass happily from
this vale of misery, unto that heavenly Country; The Lord Jesus send his
Angeles to meet you: Go, dear brother, into thine and our Fathers house, and we
will follow after, presently we shall meet in the heavenly glory, and this we
are confident of through him in whom we have believed.

The first was the Lord Schlik, a man of admirable parts, about fifty years
old: When he was condemned to be quartered, The L. Schlik.
and his parts to be scattered here and there; he said, The loss of a sepulcher
is easy: Being exhorted by a Minister to courage, he said, I have Gods favor
so; that no fear of death does trouble me; His faith and courage.
I have formerly dared to oppose Antichrist, and I dare now die for Christ. The
Jesuits troubling him when he came to the Scaffold, he shaked them off, and
seeing the sun shining bright, he said, Christ thou Son of righteousness, grant
that through the darkness of death, I may pass into eternal light; and so
having ended his prayers he constantly received the stroke: His Martyrdom.
His right hand and head were hung on the high Tower upon the Bridge.

The Lord Wenceslaus was next, about seventy years old, The L. Wenceslaus.
famous for Learning, Religion, and his travels through diverse countries: His
house was formerly plundered, even to his wearing apparel, he only saying, The
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away. Being asked why he would engage
himself in Fredericks cause, he said, My conscience pressed me to do what I
did; I am here, my God, His patience.
dispose of me thy servant as seems good in thine eyes; I am full of years,
take me out of this life, that I may not see that evil that is coming on my
Country. Afterward holding forth his Bible, he said, Behold my Paradise, it
never yielded me so much Nectar and Ambrosia as now. When he was sentenced, he
said to the Judges, Psalm. 119.92.
You have a long time thirsted after my blood, but know withal, you will find
God a revenger of innocent blood, for whose cause we suffer. A Friar saying to
him, You are deceived in your opinion, he answered, I rely not on opinion, but
on the infallible truth of God, for I have no other way but him who said, I am
the way, the truth, and the life. On the Scaffold, stroaking his long beard, he
said, My gray hairs, behold what honor remains for you, that you should be
crowned with Martyrdom: And so praying for the Church, his Country, his
enemies, and commending his soul to Christ, His Martyrdom.
his head was cut off, and set on the Tower.

The next was the Lord Harant, a man that had gained much experience by his
travels in Asia, Africa, The L. Harant
and Europe; his crime was that he had taken an oath to be true to Frederick,
and durst not violate it. As he was going to suffer, he called the Minister to
him, and told him that he much feared his wives inconstancy in Religion, His
message to his wife.
and therefore desired him to exhort her to constancy, and not to suffer her
self to be drawn from her Religion by any allurements, assuring her that it is
the infallible way to salvation. Then to exhort her to use more clemency to his
subjects, rather easing then over-charging them with burdens. Lastly to
require her to have a care of his children, and to bring them up in the pure
Religion, etc. Being called to execution, he said, I have traveled through
many Countries, through many barbarous Nations, escaped many perils by sea and
land, and now suffer innocently in my own Country, and by them for whose sake
I, and my forefathers have spent our Estates and Lives; Father forgive them.
Then he said, In thee O Lord have I hoped, let me not be confounded. On the
Scaffold he said, Into thy hands O Lord I commend my spirit: In the O Lord have
I trusted from my youth; I am confident that I shall be accepted by that
ignominious death of my Savior; and falling upon his knees, he said, To thee O
Lord I commend my spirit, for thou O God, just and true, have redeemed me: His
Martyrdom.
and so he received the fatal stroke with the sword.

Sir Casper Kaplitz.
The next was Casper Kaplitz a Knight, of eighty six years old: When the
Minister came to him after his condemnation, he said, See me a miserable old
man, who have often entreated my God that he would have mercy upon me, and take
me out of this miserable life, but have not obtained it, for God has reserved
me to be a spectacle to the world, and a sacrifice to himself, Gods will be
done: My death indeed is disgraceful in the eyes of men, but glorious in the
sight of God; for God will account that death precious in his sight, which I
suffer for his glory and truth: And when it was told him that he might have his
life, if he would ask pardon; he answered, His courage and constancy.
That he would ask pardon of him against whom he had committed many sins all
his life, but he never offended the Prince, and therefore would not give
occasion to suspect that he had committed some crime, for which he had deserved
death, etc. God forbid therefore, said he, that I should be separated from this
holy company of Martyrs. As he was going to the Scaffold, being feeble with
age, he said, Oh my God strengthen me, lest I fall down, and become matter of
scorn to the enemies. Being crooked with age, and hanging down his head, the
executioner could not well come at his neck, whereupon the Minister said to
him, My noble Lord, as you have commended your soul to Christ, so now offer up
your heavy head cheerfully to God, and lift up your self toward heaven. Then
lifting up his head as well as he could, he said, Lord Jesus into thy hand I
commend my spirit, His Martyr^^m.
and so is head was cut off.

The next was Procopius Dorzecki, ^ro^^p^us Dorzecki.
who after his condemnation said to the Minister, I have had a great contention
all night with old Adam, so that it made me sweat again; but thanks be to my
God, by whom my soul has overcome all tentations: saying further, O Almighty
God, strengthen thy servant that I may not be made a derision to mine enemies
by any fear of death; and as thou wa^^ wont to encourage thy holy Martyrs, His
prayer and (...).
so I ^trongly belee^e thou will comfort me. When he was called forth to
execution, he said, Thanks be to my God, who does now call me to himself, to
him I have lived, and for him I will die; for my Savior has therefore died
and risen again, that he might be Lord both of the living and the dead: I know
that my soul shall li^e, and my body shall be raised like to his glorious body.
Upon the Scaffold he said to the Imperi^ll judges, Tell Caesar that we are now
under his judgment, bu^ he shall undergo a more grievous, yet just judgment
of God: And seeing a gold Medal hanging about his neck, wherein was engraven
the Coronation of Frederick, he delivered it to one that stood by, saying, I
require ^hee, His fi^elity to h^s Prince.
that when my dear King Frederick shall recover the Throne of this Kingdom,
thou deliver him this, and tell him, that for his sake I wore it till my death,
His Martyrdom.
and that now I lay down my life willingly, for God and my King, and so
presently after he lost his head.

The next was the L. Frederick de Bile, L Frederick de Bile.
who suffered death likewise patiently and piously.

The next was the L. Hen. Otto. a man of great judgment, who having received
the sentence of condemn^tion, said, O Caesar, do you indeed establish your
Throne by our blood? L. Hen. Otto.
but what account will you make to God of it in the day of judgment? etc. kill
my body disp^^se my members whither you please: yet d^ I belee^e that my
Savior will gather them together again, and clothe (...) so that with th^s^
eyes I shall see him, His ^aith.
with these ears I shall hear him, with ^his tongue I shall praise him, and
rejoice with this heart f^re^er. Afterward when the Minister came to him,
amongst other (...) he sai^, I was ^roubled, but now I feel a wonderful
refreshing in m^ heart, adding, with his hands lift up to heaven, I give thee
thanks O most merciful Savior, Joy unspeakable.
who have be^n pleased to fill me with so much (...) now I fear death no
longer, I will die with joy: As he was going to the ^ca^fold he said to the
Minist^r, I am sure that Christ Jesus will meet my soul with his Angels, that
he may bring it to an everlasting marriage, where I shall drink of a new cup, a
cup of joy for ever: This death I know shall not separate me from him: Upon the
Scaffold lifting up his eyes to heaven, he said, Behold I see the Heavens open,
pointing with his hand to the place, where others also observed a certain
brightness which dazzled their eyes: after he had prayed silently, His
martyrdom.
he said, Into thy hands O Lord God I commend my spirit, have pity on me
through Jesus Christ, and receive me that I may see thy glory: and so he
received the stroke of the sword.

The next was Dionysius Zervius formerly a Papist, but being told of the
promises made to the people of God concerning the pardon of sins, Dion. Zervius.
and assurance of salvation to those that believe in Christ, he struck his
breast, and with tears in his eyes, cried out, This is my faith, and in this I
die, I rest in the grace of Christ, and I trust in my God, that he will
graciously accept my contrite spirit: When upon the Scaffold the Jesuits
exhorted him, he listened not to them, but turned from the Crucifix, and falling
down on his knees he prayed softly: Then looking up toward heaven, he cried,
They can take away the body, but they cannot take away the soul: O Lord Jesus I
commend that unto thee: and so he ended his life being fifty six years old. His
Martyrdom.


The next was an aged man about seventy years old, that had been long lame: An
aged man.
his crime was that he had assisted Frederick with his counsel and wealth: at
the time of his death, he said, O Lord Jesus, who being innocent did undergo
death, His martyrdom.
grant that I may die the death of the righteous, and receive my soul into thy
hands.

The Lord of Rugenia
The next was the Lord of Rugenia, a man of excellent parts, and full of zeal
for God; when he was judged to die, he said, that it was more welcome to him
then if the Emperor had given him life, and restored him to his estate with
addition of more: afterward he said to the Minister: His excellent speech.
God is our witness, that we fought for nothing but the Liberty of Religion:
and in that we are overcome and condemned to die, we acknowledge, and find
that God will not have his truth defended by our swords, but by our blood, etc.
When he saw diverse called out before him, he said, What is the matter my God?
thou know that I resign my self wholly unto thee: Ah do not despise thy
servant, but make haste to take me away: and when the Sheriff came for him, he
rejoiced, and said, Praised be my God, that I shall now be taken out of the
world, that I may be with Christ: and so he went to meet him: His martyrdom.
On the Scaffold he comforted himself with that promise, Father, I will, that
where I am, my servants may also be, to behold that glory which thou gave me:
Therefore (said he) I make haste to die that I may be with Christ, and see his
glory, and so he suffered Martyrdom courageously.

Val. Cockan.
The next was Valentine Cockan of about sixty years old: During his
imprisonment, he was full of heavenly discourse, and at the Scaffold he said,
Grant me O God to pass through this valley of death, that I may presently see
thee, for thou know my God that I have loved thy word, bring me O God
through the paths of life, His Martyrdom.
that I may see fullness of joy in thy presence: and kneeling down, he said,
into thy hands O Lord I commend my spirit, and so holily ended his life.

The next was Toby Steffick a man of a composed temper, Toby Steffick.
and sincere in Religion: he spent most of the time of his imprisonment in
silent sighs and tears: Before his Execution he said, His prayer.
I have received many good things of the Lord all my life long, shall I not
therefore receive this cup of affliction? I embrace the will of God, who by
this ignominious death makes me conformable to his son, and by a narrow way
brings me to his heavenly Kingdom: I praise God who has joined me undeservedly
to these excellent men, that I might receive with them the crown of martyrdom:
When he was called to die, he said: My Savior being about to die, said,
Father, not as I will, but as thou will: thy will be done. Shall I therefore
who am but a worm, yea, dust, and a shadow contradict his will? far be it from
me: yea, I come willingly my God, only have mercy on me, and cleanse me from my
sins, that no spot or rinckle may appear in me, but that I may appear pure in
thy sight, and so he lifted up himself full of sighs, yet full of hope, His
Martyrdom.
and as he was praying he rendered up his spirit unto God.

Then was Jessenius, a Doctor of Physic, called forth, D. Jessenius.
a man famous for piety and learning all over Europe: Having hard his sentence,
he said, You use us too cruelly and disgracefully: but know, A Prophecy.
that our heads shall be buried, which you ignominiously expose for a
spectacle: which afterward came to pass, Anno 1631. when the King of Sweden
with his Army took prague, and caused the Martyrs heads to be taken from the
Tower, and solemnly and honorably buried. When the Hangman required his tongue
to cut it off, he willingly put it out, and falling upon his knees, as he was
praying, his head was cut off, His Martyrdom.
his body quartered and set upon four stakes.

The next was Christopher Chober who much encouraged his fellow-Martyrs, and
then cited the words of Ignatius, I am Gods corn, Christ^* Chober.
and shall be ground with the teeth of wild beasts: So we (says he) are Gods
corn, sown in the field of the Church, His excellent speech.
and that we may be for our Masters use, we are now to be torn by beasts: but
be of good cheer, the Church is founded in blood, and has ever increased by
blood: God is able to raise up a thousand worshippers of himself out of every
drop of our blood: for though truth now suffers violence, yet Christ reigns,
and no man shall throw him from his Throne: Being called to execution, he said,
I come in the name of my God, neither am I ashamed to suffer these things for
his glory, for I know whom I have believed: I have fought the good fight of
faith, and finished my course, etc. then praying, into thy hands Lord I commend
my spirit, His Martyrdom.
he received the Crown of Martyrdom.

John Shultis was next, who on the Scaffold, said, Why art thou so sad O my
soul? Hope thou in God for thou shall yet praise him: etc. John Shultis.
The righteous seem to die in the eyes of fools, but indeed they go to their
rest: Lord Jesus thou have promised that whosoever comes to thee, thou willt not
cast off: Behold I now come, look on me, pity me, pardon my sins, and receive
my soul, to thy self: then kneeling down, he said, Come come, Lord Jesus, and
do not tarry, and so he was he headed. His Martyrdom.


Maxim. Hostialic^*
The next was Maximillian Hostialick, a learned, and pious man: after his
condemnation he was sadder then the rest, and being asked by the Minister the
reason of it, he said, The sins of my youth do now come into my mind: for
though I know that nothing remains to condemn them which are in Christ Jesus:
yet I know that God exercises justice as well as mercy toward his own: Being
called to death, he said, Look upon me O Lord my God, and lighten mine eyes,
lest I sleep the sleep of death; and lest mine enemies say, We have prevailed.
Afterward repeating the words of Simeon, Now let thou thy servant depart in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, he was beheaded.

The next was John Kutnaur, who when the Jesuits began to speak to them, His
Martyrdom.

John Kutnaur. H^s speech to the Jesuits.


said, Pray you trouble not our consciences; we are sufficiently furnished
against the fear of death, we need none of your help: and when they would have
proceeded, he said, Why do you create unprofitable labor to your selves, and
trouble to us? Then said they one to another, they are hard rocks, and will not
suffer themselves to be removed: to whom he answered, You sa^ true, Christ is
an hard rock, and we are firmly fixed on him. Afterward he said to his
fellow-Martyrs, I understand that I must be hanged, but whether by the neck,
middle or feet, I know not, nor ca^e not; this only is my grief, that my blood
may not be mingled with yours, that we might be made one sacrifice to God: When
he was called forth to execution, he was besprinckled with the tears of his
friends, to whom he said, Play the men, brethren, and refrain fron weeping, I
go before, but it is but a short time and we shall meet in the heavenly glory;
When he was upon the ladder, he said, His speech at death.
I have plotted no Treason, committed no murder, I have done nothing worthy of
death; but I die because I have been faithful to the Gospel, and my country? O
God pardon my enemies, for they know not what they do: but thou O Christ have
pity on me, for I commit my soul unto thee, His Martyrdom.

Sim. Sussickey.


and so he slept in the Lord.

The next was Simeon Sussickey, who when he saw the Jesuits coming, he said
to his companions: These birds of prey are flying hither, but they shall not
feed on these carcasses, but return hungry; For God has promised to perserve
his own as the apple of his eye, and therefore he will not suffer us to be
seduced. The last night he had a great conflict with the flesh, because the
Scripture says, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree: Tentation.
but when the Minister told him that that curse was taken away by the death of
Christ, he was well satisfied: He went to his death praying and singing, and
being hanged next to Kutnaur which was his son in law, His Martyrdom.
after he was dead, he turned toward him, and so near that their mouths
touched each other: so that their enemies said, These were such obstinate
Rebels that they cease not to plot after death.

The next was Nathaneel Wodnianskey, who when the Jesuits solicited him to
Apostasy, Nath. Wodnianskey.

His speech to the J^su^^es.


he said to them: You take away our lives under pretense of Rebellion, and not
content with that, you seek to destroy our souls? Glut your selves with sight
of our blood, and be satisfied with that, but we shall leave a sting in your
consciences: Afterward his own son saying to him, My Father, if hope of life
should be proffered you, upon condition of Apostasy, I pray you be mindful of
keeping your faith to Christ: He answered, It is very acceptable to me my son,
His counsel to his son.
to be exhorted to constancy by you, but what makes you to suspect me? I rather
advise and exhort you to follow your fathers steps, and to exhort your
brethren, sisters, and children, His Martyrdom.
to that constancy whereof I shall leave you an example: and so he patiently
ended his life upon the Gallows.

The next was Wenceslaus Gisbitzky, Wen. Gesbitzky
to whom were given great hopes of life: but the Minister fearing Satan's
stratagems, advised him to take heed of security, and to prepare himself for
the encounter of death: Upon the Scaffold, seeing his hopes frustrate, he fell
on his knees, and said: We are prostrate before thee, O eternal Father, do not
forsake us, His prayer.
have pity on us through Jesus Christ: We would say more, but we are not able
to express it: Into thy hands do we commend our souls, perfect that which
thou have begun to work in us. Render to us our inheritance that we may sing
Holy, Holy, Holy, His martyrdom.
etc. and so in the midst of his prayers he ended his life.

There was also one Martin Fruin, an eminent Citizen of P^ague, Martin Fruin.
who being taken in his own house, was scoffed at by the soldiers, beaten with
their fists, and afterward cruelly tortured, and so burnt in the privy parts,
that for six months he was troubled with most grievous pain: he was shut up in
prison from all company, He is murdered.
and at last was found dead in the Castle ditch under the Tower.

Presently after the execution of these holy Martyrs, all their goods were
confiscated, as also of those that were driven into banishment. Their goods
con^^scated.
Then was a Proclamation published, wherein a general pardon of all crimes was
offered to all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom, only their goods were
confiscated, either in whole or in part, which must be brought into his
Majesty's Treasury, to pay his debts which were contracted by this necessary
war: besides which, they were to make a confession of their faults in a form
prescribed before Cardinal Lichtenstein, who was Caesar's Viceroy, and if any
did not appear, Recantation prescribed.
he should lose this favor.

Hence it was that the enemies publicly boasted that none were punished but
such as were convicted by their own confession. Then by Edict all were
forbidden to diminish, or waste their goods, The twentieth Artifice.
by selling them, or conveying them over to others: and if any man should send
away his goods to another place, all should be lost: and whosoever received
such goods, should pay so much of his own to the Emperor.

Yet the merry Judges turned all this to a jest, saying to diverse that pleaded
their innocence from having any hand in bringing in Frederick, That though they
had not actual sins, yet they were infected with the Original sin of heresy
and wealth, and therefore could not be exempted from punishment.

Then did they proceed to take from the Protestants all their Castles, The
Protestants beggered.
Towns, and Villages, whereby they were deprived of their livelihoods, and
driven into strange places: Some were forced to cast themselves upon their
Popish friends, others to become servants to their own destroyers.

Afterward all their personal Estates were sequestered, scarce leaving so much
as a garment for them wherewith to cover their nakedness: Their debts and money
seized on.
And lest any man should should have money at use, they commanded all to bring
in all their bonds, upon pain of losing all their debts, if they concealed the
least: And when any considerable sum was brought in, the Kings Treasurers were
at hand, who protesting that the Emperor had need of it to defray his charges
of war, took it away, giving to the party a note that so much was due to him
from the Emperor, which yet was never repaied.

And thus the Protestants being commanded to depart the Kingdom, the Popish
party divided their confiscated goods and lands amongst themselves: The
s^uldiers get most.
and as it lay commodious for any of them, they added this or that Village,
Town, Castle, or Lordship to their own, but the greatest part fell to strangers
shares, Spaniards, Italians, or Germans which were Commanders in the Imperial
Army, instead of their pay. If any widows or Orphans had lands or goods not
taken away, their popish neighbors would either circumvent them by craft, or
weary them* out by quartering soldiers upon them, and so enforced them to sell
them their lands, at what prices themselves listed to make thereof, and yet
afterward not paying that neither.

The one and twentieth Artifice.

Charles de Zerotine. Another Obedi^^.


Then did the Emperor call for the ancient Charters of the Kingdom, which he
immediately rent, and threw into the fire.

The Ministers being all banished, the noble Lord Charles de Zerotine did yet
not only retain his houshold-Chaplaine; but he sustained also many others
privately in their Caves with bread and water; and not fearing man, he did not
only give liberty to his own subjects, but to diverse others in neighboring
places to resort to the holy exercises which were performed in his Castle.

The two and twentieth Artifice. Protestant Tutors banished
Then did the enemies by a new Edict publish, that all such Barons, Noblemen,
and Citizens, as kept any Protestant Tutor for their children, should presently
dismiss him: otherwise he should be taken and punished.

Then by another Edict all the Protestants were cast out of protection of the
Laws, and were to have no benefit by them.

The enemies being every day puffed up with their successes and victories, made
a Decree that all the Protestant Noblemen should presently depart out of the
Kingdom, Success makes the enemies proud.
and the Emperor published a Proclamation, that to prevent all divisions which
were dangerous to the Kingdom and Magistrates, therefore he was resolved no
longer to tolerate any of the inferior, much less of the superior estates
of either sex, who was infected with heretical errors: And withal he granted
to the superior States the term of six months, to learn the holy Roman
Catholic faith: and for that end he appointed Commissioners of Reformation to
instruct them requiring them, to be obedient to his will, and to be diligently
instructed by them, otherwise they should not be suffered to stay in the
Kingdom, much less to possess their goods: and therefore he required all those
which at the end of that term of six months did not turn Catholics, The
Protestants all bani^^ed.
immediately to depart the Kingdom and never to return again.

Hereupon they which loved Religion at their hearts, did presently separate
themselves by banishment: Others solicited Caesar by petitions, either to
change the decree, or to grant them a longer time: Others there were that
thinking to deceive the Emperor and Pope, did buy false testimonies of the
Priests, that they had been at Confession, and communicated in one kind, False
testimonies bought.
and so made show of a dissembled Apostasy, thereby to avoid banishment.

Then was the forenamed Act extended unto widows, and the Protestants children
were commanded to be delivered to the care and instruction of Chatholicks, or
else to be shut up in Monasteries: Protestants chi^dren taken from them.
and this caused extreme grief and groans, when Noble-mens sons, and
daughters, even maids that were marriageable, were pulled from their parents,
and friends, and thrust into Jesuits Colleges, or Monks Cells: their Goods
being taken also from them, and committed to Papists.

The cunning craftiness of those seducing Reformers, deceived many unwary
persons, whilst they told them that they might hold their former opinions;
Popish subtilty
only for order sake they must acknowledge the Roman Bishop to be the visible
head of the Church: Hereby the simpler sort, thinking that they were not
constrained to any other faith, but what they had formerly learned, thought
that they might with a safe conscience promise that outward obedience. And if
these seducers saw any one of more Nobility then ordinary, they presently
suggested to them how much it grieved Caesar that those ancient families which
had formerly been the ornaments and props of the Kingdom, should cast
themselves out into banishment through there unadvisedness, Tentation. Many
seduced.
when they might remain and flourish under the favor both of God and Caesar:
and this ruined many of the Protestants Nobility, who preferred their earthly,
before the heavenly country.

Yet above a hundred Families, leaving their inheritances, and all their
possessions, went away: Amongst these was the Lord de Zerotine, Lord de
Zerotine goes into exile.
who might have lived in his country if he would have deprived himself of the
worship of God, by the loss of his Minister, or if he would have used it
covertly, yet he rather chose to suffer affliction with the people of God, then
to continue the enjoyments of his earthly possessions.

And whereas many of these Protestants were gone into Silesia, and Lusatia, the
Emperor set forth a Proclamation, wherein he protested, that it was not his
intention to remove them out of Bohemia and Moravia, and to suffer them in the
incorporated Provinces, A cruel Ed^ct.
and therefore he commanded them to depart from thence also, or else they
should be brought to punishment: requiring them also to send back their
children which they had carried with them, upon penalty of losing all the goods
which any of them could demand in his country.

Presently after he published another Edict wherein he required all the
Protestant wives of the Catholics, either to reform, or to go into banishment:
But when many of the chief Officers of the Kingdom had Protestant wives,
Protestants wives b^nished from their husbands.
and they would not endure that they should be thus divorced from them, he set
forth another Edict, whereby they were tolerated till the death of their
husbands, and then they should be excluded from their inheritances, and sent
into banishment: And required that in the mean time they should absent
themselves from all festival and nuptial solemnities, or else should take the
lowest places after the Catholics.

The exiles sought after.
And whereas some of the Protestants did privately teturn, or stay to make the
best of that little that did remain unto them: Proclamation was sent out that
all such should be apprehended and imprisoned: and to warn all such as had
harbored any of them, upon their allegiance, to appear before the chief
Officers in the Castle of Prague: requiring that if any knew where any of them
lay hid, they should secretly and suddenly attach them, and bring them to
prison.

The three and twentieth Artifice.

Laws repealed


Then did the Emperor repeal, and disannull diverse of the ancient Statutes of
the Kingdom, that made most for the peoples Liberties, as concerning their free
Election of a King, etc. that he might the better every where oppress them.

The four and twentieth Artifice.
Then in all the free Cities men of base and mean quality were appointed to
determine a^l business, and to be the chief Officers, and to these were added
some of the chief of the soldiery, the better to procure subjection.

These Cities also they impoverished by taxes and contributions, which
continued diverse years, and were extorted by the Soldiers power. Apostates
pro^moted.


Then Mass Priests were put into the places of godly Ministers, and people
were compelled to frequent the Mass: Marriages were forbidden, except amongst
the Catholics: Such as turned Apostates were promoted to all places of
Magistracy in the Cities, though men of no judgment, nor experience.

Then were these Articles given to the Captains of Distresses.

The five and twentieth Artifice.
1. That whosoever is not of the Kings Religion, all traffic and commerce shall
be debarred him.

2. Whosoever shall suffer private Preaching, Baptism, or Matrimony in his
house, shall pay a great Fine, or suffer six months imprisonment: but if he
harbor a Preacher, he shall lose goods and Life.

3. If any shall work upon Catholic holidaies, he shall be imprisoned, and pay
ten Florences.

4. It shall not be lawful for any Non- Catholic to make a Will: if he do, it
shall be null.

5. No youth shall be bound Apprentice, or learn any Art or Trade, unless he
learn the Catholic Religion.

6. The poor people in Hospitals, except they be converted by such a day, shall
be turned out, etc.

After the taking of the City of Prague, Papists were examined upon oath to
declare what they knew or heard that the Protestants had spoken or done against
Caesar. Then was an Act published to the rest of the Citizens, that though they
had forfeited their whole estates, yet they should not be wholly sequestered,
but every one should contribute part of his Estate to support the Army: all men
also were required upon oath to discover what their Estates were: according to
which they were enjoined to pay a ransom to obtain a pardon: yea all trading
inhibited to such as were not Catholics.

In the City of Kutterberg were abundance of silver mines, and the Inhabitants
generally were zealous professors: hereupon so soon as they began to be
molested for Religion, the Kings Revenue began to diminish, most of the workmen
giving over the work: The King seeing this, he farms his Revenues to the
Citizens for ten years, The Protestants in the silve^ Mines had a promise of
favor. Popish perfidiousness.
promising that in the interim they should not be troubled with soldiers, nor
for their Religion: and hereto he set his hand and seal: But Satan envying
their place and liberties, stirs up the Jesuits, to move the King to break his
Covenant within four mouths after: and the soldiers were sent thither again,
and they began again to be questioned about their religion: The Citizens
astonished at this manifest breach of Covenant, humbly petition that no
violence might be offered to them, which would overthrow the mettall-works: But
instead of answer, Soldiers quartered upon them.
the Major and chief Aldermen had twenty Musketeers apiece put into their
houses upon free quarter, till they had shriven themselves to a Priest: the
Soldiers domineered exceedingly, wasting these men's estates by their
profuseness, and abusing them diverse other ways at their pleasure: yet the
patience of the one, overcame the tyranicall behavior of the other: These
godly men so long as they had it, provided for the soldiers, but when all was
gone, some of them withdrew themselves from danger by flight; others resigned
their houses and goods to these domineering villains: delivering the keys to
them, and so departing.

When yet this prevailed not, Don Martins cruelty.
the task of reforming that City was committed to Don Martin, who accompanied
with a Troop of Curiassiers, and himself brandishing a naked sword, entered into
the City, the Citizens trembling at his coming, hearing of the cruelty which he
had exercised in other places, whereupon that very night multitudes of them
betook themselves to flight, thinking to hide themselves in neighboring
villages, this caused Don Martin to get an Edict that none should harbor
exiles upon a great penalty.

The year after a Senate at Kutterberg was elected out of the Apostates: the
Major being a base and illiterate person, so that all the Citizens being still
oppressed with the soldiers, either fled with their wives and children,
leaving all behind them, or else were fain to submit their necks to the
Antichristian yoke.

The Bolislavians persecuted.
The next City whither these reformers went, was Bolislavia, where the Orthodox
Religion had continued for two hundred years, and it was the Principal seat of
the brethren. The Ministers being ejected, they placed in their rooms two
crafty Friars, that by all means sought to pervert the people, but when this
prevailed not, they brought in three companies of soldiers to quarter upon
them. Then were some of the Citizens banished, others cast into prison, and
three of the principal was sequestered to strike a terror into the rest; the
cause pretended was, because they said, as was alleged, That none had power to
command their consciences, etc. But when yet the Citizens remained constant,
Constancy.
they were all warned to appear in the Court, and being come, they were shut up
in several rooms, and called out and examined one by one. The first was the
Town Clerk, a weak and timorous man, and therefore they had set a Ruffian in a
corner, with a sword in his hand, whom the fearful man seeing, was so
terrified, that he promised to turn Catholic; Apostasy.
they so rejoiced at this beginning, that they dismissed all the rest, bad them
consider of it, and do as the Town Clerk had set them an example.

Amongst these there were two Burgomasters, learned men, who exhorted their
fellow Citizens not to be affrighted with these imaginary terrors.

Afterward one of them being called for, was partly with threats, and partly
with flatteries so wearied out, that at last he took time to consider of it:
The other being called for, and an old man proposing the others example to him,
he spit in his face, saying, Traitor is this your constancy? And so both he,
Constancy.
and the rest of the Citizens remained as unmovable as a Rock. The first
Burgomaster considering what he had done, and being ashamed of it, Recovery.
came and gave them such a positive answer, as that with the rest he was sent
to prison.

One Bartholomew Lang told them to their faces, that he had rather die by the
sword, then deny his faith; whereupon with diverse others he was thrust into a
stinking dungeon, where they kept them prisoners for seventeen weeks, their
houses in the mean time being possessed by the barbarous soldiers.

One of these godly persons died in prison: And about that time Bethlem Gabor
warring with the Emperor, and Count Mansfield entering Silesia, Bethlem Gabor.
with the King of Denmarks Army, these Tyrants were struck with such a terror,
that presently Proclamations came forth, that it was not his Majesty's pleasure
that any man should be forced to the faith, by violent means; Gods providence.
by which Proclamation the inhabitans of Bolislavia had some respit.

But the year after, when Gabor was retired, and the King of Denmark beaten out
of Silesia, their tyranny again revived and a new Proclamation came forth to
inhibit the Protestants all Trade and Commerce* and to command them to abjure
their Heresies under pain of the severest and inevitable punishment. Hereupon
some were banished, others voluntarily went into exile, others were denied
traffic, A new persecution.
the Friars taking away such commodities as they set to sale, so that the
Citizens which stayed, were forced to take the mark of the Beast, that they
might buy and sell.

In the City of Litomericia, Anno 1517. there was an unanimous agreement
amongst the Citizens, In Litomeric.
that none should be made free amongst them, but such as professed the reformed
Religion: and that whosoever should move for the nulling of this act should be
disfranchised; This continued inviolate for a hundred years till two Jesuits
sued to be made free men of the City, which being denied, they entered their
complaint in the Chancery, whether some of the principal Aldermen were
summoned, and kept for nine weeks space, till by threats they had obtained from
them to make these two men free. Popish subtilty
Five months after one of them is made an Alderman, that so they might have
their spies in every place; there were also cunning seducers sent thither to
withdraw the people from their Religion.

But when this prevailed not, Anno 1625. they took the names of every Citizen,
commanding them constantly to come to the Mass, and every one to s^ew his name
to the Sexton, that they might know that all were there present, or else for
every omission they should forfeit five pound.

Then bringing in more soldiers, they commanded all the inhabitants to be
present at their idolatrous Procession, and because the Recorder came not, they
sent a whole company of soldiers to plunder his house, who also abused and
threatened his wife.

The year after they brought more in soldiers, quartering them in the
principal men's houses, in some ten, in some twenty, and in others thirty, who
abused them fearfully, but, through Gods assistance, Patience in persecution.
they bore it with such admirable patience that the enemies were weary with
plaguing them, and began to be more moderate; yet they published an order, that
whosoever would not turn Catholic, should, with their wives and children,
depart the City and Kingdom by a certain day, whereupon many of them removed
into Misnia.

At the City of Radecium they drove away the Ministers, In Radecium.
and placed there a merry Archdeacon, who protested that all violent means were
displeasing to him, and therefore he entertained the Citizens with jests and
merry speeches, and would draw them to Taverns and Gameing houses: But when
after four years trial, Tentation resisted.
he found that he had not converted any one of them by these means, he brought
in soldiers for his help: Then did he assemble the people, requiring them to
go in Procession with him, but when none would follow, the soldiers rushed in
amongst them with their drawn swords; whereupon the people ran, some one way,
some another, Popish cruelty*
others were forced to follow the Procession whether they would or no, and some
for refusing were slain.

Then was a whole Regiment of soldiers sent thither, with express charge not
to depart, till the City was reformed. The Archdeacon taking some of these,
went to a Physician that had been lame for some years, and asks him whether
he would become a Catholic? which he stoutly refused, Constancy.
saying, that he had rather his half rotten carcass should be drawn through
the fields, and torn in pieces, then to do any thing against his conscience.
Then were all the inhabitants called together: the City gates shut, and the
people grievously threatened if they would not turn, and such as refused, were
thrust into prisons, and soldiers were sent to their houses, who raged and
domineered over their wives and children; whereupon they ran to their husbands
with tears and entreaties, Humane infirmity.
and prevailed with many of them to desire time to be given them to learn the
Romish religion, only twenty eight of them, together with their wives and
children forsook their earthly Estate, Constancy.
and went into banishment to preserve their consciences clear.

At Bidsove.
Don Martin went also to Bidsove, ten-miles from Prague, attended with his
soldiers, and assembling the Citizens, he made an Oration to them to turn
Catholics, they answered, that they could not unlearn that in an hour, which
they had been learning all their life, this so enraged Martin, that he
assaulted the man that answered for all the rest, Popish cruelty.
with a club, beating him extremely, and then he commanded the chief Officer to
carry him out of the City, not suffering him so much as to visit his house
before his departure: This so terrified the rest, that they promised to be
taught within a certain time; and whereas some of them thought to save
themselves by flight, sending their wives and some of their goods privately
before, with whom went also some godly widows; Martin having intelligence of
it, sent some soldiers after them, that stripped them of their goods, and
brought them back and cast them into fetters, refusing to release them, till
both they and their husbands turned Catholics.

At Zaticum.
At Zaticum, another City, famous for religion, the Minister being banished,
Friars were put into his place, who being assisted with soldiers used to cane
those that would not bow to the Host, and because the Major and some of the
Aldermen were absent at a solemn Procession, they sined them. Then came thither
Don Martin, and proclaimed, Bibles burnt.
that whosoever had any Bibles, or other Evangelicall books; if they brought
them not in (...), they should be fined at a hundred florences, or suffer five
weeks imprisonment. As also whosoever refused to come to Mass, should pay five
Florences, and three pounds of wax: All the books that were so brought, he
burnt them without the walls; and for such as still stood out, he quartered
Troopers upon them, which extorted money from them day by day: Hereupon many
forsook their houses, and betook themselves to the hardship of a banished life.
Then did he proclaim that without his leave none should go out of the gates
upon pain of death: The next day he arrested the Major, and would not release
him, but upon the promise of Apostasy. Two of the Aldermen he bound with iron
chains for refusing to adore the Host, Don Martins cruelty.
and for fourteen days together tormented them grievously, till he had forced
their consent to the like Apostasy. Then assembling the whole Senate, he
commands them presently to submit to Caesar's will, to go to auricular
confession, and to communicate in one kind, promising that such as obeyed
should be eased of soldiers, that the others should have their burdens
doubled, requiring every one in order to answer for himself, whether he would
promise to perform this within three weeks: One of them modestly pleading to be
excused, in regard of his conscience: the furious beast fell upon him, beat him
about the head, and abused him with cursed words, saying, Thou art an unworthy
knave to be in this place, I will have thee bound hand and foot, and cast into
a deep dungeon, and when thou have vomited out thy wicked soul, I will deliver
thee to the hangman to be buried, etc. Then he calls to his soldiers for chains
and fetters, with which they bound his hands and feet, and put an iron collar
about his neck, with a thick chain, and so brought him to the Dungeon, where
he was tormented for three weeks, neither wife nor children being suffered to
come to him, and fed with bread and water; the Jesuits also were daily
molesting him: Then was he sentenced to death, which he chose before Apostasy.
Then said one of the Jesuits, he is possessed with the devil, and therefore he
commanded him to be bound more straitely, whereby at last he was forced to go
to auricular confession, but by that means getting out of the Prison, he fled
into Misnia to escape their tyranny.

All the best Citizens did desire banishment, Exile denied to the Protestants.
but the City gates were kept strictly, least any should get out, or carry out
their housholdstuff; whereupon many escaped by the mines of the wall, and among
these, a Lords wife, leaving all her rich housholdstuff behind her, crept out
at the common sewer, to follow her husband into banishment.

Many of the exiles in Misnia, having spent all that little which they carried
with them, were forced to seek alms in Bohemia, where being betrayed, they were
cast into prison, and so tormented, till some of them were almost distracted,
and then they were sent away to other places; some of these were persons of
good quality.

At Tusta a chief Officer of the Kingdom solicited the Citizens to turn
Catholics, which they refusing to do, At Tusta.
he complained of it to the Jesuits at Prague, whereupon Don Martin is sent
thither, who entering the City, sends his soldiers into the Senators houses,
licensing them to abuse them at their pleasure, so that in a short time many
were forced to Apostasy. Then did that other Officer set a great fine upon the
City, Apostasy.
because they turned Catholics for another man's sake, and would not do it for
his: And thus the poor Protestants were abused on every hand to satisfy the
lusts of these Tyrants.

Then did another Noble man, with a band of soldiers, go to the City of
Rokizan, and tyrannically abuse them for their Religion, forbearing no kind of
insolency that they could think of: At Rokizan.
Amongst other projects this was one; He caused all the Citizens to write their
names in three books: Popish subtilty
In the first such as were already Catholics (which were but six late
Apostates) In the second the names of such as would become Apostates within a
fortnight, which were very few: In the third such as absolutely refused, and so
were opposite to God and Caesar, and in this were almost all the names, which
so enraged him, that he resolved to use all manner of cruelties, Constancy.
saying, that they deserved the cross, the wheel, yea and hell it self.

Then did he command all the Citizens to come to the Church the next day, to
receive the Sacrament in one kind; but when, coming himself to Church, he
found few or none there, he runs through the streets, and into the houses,
driving all that he met with to the Church with his stick. When he came thither
again, he espied one John Foelix, John Foelix. Barbarous cruelty.
a chief Citizen, but a Calvinist, he therefore fell upon him with a knotty
club, beating him about the head, shoulders and hands, till he was all gore
blood, and then he said to him, Get thee hence thou beast, with thy cursed
Calvin-bloud. Then did he rage against the other Citizens cursing them, beating
some, and spitted in the faces of others: and from one of the grave Citizens he
pulled off his beard, and strewed it on the floor.

After this he again sent word to Foelix, that except he changed his mind by
the morrow, Foelix escapes.
he would act a new tragedy with him, but that night he escaped, leaving
behind him his dear wife and children, and an aged mother of eighty years old.
Then did the Earl imprison his wife, and sequestered his estate, and enforced
the rest of the Citizens to subscribe that they did freely, and with all
readiness of mind, embrace the Catholic religion.

One Martinitz was appointed to reform the City of Slana, who substituted one
Hansbursky, At Slana.
an Apostate, to see this work done. This man that he might ingratiate himself
with the Jesuits, appointed a solemn Procession, and either by fraud or force,
brought to it most of the Citizens: John Blyssa.
Amongst others, he required one John Blyssa to accompany him, but he refused,
saying, As often as I have received the Lords Supper, so often have I obliged my
self to God, and against these abominations: Then said the other, Thou shall
not resist the Emperors pleasure: But said he, In those things which belong to
Caesar, I will not, but here Gods business is in hand: Then said the other,
Thou shall be forced to it: God, replied he, seeks willing, not forced
worshippers; whereupon he was presently committed to prison, for nine weeks and
so was another godly Citizen, Banished.
and fined, and then together with his wife, driven out of the City.

Afterward also was Blyssa and his wife banished, for procuring his child to
be Baptized by a Protestant Minister privately, and his estate was sequestered,
having nothing left him to support him in his banishment.

Then by diverse kinds of torments he compelled some to a forced obedience; as
he did fifty men whom he shut up in a narrow room, where they could neither
stand, sit, nor lie, nor have leave to go forth to ease nature: So that after
three days enduring of this pain and stink, they were forced to promise to
learn the Roman religion.

The like dealing he used to diverse women in his own chamber: but so soon as
they could, most of them went into voluntary banishment.

The City of Prachatice they entered by force, and slew the Major, who was
bringing to them the keys, At Prachatice. Prodigious cruelties.
together with a thousand six hundred men, women and children, sparing none but
such as fled, or hid themselves in secret places: The karcasses they left
unburied for diverse days, all dirty, and shamefully naked. Afterward when the
City began again to be inhabited, the Commissioners of Reformation came
thither, promising them that if they would turn Catholics, they should have
their Liberties restored to them, but if they refused, they should be
restrained from all trading, and when this prevailed not, they thrust men and
women, young and old into prisons, where they miserably afflicted them for four
whole months.

The like cruely they used to all other Cities, where they showed and used all
manner of impostures, deceits, tyrannies and impudent practices, till they had
rooted out the reformed Religion, and set up their idolatrous and superstitious
worship in the stead of it.

The godly Ministers being generally removed, The twenty sixth Artifice.
the next design of the enemies was to take all Bibles, and other profitable
books out of the peoples hands, that so the heat of Religion might in time grow
cold: The Friars also which were placed in the Churches: did not presently
thunder, but dealt fairly, beseeching and confirming the truth of their
Religion with oaths, and dreadful cursing of themselves, Popish subtilty
promising also the Emperors favor, and easing of their burdens; yea they
sought by works of charity to oblige the poorer sort to them.

One Friar promised a bushel of Wheat to every one that would come to
Confession; but when his Garners began to waste, he gave but half the measure,
whereupon one flang away in anger, saying, What, is my soul viler then the
rest? But when they perceived that they gained but few by their Fox-like
subtilty, they returned to their Wolvish cruelty, compelling men to come to
Mass, and taking the names of all such as absented themselves; and if any went
to private religious meetings, they were fined, imprisoned and whipped.

Some godly persons being met together with a Minister, in a private Chapel,
two Colonels, with some troops came upon them, encompassed the Church, rusht in
with their drawn swords, took the Minister from the Communion Table, stripped off
his clothes, Popish profaneness. Christians stripped.
and sent him away to prison, then they cast the bread upon the earth, poured
out the wine, and trampled upon it: Then they fell upon the people, stripping
men and women naked, it being f^^st and snow, so that many of them died; some
were wounded, others so affrighted that they fell into diseases: Modestly
forbids to tell how they used the women, Popish uncleanness.
even in the Church.

Then came out an Edict that whosever refused to turn Papist, whether men or
women, young or old; bond or free, their names should be returned to the
Council of State, who would give instructions what should be done with their
persons and estates.

Marriage, Burial and Baptism were forbidden to the Protestants, and if any
did it privately, The twenty seventh Artifice.
they were imprisoned, and not dismissed without Apostasy, or a great fine.
Then was all trading inhibited, or means of getting their living, and at last
buying of food, so that the poor people being oppressed with hunger and want,
were either forced to fly, or to Apostatize.

The countrymen they fetched out of their houses, yea out of their beds,
Prodigious cruelties.
by troops of soldiers, driving them like beasts before them in the sharpest
cold, and filled the common prisons, towers, cellers, stables, yea and hogsties
with them, where they were killed with hunger, cold and thirst.

A godly Surgeon, with others, was cast into a place full of snakes. Another
company was thrust into a stable, and all the windows stopped up, that the were
almost stifled for want of breath. In some places they shut them up in privies,
that they might be poisoned with the stink. In some places they mad holes, and
knocked them full of iron spikes, wherein those that were shut, could neither
sit nor stand, but bending and crooked: It was not possible that any man could
endure this posture above two or three hours, their sinews in the mean time
trembling and their members quivering, and their* hearts ready to faint with
anguish; so that some were forced to promise to turn Catholics, others that
refused were brought back to torture.

Then the devised a prison upon the water, very narow, and not above a cubit
and an half in length, wherein the prisoner could by no means lay himself at
length, and if he turned himself unawares, he must fall into the water.

The twenty eighth Artifice.
Another design was, first to assault men of greatest authority, to make them an
example to the rest.

In the town of Minion the Commissioner demanded of the people a positive
answer, At Minion.
whether they would turn Catholics: And one of them in the name of the rest
saying, that conscience neither would nor could be forced, he was presently
laid upon the ground and beaten, and still denying to turn Catholic, when he
could hardly speak, he was torn in pieces; The rest affrighted at this terrible
spectacle promised obedience if time were given them.

In another place the Senator refusing to turn Apostates, the chiefest of them
was made to ride the wooden horse, in the marketplace, for six hours space,
though he was very ancient, so that he was lame and half dead, when he was
taken off.

Popish malice.
When any desired to die, rather then to forsake their Religion, it was
answered: that the Emperor did not thirst after their blood, but rather after
the welfare of their souls: Death denied them.
To others they said, Oh, you affect the glory of Martyrdom, but you are base
knaves, and are unworthy to have any thing to glory in.

There were many who would have died in the maintenance of their Christian
faith, but there were none that would inflict death upon them; for these cruel
Tyrants brought up in the devils school, Prodigious* wickedness.
would not kill the body but the soul, and therefore they sought by lingering
and continual punishments to bring them first to stagger, and then to deny the
truth.

When any man desired to be convinced by Scripture, Blasphemy.
they answered with scoffs and jears, accusing the Scripture of imperfection,
of obscurity, of ambiguity, saying that it was the Fountain of Heresy, the
Sanctuary of Heretics, and that Laymen had nothing to do with it: They called
the Bible Wiblia, which in the Bohemian language, signifies vomit. They took
away all Orthodox books from the people, that thereby they might be the more
easily led into error.

In some places they shut up the people in the Church and forced them to
receive in one kind; Prodigious wickedness.
and if they would not fall down to the Host, they used to beat their legs with
clubs, till they fell down: Some they imprisoned and racked several times to
force them to auricular confession. Of others they set open their mouths with
gags, and thrust the Host down their throats. In other places they forced the
people, not only to abjure the Cup, but to throw it down, and to spit upon it,
and tread it under ^oot.

If any to avoid this Tyranny fled into the woods and secret places hunger
drove them out again, whereby they became a prey to their, adversaries; if they
went to neighboring places, some or other would betray them.

Edicts also were published, forbidding all to entertain such as fled upon pain
of forfeiting a hundred pieces of silver for every nights entertainment. Yet
these miserable people could not go out of the Kingdom, not being acquainted
with any other language: besides, they were told that ere long the like tragedy
should be acted every where

Four men of Kossenberg continuing constant after long imprisonment, they were
first exposed to cold for five weeks together in the depth of winter: Then for
nine days they were pined with hunger, they having only a small portion of
bread that kept life and soul together, and drinking their own urine, and when
they were threatened harder usage, if they turned not, they answered, We
willingly embrace all afflictions of famine, hanging, burning, or any thing,
rather then we would sin against God. Thereupon, Constancy.
only twice a week there was given them a mouthfull of bread, and a draught of
water. Then were they parted asunder, one thrust into the sink of the prison,
another into a furnace; and none permited to visit them; and when nothing would
prevail, they set a fine upon them, and banished them.

Others were kept in prisons and bonds till they died. One was kept in a filthy
prison till his feet rotted off, and yet he passed away the time with singing
of Psalms, as if he enjoyed all manner of deligths. Comfort in ^fflictions.


Another man being tired out with imprisonement, promised to turn Catholic,
and was released, but presently (as himself wrote afterward) God chastened him
for this his fault, holding his conscience captive for an whole year together,
Danger of Apostasy.
so that he could have no hope in Gods mercy: Yet he recalled to mind former
sinners, who upon their repentance obtained mercy of God: Thereupon he cried
unto God a whole year together, night and day watering his bed with his tears,
because he thought himself damned; but at last God (says he) sent his Angel to
me, and I saw this glory brighter then the sun, and I had gods Spirit bestowed
upon me, etc. After which he was apprehended, beheaded and quartered.

Bibles burnt.
The pictures of John Husse and Jerome of Prague they defaced; all the Bibles
that they could meet with, they burned; the graves of the Ministers they
opened, took out their bones and burnt them.

The Statutes of King Frederick they beat in pieces, and trampled them under
their feet. One man they fined at five hundred Dollars, for giving his son the
name of Frederick,

Before these calamities befell the Bohemians, God gave them warning by sundry
Prodigies. Prodiges.
In several places diverse Suns were seen together. At Prague the Sun seemed to
dart out bals of fire: Also a flying Dragon, flaming horribly, was seen
throughout all Bohemia and Silesia. Also a spring flowed with blood for an
whole month together. In another place a Fish Pond was wholly turned into
blood for the space of three days.

A great flock of Crows and Daws, fought together for a whole days space,
whereby multitudes of them were slain.

At Prague it rained brimstone, and the Image of the crucifix being set up, was
struck down with a thunderbolt. The gates of some Cities opened of their own
accord. Many Bibles being thrown into a great fire, were untouched, only the
margin a little scorched.

Gods judgment on Apostates.
Many Apostates tormented by the sting of conscience, cried out, They were
damned. Some to avoid these terrors hanged themselves; others drowned
themselves. Some died in fearful despair, others died suddenly* One as he was
about to abjure, was stricken dumb, and being carried home was possessed with a
great trembling all over, and gnawing his own tongue, he died miserably.

Dr Knapper a great persecutor was slain by the appointment of his wife an
adultresse, Gods judgment on persecutors.
for which she was afterward hanged. Another vomited out his ungodly soul with
blood. Another ran mad, and cast him self down from the top of his house, and
so roaring fearfully he breathed his last. Another shot himself to death with
his own Pistol. Another ran mad, fell into such a disease, that none could
come near him for stink, and at last was choked with vomiting up abundance of
blood. Another being taken with a sudden disease, waxed as black as a cole,
uttered his speech like the barking of a dog, and within three days died with
terrible pains. Another, by the breaking of a great gun, was torn all to
pieces. Another had a terrible disease in his throat, his tongue rotted, many
holes were eaten in his throat, whereout his food and medicines came, so that
he died myserably.

Collected out of a Book called Historia Persecutionum Ecclesiae Bohem. written
by some Bohemian exiles. HAving thus given you a brief Narrative of the
Persecutions of the Church in Bohemia, from the first planting of the Gospel
amongst them, to our present times: Before I proceed any further, let us a
little look back to see how God fought for them, against their Popish
adversaries, and thereby after a wonderful manner plagued their persecutors.
Much may be read hereof in my second Part, in the Life of Zisca; but after his
death, there was a great fear, and sorrow seized on his Army, and the soldiers
being divided amongst themselves, one part of them chose for their Captain
Procopius Magnus, who still retained the name of Thaborites. The other part,
thinking none worthy to succeed Zisca, named themselves the Orphans, by reason
of the loss of their Captain; yet whenever their Popish adversaries came
against them, they both joined together to defend themselves, and the liberty
of the Gospel in Bohemia.

About this time Pope Martin perceiving the Gospel and the Professors of it to
increase daily in Bohemia, The Pope stirs up persecution.
he sent the Cardinal of Winchester an English man, into Germany, to stir up
the Emperor and German Princes to make war against the Bohemians. Hereupon
three Armies were levied, one under the Duke of Saxony; the second under the
Marquess of Brandenburg, the third under Otho Archbishop of Trevers: These
three Armies entered Bohemia three ways, and at last joining all into one,
besieged the City of Misna, which but the night before was won from the Papists
by one Prichicho, a learned and zealous Protestant, and therefore the Popish
Armies resolved to take that place before they marched any further: Gods
judgments on persecutors. The Popish Army flies.
But so soon as news came that the Protestants had raised an Army, and were
hasting to the relief of Misna, they speedily fled before they ever saw an
enemy, leaving all their Engines of war, and a great booty behind them.

The Cardinal meeting them in their flight, used all the arguments that
possibly he could to the Nobles and Captains, to turn them back again,
magnifying their number and prowess, and vilifying their enemies, but when
nothing would prevail, himself was fain to accompany them in the flight.
Presently the Bohemians pursuing, fell upon their rereward, which made their
flight much more fearful and disordered then it was before, neither did they
leave flying till the Bohemians left pursuing of them.

The Emperor hearing of this shameful flight, went to Noremberg and by the
assistance of the Cardinal, a new Army was raised under the Command of
Frederick Marquess of Brandenburg, which entered Bohemia one way, A new Army
raised.
and another great Army under Albert Archduke of Austria, which entered another
way. In these two Armies were all the chiefest Nobles and Bishops in Germany,
being above forty thousand horsemen, besides foot.

The Bohemians as soon as they heard of their enemies approach, gathered their
Host with all speed to encounter them: But God marvellously fought for them,
for before the Bohemians came near them, the Popish Army was struck with such a
mavelous sudden fear, that they began most shamefully to run away; They fly
when none pursues.
the Cardinal wondering at it, went up and down to the Captains, exhorting and
encouraging of them, telling them that they were to fight for their Lives,
Honor, Religion, and the salvation of souls, etc. but notwithstanding all that
he could say and do, the Ensigns were suddenly snatched up, and every man ran
headlong away, so that the Cardinal was forced to do the like: The Protestants
encouraged hereby, speedily pursued them, and obtained a very great booty. This
so astonished both the Pope and Emperor, that afterward they sought rather by
subtilty to entrap them, then by force to compel them to forsake their
religion, as we have seen in the foregoing story.

CHAP. XXVI. The Persecution of the Church in Spain, which began Anno Christi,
1540.
ANno 1540. there was one Francis Roman, F. Romans Conversion.
sent by the Spanish Merchants of Antwerp, to Breme to take up some money that
was due to them; where, being at a Sermon (through the marvelous working of
Gods Spirit) he was so effectually wrought upon, that after the Sermon he went
to the Preacher, and repeated the contents of his whole Sermon to him, and then
betaking himself to the searching of the Scriptures, and conferring with
learned men, in a short space he had attained to a great measure of knowledge
in the Word of life; which the Minister observing, and withal finding him of a
fervent spirit, he directed and exhorted him to circumspection in his carriage,
more and more instructing him in the knowledge of the Gospel, which he so
greedily received as one that could never be satisfied. This made him give over
seeking after temporal treasure, and instead thereof he bought good books, by
reading of which, and conference with the Minister, he much improved his
knowledge in all the chief Articles of Religion. Then did he write letters to
his contrymen at Antwerp, wherein he first gave thanks to God for revealing
his truth to him; Zeal.
then did he bewail the gross ignorance of his contrymen, beseeching God
to open their eyes to understand the word of salvation, and so promised shortly
to return to them to confer with them about the grace of God, which he had
received; and lastly he declared his purpose of going into Spain to acquaint
his parents and friends with that wholesome Doctrine which God had communicated
to him.

Then wrote he other letters also to the Emperor Charles the fifth, opening to
him the miserable state of Christ's Church, desiring him to tender the good
thereof; especially to reform the gross corruptions of the Church of Spain;
he wrote also a Catechism, and some other Treatises in the Spanish tongue.

The Merchants at Antwerp having received his Letters, sent for him, pretending
much good will, but secretly practicing his destruction: For against his
coming, they suborned some Friars, who so soon as he was alighted from his
horse, seized upon him, rifled his books, Subtilty.
and carrying him into a Merchants house, examined him; Treachery.
But he mightily confuting them, they bound him hand and foot, calling him
Lutheran; they also burnt his books before his face, threatening to burn him
likewise. Then was he sent Prisoner to a Tower six miles from Antwerp, and cast
into a deep dungeon, where he endured much misery for eight months, at the end
whereof, the Merchants, supposing that he would be better advised for the time
to come, released him. Then did he go to Lovain, where he had much conference
with Driander, who advised him to continue in his calling of a Merchant, Good
counsel.
wherein he might have many opportunities of doing good; and for Religion, that
he should do nothing for favor of men, whereby the glory of God should be
diminished. He advised him also to take heed of inconsiderate zeal, lest he
should do as some, who going beyond the bounds of their vocation, thinking to
do good, and to edify, they destroy and do harm. For said he, it is God that
takes care of his Church, and will raise up faithful Ministers for the same:
neither does he approve such as rashly intrude themselves into that function
without any calling thereto. Note.


This advice Francis willingly hearkened unto, promising to follow the same. Not
long after going to Ratisbone, where the Emperial Diet was held, He goes to
the Emperor.
having opportunity, he boldly stepped to the Emperor, beseeching him to deliver
his country and subjects of Spain from false Religion, and to restore them to
the sincerity of Christ's doctrine, protesting that the Protestants of Germany
were in the truth; and that the Religion of Spain was greatly dissonant to the
Word of God, etc. The Emperor all this while heard him gently, promising him
to consider of the matter, and so to do therein as he trusted should be for the
best.

Francis being encouraged with this answer, went again to the Emperor a second
and third time, and still received a quiet answer as before; yet not satisfied
herewith, he went a fourth time, but was repulsed by some Spaniards about the
Emperor, who were so incensed against him, that immediately they would have
thrown him headlong into the river Danubius, if the Emperor had not restrained
them, willing that he should be judged by the Laws of the Empire: Then was he
cast into prison, till the Emperors voyage into Africa, Is imprisoned. Carried
into Spain.
at which time he, with some other Captives, was carried into Spain, and there
delivered unto the Inquisitors, who cast him into a dark prison under ground;
He was often examined, laden with many reproaches and contumelies, yet ever
remained firm and unmovable, so that at last they condemned him to be burnt
for an heretic. Condemned by the Inquisitors.
As he was led to the place of execution, they put upon him a Miter of paper,
painted all over with ugly Devils; as he passed by a wooden cross, they
required him to worship it, to which he answered, that the manner of Christians
was not to worship wood: Being laid upon the pile of wood, when he first felt
the fire, he lifted up his head toward heaven; whereupon the Inquisitors
thinking that he would recant, Burned.
caused him to be taken down, but when they found his constancy, they threw him
on again, where he slept in the Lord. Then did the Inquisitors proclaim that
he was damned, and that none should pray for him, and that they were heretics
whosoever doubted of his damnation.

There was also dwelling at Saint Luca^ in Spain one Rochus, a skilful graver
of images: Rochus.
but the Lord pleasing to enlighten him with the saving knowledge of his truth,
he gave over making of idolatrous images, and employed himself in making of
seals: only he kept standing on his stall an image of the Virgin Mary,
artificially graven for a sign of his occupation.

An Inquisitor passing by, and liking the image, asked the price of it: Rochus
set him a price, but was not willing to sell it: the Inquisitor bade him half
so much: the other answered that he could not afford it so, and that he had
rather break it than sell it; yea, said the Inquisitor, let me see that if thou
dare? with that Rochus with a Chisel cut off the nose of the image; whereupon
the Inquisitor presently commanded him to prison, and within three days he was
condemned to be burnt. At the place of execution he poured out his fervent
prayers to Almighty God, Condemned.
and so made a blessed end, Anno 1545.

Diverse other godly persons being by the Inquisitors cast into loathsome
dungeons, ended their lives there.

Anno 1550. At Validolid, the Inquisitors brought forth thirty prisoners
together, of high and low estate, as also the Coffin of a certain noble woman
with her picture lying upon it, she being dead long before, to eceive judgment
and sentence: for the solemnities whereof they had erected three great stages;
the first for the Kings sister, the Lady Jane, and his eldest son Prince
Philip, with other States: The second for the Fathers Inquisitors: And the
third for the Prisoners. Multitudes of people being assembled together, these
dear servants of Jesus Christ, clothed with Sambito's, a yellow cloth hanging
down before and behind, Thi^ty Christians condemned.
powdered with red crosses, and having burning tapers in their hands, and Miters
upon their heads painted with Devils, were placed in their ranks: Then was a
Sermon preached, after which an Oath was administered to the Princes and Nobles
by the Inquisitors, that they should favor the holy Inquisition, and consent
to the same, and that they should employ their uttermost endeavor to see all
them executed which should swerve from the Church of Rome, and adhere to the
Lutherans, without respect of persons, of what degree, quality, or condition
soever; A wicked Oath.
and that they should compel their subjects to submit to the Church of Rome,
and to obey all its laws, etc. Then was Doctor Cacalla called forth, a man of
excellent learning, who had often preached before the Emperor whilst he was a
Friar; Cacalla condemned.
but being now accounted to be the Standard Bearer to the Lutherans, he was
called forth to hear his sentence, which was, that he should be degraded, and
presently burnt, and his goods confiscated.

The like sentence of condemnation was pronounced upon his brother Francis, a
Preacher also, who having spoken boldly against the Inquisition, they so stopped
his mouth that he could not speak a word. Then Blanch their sister received the
like sentence, and so did most of the other, only some few of them were
condemned to some years imprisonment, and to wear their Sambito's all their
life time, etc.

Then was the Coffin of the dead Lady with her picture it upon condemned
likewise to be burnt. This good woman, whilst she lived, was a worthy
maintainer of the Gospel, of great integrity of life, and one that had diverse
assemblies in her house for the true preaching of the Word of God; wherefore
her house was also sentenced to be razed down, Popish malice.
and a Pillar to be set up in the place thereof, with an inscription showing
the cause.

Then were all these that were sentenced to death, Malice.
together with the Coffin, delivered to the secular Magistrate, and so every
one of them being set upon an Ass with their faces toward his tail, they
were guarded by many soldiers to the place of execution: at which place there
was for each of them a stake set up, Many burnt together.
to which every of them were bound, and so they were first strangled, and then
burnt to ashes; only one of them, who had been most vehement against them, was
burnt alive, and his mouth stopped that he should not speak to the people. All
men marvelled at their constancy and quiet end.

At the same time also there were in prison at Validolid thirty seven others,
which were reserved for another Tragedy and Spectacle of the bloody
Inquisition. But seeing much mention is made of the Spanish Inquisition, and of
the cruelty exercised thereby against the poor servants of Jesus Christ, I
shall here set down the first Original, and Progress thereof, as hereafter
follows.

CHAP. XXVII. The Original, Progress, and Practice of the Spanish Inquisition.
WHen King Ferdinand and Isabel had expelled the Turks out of the City and
Territories of Granata, The Spanish Inquisition.
and other places of Spain, who had lived there seven hundred, seventy, and
eight years, they set upon the Reformation of Religion; and granted the
conquered Moors liberty to stay, and to enjoy all their goods, provided that
they would turn Christians; and whereas also there were very many Jews, who had
continued there since Titus conquered Jerusalem, they gave them leave to stay
upon the same condition; but all such as refused, were commanded presently to
depart out of Spain. Yet afterward, finding that those Persons were only
Christians in name, and had submitted only to save their estates, instead of
providing godly Ministers with meekness to instruct them, and to draw them
from their errors; Invented by Dominicans.
(by the advice of the Dominican Friars) they erected the Inquisition; wherein
the poor wretches in stead of instructions, were robbed of all their estates,
and either put to most cruel deaths, or else suffered most intolerable torments
by whipping, etc. and leading the rest of their lives in ignominy and poverty;
Neither was this only inflicted upon such as blasphemed Christ, but for the
observation of the least Jewish, or Moorish ceremony, or the smallest error in
the Christian Religion. But this Inquisition at first erected against Jews and
Moors, was afterward turned against the faithful servants of Jesus Christ, and
for the suppressing of the Gospel, and the Profession of it; and thus briefly
you have the Original of it; let us now see what their practice and exercise is.

As soon as information is given in against any one, though but for a very
small matter, they do not presently cite the person to appear before them, but
they suborn one of their Officers, called a Familiar, to insinuate himself into
his company, who taking occasion to meet the pa^ty accused, uses thus to greet
him; Sir, I was yesterday by accident at my Lords Inquisitors, who said that
they had occasion to speak with you about certain of their affairs, and
therefore they commanded me to summon you to appear before them to morrow at
such an hour: The party not daring to refuse, goes to the place, sends in word
that he is come to attend them, and so when he is called in, they ask him what
suit he has to them? and when he answers, that he comes upon summons, they
enquire his name. For, say they, we know not whether you be the same man or
not: but since you are come, if you have any thing to inform this Court of,
either concerning your self or any other, you may let us hear it, for the
discharge of your own conscience; The Parties safest way is constantly to deny
that he has any thing to declare to them. But if through simplicity he does
accuse himself, or any other they rejoice, as having attained their desires,
and so presently commit him to prison.

If nothing be confessed, they dismiss him, pretending that for the present
they know not whether he be the Party or no: after his departure they let him
alone for some space, and then send for him again, exhorting him that if he
know, or has heard any thing that concerns their holy Court, to disclose it to
them; For (say they) we know that you have had dealing with some persons
suspected in Religion, and therefore remember your self well; if you confess
you shall fare the better, Subtilty.
and you shall but do therein as a good Christian ought to do. If still he
refuse, they threaten, and so dismiss him.

Yet they have always one or other to keep him company, to creep into his
bosom, and grope his conscience: who under the color of friendship shall
visit him daily, and have an eye to all his dealings, observe what company he
keeps, with whom he conferres, etc. So that without Gods special assistance,
it is not possible to escape their snares; The Inquisitors also if they meet
him, speak courteously to him, promise to befriend him, etc. and all to make
him more careless of himself, that they may undo him before he be aware. But
if the Party be a stranger, or one that is like to make an escape; Their
dealing with strangers.
or that they hope to gain any thing by his confession, they presently clap him
up in prison: in which prison great numbers die, either starved with hunger, or
by extremity of racking of them, etc.

If any one that is accused chance to make an escape, they have many devices to
find and fetch him again. They have store of searchers, to whom besides the
common signs, they give his lively picture, whereby they may easily know him:
Their Familiars.
An Italian at Rome having wounded an Apparator, fled to Sivil: the Familiars
were sent to seek him, and when they had found him, though they had his
counterfeit, yet by reason that he had altered his habit, they were doubtful
whether it was he or no, the rather because he had changed his name, whereupon
they followed him only upon suspicion: but one day as he was walking, and
earnestly talking with some Gentlemen, two of these Familiars suddenly called
him by his old name: The Party earnest in talk, and not minding it, looked
behind him, and made answer, whereupon they presently apprehended him, clapped
him in irons for a long time, then whipped him, and condemned him to the Galleys
during his life. So soon as any is arrested by the Familiars, they take from
him all the keys of his locks or chests whatsoever, and then they take an
Inventory of all his goods, leaving them with some man that will undertake to
be accountable for them: but in the sequestring and rifling the houses, if they
have any gold, silver, or Jewels, these Familiars, Sequestration.
which usually are bawds, thieves, shifters, and the vilest of people, will be
sure to filch some of it; and the reason of this sequestration is, that if the
Party be condemned, the holy Inquisition may enjoy his whole estate.

As soon as the Prisoner is entered within the first gate of the Prison, the
Jailor asks him if he have a knife about him, or money, or ring, or Jewels;
Stripped of all in prison.
and if a woman, whether she has knives, rings, chains, bracelets, or other
ornaments, and all these the Jailor strips them of as his fee: And this is done
that the poor prisoners may have nothing to relieve themselves with, during
their imprisonment; They search them also to see whether they have any writing
or book about them, which likewise they take from them: then they shut them up
in a Cabin, like to a little-ease, where they have little room for
cleanliness, and but little light.

Some are thus kept all alone for two or three months, some as long as they
live, others have company, as the Lords Inquisitors please. When the Party has
been in prison a week or two, the Jailor persuades him to petition for a day of
hearing, telling him the sooner the better, and that it will much further his
cause, Subtil^y.
and bring it to some good effect, etc. whereas it were far better for him to
stay till he be called for; for then he has nothing to do but to answer their
objections: But the poor Prisoner, not knowing this mystery, is usually ruled
by his Keeper, entreating him to stand his friend to procure him a day of
hearing, whose suit is easily heard, and the Prisoner is brought into the
Consistory. Then do the Inquisitors ask him, what is his request? the Prisoner
answers, that he would gladly have his matter heard; How Inquisitors deal
with the prisoners.
then they labor by threatening him with worse usage if he conceal the truth,
to cause him to confess the thing whereof he is accused, and if they can but
draw him to this, they have their desires; for usually they draw more from him
than they could have proved against him: Then they advise him to let it come
from himself, promising that if he acknowledge his faults, he shall presently
be released, and sent home: If yet he stand mute, they then charge him to
disburthen his conscience, and in the mean time to return to his prison, till
he has better bethought himself, and then he may sue for a new day of hearing,
and so they dismiss him.

Then after some days they call for him again, asking him he be ye^ determined
to confess ought? but whether he plead his innocence, or confess some little,
they still urge him to disburthen his conscience, persuading him that they
advise him for the best, and in love and compassion to him; but if he now
refuse the favor proffered, he shall find them afterward sharp Justices,
etc. and so send him back again to prison.

The third time he is called for, they use the like subtilty to draw him to
confession, telling him that if he refuse, they must use extremity, and do what
they can by law; by which word they mean extreme tormenting and mangling of
him; Then if the Party confess any thing; Nay, say they, we are not yet
satisfied, we have not all you can say, you keep back something on purpose, and
so they remand him to prison.

Having thus excruciated him day by day, if they can yet get nothing out of
him, they then require an oath of him, and hold a Crucifix o^ Cross before
him, whereby the poor Christian must at last neeeds show himself: for knowing
that he ought to swear by God alone, who has reserved his honor to himself,
he must refuse the oath; which if he do, then they read a large enditement
against him, wherein they lay to his charge things that never no man accused
him of, and which it may be, himself never thought of; and this they do to
amaze him, and so to try if he will confess any of these misdemeanors, or if
they can trip him in his answers, and so catch him in their net. Then they put
him to answer to every article particularly ex tempore, without any time of
deliberation: Then they give him pen, ink, and paper, requi^^ng him to set down
his answer in writing, to see if they can find any difference betwixt his
former answer and this: and if the Party chance to confess ought, then they
enquire of whom he learned it, and whether he has spoken of it before others,
and who they are, and hereby many are brought into trouble; for whether they
liked it or not, they are sure to be questioned, because they did not come and
declare it to the fathers Inquisitors. Then pretending to show him favor, they
appoint him an Advocate to blind the peoples eyes, as if they proceeded
according to the rules of Justice; but this Advocate dares not tell his Client
any point of Law, that may do him good, for fear of angring the Inquisitors;
neither may he speak privately with his Client, but either before an
Inquisitor, or a Notary.

Two or three days after the Party has had the Copy of his accusation, he is
called into the Court, where his Advocate is, as if he intended to defend his
cause; but indeed he dare say nothing to the purpose for fear of angring the
Inquisitors; only he chears up his Client, and bids him tell the truth in any
case, as the only way to prevail in that Court, and then is the Prisoner sent
back again who hopes that now his cause will be heard, and his business
dispatched, whereas usually these good fathers let him lie, two, three, or four
years in prison, without ever calling for him again; and if through
loathsomeness and intolerablenesse of the prison any sue to come to hearing, it
may be with much ado he obtains it, but usually that favor is denied him: yet
at length when they please, they call for him to hear the depositions of the
witnesses against him: which yet is not done till the poor Prisoner by his
grievous imprisonment is brought so low, as that they think he will rather
choose death than such a life, and therefore will be willing to tell all, that
so he may be rid out of his misery. Then between rebuking and a gentle
admonition, they tell him, that though he has stood out so long, yet at length
they would have him wiser to confess the truth; but if he yet refuse to be his
own accuser, then the Fiscal produces the depositions, which are delivered to
the Prisoner, but they are drawn up so intricately and ambiguously, that he
knows not what to make of them; and this they do to conceal the witnesses, lest
he should except against them, and to set him on guessing, that so if he chance
to reckon up any others to whom he spoke any thing about any of those matters,
they may thereby get more grists to their mill. For they presently outlaw such
persons as favorers of heretics, for suffering an heretic to sow such
pestilent seeds amongst them, without complaining thereof to the Inquisitors.

The Keeper of the Prison also is examined what he has seen and observed of
him in the Prison, and his testimony is as good as two witnesses to take away
the Prisoners life.

They have also Promoters to bring in accusations, who are admitted, though
frantic Bedlams, or the veriest Varlets that be: and in their informations, if
they chance to want words of weight, the Inquisitors will help them out, and
prompt them word by word. Then after three or four days the Prisoner is called
again to put in his answer to the depositions; but in the interim his Advocate
never comes at him to assist or direct him, but he is left to himself without
all help, save of God alone. His answer being viewed, he is remanded to prison
again with this Item, that if he confess not the truth, they will extort it
out of him by extremity.

After two or three months more, he is called for once again, and required to
speak what he has for himself, or else they must draw to an end: and if he
still shrinks not, but stands firm in his own Justification, they proceed to
other dealings, in comparison of which all their former proceedings are not
only sufferable, but seem very reasonable and full of gentleness. For their
future actions far exceed all barbarousnesse, the Devil himself being not
able to go beyond them in their monstrous tyranny: For not long after the
Prisoner is called in before the Inquisitors, who tell him that they have
deeply considered his whole case, and found out that he does not declare the
whole truth, and therefore they are resolved that he shall be racked, that by
force they may draw from him what by fair means he will not acknowledge: and
therefore they advise him rather to do it voluntarily, and thereby to avoid*
the pain and peril that yet attends him* yet whether he confess or not
confess, all is one, for to the Rack he must go; Then is he led into the place
where the Rack stands, They proceed to the Rack.
which is a deep and dark dungeon under ground, with many a door to pass
through ere a man come to it, because the shreekes and cries of the tormented
should not be heard: then the Inquisitors set themselves upon a scaffold hard
by the Rack, and the torches being lighted, the Executioner comes in, all
araied from top to toe in a suit of black canvas, his head is covered with a
long black hood that covers all his face, having only two peep-holes for his
eyes: which sight does more affright the poor soul, to see one in the likeness
of the Devil to be his tormentor. The Lords being set in their places, they
begin again to exhort him to speak the truth freely and voluntarily: Then with
sharp words they command him to be stripped stark naked, yea though the
modestest maid, or chasest Matron in the City: Their privy parts a^e only
covered with linen.
whose grief in regard of the Rack is not half so great as to be seen naked in
the presence of such manner of persons: For these wicked villains without any
regard of honesty, will not by any Prayers of godly Matrons, or chaste Maidens
forbear one jot of that barbarous impudence: as if a shirt or smock could
hinder the violence of the Rack from sufficiently tormenting them.

The Party being thus stripped, the Inquisitors signify to the Tormentor* how
they would have him or her ordered. The first kind of torment is the Jeobit, or
Pully; but first one comes behind him, and binds his hands with a cord eight or
ten times about, the Inquisitors calling upon him to strain each harder than
other; they cause also his thumbs to be bound extreme hard with a small line,
and so both hands and thumbs are fastened to a Pully, which hangs on the
Jeobit: The Jeobit.
then they put great and heavy bolts on his heels, and hang upon those bolts,
between his feet certain weights of iron, and so hoise him, or her up from the
ground; and whilst the poor wretch* hangs in this plight, they begin to exhort
him again to accuse himself, and as many others as he knows of; Then they
command him to be hoised up higher to the very beam till his head touch the
Pully. Having hung thus a good while, Inhumane cruelty.
they command him to be let down, and twice so much weight to be fastened to
his heels, and so hoised up again, and one inch higher if it may be: Then they
command the hangman to let him up and down, that the weights of the iron
hanging at his heels may rent every joint in his body asunder. With which
intolerable pains if the Party shreek or cry out, they roar out as loud to him
to confess the truth, or else he shall come down with a vengeance. Then they
bid the hangman suddenly to slip the rope, that he may fall down with a sway,
and in the midway to stop; then give him the Strappado, which being as soon
done, it rends all his body out of joint, arms, shoulders, back, legs, etc. by
reason of the sudden jerk, and the weights hanging at his legs. If he yet
remain constant, they add more weight to his heels the third time, and the
poor wretch already half dead is hoisted up the third time, and to increase his
misery, they rail upon him, calling him Dog, and Heretic, telling him that he
is like there to make his end. Rail^ngs.
And if the poor creature in his pangs call upon Christ, entreating that he
would vouchsafe to aid and assist him, thus miserably tormented for his sake;
Scoffs.
Then they fall to mocking and deriding him, saying, Why call thou on Jesus
Christ? Let Jesus Christ alone and tell us the truth; what a crying out upon
Christ make thou? etc. But if the Party desire to be let down, promising to
tell somewhat, that is the ^eady way to make him to be worse used, for now they
think that he begins only to broach the matter: for when he has done they
command him to be haled up again, and to be let down as before: so that usually
these torments* are exercised upon him for three hours together. Then they ask
the Jailor if his other torments are ready, to affright the poor soul; the
Jailor answers that they are ready, but he has not brought them with him:
Then the Inquisitors bid him to bring them against the morrow; for say they, we
will try other ways to get the truth out of this fellow: and so turning to him
that lies in miserable pain, having all his joints out; How now, Sir, say
they, how like you this gear? have you enough of it yet? Well, see that you
call your wits to you against to morrow, or look to die then; for what you have
yet felt is but a flea-biting in comparison of what is behind; and so they
depart. Threats.


Then the Jailor plays the bone-setter so well as he can, setting his joints,
and so carries him back to prison, or drags him by the arms or legs most
pitifully; If they mean to rack him no more, after two or three days they send
for him again, and cause him to be brought by the Rack, where the hangman
stands in the likeness of a Devil as before, the more to affright him. When he
comes before the Inquisitors, they fall a persuading him to confess the truth
at last: and if he confess any thing, he may chance to go to the Rack again,
whereby they hope to extort more; and when indeed they intend to rack the Party
again, then at three days end, when the ach in his joints is most grievous and
painful to him, they send for him, requiring him to declare all his heresies,
and to peach all such as he has had conference with, about them, and all such
as he knows to be of that mind: or else he must prepare himself for the Rack;
and if he continue constant, he is again stripped of his cloths, and hoisted up
with weights at his heels as before, besides which, Another cruel tormen^.
as he hangs at the Pully, they bind his thighs together, and legs about the
calf with a small strong cord, and with a short piece of wood they twist the
cord till it be shrunk so deep in the flesh that its past sight, which is an
extreme and terrible torment, worse than any that he has yet endured, and in
this plight they let the poor soul lie two or three hours: the Inquisitors in
the mean time not ceasing to exhort, persuade, threaten and scoff at him.

Yea sometimes they proceed to another kind of torture called the Aselli, which
is after this manner; There is a piece of timber somewhat hollowed on the top
like a trough, The trough.
about the middle whereof there is a sharp bar going a cross, whereon a man's
back rests that it cannot go to the bottom: its also placed so that his heels
shall lie higher than his head: then is the naked Party laid thereon: his
arms, thighs and legs bound with strong small cords, and wrested with short
truncheons, till the cords pierce almost to the very bone. Divellish cruelty.
Then they take a thick fine lawn cloth, laying it over the Parties mouth as he
lies upright on his back, so that it may stop his nostrils also; then taking a
quantity of water, they pour it in a long stream like a thread, which falling
from on high, drives the cloth down into his throat, which puts the poor wretch
into as great an Agony as any endure in the pains of death, for in this torture
he has not liberty to draw his breath, the water stopping his mouth, and the
cloth his nostrils, so that when the cloth is drawn out of the bottom of his
throat, it draws forth blood with it, and a man would think that it tore out
his very bowels. This is iterated as often as the Inquisitors please, and yet
they threaten him with worse torments if he confess not; and so he is returned
to his prison again.

Yet many times after he has lain there a month or two, he is brought again
to the rack and used as before, yea sometimes five or six times, even as often as
they please, for their lust is a law. Torment with fire.
And yet they have another torment with fire, which is no whit inferior to the
former; They take a Pan of burning charcole, and set it just over against the
soles of the Parties feet, just before he goes to the Rack, and that the fire
may have the more force upon them, they bast them with lard or bacon. But if
all the extremity of torments will not force him to confess what they desire,
nor to deny the truth, they use other means by subtle interrogatories, Subtilty.
and frequent questionings to draw him into some snare or other: Yea, if yet
they cannot prevail, then some one of the Inquisitors comes to him in private,
and shows himself much affected with his misery, weeps with him, comforts him,
gives him advice, seems to impart such a secret to him as he would scarce
impart to his father, or dearest friend alive: and this they use most with
women, whereas they are but fair baits upon deadly hooks, whereby they seek to
destroy them; whereof we have this example.

At Sivil there were apprehended, a godly Matron, two of her daughters, and her
Niece, A woman, and her tow daughters, and niece.
who all of them underwent the forementioned torments with manly courage and
Christian constancy, because they would not betray each other, nor other godly
Persons in that City. Then one of the Inquisitors sent for the youngest maid
often to his chamber, pretended much compassion toward her, spoke much to
comfort her, told her what a grief it was to him to see her torments; then used
familiar and pleasant communication to her, then told her that he would advise
her the best way to free her self, A Judas.
mother and sister from these troubles: That he would undertake the ordering of
their business; and then persuaded her to disclose the whole truth to him, and
he bound himself with an oath that he would stop all further proceedings
against them, and procure their dismission. Having thus outwitted the poor
maid, who gave too much credit to him, she told him of some points of Religion
which they had wont to confer of amongst themselves, and so when he had gotten
out of her what possibly he could, like a perfidious Villain, contrary to his
vows, promises, and oath, Perjury.
he caused her to be racked again to get more out of her, yea they put her also
to the intolerable pain of the trough, and through extremity of pangs and
torments they at last extorted from her a betraying of her own Mother, Sisters,
and diverse others, which were immediately apprehended, tortured, and at last
burnt with fire. But when they were brought in great pomp upon the Scaffold,
and had the sentence of death passed upon them, this maid went to her Aunt, who
had instructed her in the principles of Religion, and boldly without change of
countenance, gave her hearty thanks for that great benefit which she had
received by her means* entreating her to pardon her for what she had offended
her at any time, for that she was now to depart out of this life. Her Aunt
comforted her stoutly, bid her be of good cheer, for that now ere long they
should be with Christ. This woman was openly whipped, and kept in prison during
her life; the rest were all presently burned.

Another device that they have is this: when they think that Prisoners which
are together do talk together of Religion, exhorting and comforting one another
as they have occasion or opportunity, the Inquisitors commit to prison under a
color, Fly.
a crafty knave whom they call a Fly: who after two or three days will
cunningly insinuate himself into the bosoms of the other Prisoners, and then
pretending a great deal of zeal to Religion, he will proffer discourse to them,
and by degrees get out of their mouths something whereof he may accuse them.
Then does he move for a day of hearing, and so getting to the Inquisitors, he
peaches the Prisoners, who shall be sure afterward to hear of it to their
smart. Yea these Flies, as soon as they are out of one prison, for the hope of
gain, will be content presently to be put into another, and then into a third,
where they will lie in chains, as the other Prisoners do, enduring hunger,
cold, stink, and the loathsomeness of prison, and all to betray others. And
this man's accusation is as strong and valid as the testimony of any other
witness whatsoever. Other Flies also there be that serve the holy Inquisition
abroad, slily insinuating themselves into the companies of the common people,
who are suspected to be Lutherans, and when they can pump any thing out of
them, they presently betray them. They have yet this other device, when they
can catch any man that is noted for Religion, or a Minister that has
instructed others, after he has been in prison awhile, they give it out that
upon the Rack he has discovered all his disciples, and acquaintance, and they
suborn others to averr that they heard it, and this they do to draw the simple
people to come of their own accord, and to confess their faults to the
Inquisitors, and to crave pardon, whereupon they promise them favor.

The Inquisitors and their Officers use to call their Prisoners Dogs and
Heretics: Their cruel prisons.
and indeed they use them much worse than most men do their Dogs. For first,
the place where usually each of them is laid, by reason of the straitness, ill
air, and dampnesse of the earth, is liker a grave than a prison: and if it be a
loft, in the hot weather, it is like a hot Oven or Furnace: and in each of
these holes usually two or three are thronged together, so that they have no
more room than to lie down in; in one corner is a stool of easement, and a
pitcher of water to quench their thirsts. In these Cells they have no light, but
what comes in at the Keyhole, or some small crany: other some there are much
worse, not being long enough for a man to lie in, so that such as are put into
them, never likely come out till they be half rotted away* or die of a
consumption.

Their diet is answerable to their lodging: The rich pay large fees to the holy
house, and every Prisoner is rated as the Inquisitors please: but such as are
poor, the King allows them three pence a day, out of which the Steward,
Landresse, and some other necessary charges are deducted, so that one half of
it comes not to the Prisoners share; and if any be moved with compassion to
relieve them, it is counted such an heinous offense, that it will cost him a
scourging till blood come at least.

It once happened that there was a Keeper appointed for their prison, in the
Castle of Triana in Sivil, that was of a courteous disposition by nature, who
used the Prisoners well, and closely, for fear of the Inquisitors, showed them
some favor: at which time there was a godly Matron and her two daughters
committed to prison, which being put into several rooms, had a great desire to
see each other for their mutual comfort in their distresses; whereupon they
besought the Keeper to suffer them to come together, if it were but for one
quarter of an hour: the Keep yielded, and so they were together about half an
hour, and then returned to their former prisons. Within a few days after,
these women being racked in a terrible manner, the Keeper fearing lest they
would confess that little favor which he had showed them, of his own accord
went to the Inquisitors, confessed his fact, and craved pardon; but they deemed
this so heinous an offense, that they presently commanded him to be haled to
prison, where by reason of the extremity showed him, he fell mad. Yet this
procured him no favor: for after he had been a whole year in a vile prison,
they brought him upon their triumphing stage, All pity denied them.
with a Sambenito upon him, and a rope about his neck, and there they censured
him to be whipped about the City, and to have two hundred stripes, and then to
serve in the Galleys for six years. The next day one of his mad fits coming
upon him, as he was set on an Asses back to be scourged, he threw himself off,
snatched a sword out of the officers hand, and had slain him, if the people had
not immediately laid hold on him; whereupon he was bound faster on the Asses
back, had his two hundred stripes, and was for this offense condemned four
years longer to the Galleys.

Another Keeper at another time had a maid, who seeing how miserably the
prisoners were used, pitying their distressed condition, who were
hunger-starved, and almost pined, she would sometimes speak to them at the
grate, exhort and comfort them as well as she could, A maid whipped for showing
them favor.
and sometimes would help them to some good and wholesome food: yea, by her
means the Prisoners came to understand one another condition, which was a
great comfort to them. But this at last coming to the inquisitors ears, they
enjoined her to wear the Sambenito, to be whipped about the streets, to receive
two hundred stripes, and to be banished the City for ten years, with this
writing on her head, A favourer, and aider of Heretics. And whereas all other
sort of persons in prison and bondage are allowed to recreate and refresh
themselves with singing at their pleasure, The prisoners denied leave to sing
Psalms.
these poor souls are forbidden this small solace in their great misery: for if
any of them sing a Psalm, or openly recite any portion of Scripture, the
Inquisitors take it very hainously, and presently send to them, requiring them
to be silent, upon the pain of Excommunication: and if the prisoner make light
of this warning, he shall have a bit set on his tongue to teach him obedience:
and this they do, both to deprive the poor souls of all kind of solace, and to
keep other Prisoners from knowing how their friends do: So that it often falls
out that a man and his friend, the Father and Son, yea the husband and wife
shall be in one prisonhouse two or three years together, and not know of each
others being there till they meet upon the scaffold upon the great day of
triumph.

By reason of this cruel usage many of the Prisoners die, some, of their
torments, others, of the stink of the prison, and others, of diseases
contracted by hunger, cold, ill diet, etc. They have also an Hospital, unto
which they remove such as fall sick in their prisons, Their hospital
where yet they are not dealt more gently with in any thing, save that they
have Physic allowed them for their healths sake: But none are suffered to come
to them but the Physician, and the servants of the Hospital: And as soon as the
Patient is on the mending hand, he is carried back to the place whence he came.

If the Prisoner be half naked, or want something to lie on, and thereupon pray
the Inquisitor that his necessity may be considered* The answer which he
receives is this, Well, now the weather is warm, you may live full well without
either clothes or couch; And if it be winter time, his answer is: True, it has
been a great frost of late, but now the cold is come down again, and it will be
more seasonable weather. Care you for the garments wherewithal you should
cloth your soul, Cruel mercy.
which consists in uttering the truth, and discharging your conscien^e before
this holy house: And if the Prisoner desire to have some good book, or the holy
Bible to enable him to pass that troublesome and careful time to some profit;
The Inquisitor answers him, that the true book is to speak the truth, and to
discharge his conscience to that holy Court, and that he ought to be occupied
in laying open his wounds to their Lordships, who are ready to give him a
plaster: whereby it appears that all their care and desire is, that the poor
Prisoner may have nothing to look on or think on but his present miserable
state, that the grief thereof grating upon him, may force him to satisfy their
requests.

The last act of the Tragedy remains, wherein both Parties are pleased and
have their desire; Their condemnation.
the Inquisitors in obtaining their prey, the Prisoners in finding some end of
their miserable usage; but two or three days before the solemnity, they use
severally to call before them, all such whose estates are confiscated,
examining them what lands or goods they have, where they lie, charging them
upon great penalties not to conceal one jot, telling them, that if any thing be
afterward found, felony shall be laid to their charge, and he with whom it is
found, shall pay foundly for it, and when all is confessed, they are returned
to prison again.

The night before the Festival, they cause all the Prisoners to be brought into
a large room, where they are informed of the several kinds of pennances that
they are to do the next day: The next morning very early, the Familiars come
and attire the Prisoners in their several habits, in which they are to appear
before the people: Their habits.
Some in Sambenito's, which is a long garment painted all over with ugly
devils: on his head he has an high-crown'd hat whereon a man is painted
burning in the fire, with many devils about him, plying him with fire and
fagots. Besides, their tongues have a cleft piece of wood put upon them, which
nips, and pincheth them that they cannot speak; they have about their necks,
cords, and their hands fast bound behind them. On this sort come these constant
Martyrs disguised, first to the stage, and then to the stake; and in the like
sort do all the rest come forth, arraied as the other, and set forth with the
like notes of infamy, either more or less, as the Inquisitors please to
disgrace them in the sight of the people. On each hand of every Prisoner goes
a Familiar, all armed, to guard him: as also two Friars with every one that is
to die, who persuade him tooth and nail to deny that doctrine that formerly he
has professed, now at their going out of this world; which wicked importunity
is a great grief to the poor servants of Jesus Christ.

The Inquisitors also pass in great pomp from the Castle of Triana to their
scaffold: And when all are set in their places, a Sermon begins, framed on
purpose in commendations of the holy house, and in confutation of such
Heriticks as are presently to suffer: but the greatest part is spent in
slanderous reproaches, wherewith they vilify and disgrace the truth, and the
Professors of it. The Sermon being ended, the sentences against the Prisoners
are read; First, against such as have easiest punishments, and so in order to
the greater; Which sentences are commonly these, Death without mercy; Whipping
in such extremity that the Persons seldom escape with their lives;
Condemnation to the Gally; Forfeiture of all their estates, etc.

Then does the chief Inquisitor absolve all such as have forsaken Christ, and
are come home to the Church of Rome, from all the errors for which they showed
themselves penitent; but though hereby they are absolved from the fault, yet
not from the punishment; for notwithstanding their Recantation, they must abide
the punishment without mercy.

And whereas multitudes of people resort to this spectacle, some coming twenty
Leagues to see it; The Inquisitors have this trick to uphold their Kingdom,
They cause all the people present, A wicked oath
to take an oath to live and die in the service of the Church of Rome,
hazarding both life and goods against any that shall oppose it; as also to
their power, to uphold and maintain the holy Inquisition, and to defend all the
officers thereof, etc.

Then if there be any amongst the Prisoners to be degraded, they proceed after
this manner. First, they apparel him in his massing Robes* then they despoil
him again of every part thereof; then are his hands, Degradation.
lips, and the Crown of his head scraped with a piece of glass, or a sharp
knife till they bleed again, to scrape off the holy oil, wherewith he was
anointed at his ordination. In the end of their sentence which is pronounced
upon such as are to be burned, they use this abominable hypocrisy: They
bequeath him to the secular power, with this humble request to them, Hypocrisy.
to show the Prisoner as much favor as may be, and neither to break any bone,
nor pierce the skin of his body: This shows their great impudence, that having
already given sentence on him to be burned, they yet should pretend such mercy
and clemency toward him, whom all along themselves have used with such extreme
cruelty.

They use also this trick further, that in reading the crimes for which he is
condemned, they do not only misreport such things as he confessed upon his
examination, but they devilishly father upon him such things as he never spoke,
or thought of in all his life: and this they do to disgrace him, and to make
him and his opinions more abhorred of all men, and to increase their own
estimation and credit, as being necessary officers to rid the world of such
pestilent persons; and all this while the Prisoners tongue has a cleft piece
of wood upon it to his intolerable pain and grief, that he cannot answer for
himself, nor gainsay that they charge him with.

All these things being finished, the Magistrate takes them into his hand, and
conveys them presently to the place of execution, with diverse instruments of
Satan about them, calling and crying to them to forsake the truth; and when
they cannot prevail, after the Prisoner is tied to the stake, they break his
neck in a trice, and then they report amongst the common people that they
recanted their heresies at the last hour, Abominable lies.
and so came home to the Church of Rome, and therefore they felt no pain in the
fire at all, which made them take it so patiently.

Such as are not condemned to die, are carried back to prison, and the next day
brought out to be whipped, after which some of them are sent to the Galleys,
others kept in prison all their life time: but all have this special charge
given them, Their cruelty concealed.
that they never speak of any thing that they have heard, seen, or felt, during
their imprisonment in the Inquisition; for if the contrary be ever proved
against them, and that they utter any of their secrets, they shall be taken for
persons relapsed, and be punished with greatest severity, their judgment being
death without Redemption; and hereby they keep in all their Knavery and Tyranny
close and secret to themselves: And if any of them be released because their
faults were but small, they are yet so careful lest their cruelty should come
to light, that they inhibit them the company or conference with any other, than
such as they shall appoint and allow them; neither will they suffer them to
write to any friend, except they first have the perusing of their letters.

Sometimes also, after they have imprisoned men in such a miserable state, for
a year or two, and can extort nothing out of them by their torments, nor prove
any thing against them by witness, so that they must necessarily dismiss
them, they then call them into the Court, and begin to flatter them, and tell
them what a good opinion they have of them, and that they are resolved to send
them home, for the which fatherly favor extended toward them in saving their
lives and goods, Flattery.
they are to account themselves much beholding to their Lordships, etc. And so
at last they dismiss him with special charge of silence: and when he is gone,
they have special Spies abroad to see how he takes the matter; and if they find
that he complains of his punishments, or discloses their secrets, they
presently commence a new suit against him. On a time the Inquisitors at Sivill
apprehended a noble Lady; the cause was, for that a Sister of hers, A Lady
imprisoned.
a very virtuous Virgin, who was afterward burned for Religion, had confessed
in the extremity of her torments, that she had sometimes had conference with
this her sister about matters of Religion: This Lady when she was first
apprehended, was gone with child about six months, in respect whereof they did
not shut her up so close at first, nor deal so severely with her as they did
with others; But within four days after she was brought to bed, they took the
child from her; and the seventh day after, they shut her up in close prison,
Their cr^el usage o^ her.
and used her in all things as they did other Prisoners; the only worldly
comfort that she had in her misery, was, that they lodged her with a virtuous
maiden that was her fellow-Prisoner for a time, but afterward burned at the
stake: This maid whilst they were together, was carried to the rack, and so
sore strained and torn thereon, that she was almost pulled in pieces, then was
she brought back and thrown upon a bed of flags, that served them both to lie
on; the good Lady was not able to help her, yet showed singular tokens of love
and compassion toward her.

The maid was scarce recovered when the Lady was carried out to be served with
the same sauce, and was so terribly tormented in the trough, They torment her
in the trough.
that by reason of the strait straining of the strings, piercing to the very
bones of her arms, thighs and shins, she was brought back half dead to her
prison, the blood gushing out of her mouth abundantly, which showed that
something was broken within her: but after eight days the Lord delivered her
from these cruel Tigers by taking her mercifully to himself. She dyed.


Upon one of their days of triumph there was brought out one John Pontio, of a
noble Family, a zealous Professor of the truth, John Pontio.
and one of an holy and blameless life, and well learned; he was eminent also
in works of charity, in which he had spent a great part of his estate: Being
apprehended for the Profession of the Gospel, he was cast into Prison, where he
manfully maintained the truth in the midst of all their cruel dealings with
him; At last they cast into prison to him one of their flies, who by his
subtilty and craft, so wrought upon him that he drew from him a promise to
yield obedience to the Romish Church. Humane frailty.
But though God suffered him to fall a while to show him his frailty, yet
afterward in much mercy he raised him up again with double strength to that
which he had before, and before his execution he manfully defended the truth
against a subtle Friar. The things which he was condemned for, were these; That
he should say, Recovery.
that from his heart he abhorred the idolatry which was committed in
worshipping the Host: That he removed his household from place to place, that he
might shun coming to the Mass: That the Justification of a Christian rests
only in the merits of Jesus Christ apprehended by faith, etc. That there was no
Purgatory: That the Popes pardons were of no value, etc. And for my self, His
speech at death.
(says he) I am not only willing but desirous to die, and ready to suffer any
punishment for the truth which I have professed: I esteem not of this world nor
the treasures of it more than for my necessary uses, and the rest to bestow in
the propagation and maintenance of the Gospel: And I beseech God daily upon my
knees for my wife and children, that they may all continue in this quarrel even
to the death. And when he came to his execution, he patiently and comfortably
slept in the Lord.

At the same time there was also brought forth one John Gonsalvo, formerly a
Priest, John Gonsalvo.
but by his diligent study of the Scripture it pleased God to reveal his truth
to him, so that he became a zealous Preacher of it, laboring in all his
Sermons to beat into men's minds the true way, and means of our Justification to
consist in Christ alone, and in steadfast faith in him: Tormented in prison,
for which he was apprehended and cast into prison, where he endured all their
cruely with a Christian courage; At last with two of his Sisters he was
condemned: His mother and one of his brothers were also imprisoned with him for
the truth, and executed shortly after: When he with his sisters went out at the
Castle gate, having his tongue at liberty, he began to sing the 106. Psalm
before all the People, who had often heard him make many godly Sermons: He also
condemned all hypocrites as the worst sort of People: with a cleft stick.
Whereupon they stocked his tongue: Upon the stage he never changed
countenance, nor was at all daunted. When they all came to the stake, they had
their tongues loosed, and were commanded to say their Creed, which they did
cheerfully: when they came to those words, The holy Catholic Church, They were
commanded to add, Of Rome, but that they all refused: whereupon their necks
were broken in a trice: and then't was noised abroad that they had added those
words, and died, confessing the Church of Rome to be the true Catholic Church.

There was in Sivil a private Congregation of Gods people, most of which the
Inquisitors consumed in the fire, A Church in Sivil.
as they could discover any of them; amongst others that were apprehended, they
took four women, famous above the rest for their holy and godly conversation,
but especially the youngest of them, who was not above one and twenty years
old, who by her diligent and frequent reading of the Scriptures, and by
conference with godly and learned men, had attained to a very great measure of
knowledge: so that whilst she was in Prison, she non-plus'd and put to shame
many of those Friars that came to seduce her.

Another of these women was a grave Matron, whose house was a School of virtue,
and a place where the Saints used to meet, and serve God day and night; but the
time being come wherein they were ripe for God, they, together with other of
their neighbors, were apprehended and cast into prison, Some of them cast into
prison
where they were kept in dark dungeons, and forced to endure all the cruel and
extreme torments which are before mentioned: At last they were condemned, and
brought forth to the scaffold amongst other Prisoners: The young maid
especially came with a merry and cheerful countenance, as it were triumphing
over the Inquisitors, and having her tongue at liberty, she began to sing
Psalms to God, whereupon the Inquisitors caused her tongue to be nipped by
setting a Barnacle upon it: After sentence read, A cleft stick.
they were carried to the place of execution, where with much constancy and
courage they ended their lives: Yet the Inquisitors not satisfied herewith,
Their death*
caused the house of the Matron where the Church used to meet, to be pulled
down, and the ground to be laid waste, Malice.
and a pillar to be erected upon it with an inscription showing the cause.
There was also apprehended another worthy member of the same Congregation
called Ferdinando; Ferdinando.
he was of a fervent spirit, and very zealous in doing good: A young man, but
for integrity of life very famous: He had spent eight years in educating of
youth, and had endeavored to sow the seeds of Piety in the hearts of his
Scholars, as much as lay in him to do in a time of so great persecution and
tyranny; being at the last apprehended for a Lutheran, he was cast into prison,
and terribly tormented upon the Jeobit, and in the Trough, His torments.
whereby he was so shaken in every joint, that when he was taken down, he was
not able to move any part of his body; yet did those cruel tormentors draw him
by the heels into his prison, as if he had been a dead dog: But notwithstanding
all his torments, A special Providence.
he answered the Inquisitors very stoutly, and would not yield to them one jot.
During his imprisonment God used him as an instrument to recall and confirm a
Monk, who had been cast into prison for confessing the Gospel openly: But by
means of the Inquisitors flatteries and fair promises he had somewhat relented:
Gods Providence so ordering it, Humane infirmity.
that Ferdinando was cast into the same prison, and finding the Monk wavering,
he rebuked him sharply; and afterward having drawn him to a sight of, and
sorrow for his sin, he at last strengthened him in the promises of free grace
and mercy; Hereupon the Monk desired a day of hearing, where, before the
Inquisitors, he solemnly renounced his recantation, Recovery.
desiring that his former confession might stand, whereupon the sentence of
death passed against them both: after which the Inquisitors asked Ferdinando
whether he would revoke his former heresies; to which he answered, That he had
professed nothing but what was agreeable to the pure and perfect Word of God,
and ought to be the profession of every Christian man, and therefore he would
stick to it to the death: Execution.
Then did they clap a Barnacle upon his tongue, and so they were burned
together.

There was also one Juliano, called, The little, because he was of a small and
weak body, who going into Germany, was there conversant with diverse learned and
godly men, Juliano.
by which means he attained to the knowledge of the truth, and became a zealous
Professor of it, and earnestly longing after the salvation of his Countrymen,
Zeal.
he undertook a very dangerous work, which was to convey two great dry Fats
full of Bibles printed in Spanish, into his own Country: In this attempt he
had much cause of fear, the Inquisitors had so stopped every Port, A special
Providence.
and kept such strict watch, to prevent the coming in of all such commodities;
but through Gods mighty protection, he brought his burden safely thither, and,
which was almost miraculous, he conveyed them safe into Sivil, notwithstanding
the busy searchers and catch-poles that watched in every corner. These Bibles
being dispersed, were most joyfully and thankfully received, and through Gods
blessing wrought wonderfully amongst Gods people to ripen them against the time
of harvest. But at last the matter broke out by the means of a false brother,
who going to the Inquisitors played the Judas, A false brother.
and betrayed the whole Church to them. So that there were taken at Sivil at
one time, eight hundred Christians, Twenty burnt.
whereof twenty of them were afterward roasted at one fire.

Amongst these, this Juliano was one of the first that was apprehended and sent
to prison, where he lay without any company laden with irons above three years;
yet was his constancy so great and wonderful, that the tormentors themselves
were sooner wearied in inflicting, Juliano's torments and constancy.
than he in suffering torments; and notwithstanding his weak and wearyish body,
yet he remained undaunted in mind in undergoing all their tyrannies, so that he
never departed from the rack more dejected than he came to it; neither
threatenings, nor pains, nor torments made him shrink or yield one jot to them:
but when he was drawn back to his prison, he would tell his fellows how he had
conquered and confounded his enemies, saying, They depart vanquished, they
depart vanquished; The wolves fly with shame, they fly with shame.

In the day of their triumph, when he was brought out to be apparelled (with
his other fellow Prisoners) in all their shameful habits, he exhorted them with
a cheerful countenance, saying: My Brethren, be of good cheer, this is the
hour wherein we must be faithful witnesses unto God and his truth before men,
as becomes the true servants and soldiers of Christ, and ere long we shall
have him to witness with us again: and within a few hours we shall triumph
with him in heaven for ever; But hereupon they presently clap't a Barnacle upon
his tongue that he should speak no more, and so he was led to his execution;
His death.
but though he could not speak, yet by his countenance and gestures he showed
his cheerful and quiet mind: Then kneeling down, he kissed the step whereon he
stood, and being tied to the stake, he endeavored by his looks and gestures to
encourage his fellow Martyrs in their sufferings, and so they quietly and
patiently resigned up their spirits unto God.

There was also John Leon, a Tailor by Trade, who out of a blind devotion to
serve God, John Leon.
resolved to enter into a Monastery, but by Gods Providence it so fell out that
he entered into a Cloister at Sivil, wherein most of the Monks were well
affected to the true Religion, amongst whom in two or three years space, he was
so grounded in the principles of Religion, that he resolved to leave that kind
of life, which accordingly he did, and went into the Country, yet after a time
he had a great mind to confer with his former Schoolmasters: but when he came
back to the Cloister, he found that they were all fled in^o Germany; hereupon
he resolved to follow them, and through many dangers and perils, it pleased God
at last after a long and tedious journey, to bring him safe to Franckfurt,
where he met with some of his old acquaintance, and with them he traveled to
Geneva: About which time Queen Mary suddenly dying, and Queen Elizabeth of
blessed Memory succeeding her, the English Exiles that lived in those parts
were called home: whereupon diverse Spaniards that sojourned at Geneva, thinking
England a fitter place for their Congregation, resolved to accompany the
English men* and for this end they dispersed themselves into several companies
that they might travel with the more safety: The Inquisitors took the departure
of these Monks so ill, that not sparing any cost, Leon goes towa^ds England.
they sent their Flies abroad to apprehend them, who waylaid them, especially
at Collen, Franckfurt, Antwerp, and in all the ways that led from Geneva. This
John Leon had got him a companion, with whom he traveled toward England, who
being discovered at Argentine, were dogged into Zealand, and as they were ready
to take ship, they were apprehended. John Leon took his arrest very composedly,
never changing countenance at it: They were presently carried back into the
Town, Is apprehended.
where they were miserably ^acked to discover their fellows, and not long after
were shipped for Spain, having great irons, wrought like a net, that covered
both head and face, within which also was another piece of iron made like a
tongue, which being thrust into their mouths took away their speech; Sent to
Spain.
they were also laden with other engines and fetters of iron, wherewith they
were bound hand and foot, and in these continual pains and torments they lay a
shipboard till they came into Spain, and then John Leon was sent to Sivil, and
his companion to Validolid, where afterward in defense of the truth he
suffered Martyrdom: But John remained long in prison, where he tasted of the
Inquisitors tyranny, suffering both hunger and cold, and enduring all their
torments one after another, Tormented.
and at last was brought out in their solemn show, arrayed after their usual
manner; It was a sad sight to see such a ghost as he was, his hair so grown,
his body so lean, that he had nothing but skin and bones left on him, and his
pain much increased by having a Barnacle upon his tongue: After sentence of
death pronounced upon him, they set his tongue at liberty hoping that he would
have recanted, but he made a stout and godly Confession of his faith, and so
quietly ended his life in the flames. There was also burned at the same time a
godly Virgin, that had formerly been a Nun, but being, through Gods grace,
converted, she left her Cloister, Martyred.
and joined her self to the Church of Christ: A ma^ds sufferings, and martyrdom*
Being apprehended by the Inquisitors she was entreated as others had been
before her: and at last was brought out to the Scaffold, where with a manly
courage she put the Inquisitors to a foul foil, not only constantly affirming
the truth, but sharply rebuking those fathers, calling them dumb dogs, a
generation of vipers, etc. being brought to the stake, with a cheerful
countenance she underwent the pains of death, and so quietly slept in the Lord.

There was also one Christopher Losada, a Physician, a learned man and very
well studied in the Scriptures, Christopher Losada.
as also of a very holy conversation, insomuch as he was chosen Super-intendent
of the Church of Christ in Sivil, which at this time was very great, though
dispersed into corners: At last he was apprehended by the Inquisitors, before
whom he made a good Confession of his faith, for which he endured hand and
sharp imprisonment, with most cruel torments, and the open infamy of their
solemn show, and lastly was adjudged to the fire: As he stood at the stake, the
Barnacle being taken from his tongue, he disputed notably with some Monks that
came to seduce him; and when they spoke Latin that the common People might not
understand them, Losada also began to speak in Latin so copiously and
eloquently, His constancy.
as was strange to hear that he should have his wits so fresh when he was ready
to be burned: after which he patiently resigned up his spirit unto God in the
fire. Death.


Arias.
There was also in Sivil one Arias, a man of a sharp wit and well-studied in
Divinity, but withal of a crafty wit and inconstant nature; which vices he yet
covered with a cloak of Religion, whereby he deceived many: About this time
there were also in that City two sorts of Preachers, and both had a great
number of Auditors: The one taught School Divinity, and were continually
calling upon their hearers to often fastings, mortification, self-denial,
frequency of Prayer, humility, etc. But themselves practiced nothing less than
these things: and indeed all their Religion consisted in works and bodily
exercises, as running to Masses, hallowed places, shrift, etc. The other sort
dealt more sincerely with the holy Scriptures: out of which they declared what
was true righteousness, and perfect holiness: by means whereof that City
above all others in Spain, bore the name for just and true dealing; and it
pleased God that the brightness of this light did discover all the counterfeit
holiness, and Pharasaical devotion of the other party; The chief Laborers in
this harvest were Constantino, Aegidius, and Varquius, all Doctors, and sober,
wise, and learned men; who by this kind of preaching procured to themselves
many enemies; but above all others, Arias was the most spiteful and malicious;
He turns persecutor.
yet he carried it so cunningly, that he still kept up his reputation with
these men; but it was not long before he discovered himself: and that upon this
occasion; There was one Ruzius, a learned man, questioned before the
Inquisitors, for something that he had delivered in a Sermon about the
Controversies in Religion; The Inquisitors appointed him a day of hearing; and
two or three days before, Arias met him, saluted him courteously, and
discoursed familiarly with him; then did he pump out of him, all those
Arguments wherewith he intended to defend himself before the Inquisitors: When
the day came, and Ruzius appeared, Arias went on that side where his opponents
were, which much amated Ruzius, and in the disputation, Arias being prepared,
did so wittily enervate all his Arguments, that Ruzius had nothing to say for
himself, and so was fain to yield the cause, and Arias went away with the
honor of the field, though he got it by treachery. Yet did this Arias, being
of Saint Isidores Monastery, preach so practically, that a great light began to
dawn in that dark place; for the whole scope of his Sermons was to overthrow
all their Profession; he taught them that singing and saying of their Prayers
day and night was no service of God, that the holy Scriptures were to be read
and studied with diligence, whence alone the true service of God could be
drawn, and which alone teach us the true obedience to his Will, to the
obtaining whereof we must use Prayer as a means, proceeding as well from a
sense and feeling of our own infirmities, as grounded upon a perfect trust and
confidence in God.

By laying these foundations, through Gods blessing, he began to make them out
of love with their Monkish Superstition, and much provoked them to the study of
the holy Scriptures. Besides also his Sermons, he read daily a lecture upon
Solomon's Proverbs very learnedly, and made application thereof with good
judgment and discretion; also in his private conference he did much good. The
Lord also so ordered it in his wisdom, that he met with Scholars that were
very tractable, such as were not greatly wedded to their Superstitions. And
such was the force and might of Gods Election, that these few good seeds so
fructified, that in the end they brought forth a great increase of godliness.
For diverse of the Monks, that hereby had their consciences awakened and cleared
to see their former hypocrisy and idolatry, sought out for further
instructions, and, through Gods mercy, they light upon those Preachers which
taught the truth with more sincerity: A special Providence.
of whom they learned the Principles of pure and perfect Religion, so that by
degrees they left that evil opinion which they had formerly conceived against
the Lutherans, and were desirous to read their books: And God miraculously
provided for them, that they had all sorts of books brought them that were
extant at that time, either in Geneva or Germany: whereby it came to pass that
there were very few in all that cloister but they had some taste of true
Religion and Godliness, so that instead of mumbling their mattens, they
brought in Divinity-lectures, etc. Vain fasting was turned into Christian
sobriety, neither were any taught to be Monkish, but to be sincerely and truly
religious.

But considering that when this should be once known they could not live in any
safety, they resolved amongst themselves to forsake their nest, and to fly
into Germany, where they might enjoy more safety of their lives, and freedom
of their consciences; But how to get thither was all the difficulty; If one or
two should go first, the rest would be exposed to danger: if many should go
together, a thousand to one but they would be taken again, being to travel from
the furthest part of Spain into Germany: yet upon debate they concluded, that
they must all either speedily depart, or shortly be apprehended by the
Inquisitors, who now had got some inkling of the matter; And God seeing them in
this distress, showed them a means how, under an honest pretense, a dozen of
them might depart together within a month, and each betake himself a several
way toward Geneva, where they appointed, by Gods assistance, all to meet
within a twelve month; The rest which were but young novices were left behind,
who yet not long after were so strengthened by God, that they endured the brunt
of persecution when it came, three of them being burned, and diverse others
diversely punished.

The aforementioned servants of Jesus Christ forsook that place where they
lived in honor, ease and plenty, and by undertaking, for Christ's sake, a
voluntary exile, exposed themselves to shame, ignominy, wants, yea and were in
continual danger of their lives also: And under God, Arias was a great means of
this, who, by his ministry, had first enlightened them with the knowledge of the
truth: for which he was often complained of to the Inquisitors, and was
convented before them, where he so cunningly answered the matter, that he was
still discharged; But his last apprehension, through the mercy of God, brought
forth in him the fruits of true repentance; for he did so deeply and unfainedly
bewail, and repent of his former withholding of the truth in unrighteousness,
Arias his Re^covery.
that whereas he used to be exceeding fearful of the Rack, he being brought to
it and upon it, with a mavelous constancy withstood the enemies of Gods
truth, and took up the Inquisitors roundly: His courage.
withal telling them that he was heartily sorry, and did most earnestly repent
him, for that he had wittingly and willingly in their presence impugned the
truth against the godly defenders of the same: Many other sharp rebukes he gave
to the Inquisitors so often as he came to his answer: But at last he was
brought forth arraied in their accustomed manner upon their day of triumph, at
which time he also made a notable Profession of his faith, and so was led from
the stage to the stake with a merry and cheerful countenance, where, by the
notable example of his repentance at his death, he made satisfaction to the
Church of Christ for all his former unfaithful and hypocritical dealing with
them, His Martyrdom.
and so quietly slept in the Lord.

The Life of Doctor Aegidio.
DR. Aegidio, who is before mentioned, was brought up in the University of
Alcala, Scriptures contemned.
where he took all his degrees, and was a hard Student in School Divinity: but
the study of the holy Scriptures was there so neglected and contemned, that if
any one read it, he was in contempt and scorn called a good Bibler; Gross
ignorance.
Afterward being public Reader of Divinity in that University, he grew famous
all over Christendom, and was sent for to Sivil to be Divinity-Reader in the
Cathedral Church, where he was so highly esteemed, that soon after he was
chosen Sub-Deane, yet did he not attempt to preach openly, nor had once so much
as opened the Bible to read and study the Scriptures: And therefore the first
time that he came into the Pulpit, contrary to all men's expectations, he was
found so unfit for such a function, that he grew out of conceit with himself,
and was contemned by others, insomuch as they fell to repent themselves, the
one for admitting him so unadvisedly, the other for taking upon him that office
so arrogantly: But having passed over some time, it so fell out that he met
with a plain man, which gave him such instructions, that after a few hours
conference he learned by him what the office and duty of a Preacher was, and by
what means he might attain thereto; and, through Gods blessing, his advice was
so effectual, that now Dr. Aegidio was quite altered and become a new man,
thinking all his former life and labor ill spent, and therefore he resolved to
steer another course; He also fell into acquaintance with Doctor Constantino, a
man excellently well learned, by whose conference and advice he profited
marvellously in his studies, fell to the reading of good Authors, and grew to
profound knowledge in the holy Scriptures: so that after a time, he began to
preach as learnedly, godly, and zealously, as he had before done coldly,
foolishly, and unskilfully: Then did his hearers find the mavelous force of
that doctrine, which was taught them by these three worthy men, Aegidio,
Constantino, and Varquia, Ministers honored.
so that the more they crept out of their former ignorance and grew in
knowledge, the more they esteemed and honored them.

Hereupon there were daily complaints made against them to the Inquisitors,
especially against Doctor Aegidio, who did more openly than the rest inveigh
against the adversaries of the truth. But it so fell out by Gods Providence,
that just at the same time the Emperor Charles the fifth, in respect of his
singular learning and integrity of life, elected him to the Bishopric of
Dortois: Aegidio chosen Bishop.
Then did those hypocritical Inquisitors bestir themselves on all hands, citing
him to come before them, where articles were exhibited against him, and
thereupon they cast him into prison, and examined him. But the Emperor, He is
persecuted.

Imprisoned.


who had elected him to the Bishopric, and the whole Chapter of the Cathedral
Church in Sivil, became very earnest Suitors to the Inquisitors in his behalf.

It fell out also that just at the same time, whilst Aegidio was in prison,
three of his greatest adversaries amongst the Inquisitors, and the prime
enemies against the truth, sickned, and died shortly one after another, Gods
judgment on Persecutors.
whereby he was released, and lived four or five years after; at the end
whereof he was sent upon an Embassy, in which journey he visited the brethren
that professed the truth in Validolid, Released.
and much comforted and confirmed them; but in his return home, his aged body
being sore shaken in that long journey, having not been used to travel of a
long while before, he sickned, and within a few days departed out of this
troublesome life to everlasting rest.

But within three years after, the new Inquisitors thinking that the former had
dealt too gently with him, dug him out of his grave, and buried in his place
a puppet of straw; then they brought his corpse upon the Scaffold, and used it
in the same sort as they would have used himself if he had been alive.

The life of Doctor Constantino.
Doctor Constantino of whom mention has been made before, was a most famous
Divine, and endued by God with such rare abilities as the like were hardly
found in that age; he was a man of a very pleasant wit, and wondrous facetious,
which he especially used against the hypocritical Monks and Friars; and though
he lived in a barbarous age, wherein all good learning was almost lost, yet by
his wit and industry he attained to a great deal of skill both in Latin, Greek,
and Hebrew, and was also an excellent Orator: and studied the Scriptures so
hard, that he grew very exquisite therein; He was also so eloquent in his own
language, that all his Auditors were brought into a great admiration of him;
His excellent virtues.
He was very discreet in all his doings: which parts he attained to, both by
his study and long practice and experience, but especially by profound
knowledge in the holy Scriptures.

Whenever he preached, there was so great a resort to his Sermons, that three
or four hours before he began, there was scarce a place in the Church to be
gotten. He was far from covetousness and ambition, insomuch as having a good
Canonship in the Church of Toledo proffered him, he refused it, together with
diverse other Preferments. In his Ministry in Sivil he did so plainly set forth,
and so sharply rebuke those hucksters that sold indulgences, pardons, etc. That
they were much incensed against him, fearing that he would prove a plague to
the whole generation of them, so that they hated him deadly, yet could find
nothing whereof to accuse him, but what would redound to their own shame.

But for all this he neglected not to preach the truth faithfully, though he
knew that they lay at catch, waiting for an opportunity to ensnare him; Zeal.
And it was the singular Providence of God that that City should enjoy such
preaching, when there were so many powerful and malicious enemies to oppose it.
For at this time Varquio read upon the Gospel according to Matthew, and upon
the Psalms: Aegidio preached daily; and Constantine, though not so often, yet
to as great fruit and edification, thus continuing till God sent storms to try
each man's faith; In the midst of which tempest Varquio dyed, and Constantine
was sent for by the Emperor to be his household Chaplain: only Aegidio was left
alone, like a Lamb amongst wolves, to be the object of their fury, He goes to
the Emperor.
of whose end we have heard before; after whose death Constantine left the
Emperors Court, and returned to Sivil, where he preached the Gospel with as
much zeal as ever he did before: His return to Sivil.
Then was he chosen to preach every other day in the Cathedral, which he
refused, because of a great fit of sickness which had made him very weak, but
he was forced to undertake it, though he was so weak a creature, that sometimes
he was fain to be carried to Church, His weakness.
and by reason of his faintness was necessitated once or twice in a Sermon to
drink a draught of wine to refresh himself. About this time there was one
Scobario, a man famous for life and learning, chosen by the Magistrates of the
City to the Government of the College of Children, who out of his zeal to
promote the Gospel converted his Stipend, to the erecting of a Divinity-lecture
in the Cathedral Church; and Constantine, Chosen Divinity-Lecturer.
having recovered his health, was chosen to read it; who performed it
excellently well, beginning with the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Canticles;
which having passed through very learnedly, he began upon the book of Job, and
proceeded to expound more than half of it. But some evil spirit envying the
Progress of the Gospel in that City, under a pretense of fervent zeal, caused
him to forsake this course, and encombred him so many ways, that he was never
clear of those troubles to his dying day.

For not long after he was brought before the Inquisitors, and had many things
laid to his charge; yet by his quick and ready answers he easily avoided them,
and they could not by any means bring him to make an open Protestation of his
faith, by which all their hope was to circumvent him; and so he might have
escaped, had not God, by a special Providence, compelled him as it were briefly
and plainly to confess his faith; The occasion was this.

There was one Isabel Martin apprehended, in whose house Constantine had hid
some special books for fear of the Inquisitors: This woman's goods being
sequestered, her son conveyed diverse chests of her best goods away to another
place. This coming to the Inquisitors ears by means of an unfaithful servant, A
strange Providence.
they sent their Officer immediately to demand those Chests: The woman's son
supposing that the Officer came for Constantines books, said unto him, I know
what you come for, and therefore if you will promise me upon your honest word
to depart quietly, I will bring you to them: the Officer supposing that he
meant the Chests, promised him so to do: Then did he carry him into a secret
place, and plucking forth a stone or two in the wall, showed him Constantines
Jewels; of paper indeed; but far more precious than gold or pearl; the
Officer astonished to find that which he looked not for, told him that he came
for no such thing, but for certain Chests of his mothers goods, which he had
purloined from the Sequestrators; and that notwithstanding his promise, he must
carry both him and his books to the Inquisitors: Thus came Constantines
writings into the Inquisitors hands, out of which they quickly found matter
enough against him. Then did they send for him before them, and demanded if he
knew his own hand; he shifted it off at the first, but afterward perceiving
that it was the Will of God that he should bear witness to the truth, he
confessed it to be his own writing, protesting openly that all things therein
contained were full of truth and sincerity; Therefore, said he, trouble your
selves no further in seeking Witnesses against me, seeing you have so plain and
apert a Confession of my judgment and faith, Courage.
but deal with me as you shall please; Then was he cast into prison, and kept
there two whole years, Imprisoned.
where partly by occasion of his corrupt diet, but chiefly of grief to see such
havoc made of the poor Church of Christ, which himself and his brethren had
with so great pains and care planted and watered, he began first to be crazy,
and then not being able to endure the extreme heat of the Sun, which made his
prison like an hot house, he was forced to strip himself to his very shirt,
wherein he lay day and night, by occasion whereof he fell into the bloody flux,
His death.
and within fifteen days died in the stinking prison, rendering up his soul to
Christ, for promoting of whose glory he had often times manfully adventured it.

He never indeed felt those cruel torments which the Inquisitors used to
inflict upon others, but it was not because they regarded such a man of
eminency as he was, but because they intended to delay his punishment by
keeping him long in prison, not expecting that he should so suddenly have been
taken out of their hands. Yet did these Imps of Satan spread abroad a report,
that before his death upon the Rack he had confessed to them who were his
disciples; and this they did to make men come in and accuse themselves, upon
hope to find the more favor with the Inquisitors; They reported also that he
opened one of his veins with a broken glass whereof he died, that so he might
avoid the shame and punishment of his heresies. And against the day of their
solemn triumph, his corpse was taken out of his grave, and set in a Pulpit, with
one hand resting on the Desk, and holding up the other, just as he used to do
when he preached: Then they passed sentence upon him, His Corpse burned.
and so afterward caused him to be burned.

Thus we have seen in some few examples the rage of these bloody Inquisitors
against the poor Saints and Servants of Jesus Christ, whereof a great number
were cruelly murdered in a few years space in that one City of Sivil, whereby
we may partly guess how great numbers have suffered in all other places, since
the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ brake forth, until this day
under their cruel and bloody tyranny.

Collected out of a book called, The Discovery of the Spanish Inquisition, etc.
First written in Latin by Reynold Gonsalvius Montanus, and afterward
translated into English.

The Persecution of Nicholas Burton Englishman* by the Inquisitors in Spain,
Anno 1560.
THis Burton was a Citizen of London, who being about his merchandise at Cadiz
in Spain, Nicholas Burton.
there came to his lodging one of the Familiars, desiring to take lading to
London in the ship which Burton had fraited; and this he did, that he might
learn where his goods were; Presently after came a Sergeant who apprehended
Bur^ton, and carried him away to the Inquisitors, who, though they could charge
him with nothing spoken or written against them since he came to Spain, yet
they sent him to the filthy common prison, where he remained in irons fourteen
days amongst Thieves: In which time he so instructed the poor Prisoners in the
Word of God, that in short space he had well reclaimed many of those ignorant
and superstitious souls: which being known to the Inquisitors, God^ Providence.
they presently removed him, laden with irons, from thence to Sivil, and put
him into the more cruel prison in the Castle of Triana, He is sent to Sivil.
where the Inquisitors proceeded against him after their accustomed cruel
manner, by racking, etc. Neither could he get leave to write to, or speak with
any of his Countrymen: Afterward they brought him forth with many other godly
persons upon their public day of triumph, in his Sambito painted all over with
ugly devils tormenting a soul in flames of fire, and with a Barnacle upon his
tongue, where he received sentence of death, Condemned.
and so with the rest was carried to the place of execution to be burnt; and he
endured the flames with so much patience and cheerfulness of countenance, that
his Popish adversaries said, that the Devil had his soul before he came to the
fire, whereby his sense of feeling was taken away: They also sequestered all his
goods, which could never be recovered out of their hands, though great means
were used for the same. This was in Queen Mary's days.

There was burned with him at the same time another Englishman: and not long
after two more, called John Baker and William Burgate: John Baker. Will.
Burgate. Will. Burges. Will. Hooker.
And about the same time William Burges, Master of an English ship was burned
there also: and William Hooker, a youth of about sixteen, was there stoned to
death for the bold profession of his faith.

Here place the seventh Figure.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Persecution of the Church of Christ in Italy, which began,
Anno Christi, 1155.
ANno Christi, 1155. Adrian the fourth, an English man, being Pope, there was
one Arnald of Brixia, who coming to Rome, preached boldly against the
corruptions which were crept into the Church, and found great favor amongst
the Senators, and people, insomuch as when the Pope commanded this Arnald to be
driven away as an Heretic, they resisted his command, and defended Arnald,
till at last the Pope interdicting the whole City, at the importunity of the
Clergy, the Senators and Citizens were forced to send him away: and shortly
after he was apprehended by the Popes Legate, Cardinal of St. Nicholas, out of
whose hands he was rescued by the Vicounts of Campany, with whom he remained,
and to whom he preached the Gospel of Christ, and was had in such esteem that
he was accounted a Prophet.

Shortly after, Frederick Barbarossa the Emperor, coming unto Italy to be
crowned, the Pope sent some Cardinals to him, requesting that he would deliver
Arnald of Brixia into their hands, whom the Vicounts of Campania had taken from
his Legate at Otriculi, whom they held for a Prophet in their Country, and
greatly honored him. The Emperor receiving these commands from the Pope,
presently sent forth his Apparitors, and took one of the Vicounts prisoner,
wherewith the other were so terrified, that they delivered up Arnald to the
Cardinals; and this the Emperor did to gratify the Pope that was to set the
Imperial Crown upon his head.

Not long after the Pope being in his Ruff, marching with a brave Army into
Apulia, commanded his Prefect at Rome to do execution upon Arnald, who
accordingly most cruelly, first hanged, and then burned him for an
Arch-heretick at the appointment of the Pope.

This Arnald was born in Italy, and was trained up under Peter Abailardus in
France: His heresies were, that he preached against the Pride and Covetousness
of the Clergy and Monks: That he inveighed against the corruptions which were
crept into the Sacraments, etc. He first Preached in Brixia, and expounded to
the people the sacred Scriptures, who earnestly embraced his doctrine;
whereupon the Bishops and Monks of that City complained of him to the Council
that was held at Rome by Pope Innocent, who (to prevent the spreading of his
Doctrine) enjoined him silence, and banished him Italy. Then did he go beyond
the Alps into a Town of Germany called Turengum, where, for a time he preached
the truth, and did much good, till he heard of the death of Pope Innocent his
old Adversary: at which time he returned into Italy, and went to Rome, where
what his success was we heard before: after his body was burnt, they gathered
up his ashes, and threw them into the River Tybur. Otho Frising.

Encenas.
Anno Christi, 1546. There was one Encenas, or Driander, a Spaniard, born in
Bruges, who in his youth was sent by his superstitious Parents to be educated
in Rome, where in process of time, through God mercy, he came to the knowledge
of the truth, and thereupon manifesting his dislikes of the impure doctrine of
the Church of Rome, he was betrayed by some of his own Countrymen and household
friends, Treachery.
and by them carried before the Cardinals, who committed him to strait prison:
and afterward, being called forth to declare his judgment in matters of
Religion, Courage.
he gave a notable testimony to the truth before the Cardinals and the Popes
whole retinue, whereupon they cried out upon him that he should be burned; yet
the Cardinals proffered him life, if he would wear the Sambito: but he
constantly refused to wear any other badge, save the badge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which was, to seal his Profession with his blood: Hereupon he was
condemned to the fire, and suffered Martyrdom with great patience and
constancy. Constancy. Francis Encenas.
His brother Francis Encenas, a very learned and godly man as any was in Spain,
being in the Emperors Court at Bruxels, offered to Charles the fifth the New
Testament translated into Spanish, for which he was cast into prison, (...)
remained in great misery for the space of fifteen months, looking for nothing
but present death: but at last, through the mavelous Providence of God, at
eight a clock at night he found the prison doors standing wide open, and a
secret motion in his mind to make an escape, A special Providence.
whereupon going out of prison with a leasurely pace, he went without
interruption, and so from thence went strait into Germany.

Faninus.
Anno 1550. There was at Ferrara one Faninus, who by reading of good books, was
through Gods grace, converted to the knowledge of the truth, wherein he found
such sweetness, that by constant reading, meditation and prayer, he grew so
expert in the Scriptures, that he was able to instruct others: and though he
durst not go out of the bounds of his calling to preach openly, yet by
conference and private exhortations he did good to many: This coming to the
knowledge of the Popes Clients, they apprehended and committed him to prison,
where by the earnest solicitations of his wife and children, and other friends,
Humane infirmity*
he was so overcome, that he renounced the truth, and so was dismissed out of
prison. But it was not long before the Lord met with him: so that falling into
horrible torture of conscience, he was near unto utter despair for his
Apostasy, Danger of Apostasy.
and for preferring the love of his kindred and friends before the service of
Jesus Christ, neither could he possibly by any means be free from these
terrors, before he had fully resolved to adventure his life more faithfully in
the service of the Lord. Wherefore being thus inflamed with an holy zeal, he
went about all the Country, Recovery after his fall.
doing much good wheresoever he came, whereupon he was again apprehended, and
cast into prison, and condemned to be burnt: A prophecy.
but he told his Judges that his time was not yet come, and so it fell out; for
shortly after he was removed to Ferrara, where he continued in prison two
years; Then was he again condemned by the Popes Inquisitors; and yet his time
being not come, he remained a good while after in prison: in which time many
godly people came to visit him, which caused the Pope to comm^^d him to be kept
more strictly: Then was he kept close Prisoner for eighteen months, wherein he
endured many and great torments: After this, he was brought into another
prison, where were many Nobles, A special Providence.
great Lords and Captains for stirring up sedition, who when they first heard
him speak, set him at naught and derided him: and some of the gravest of them,
supposing it to be but a melancholy humor, exhorted him to leave his opinion,
etc. Faninus gave them thanks for their friendly good will, but withal,
modestly and plainly he declared to them, that the doctrine which he professed
was no humor nor opinion of man's brain, but the pure truth of God held forth
in his Word, which truth he was fully resolved never to deny, etc. With which
instructions they were, through the mercy of God, clean altered in their
carriage and judgment, highly admiring and honoring him now, whom a little
before they derided and contemned; Then did he proceed still to impart the Word
of grace to them, declaring, that though he knew himself to be a miserable
sinner, yet through faith in Jesus Christ and his grace, he was fully persuaded
that his sins were forgiven; assuring them likewise that if they did repent and
believe on our Lord Jesus Christ, they also should have their sins remitted
unto them.

There were in that prison also some that having formerly lived very
delicately, could not now endure the hardship of prison, to whom he administered
much comfort in this their distress, insomuch as they rejoiced in ^hese their
sufferings, by which they had learned a better kind of liberty than ever they
had before.

His Kinsfolk hearing of his imprisonment, his wife and sister came to him,
Tentation resisted.
pitifully weeping and entreating him to consider and remember his poor family,
etc. To whom he answered, that his Lord and Master had commanded him not to
deny his truth for his families sake: and that it was too much that once for
their sakes he had fallen into that Cowardice, which they knew of: Therefore he
desired them to leave him, and not to solicit him any further in that kind, for
he knew that his end now drew near, and so he commended them to the Lord.

Presently after, the Pope sent a command that Faninus should be executed,
whereof when an officer brought him word, he much rejoiced at it, thanking the
Messenger: Then did he begin to make a long exhortation to his fellow prisoners
about the felicity of the life to come.

He had life proffered him if he would recant, and he was put in mind what a
sad condition he would leave his wife and children in; Proffer of life refused.
whereupon he answered that he had committed them to an Overseer that would
sufficiently care for them; and being asked who that was? Faith.
he answered, Even the Lord Jesus Christ, a faithful Keeper of all that are
committed to him; the next day he was removed into the common Prison, and
delivered to the secular Magistrate.

In all his words, gestures and countenance, he showed such modesty, constancy,
and tranquillity of mind, that they which before extremely hated him, and
thought that he had a devil, began now favorably to hearken to him, and to
commend him: yea with such grace and sweetness he spoke of the Word of God,
that many of the Magistrates wives which heard him, could not abstain from
weeping: yea the Executioner himself wept.

As he was going to execution, one that saw him so merry and cheerful, asked
him what was the reason of it, whereas Christ before his death sweat blood and
water? Comfort in death.
To whom he answered, that Christ sustained all the sorrows and conflicts with
hell and death that were due to us, Note.
that by his sufferings we might be freed from the sorrow and fear of them all.

At the place of execution, after he had made his most earnest prayers to the
Lord, he meekly and patiently went to the stake, where he was first strangled,
A special Providence.
and afterward burned; And during the time of his burning there came a most
fragrant and oderiferous smell to the Spectators, the sweetness whereof did so
delight and refresh their senses, as his words would have done, if they had
heard him speak.

There was also one Dominicus, sometimes a soldier under Charles the fifth in
Germany, Dominicus.
where he received the first taste of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, after which
by his conf^rence with learned men he much increased in knowledge, insomuch as
he was able to instruct others; whereupon he returned into Italy, and in the
City of Naples, he taught the Word of God to many, Anno 1550. From thence he
went to Placentia, where he instructed the People also in many of the
fundamentals of Religion, promising that he would next speak to them of
Antichrist, whom he would paint out in his colors; but when he came the next
day, Apprehended.
he was apprehended by the Magistrate, whom he readily obeyed, saying, that he
wondered the devil had let him alone so long: and being asked whether he would
renounce his doctrine, he answered, Constancy.
that he maintained no doctrine of his own, but the doctrine of Christ, Thanks
for sufferings.
which also he was ready to seal with his blood, giving hearty thanks to God
for accounting him worthy to suffer for his name. Then was he committed to a
filthy and stinking prison, where he remained some months, and was often
solicited to revoke his opinions, or else he must suffer death: but, through
Gods mercy, nothing could remove him from his constancy: being therefore
condemned to death, he was brought forth into the marketplace, where he most
heartily prayed for his enemies, instructed the People, and then was hanged,
resting in peace in the Lord.

In Saint Angelo, there was an house of Augustine Friars, to whom there often
resorted a Friar from the City of Pavia, who was a man very expert in the
Scriptures, and of godly conversation, by whose labors not only diverse of the
Friars, but other Townsmen were brought to the knowledge and love of Gods Word;
and amongst the rest, one Galeacius Trecius, a Gentleman of good quality,
Galeacius Trecius.
very wealthy and bountiful to the poor, was wrought upon to embrace the truth,
and was afterward much confirmed and strengthened by Caelius Secundus, who
being persecuted from Pavia, came to this place. After some time Galeacius
having much profited in knowledge, was inflamed with a godly zeal to promote
and propagate the knowledge of the truth unto others; But a light shining in
such darkness could not be long hid: Insomuch as Anno 1551. he was apprehended
and carried before the Bishop, by whom he was kept in bands, having only a pad
of straw to lie on; and though his wife sent him a good bed and sheets, yet did
the Bishops officers keep them from him, Cruelty.
dividing it as a booty amongst themselves.

Thrice he was brought before the Commissioners, where he boldly rendered a
reason of his faith, answering all their interrogatories with such evidence of
Scripture and constancy of mind as astonished all that heard him: yet
afterward at the importunity of his friends and kindred, he was by much
persuasion brought to assent to certain Popish points. But, through the mercy
of God, he was after a while, Humane infirmity* Recovery.
brought to such repentance and bewailing of this fact, that afterward he
became more valiant in the defense of Christ's quarrel; neither did he desire
any thing more than to have occasion to recover again by confession that which
he had lost by denial: affirming that as he never had felt more joy of heart
then when he constantly professed the truth, so he never tasted more sorrow in
all his life, then when he turned from the same by dissimulation: Professing to
his Christian friends, that death was much more sweet to him with testimony to
the truth, Note.
then life with the least denial of it, and violation of a good conscience
thereby. So that afterward, through Gods mercy, he was so full of comfort,
that diverse which talked with him, continued all day without meat or drink, and
if they might, would have stayed all night too, they were so delighted with him.

Galeacius thus waiting for some occasion to manifest his Recovery, Joy
unspeakable.
it so fell out that the Inquisitors came into the Prison to him, supposing
that now he would have confirmed what before he had granted unto them,
requiring him so to do; But Galeacius on the contrary retracted that, and
boldly asserted the truth with more courage than he did before: and hereby his
mind was greatly refreshed, and his adversaries went away ashamed: yet did they
condemn and deliver him to the secular Judge to be burned; Then was he brought
forth in the morning to the marketplace, and bound to a stake, where he was
left till noon to be a gazing stock to all the people: during which time many
came to see him, exhorting him to recant, and not so wilfully to cast away
himself, Tentation resisted.
and thereby to undo his loving wife and young children, etc. But nothing could
alter the firm mind of this constant Martyr, and therefore at length fire was
put to him, and so he quietly slept in the Lord.

A little before his execution, he hearing that there was a controversy
between the Bishop and Major of the City, Note.
which of them should be at cost to buy wood for his burning, he sent to them
to end that quarrel, for that he himself would be at the cost of it, out of his
own goods.

The life of John Mollius.
THere was at Rome one John Mollius, who at twelve years old was placed by his
Parents in the house of the Gray-friars, where being of an excellent wit, in a
short time he so profited both in the knowledge of the Arts and Tongues, that
at eighteen years old he was made a Priest: His education.
Then was he sent to study at Ferrara, where he so profited in six years time,
that he was made Doctor and Reader of Divinity in that University, His enmity
to the truth.
and by his Sophistry showed himself an utter enemy to the Gospel. From thence
he went to Brixia, and the year following to Millaine, where he read openly;
Then by Francis Sforce he was brought to the University of Papia, to be the
Philosophy Professor, where he remained four years; Then was he called to the
University of Bononia: about which time it pleased God so to inlighten him with
the knowledge of his truth, Conversion. Zeal.
that he began secretly to expound The Epistle of Paul to the Romans to a few,
but presently his Auditors increased so fast, that he was compelled to read
openly in the Church, where the number of his Auditors daily increased, and
withal, they showed such fervency of mind, that most of them came with pen and
ink to write what they heard, taking great care to come so early that they
might have room to hear him. This was Anno 1538. Hereupon Cardinal Campeius set
up one Cornelius, an arrogant Babbler, to expound the same Epistle, who cried up
the Pope and his traditions; as John on the contrary commended and extolled
Christ and his merits to the People: But Cornelius his Auditors quickly
decreased, and the others increased exceedingly: This angered Cornelius,
insomuch as by Cardinal Campeius his advice, they came to an open disputation,
and when they could not agree, as John was returning home in a narrow place
where his friends could not come to his rescue, His apprehension.
he was apprehended and clapped up in prison; but this caused such stir in the
City, that Cornelius was feign to hide himself; Then did the Bishop send word
to John in prison, that he must either recant or be burnt: To the first he
answered that he would by no means condescend; only it grieved him that he
should be condemned, and his cause not heard; Constancy.
yet by the mediation of a friend he was released out of prison, upon condition
that within three months he should appear at Rome: H^s Release.
some of his friends dissuaded him from going to Rome, advising him rather to
go into Germany, and they would give him money to bear his charges; but he
refused, Courage.
saying, that he must preach the Gospel at Rome also.

When he came thither, he requested of the Pope that he might have a public
hearing, but that was denied him, and he was commanded to write his opinion:
which accordingly he did, About Original sin, His appe^ring at Rome.
Justification by faith only, Free Will, Purgatory, etc. All which he confirmed
by the Authority of Scripture and Fathers, and so exhibited it to the Pope, who
referred it to some Cardinals: and they disputed with him three days upon
those points, but could not confute them; then was he answered, That it was
truth which he said, yet not meet for the times; and therefore he was commanded
to abstain from preaching, Note. H^s return to Bonony.
and to return to Bonony to be the Philosophy Professor.

When he came back, all men longed to hear how he had sped, and in the Pulpit
he openly declared the whole proceedings to them, giving God thanks for his
safe return.

But this so offended the Cardinal, that by order from the Pope, he was removed
from Bononia to Naples: There also his doctrine was so distasted by the
Viceroy, that he laid wait to take away his life; yet, A special Providence.
through Gods mercy, he escaped, and wandered up and down Italy, preaching the
Gospel of Christ wheresoever he came: At last he was called back to Bonony,
where privately he expounded Paul's Epistles, which could not be long concealed;
whereupon he was apprehended and carried to Faventia, where he was cast into a
filthy stinking prison, He is again apprehended.
and lay there four years, no man being suffered to come to him: yet at last
by the mediation of some friends he was again released, His Release.
and went to Ravenna, where he preached the Gospel of Christ with such
affections, that he never spoke of Jesus Christ, Love to Christ
but tears dropped from his eyes.

After a short time he was again cast into prison; but four persons of quality
proffering to be his Bail, through Gods mercy, he was released; after which so
many flocked to him, Man^fold afflictions.
that his adversaries consulted to kill him, lest his doctrine should spread
further: and apprehending him, they sent him bound to Rome, where again he was
cast into prison for eighteen months, in which time he was often assaulted,
sometimes with flatteries and fair promises, Constancy.
sometimes with terrible threats: but his constancy could not be shaken by
either; whereupon he, with some others, were brought forth to receive the
sentence of condemnation, at which time with great earnestness, he confirmed
his former doctrine, affirmed the Pope to be Antichrist, His Martyrd^me.
etc. citing them to appear before the Tribunal of Christ.

Being condemned and carried to the place of execution, he exhorted the People
to have no Saviors but Christ alone, the only Mediator betwixt God and man,
and so he was first hanged, and then burned. This was Anno Christi, 1553.

Francis Gamba.
The year after, Francis Gamba, born in Lombardy, having, through Gods grace,
received the knowledge of the Gospel, went to Geneva, where he was much
confirmed in the truth, and received the Sacrament with them; then returning
into his own country he was apprehended and cast into prison, whither many
Nobles, Doctors and Priests resorted to him, laboring by all means to dissuade
him from his opinions; But he disputing with them, constantly affirmed that
what he held was consonant to the Word of God, Constancy.
and the evident doctrine of Jesus Christ, and necessary for all men to believe
if they would be saved; Assuring them that rather than he would be found false
to Christ and his Word, he was there ready to shed his blood: He was long
assailed by the entreaties of his friends and threatenings of his enemies,
Tentations ^esisted.
but could by no means be discouraged, yea he gave thanks to God for accounting
him worthy to suffer rebukes and death for the testimony of Jesus Christ: and
so by order of the Senate of Millain he was had forth to execution.

He went with a great deal of cheerfulness; and when a Cross was brought him
by a Friar, Comfort at death.
he said, that his mind was so replenished with joy and comfort in Christ, that
he needed neither his Cross nor him: then, because he declared many
comfortable things to the people, his tongue was bored through, and he was
first strangled, and then burnt, undergoing death with admirable patience and
constancy.

Anno 1555. There was one Algerius, a Student in Padua, a young man of
excellent learning, Algerus.
who having attained to the knowledge of the truth, ceased not by instruction
and example to inform others that he might bring them to the saving knowledge
of Christ; for this he was accused of heresy to the Pope; by whose command he
was apprehended and cast into prison at Venice, where he lay long; during which
time he wrote an excellent letter to the afflicted Saints, wherein, amongst
many other excellent expressions, he thus writes; I cannot but impart unto you
some portion of my delectations and joys which I feel and find: I have found
honey in the intrals of a Lion; Who will believe that in the dark dungeon I
should find a Paradise of pleasure? Joy in afflictions.
In a place of sorrow and death, dwells tranquillity and hope of life^ In an
infernal Cave, I have joy of soul: where others weep, I rejoice: where others
shake and tremble, there is strength and boldness, etc. All these things the
sweet hand of the Lord does minister to me. Behold, he that was once far from
me, is now present with me: whom I could scarce feel before, now I see more
apparently: whom once I saw afar off, I now behold near at hand: whom once I
hungered for, he now approaches and reaches his hand to me: he does comfort me,
and fills me with gladness: he drives away all sorrow, strengthens,
encourages, heals, refreshes and advances me: O how good is the Lord, who
suffers not his servants to be tempted above their strength! Oh how easy and
sweet is his yoke, etc. learn therefore how amiable and merciful the Lord is,
who visits his servants in tentations, and disdains not to keep them company
in such vile and stinking dungeons, etc. And in conclusion he subscribes his
letter, From the delectable Orchard of the Leonine prison, etc. After this the
Pope sent for him to Rome, where, by manifold persuasions and allurements, Note.
he was tempted to desert and deny the truth, which not prevailing, he was
adjudged to be burnt alive, Tentation resisted.
which death he most constantly endured to the great admiration of all that
beheld him.

Anno 1559. John Aloysius, being sent from Geneva to be a Pastor in Calabria,
was thence sent for by the Pope to Rome, John Aloysius.
where he suffered Martyrdom.

Also James Bovellus; a godly Minister in the same place, and at the same time
was sent for by the Pope, by whom he was sent to Messina, James Bovellus.
and there Martyred.

Pope Pius the fourth raised an hot persecution against the people of God in
all the Territories of the Church of Rome, whereby many constant Christians
suffered Martyrdom. Yea, Persecution raised by the Pope.
this persecution was so hot in the Kingdom of Naples, that many Noblemen with
their wives, and diverse others, were there slain; Anno 1560.

A Papist writing to a Noble Lord about the cruelty showed to some Christians,
has these expressions: When I think upon it, I verily quake and tremble:
Horrible Cruelty.
for their manner of putting to death may fitly be resembled to the slaughter
of Calves and Sheep; for eighty eight of them being thrust up together in one
house as in a sheepfold, the Executioner comes in, takes one and blindfoldeth
him, and so leads him forth to a larger place adjoining, where commanding him
to kneel down, he cuts his throat: and leaving him half dead, he takes his
Butchers knife and muffler, all gore blood; and goes back to the rest, and so
leading one after another, he dispatches them all: How sad this spectacle was,
I leave to your Lordship to judge; for my own part I cannot but weep to think
of it; neither was there any of the Spectators which seeing one to dye, could
endure to behold another: But truly so humbly and patiently they went to their
death, as is almost incredible to believe: Patience of the Saints.
All the aged Persons went to death more cheerfully, the younger were something
more timorous: I tremble and shake to remember how the Executioner held his
bloody knife between his teeth, with the bloody muffler in his hand, and his
arms all gore blood up to the elbows, going to the fold, and taking every one
of them one after another by the hand, and so dispatching them all, no
otherwise than as a Butcher does kill his Calves and Sheep. This was in
Calab^ia, Anno Christi, 1560.

Persecution raised by the Pope in Venice.
THe City of Venice was a long while from the cruel Inquisition, whereby the
face of a Church was discerned there, from the year 1530. to the year 1542.
yea, and multitudes of good Christians flocked thither from other parts, which
so provoked the Devil to envy, that he stirred up the Pope to send Inquisitors,
which erected an Inquisition in that City, and for diverse years the Pope sent
them money to distribute amongst their Flies, and such persons as would betray
the faithful to them: By this means many of the worthy servants of Jesus Christ
were apprehended, imprisoned, and after a while sent to Rome to be there
butchered.

Then was a newfound manner of death inflicted upon diverse others, never till
then heard of, whereby they were drowned in the bottom of the Sea; The manner
of it was thus; After any of them had received the sentence of death by the
Inquisitors, an iron chain was fastened about their middle, with a very heavy
stone tied thereto, then were they laid upon a plank between two boats, and so
rowed to an appointed place in the Sea, where the boats parting asudder, the
Martyrs presently sunk into the bottom of the Sea and were drowned. Yet
notwithstanding this cruelty, many godly persons ceased not to assemble
together in a place appointed for that purpose, where they talked and
discoursed of heavenly matters for their spiritual edification, and made
collections for the relief of the poor amongst them. And Anno 1566. they called
to them a Minister of the Gospel, and constituted a Church, where they enjoyed
all the Ordinances with much comfort: but some false brethren creeping in
amongst them, after a while betrayed them; then were many apprehended, cast
into the Sea and drowned: Others were sent to Rome, where they were cast into
prison till they rotted and dyed there.

Amongst others that were condemned to be drowned at Venice, was one Mr.
Anthony Ricetto: to whom after his condemnation, his son, a youth about
twelve years old, Anthony Ricetto. Tentation re^sisted.
came, beseeching him with tears to yield, that his life might be saved, and
himself not left fatherless: To whom he answered, A good Christian is bound to
forgo children, goods, yea, and life it self for the maintenance of Gods
honor and glory: For which cause (said he) I am now resolved to lay down my
life, the Lord assisting me.

The Lords of Venice offered to restore to him his Patrimony, which was partly
morgaged, and partly sold, if he would submit to the Church of Rome; but he
resolutely refused that condition. Not long after came a Captain to him, and
told him of one Francis Sega, his prison-fellow, that wa^ resolved to recant:
To whom he answered, What tell you me of Sega? Constancy.
I am resolved to perform my vows to the Lord my God: Then was he carried
forth bound to the boats, and by the way a Priest presented him with a wooden
Cross, exhorting him to recant, etc. But he on the contrary persuaded him and
others to come out of the snares of the Devil, and to cleave to Jesus Christ,
and to live, not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit; For, said
he, otherwise your unbelief will bring you into the lake of fire that never
shall be quenched. When he came to the place where he was to suffer, the
Captain lastned the chain and stone to him, whereupon, lifting his eyes to
heaven, he said, Father forgive them, they know not what they do. Lord Jesus,
into thy hands do I commend my spirit; and so in the sea he ended his life.

A few days after one Mr. Francis Spinola was apprehended and committed to
prison, and when he was brought forth before the Inquisitors, Francis Spinola
they showed him a Treatise about the Lords Supper, demanding whether he was
the Author of it, which he acknowledged, avouching that the doctrine that was
contained therein was agreeable to the holy Scriptures. Then was he returned to
his prison, where the aforementioned Sega was, who waiting for his coming, as
he passed by, saluted him by his name; after which they conferred together
about the doctrine of the Gospel; Sega.
and Sega having heard that Spinola had stood stoutly in the Confession of the
truth, he was much comforted, saying, that God had reserved him for such a time
as this to make him Partaker of so great consolation. Shortly after the Jailor
told Sega that he was to die one hour within night, at the hearing whereof he
entreated Spinola to pray with him, and after prayer he said, that his soul was
heavy unto death. Spinola answered, Fear not, for it will not be long before
your soul shall partake of those joys which shall endure for ever. At the
appointed time he was fetched out of the dungeon, where he took his leave of
Spinola and the other Prisoners: As he went into the boat, a Friar persuaded
him to return to the Church of Rome; Sega answered, that he was already in the
way to our Lord Jesus Christ, and so passing on, he called upon the name of
God: He seemed to be a little amazed at the fastening of the chain and stone to
his body, yet presently recollecting his spirits, he took it patiently, and so
commending his soul into the hands of God, Sega's Martyrdom.
he quietly slept in the Lord.

Spinola being again called before the Inquisitors, he boldly reproved the
Popes Legate, and the other Judges, for that contrary to their consciences they
persecuted the truth of God, calling them the offspring of the Pharisees, etc.

The third time that he was called before them, they asked him if he would not
recant his errors? he answered, that the doctrine which he maintained was not
erroneous, but the same truth which Christ and his holy Apostles taught, and
for which all the Martyrs, both in former and later times, did willingly lay
down their lives, Humane infirmity.
and endured the pains of death. Yet after all this, Spinola by the crafty
persuasions of some seeming friends, began to strike sail and to faint; but,
through Gods goodness, he soon recovered again, and being called before the
Judges, Recovery.
he openly confirmed the truth, and so had sentence passed upon him that he
should be drowned as an Heretic. To which he answered, I am no Heretic, but
the servant of Jesus Christ; Spinola's Martyrdom.
at which words the Popes Legate commanded him silence, and told him that he
lied; the night after he was conveyed into the sea, and there drowned, praising
and blessing God with invincible constancy.

Anno 1595. There was at Rome a young Englishman, An English man at Rome.
who going into a Church, and seeing their gross idolatry, was so inflamed
with zeal that he could not endure the sight of those horrible impieties, and
therefore he went out into the Church porch, and as the Procession passed by
him, he waited till the Bishop came that did bear the Host, and then stepping
forwards, he plucked it out of his hands, threw it to the ground, saying aloud,
Ye wretched Idolaters, do ye fall down to a morsel of bread? An heroical act
This so provoked the People that they had almost torn him in pieces, and yet
they spared him and sent him to prison.

Complaint being made to Pope Clement the eighth, he was so incensed that he
appointed him to be burnt the same day; but some of the Cardinals advised that
he should rather be kept in prison, and examined by exquisite torments to find
out his abettors and setters on. This accordingly was put in practice, yet
could they draw nothing from him but these words, His cruel torments.
Such was the will of God. Then was he adjudged to be led from the Capitol,
naked to his middle, and to wear on his head the form of a Devil, his breeches
to be painted over with flames of fire, and so to be carried all about the
City, and then to be burnt alive.

When he heard this sentence, he lift up his eyes to heaven, and implored the
help of Almighty God. As he passed through the streets he was mocked and
derided of all the People, but he continued his fervent Prayers to God; At last
he spoke something against the filthy lives of the Cardinals, which so enraged
them, that they caused him to be gagged, which cruelty he patiently endured.
When he came before the Church where he cast down the idol, the hangman cut off
his right hand, and set it on a pole in the Cart to which he was tied; then did
two Tormentors with flaming torches scorch and burn his flesh all the way as he
went through the City of Rome, all which he bore with admirable patience; By
that he came to the place where he was to be executed, Patience.
his body was all over scorched, blistred and bloody, having no part free but
his head; Then was he taken from the Cart, and seeing the Post to which he
should be tied, he went of himself to it, and kneeling down, kissed the chains
which should bind him to it; The Friars urged him to worship an idol which they
presented to him, but he turning away his face showed his detestation of it,
holding on his Christian course unto the end: and when the flames of fire
seized on him, His Martyrdom.
he bowed his head, and quietly yielded up his soul to God.

The same year there was an old godly man that had long lain in the Inquisitors
dungeons, who was at last brought forth and condemned; after which the Friars
brought to him a Crucifix, importuning him to kiss and adore it; He seeing
their impudence, said unto them; If you take not this idol out of my sight, ye
will constrain me to spit upon it; The Friars hearing this, Idolatry detested.
sent him away immediately to the fire, where with great courage and constancy
he resigned up his spirit unto God.

CHAP. XXIX. The Life and Martyrdom of William Gardener in Portugal, Anno
Christi, 1552.
WIlliam Gardener was born at Bristol, and well educated, and when he was grown
up, was placed with one Master Paget, a Merchant, by whom when he was twenty
six years old, he was sent into Portugal to Lisbone, the regal City, to be a
Factor: there he learned the country language, and became a profitable servant
both to his Master and others. He was careful to keep close to God, His going
to Lisbone.
and to avoid the superstitions of that country, and there being diverse good
men in that City, he associated himself with them, used good conference, and
often bewailed to them his own weakness, as being neither sufficiently humbled
for his sins, nor yet enflamed with a love of godliness as he ought: Humility.
he had also good books which privately he made much use of. Now whilst he was
here abiding, it so fell out that a great marriage was to be solemnized betwixt
the King of Portugals son, and the King of Spains daughter. Great
preparations were made for it, and a great concourse there was of Persons of
all Ranks that came to it; and upon the wedding day they went to Church in
great pomp; and amongst multitudes of Spectators, William Gardener made one,
rather for the novelty of the business, than for any desire that he had to see
their Ceremonies, and going to Church early in the morning, he got a convenient
place to hear and see in.

When all were come to Church, a Cardinal began to say Mass: The People
standing with great silence and devotion: The fight of these superstitions did
wonderfully grieve the mind of William Gardener, not so much to see the folly
of the common People, Zeal.
as to see that the King himself, and so many sage Nobles should be led away
with such abominable idolatry; wherewith he was so exceedingly moved in his
spirit, that he had much ado to refrain himself from doing something whereby he
might manifest his dislike; but the great throng that he was in, hindered him,
that he could not come near to the Altar.

When all was ended he returned home very sad, seeking out solitary places,
where falling down prostrate before God, with many tears he bewailed the
neglect of his duty, and studied how he might revoke that People from their
impiety and superstition. At length his mind was fully setlet not to defer the
matter any longer, whereupon he renounced the world, exactly made up all his
accounts, both what he owed, and what was owing to him to a farthing. Then did
he continue night and day in Prayer unto God, and in continual meditation of
the holy Scriptures, Prayer.
so that he would scarce take any meat by day, or sleep by night, as one
Pendigrace his bedfellow testified.

The Sabbath following Mass was to be celebrated with the like solemnity;
Whereupon William Gardener went early in the morning handsomely apparalled to
Church, setting himself near to the Altar; After a while the King and States
came; Gardener with a New Testament in his hand, stood near the Altar,
privately reading it all the while. A Cardinal began the Mass, consecrated the
Host, lifted it up an high, showed his God to the people, Gross idolatry
they adored it: yet Gardener contained himself all this while. Then the
Cardinal took the Host, tossed it to and fro about the Chalice, An heroical act
made diverse circles, etc. With that Gardener stepped to him, took the Host out
of his hand, and trampled it under his feet, and with his other hand overthrew
the Chalice.

At first all that were present stood amazed; then arose a great tumult, and
one drawing his dagger wounded Gardener in the shoulder, and as he was about to
have slain him, His danger.
the King commanded him to forbear, whereby his life was saved for the present;
the tumult being ceased, the King demanded of him what Countryman he was? He
answered, Most noble King, I am not ashamed of my Country, I am an Englishmam
by birth and Religion, His speech to to the King.
and came hither as a Merchant, and seeing so great idolatry committed in this
famous Assembly, I neither ought, nor could any longer suffer it: neither could
I forbear doing what you have seen: which thing, most noble Prince, was not
done in contempt of your Presence, God is my witness, but to seek the salvation
of this People.

The King hearing that he was an Englishman, and considering what alteration of
Religion King Edward had made, presently conceited that he was suborned by some
body to do this in scorn to their Religion; wherefore he asked him who was the
Author and procurer of this act? Gardener answered that he was not moved
thereunto by any man, but only by his own conscience; For, says he, there is
no man under heaven, for whose sake I would put my self into such manifest
danger, but that I owed this service first to God, Courage.
and then to your salvation: and if I have done any thing which is dispeasing
to you, you ought to impute it to no man, but to your self, who so i^reverently
use the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper to so great Idolatry, etc. Whilst he
thus stoutly spoke to the King, by reason of the loss of much blood by his
wound, he was ready to faint. Whereupon Chirurgions were sent for to cure him,
that he might be reserved for further torments.

Then were all other Englishmen in the City clapped up in prison, especially
his bedfellow, who was grievously tormented and examined more then all the
rest, and scarcely delivered after two years imprisonment; the rest got off
sooner.

They searched also all his writings and letters, to see if they could find out
any confederates; then they went to him seeking by torments to extort the
Author of this fact. They also invented a new kind of torment, exceeding
Phalaris his brazen Bull; which was this: They made a ball of linen cloth, He
is tortured.
which with violence they thrust down his throat to the bottom of his stomach,
and with a string fastened to it, they pulled it up again; and this they did
diverse times, which caused as bitter pains as the pains of death; but when by
this means they could get no confession from him, they asked him if he did not
repent of his wicked fact? whereto he answered, that he was so far from
repenting, that if it were to do again he should do it: yet was he somewhat
sorry that it was done in the Kings presence, to his disturbance, but they were
not to blame him for it, but the King was rather to be blamed, who having
power, would not prohibit so great Idolatry.

When they had used all kinds of torments, and that he was so weakened thereby,
that he was not like to live long, they first cut off his right hand, then
carried him into the marketplace, where they cut off his other hand also: then
fastening a rope about his middle, with a Pully they hoisted him up an high, and
making a great fire under him, they let him down, His cru^l Martyrdom.
so that his feet only felt the fire, and so often pulling him up and down,
they burned him by degrees: and yet in all these great torments he remained
constant, and the more terribly that he burnt, the more earnestly he prayed;
When his feet were consumed, they asked him whether he yet did not repent him
of his deed? Constancy.
exhorting him to call upon our Lady and the Saints. He answered that what
torments soever they used, the truth was the same: that which he had confessed
in his life, he would not deny at his death; and that when Christ ceased to be
our Advocate he would pray to our Lady, etc. And when they labored to stop his
p^aying to, and praising of God, he with a loud voice reheased the 34. Psalm:
which being almost ended, the rope was burned in sunder, so that his body fell
down into the fire, where he changed his momentany pains for eternal rest.

But the Lord suffered not this cruelty to go altogether unpunished in this
life; for a spark of the fire wherewith he was burned, Gods judgment on
persecutors.
was driven by the wind into the Haven, where it set on fire one of the Kings
great ships, and consumed it: The new-married Prince also died within half a
year, and the King himself not long after.

The Martyrdom of a Christian Jew in Constantinople, Anno Christi, 1528.
THis Jew dwelling ar Constantinople, through Gods grace, was there converted,
baptized, and became a good Christian; which the Turks understanding, were
vehemently exasperated against him for it, fearing lest his conversion should
prove very prejudicial to their Mahumetan Religion, and therefore they
apprehended and cruelly murdered him, and for his greater infamy they cast out
his dead body into the open streets, forbidding all strictly to bury it. A
special Providence.
Thus his dead body lay in the streets nine days; yet, through the power of
God, it corrupted not at all, yea there proceeded from it a certain delectable
sent or odor, which much astonished the Turks, so that at last they took it
up, and carried it out of the City, and buried it.

CHAP. XXX. The Persecution of the Church in Germany, which began, Anno
Christi, 1523.
The Pope stirs up the Emperor to persecute the P^otestants.
THe Gospel being spread abroad in Germany, by the means and ministry of Luther,
and his fellow laborers, the Pope having tried all other means for the
suppressing of it, and finding them ineffectual, he at last provokes the
Emperor Charles the fifth by war to destroy the Protestants, and for that end
gives him two hundred thousand crowns in money for the maintenance of these
Wars, and ties himself at his own cost to maintain twelve thousand foot and
five hundred horse for six months; yea out of his zeal for the cause, he
allows the Emperor the one half of the Revenues of the Clergy, and gives him
leave to sell off Abby-lands to the value of five hundred thousand crowns,
whereupon great preparation was made for this War both in Germany, Spain, and
Italy, the consideration wherereof caused the confederate Protestant Princes to
raise a great Army also for their own defense; upon which occasion they were
proclaimed guilty of high treason by the Emperor.

The two Armies lay near together, and the Protestants offered battle to the
Emperor, but he refused, assuring himself that they could not long continue
together: The Army of the Protestants was commanded by the Duke of Saxony, and
the Lantgrave of Hessen, who did not concur very well in their counsels;
besides they wanted both victuals and money, so as they were forced to dislodge
and retire further off: the Emperor following, forced the Elector to fight
with disadvantage; and God who does not always prosper the better cause, gave
the victory to the Emperor, Duke of Saxony and the Lantgrave taken prisoners.
A cruel persecution.
the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgrave being taken prisoners, Anno 1547.

Presently after ensued a great persecution in many places: authority armed
with laws and rigor, striving against simple verity: It was lamentable to hear
how many poor men were troubled, both Ministers and Christians; some tossed
from place to place; others exiled out of their own Countries; some driven into
Woods, and forced to dwell in Caves; some tormented upon the Rack, and some
burned with fire and faggot; Amongst others, two young men were burnt at
Bruxels, viz. Henry Voes and John Esch, Henry Voes, John Esch.
formerly Augustine-Friars; When they came before the Inquisitors they were
examined what they did believe? they answered, the books of the Old and New
Testament, wherein were contained the Articles of the Creed. Then were they
asked whether they did not believe the decrees of the Councels and Fathers:
they answered such as were agreeing to the Scriptures, they believed, etc. When
they were condemned, they gave thanks to God their heavenly father, which of
his great goodness had delivered them from that false and abominable Religion,
making them Priests to himself, and receiving them to himself as a sacrifice of
a sweet odor; They went joyfully to the place of execution, protesting that
they died for the glory of God and the doctrine of the Gospel as true
Christians, and that it was the day which they had long desired; They joyfully
embraced the stake, and endured patiently the torments of the fire, singing
Psalms, and rehearsing the Creed in testimony of their faith; whereupon one
said to them, Comfort and joy in death.
that they should take heed of glorifying themselves so foolishly; but of them
answered, God fobid that we should glory in any thing but in the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ; When the fire was kindled at their feet, one of them said,
Methinks you do strew Roses under my feet; A miracle of mercy.
presently after they quietly slept in the Lord. Henry being before demanded if
Luther had seduced him: he answered, Even so as Christ seduced his Apostles.

The year after there was one Henry Sutphen, who, Henry Sutphen.
having been with Luther, came to Antwerp, from which he was driven for his
Religion; Then did he go to Breme, where he was requested by some godly
Citizens to preach to them, and the Citizens hearing him preach the Gospel so
sin^rely, they were so in love with his Doctrine, that they requested him to
tarry amongst them to be their Minister; but the Popish Clergy presently
complained of him to the Magistrates, accusing him of Heresy, and desiring
that he might be banished the town; but not prevailing there, they complained
to the Archbishop, and sent their Chaplains daily to his Sermons to entrap him
in his words: Popish malice.
but it pleased God so to work upon them by his Ministry, Some that came to
catch were converted.
that most of them were converted, and did openly witness that he taught
nothing but the truth of God.

Not long after he was set for to Meldorp, to preach the Gospel to them also;
wherefore he thought good to try what God would work by him there; but the
Citizens of Breme were very unwilling to part with him, because the Gospel had
not as yet took much deep root amongst them, and because the persecution was
very great, etc. Yet Sutphen alleged, that in Diethmarch there was more need
of his labors, the people being as sheep amongst Wolves, and that with a safe
conscience he could not deny their request, and that he did not intend utterly
to forsake Breme, but only for a month or two, after which he would return to
them again. So having made all things ready, he went into Diethmarch to
Meldorp, were he was joyfully received. But before he began to preach, Popish
subtilty and malice.
the Devil and his instruments began to fret and fume, and consulting together,
they resolved to hinder him from preaching, fearing that if the people once
heard his doctrine, it would be too late to stop it; Hereupon they grievously
complained to the Magistrates, telling them that if they suffered this Heretic
to preach, he would infect all the Country as he had done at Breme, and that it
would be a most grateful service if they would put him to death. This so far
prevailed with these ignorant men, that they resolved that he should be put to
death unseen and unheard: They wrote also to forbid him to preach, whereunto,
he answered, that since he was come at the request of the whole Parish to
preach, he resolved to answer that call, and rather to obey God than man, and
that if God had determined that there he should lose his life, Courage.
there was as near a way to heaven from thence as from any other place;
assuring himself that sooner or later he must die for the Gospels sake: And
accordingly the next day he preached, and the people so liked him, that they
resolved to have him for their Preacher, and to defend him to their power; in
the afternoon he preached again; afterward also he preached a third time with
such a spirit and grace, that all men admired him, praying God earnestly that
they might long enjoy such a Preacher; But his enemies were not all this while
idle: for going to the Rulers of the Country, they procured some of them to
join with them, Implacable malice.
and privately raised five hundred men, with whom they went in the night time
to Meldorp, brake into the house where Sutphen lay, pulled him out of his bed
naked, and in their rage had almost pulled him to pieces: they then bound him,
and asked him for what cause he came into Diethmarch? he gently declared it to
them, yet they led him away barefoot: so that his feet being pitifully cut with
the ice, he desired a horse to ride on, for which they jeared him, saying, Must
we provide an horse for an Heretic? thou shall go on foot whether thou will or
no: Afterward they bound him with chains, and set him in the stocks: Then was
he removed to another place and shut up in a Cupboard; The next day binding
him, hands, feet and neck, they carried him forth to be burned. He is condemned
unheard.
Then a certain woman came to them, and proffered her self to suffer two
thousand stripes, and to give them a great sum of money if they would but
respite his life till he had a public hearing, but they threw her underfoot
and trod upon her; Popish cruelty
They also fell upon Sutphen, cutting and mangling of him in several parts: The
fire was often kindled, yet would not burn; then they fell upon him again,
cutting and slashing him, and at last bound him to a ladder, and threw him into
the fire, and when he began to pray, one of them him struck, saying, Thou shall
first be burnt, and then pray and prate thy fill; His Martyrdom.
another trod upon his breast, and another endeavored to strangle him:
another ran him through with an Halberd: another struck him on the breast with
a Mace till he died: and lastly they roasted him upon the coals, and so he
finished his Martyrdom. About the same time many other godly persons were
thrown into the River of Rhene and drowned, Many drowned.
and in the Town of Diethmarch another faithful servant of God suffered
Martyrdom.

In Hala a godly preacher was slain by a company of cutthroats, set on by the
Friars. And not long after the Town of Miltenburg was taken, sacked, Miltenburg
sacked.
many slain, and others imprisoned for maintaining Caralostadius to be their
Preacher: Two other godly persons were burned at Vienna.

Also a godly Minister for reproving sin in his Prince sharply, was condemned
to be hanged, A Minister condemned to be hanged.
and a cruel Gentleman with a Troop were sent to apprehend and hang him: The
Gentleman when he came to his house saluted him friendly; pretending that he
came to make good cheer with him, for he was a good housekeeper, and the
Gentlemen of the Country used often to resort to him; The Minister in a short
time prepared* a sumptuous banquet for them, whereof they ate freely. Dinner
being ended, the Gentleman said to his men, Take this Priest our host and hang
him without delay: his servants astonished hereat, abhorred to do the deed,
saying, God forbid that we should commit such a crime, Ingratitude.
as to hang a man that has used us so courteously, its a wicked act thus to
render evil for good, etc. But the Gentleman still provoked them to accomplish
his command: Then did the Minister say, I beseech you show not such cruelty
upon me, rather lead me to purge my self to my Prince, before whom I doubt not
to purge my self from any thing wherewith I shall be charged, neither so
violate ye the laws of hospitality which I have showed to you and to other
noble men, which used to resort to my house; besides consider what a sting this
act will leave in your consciences: for I have faithfully and truly taught the
doctrine of the Gospel, and that is the principal cause that my Prince bears me
this ill will, etc. But whatsoever this good man could say in his own behalf,
the wicked Gentleman continued resolute, provoking his servants to accomplish
that which he commanded them, withal saying to the Minister, You shall gain
nothing by your preaching in this sort, for I am fully determined that the
Princes will shall be fulfilled. At last the servants took the Minister, and
with great lamentation and mourning, hanged him upon a beam in his own house,
He is hanged.
the Gentleman standing by and looking on.

Also about the same time there was a godly learned Minister, Peter Spengler.
called Master Peter Spengler in a town called Schlat, who faithfully
discharged the duty of his place, and was much beloved for his affable and
courteous carriage: he was also a great peacemaker, and very prudent in
composing differences, well studied in the Scriptures, whereby he saw that
persecution was at hand, the enemies of the truth beginning now to rage, and
proudly to lift up their heads; yea shortly after he saw many bodies of the
Saints cruelly tormented, beaten, exiled, drowned and burned; and to the end
that he might not defile himself with fornication, he married his maid, who was
one that feared God, and by whom afterward he had many children. The rising of
the Anabaptists.
About this time there was a great commotion of the Boores, who went to Abbeys
and Monasteries, robbing, plundering, and spoiling what they could not carry
away; one company of them came to his house, whom he entertained kindly, yet
they ransacked and robbed him of all, even to his very apparel, not leaving him
so much as a pair of stockings, though he labored to convince them of their
wickedness; As they were going out of his house he fell a weeping, He is
robbed by them.
and said to them, I tell you that this your wickedness will in the end bring
much mischief upon your selves; you pretend the Gospel, but walk contrary to
the rules of it, His good counsel.
etc. But for his good counsel they requited him with scoffs and jeers.

It pleased God not long after, that this faithful Pastor in the nightime was
taken by a company of Popish soldiers, who bound him hands and feet with a
great rope, Popish cruelty
and so carried him away to Friburg: It would have grieved any heart to hear
the barbarous and despightful taunts and scoffs that they gave him; From thence
they carried him to another place, where they cast him into prison, cruelly
tormented him in his privy members, and other parts of his body, and at last
adjudged him to death; As he was going to execution, he said, I shall be an
acceptable sacrifice to my Savior Jesus Christ, who has given me a quiet
conscience, as knowing my self innocent from the crimes objected against me: A
Christian speech at his death.
For my death, it is all one whether I die thus or no; for if you had let me
alone, I must shortly have forsaken this skin, which already scarcely hangs to
my bones. I know that I am a mortal and corruptible worm, I have long desired
my last day, and have often prayed that I might be delivered out of this mortal
body, to be joined with my Savior Jesus Christ, etc. Then was he cast headlong
into the river: which afterward for a certain space was as red as blood. A
miracle.


Another godly man there was, who (after the commotion raised by the
Anabaptists was quieted) was apprehended under pretense that he was one of
them, and cast into prison, in which he was long detained, and at last they
hoisted him up with a cord, with a great stone fastened to his feet, Popish
cruelty
where they kept him six hours, so that the sweat that dropped from his body,
through pain and anguish, was almost blood: at last his strength ^ailing, they
let him down with great violence: where he lay as a stock almost dead, only
they perceived him to breath; Then did they use means to recover him, and gave
him some food, after which they let him down into a deep dungeon: There he
continued eighteen days, in the end whereof they took him forth, and examined
him of diverse things, which he denied: Then did they devise sundry kinds of
torments to force him to accuse himself falsely, yet he constantly denied it:
Afterward they hired an hangman who left no kind of cruelty unpractised upon
him: yet at length he was constrained to give over his cruelty, and pronounce
the man innocent, in that he had constantly endured so many and grievous
torments: Then did they again cast him into the dungeon, and in the mean time
suborned two false witnesses against him, False witnesses.
whereupon they condemned him unheard, and having let down a cord, they drew
him up out of the dungeon to his execution; As he was going to it, a Friar
persuaded him to confess his sins in his ear, and he would absolve him, and
so he should go to heaven: To whom he answered, Thou wicked Friar, get thee
from me, I have long since bewailed my sins to God, and obtained absolution at
the hands of my Savior Jesus Christ, and therefore I have no need of thy
absolution, His constant death.
etc. At the place of execution, after he had made his Prayer to God, and
vindicated his own innocence, his head was cut off. These were written by
Oecolampadius.

Wolfgang Scuch coming to Hippolitus in Lorrain, was chosen to be their Pastor,
Wolfgang Scuch
where through Gods blessing upon his Ministry, he mightily prevailed with the
People to bring them from darkness to light, so that they forsook their former
idolatry, Idolatry reformed.
and abolished the Mass, and other superstitious practices from amonst them,
which much enraged their Popish neighbors about them, so that they complained
to the Duke that they had not only fallen from the Pope, but went about to cast
off their obedience to him, and to shake off his authority: This so provoked
the indignation of the Duke, Popist rage.
that he threatened utterly to destroy the town with fire and sword; Wolfgang
being informed hereof, wrote to the Duke in most humble wise, defending his
Ministry and the doctrine which he taught, and the whole cause of the Gospel;
he also excused the People as innocent and guiltless, confuted the slanders of
their malicious adversaries, and professed their ready and willing subjection
to that authority which God had placed over them; But this Epistle prevailed
nothing by reason of the virulent accusations of their enemies; He goes to the
Duke and is imprisoned.
Whereupon to save the town from ruin, he went of his own accord to the Duke
to render an account of his doctrine, thereby deriving all the Odium and danger
upon himself.

As soon as he came thither he was apprehended and cast into a straight and
stinking prison* where he was most cruelly handled by the churlish Jailor: In
this plight he remained a whole year, and yet would not shrink from his
constancy, though besides his hard usage, he had a wife and five or six small
children to care for: Then was he called to justify his faith, which he did
wittily and learnedly confuting all that did oppose him: and though they called
him Heretic, Judas, Devil, He is reviled.
etc. yet he regarded it not, but went on confirming his doctrine by the
Scriptures: But when his adversaries could not make their part good against
him, His Bible burnt.
they took his Bible and burned it, and proceeded to condemn him to be burned;
which sentence when he heard pronounced against him, he sang the 122. Psalm.
When he came to the place of his Martyrdom, they asked him if he would have his
pain shortened, he answered No: for says he, God that has been with me
hitherto, His faith.
I trust will not now leave me when I have most need of him. When faggots were
heaped about him, His Martyrdom.
he sang the 51. Psalm, and so continued singing till the flame and smoke took
away his voice and life.

Shortly after the Commendator that sat as chief Judge upon him, Gods
judgments on Persecutors.
died suddenly: Also his fellow Judge hearing the sudden noise of some guns
that went off at the coming of the King of Denmak into the town, was so
overcome with fear, that he suddenly fell down and died.

One John Huglin, a Minister, was burned at Mersperg for Religion, John Huglin
burned*
Anno Christi 1526.

At Munchen in Bavaria, George Carpenter.
one George Carpenter was apprehended and cast into prison for his Religion,
and at last was brought forth before the Judges, where he stoultly defended the
truth, refusing to recant; Then came a Schoolmaster to him, saying, My friend,
do thou not fear death? would thou not fain return to thy wife and
children? To whom he answered, Were I at liberty, whether should I go but to my
dear wife and children? Then said the Schoolmaster, Recant your errors and you
shall be set at liberty: George answered, Christ preferred before wife and
children.
My wife and my children are so dear to me, that they cannot be bought from me
with all the riches and possessions of the Duke of Bavaria: but for the love of
my Lord God I willingly forsake them all. When he went to execution, being
again persuaded to recant, he said, I will confess Christ this day before the
whole world, for he is my Savior, and in him do I believe. When he was bound
to the Ladder, some Christian brethren desired him, that as soon as he was cast
into the fire, he would give them some sign of the truth of his faith; to whom
he said, This shall be my sign, His sign* His Martyrdom.
that so long as my tongue can wag I will not cease to call upon the name of
Jesus. He never changed his countenance, but cheerfully went to the fire, and
crying continually Jesus, Jesus, he joyfully yielded up his spirit unto God.

Also one Leonard Keyser, a Bavarian, being a Student at Wittenburg, was sent
for to come home, Leonard Keyser.
his father lying upon his deathbed; but so soon as he was come, he was
apprehended at the command of the Bishop; and though the Duke of Saxony, Popish
malice.
and his own friends solicited very earnestly to the Bishop for his life, yet
he proceeded to condemn him, and delivered him over to the secular Magistrate.
His Martyrdom.
As he was led to the place of execution, he said, O Lord Jesus, remain with
me, sustain and help me, and give me strength; When the fire was ready to be
kindled, he cried out with a loud voice, O Jesus, I am thine, have mercy upon
me, and save me, and so he quietly slept in the Lord.

The Martyrdom of a godly Minister in Hungary.
A Cruel Bishop in Hungary took a godly Minister for preaching the truth; A
Minister worried.
and caused Hares, Geese, and Hens to be tied round about his naked body, and
then set dogs upon him, that cruelly rent and tore whatsoever they could catch,
Gods judgments on Persecutors.
so that he died thereof; but God left not this cruelty unrevenged; for shortly
after the Bishop fell mad, and raving, died miserably.

CHAP. XXXI. The Persecutions of the Church in the Low Countries,
IN Holland there was a grave widow called Wendelmuta, to whom it pleased God
to reveal his truth, and she became a zealous Professor of it, for which she
was apprehended and cast into prison, and afterward brought forth at the
Sessions, where many Monks persuaded her to recant, but could not prevail. Many
also of her kindred and other women were suffered to persuade with her, amongst
which was a noble Matron, who coming to her, said, My Wendelmuta, Why do thou
not keep those things which thou believe secret in thy heart, Tentation.
that thou may prolong thy life? To whom she answered, Truly you know not
what you say; for with the heart man believes to righteousness, but with the
tongue confession is made to salvation. Then was she condemned to be burnt to
ashes, and her goods to be confiscated, which sentence she took patiently and
quietly.

At the place of her execution a Monk brought her a Cross, and bade her to
kiss and worship her God, to whom she said, Ignorance.
I worship no wooden God, but only that God which is in heaven; and so with a
merry and joyful countenance she went to the stake, desiring the Executioner to
knock it in fast that it might not fall; Being bound to it, she ardently
commended her soul into the hands of God; when she was to be strangled she
modestly closed her eyes, and bowed down her head as one that went to sleep;
after which she was burned to ashes. Her Martyrdom.


Anno 1529. There were two godly and learned men apprehended in Colen, and cast
into prison, where they were kept a year and an half, and the sweating
sickness raging exceedingly at that time in Germany, the Popish Clergy
preached that the way to pacify Gods wrath, Popish malice.
and to remove the plague, was to cut off Heretics, Two godly men burnt.
whereupon these two godly men were brought out, and condemned, and presently
after burned.

Also one Nicholas, a godly man, was apprehended at Antwerp, bound up in a
sack, cast into the river and drowned. Nicholas drowned.


Also Pistorius, a learned and godly Preacher, coming from Wittenburg into
Holland, preached against the Mass, Popish pardons, Pistorius.
etc. Whereupon he was cast into prison amongst. Malefactors, whom he
instructed, and much comforted in their distressed condition; and one of them
being half naked, he gave him his gown; Charity.
His father visiting him in prison, encouraged him to constancy: At last he was
condemned and carried forth to execution with a fools coat on his back; when he
was tied to the stake, he said, O death, where is thy victory? His Martyrdom.
and so he was first strangled, and then burned.

Another for speaking against the Mass and Relics, was hanged in Suevia. One
hanged.


Another godly Minister being commanded to go to sixteen men that were to be
beheaded, to counsel and comfort them at their death: when they were executed,
was himself bidden to kneel down, A Minister beheaded.
and so they cut off his head.

Also George Scherter, a godly Minister, that took great pains in instructing
his people in the knowledge of the Gospel in a town near Salizburg, was
apprehended and cast into prison, George Scherter.
where he wrote a Confession of his faith, and afterward was condemned, first
to be beheaded, and then burned. As he went to the execution he said to the
Spectators, That you may know that I die a true Christian, A Miracle.
I will give you a sign: and accordingly when his head had been cut off, so
long as whilst a man might eat an egg, his body all the while lying upon the
belly, it turned it self upon the back, crossing the right foot over the left,
and the right hand over the left: by which miracle many were induced to believe
the Gospel.

Another godly man was burned at Dornick.

Ministers Martyrs.
Anno 1539. A godly minister not far from Basil, was murdered in his own house
by a Popish Priest, whom he had kindly entertained; many other Ministers about
that time, were, some drowned, some beheaded.

Anno 1543. Notice was taken that there were diverse godly persons in Lovain,
whereupon an Inquisitor came from Bruxels thither, and having gotten a company
of soldiers, Popish cruelty
in the night time he brake into their houses, plucking men and women out of
their beds from their children, and casting them into prison: Thither the
Doctors of Lovain came, thinking either to convert them or confound them; but
the spirit of God assisting his Saints, Vincit ^eritas.
the doctors went away confounded themselves: Then did they cruelly torment
every one of them by themselves; amongst these an aged Minister of about sixty
years old was condemned to perpetual imprisonment in a dark and stinking
dungeon, where he could neither read nor write, nor might any man come to him,
and he was fed only with bread and water.

Two were burnt alive in the fire; an aged man was beheaded: Two aged women
were buried quick: others for refusing to do penance, were burned also; All
which took their death very patiently and cheerfully.

The year after in the same University of Lovain, was one Master Persival, Mr.
Persival.
a very learned and godly man, cast into prison, and because he could by no
means be brought to recant, he was adjudged to perpetual imprisonment, Cruelty.
and there to be fed only with bread and water: neither would they suffer the
Citizens to send any relief to him: shortly after he was made away in prison.

Also one Justus Insberg in the same city, for having a New Testament and some
of Luthers Sermons found in his house, Justus Insberg.
was cast into prison, and command given that none should speak with him. At
the same time there were prisoners, in a room under him, Aegidius and Encenas
metioned before, A special providence.
whose door being left open accidentally, they went to this poor man* and much
confirmed and strengthened him in the faith, insomuch as when the Lovain Doctors
came to persuade him to recant, he before them all made a bold confession of
his faith, from which he would not be dissuaded, whereupon he was condemned and
beheaded.

About the same time there was one Giles Tilleman, a Cutler at Bruxels, Giles
Tilleman. Conversion.
who by diligent reading of the Scriptures, through Gods grace, was converted,
and became very zealous for the truth; he was also very humble, mild, and
merciful; whatsoever he could spare from his own necessity, Charity.
he gave it to the poor, living by his trade himself; Some he refreshed with
meat, others with clothing; to others he gave shoes, to others
household stuff; to others he ministered godly exhortations for their
edification. One poor woman being delivered of a child, and wanting a bed to
lie on, he sent her his bed; and himself was content to lie on the straw; At
last he was discovered and cast into prison; where much pains was taken to
bring him back to Popery, Constancy.
but always his adversaries went away with shame; After eight months
imprisonment he was sent to Bruxels to be judged, in which place he comforted
many that he found in prison there, exhorting them to constancy that they might
attain the Crown; Most of his food he divided amongst them, contenting himself
with some few scraps: He was so ardent in Prayer, kneeling by himself in some
secret place, that often he forgot himself; Earnest Prayer
and being many times called to his meat, he neither heard, nor saw them that
stood by him till he was lifted up by the arms.

Diverse Friars coming to reduce him, he would still request them to go their
ways, for he was at a point; and when they reviled him, Meekn^sse.
he would not answer them again, insomuch as they reported abroad that he had a
dumb Devil in him. But when they spoke of matters of Religion, he answered them
freely, mightily confuting them by the Scriptures; Often he might have escaped,
the prison doors being set open, but he would not, that he might not bring his
Keeper into trouble; F^^ght refused*
Afterward he was removed to another prison, where they sought by torments to
enforce him to recant: and when all would not prevail, he was condemned to the
fire; which when he heard of, he gave hearty thanks to God for that the hour
was come wherein he might glorify his name. Seeing a great pile of wood
prepared for his burning, Constancy.
he desired that most of it might be taken away and given to the poor; Note.
for a little, said he, will serve to burn me: and seeing a poor man by that
lacked shoos, he gave him his: Being tied to the stake the hangman would have
strangled him, but he refused, saying, It needs not, I fear not the fire, His
Martyrdom.
and so in the midst of the flames he gave up the Ghost.

Anno 1543. and 1544. There was a great persecution all over Flanders, A great
persecution.
so that there was neither town nor City in all the Country, wherein some were
not banished, beheaded, or condemned to perpetual imprisonment: neither was
there any respect either of age or sex: But especially at Gaunt, many of the
chief men were burned for Religion.

Also at the Emperors going to Bruxels, there was a terrible persecution and
slaughter made of Gods People in Brabant, Artois, etc. so that two hundred men
and women were apprehended at one time, whereof some were drowned, some buried
quick, some privily made away: others sent to perpetual prison; yea so many
others were put to death, that the hands of the hangman were tired with slaying
of men.

Anno 1545. There was one Martin, at Gaunt, a Fishmonger, Martin converted in
his old age.
who lived very dissolutely to his old age; but it pleased God by a Sermon that
he heard, to bring him to the knowledge of the truth and to repentance for his
former sins, whereupon he left Gaunt, and sought out the company of godly
Christians, who used much reading of the Scriptures, by whom he was further
instructed and grounded in the truth; Then after three months he returned to
the City again, where he visited the Captives in prison, comforted them in
persecution, and confirmed them in the truth which were led to the fire.

The Friars seeing this, though formerly he had been very bountiful to them,
yet now they conspired against him, whereby he was laid in bands, and by sharp
and cruel torments they would have enforced him to recant, but not prevailing,
he was condemned, and his goods confiscated; as he stood at the stake, He is
condemned.
a Friar said to him, Martin, except thou do turn, thou shall go from this
temporal to everlasting fire, to whom he answered, It is not for you to judge
me; His Martyrdom.
and so he quietly slept in the Lord.

The next day after two other men were burned, and a woman buried alive for the
same cause, who joyfully and cheerfully suffered Martyrdom.

At Delden two Virgins of a noble stock, who frequently and diligently attended
Sermons, Two godly Virgins.
being apprehended and examined, courageously confessed and maintained the
truth, whereupon they were condemned, and the younger was first burned; In the
fire she prayed so ardently for her enemies, Burnt.
that the Judges greatly marvelled at it; Then did they exhort the elder, that
if she would not recant, yet at least that she would petition to have her
punishment changed into beheading instead of burning, whereupon she answered,
that she held no error of which she had cause to repent, Constancy and courage.
but the truth which was consonant to the Scriptures, in which she trusted to
persevere unto the end: And for the kind of her punishment she feared not the
fire, but would rather follow the example of her dear sister, and so being put
into the fire she quietly slept in the Lord. But this was mavelous, that
after their death, the bodies of them both remained white, A Miracle.
and unhurt by the fire, whereupon some Christians privily in the night buried
them.

Anno Christi, 1545. There was in Mechlin one Andrew Thiessen, who had three
sons and a daughter, Andrew Thiessen.
whom he carefully brought up in the knowledge of the truth; after which he
went into England, and there died; Two of his sons went into Germany to study
there, and after a time returned home again, instructing their mother, brother,
and sister in the right knowledge of Christ, which being taken notice of, they
were all carried before the Magistrate, and exhorted to return to the Church
of Rome again; The younger brother and sister, being not so thoroughly grounded
in the truth by reason of their years, yielded something and so were sent home
again: the mother, who remained constant, Constancy.
was adjudged to perpetual imprisonment: the two elder brethren defended the
truth stoutly against the Friars; Disputation not prevailing, Popish cruelty
they proceeded to torments, endeavoring to know of them who was their Master,
and what fellows they had? they answered that their Master was Christ, who bare
his Cross before them; and for fellows they had innumerable, dispersed in all
places. At last they were condemned to the fire; and at the place of execution,
they began to exhort the people, whereupon bals were put into their mouths;
which through vehemence in desiring to speak, they thrust out again, entreating
them for the Lords sake that they might have leave to speak; and so singing
with a loud voice, they were fastened to the stake, where they prayed for their
Persecutors, exhorted one another, Joy and comfort at death.
and endured the fire patiently: One of them feeling the violence of the flame,
said, O what a small pain is this compared with the glory to come! and so,
committing their spirits into the hands of God, they finished their race.

Anno 1545. There was a great persecution in Dornick; and amongst others there
was one Adrian Tailor and his Wife apprehended, Adrian Tailor and his wife.
and upon their examination, the man being somewhat timorous, relented
something, and so was beheaded: but the woman, being more constant was put into
an iron grate and so buried alive.

There was also one Master Peter Bruly about the same time, sometimes a
Preacher in Strasburg, Master Peter Bruly.
but now at the request of the faithful in Dornick, a diligent Preacher there;
He used to preach in houses, the door standing open; the Magistrate hearing of
it, laid wait for him, shutting up the City gates, and searching three days for
him; but the brethren in the night time let him down in a basket over the wall*
and when he was down, one of them leaning over the wall to bid him farewell,
unawares threw down a loose stone, which falling upon his leg, brake it in
pieces; He complaining of his hurt, the watchmen heard him and apprehended him.
A special Providence.
Then did he give thanks to Almighty God, who by that providence staid him
there to bear witness to his truth: whilst he was in prison, he ceased not to
instruct and confirm all them that came to him in the Word of grace: after four
months imprisonment he was condemned to be burnt, and his ashes to be cast
into the river; Popish malice and cruel^y.
The Friars took care that he should have but a small fire, that his pain might
be the more increased, yet he constantly and cheerfully suffered Martyrdom.

God made the Ministry of this good man very powerful to many; amongst others
there was one Peter Mioce, Peter Mioce.
who had lived long in all manner of wickedness and licenciousness; but being,
through Gods grace, converted, His conversion
he excelled all the rest of the brethren in zeal and holiness; at last he
was apprehended, and being asked whether he was one of Peter Brulies disciples:
he said that he was, and that he had received much benefit by his Doctrine:
withal professing that his doctrine was consonant to the holy Scriptures;
whereupon he was let down into a deep dungeon full of Toads and other vermin:
Put into a dungeon amongst Toads.
Afterward he was brought forth before the Senate, who had provided some
Friars to convert him: To whom he said, When I lived an ungodly life in all
manner of vice and wickedness, you never said word to me; Note.
but now for savouring and favoring the Word of God, you seek my blood. Then
did they examine him about sundry Articles of Religion, to which whilst he was
making a full answer, they cut him off, bidding him answer in two words, Yea,
or No; Whereupon he said, Zeal.
If you will not give me leave to answer fully to things of such importance,
send me again to my dungeon amongst the Toads and Frogs, who will not interrupt
me whilst I talk with my Lord my God: Shortly after he was condemned to be
burned: and having a bag of powder hung about his neck, when the fire came to
it, it gave a crack: whereupon the Friars told the People, Popish lies.
that the Devil came out of him and carried away his soul to hell.

A godly Mininister martyrred.
A tyrannous Prince in Germany apprehended a godly Minister, and for his
constancy in the truth, put out both his eyes, and kept him a long time in
prison, afflicting him with diverse kinds of torments; Then did he cause him to
be degraded, shaving the skin off his head, and rubbing it with salt till the
blood ran down his shoulders, and paring off the ends of his fingers; so that
four days after he patiently yielded up the Ghost.

Not long after there was a godly Minister in Antwerp, called Christopher
Fabri, Christopher Fabri. A Traitor.
that was betrayed by a woman, who pretended a great zeal to Religion, and was
cast into prison, where he lay for a long time, and endured much misery: at
last he was brought forth and condemned to be burnt alive. And when the
Margrave brought him forth to execution, the people having first sung Psalms,
fell to casting of stones against the Executioner, so as the poor Prisoner
being bound, and fire set to him, the Margrave durst stay no longer but ran
away, and so did the executioner; but before he fled, by the command of the
Margrave, The people drive away the Executioner.
he took a hammer and beat out Fabrie's brains, and stabbed him into the back
with a dagger, so that the people running to save him from the fire found him
dead: after which by the command of the Margrave, His Martyrdom.
he had a great stone tied about his neck, and was thrown into the river.

Anno 1549. One Nicholas and Barbara his wife, and one Austin and Marrian his
wife, Germans by birth, went to Geneva, where they lived for a space; Two men
and their wives.
then returning through Germany they intended to go into England, but having
passed through Dornick, they were discovered to the Lieutenant thereof, who
speedily pursuing them, overtook them; yet at that time God delivered Austin
out of their hands: but Nicholas and the two women were apprehended and carried
back by the soldiers; Coming to an Inn by the way, at table Nicholas gave
thanks: whereat the wicked Captain swearing grievously, said, Let us see,
Blasphemy.
thou lewd Heretic, if thy God can deliver thee out of my hand; Nicholas
replied, Has Christ ever offended you that by your blasphemous swearing you
thus tear him in pieces? Pray you if you have any thing against Christ, rather
wreak your anger upon this poor body of mine, and let the Lord alone; Then did
he bind them hands and feet, Zeal.
and carried them to Burges, and cast them into the dungeon.

Diverse Friars coming to them, Nicholas in disputing with them so confounded
them, Vincit veritas.
that they went away ashamed, saying, that he had a devil, crying, To the fire
with the Lutherane. Afterward the Magistrate sought to pump out of Nicholas
what acquaintance he had in that City: but not prevailing with him, he went to
his wife, and by flattering speeches and fair promises, Popish subtilty.
he wrought so upon her weakness, that he gat out all that she knew, whereupon
ensued a great persecution.

Shortly after Nicholas was condemned to be burned, at the hearing of which
sentence, Courage.
he blessed the Lord who had counted him worthy to be a witness in the cause
of his dear and wel-beloved Son Jesus Christ; At the place of execution hew a
commanded not to speak to the People, for if he did, he should have a wooden
ball thrust into his mouth; yet as he was binding to the stake, forgetting the
command, he cried out, O Charles, Charles, Meaning the Emperor.
how long shall thy heart be hardened? With that one of the Soldiers gave him a
great blow: Then he said, Ah miserable People, who are not worthy that the Word
should be preached to you; The Friars crying out that he had a Devil, he
answered them in the words of David, Depart from me all ye wicked, for the Lord
has heard the voice of my weeping; N^te.
and so commending his spirit into the hands of God, he ended his life in the
midst of the flames.

Marrian was condemned to be buried quick; and when some earth was thrown upon
her, the hangman stamped upon her with his feet till she died. Afterward
Austin that had before escaped, was apprehended, and being examined, Austins
courage.
though by nature he was a very timorous and weak man, yet did he stand to the
defense of the truth valiantly, and answered his adversaries very boldly. Being
condemned to be burnt, as he was going to execution, a Gentleman drank to him
in a cup of wine, exhorting him to pity himself, at least not to destroy his
soul: Austin thanked him, saying, Tentation.
What care I have of my soul you may see by this, in that I had rather give my
body to be burned, Zeal.
then to sin against my conscience. Being tied to the stake and fire set to
him, he heartily prayed to the Lord, and so patiently departed.

Anno 1551. The Emperor Chales the fifth, having obtruded the Interim upon
Germany, many godly Ministers were persecuted and driven from their places for
opposing the same, as may be seen in my first part of Lives. The city of
Magdenburg also for refusing it, had an army sent against it, which besieged it
for a whole year together, Magdenburg besieged;
whereby many of the godly Citizens lost their lives, and others endured great
miseries. But at last, Gods providence so ordering of it, war arose betwixt
the Emperor and the King of France, whereupon peace was granted unto
Magdenburg upon good terms, And delivered.
and the inhabitants enjoyed their former Religion quietly.

Anno 1555. There was one Hostius born at Gaunt, Hostius.
who for some time was a member of the French Church here in London in King
Edwards days: but in the beginning of Queen Mary's reign, he went with his
family to Norden in Frizeland: and afterward having some business to Gaunt,
he went thither, where he instructed many of his friends in the truth; and
hearing that a Friar used to preach good doctrine, he went to hear him; but the
Friar that day defended transubstantiation, which so grieved him, Zeal.
that he could scarce refrain from speaking till the Sermon was ended. When the
Friar was come down from the Pulpit, he charged him for preaching false
doctrine, persuading the people by the Scripture, that the bread was but the
Sacrament of the Lords body; but the people making a tumult, carried him out of
the Church in a crowd; and he had not gone far before he was apprehended by an
Officer, and carried to prison; Then came diverse Friars to reason with him; and
he stood to the trial of the Scriptures only, which they refused. During his
imprisonment he wrote a consolatory letter to his wife, His letter to his wife.
exhorting her to bring up his children in the fear of God. Being condemned, he
was commanded not to speak to the people; being bound to the stake, His
Martyrdom.
he prayed for his enemies, and was first strangled, and then burnt.

The same year there was at Dornick one Bertrand, who to enjoy the freedom of
his conscience went to Wesell; Bertrand.
but being desirous to draw his wife and children thither, he went thrice to
Dornick to persuade her to go with him; yet could he by no means prevail with
her; Then did he set his house in order, desiring her to pray that God would
establish him in the work that he went about; and on Christmas day he went to
the great Church at Dornick; and the Priest being at Mass, when he was about
to elevate the Host, An heroical act.
Bertrand took the cake out of his hand and trampled it under his feet, saying,
that he did it to show the glory of that god that they worshipped, or rather
what little power he had; laboring to persuade them that the cake was not
their Savior; At first the people stood amazed, but presently they raised such
a tumult that Bertrand hardly escaped with life.

The Governor hearing of it, was exceedingly enraged, and sent for Bertrand
into the Castle, asking him whether he was sorry for his fact, and whether he
would do it if it were to do again? Bertrand answered, That he would, and if he
had a hundred lives to lose, he would lose them all in that quarrel; Courage.
Then was he thrice put to the rack and tormented cruelly to draw from him who
were his setters on; Cruelty.
yet could they get nothing from him: Then was he condemned, and drawn from the
Castle to the Marketplace with a Ball of iron in his mouth: There he was set
upon a stage, and had his right hand wherewith he did the fact, Barbarous
cruelty.
crushed between two hot irons with sharp edges, till the form of his hand was
quite changed; Then did they bring other red hot irons for his right foot,
which they used as they had done his hand, which he with mavelous patience
and constancy underwent, putting out his foot of his own accord to them; Then
taking the ball of Iron out of his mouth, Admirable patience.
they cut out his tongue: notwithstanding which, he continually called and
cried unto God, which caused them to thrust in the ball of iron again; Then was
he let down in an iron chain upon the fire and pulled up again, A special
Providence.
and so they continued pulling up and letting him down till he was burnt to
ashes, which ashes they threw into the river.

From Locrane in Helvetia the Ministers were banished, but were entertained by
the Tigurines.

Zurich.
Two other good men born in Dornick, went into diverse reform^d Churches, where
they increased much in knowledge and godliness, and at last resolved to return
to Dornick, to do what good they could in their own Country; and it so fell out
that on a day when many good people were gone to a wood to hear the Word of God
preached to them by a Minister of Jesus Christ, their Adversaries having
intelligence of it, followed them thither, and took about thirty of them,
amongst whom were these two men, who fell to singing of Psalms, Thirty taken at
a Sermon.
supposing that they should be presently burned; but afterward they were
condemned to be beheaded; and so they comfortably ended their lives.

Also diverse godly men and women suffered Martyrdom at Valence, amongst whom
was James Faber, an old man, who, James Faber his excellent answer.
when they argued with him about his religion, said, Though I cannot satisfy
you by reasoning, yet I can constantly abide and suffer for the truth of the
Gospel.

Also one Godfride, being condemned at Dornick for an Heretic; O^ ^urnay
Godfride.
Nay said he, Not an Heretic, but an unprofitable servant of Jesus Christ.
When the Hangman would have strangled him to ease his pain in burning, he
refused, saying, Courage.
that he would abide the sentence of death which was passed upon him.

Besides these, there were both in the upper and lower Germany many others
secretly made away; some drowned: some bured quick; A Minister poisoned.
some murdered in prison, etc. A godly Minister was also poisoned by a Priest
at Erford for preaching the truth of Christ; Besides many others.

In the city of Lile the Gospel was secretly preached for three years together,
sometimes in houses, then in woods, fields, in Lile.
and Caves of the earth, not without hazard of their dearest lives if they had
been discovered; yet did not dangers cool the zeal of Gods people; but what was
preached, was accordingly practiced amongst them; works of mercy and charity
were their exercise, not only toward those of the household of faith, but
toward those which were without also; Christian charity.
so as many by means hereof were drawn and brought to the knowledge of Christ.

This so enraged Satan and his instruments, that Anno 1556, the time being come
wherein God had given them power to try and exercise the faith of his people,
they neglected not to show their cruelty upon them: and for that end one night
about ten of the clock, the Provost of the City with his armed Sergeants made
search to see if they could find any met together; but, by Gods Providence,
there was no meeting of Gods People at that time; then went they to the house
of one Robert Oguire, Robert Oguire and his (...) carried to prison.
which was a little Church; for all in it, both small and great, were
familiarly instructed in the knowledge and fear of God.

Being violently entered into the house, seeking up and down for their prey,
they found certain books which they took away with them: but Baudizon the son
of Robert, whom they principally sought after, was not then at home, Baudizon.
being gone abroad to confer of the word with some of the brethren. Before the
Provost was departed, Baudizon came home, and knocked at the door. Martin his
younger brother, who watched for his coming, bade him presently to be gone: but
he thinking that he had mistaken him for some other, continued knocking,
saying, It is, I open the door. Then came the Sergeants and opened the door,
and laying hold on him, said, Ah Sir, you are well met, and with that the
Provost arrested him in the Emperors name, withal causing the Father, Mother,
and two sons to be bound, and so carried them away toward the prison; As they
went through the streets, Baudizon said aloud: Oh Lord, assist us by thy grace,
not only to be prisoners for thy names sake, but to confess thy holy truth in
all purity before men, so far as to seal the same with our blood, for the
edification of thy poor Church; they were all cast into several prisons, yet
remained cheerful, praising God for accounting them worthy to suffer for his
truth; Joy in tribulation.
and after a few days they were all brought forth before the Magistrates, who
speaking to Robert Oguire said; They are examined.
We hear that you never come to Mass; That you dissuade others from it; That
you keep Conventicles in your house, where erroneous doctrine is preached, etc.
Robert answered, I indeed refuse to go to Mass, because the death and precious
blood of Christ is utterly abolished there, and trodden under foot, etc. And I
cannot deny but there have met together in my house honest people, fearing God;
Not with intention to harm any, I assure you, but for the advancement of Gods
glory, and the good of many, etc. Then one demanded what they did when they met
together; To which Baudizon ansvvered, When we meet together in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ to hear the Word of God, An holy practice.
we first, falling on our knees before God, in the humility of our spirits, do
make confession of our sins before his Divine Majesty: then we pray that the
Word of God may be rightly divided, and purely preached; then we pray for our
Sovereign Lord the Emperor, that the Commonwealth may be peaceably governed to
the glory of God; yea we forget not you whom we acknowledge our Superiors,
entreating our good God that you may maintain this City in tranquillity, etc.
Thus you hear what we do in our Assemblies: and if you will not be offended to
hear the sum of our prayers, I am ready to recite the same unto you. One of
the Magistrates wished him to go on, whereupon kneeling down, Fervent prayer
he prayed before them all with such fervency of affection, and ardency of
zeal, that it forced the Magistrates to break forth into tears; Baudizon rising
up, said, Your Masterships may hereby take a scantling how we are employed in
our meetings.

Being further examined, every one of them made an open Confession of his
faith, and so were returned to prison again; And not long after they were
tortured upon the Rack to make them confess who they were that met at their
house: They are tortured.
but they would discover none but such as they knew were at that time out of
their reach.

Four or five days after, the men were again convented before the Magistrates,
who asked them if they would submit themselves to the will of the Magistrates:
Robert and Baudizon said they would; but Martin the younger son said, he
would not submit thereto, but would accompany his Mother, Robert and Baudizon
condemned.
and so he was sent back to prison; and the Father with his eldest son were
presently adjudged to be burnt alive. Sentence being pronounced, one of the
Judges said, This day shall you go to dwell with all the Devils in hell fire;
Then were they returned to prison, praising God, and by their patience and
constancy, conquerred the rage and fury of their enemies; In prison there came
some Friars to them, Popish malice
telling them that the hour was come wherein they must finish their days: They
answered; Blessed be the Lord our God, who now delivering our bodies out of
this vile prison, will receive our souls into his glorious and heavenly
Kingdom. Then said one of the Friars, Father Robert, thou art an old man, I
entreat thee in this thy last hour think of saving thy soul; and if thou will
give ear to me, I Will warrant thee thou shall do well; Robert answered, Poor man,
how dare thou assume that to thy self which belongs to God alone, and so rob
him of his honor? etc. Another wishing him to pity his soul, he said, Do
thou not see what pity I have on it, when for the name of Christ I am willing
to give my body to the fire, hoping to day to be with him in Paradise, etc.
Note.
Then said a Friar, Out Dog, thou art not worthy the name of a Christian: thou
and thy son are resolved to damn your souls with all the Devils in hell.

Then would they have severed the Father from his son, which Baudizon
perceiving, said, Pray you let my Father alone, he is an old man, hinder him
not from receiving the Crown of Martyrdom. Another Friar said, Away Varlet,
thou art the cause of thy Fathers perdition. Whilst Baudizon was stripping and
fitting himself to be sacrificed, some of the Friars had fastened a Crucifix in
the old man's hands, persuading him that it would please the People, and that
for all that, he might lift up his heart to God, etc. But so soon as Baudizon
saw it, he said, Alas Father, what do you now? will you play the Idolater at
your last hour? and so pulling the Idol out of his hand, Zeal.
he threw it away.

At the place of execution they were set upon a Scaffold, and Baudizon desired
leave to make a Confession of his faith: answer was made, that he might confess
himself to a Friar if he would, which he refusing, was readily haled to the
stake, where he began to sing the 16. Psalm; then said a Friar, Do you not hear
what wicked errors these Heretics sing, to beguile the people withal?
Baudizon hearing him, replied: Blasphemy.
Thou simple Idiot, call thou the Psalms of David errors? but no marvel,
for thus are ye wont to blaspheme against the Spirit of God. Then seeing them
about to chain his Father to the stake, he said to him, Be of good courage
Father, the worst will be past by and by. Then did he often breath forth: Oh
God, Father everlasting, accept the sacrifice of our bodies for thy
well-beloved Son Jesus Christ his sake. A Friar cried, Faith and courage.
Out Heretic thou lie; God is none of thy Father; the Devil is thy Father.
Baudizon fixing his eyes upon heaven, said to his Father, Behold, I see the
heavens open, and millions of Angels ready to receive us, and rejoicing to see
us thus bearing witness to the truth in the view of the world. Father, let us
rejoice and be glad, for the joys of heaven are opened to us. Then said a
Friar, I see Hell open, and millions of Devils are ready to carry you thither.
A poor man in the crowd cried out, Be of good comfort Baudizon, stand to it,
thou fightest in a good quarrel, I am on thy side; which words so soon as he
had spoken, he departed, and so hastened himself from danger.

The fire being kindled, Baudizon often said to his Father, Yet a very little
while and we shall enter into the heavenly mansions; the fire increasing, the
last words which they spoke, were, Jesus Christ thou Son of God, into thy
hands we commend our spirits, and so they sweetly slept in the Lord. Their
Martyrdom.


After the death of these worthy champions of Christ, many of the Popish rabble
were sent, Martin and his Mother.
if possible, to seduce the Mother and son remaining in prison; and coming to
them, the first subtilty they used was to separate them asunder; Popish
subtilty.
then they set upon the woman as the weaker vessel, and so wrought upon her
that she began to waver and let go her first faith; this the adversaries much
rejoiced in; and the poor flock of Christ in that place hearing of it, Humane
frailty.
were as much afflicted with the news; but God left them not in this mournful
condition long: For a Monk one day going to her, persuaded her to draw her
son Martin to the same recantation with her self, which she promised to do;
but when they came together, Martin perceiving the grievous Apostasy of his
Mother, bewailed it with many tears, saying to her, Oh Mother, what have you
done? have you denied him that redeemed you? Alas what injury has he done you
that you should requite him with so great an injury and dishonor? Now am I
plunged into that woe which I most feared; Ah good God that I should live to
see this, which pierces me to the very heart? His mother hearing his pitiful
complaints, and seeing him drowned in tears for her sake, began again to renew
her strength in the Lord, and with tears cried out, Oh Father of mercies, be
merciful to me miserable sinner, Recovery.
and cover my transgression under the righteousness of thy blessed Son: Lord
enable me with strength from above to stand to my first confession, and make me
to abide steadfast therein even to my last breath. Presently in came the
seducers, hoping to find her in the same mind that they left her; but she no
sooner saw them, but cried, Avoid Satan, get thee behind me, for henceforth
thou have nether part nor portion in me; I will by the help of God stand to my
first Confession, and if I may not sign it with ink, I will seal it with my
blood: and so after this time, through Gods gracious assistance, she grew
stronger and stronger; Then were they both condemned to be burnt alive, and
their ashes to be sprinkled in the air. When the sentence was passed, as they
returned to prison, they said; Now blessed be God who causes us thus to
triumph over our enemies. This is the wished hour, our gladsome day is come;
Joy in tribulation.
let us not therefore forget to be thankful for that honor that God does us
in thus conforming us to the image of his Son. Let us remember those that
have trodden this path before us; for this is the highway to the Kingdom of
heaven, etc. Hereupon some of the Friars, being ready to burst for anger, said
unto Martin that was most valiant, We see now Heretic that thou art wholly
possessed body and soul with a Devil, as were thy father and brother, who are now
in hell. Martin answered, As for your railings and cursings, God will this day
turn them into blessings in the sight of himself and all his holy Angels. Faith
and patience.


When they came into prison, there came to them two persons of great quality,
of whom one of them said to Martin, Young man, Tentation.
I have compassion on thee; if thou will be ruled by me, and return to the
Church of Rome, thou shall not only be freed from this shameful death, but I
will also give thee an hundred pounds; Martin presently replied, Sir, you
present before me many temporal commodities: But alas! Resisted.
do you think me so simple, as to forsake an eternal Kingdom for the enjoyment
of a short temporal life? No Sir, its now too late to speak to me of worldly
commodities; I will hearken to no other speech but of those spiritual
commodities which I shall enjoy this day in Gods Kingdom, etc. Soon after
Martin and his mother were carried to the place of their Martyrdom, and being
bound to the stake, the woman said: We are Christians, and that which we now
suffer, is not for murder nor theft, but because we will believe no more than
the Word of God teaches us.

The fire being kindled, the heat of it did nothing abate the fervency of their
seal, but they continued crying, Their Martyrdom.
Lord Jesus into thy hands we commend our spirits, and so they blessedly slept
in the Lord.

A Friar at Gaunt called Charles Coninck, being through Gods mercy converted to
the truth, left his Friars weed, Charles Coninck
and joined himself to the brethren; for which he was apprehended; and
remaining constant, was condemned: then came a special friend persuading him to
recant, and he would procure him a Cannonship: To whom Charles answered, Sir,
Tentation resisted.
I thank you for your good will and kind offer, but I cannot accept them
without offending God; and that rest is no true rest and quietness, which is
obtained against the peace of a good conscience: Shortly after his death, one
of his adversaries which had the greatest hand in procuring of it; ^ods
judgment on a Persecutor.
fell into grievous terror and horror of conscience, whereof within a few
days he died.

The Persecution of the Duke de Alva in the Netherlands.
WHen the light of the Gospel was much spread abroad in the Netherlands: King
Philip of Spain sent the Duke de Alva with a great Army to root out the
Professors of it, who exercised unparalleled cruelty against all sorts of
persons, both of the Nobility and Commons, Barbarous cruelty.
permitting his soldiers to ravish honest Matrons and Virgins, many times
causing their husbands and Parents to stand by and behold it.

This Duke on a time boasted at his own table that he had been diligent to root
out heresy: for that beside those which he had slain in war, in the space of
six years he had put into the hands of the common hangman above eighteen
thousand persons.

His son also Don Frederick being sent by him to Zutphen, was rereceived by
the Bourgers without any opposition, yet was he no sooner entered, Don
Fredericks cruelty to Zutphen.
but he fell to murder, hang and drown a number of the inhabitants, with
infinite cruelties showed upon wives and virgins; yea, not sparing the very
infants. From thence marching to Naerden in Holland, the inhabitants made an
agreement with him, At Naerden.
and he entered the town peaceably; but never did Turks or Scythians, or the
most barbarous and inhumane Nations in the world, commit more abominable
cruelties than Don Frederick did in this town; for when the Bourgers had given
the best entertainment that they could to him and his soldiers, he caused it
to be proclaimed, that they should all assemble themselves together in the
Chapel of the Hospital, where they should be made acquainted with such Laws,
according to which they should hereafter govern themselves; but when these poor
people were thus assembled, he commanded his soldiers to murder them all,
Treachery.
without sparing any one; the men were massacred, the women were first
ravished, and then murdered most cruelly, the children and infants had their
throats cut, and in some houses they tied the inhabitants to posts, and then
set fire on the houses, and burnt them alive; so that in the whole town,
neither man, wife, maid, nor child, old nor young were spared; and then the
town was wholly razed to the ground without pity or mercy.

After this Don Frederick besieged Harlem, which held out against him for a
long time, but at last, their Provision being spent, they made bread of Linseed
of Turnups, The siege of Harlem.
and lived upon the flesh of horses, dogs, cats, A Famine.
and such like: and this also in the end failing them, they were enforced to
surrender the town upon composition, by which they were to pay two hundred and
forty thousand florins to redeem themselves and town from spoil. The town
surrendered.


Don Frederick having thus got the town into his hands, commanded that at the
tolling of the great bell, all the Bourgers and Soldiers should bring their
arms into the state-house, that the townsmen should go into the Cloister of
Zyel, Popish perfidiousnesse.
the women into the Cathedral Church, and the soldiers into another Church,
this done, all the Ensigne-bearers were singled out and imprisoned, and whilst
the poor Bourgers were guarded in the Church, the perfidious Spaniards
plundered their houses; The next day this bloody Don Frederick caused three
hundred Walloons to be hanged and headed: the next day Captain Riperda and his
Lieutenant were beheaded, A Minister hanged.
and a godly Minister called Stembach, was hanged, and two hundred forty seven
soldiers were drowned in the sea of Harlem; the next day a great number were
executed, and the day following three hundred more Soldiers and Bourgers lost
their heads, Another beheaded.
and with them a godly Minister called Simon Simonson: presently after three of
the principal men lost their heads, and shortly after all the English and Scots
were beheaded, and to fill up this sea of blood, Barbarous cruelties.
all the wounded and sick were beheaded before the Hospital door.

In the mean time a Party of soldiers that lay without in a sconce, were all
starved to death.

Not long before, the strong town of Valenciennes in Henault, having set up the
free exercise of the reformed Religion amongst them, Valenciennes besieged.
were presently besieged by an army under the Signior of Noircarmes; the siege
lasted about three months, and the Citizens having no hope of relief, at last
treated and surrendered the City upon good conditions; but Noircarmes being
entered, Popish perfidiousnesse and cruelty.
he kept the City gates shut for diverse days, and most perfidiously and
barbarously hanged up all the French soldiers, with all the Ministers and
Protestant Merchants, and confiscated their goods. But besides these generals,
let us also view some particulars.

Anno 1560. There was in Flanders one John Herwin, John Herwin.
a soldier of a very dissolute life: but God having a purpose to show him
mercy, put it into his heart to go into England, and accordingly he came to
London in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, and by Gods good Providence
was entertained in a Brewers family, A special Providence.
where both master and servants feared God: His Master caused him often to go
to the Dutch Church, where, by the Ministry of the Word he first began to taste,
His conversion
and afterward more and more to increase in the saving knowledge of Christ.
After a while he returned back into Flanders, and at Furne he was presently
laid wait for by the Popish Bailiffe; This occasioned his removal to Honscot;
and yet there also the Bailiffe being informed of him, went in the night with
his Sergeants, and apprehended him; By the way they met some drunkards in the
streets; whereupon the Bailiffe said, We have, as they say, many Gospellers in
this town, but it little appears by these disorders. Herwin hearing him, said,
Is drunkenness a sin Master Bailiffe? The Bailiffe answered, what of that?
Herwin replied, Why then do you not commit these men to prison, Herwin
imprisoned.
seeing it is your office to punish vice, and to protect them that fear God? To
this the Bailiffe answered not.

In the prison Herwin behaved himself so virtuously, that every one admired
him. Being somewhat long before he was called before the Magistrate, he was
much troubled at it, his heart being inflamed with an holy zeal to confess
Jesus Christ before his Judges. Zeal.
Yet many of the brethren were very fearful of him, considering what his former
life had been, and what a novice he as yet was in the Profession of the Gospel.

At last he had his hearts desire, being brought before the Sheriff; there a
Priest was provided to dispute with him, to whose questions Herwin answered
with such soundness of judgment and modesty, that it easily appeared that he
had profited well in Christ's school. Being asked of Christ's real presence in
the Sacrament, he answered, That the highest dwells not in Temples made with
hands, etc. Whereupon he admonished his Judges to examine the doctrine of the
Church of Rome by the true touchstone of Gods Word, whereby they might easily
see how contrary it is to the Scriptures, etc. And having made a free
Profession of his faith, he craved Justice one way or other; Courage.
but they still urged him to recant, to which he answered, Constancy.
My faith is not built upon man's opinion, but the Lord has taught me to eschew
evil, and to do good* Then was he returned to prison again.

During his imprisonment he was dangerously assaulted by some subtle and
cunning Friars, who alleged the sayings of diverse of the Fathers, to prove
their transubstantiation; but he, through Gods mercy, holding close to the Word
of Christ, overcame them. In prison he used to recreate himself by singing of
Psalms, Vincit veritas.
and the people used to flock together to the prison door to hear him; This so
angered the Popish Clergy, that they sought to hinder him from singing, and for
this end they caused two desperate Malefactors to be put into the same room
with him; Popish malice* and subtilty.
but within a few days, these Villains brake prison and escaped, leaving
opportunity to Herwin to escape also; but he, fearing that his flight might be
prejudicial to other godly persons in the City, upon whom it would be charged,
Flight refused.
resolved rather to remain there, than to fly: Presently after news was
brought him that sentence of death was passed upon him, whereupon he thanked
God for advancing him to so high an honor as to be accounted worthy to suffer
for his name: Testifying the inward joy which he felt in his soul by a letter
that he wrote to the brethren, Thanks for sufferings.
wherein he exhorted them to constancy and perseverance in the doctrine of the
truth which they had received from God: Within a few days after he was carried
forth to hear his sentence, at which time the Magistrate by earnest entreaties
and large promises sought to bring him to a recantation, Tentation resisted.
and to worship their breaden God, promising that thereupon he should be
presently released: but Herwin refusing their offer of life upon those terms,
was bound and carried into a Chapel where they celebrated the Mass; at which
time, to show his detestation of their idolatry, he turned his back, winked
with his eyes, and stopped his ears. At the elevation of the Host one asked
him if Jesus Christ was not now between the Priests hands? Zeal.
To which he answered, No, he is in heaven at the right hand of his Father:
Then was the sentence of death read against him.

As he was going to execution, he said to the people, See here how this wicked
world rewards the poor servants of Jesus Christ: whilst I was a drunkard, a
player at Cards and Dice, living in all dissoluteness and ungodly behavior,
Whence persecution arises.
I was never in danger of these bonds; yea, I was then counted a good fellow,
and at that time, Who but I? But no sooner began I, through Gods grace, to seek
after a godly life, but presently the world made war upon me, and became mine
enemy, etc. yet this discourageth me not; for the servant is not better than
his Lord; seeing they persecuted him, no question but they will persecute us.
At the place of execution, one gave him his hand, and comforted him: then began
he to sing the 30. Psalm, whereupon a Friar interrupted him, saying, Oh John
turn, there is yet time and space; the Martyr disregarding his words, turned
his back upon him; and some of the company said to the Friar, Turn thou, thou
hypocrite; and so Herwin quietly finished his Psalm; many joining with him in
singing of it; then said the Friar, Be not offended good people to hear this
Heretic to sing of God; The people answered, Hold thy peace thou Balaamite,
here is no body offended. There were present at least four hundred that
encouraged the Martyr to continue to the end, as he had well begun; To whom he
answered Brethren, I fight under the Standard, and in the quarrel of my great
Lord and Captain Jesus Christ. Then he prayed, His Martyrdom.
and so went into his Cabin made with fagots, saying to the people, I am now
going to be sacrificed; Follow you me when God of his goodness shall call you
to it: and so he was first strangled, and then burnt to ashes.

Anno 1561. There was apprehended in Antwerp one John de Boscane, John de
Boscane*
who for his constancy in Religion was condemned to death: But the Magistrate
fearing an uproare if he should put him to death publicly, knowing that he was
a man free of speech, and beloved of the people, he resolved for this cause
secretly to drown him in the prison; and for this end a tub with water was
provided, and an Executioner sent to drown him; but the water was so shallow,
and the Martyr so tall, that he could not possibly be drowned therein; His
cruel Martyrdom.
whereupon the Executioner gave him many wounds and stabs with a dagger, and so
this holy Martyr ended his life.

About the same time another servant of Jesus Christ, having made a bold
Profession of his faith, was in the same City sentenced to death; John de
Buisons beheaded in prison.
and because they du^st not execute him publicly, they privately sent and
beheaded him in prison; his name was John de Buisons.

The godly in this City of Antwerp, being desirous to take all opportunities to
meet together in the fear of God, on a day when the Popish party was met to
behold great triumphs, The Church of Antwerp persecu^ed.
they withdrew themselves out of the City, and went into a Wood, where their
Minister preached the Word of God to them; The Drosart of Marksem being
advertised hereof, took his officers and went thitherward* by the way he met
with some poor boys that were cowherds; to whom he promised new clothes if if
they would bring him to the place in the Wood where their assembly was; which
they undertaking, he sent some of his officers along with them into the Wood,
who coming to the place like wolves, the sheep of Christ began to fly: the
Minister seeing their fear, admonished them not to stir; The Persecutors were
not above five or six, and the persecuted four or five hundred, so that they
might easily have resisted them, but they would not. The officers chiefly aimed
to apprehend the Minister, and having caught one of the Assembly, they thought
him to be the man, crying one to another, Hold the Priest fast, striking him
with their Pistols and staves, and so carried him to the Drosart; they caught
also two or three more, which afterward made an escape: the man only that
remained with the Drosart whose name was Bartholomew, was often set upon to be
turned aside from his holy Profession; Why, say they, Bartholomews constancy.
cannot such a young man as thou art content thy self with our Religion and
glorious Church, adorned with gold, silver, precious stones, in which there is
such melodious music, The Church of Rome a glorious strumpet.
both of voices and instruments, but thou must needs join thy self to that
Church that is hated, despised, and exposed to all manner of contempt?
Bartholomew overcame all these tentations by the power of the Almighty, saying,
That which is greatly esteemed amongst men, is altogether abominable in the
sight of God; Then was he condemned and beheaded; by which death he glorified
God.

Anno 1568. There were apprehended in Antwerp, one Scoblant, John de Hues,
Scoblant, John Hues, Joris Coomans.
and Joris Coomans, who being cast into prison were very oyful, confessing that
nothing befell them but by Gods divine Providence, as they acknowledge in a
letter which they wrote to the brethren, wherein they thus write, Seeing it is
the will of God that we should suffer for his name, and in the quarrel of his
Gospel, we certify you, dear brethren, Joy in tribulation.
that we are joyful; and however the flesh continually rebels against the
spirit, counselling ever and anon according to the advice of the old Serpent:
yet we are well assured that Christ, who has bruised, will still bruise the
Serpents head, and not leave us comfortless; we are indeed sometimes pricked
in the heel, yet we are not discouraged, but keep our faith close to the
promises of God, Faith*
etc. Be not therefore dismayed for our bands and imprisonment; for it is the
good Will of God toward us, and therefore we pray that he will give us grace
to persevere constantly unto the end.

Shortly after Scoblant was brought to his trial, where he made a good
confession of his faith, and so was condemned. Returning to prison, he
earnestly requested the Jailor that he would not suffer the Friars to come and
trouble him; for, said he, they can do me no good, seeing the Lord has already
sealed up the assurance of my salvation in my heart, by his holy Spirit. His
excellent speech.
I am now going to my Spouse, and putting off this earthly mantle, to enter
into his celestial glory, where I shall be freed from all superstitions. Would
to God that I might be the last that these tyrants should put to death, and
that their thirst might be so quenched with my blood, that the poor Church of
Christ might henceforth enjoy rest and quiet.

When he was to go forth to execution, he sung the fourtieth Psalm with his
fellow prisoners, Scoblants Martyrdom.
then said the Lords Prayer, and so kissing each other, they commended one
another unto God with many tears. Being tied to the stake, he was burned
alive, calling upon the name of the Lord.

John Hues died in prison, whereupon Joris wrote thus to his friends; Brethren,
John Hues died in prison.
I am now left alone, whereas we were three in number. John Hues is now dead in
the Lord; and yet I am not altogether alone, seeing the God of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob is with me; he is my exceeding great reward, and will not fail to
reward me so soon as I shall have laid down this earthly tabernacle. Pray unto
God that he will strengthen me to the end; for every hour I expect the
dissolution of this house of clay.

When he was brought forth before the Judges, and examined of his faith, he
answered freely, and proved what he said by the holy Scriptures; and being
asked whether he was resolved to die for the faith which he professed? he
answered, I will not only venture to give my body, but my soul also for the
confirmation of it; Courage. Joris his Martyrdom.
and so being condemned, he was shortly after burned, dying with much comfort.

The persecution growing hot in Flanders, one Giles Annik, and John his son
removed to Emden; Giles, and John Annik.
but by reason of their sudden departure they could not take their wives with
them; whereupon in the year 1568. they returned back to fetch their wives, who
were at Renay; yet in regard of the danger, they durst not go into the town
openly, but took up their lodging in the evening, at an honest man's house
called Lewis Meulin.

Now it so fell out that that very night the enemies had appointed to make a
secret search after such as professed the Gospel, A special Providence.
and so passing by this house, and seeing the light of a candle in it,
expecting their prey, they forced open the door, and took these two, together
with their Host prisoners, God having appointed them to bear witness to his
truth: After they had been in prison awhile, they were all three condemned for
Heretics; and presently after Giles, the father, was burned. John, the son,
being fetched to execution, Their Martyrdom.
when he saw the man that first apprehended him, he called him to him, saying,
I forgive thee my death, and so he, with Lewis Meulin, were both beheaded.
Lewis Meulin.


About the same time there was also a godly widow apprehended and cast into
prison, her crime was, A widow
for that about two years before she had suffered a Minister to preach in an
out-house on the backside of her dwelling. She was very charitable in relieving
the poor, and every way showed forth the fruits of a true saving faith: Charity.
After seven months imprisonment she was condemned to die, and a Priest coming
to her, to hear Confession, she spoke to him with such a divine grace, and with
a spirit so replenished with zeal, that he went from her with tears trickling
down his cheeks, saying, I came to comfort you, but I have more need to be
comforted of you: when she was carried forth to execution, Her Martyrdom.
she went with much boldness and joy of heart, and having her head cut off,
she sweetly slept in the Lord.

There was also one Christopher Gauderin, that at first was brought up under
the Abbat of Hename; but the Abbat dying, Christopher Gauderin.
he betook himself to the weaving of linen, and quickly grew expert in his
trade; But having been trained up in a bad school, when the Sabbath came, he
spent riotously what he had gotten all the week by his labor: Now, through
Gods mercy, it so fell out that a godly man working with him, would often tell
him of the danger of his present condition, exhorting him rather to distribute
his gettings to the poor, assuring him that if he spent his money so wastfully,
God would call him to an account for it: These with the like exhortations so
wrought upon him through the grace of God, that he began to change his course,
His Conversion.
and in stead of frequenting Taverns, he became a diligent hearer of Sermons,
and gave himself much to reading of the holy Scriptures; so that not long after
he was called by the Church to the office of a Deacon, which he discharged
carefully and faithfully.

Shortly after having occasion to go to a place called Audenard, to distribute
some alms to the poor there, he was apprehended; and the Bailiffe that had
formerly seen him in the Abbats house, asked him how he came to turn Heretic?
Nay, said he, I am no Heretic, but a right believing Christian, His
imprison^ent.
and what I learned of him I am now ashamed to remember.

In prison he had many disputes about his faith, which he so maintained and
defended by the Word of God, Vincit veritas.
that he silenced all his adversaries. Some told him that he would cast away
himsef in his youth, being but thirty years old, to whom he answered, That man's
life consisted but of two days, viz. The day of his birth, and the day of his
death, and therefore he must needs die once, And for my part, said he, I am now
willing by death to pass into eternal life. Man's life but two days.


When news was brought him in the evening that he must die the next day, he
retired himself, and poured out his soul in prayer unto God till ten a clock;
and after his rest, the like he did the next morning: Prayer.
Having ended his Prayer, he put on a clean shirt and washed himself; saying to
his fellow prisoners, Brethren, I am now going to be married, I hope ere noon
to drink of the wine of the Kingdom of heaven; When he came down he found
three other prisoners that were to suffer with him. These four exhorted and
encouraged one another to suffer patiently and constantly; Then came a Friar,
saying, that he came to convert them, His Zeal.
To whom Christopher said, Away from us thou seducer of souls, for we have
nothing to do with thee; The Hangman coming to put gagges into their mouths;
one of them said, What? shall we not have liberty at this our last hour to
praise God with our tongues? Christopher answered, Let not this discourage us,
the more wrong our enemies do to us, His faith.
the more assistance we shall find from God; and so ceased not to comfort them
till himself was gagged also; Their sentence was that they should be hanged for
hearing Sermons: and so with admirable constancy they yielded up their souls to
God; One of them being a woman was condemned to be beheaded, Martyrdom.
because she had sung Psalms, and exhorted her neighbors out of the Word of
God, at a woman's upsitting: Her body was grown very feeble, so that she was
caused to sit on a stool, Admirable constancy.
where she received three blows with a sword overthwart her teeth: yet did she
constantly sit still till she received the Crown of Martyrdom, Anno 1568.

About the same time there was in a town a mile distant from Gand, a Minister
whom it pleased the Lord to illuminate with the saving knowledge of his Gospel,
Giles de Meyer
whereupon he became a diligent and faithful Preacher of it, both in his life
and doctrine; yea, he went from house to house exhorting and comforting every
one as he had occasion out of the Word of God; and above all, laboring with
them to beware of the abominable superstitions of the Papacy. The Popish Clergy
of Gand having intelligence hereof, fearing lest by this means, their doctrine
and authority would come into contempt, caused him to be apprehended and cast
into a deep and dark hole, where he remained bearing his affliction patiently,
His imprisonment.
and calling upon God night and day, praising him for accounting him worthy to
suffer for his names sake. Whilst he lay there, many good people came to visit
him, receiving such instructions and consolation from him, that they could not
be drawn to leave him till necessity enforced, neither then could they depart
without abundance of tears.

The Priests and Friars sought by all means to draw him to a recantation, but
to no purpose, His constancy.
for he still kept himself close to the Word of God, which so vexed them, that
at last they procured his condemnation to be hanged. The Spanish soldiers
which carried him to execution, would needs have him burned, binding and
straining him exceedingly with cords, and in the way abused him shamefully with
mocks and scoffs, thrusting him forwards and striking him; the Captain also
gave him a blow on the face with his Gantlet, Popish malice and cruelty.
which much disfigured him; yea they used him worse then a dog, being the more
enraged against him, because of his patient and meek carriage; At last they
thrust him into a little Cabin piled with Fagots, and so burnt him, His
Martyrdom.
continually calling upon God till he resigned up his Spirit to him.

Anno 1568. There was a Goldsmith dwelling in Breda, who had long been a Deacon
of the Church in that place, his name was Peter Coulogue: in his house the
Church often met for the service of God; Peter Coulogue and Betkin his maid.
the Popish adversaries being much enraged hereby, cast him into prison, which
the faithful much grieved at, and endeavored to visit and comfort him: This
the enemies taking notice of removed him into the Castle; during his abode
there, though all others were excluded from him, yet his Maidservant brought
him his food daily, never ceasing to confirm and comfort him out of the Word of
God, as well as she was able, for which at length they imprisoned her also:
This she was right glad of, thinking her self happy to suffer for righteousness
sake.

Not long after Peter was put to the torment, which he endured patiently; then
did they fetch Betkin also to it, whereupon she said, My Masters, wherefore
will you put me to this torture, Their torments.
seeing I have no way offended you? if it be for my faiths sake, you need not
torment me, fos as I was never ashamed to make a confession thereof, no more
will I now be at this present before you, but will, if you please, freely show
you my mind therein; Yet for all this they would have her to the Rack,
whereupon she again said, If I must needs suffer this pain, Prayer.
I pray you give me leave to call upon my God first: This they consented to:
and whilst she was fervently pouring out her prayers unto God, one of the
Commissioners was surprised with such a fear and terror, that he fell into a
swoon, and could not be recovered again, by which means the poor maid escaped
Racking.

Shortly after, Gods judgment on a Persecutor.
these two innocent persons were condemned to be burned, and as they were led
to execution, there was much lamentation amongst the people. Peter and Betkin
prayed earnestly unto God to strengthen them, and perfect the good work that he
had begun in them, and to assist them till they had finished their course.

The courage and constancy of the maid did so work upon many of the people,
godly men and women, that not considering the danger, they brake through the
multitude, embracing the Prisoners, and praising God for their constancy,
saying to them, Fight manfully, for the Crown is prepared for you: At the place
of execution Betkin with a cheerful and amiable countenance spoke thus to the
people: Dear brethren and sisters, be always obedient to the Word of God, and
fear not them that can kill the body, but have no power over the soul: as for
me, I am now going to meet my glorious Spouse the Lord Jesus Christ; Then
falling upon their knees they prayed to the Lord with great devotion; And the
executioner fastening them to the stake, strangled Peter, Betkin encouraging
him till he yielded up the Ghost, Their Martyrdom.
and till the fire had taken hold of her self; and in the flames she was heard
to magnify the Lord, till she yielded up her spirit into his hands.

About this time multitudes of persons were murdered in Flanders by the bloody
Inquisition, whose dead bodies were cast out to be gazed upon in every place; A
great persecution.
and multitudes of believers, both men and women were cast into prisons, where
they languished till many of them died. In the City of Valence there were
executed fifty seven persons, most of them Burgesses, only because they clave
to the true faith of Jesus Christ.

The Martyrdom of William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange.
THe Estates of the United Provinces, having declared the King of Spain to be
fallen from the Government of of those Countries, they chose William of Nassaw,
Prince of Orange, to be their Captain General, The Prince proscribed.
whereupon he was proscribed by the King of Spain, and a great sum of money
promised to him that should slay him; Not long after a desperate villain called
Joanville was suborned to do the feat; for which end he was directed to charge
his Pistol with two bullets, Joanville suborned to kill him.
and to shoot him behind in the head; the day appointed for this execution was
March 18. 1582. upon which day the Prince was to be at a great feast at the
Duke of Anjous Court; but the press being great there, Joanville chose rather
to do it at the Prince of Oranges own house as he was at dinner; the Villain
being thus desperately resolved, a Jacobin Friar came to confess him,
fortifying him in his resolution with many sweet words, persuading him that he
should go invisible, for which end he gave him some characters in paper, and
little Frogs bones, Popish subtilty.
and other conjurations.

Being thus assured, he drunk a cup or two of Malmsey, and so accomxanied with
his Ghostly father, he went to the Princes Court; at the stair-foot the Friar
gave him his blessing, encouraged him, and so left him; The Prince of Orange
was set at dinner, with the Earls of Laval, Hohenlo, and many other Noblemen;
Joanville came into the dining room, attired like a Frenchman, so that he was
taken for a servant to some of those French Noblemen; He thrust forward twice
or thrice to come behind the Prince to shoot him in the head, as he was
directed, but was still repulsed by the Princes Gentlemen that stood about him;
Dinner being done, the Prince was going to his retiring chamber, whereupon this
Villain gat before a window in the Hall, close by the door of that room into
which the Prince was to go; As the Prince passed toward it, he was showing the
Earl of Laval the cruelties that the Spaniards had exercised in the
Low Countries, which were wrought in the hangings; and having his face turned,
this murderer discharged his Pistol at him; but the Prince, A special
Providence.
as God would have it, turning at the same instant, the bullet entered in at his
throat under the right chap, being so near that the fire entered with the bullet
into the wound, burning his Ruff and Beard; it brake out one of his teeth,
pierced the jugular vein, but hurt not his toungue, and so came out at his left
cheek hard by his nose; the blow being given, one with an Halberd could not
contain himself, but thrust the Villain through, and slew him.

The Chirurgions being sent for, found that the fire which entered the wound,
had cauterized the jugular vein, and had done him much good, so that the wound
was not mortal. The Friar was afterward apprehended and executed.

Anno 1584. The Spaniards thinking they had no greater enemy in the world than
the Prince of Orange, and that if he were dead they should quickly attain their
desires in the Netherlands; they suborned one Baltazar Gerard, an high
Burguignon, to murder him, Beltazar Gerard suborned to kill him.
who bought a good pair of Pistols, and on the tenth of July watched when the
Prince should go down into the Hall to dinner at Delpht in Holland, and as he
passed by, he demanded a Pasport of him; the Princess observing that he spoke
with an hollow and unsettled voice, she asked her husband who he was? saying
that she did not like his countenance; the Prince answered that he demanded a
Pasport, which he should presently have: After dinner the Prince going out of
the Hall, the murderer stood behind a Pillar in the Gallery, and as the Prince
passed by, suddenly shot him from the left side to the right, through the
stomach and the vital parts, who said no more, but O my God, take pity of my
soul, I am sore wounded; my God, take pity of my soul and of this poor people;
The Prince his death.
and presently after he gave up the Ghost.

Collected out of Sleidens Commentaries, and the History of the Netherlands,
etc.

CHAP. XXXII. The Modern Persecutions of the Church in Germany, since the year,
1630.
THe Swedes being possessed of a Town called Pasewalck, the Imperialists took
it by storm, beat, killed, and drove out the Swedes, and not content therewith,
they fell to torturing of the townsmen, ravishing women and gilrs in the open
streets and Churchyards, Abominable villainies.
yea women in childbed; then they killed the men, fired their houses, and
burnt many in them; thrust straw into Cellars where children were hidden, and
so burnt and smothered them; Then they burnt the Churches, and massacred the
Ministers, and at last burn down the whole Town.

Magdenburg burnt.
The like cruelty was used against the City of Magdenburg, famous for Religion,
which being taken by Tilly and Pappenheim, Anno 1631. was in twelve hours space
wholly turned into cindars, except one hundred thirty nine houses, by which
fire six godly Churches were burnt down; Cruelties used there.
no mercy was showed to any age, sex, or condition; above twenty thousand
persons were slain, burnt, and smothered to death; six thousand were drowned in
the river Elve; Ladies and Gentlewomen, like beasts were yoked together all
about the Country, and driven into woods to be ravished; and such as resisted
were stripped stark naked, whipped, had their ears cropped, and so were turned up.

Anno 1634. The Popish Army having taken the town of Hoxter, they spared
neither man, Cruelties at Hoxter.
woman nor child, most inhumanely butchering and hewing in pieces all, without
respect of age, sex, or condition; and what the sword could not spoil, they
caused the fire to consume, and the dead corpses they cast into the Weser.

At Griphenburg they kept the Senators shut up in a Chamber, macecrating and
tormenting them so long with hunger and smoke, Griphenburg.
that diverse of them died.

In Heidleberg they shut up diverse Reverend Ministers and Bourgers in prison,
Heidleberg.
allowing them nothing to eat but bread and water.

Frankendall being surrendered upon Articles, contrary to Covenants, the grave
Counselors and other Electoral Ministers, Frankendal.
were forced to endure such conditions, as were fitter for Dogs than men: Some
were cast into prison, and so abused that they died there; others were forced
to redeem themselves with unreasonable ransoms; the goods of such as were fled
were confiscated; and though the inhabitants were willing to have left their
houses, and all their goods, yet were they detained in the City, and their
destruction most cruelly plotted.

Their rage was so great against the Professors of the Gospel, that neither
Turks nor Heathens did ever exceed them. Princes sacred Person were not
exempted from their fury; The old Lantgrave of Hessen, and the old Duchess
Dowager of Wittenburgh were taken prisoners, reviled, and abused. In Saxoni
Tillies Soldiers tortured the Protestants by half strangling them, and
pressing their thumbs with wheels. Saxony.
In Pomeren they, forced the people to eat their own excrements, and if they
refused, they thrust them down their throat, Pomeren.
whereby some of them were choked; If they suspected that any had hidden their
gold or silver, Horrible cruelties.
they used exquisite torments to make them to confess it; They wound and tied
about the heads of some, strong matches or cords, and with short truncheons
twisted them till blood came out of their eyes, ears, and noses, yea sometimes
till their eyes started out of their heads; to others they tied burning matches
between their fingers, yea to their eyes, ears, noses, tongues, cheeks,
breasts, legs, and secret parts; yea, such parts that nature hides, they
either stuffed with gunpowder, or hung bags of powder to them, and so giving
fire to it, in an horrible manner they burst their bellies, and killed them.
With bodkins they made holes, or with knives they cut the skin and flesh of
many. They drew strings and cords through the fleshie parts of some, and
through the muscles of their thighs, legs, arms, etc. or through their noses,
ears, lips, etc. Some they hung up in the smoke, drying them with small fires,
and sometimes refreshing them with small drink, or water, taking care lest in
their torments they should die too soon. Some they put into hot Ovens, roasting
or smothering them there. Some they roasted with fires of straw. Some they
stifled, strangled, or hanged, and this was a great favor so soon to rid them
out of their pain. Of many they bound their hands and feet so hard, that the
blood spirted out their fingers and toes ends. Of some they tied their hands
and feet backwards together, stopping their mouths with clouts to hinder them
from praying. Some they hung up with ropes fastened to their privy parts, and
hearing their cries, strove by their roarings to drown their cries, as in sport.

Where they found poor creatures troubled with ruptures, they enlarged them by
villainous means, filling them with gunpowder, and blowing them up as a Mine by
giving fire thereto. Many they drew up on high, hanging great weights at their
feet to pull their bodies out of joint. Of some they plained their faces with
Chisels. Some men they openly gelded in the presence of their wives and
children. The mouths of some they set wide open with gags, and then poured down
their throats stinking water, urine, and other liquid things till they grew
sick, and their bellies swelled like tuns, whereby they died leasurely with
greater torment.

Down the throats of some they violently thrust knotted clouts, and then with a
string pulled them up again, whereby they displaced their bowels, and put them
to miserable torment, insomuch as some were made dumb, others deaf, others
blind, and others lame.

If the Husband entreated for his Wife, or the Wife for the Husband, they would
take the intercessour and torture him in the same manner before the others
eyes; and when any of these poor creatures in their torments or agonies of
death called and cried unto God for mercy, they would command, and seek to
force them to pray and cry unto the devil. Blasphemy.
Yea their divellishnesse proceeded so far, that they studied to find out new
and unheard of torments. Some they bound, hung up, and sawed off their legs:
Of others they rubbed off the flesh off their legs to the very bones: Of
others they tied the arms backwards, and so hanged them up by those distorted
parts. Many they drew through the streets of the Cities stark naked, then brake
and wounded them with axes and hammers, and generally used them with such
barbarous cruelty, that many begged to be shot or slain instantly, rather than
to live and be partakers of such miseries. In most places they took away all
the corn and provision of victuals, leaving the places so bare, that many of
the best Rank for the space of diverse days after saw not one bit of bread, but
were glad to live with roots and water. In other places they spoiled the
inhabitants of their garments, exposing them to that nakedness, that neither
Man, Woman, nor Child had clothes to put on. Hereby fruitful Countries were
totally ruinated: Cities, Towns, and Villages, were spoiled and turned into
pillars of fire and smoke; Churches lay desolate, the Woods were cut down, the
ground lay wast and untilled.

One reverend aged Divine they stripped, bound him backwards upon a Table, A
Minister killed with a Cat.
and set a big Cat upon his naked belley, beating and pricking the Cat to make
her fix her teeth and claws therein. So that both man and Cat, with hunger,
pain and anguish breathed their last.

The Crabats labored much to teach their Horses, not only to kill men, but to
eat humane flesh; and consulted how to find out more new and exquisite torments
than ever were before used.

At the taking of Magdenburg, a godly Minister of great esteem was found in one
of the Churches, Magdenburg.
whom they dragged out to his own house, where they ravished his Wife and
Daughters before his face; his tender Infant they snatched from the Mothers
breast, and stuck it upon the top of a Lance; and when his eyes and heart were
glutted with this so cruel a spectacle, they brought him forth bound into the
street, and there burned him with his own Books.

Rapes and Ravishings were committed beyond all humane modesty; Maids and
Matrons, Wives and Widows, they forced and violated without distinction, yea,
and that in the presence of their Parents, Rapes and Ravishings.
Husbands and Neighbors; yea, Women great with child, and others in Childbed:
Their beastliness was such that no pen can write it, no Faith can believe it;
Chapels and Churches were not freed from their filthy pollutions; yea,
Hospitals, and Bedlam-houses were not spared.

In Hessen land they took diverse poor women, some mad, some dumb, some lame,
and tying up their coats about their ears so used them, as a modest pen cannot
express.

In Pomeren they took the fairest maids, and ravished them before their Parents
faces, making them sing Psalms the while. One beautiful maid being hid by her
Parents in a dunghill, they found her out, had their pleasure of her, then cut
her in pieces, and hung up her quarters in the Church. Yea very girls of ten
years old and under, they ravished till some of them died; virtuous and chaste
women, they would threaten to kill, to throw their children into the fire, if
they would not yield to their lusts. Diverse maids and women to avoid the lusts
of these Hell-born furies, have leaped into Rivers and Wells, and some have
otherwise killed themselves; and that which was never before heard of, they did
not only violate sickly and weak maids and women till they died, but committed
the like filthiness with the dead corpses.

The Merchants of Basil returning from Strasburg Mart, were set upon by the
Imperialists in their lodging; Bazil Merchan^s murdered.
and though they craved their lives upon their knees, yet they killed ten of
them, saying, they must die for that they were Heretics; the rest leaving
their goods and garments, escaped by flight stark-naked in the night.

Two Noble Countesses with their fair Daughters were rifled in their Coaches
of all that they had, nor sparing the very garments that covered them.

Near Friburg these bloody miscreants cut in piecs a Reverend Minister, a man
of rare learning and piety; A Minister murdered.
after whose death the Dogs would not lick his blood nor touch his flesh. For
the common people, they made not so much account of them as of Dogs, murdering
them upon every trifling occasion, neither pitying old nor young, men, women,
nor innocent babes, whom sometimes most barbarously they used to eat, even when
other meat might be had: yea such inhumane cruelty they used, The Crabbats eat
infants.
that in some places they scarce left any remaining alive to relate the
sufferings of the dead. Many times they cut off the Noses and Ears of the
living, carrying them about in bravery. Collected out of a Book composed by
Doctor Vincent a Divine, who was an eyewitness of many of these things.

Before this great persecution befell the Church of God in Germany, God gave
his people warning of it by many and strange prodigies. For October the 26.
Anno Christi 1618. there appeared a terrible Comet with a great blazing tail,
at first of a red, A Comet.
afterward of a pale-red color, which continued for the space of twenty seven
days, and in some places it was seen longer. This fearful and ominous Link or
Torch the Lord sent to those who had long despised and slighted his voice in
his sacred Word preached by his vigilant and faithful Ministers, to awaken them
from their dead sleep of sin, and by repentance to bring them to the
reformation of their lives, or otherwise to assure them that he would come
suddenly upon them, and plague them with all those evils and miseries which he
had denounced against them by his messengers, and whereof he gave them warning
by this dreadful sign.

Anno 1619. At Groningen in the Dukedom of Brunswick was seen a great blazing
star, A blazing star. And two Armies.
and two Armies, one in the East, and another in the North, fighting together
till one of them was defeated and slain.

Water turned to blood. Three Suns.
At Wien in Austria, the water in a Dith was seen to be like blood for the space
of eight days; and shortly after three Suns appeared in the Heavens. In the
beginning of April, Anno 1619. and Anno 1621. in March in the same Country of
Austria, were two Armies seen in the Heavens by clear daylight, Two Armies.
fighting furiously together with great thundering of Ordnance and Canons.

In the same Country, Anno 1623. in the month of January, just over the City
of Lintz, two swords were seen one over against the other, and two great Armies
fighting a pitched battle together, Two swords, and two Armies.
which caused great terror to the beholders.

At Heidleberg in February, Anno 1622. were seen three Suns, and three
Rainbows. Three Suns and th^ee Rainbows.
Shortly after which, that City was besieged by the Inperialists, and at last
taken, where a grear slaughter was made of the Imhabitants, and in Neckergemund
three miles off, all the inhabitants, Men, Women, and Children were put to the
sword.

In April, Anno 1622. In the Country of Darmstad, were trees whose leaves
dropped blood; and the year after in the same Country in diverse Towns and
Villages, Trees dropped blood.

Blood on houses and stone-walls,

And sickles.


were seen bloody signs on Houses and stone-walls. About Meyenfield and
Malants, as men were reaping their Corn, their Hands and Sickles were all
bloody.

In July, Anno 1622. In the Dukedom of Wittemburgh, it rained so much blood,
that it fell upon the hands and clothes of people in the fields, It rained
blood.
and was seen upon Trees, Stones, and other places.

May the twelfth, Anno 1624. in the Dukedom of Anhalt there appeared a strange
prodigy in the Heavens, which continued from six till eight a clock at night:
First there came out of the clouds an Ancient-bearer; After him came forth a
grave man in the same habit; then came forth a Chariot drawn with two
particouloured Horses: Two Armies.
Then another Chariot with four armed Horses: Then suddenly there brake out of
the Clouds an infinite number of people like a swarm of Bees: After them
followed a man sitting on horseback with a long Robe, putting the people before
him; A quarter of an hour after came forth another Army consisting of many
horse and foot, etc. The two Armies fought till one of them was routed, and
presently after all vanished away.

Anno 1624. In May a strange tempest happened at Ratisbone; A strange tempest.
The weather being very calm, with little rain, two dark clouds met together,
which suddenly belched out a great wind mingled with fire, which raised such a
tempest, that near to the City it tore up trees by the roots, and in a moment
drove them into diverse places, and thence extending it self to the City, it
overturned above two hundred houses in the Town and Suburbs, not leaving a
Chimney standing, nor a roof to cover an house. The Church of Emerans, besides
the shattered windows, had one of the steeples laid flat to the ground, and the
other broke off in the middle; two other of the chiefest steeples in the City
were also broken down. This tempest lasted not above a quarter of an hour, nor
extended beyond the City, neither were there above four men slain by it.

Anno 1625. A fight of Jackdaws.
Near Troppash a great multitude of Jack-dawes met in the air, where they
fought a great battle, and that with so great eagerness, that many of them
fell down dead, so that the Contrymen gathered up whole sackfuls of them.

Anno 1628. In Pomerland the heavens seemed to open, and an Army came forth of
the Northern part, Two armies.
the Avauntguard consisting of Pioneres and Musqueteres; then followed great
pieces of Ordnance, and in the Rear came the Cavalry. Another Army came forth
on the other side, and betwixt them there became a cruel battle: The victory
inclining to the Northern Army; And at last a fiery beam followed upon the
Northern Conqueror, which continued for the space of some hours.

Anno 1631. At Hall in Saxony the water was turned into blood to the great
astonishment of the inhabitants.

During the siege of Magdenburg, a Captains wife being in travel, Water turned
into blood.
when she could not be delivered, and was near death, she desired that when she
was dead, her body might be opened; which being done, there was found in her
womb, A monstrous c^^ld.
a boy almost as big as one of three years old with an headpiece and
breastplate upon him, great boots after the French fashion, and a bag by his
side with two things in it like musket bullets.

June the nineteenth, Anno 1631. In the lower Saxony two great Armies appeared
in the air, one in the North, the other in the South, Two armies.
which fought a great battle together; After long fighting the Northern Army
obtained the victory. After the battle was ended, there appeared a man in a
long coat, bearing a bow, with which he shot at, and overthrew the Commander of
the Southern Army.

In the same Country a woman having bought a loaf of bread, when she came
home was dividing it, Bloody bread.
and in the cutting of it there came forth blood.

Anno. 1633. In the Country of Altenburgh, a fish pond was turned into blood,
which stank so extremely, A fish pond turned to blood
that if any Passengers did but touch it, they could not wash off the stink
thereof in three days space.

Anno 1634. At Berlin in Brandenburg, It rained blood and brimstone.
it rained blood and brimstone.

Anno 1635. In Hessen there met two armies of strange birds, which fought a set
battle; And not far off, about that same time a multitude of dogs had their
Randevouz, A battle of Birds and Dogs
which fought so eagerly, that they would not be reconciled; and when the
Governor of a neighbor Garrison sent out four companies of Musketeers
against them; they seeing a common enemy, joined together, and in despite of
their guns, beat them away, and devoured nine of them.

Here place the eighth Figure.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Persecution of the Church in France, which began, Anno
Christi, 1524.
ANno Christi, 1209. There were certain learned men in France, disciples of one
Almericus at Paris, whose names were, Master William a subdeacon of Poictiers,
well studied in the Arts, and Divinity: Bernard another subdeacon: William
Goldsmith, Steven, a Priest: Steven of the Seller, and one John, a Priest, who
upon examination held, That God was no otherwise present in the Sacramental
bread, than in any other bread: That it was Idolatry to build Altars to Saints,
or to cense their Images. They mocked those that kissed the Relics: They said
that the Pope was Antichrist, and Rome Babylon: That God was not seen in
himself, but by his creatures: For which (when they could not be drawn to
recant) they were condemned to be burnt at Paris, which accordingly was
executed: Bzorius out of Caesarius. And Almenneus who had been their Master,
had his body dug up in the Churchyard, and was buried in the field. And all
French books of Divinity were for ever condemned, and burned.

Anno Christi, 1524. At Melden in France there was one John Clark, who set up a
Bill upon the Church-door against the Popes pardons, John Clark.
lately come thither, wherein he called the Pope Antichrist; for which, being
apprehended, he was adjudged three several days to be whipped, then to have a
mark burned in his forehead as a note of infamy; A mother encourages her son.
his mother a good woman, when she saw her son so pitiously scourged and
branded, encouraged him, crying with a loud voice, Blessed be Christ, and
welcome be these marks for his sake. Afterward he removed from thence, and
went to Metz in Lorrain, where for a time he followed his calling of a
Woolcarder. But the people of the City used once a year all of them to go forth
into the Suburbs to worship some Idols there; whereupon John Clark, inflamed
with an holy zeal, went the night before and brake down all those images; The
next morning when all the Clergy and people came to the place to worship them,
they found all their Idols broken upon the ground; Zeal.
This set all in a tumult; and great searching there was after the Author of
this deed; and quickly was John Clark suspected and apprehended* he presently
confessed the fact, and told them the reasons why he did it.

The people hereupon cried out against him in a great rage: Before the Judges
he professed the pure doctrine of the Son of God; and thereupon was condemned
to a cruel death, which he sustained with admirable patience and constancy.
First his right hand was cut off; then was his nose with sharp pincers pulled
violently from his face: then were his arms and breasts pulled off with the
same instrument: yet he, through Gods grace, endured all with great quietness,
His torments.
pronouncing the while that of Psalm 115. Their Idols are silver and gold the
works of men's hands; His martyrdom.
Lastly, he was cast into the fire, and there consumed.

Not long after Master John Castellane, Doctor in Divinity, borne at Tourney,
Mr. Castellane.
being through Gods mercy called to the knowledge of the truth, became a
zealous, fervent, and faithful Preacher of it in diverse places, and at last he
was taken Prisoner by the Cardinal of Lorrains servants, by whom he was carried
to the Castle of Nommenie, where he endured much cruel usage, yet still he
persevered in confessing the true doctrine of the Son of God; then was he
carried to the Castle of Vik, and after a time was condemned, degraded, and
delivered over to the secular power, with this hypocritical speech; My Lord
Judge, we pray you as heartily as we can for the love of God, Popish hypocrisy.
and the contemplation of tender pity and mercy, and for respect to our
Prayers, that you will not in any point do any thing that shall be hurtful to
this miserable man, or tending to his death, or the maiming of his body; His
Martyrdom.
Then was he burnt alive, which death he underwent with much patience and
comfort.

At Paris one James Panane a Schoolmaster was burnt for the truth. James Panane.


Dennis de Reux
Also at Melda, Dennis de Reux was burned, for saying that the Mass was a plain
denial of the death and passion of Christ: He used often to meditate of, and to
repeat those words of Christ; He that denies me before men, him will I deny
also before my Father; he was burnt in a slow fire, and so abode much torment.

John de Cadurco, preaching to his Countrymen of Limosine, was apprehended and
degraded: John de Cadurco
The Friar that was to preace at his degradation, took that text, 1 Timothy 4. The
spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter days men shall depart from the
faith, giving heed to lying spirits and doctrines of errors; Then did John call
to him to read on, but the Friar stood dumb, and could not speak a word more; A
special providence.
Then did John read on, Teaching false doctrine in hypocrisy, having their
consciences seared with an hot iron, forbidding to marry and to eat meats
created by God to be received with thanksgiving, etc. Presently after he was
burned.

Five burnt at Paris.
About the same time, five men for scattering about certain papers against the
Mass, and other popish superstitions, were apprehended and burnt at Paris. One
of them for speaking freely, had his tongue burned through, and with a wire
tied fast to one of his cheeks.

Alexander Canus, a godly Minister, for preaching and confessing the truth of
Christ, Alexand. Canus
was burned at Paris with a small fire, whereby he endured great pain.

Also John Pointer a Surgeon, had his tongue first cut out, and then was
burnt about the same time. John Pointer.


Peter Gaudet living at Geneva, was by a popish Uncle trained into France,
apprehended, Peter Gaudet. Popish treachery.
condemned, and after many and long torments sustained in prison, was burned.

Diverse others were apprehended, condemned, and burned at Arras.

A godly Virgin was burned at Fountains, Anno 1534. John Cornor.
As also one John Cornon, an husbandman, but one endowed with such wisdom by
God, that all his Judges were amazed at it; yet was he condemned and burned.

Martin Gonin was cast into the river and drowned. Martin Gonin.


Anno 1540. One Claudius endeavoring to convert his friends and kinsfolk in
Paris, was by them betrayed, Claudius. Popish treachery.
adjudged to have his tongue cut out, and then burned.

Stephen Brune at Rutiers, Stephen Brune.
being for the constant Profession of his faith condemned to be burned; when
the fire was kindled a great wind so drove away the flame from him, that he
stood for ean hours space, A special providence.
exhorting and instructing the people; Then did they bring oil vessels, and
more fagots, yet still was the flame driven from him: Whereupon the hangman
took a staff, and struck him on the head, to whom he said, I am condemned to
be burned, and do you strike me with staves like a dog? Note.
with that the hangman with a pike thrust him through the belly, and threw him
down into the fire, and afterward scattered his ashes in the wind.

At Roan four Christians were condemned to be burned, An excellent speech.
and being carried to the stake in a dung-cart, they said, Blessed be God, we
are here reputed as the excrements of this world, but yet our death is a sweet
savor unto God.

John de Beck a godly Minister, John de Beck.
being condemned for the doctrine of the Gospel, constantly endured the torment
of the fire at Troyes.

Aymond de Lavoy, a godly Minister, Aymund de Lavoy.
preaching the truths of God faithfully, was complained of by the Popish Clergy
to the Magistrates of Bourdeaux, who sent to apprehend him; hereupon some of
his friends persuaded him to fly; but he refused, saying, that thereby he
might cause the People to think that he had fed them with dreams and fables,
and not with the pure Word of God; Flight refused.
whereas he feared not to yield up both soul and body in the quarrel of the
truth which he had taught, saying, That with Paul, Courage.
he was ready not only to be bound for the testimony of Christ in the City of
Bourdeaux, but to die also.

After the Sumner came, he stayed three days and preached three Sermons; and
whereas the people would have rescued him out of the Sumners hand, he desired
them not to stop his Martyrdom; for said he, Since it is the Will of God that
I shall suffer for him, I will not resist his will. At Bourdeaux many witnesses
came in against him, against whom he made many exceptions, but they would not
be admitted. Nine months he remained in prison, suffering great misery, much
bewailing his former course of life, though yet it had been such as none could
charge him with any crime; Then the Judges proceeded to his condemnation, and
he had greater fetters put upon him; His torments.
he was also examined with torments, which he endured two or three hours,
though but of a weakly body, comforting himself thus: This body must once die,
but the spirit shall live, the Kingdom of God abides for ever; During his
torments he swowned, and when he came to himself again, he said, O Lord, Lord,
why have thou forsaken me? Nay said the President, wicked Lutheran, Thou have
forsaken God: Aymund replied, Alas good Masters, why do you thus miserably
torment me? Prays for his enemies.
O Lord, I beseech thee forgive them, for they know not what they do; See said
the President, this Caitiffe how he prays for us? Shortly after he was
condemned; and when the Friars came to confess him, he bade them depart from
him, for he would confess his sins to the Lord. He went to the place of
execution with much joy, exhorting the people all the way; at the place of
execution they tumbled him out of the Cart, and when he was upon the stage he
said, O Lord, make haste to help me, tarry not, despise not the work of thy
hands: and seeing some Scholars, he said to them, My brethren, I exhort you to
study and learn the Gospel, for the Word of God abides for ever: Labor to
know the Will of God, and fear not them that kill the body, but have no power
over your souls. Afterward he said, My flesh does wonderfully resist the
spirit, but presently I shall cast it away. At the stake he often repeated, Oh
Lord my God, into thy hands I commend my soul; and so he was first strangled by
the hangman, His Martyrdom.
and then burned.

Francis Bribard, Secretary to the Cardinal of Bellay, being convicted for
adhering to the truth, Francis Bribard
had first his tongue cut out, and then was burnt. Anno 1544.

About the same time, William Husson, an Apothecary, came from Bloys to Roan;
William Husson.
and in the Palace where the Counsel sat, he scattered sundry books concerning
Christian doctrine, and against men's traditions; and presently taking horse
rode away: The books being found, the Counsel made diligent search for the
Author, and at last heard that probably this Husson had scattered them there;
whereupon Posts were sent out every way to apprehend him, and by some of them
he was taken, riding toward Deep, and brought back to Roan; who being
examined, professed his faith boldly, and that he had scattered those books,
and that he was going to Deep to do the like there. For this he was condemned
to be burnt alive; and as he was carried to execution, because he refused to
worship an Image, his tongue was cut out; afterward his hands and feet being
bound behind him, he was pulled up with a Pully, and so let down into the fire,
in which he with a cheerful countenance held up his head, His Martyrdom.
and fixed his eyes upon heaven, till he yielded up his spirit unto God.

Anno 1545. James Cobard, a Schoolmaster in the City of Saint Michael, James
Cobard.
declared and proved that the Mass neither profited the quick nor dead, etc.
for which he was burned,

Also at Melda fourteen godly persons were cast into prison, where they were
cruelly racked to make them confess their fellows, Fourteen martyred.
which they stoutly refused to do, and at last were condemned to the fire;
seven of them had their tongues cut out, and so all of them were burned
together, their wives being compelled to stand by to see their torments; many
others were scourged and banished.

Anno 1546. There was one Peter Chapot, Peter Chapot. Zeal.
who having been a while at Geneva, out of a zeal to do good to the Church of
Christ, carried diverse Bibles into France, and dispersed them amongst the
faithful; at last he was apprehended and carried to Paris; there he readily
rendered an account of his faith, exhorting the Judges to do their office
uprightly. Three Doctors of Sorbone were appointed to dispute with him, but he
made them all to go away ashamed: then was he condemned to be burnt. Vincit
veritas.
At the stake, one of the Doctors pressed him sorely to pray to our Lady, which
he refused, crying only, O Jesus Son of David have mercy on me; The Doctor
bade him say only Jesus Maria, and he should not be burnt alive, but he for a
while refused, yet at last through his importunity, he said Jesus Maria, but
presently checking himself; he said, Humane infi^mity.
Oh God what have I done? pardon me O Lord; for against thee only have I
sinned; and so he was presently strangled and then burned; but upon the
complaint of the Doctor, the Court made a Decree, that all which were to be
burned, unless they recanted at the stake, should have their tongues cut out,
A cruel law.
which was diligently afterward observed.

There was living at Meaux a lame Creeple, to whom God was pleased to reveal
his truth, and after a time he was apprehended, A^ Creeple martyred.
and examined, at which time he confessed more than they desired to hear; Then
did they ask him whether he would stand to that which he had said? To whom he
answered; and I ask you again, Zeal.
Dare you be so bold as to deny that which is so plain and evident in the holy
Scriptures? being advised to take care of his life, he said to the Judges, for
Gods sake take care of your own lives and souls, and consider how much innocent
blood you spill daily in fighting against Jesus Christ and his Gospel; His
Martyrdom.
At last he was carried to Paris, where he endured many sorts of torments, and
lastly was burned.

At Fera, one Stephen Polliot was apprehended, carried to Paris, Stephen
Polliot.
and there cast into a foul and dark dungeon, where he lay long in bonds and
fetters; At last he was brought forth and condemned to have his tongue cut out,
and to be burned with his sachel of books hanging about his neck, which was
accordingly executed.

Anno 1547. There was one John English condemned by the Court of Paris for
confessing the truths of God; and so sent to Sens in Burgundy, John English.
where he was burned.

Also Michael Michelote, being apprehended for professing the Gospel, Michael
Michelote.
was put to his choice either to recant and be beheaded, or to persevere and be
burned; he answered, that he trusted that he which had given him grace not to
deny the truth, Faith, and Courage.
would also give him patience to abide the fire, and so he was burned.

Another being betrayed by false brethren, Treachery.
was burned at Bar in Burgundy.

Five men and two women were condemned to the fire at Langres, for adhering to
the truth: one of the women being the youngest, Seven Martyrs.
was reserved to be burned at last; and in the mean time she much encouraged
them all, saying, This day we shall be married to the Lord Jesus to live with
him for ever, Four Martyrs.
and so they all quietly slept in the Lord. Four others about the same time
were condemned, and cruelly burnt at Paris for the same cause.

Anno 1548. There was one Blondel, a Merchant of precious stones, that
frequented many great Fairs in France, Blondel.
and was well-known both in Court and Country; he was a man of singular
integrity, and a Favourer of Gods Word; being at an Inn in Lions, he freely
reproved the filthy talk and superstitious behavior which he there heard and
saw; hereupon the Host complained of him to an officer; withal, informing him
of his rich Collar of Jewels; These two suborned one to borrow money of him,
Popish malice.
which because Blondel refused to lend, the fellow caused him to be apprehended
for heresy, thinking thereby to attach his goods, but Blondels friends
prevented it, privily conveying them away.

Courage.
Blondel being examined of his faith, gave a plain and full Confession of it;
whereupon he was sent to prison, in which he did much good amongst the
Prisoners, Charity.
paying the debts of some and so loosing them, feeding others, clothing
others, etc. At length through the importunity of his Parents and friends,
Humane infirmity.
he changed his Confession; yet was he sent to the High Court at Paris, where
being examined again concerning his faith, Recovery.
he adhered to his first Confession, much bewailing his former fall; Then was
he condemned to be burnt, and great haste was made for his execution, left his
friends at Court should save his life.

Hubert.
Anno 1549. One Hubert, a young man of nineteen years old, was so constant in
the faith, that neither the persuasions of his Parents, nor the threats of his
adversaries could remove him from his steadfastness, for which he was burned at
Dyion.

Florent Venote.
The same year there was a godly Minister, called Florent Venote, cast into
prison at Paris, where he lay above four years, in which time there was no kind
of torment, Cruelty.
which he did not endure and overcome: amongst others he was put in to so
narrow a place, that he could neither stand nor lie^, in which he remained
seven weeks, whereas there was never any Malefactor that could endure it
fifteen days, but he either grew mad or died. A miracle of mercy.

Henry the second.


At last when a great show was made at the Kings coming into the City, and
diverse other Martyrs in sundry places of it were put to death, Florent also
having his tongue cut out, was brought forth to see their execution, His
Martyrdom.
and lastly was himself burnt.

About the same time one Anne Audebert, as she was going to Geneva, Anne
Audebert
was apprehended and brought to Paris, where she was adjudged to be sent to
Orleance and burned there: when she was had forth to execution, a rope being
put about her, she called it her wedding girdle, wherewith she should be
married to Christ; Courage and comfort at death.
and being to be burried upon a Saturday, she said, On a Saturday I was first
married, and on a Saturday I shall be married again: She much rejoiced when she
was put into the dung-cart, and showed such patience and constancy in the fire,
as made all the Spectators to wonder at it.

Not long after the Coronation of Henry the second, King of France, at whose
coming into the City of Paris diverse godly Martyrs were burned, there was a
poor Tailor, A Tailor.
that dwelt not far from the Kings Palace, apprehended for working upon an
holy day: Being by the Officer asked why he wrought upon that day? He answered
that he was a poor man living only upon his labor, and that he knew no day but
the Sabbath whereupon he might not work, his necessity requiring it; Then was
he clapped up in prison; this being noised in the Court, some would needs have
the Tailor sent for, that the King might have the hearing of him. Then was the
Tailor brought thither, and the King sitting in his chair of State, commanded
the Bishop of Mascon to question with him: The Tailor being nothing amated at
the Kings presence, after he had done reverence to his Prince, Admirable
courage.
gave thanks to God for honoring him so greatly, being such a wretch, as to
bring him where he might bear witness to his truth before so great a Prince:
The Bishop questioned with him about the greatest matters of Religion, and he
with an undaunted spirit so answered for the sincere truth, and with such
pregnant proofs of Scripture, as was wonderful; and though the Nobles that
were present jeered and taunted at him, yet could they not dash him out of
countenance, Popish pride.
but that still with much liberty and freedom of speech he defended the truth
of Christ, neither flattering their persons, nor fearing their threats. The
King seeming to muse much within himself, that so mean and simple a person
should show such audacity in such a presence, the Bishop and Popish Lords
taking notice of, cried out that he was an obstinate and impudent Heretic, and
therefore remanded him back to prison: Popish subtilty
and within a few days after he was condemned to be burnt alive; and left the
King should be affected with what he heard from the Tailor, the Bishops often
suggested that the Lutherans were such as carried a vain smoke in their
mouths, which being put to the fire would soon vanish; They also would needs
have the King present at his execution: but it pleased God to give such
strength and courage to the Tailor at his execution, as much more astonished
the King than all his former carriage; Gods judgments on persecutors.
for having espied the King in the window where he sat, he beheld him with so
steadfast a countenance, that his eyes were never off him; yea, when the fire
was kindled about him, he still kept his eyes so fixed upon the King, that the
King was constrained to leave the window, and to withdraw himself, and was so
wrought upon thereby, that he confessed that he thought the shadow of the
Tailor followed him whithersoever he went, and for many nights after he was so
terrified with the apparition thereof, that he protested with an oath, that he
would never see nor hear any more of those Lutherans, though afterward he
brake his oath, as it follows in the story of Anne Du Bourg.

About the same time one Claudius a godly man, was apprehended as he came from
Geneva, and burned at Orleance. Claudius.


Anno 1551. One Thomas, a young man of about eighteen years old, Thomas.
coming from Geneva to Paris, rebuked one for swearing, Zeal.
whereupon he was apprehended for a Lutherane, and carried before the high
Court; by them he was committed to prison, Cruelty.
and cruelly racked to confess his companions, which he still refused to do,
whereupon they continued to rack him, till one of the bloody Inquisitors turned
his back and wept, and till the Hangman was a weary; then was he carried to be
burned, and was let down with a pully into the fire; and after a while being
pulled up again, they asked him if he would yet turn, To whom he said, That he
was in his way to God, An excellent spirit.
and therefore he desired them to let him go, and so he quietly slept in the
Lord.

Anno 1553. There was apprehended at Lions one Peter Bergerius who for his bold
and constant confession was cast into prison, Peter Bergerius
and put into a dungeon, where was a thief that had lain there seven or eight
months, who being in great pain and torment, cried out of God, and cursed his
Parents that begat him, An admirable example.
being almost eaten up with lice, and fed with such bread as dogs and horses
had refused to eat; but it pleased Almighty God of his goodness, through the
instructions and prayers of Bergerius, that he was converted and brought to the
knowledge of the truth, after which, the very next day, his lice which before
extremely abounded, so went away, that he had not one remaining; and God so
stirred up the hearts of good men, that he was fed plentifully, and that with
white bread, so that with much patience and joyfulness he bore his
imprisonment, and had great comfort afterward in his soul.

Three godly men.
About the same time three godly men were apprehended at Lions, and being
condemned for the truth, when they were to be led forth to execution, two of
them had ropes put about their necks; the third, having served the King in his
wars, was favored to have none; whereupon he said to the Lieutenant, Note.
that he also desired to have one of those precious chains about his neck in
honor of his Lord the which being granted, they all went singing to the fire,
where with much patience they yielded up their spirits unto God.

Not long after in the same place was apprehended one Matthew Dimonet, Matthew
Dimonet a persecutor converted.
who formerly had lived a most wicked life, full of all filthiness and
abominations; he had been also a searcher out of the Professors of the Gospel,
and a great Persecutor of them; yet at last it pleased God to show him mercy,
and he was converted to the knowledge of the truth: after which, being
apprehended and examined, he made a stout profession of his faith; and during
his imprisonment he had great conflicts with the infirmity of his own flesh,
but especially with the temptations of his Parents, kindred, and friends; yet
the Lord did so strengthen him that he endured constant to the end; Tentation
resisted.
At his burning he spoke much to the people, and was hearkened to with great
attention.

Simon Laloe coming upon some occasions from Geneva into France, was
apprehended by the Bayliffe of Dyon, Simon Laloe.
by whom he was imprisoned and racked to force him to confess what fellows he
had; but that not prevailing, he was condemned to be burned. At his death the
Executioner, An hangman converted.
seeing his great faith, patience, and constancy, was so wrought upon
therereby, that he fell into great terrors of conscience, so that he was near
to utter despair, and all the promises of the Gospel could scarce comfort him;
yet at last, through Gods mercy, receiving comfort, he with all his family
removed to the Church of Geneva, where he afterward lived till his death.

Nicholas Nail, carrying some good books to Paris, was there apprehended, and
made a bold confession of the faith, Nicholas Nail.
for which he was cruelly tormented sundry wise, and racked all his joints
asunder, and lastly being condemned, when he was carried to the stake, Popish
cruelty.
they put a gag into his mouth, which they tied in so hard with a rope about
his head, that blood gushed out of his mouth: they also besmeared all his body
with oil and brimstone, so that at the first taking of fire, all his skin
was shrivelled together, whilst his inward parts were untouched; the cord
being burnt in sunder, and the gag falling out of his mouth, he praised God in
the midst of the fire, till he yielded up his spirit unto God.

Peter Serre was at first a Priest, Peter Serre.
but God of his mercy revealing his truth to him, he went to Geneva, and there
learned the Shoomakers craft, whereby he maintained himself; and having a
brother at Toulouse, out of a singular love to his soul, he went thither to
instruct him; Charity.
his brothers wife being not well pleased herevvith, Treachery.
revealed it to one of her Gossips, who informed the Official against him;
hereupon he was apprehended and carried before the Inquisitor, to whom he
made an excellent declaration of his faith, and so was delivered to the Judge,
who asked him of what occupation he was? He said, that of late he was a
Shoemaker; then did the Judge ask him of what Occupation he had formerly been?
he said, he had been of another formerly, but he was ashamed to utter it or to
remember it, Note.
being the worst and vilest Science of all others in the world; the Judge and
people supposing that he had been some Cutpurse or thief, were more importunate
to know what it was but shame and sorrovv so stopped his mouth that he could
not declare it; at last through their importunate clamor, he told them he had
been a Popish Priest: this so incensed the Judge, that he presently condemned
him to be degraded, to have his tongue cut out, and to be burned; which was
accordingly executed: In the fire he stood so quiet, looking up steadfastly to
heaven at the time of his burning, as if he felt no pain at all, Admirable
patience. Note.
which caused wondeful admiration in the people; and one of the Parliament
said, that it was not the best way to bring the Lutherans to the fire, for it
would do more hurt then good.

Anno 1554. There were two godly men, with one of their sons and daughter going
toward Geneva, whom a Lieutenant overtaking by the way, like a Judas, he
insinuated himself into their company, A Judas.
pretended great favor to them and to that Religion, which he said, he
supposed them to be of; and so with fair words he circumvented them, and drew
out of them that they were Protestants, and their wives at Geneva, whither they
were now traveling; Then did he apprehend them and carry them to the Castle of
Niverne; During their imprisonment they were examined of many Articles, Courage.
to which they made a full and clear answer according to their faith; Cruelty.
after this they were racked extremely for three hours together to force them
to recant, which they bore with admirable patience; being therefore condemned,
as they went to execution, Zeal.
the Officer bound a wooden cross between their hands, but they pulled it out
with their teeth, and threw it away, whereupon their tongues were cut out,
notwithstanding which God gave them utterance, A miracle.
so that they spoke plain, saying, We bid sin, the flesh, the world, and the
devil farewell for ever, with whom we shall never have more to do hereafter, and
much more to the like purpose. When the Officer came to besmear them with
brimstone and gunpowder, they said, Go to, salt on, salt on the stinking and
rotten flesh; and so persisting constant in the flames they finished their
Martyrdom.

Philber Hamlin.
Anno 1557. Philbert Hamlin, a Priest, was through Gods grace brought to the
knowledge of the truth, whereupon he went to Geneva, where he exercised
Printing, and sent books abroad. Afterward he was made a Minister, and
preached at the Town of Alenart, in which and in some other places he did much
good; At last he with his Host, a Priest, whom he had instructed in the
knowledge of the Gospel, were apprehended and cast into prison at Bourdeaux;
and whilst they lay there, in came a Priest with his furniture to say Mass;
Zeal.
but Philbert inflamed with a holy zeal, went and plucked the garments from his
back, and overthrew the Chalice and Candlesticks, saying, Is it not enough for
you to blaspheme God in the Churches, but you must also pollute the prison with
your idolatry? the Jailor seeing this, fell upon him, and beat him with his
staff, and also removed him into a dungeon, loading him with irons which made
his legs to swell: there he lay eight days. The Priest his Host, Apostasy.
terrified with the prison and fear of death, renounced Christ and his Word,
and was set at liberty; whereupon Philbert said to him, O unhappy and more then
miserable man! Is it possible that you should be so foolish, A Prophecy.
as for to save your life a few days, you should so start away from and deny
the truth? Know you therefore that although hereby you have avoided the
corporal fire, yet your life shall be never the longer; for you shall dye
before me, and yet shall not have the honor to die for the cause of God: and
you shall be an example to all Apostates. Gods judgemen^ on an Apostate.
Having ended his speech, and the Priest going out of Prison, he was presently
slain by two Gentlemen, who formerly had a quarrel to him. Philbert hearing of
it, professed that he knew of no such thing before, but spoke as it pleased God
to guide his tongue. Philbert being condemned, and had to execution, they
labored to drown his voice by sounding of trumpets, and so in the midst of the
flames, praying and exhorting the people, he rendered up his soul unto God.

Nicholas of Jenvile.
Anno 1558. Nicholas of Jenvile, a young man that had lived at Geneva, coming
into France to get up some money that was owing to him, was betrayed by a Lady,
apprehended and condemned, and being carried in a Cart to execution, Popish
treachery.
his Father met him and would have beaten him with a staff, but the Officers
not suffering it, were about to have stricken the old man; Blind zeal.
the son seeing it cried to them to let his father alone, saying, that he had
power over him to do to him what he would. At the place of execution he had an
iron ball put into his mouth, and so he patiently took his Martyrdom at Jenvile.

About the same time a company of the faithful of about three or four hundred
were met together at an house in Paris, in the beginning of the night, to
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; some Priests getting intelligence of
it, Popish malice.
gathered many of that faction together, and came, and beset the house, making
an outcry that the watch might come and apprehend them, so that in a short time
most of the City of Paris was up in arms, supposing that there had been some
conspiracy: The people following the noise, and perceiving that they were
Lutherans, they grew into a great rage, seeking to murder them, and thereupon
stopped the streets and lanes with Carts, and made fires that none might escape
them; but, through Gods mercy, before this tumult began, the faithful had
finished their administration and prayers, with as much quiet as ever they had
done; and now seeing this sudden danger, they were somewhat amazed; whereupon
the Pastors of the Congregation exhorted them and fell to prayer; after which,
considering the cowardliness of the multitude, it was resolved that such as had
weapons should adventure through the press; which being put in practice, the
admirable power of God appeared, in that notwithstanding the fires, and
stopping of the passages, yet they all escaped safe, only one was beaten down
with stones and slain: The rest, A special Providence.
which wanted weapons, being about one hundred and twenty, stayed in the house
with the women and children, some of which leaped into Gardens, where they
remained till the Magistrates came; The women, which were all persons of good
quality, save six or seven, perceiving their danger by reason of the fury of
the people, went up into the windows, showed their innocence, and desired that
they might be tried in an ordinary way of Justice; yet there they were enclosed
by the rabble for six or seven hours; At last came the Kings Attorney with
many Sergeants and Officers, who with much ado appeasing the people, entered
into the house, and their seeing the quality of the persons, and their
innocence, the Attorney much pitied them, yet carried them to prison in the
little Castle; but as they went, the furious multitude plucked and haled the
Gentlewomen, tore their garments, pulled their hoods from their heads, Popish
rage and cruelty.
and all besmeared their faces with dust and dirt.

In the prison they were used no better; for the Villains and Thieves being let
out of their holes, and stinking Caves, these Lambs of Christ were put into
their rooms. Popish lies and slanders.
Then followed the cruel and slanderous reports of the Friars, who in their
Sermons railed upon them, told the people that they were assembled to make a
banquet in the night, after which, putting out the candles, they went together
Jack with Jill, after a filthy and beastly manner; Satan's subtilty.
they charged them also with sedition, as if they conspired against the King,
etc. And these cursed defamations were no sooner vented, but they were spread
abroad far and wide, yea in the Court itself, and the Cardinal of Lorraine
procured a certain Judge to come to the King, who testified that he found in
the House diverse Couches, upon which they intended to commit their whoredoms
and adulteries, which much enflamed the King against them.

These things made the enemies to triumph exceedingly, and on the contrary, the
brethren which escaped, were full of perplexity, and lamentations, sorrowing
not so much for themselves, as for the imprisonment of their friends; yet they
much comforted themselves in the consideration of there own wonderful
deliverance. They upon debate also resolved, First, that all of them should
humble themselves before God in their own families. Christian wisdom.
Secondly, That they might stop the false rumors, to write two Apologies, one
to the King, and another to the People. Thirdly to write consolatory letters to
their friends in prison.

The Apology to the King was written and conveyed privily into his Chamber,
where it was met with and read openly before the King and his Nobles; yet this
prevailed little; for their adversaries suggested to him that all was false,
and a pretense to hide their wickedness: But that to the people did very much
good, and so did their consolatory letter to their friends in prison.

The adversaries all this while did bestir themselves to bring them that were
in prison to execution, and procured a Commission from the King to certain
Judges to hasten their trial. But it fell out by Gods Providence, that at this
time the Protestant Princes of Germany were met at a Colloquy at Worms, Gods
merciful providence.
to whom diverse learned men resorted from Geneva, requesting them to send their
Ambassadors to the French King, in the behalf of these poor Christians thus
imprisoned; by whose mediation, and the Kings other business, who was now in
war with the King of Spain, many of them were delivered, yet some of them were
executed before the coming of the Ambassodors.

Amongst them were Nicholas Clivet, and one Granvelle, both of them elders of
the Congregation, Nicholas Clivet and one Granvelle.
who stoutly defended the truth against the Sorbone Doctors, and afterward
patiently resigned up their souls to God in the cruel flames. Also a young
Gentlewoman of about twenty three years old, which came from Gascoigne to join
her self to the Church at Paris, was brought forth with the former, and endured
many conflicts with the Judges and Sorbonists; who when she was urged to
recant, said, That she had learned her faith from the Word of God, and
therefore therein she would live and die: Her neighbors testified against her
that there was much singing of Psalms in her house, Popish malice.
and that sometimes they had seen abundance of people come out of it, and that
at the death of her husband no Priest was called for, Gods judgment on
persecutors.
etc. But presently after, two of these witnesses fell out, and one slew the
other with a knife.

The Cardinal of Sens much hastened this Gentlewomans death, that he might have
her estate. When she was condemned, she had her tongue cut, as the two former
also were served. Going to execution, she dressed her self like a Bride,
Courage.
being that day to be married to her Spouse Jesus Christ; she went to the fire
without ever changing countenance, and so quietly yielded up her spirit to God.

Diverse others of this Congregation suffered in the like sort: the rest at the
mediation of the Prince Elector Palatine, and the Protestant Switzers were
released.

In other parts of France also sundry faithful Christians were imprisoned,
cruelly racked, had their tongues cut out, and finally were burned, concerning
whom because I find nothing extraordinary, I have forborne to mention them.

Anno 1559. The King of France, Henry the second, coming into the the
Parliament in Paris, there was one Anne Du Bourg, a noble Counselor, a man of
singular understanding and knowledge, bred and nursed up in the bosom of the
Church of Christ, who made a bold speech before him, wherein he rendered thanks
to Almighty God, A Christian speech.
for moving the Kings heart to be present at the decision of so weighty a cause
as that of Religion was, humbly entreating him to consider well thereof, being
the cause of Christ himself, which of good right ought to be maintained by
Princes, etc. But the King instead of hearkening to his good advice, was so far
incensed against him, that he caused him to be apprehended by the County of
Montgomery, Constable of France, and to be carried to prison, protesting to him
in these words, These eyes of mine shall see thee burnt; Popish malice.
and presently after he sent a Commission to the Judges to make his process.

During his imprisonment there was a godly woman, who was Prisoner also in a
Chamber just over against his, who at her window, sometimes by words, other
sometimes by signs, Gods mercy.
did much encourage him to persevere constantly in the truth, whereby he was so
comforted, that when some of his friends persuaded him to recant, he said, God
forbid, for a woman has taught me my lesson, how I ought to carry my self in
this business; He was often examined about sundry points of Religion, Tentation
resisted.
and being once asked whether he had conferred with any one about them, he
answered that he had conferred with his books, especially with the holy
Scriptures.

Having drawn up a confession of his Faith, he intended to present it to the
Parliament; but some Advocates that belonged to that Court, who pretended great
love to him, Tentation.
labored to draw him to make another confession, not contrary to the truth,
but in such ambiguous terms as might satisfy his Judges, who would not stand
strictly to examine it; Du Bourg long resisted, Hum^ne infirmity.
but at last was prevailed with to draw up such a confession, supposing it
sufficient that himself knew his own meaning; So soon as this his confession
came into the hands of his Judges, great hopes were conceived of his
enlargement; but when the Christian Congregation had gotten a copy of it, they
were much grieved; whereupon they ordered Master Augustine Marlorate, a learned
and godly Minister, to write a large discourse concerning the duty of such as
were called to bear witness to the truth of God before Magistrates, wherein he
set down Gods threatenings and judgments against such, as either directy or
indirecty deny the truth, exhorting him more highly to prize the glory of God
then his own liberty; Good counsel.
the truth of his Gospel then a short and transitory life; showing that he
ought not now to give over, having made so happy a beginning and progress in
his Christian course: That the same of his constancy was spread, not only
through France, but all Christendom over: that he had been a means to confirm
many weak ones, and caused others to enquire after the means of salvation: that
all men's eyes were fixed on him to enquire by what means he gat out of prison,
so that, if through fear and faint-heartedness, he should enterprise ought that
should contradict his first Profession, he would give much scandal and offense,
and therefore he exhorted him to give glory to God, to edify his Church;
telling him that then he might assure himself that God would neither leave nor
forsake him.

These Letters brought Du Bourg to a sight of his sin, for which asking pardon
of God, Recovery after a fall.
without any further delay he wrote to the Judges, retracting his last, and
protesting to stand to his first confession; so that shortly after he was
condemned.

In the mean time great feasts were preparing in the Court, for joy of the
marriages that should be of the Kings daughter and sister; The day whereof
being come, the King employed all the morning in examining the President, and
other Counselors of the Parliament against Du Bourg, and other his companions
that were charged with the same doctrine, intending to glut his eyes in seeing
their execution, and then went to dinner.

After dinner the King being one of the Defendants at the Tilting, which was
near the prison where Du Bourg and his fellows lay, A special providence.
entered the lists, and behaved himself valiantly, breaking many spears against
Count Montgomery and others, whereupon he was highly commended of the
Spectators, and all thinking that he had done enough, desired him to give over
with praise; But he being puffed up with their commendations, would needs run
another course with Montgomery, who kneeling on his knees craved pardon,
refusing to run against him; the King being eagerly set on, commanded him upon
his Allegiance to run, and put the spear into his hands; Montgomery thus
enforced, addressed himself to the course, and the King and he meeting
together, brake their spears, and the Kings He^met falling down at the same
instant, Gods judgment on Persecutors.
one of the splinters of Montgomeries spear entered just into his right eye, and
so pierced his head that the brains were perished; which wound, despising all
means of cure, killed him within a eleven days, whereby his hope of seeing Du
Bourg burned was frustrated, and thereupon Du Bourg his execution was deferred
for six months longer; at the end whereof, he having constantly persevered in
the confession of his faith, was first degraded, and the next day carried out
to execution; The Judges appointed six or seven hundred Horse and Foot well
armed, Du Bourg executed.
to guard him; he was first hanged, and then his body was burnt to ashes.

Popish cruelty
Presently after, diverse others were burnt in Paris, and in many other places
for their Religion: many also were massacred as they passed along the streets
for not doing reverence to the images, which were then newly set up in the
corner of every street; such also as refused to contribute money to buy wax
candles to burn before them, The Church prospers under persecution.
it cost them their lives. Notwithstanding which cruelties, those of the
Religion increased daily, both in zeal and number in all parts of the Realm.

This much incensed the Duke de Guise in his Government of Dauphine, whereupon
he sent Mangiron, a cruel man, A great persecution in Dauphine.
and great enemy to the Protestants, with charge wholly to root them out; This
Mangiron first played his part very subtly; but at last he fell upon Valence,
lacking the houses of the Protestants, as if he had taken the Town by assault;
and the more to strengthen him in his mischief, he had many Troops of Horse,
and some Lanciers sent him: Truchon also, President of Grenoble, cast sixty of
the chiefest of the Protestants into prison at Valence, whilst Mangiron
pillaged those of Montelimart, Popish cruelty
to whom he had promised and sworn to do no wrong.

Truchon caused two Ministers at Valence to be hehaded, Two Ministers beheaded.
and three of the principal Citizens to be hanged; the rest he punished with
great fines, whippings, and banishments.

At Roan he hanged two men, whipped one, and afterward sent him to the Galleys.

Anno 1559. In Provence, a godly Gentleman was traitorously massacred for his
profession of Religion.

Those of the Religion, Ar^^ Ecclesiae.
seeing themselves destitute of all humane aid, resolved in all their dangers
instead of seeking to man for help, to pray to God, to hear his Word, to
continue in true obedience unto it, living in great love and concord one with
another, whereby abundance of Papists were so edified, A great conversion.
that by whole Troops they left the Mass, and made open profession of the
Protestant Religion.

Anno 1561. There happened a great mutiny in the City of Paris, raised by some
Priests, which rang a Bell while those of the Religion were hearing a Sermon:
from which proceeded wounds, murders, Popish malice.
and imprisonments; four of the Protestants were hanged to please the people,
and the rest paid a fine.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Persecution in the time of the Civil Wars.
ANNO 1562. The Duke de Guise passing toward Paris, and coming near to Vassy,
understanding that the Bell rang to a Sermon, which was to be preached in a
Barn, in which place there were assembled about twelve hundred men, women, and
children, he presently went with all his Troops to the barn, and entering into
it, they cried out Death of God, kill, kill these Huguenots; Christians
murdered at a Sermon.
then did some of them shoot at those which were in the Galleries, others cut
in pieces such as they met with. Some had their heads cleft in twain, others
had their Arms and hands cut off, so that the Walls and Galleries of the Barn
were died with the blood of the slain; The Duke with his sword drawn stood
amongst them, charging his men to kill without sparing, especially the young
men: Some of these godly persons getting upon the roof, hid themselves there:
but at length some of this bloody crew spying them, shot at them with long
pieces, whereby many of them were slain, falling down from the roof like
Pigeons. Then they fell to murdering of them all without distinction; the poor
Saints of God made no resistance, only praying unto God: and every one running
to save himself, as it pleased God to direct him, many men and women were
slain; others being sore wounded, escaped, which died shortly after; the poor
man's box was taken and emptied. The Minister in the beginning of the Massacre
ceased not to preach still, till one discharged his Piece against the Pulpit;
Then falling upon his knees, he entreated the Lord to have mercy upon him, and
upon his poor persecuted flock; and so coming down from the Pulpit, attempted
to escape, but by the way he received diverse wounds, whereupon finding himself
as he thought, mortally hurt, he cried, Lord into thy hand I commend my spirit,
for thou have redeemed me O Lord God of truth; yet before he was slain, some
took him and carried him before the Duke, Who said to him, who made thee so
bold thus to seduce the People? Slanders.
Sir, said the Minister, I am no seducer, but have faithfully preached the
Gospel of Jesus Christ to them. Then did the Duke curse and swear, saying,
Death of God, does the Gospel teach sedition? and calling the Provost, he said,
Take this Varlet and hang him upon a Gibbet; Then was the Minister delivered to
two Pages, who basely abused him; The popish women also threw dirt at him, and
could scarce be restrained from tearing him to pieces. He was kept close
Prisoner, none being suffered to bring him necessaries; and he was often
threatened to be sown up in a sack and drowned; A special providence.
yet at last, through Gods mercy, he was released, at the earnest request of
the Prince of Portion. The pulpit was broken down, Barbarous cruelty.
the slain stripped stark naked, and so the Duke departed with his bloody Troops,
sounding his trumpets as if he had obtained a great victory.

When he came to Paris, he with the Constable and Marshal of Saint Andrews,
seized upon the King, defaced and overthrew the places where they of the
Religion used to assemble, which so encouraged the Popish party, that in every
place they so abused those of the Religion, as the most cruel Barbarians would
have been ashamed to do the like. This caused a Civil War, wherein the Duke of
Guise, having taken Roan, sacked it for three days space, and executed many of
the Citizens.

Not long after he went to Orleance, boasting that within twenty four hours he
would win the Town; and neither spare man, woman, nor child in it, and that he
would so destroy the Town that the memory of it should be extinct for ever; But
man's purposes; and God disposes; for the same night there was a young Gentleman
named John Poltrot, who watching his opportunity, Gods judgment on Persecutors.
shot him with his pistol laden with three bullets, whereof he shortly after
died; and Poltrot declared at his death, that he did it to deliver France, and
especially the City of Orleance from the violence of the Duke of Guise; After
whose death peace was shortly after concluded between the Queen Mother and the
Protestants.

But before this peace took place, those of the Religion suffered much in
sundry parts of the Realm.

In Paris they were persecuted cruelly, the Popish people being wholly set upon
blood, Persecution in Paris.
and the Parliament there sparing neither great nor small that fell into their
hands, either of that City, or such as were brought thither upon appeal, or
summons.

At Senlis many godly Christians suffered much, some were beheaded, At Senlis.
some murdered in a popular tumult, some were whipped, some imprisoned, some
fined, and others sent to the Galleys, not sparing the simple women. Yet
through Gods mercy, some escaped, amongst whom was one John Gardens and his
Wife, who living with his Wife and child in the fileds, at length determined to
go back into the City, casting themselves upon Gods providence; but when they
came into the suburbs, they met some who bade the soldiers to put them to the
sword. The woman kneeling down, begged of the soldiers, that if they must
needs dye, they would kill her child first, saying that so she should die with
the more comfort; A special providence.
which speech of hers so wrought upon the soldiers, that they spared all their
lives.

In Chaalons there was a godly Minister, called Fournier, At Chaalons. Mr.
Fournier.
apprehended and spoiled of all that he had: They stripped him also of his
apparel, instead whereof they put on him a thredbare cloak, and so carried him
away in a Cart, by reason of an hurt that he had gotten in one of his feet; by
the way they did nothing but jeere and scoff at him, and every moment he was
in danger of his life; the rude people also had almost pulled him in pieces;
but it pleased God that he was preserved by those which had designed him to
death. When he came to Munchon he was cast into prison, and after a while there
came a Captain to him with many soldiers, who mixing mocks and threatenings
together, swear that within three hours he should be hewn in pieces. After
them came in some of the Judges, commanding the Jailor to load him with irons,
saying to him, You are no better I am sure then Saint Peter, whom they laid in
irons: but if you have as much faith as he, God will then deliver you as he did
him, by sending an Angel to you. I will not, said Fournier, compare my self
with Saint Peter; yet it is not twelve years ago, since for preaching the same
doctrine that Peter did, I was imprisoned at Toulouse, and there was admirably
delivered. And though Peter was delivered out of prison, yet in the end he
glorified God by his death: Faith.
and if I should be counted worthy with him to suffer for the truth, may it not
be said that I have the like precious Faith with Saint Peter? When they were
gone, the Jailor forbore putting bolts upon him, because of his sore leg, yet
did he put him into a straiter prison.

Afterwars the Duke of Guise being made Governor in that place, he was put to
the torture, where first they strained his thumbs so hard with a small cord
that blood came forth: Then turning his arms behind his back, they hoisted him
up with a rope put between his thumbs, twitching him up and letting him down
five or six times; they tied also great stones to both his great toes, and let
him hang till his spirits failed: Popish cruelty
then they let him fall with such violence upon his face, that he was
grievously hurt thereby. Then was he thrown into prison, and they would not
suffer him to have a Surgeon to cure him of the gashes which the cords had
made in his flesh even to the bare bones: so that his torment and anguish was
very great, neither could he lift his hands to his mouth, which he was likely
to lose the use of. But it so fell out by Gods Providence, that after he was
condemned, news coming of the Duke of Guise his death, A special Providence.
his enemies began to tremble, and some of his Judges coming to him in prison,
asked him if he did not bear them ill will? He answered, that men of his
Profession and Religion ought not to bear malice to any, being enjoined by God
to love and pray for those that persecuted them; Showing also that whatsoever
troubles had befallen him, were none other but such as God had foreordained
for the setting forth of his own glory, for which he esteemed himself most
happy; yet he warned them to lay to heart the wrong that they had done him,
lest the vengeance of God did sooner or later overtake them for it. The next
day Bussi, one of his persecutors, having received letters from the Constable
of France to release him, swore that he should be delivered indeed, but into
the hands of the multitude.

But it pleased God that just at that time there came by the Prince of Portion
with his Germane Soldiers, A special Providence.
which were for the Protestants, who sent word that they would not leave so
much as a house standing except they would deliver Fournier; This so affrighted
his enemies that they released him out of prison, protected him from the
violence of the multitude, His delivery.
and conveyed him in safety to the Prince; There he was kindly welcomed and
entertained, all grieving for the miseries which he had endured, and two days
after he preached before the Prince and his followers, and the day after, at
the instant request of the Protestants of Vitri, he went to them to preach and
baptize their children, and shortly after was called to Ver, where he gathered
a Congregation, and spent some time amongst them with wonderful fruit; but by
reason he was so extremely weakened by his strait imprisonment and tortures,
being above fifty years old, His death.
he soon after finished his course, and quietly resigned up his soul unto God.

At Amiens Bibles burnt.
At Amiens, all Bibles, New Testaments, and Psalm-books were sought for and
openly burnt, as also the Ministers Pulpit: Then did the Guisians proceed to
killing of the Christians, and casting them into the River, some they shot to
death, and others they hanged.

At Abbevilli they slew the Lord of Haucourt, with diverse others; one Beliart
they dragged along the streets with his face downwards, At Abbevilly.
and then drowned him in the river.

At Meaux.
At Meaux the Protestants were the stronger Party, and therefore continued the
free exercise of their Religion for a while; but the Parliament of Paris gave
judgment against them, and exposed them to the spoil of such as would undertake
it; Then a company of Soldiers entering the Town, disarmed the Citizens, and
slew about four hundred of the Religion; Then Mounsieur de Boisy entering with
more Soldiers committed a thousand villainies: Abominable villainies.
women and maids were ravished in the open marketplace and streets; some were
beaten and hailed to Mass; children were rebaptized: others married again;
houses were pillaged and plundered: Some that fled into the field died with
hunger and cold. Many men, women and children, were massacred and drowned;
infants were dashed against the walls; and some others were hanged. The
Executioners running into diverse places, committed a world of mischief; and
diverse Priests amongst them slew some of the Protestants with their own hands.

At Troys, At Troys Bibles burnt.
Bibles and Divinity-books were rent and torn in pieces; They of the Religion
were murdered, and their houses sacked; Eighteen men were hanged; women were
dragged through the streets, and cast into the river; and Infants were pulled
from their Mothers breasts, and rebaptized.

At Bar the Popish enemies entering the Town, committed such cruelties as never
were seen, especially against women and little children; At Bar.
Some of their breasts they cut open, Popish cruelty
pulled out their hearts and gnawed them with their teeth, rejoicing that they
had tasted of an Huguenots heart; A young Counselor they hanged at the request
of his own father; with most horrible blasphemies they ravished women and girls.

Mounsieur de St. Esteen with his two brothers were cruelly stabbed by their
own Cousin germane, their wives were spoiled of all they had, and led away
prisoners.

The Pesants in some places committed infinine murders and mischiefs against
those of the Religion; Monsieur de Vigney with his wife and servants they
massacred in his own house, which afterward they pillaged and spoiled.

In Crant, the Pesants entering the Town, murdered many; one young child
together with his father they burnt. At Crant.


In Sens one hundred Protestants were cruelly murdered, At Sens.
and their naked bodies thrown into the River; one hundred houses were
plundered, the Church where they preached was defaced.

At Auxerre one Cosson was barbarously massacred; a fair young Gentlewoman was
stabbed and cast into the River; At Auxerre.
many other outrages and robberies were committed.

At Nevers the Ministers were cast into prison, At Nevers.
whereof one perished miserably there; Another miraculously escaped; Children
were rebaptized, marriages reiterated, and many houses plundered.

The Popish party entering Chastillon, left no kind of cruelty un-exercised,
neither upon Women nor Children, old nor young; At Chastillon.
yea not sparing the women with child that were ready to be delivered.

At Guyen.
At Guyen they used all the cruelty that possibly could be invented: and some
Italians, in hatred of the Religion, cut an infant in two pieces, and eat his
liver.

At Montargis, there lived the Lady Rene, Duchess Dowager of Ferrara, At
Montargis.
and daughter to King Lewis the twelfth; The Duke of Guise sent thither one
Malicorn a Knight of the Order, who entering the Town, murdered some of the
Religion, and committed other outrages; Then he proceeded so far as to threaten
the Lady to batter her Castle with Canon-shot, if she would not deliver up
those of the Religion which were with her; To whom the Princess bravely
answered, I charge you, look what you enterprise; A brave answer of the Lady
Rene.
for no man in the Realm can command me but the King only: and if you proceed
to your battery, I will stand in the breach, to try whether you dare kill the
daughter of a King; neither do I want means or power to be revenged on your
boldness, even to the infants of your rebellious race: This stout answer made
Malicorne to pull in his horns and depart.

At Monlius, Monsieur de Montare used all extremity against the Protestants; At
Monlius.
and without any form of Law he hanged up two Artificers, drove others out, and
plundered their houses, and murdered many.

At Man's two hundred persons were put to death, men, women, and children, At
Man's.
the houses of the Protestants were pillaged; such as were fled, were executed
by their pictures, their goods confiscated, and their children made incapable
of their offices and estates, yea of inheriting their Lands. Some they
beheaded; Others they hung up; Others they massacred, and being half dead,
threw them into the River: Above one hundred and twenty men, women, and
children were murdered in the neighboring Villages. One Captain threw above
fifty persons into his fishpond to feed his Pikes, and above as many more were
thrown into Ditches.

One godly man, a Weaver, had his throat cut, and his moutastuffed with leaves
of a New Testament which they found bouth him.

At Angers.
At Angers they murdered a godly Minister, cast many into prison, robbed the
houses of others, and slew such as they found therein: In a Merchants house,
Bibles burnt.
finding many books of the holy Scriptures, they openly burnt them in the
middle of the Town; One fair guilt Bible they hung upon an Halberd, and carried
it in Procession, saying, Behold truth hanged, the truth of the Huguenots, the
truth of all the Devils; Behold the mighty God, Horrible blasphemies.
behold the everlasting God will speak; and when they came to the Bridge, they
threw it into the River, crying louder, Behold the truth of all the Devils
drowned.

Above eighty other persons were executed. An aged Gentlewoman of the age of
seventy years was beaten to death with their pistols, then drawn through the
dirty streets, and thrown into the River, terming her the mother of the Devil
that preached to the Huguonets. A Counselors wife that lay bedridden was
murdered; women and maids were ravished: Two young maids were ravished before
their Fathers face, who was forced to look on the while: All that were but
suspected to be of the Religion, were massacred, and their houses pillaged.
Popish perfidiousnesse.
A valiant Captain, contrary to their faith given to him, they broke upon a
Cross, and so they left him hanging in great misery till he died.

Anno 1562. a Decree was made by the Parliament of Paris, A bloody Edict.
commanding all Catholics presently to rise in Arms, to sound the Bells in
every place, to destroy all those of the Religion without respect of quality,
sex, or age, to spoil their Houses, and utterly to root them out. This
encouraged all sorts of rascals to rise up in Arms, forsaking their Vocations,
and to march against the Protestants.

In Ligueul they hanged up some, put out the Ministers eyes, In Ligueul.
and then burnt him in a small fire: In other places they committed infinite
villainies; One young man they flayed alive; The Village of Aze they burnt down,
and massacred thirty persons therein. A godly Minister was drowned called John
de Tour, at seventy five years old. John de Tour.


At Tours, one hundred and forty were murdered and cast into the River; diverse
others were drowned, sparing neither man, woman, At Tours.
nor child. The President being suspected to favor them of the Religion, was
beaten with staves, stripped to his shirt, hanged up by one foot, Barbarous
cruelties.
his head in the water up to the breast, and whilst he was yet living, they
ripped up his belly, plucked out his guts, and threw them into the River; and
sticking his heart upon the point of a Lance, they carried it about, saying, It
was the heart of the President of the Huguenots.

Shortly after came thither the Duke de Monpensier, who caused gibbets, wheels
and stakes to be set up, whereupon many more, especially of the richer sort,
were murdered to the number of some hundreds: when they put any man or woman
to death, they entered their houses, murdered their children, and took all
their goods.

A poor woman, whose husband was a little before drowned, having a young infant
sucking at her breasts, and a beautiful daughter of about sixteen years old in
her hand; These bloody villains drew them to the River: there the woman on her
knees prayed ardently unto God: then took her infant, and shifting it in the
Sun, laid it upon the grass: In the mean while this hellish Rabble
endeavored, partly by threats, partly by fair promises to seduce the young
maid; and one of them finer then the rest, promised to marry her if she would
do it, Popish subtilty
so that the poor wench stood in a disway, which her mother perceiving, who was
now ready to be thrown into the River, she earnestly exhorted her daughter to
persist in the truth; the daughter hereupon cried out, I will live and die with
my Mother, whom I know to be a virtuous woman: as for your threats and promises
I regard them not, do with me what you please. The mother was not yet dead when
they threw in the daughter after her, where making toward her mother, they
mutually embraced each other, The Mother and her daughter drowned.
and so yielded up their souls into the hands of God.

Also in the same City there was a godly Matron called Glee, who was carried
before the Captain, where she gave a reason of her Faith, Glee.
and confirmed it by evident testimonies of Scripture: She dispuited also with
some Friars, whom she so silenced that they had nothing to say, but that she
was in a damnable condition. Vincit verit^^.
It seems so indeed, says she, being in your hands; But I have a God that will
not fail nor forsake me, etc. Then was she committed to prison, where she was
much solicited to recant, but all in vain; for she spoke her mind freely, and
comforted the prisoners which were in the same Prison for Religion. News being
brought her that she was condemned to be hanged, when the rope was put about
her neck, Joy in tribulation.
she kneeled down, praising and magnifying the name of God, in that he showed
her such mercy as by this death to deliver her out of the troubles of this
wretched world, as also for that it pleased the Lord to honor her so far as to
die for his truth, and to wear his livery, meaning the halter; Then she brake
her fast with the rest of the company, and giving thanks to God, she exhorted
them to be of good courage, and to trust to the end in his free mercy, etc. As
she went to execution, Tentation resisted.
a Kinswoman met her with her little children, persuading her to recant,
telling her that thereby she might preserve her life, and see those her Babes
provided for; This meeting wrought so upon her motherly affection, as made her
shed plenty of tears; but presently taking new courage, she said, I love my
children dearly, yet neither for love to them, Faith.
nor for any thing else in the world, will I renounce my God or his truth. God
will be a Father to these my children, and will provide better for them then I
could have done, and therefore to his providence and protection I commend and
leave them, At the place of execution having prayed to, and praised God with a
cheerful heart and voice, Her Martyrdom.
she quietly resigned up her spirit unto God.

Ponteou de Mer
The Duke de Aumale in Normandy, took Pontea de Mer by subtilty, where he used
all kinds of cruelty, especially against the Minister, Master Brione; Shortly
after, Roan was besieged, and two Forts taken, wherein they put all to the
sword, Impudence.
the Queen Mother in an impudent manner leading the King, who was but twelve
years old, to show him the naked bodies of the women weltring in their own
blood; After diverse assaults the City of Roan was taken, wherein the Kings
soldiers used all kinds of monstrous cruelty, massacring all they met: many
English and Scots soldiers were hanged; the sick and wounded were cast into
the river: Diverse Ministers were retreated into a strong Tower, which they
yielded upon promise of safety, but contrary therereto they were cast into
prison; Marliorat hanged.
Augustine Marlorat with three Counselors were condemned to be hanged, which
was presently executed, with many opprobrious speeches against Marlorat; The
sackage of this Town lasted four months together, in which space diverse were
executed.

In Valougnes diverse persons of good quality were massacred, and the houses of
the Protestants were filled with soldiers that did what they listed therein.
At Valougnes.
Amongst other outrages they slew a godly Minister, called Monsieur de
Valougnes, whose body* they stripped naked, dragd it up and down his house with
many scorns and jears; Monsieur Valougnes. Popish profaneness and blasphemy.
at last bringing it into the chamber where he used to preach to his people,
they spurned his corpse, saying, Now pray to God* and preach if thou can; The
Priests that were present stuffed his mouth and wounds with the leaves of his
Bible, saying to him, Preach the truth of thy God, and call upon him now to
help thee.

In Vire as they came from a Sermon, some were slain, some stoned, At Vire.
and a while after many were put to the sword.

In, and about Again, Monluc killed and massacred many, At Again.
two young children were roasted.

In the Castle of Reime, Monluc used great cruelty against those of the
Religion, sparing none, At Reime.
but murdering young children in their mothers arms, and then killing the
mothers: some other women they reserved for their lust, which they so abused,
that (says mine Author) I abhor to write it. Above five hundred men were
hanged upon gibbets, amongst whom was a grave Counselor in his long gown and
square cap. One poor man they cut and mangled in several parts of his body,
filling all his wounds with salt.

In the City of Blois there was a godly woman called Nichola, at whose house
some holy people used to meet to pray, At Bl^is.
and confer together for their mutual edification and comfort. The murderers
hearing of it, came rushing in, thinking to have found a Minister preaching,
but being disappointed in their expectations, they dragged these good women out
by the hair of the head, loaded them with many stripes, and then threw them
into the river; but behold a singular Providence! God so endowed them with
strength and skill, that they swam safely to an Island: yet after a while some
watermen finding them there, they stripped them stark naked, and threw them again
into the river, yet they still sought to save themselves by swimming, and
coming at last to the Suburbs of Vienne, they were there most cruelly knocked
on the head by the bloody Papists.

Monluc having defeated a party of the Protestants under Monsieur Duras, he
took diverse Prisoners, most of which he hanged, especially the Ministers.
Amongst the Prisoners was a Captain called La-mothe, whom Monluc meeting with,
gave him diverse stabs with a dagger, and thrust him through with a rapier,
saying, Villain, Blasphemy.
thou shall die in despite of God; but he proved a liar; for the man being
carried away, though he had many mortal wounds, yet he was wonderfully cured
and lived after. A miracle.


In Guillac, In Guillac.
the murders committed upon the Protestants were many and horrible; and
amongst other this was one of their practices; There was by the City, the Abbey
of St. Michael, built upon a very high rock, under which ran a swift and deep
river called Tar. Many of the Protestants they forced to go up to the top of
this rock, whom they threw headlong down into the river; by the way there was
another rock, Horrid cruelties.
upon which most of the bodies falling, were dashed and broken all to pieces,
and if any escaped with life into the river, they had their cutthroats waiting
upon the river in boats to knock them on the head; Amongst others there was one
Peter Domo, an Apothecaries servant, Peter Domo.
who seeing them bent to murder him, requested that he might have leave to
cast himself down from the top of the Abbey, provided that if God should
preserve him in the fall, they would suffer him to escape with life; this they
promised; whereupon having made his Prayers to God, he fetched his leap from
the top of the Abbey, Popish perfidiousnesse.
and flew so far, that missing the rocks under him, he fell safely into the
river, and endeavored to swim out with life; but these perfidious Villains,
contrary to their promise made, knocked him on the head and slew him.

In Souraize.
In Souraize, there was one Captain Durre, who with his soldiers going into the
house of a godly widow, called Castille Roques, he caused her to be bound with
cords, and a rope to be put about her neck, by which he haled her up and down,
almost strangling her; then he asked her how often she had played the whore with
those of her Religion? She answered, That in their Christian meetings they had
no such villainies committed. Durre fretting and fuming at this answer, took her
by both the cheeks, and often dashed her head with such violence against the
wall, that he had almost beaten out her brains; Then he required her to give
him the seven hundred pieces of gold which she had hidden; Prodigious villainies.
she told him that she was a poor woman, and had only one French penny; This
more enraged him; whereupon he drew her again about by the neck, and applied
burning hot eggs to her armpits, till they were all blistred, Blasphemy.
bidding her in derision to cry to her Father which was in heaven. Faith and
patience.
She answered, I will not cry aloud for thee, and yet my God can hear me well
enough, and when his pleasure is, he will deliver me out of thy hand. This made
him so to blaspheme, that the poor woman was more afflicted to hear his
blasphemies than with all her pains. Then did he call her Huguenote whore,
telling her that these were but the beginnings of her sorrows, except she
fetched him out her gold, which if she refused, he would draw her cheeks and
breasts with Lard, and so roast her quick, and afterward throw her headlong
from the highest steeple in the town. Well, Faith.
said she, If you throw my body never so low, that shall not hinder my soul
from ascending into heaven: This her courage and constancy did still further
enrage him; Then did he open her mouth with his dagger, and crammed lime down
her throat; after which he made her drink a glass of Urine which himself had
made before her, withal throwing the glass with the remainer into her face.
After this he carried her to his quarters, where with strange cruelties he
intended to have slain her: but some of the neighbors pitying her sad
condition, redeemed her from him with ten Crowns, A special Providence.
and so conveyed her to her house, where shortly after she finished her days.

Some other of these hell hounds meeting with one Peter Roch, constrained him
to dig his own grave, Peter Roch buried quick.
and then to try how it fitted him; which whilst he was doing, they buried him
alive.

In Saint Martins in Castillon, they took the wife of one Andrew Renaud,
stripped her stark naked, Two crowned with thorns.
and would have violated her chastity, which she resisting, they whipped her most
cruelly, wounded her with their swords, crowned her with thorns, and lastly
shot her to death.

Janetta Calvin.
They took also one Ianetta Calvin, whom they carried into the City of Brignole,
stripped her, whipped her cruelly, crowned her with thorns, and first stoned, and
afterward burned her.

In Mont de Marsan, At Mont de Marson.
six of the principal men had their heads stricken off, otheres were executed
diverse ways; One was buried quick; and a young woman being pursued to be
ravished, threw her self out of a window and died.

In Toulouse the Papists fell upon the Protestants, hurt many, In Toulouse.
killed some outright, diverse they threw into a Well; Then did some Counselors
proclaim, that they should not spare to kill and spoil all them of the
religion, for that they were licensed by the King and Pope. This soon ran
through all the Villages, and the Papists rang their bells; In Toulouse were
about thirty thousand Protestants, so that there began one of the most horrible
Massacres that was in those parts. Horrible cruelties.
The prisons were presently filled, and many were knocked on the head at the
prison-doors, because they could hold no more; the river in a short space was
covered with dead bodies; many were thrown into the streets out at the windows:
if any sought to escape out of the water, they were presently slain with swords
or stones.

Some of the Protestants gat into the townhouse, where they stood upon their
guard, and at last it was agreed, that leaving their Arms, they should depart
in safety; and so after they had received the Sacrament, commended themselves
to God with prayers and tears, they came forth; but contrary to the faith and
promise made to them, the Popish party seized upon as many as they could, whom
they cast into prison; Popish perfidiousness.
of such as gat out of the City, some escaped to Montaubon, others in the way
were spoiled and killed by the Soldiers and Pesants.

At Carcasson those of the Religion being gone out of the Town to hear a
sermon, when they returned, the gates were shut, Carcasson.
and the Papists shot at them, who afterward issuing out against them, slew
some, and hurt others: One they beat down, cutting off his nose and ears, and
pulling out his eyes: some they took prisoners, whom they hanged; one they
beheaded, and put others to great ransomes. One they took, blacked his face,
hands and feet, and gave it out that he had a Devil within him, then hanged
him, and threw his body to the dogs; Others they banished, or condemned to the
Galleys. Popish lies.


In Limoux the Papists used all manner of cruelty, At Limox.
deflouring women and very girls in a most detestable manner; The Minister was
slain, two Gentlemen, and sixty others were hanged. A widow of great account
redeemed the virginity of her only daughter with a great sum of money; but the
villain that promised to defend her, Abominable villainy.
ravished her in her Mothers presence, and then killed them both. Yea after
peace was proclaimed, fourteen of the Religion coming thither were all slain.

In Nonnay, Monsieur Chaumont having surprised the Town, At Nonnay.
murdered many Protestants, spitting out infinite and horrible blasphemies
against God himself: Blasphemy.
A Locksmith being commanded to despite and blaspheme God, because he refused
to do it, was presently hewn in pieces; for the same cause another was brained
with the butt end of a musket; Barbarous cruelties.
A Naylor, because he would not give himself to the Devil, was drawn about his
shop by the ears; then being laid on his Anvile, they beat his head in pieces
with hammers; yea all manner of cruelty was used that could be devised; Three
of the principal in the Town were thrown down from an high Tower; many other
were thrown down to make sport: Some were burnt in their houses, others thrown
out at windows: others stabbed in the streets: women and maids were most
shamefully handled; a young woman that was found hid in an house with her
husband, was first ravished before her husbands face, then forced to hold a
Rapier; wherewith one thrusting her arm, made her kill her own husband.

In Foix, many Protestants were cast into prison, of whom some had their arms
and legs cut off, At Foix.
and then were beheaded; Some burnt, some hanged, and others sent to the
Galleys.

In Aurange they killed the Protestants without distinction of age, sex, or
quality: At Aurange.
Some they stabbed, others they threw upon the points of Halberds; Some they
hanged, others they burnt in the Churches; Of some they cut off their privy
members, sparing neither old nor bedrid, nor the diseased in the Hospitals.
Women and maids were killed, others hanged out at windows were harquebushed,
sucking children massacred at their mothers breasts; Horrible cruelties.
girls of five or six years old ravished and spoiled; the wounds of the dead
were filled with leaves torn out of Bibles. Those in the Castle yielding upon
oath and promise of safety, were all stabbed, or thrown over the walls, being
one hundred and ninety of them. Perfidiousness.


In Grenoble, they slew many of the Religion, and others they cast from the
Bridge into the River. At Grenoble.


At Cisterno.
In Cisterno, the men that were of the Religion being fled, the popish party
fell upon the women and children, whereof they slew three or four hundred:
Some women with child were rip't up, many were buried quick; Some had their
throats cut like sheep, others were drawn through the streets, and beaten to
death with clubs.

At Beaune.
In Beaune, they were bereaved of the exercise of Religion, their three
Ministers imprisoned; many were driven out of the Town to the number of eight
hundred persons with women and children: their houses were filled with
soldiers who made spoil of all; such as were found in their houses, were
vilely abused, and some were slain.

In Mascon the bloody Persecutors having apprehended a godly and learned
Minister called Bonnet Bor who was of a very unblameable life, At Mascon.
Bonnet Bor a godly Minister
having served twenty years in the Ministry, and in that time had been put to
his ransom three times; they carried him along the streets with a thousand
scoffs and scorns, smiting him with their fists, thrusting him up and down, and
then made a Proclamation, That whosoever would hear this holy man preach,
should come to the slaughterhouse; at which place they again buffeted and
mocked him two hours together: Hereupon he requested them that before his death
they would permit him to pray to God: Barbarous cruelty.
Then one stepping to him cut off half his nose, and one of his ears, saying,
Now pray as long as thou will, and then we will send thee to all the Devils;
and so this holy man kneeling down, prayed with such fervency of spirit that
drew sighs from some of the Murderers: and afterward directing his speech to
him that had cut off his nose, he said, Friend, I am now ready to suffer what
thou have further to inflict upon me; But I entreat thee and thy companions to
bethink you well of the outrages committed by you against this poor City; for
there is a God in heaven, Courage and constancy.
before whose Tribunal you must shortly give an account of these your
cruelties. A Captain passing by, cried, send that wretched man to the Devil;
which one of them hearing, took him by the hand, pretending to have him to the
river to wash off his blood, but when he came thither he threw him into it, His
martyrdom.
battering him with stones till he was drowned.

CHAP. XXXV. The History of the Massacre at Paris
ANNO 1571. After the end of the third Civil War in France, great means was
used to draw the chief of the Protestants to Paris, See this more fully in the
life of the Admiral at the end of this book.
under pretense of a marriage between the Prince of Navar and the Lady
Margaret, sister to the King of France; but in the mean time the Papists in
Roan murdered diverse Protestants as they came from a Sermon, and grievously
beat others; this seemed much to displease the King, and three or four were
executed for the mutiny; then were the Articles of marriage agreed upon; The
place for it, Paris: and the Admiral sent to by the King to be present at the
wedding, and to prevent all Jealousies, those of the house of Guise were sent
away, whereat they seemed much discontented. The Admiral was allowed to bring
with him fifty Gentlemen armed for his greater security. When he came to Paris,
he was honorably received and conducted to the King, who calls him his Father,
Divellish dissimulation.
protesting that in all his life he had not seen any day more agreeable to his
mind than that, wherein he assured himself to see the end of all troubles, and
the beginning of firm peace and quietness in his Realm: the Queen Mother and
the rest of the great Courtiers received him with greater favor than he
expected: Then did the King send him one hundred thousand Franks out of his
treasury for the losses which he had received in the wars, etc.

The Admiral had diverse advertisements of the intended treachery; yet God so
blinded him at that time, though a very prudent man, that he gave little heed
to them. Yea such a general stupidity seized upon the Protestants, that their
minds were very wavering, Sin the forerunner of persecution.
and few there were that showed themselves zealously bent to Religion; but all
both great and small, thinking deeply upon worldly matters, built them goodly
Castles in the air.

Then was the Queen of Navar sent for by the King of France to Paris, to
prepare all things against the wedding: but presently after her coming she fell
sick of a Feavor, made her will in a most Christian manner, had much inward joy
and comfort, and at five days end died, not without suspicion of poison from
certain perfumes given to her: and after her death the Chirurgions were not
suffered to open her head, The Queen of Navar dies.
where the mischief lay, whereby it was the better concealed.

The Admiral was again advertised of his danger; but he resting upon the
testimony of a good conscience, and the providence of God, misinterpreted those
advices, as if they proceeded from men desirous of new troubles. Many Lords and
Gentlemen of the Religion, accompanied the King of Navar, and the Prince of
Conde to Paris.

The King of France, the better to delude the Protestants, spoke openly, that
he gave not his sister to the King of Navar only, but as it were to the whole
Church of the Protestants to join with them in an indissoluble union,
Dissimulation.
and as a tie to their peace and safety.

August 17. Anno 1572. The King of Navar and the Lady Margaret were married by
the Cardinal of Bourborn, The K. of Navar married.
upon a scaffold in the sight of all the people, and that day was spent in
banquets, dances, and masks, with a strange mixture of Protestants and Papists
together; but in the mean time the Queen mother with her Privadoes, as also the
Duke of Anjou with the Guises, consulted about killing the Admiral, and
dividing the Protestants.

Five days after, as the Admiral came from the Court, accompanied with about
fifteen Gentlemen, reading a petition as he went, one shot at him with a
Caliver; The Admiral shot.
the bullet taking away his right forefinger, hurt him in the left arm: he
that shot had a Spanish Jennet at the backdoor of his lodging, upon which he
immediately mounted and escaped: The door being burst open, it was found that
the Caliver left behind, was brought to the house the day before by one Chally,
steward of the Kings house, and a great dealer for the Duke of Guise; the
Admiral being conveyed to his lodging, showed most admirable piety, patience,
and constancy.

The King complained of the mischief, swearing and promising to execute such
justice upon the offender, that the Admiral and all his friends should think
themselves well satisfied. He caused also all the gates of Paris to be shut,
Dissimulation.
swearing and blaspheming, that he would not that they which had done the fact
should escape; he also appointed many Lords and Gentlemen of the Protestants to
lodge in the Admirals quarter, the better, as he pretended, to secure
themselves against any danger.

After noon the King went to visit the Admiral, and there, with many Oaths and
protestations, assured him of his love to him, care over him and them of the
Religion, and that he would severely punish the Authors of his present hurt.
Presently after the Vidame of Chartres [John de Ferriers] advised the King of
Navar, the Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and other chief Lords of the religion,
Good counsel neglected.
presently to depart out of Paris, assuring them that that blow was but the
beginning of the Tragedy which was soon to ensue, but they trusting to the
Kings word, rested secure.

That day also the King wrote to the Ambassadors of foreign Princes, and to the
Governors of all his Provinces how much he was offended at the Admirals hurt,
how severely he would punish it, Deep dissimulation.
yea he desired that all the world might know how much he was offended at it;
and the Queen Mother wrote the like.

In the mean time the Dukes of Anjou and Guise employed some to go from house
to house to take the names of all the Protestants, The Massacre suspected.
and to return the Catalogue to them, so that presently after they of the
Religion began to discover that some bloody intentions were hatching against
the Admiral and his friend. For the King set a guard of fifty Harquebushires at
the Admirals gate. Great store of Arms were carried into the Loure, and about
evening all the people were in Arms.

The chief of the Protestants hereupon assembled again in the Admirals lodging,
where the Vidame of Chartres advised as before, that they should essay
presently to carry the Admiral out of Paris, and that the rest should presently
dislodge; yet all the rest refused this counsel, resolving to rely upon the
Kings word, who had promised them Justice.

In the evening some Protestant Gentlemen proffered to watch with the Admiral,
but he would not suffer them: At night the Duke of Guise sent for the Captain
of the Switzers* showing him his Commission to kill the Admiral and all his
partakers, The Kings Commission showed for it.
exhorting him and his men to be courageous in shedding of blood. At midnight
the Provost, Sheriffs, and Captains of every Ward had the same showed them,
with assurance that through the whole Realm the like should be done to all the
Protestants, and that the watchword for the general Massacre should be the
tolling of the Bell in the Palace to be rung at the break of day, and the Badge
of the Executioners should be a white Handkerchif tied on their arms, and a
white Cross in their hats: The Massacre begins.
The Duke of Guise and his Associates were to begin at the Admirals lodging:
Some of the Protestants being awakened with the noise in the streets of men
running up and down in arms, and with torches, gat up to enquire what was the
matter; but presently the Bell rung, and the Duke of Guise with his cutthroats
hasted to, and knocked at the Admirals gates: he that opened them was presently
stabbed; The Admiral hearing the noise, gat out of bed, and joined with his
Minister [Master Merlin] in fervent prayer, commending his soul into the hands
of God; Then said he, Of Merlins miraculous escape, see in my book of Examples.
It is long since I disposed my self to die; save you your selves if it be
possible, for you cannot save my life; I commit my soul into the hands and
mercy of God; Then did Merlin his Minister, and the rest get up to the top of
the house, and crept out of windows into the gutters to hide themselves; yet
most of them were slain in the next house: Then seven or eight men brake into
the Admirals chamber, and one of them went to him with his naked sword offering
him the point, to whom he said; Young man, thou ought to respect any age and
infirmity, yet shall thou not shorten my life; with that he thrust him into the
body, and all the rest laid at him, so that he fell to the ground, The Admiral
slain.
where he lay gasping: The Duke of Guise below called to them to throw his body
out at window, which they did: his face being all bloody, the Duke of Guise
wiped it, and looking on it, said, Now I know him, it is he, and so kicked him
on the face with his foot, whom all the murderers in France feared so much
when he was alive.

Then went he out into the streets, crying, Courage my fellows, we have here
made a good beginning, let us now fall upon the rest, the King commands it* His
head imbalmed, and sent to the Pope.
it is his express pleasure, he commands it. The Admirals head was sent to the
King and queen mother, and by them sent to the Pope and Cardinal of Lorrain as
a grateful present. The Pope when he heard the news, set apart a day of
public thanksgiving to God, in the Church of St. Lewis, and published a Bull
of extraordinary Indulgences to such as should pray for the heavenly assistance
to the King and Kingdom of France. Strada. The common people cut off the
Admirals hands and privy members, drawing his body about the streets three
days, and then hung it by the feet upon the Gallows. Popish cruelty


All the Attendants of the King of Navar and Prince of Conde which lay in the
Kings Palace were massacred; the like was done to the Lords and Gentlemen that
lay about the Admirals lodging, and then through all the City were the
Protestants murdered, Ten thousand slain in Paris.
so that that night and the two next days there were slain in Paris about ten
thousand persons of all ranks, ages, and sexes, yea they spared not children in
the Cradle, nor infants in their mothers wombs. But to color this their
villainy, they gave it out, that the Huguenots had conspired to kill the King;
They boasted also that they had in one day done that, which Processes,
sentences of Justice, Popish lies.
and open War could not do in twelve years.

The Lords and Gentlemen were most inhumanely mu^thered, some in their beds,
others on the roofs of their houses, and in all other places wheresoever they
were found.

There were at this time in Paris about sixty thousand men with pistols, pikes,
curtelaces, poinards, knives, and such other bloody instruments, that ran up
and down swearing and blaspheming the sacred Majesty of God, cruelly massacring
all that they met with: The streets were covered with mangled bodies, gates and
doors defiled with blood; Shoutings and howlings of the murderers, mixed with
the cries and groans of the dying; The river died red with blood
the breaking open of doors and windows, with the noise of guns and pistols,
all which made an hellish noise; multitudes of dead bodies were thrown into the
Seine, which was died red with their blood.

The King certified the King of Navar and the Prince of Conde of all that was
done, saying, that he saved their lives upon condition that they should
renounce their Religion, and turn Papists. The King of Navar desired him not to
force his conscience, but to remember the Alliance so lately contracted betwixt
them: The Prince of Conde with more zeal told him, Prince of Conde's zeal, and
courage.
that his body and estate were in his power to do with them what he pleased;
but for his Religion he was fully purposed not to forsake it, but to remain
constant therein to the loss of his life; he put the King in mind also that
he had given his faith to him, and to those of the Religion, and therefore he
hoped he would not falsify his oath, etc. This so enraged the King that he
called him rebel, and the son of a rebellious person, with horrible
threatenings that he should lose his head if within three days he altered not
his mind.

The King and his Confidents perceiving that this Massacre would not quench the
fire, but rather stir up the Protestants in other parts of the Kingdom to
defend themselves; they presently dispatched away letters to the Governors of
Towns, with express commands to masscacre all the Protestants: yet at the same
time the King wrote other letters, wherein he laid the fault of the murder of
the Admiral upon the Duke of Guise: Divellish dissimulation.
pretending that he had quieted all things in Paris, and intended that his
Edicts of pacification* should hold inviolably.

Upon the receipt of the first letters, the Papists fell upon the Protestants
at Meaux, Trois, Orleance, and other places, and murdered them without all
pity, besides such as were massacred in Villages and Fields, where they thought
to save themselves, so that in a few weeks there were above thirty thousand
persons massacred in France. But besides this general account, some particulars
deserve remembrance, Above thirty thousand massacred in three months
which are these that follow.

Monsieur de la Place, President of the Court of Requests, had a Captain armed
that came into his house, telling him that the Duke of Guise, had slain the
Admiral at the Kings appointment, with many other Huguenots, and that he was
come to protect him in that common destruction, only he desired a sight of the
Gold and Silver that was in his house: The L. de la Place amazed at his
audaciousnesse, asked him whether he thought that there was a King or no? The
Captain blaspheming, willed him to go with him to know the Kings pleasure;
Hereupon the Lord went from him to secure himself; Then did the Captain rifle
his house, taking above one thousand Crowns: The Lord would have secured
himself in three several houses, all which refused to entertain him, which
caused him to go back to his own house again, where he found his wife very
heavy, whom he rebuked, discoursed to her of the promises, told her that we
must through many afflictions enter into the Kingdom of God, etc. which much
comforted her: Then calling his family together, he made an exhortation to
them, went to prayer, The Lord de la Place h^s holy zeal.
and began to read a chapter in Job with Calvin's Exposition upon it. Then went
he to Prayer again, resolving to suffer all torments or death, rather than to
do any thing that might be dishonorable to God: Then came the Provost-Marshal
with many Archers to his house, pretending to secure him, and safely to convey
him to the King, who would speak with him; De la Place told him that he was
most willing to do it, but saw it impossible (in regard of the horrible
massacres committed every where) without apparent danger of his life; In brief,
presently after came the Provost of Merchants, who would needs also have him to
the King, yet he would have excused it as before, but the Provost would have no
nay, wherefore resolving upon death, which he saw he could not avoid, he
embraced his wife, wishing her above all things, to continue in the fear of
God, and so went on his way boldly; but in the street some murderers that
attended there for his coming, with their daggers stabbed him, and then
pillaged him, carrying his body into a stable, and covering his face over with
dung, The Lord de la Place murdered.
and the next day they threw him into the river.

Peter Ramus also, the Kings Professor in Logic was not forgotten; the
murderers breaking into the College of Priests where he was, Peter Ramus
murdered.
massacred him, then cast him out of the chamber-window, so that his bowels
issued out on the stones: then was his body trailed through the streets and
whipped by certain young Scholars, who were set on by their Popish Tutors to do
it.

A godly young man going early abroad on the Sabbath morning, and hearing of
the death of the Admiral, and seeing the insurrection, out of a singular
child-like affection to his mother, he hasted home, informed her of the danger,
secured her in a place of great secrecy; after which he shut himself up in his
study, A dutiful and loving son.
by Prayer to fit himself for death, into which the murderers breaking with
battleaxes and staves, so loaded him with blows on the head, that he received
his blood into his own hands; and when they had killed him, they threw him into
the river.

Two Ministers murdered.
Two Ministers belonging to the King of Navar were also murdered, and thrown
into the river: God miraculously preserving all the other Ministers in the City.

A Jeweller being in bed with his wife, who at that time had the midwife with
her, being near the time of her delivery, these bloody Villains came knocking
at the door, and in the Kings name demanded entrance; the woman as ill was she
was, opened the door, whereupon rushing in, they stabbed her husband in his
bed; the Midwife seeing that they were bent to murder the woman also,
earnestly entreated them to tarry at least so long till the infant (which would
be the twentieth child that God had given her) was born; Hellish cruelty.
but notwithstanding her request, they took the woman, and thrust a dagger into
her fundament up to the hilts; the woman finding her self mortally wounded, yet
desirous to bring forth her fruit, fled into a corn-loft, whither these tigers
persuing her, gave her another stob into the belly, and so cast her out of the
window into the street, and upon the fall, the child came forth of her body,
the head foremost, gaping and yauning in a pitiful manner.

One of these murderers snatching up a little child in his arms, the poor
babe began to play with his beard, An Infant murdered.
and to smile upon him; but instead of being moved to compassion, this villain,
whose heart was harder than the rocks, wounded it with his dagger, and cast it
all gore blood into the river.

The Kings letters being come to Meaux upon the same Sabbath, to Cosset the
Kings Atturny there, At Meaux.
upon the sight of them, he presently went about to his cutthroats, warning
them to come to him armed at seven a clock at night, withal causing the gates
of the City to be shut up; The hour being come, he with his Partisans went up
and down, cruelly murdering the innocent servants of Jesus Christ, in which
bloody employment they spent all that night; The next day they pillaged their
houses, and took above two hundred Protestants more, and shut them up in
prison: the next day toward evening, Two hundred Protestants murdered.
Cosset with his companions went to the prison, where having a Catalogue of the
prisoners names, Cosset called them out one by one, and then they murdered
them till they were aweary: Then they went to supper, that so they might breath
and refresh themselves; and then filling themselves with wine, they went back
to glut themselves with blood also; They took with them butchers axes that they
might dispatch them the more easily, with which as they called them forth, they
knocked them down and murdered them; Amongst those that were thus butchered,
was an Elder of the Reformed Church, who praying for his enemies, they laughed
him to scorn, and because he had a Buffe-coat on, which they were loath to
spoil, they opened it before, and stabbed him into the breast.

Another was an ancient man, that had been sheriff of the City; him they were
not content to kill outright, but first cut off his nose, ears, and privy
members, then they gave him several small thrusts into the body, tossing him up
and down, till through loss of blood he fell down, calling upon the name of
the Lord, and so with many wounds he was slain.

The Kings letters being come to Troys, the Protestants were all shut up in
prison; At Troys.
Then did the Bailiffe send for the common Hangman to murder them; but he
refused, saying, That his office was only to execute such as were legally
condemned, and so went his way: Then was the Keeper of the prison sent for, who
being sick, he sent one Martin to know what the business was, to whom the
Bailiffe imparted the matter, wishing him to murder all the Prisoners; and
that their blood might not run out into the street, he bade him to make a great
trench in the midst of the prison, and to cause certain vessels to be set into
it to receive the blood; This Martin going back with abhorrency of the fact,
concealed it from the Jailor: The next day the Bailiffe came to the prison, and
smiling, asked the Jailor if it was done? but he, being ignorant of his
meaning, asked him what should be done? Hereupon the Bailiffe was so enraged,
that he was ready to strike him with his dagger, till he promised to perform
his Will; Then did the Jailor go to the Prisoners who were in the Court
recreating themselves, and shut them up one by one in their several Cells, which
made them suspect that they were destinated to slaughter, and therefore they
betook themselves to prayer; The Jailor called his companions about him,
acquainted them what was given him in charge, and caused them to swear to
execute it; but when they approached to the prisoners, they were so surprised
with fear, that they stood gazing one upon another, Gods Providence.
having not hearts to act so horrid a deed; whereupon they returned to the
Jailors Lodge, and sent for eight quarts of the strongest wine, with other
things, to intoxicate their brains; then they took a Catalogue of all their
prisoners, and gave it to one Martin to call them forth in order: Prodigious
wickedness and cruelty.
The first prisoner being called for, presented himself with a cheerful
countenance, calling upon the name of the Lord, then opened his breast to them,
receiving the mortal stroke, whereof he died.

Another being called forth, one of them thrust at him several times with the
point of his Halbard, Courage and constancy of Gods people.
wounding, but not killing him, whereupon the prisoner took the point of the
Halbard, and set it against his heart, saying with a steadfast voice, Here
soldier, here, right at the heart, right at the heart, and so finished his
life.

The rest were all murdered in the like manner, after which the murderers
made a great pit in the backside of the prison, into which they cast the
bodies one upon another, some of them yet breathing: yea one of them raised up
himself above his fellows, whereupon they threw in earth and so smothered him:
But the Bailiffs order of making a trench being not observed, the blood of the
slain ran so abundantly out of the prison door, that thence, through the
channel, it ran into the river, and turned it into the color of blood, which
bred an horror in the very Papists themselves which saw it.

The Massacre at Orleance.
At Orleance the Kings Edict for observing the Treaty of Peace was solemnly
published, which made those of the Religion very secure, whereupon above three
hundred of them, men, women and children met together at a Sermon; but the same
night came the Kings letters for the massacring of them all; Then did the Major
and Sheriffs raise the companies in Arms to put it in execution. A Noble
Counselor.
One of these murderers with some of his companions went to a Noble
Counselors house, bidding themselves to supper; The Counselor ignorant of
their intents, made them good cheer; Monstrous ingratitude.
but when supper was ended, with horrible blasphemies they murdered him, and
then plundered his house.

About the Ramparts of the wall inhabited many of the Religion, amongst whom
all night was heard nothing but shooting of guns and pistols, breaking open of
doors, fearful outcries of the men, women and children that were massacred,
trampling of horses, rumbling of Carts that carried the dead bodies away, and
the cryings out of the murderers that went up and down, howling out, Kill,
kill them all, and then take the spoil.

This Massacre continued all the week long, the bloody beasts crying out to
those whom they murdered, Blasphemy.
Where is now your God? What is become of all your Prayers and Psalms now? Let
your God whom you called upon, save you if he can. Others sang in scorn to them
the 43. Psalm, Judge and revenge my cause O Lord. Others, Have mercy on me, O
God, etc. Yet notwithstanding all these taunts, the faithful died courageously.
In this Massacre the Papists boasted that they had slain above twelve thousand
men, besides women and children; some of them said eighteen thousand.

A Doctor of the Law.
On Tuesday night some of these murderers came and knocked at the door of a
Doctor of the Civil Law, and when he opened it to them, they told him that he
must die, whereupon he fell to Prayer with such ardency and affection, that
they being amazed and overruled by a divine power, only robbed him and went
away; The next day came some Scholars to his house desiring to see his Library,
which he showed them; then they asked, some one book, some another, which he
gave them; yet they told him they were not satisfied, but they must kill him;
whereupon betaking himself to prayer, when he had done, he desired them to kill
him there, which they refused, forcing him out into the streets, leading him by
the schools, and there he again desired them to kill him in that place, where
he had taught so long; but they still refused; and when they had led him a
little farther, they knocked him on the head.

Others meeting with an Apothecary who had brought Physic to a Patient, cut
off one of his arms, An Apothecary.
and then had him forth into the marketplace, where they murdered him.

A Cook that had hid himself three days, A Cook.
was at last through hunger forced to come forth, and so was slain.

And to fulfill the measure of their cruelty, such Protestants as through fear
revolted to them, The reward of Apostates.
they placed them in the forefront of their companies, putting weapons in
their hands, compelling them to give the first onset, crying, Smite them, smite
them, are they not your holy brethren and sisters? and if any refused, they
presently slew him.

In Lions, Mandolet Governor thereof, hearing of the Massacre at Paris,
presently caused the City gates to be shut, raised forces, commanding them,
that if any of the Protestants came out of their houses, though but with
swords, they should presently kill them; but the Protestants seeing a storm
coming, The patience of the Saints.
which they knew could not arise without the special providence of God, set
themselves to bear it with invincible patience. Gods providence.
The day following if any of them did but go abroad about their necessary
occasions, they were presently clapped up in prison, and when night came, the
murderers entered their houses, which they rifled and plundered, and pretending
to carry the Protestants to prison, some they stabbed in the streets, others
they threw into the river, whereof some were carried down the stream half a
mile below the City, by which means they escaped; The day after, Proclamation
was made by sound of Trumpet, that all of the Religion should appear at such a
place to know the Kings pleasure concerning them; many went, Popish malice and
cruelty.
but so soon as they came, they were sent to several prisons, and the night
following every corner and part of the City was full of lamentable cries and
shreekings, partly of such as were massacred in their houses, partly of such as
were but half murdered, and so haled to be thrown into the river; and from
that time there were such horrible murders committed in the City, as if the
Devils in the likeness of men ran roaring about to do mischief; The Sabbath
morning following those that had hitherto escaped massacring, were then
dispatched.

In the Archbishops house there were three hunded and fifty Prisoners shut up,
Three hundred and fifty murdered.
and a bloody crew of cutthroats were appointed to murder them, to whom the
keys were delivered, and they rushing into the great Court, gave notice to the
prisoners with a loud voice that they must die; then having first taken all the
Prisoners purses, they fell upon them with barbarous cruelty, hacking and
hewing them in a furious manner, so that within an hour and an half, they were
every one cut in pieces; The prisoners were all slain, with their eyes and
hands lift up to heaven, whilst their hands and fingers were cut off.

There was a Merchant called Francis de Bossu that had two sons; the father
seeing the horrible Massacres, Francis de Bossu and his two sons.

The father encourages his sons to die.


said to his sons, Children, we are not now to learn that it has always been
the portion of believers to be hated, persecuted, and devoured by unbelievers,
as Christ's sheep of ravening wolves; if we suffer with Christ, we shall also
reign with him: let not therefore these drawn swords terrify us, they will be
but as a bridge whereby we shall pass to eternal life: we have lived long
enough amonst the wicked, let us now go and live with our God, let us joyfully
go after this great company that is gone before us, etc. When he saw the
murderers come, he clasped his arms about his two sons, and they theirs about
him, as if they strove mutually to ward off the blows each from other, who were
afterward found dead in these mutual embraces.

The murderers went up and down the City boasting that they had died their
white doublets red in the blood of the Huguenots; Prodigious cruelty.
one bragging that he had killed an hundred, and some more, and some less:
when the people went into the Archbishops house, and saw the slaughter that
had been made there, though they were Papists, yet they said that surely they
were not men, but Devils in the habit of men that had done this. The dead
corpses were carried out, and lay spread like dung upon the face of the earth,
and when they were about to throw them into the river, an Apothecary told them
that much money might be made of their grease, whereupon all the fat bodies
were sought out, ripped up, Their grease is sold.
and their grease sold for three shillings a pound; which being done, after
many jears bestowed upon the dead carcasses, some were tumbled into a great
pit, others thrown into the river. The Countries which lay below upon the river
were amazed to see such multitudes of dead bodies to come down the stream,
some with their eyes pulled out, others their noses, ears, and hands cut off;
stabbed into every part of their bodies, so that some had no part of humane
shape remaining.

Shortly after the Popes Legate came thither, and as he came out of the great
Church from Mass, all the chief Massacrers kneeled down for to have his
absolution, The murderers absolved.
and when he was told who they were, and why they kneeled there, he absolved
them all by making the sign of the Cross.

A Gentleman of Paris, as soon as the Massacre was ended there, went to
Angiers, At Angiers.
and coming to the house of a reverend, godly, and learned Minister called
Master John Mason, meeting his wife at the door, he saluted her, Hypocrisy. A
Minister murdered.
asking where her husband was? she said that he was walking in his garden,
directing him the way to him; when he came to him, he lovingly embraced him,
and then said, Do you know wherefore I am come to you? the King has commanded
me presently to kill you, and therewithal he presented a Pistol to his breast;
the Minister replied that he knew not wherein he had offended the King; But
seeing, said he, you will have my life, pray you give me leave to pray to God,
and to beg mercy at his hands; which being granted, he made a short prayer, A
godly Minister pistolled.
and then willingly presented his body to the murderer, who pistolled him, and
so departed.

Presently after the King sent one Pugilliard, And his wife murdered.
who drowned nine or ten more in that place, and amongst the rest, the wife of
this Mr. Mason, who showed an admirable constancy of faith, even to her last
breath.

In Roan in a few days they murdered above six thousand men besides women,
upon whom they exercised no less cruelty than upon the men; At Roan six
thousand murdered.
their dead bodies they carried out in tumbrels, and threw them by heaps into
great pits dug for that purpose.

The news of the Massacre of Paris coming to Toulouse, At Toulouse.
the great gates of the City were presently shut up; but it pleased God, that
that morning most of the Protestants were gone out of the City to hear a
Sermon; The report of the shutting up of the gates coming to them, some thought
it not fit to return, others would needs go back to take order abour their
affairs: these were suffered to enter peaceably, leaving their swords at the
gates, Popish subtilty
the rather to draw in the rest, amongst whom were diverse Counselors; and
great means were used to entrap them, and indeed some of them were enticed to
come back; but when they saw they could get in no more, the wednesday morning
following soldiers were sent to break into all the houses of those of the
Religion, and to carry them to sundry prisons; and the gates were watched that
none should escape: And cruelty.
command also was given that none should conceal any of the Protestants:
Amongst the prisoners were five or six Counselors, who much comforted and
encouraged the rest. Then were all the prisoners brought together into one
place, and letters procured from the King to massacre them all: and accordingly
some lewd persons, armed with axes and butchers knives, were sent to effect it,
who calling them out one by one, murdered them all, not permitting them so
much as to speak, much less to pray. The number of the slain was above three
hundred, who were all stripped stark naked, Three hundred murdered.
and their bodies left to the common view of all for two days together: then
were they, thus naked, thrown into pits one upon another, only the Counselors
were hung up in their long gowns upon an Elm in the Palace-yard; all their
houses were also sacked and plundered.

At Bourdeaux when the news of the Massacre of Paris came thither, the
Protestants were taking boats to go into a meadow to hear a Sermon, At
Bourdeaux.
but the Governor sent and stayed them, yet under preience of securing them
against the multitude; then were the gates guarded that none might escape, yet
it pleased God that the Ministers were conveyed away, A special Providence.
who afterward took ship and came into England.

There was a Jesuit that daily preached in that City, A bloody Jesuit.
to stir up the Governor and people to massacre the Protestants, proposing the
example of the Persians to them. The Governor could not well tell what to
do, but the Lord of Monpessat assured him that it was the Kings mind that they
should all be murdered, and that he could not do a more acceptable service to
him; whereupon he, gathering the scum of the Citizens together, commanded them
to kill all the Protestants without sparing one, and to give them an example,
himself went to the Lord of Obiers house, and murdered him in his own Court;
Then did they murder a Country Minister also that was come thither for
shelter, The Lord of Obiers murdered, and a Minister.
together with the rest of the Protestants, and afterward pillaged their
houses: An old man that was a Deacon of the Reformed Church, being at this time
sick in bed, they dragged him forth into the streets, asking him whether he
would go to Mass, to whom he answered; I hope I shall not so far forget the
eternal salvation of my soul, An holy speech
as for fear of death to prolong my life for a few days; for thereby I should
buy a short time of life at too dear a rate; whereupon they instantly murdered
him. It was lamentable to see the poor Protestants wandering up and down, not
knowing where to hide themselves; some were rejected of their own Parents and
Kinsfolk, who would not open their doors to them; others were betrayed by their
friends, and delivered into the hands of their murderers; yet some were hidden
by their very enemies, whose hearts abhorred such detestable outrages. Gods
providence.


CHAP. XXXVI. The Siege of Sancerre, Anno Christi, 1573.
Gods care of his people.
YEt in the midst of these Massacres and dangers God provided some Pella's
[places of refuge] for his people, as Rochel, Montalbon, Nismes, Sancerre,
Privas, etc.

Anno 1573. Sancerre was besieged by the Lord of Chastre, with an Army, who
planting his Cannons, played incessantly upon the Town, so that the stones of
the wall, A special Providence.
the pavement in the streets, and the shivers of timber flew about continually,
yet the mighty power and providence of God herein appeared, that none within
the City were slain, but only one maid that was slain with the breath of a
Cannon-bullet: yet were the stocks of Muskets sometimes broken in the hands
and on the shoulders of the townsmen, and themselves not hurt; yea some had
their coats, breeches and hats shot through, and their bodies not hurt; yea
some stones that were beaten off the wall, flew violently between a Ministers
legs, and hurt him not. Many were the assaults given to this Town, yet still
the Assailants were beaten back with great loss.

The siege continuing long, the Townsmen began to be in want, A terrible Famine.
so that they were forced to eat their Horses, Asses, and Mules, which food
lasted but a month, then they did eat all the dogs, cats, rats, mice, and
moles that they could get: and those also being spent, they lived upon hides of
beasts, Calves and Sheepskins: then did they eat parchment, horse and beasts
hoofs, horns, Lanthorns, halters, and furniture for horses, girdles o^
leather, herbs and wild-roots; and these being all spent, and no bread left in
the City, such as could get Linseed, or any other seed, ground it, or beat it
in a mortar, and made bread thereof, as also of herbs mixed with bran if they
could get it: This being spent they eat bread made of straw-meal, powder of
nutshels, yea of slates; suet, old ointments, and other old grease served to
make pottage, and with it also they fried the excrements of horses and men,
which they did eat, yea the filth in the streets was not spared.

In this extremity a poor labourer and his wife were taken and executed for
eating the head, intrals and brains of their daughter of three years old, that
died of famine; they had dressed also the rest of her body to eat at other
times; and that which aggravated their fault was, that it was proved that that
day there was given to them a little pottage made with herbs and wine, Two
executed for eating part of their own daughter.
which might have satisfied them in that necessity: Such as went forth of the
walls to seek relief, were either slain by the enemy, or lived upon sprigs of
vines, black-berries, red snailes, and herbs; Amongst other sad and lamentable
spectacles, one was of a labourer and his wife found dead amongst the Vines,
and two of their children crying by them, the lesser being but six weeks old,
which a charitable Widow took home to her house and sustained: Many dyed in
this famine, some in their houses, others fell down in the streets, and gave up
the ghost; most of the children under twelve years old died: Lamentable it was
to hear the poor fathers and mothers mourning and weeping to see their misery
and yet they could not relieve them; Nevertheless most of them did wonderfully
encourage themselves with the assurance of the grace of God, whereof there is
this notable example.

A boy of five years old, languishing diverse weeks, ran along the streets, till
nature failing him, he fell down in the presence of his father and mother, who
wept and lamented over him; and feeling upon his arms and legs, they were as
dry as a stick; whereupon the child said; Why do you thus weep to see me die of
hunger? I ask you no bread, mother, A remarkable story.
for I know you have none; but seeing it is the Will of God that I should die
in this sort, I must take it thankfully: Had not the holy man Lazarus hunger?
Have not I read it in my Bible? and saying so, he yielded up his spirit unto
God.

That which preserved all from being famished, was this; There were yet six
Kine kept to give milk for some infants, and certain horses of service which
were reserved for an extremity; These were killed, and their flesh sold to
comfort those that lived. Also some little corn was brought into the Town by
stealth, which was sold for two shillings six pence a pound.

The war killed but eighty four persons, but the famine killed above five
hundred, besides those which were brought so low that they hardly recovered.

During these miseries, diverse soldiers, and some townsmen gat out, choosing
rather to die by the sword of the Enemy, than by famine, of whom some were
slain, others imprisoned, and executed.

So all hope of being saved in man's judgment failed to those of Sancerre: A
wicked oath
for the King had sworn that he would make them devour each other. But man's
misery is Gods opportunity; The King of Kings found out a strange means to
deliver his people that put their trust in him; Just at this time, by the
solicitations of the Bishop of Valence, the Polonians had chosen the Duke of
Anjou, brother to the French King, King of Poland, and Ambassadors were come to
fetch him into that Country, who hearing of this siege, solicited the Bishop
of Valence to perform the Promise, which he had sworn to them in the name of
his Master, viz. to fet at liberty all the Towns of France that were molested
for Religion: by this means the poor Sancerreans, half dead for hunger, were
delivered at the request of these good men who came from a far Country to be
their deliverers, An admirable Providence.
though their enemies had oft-times threatened them with a general Massacre;
They were suffered to depart with their arms and goods, and such as would
stay, not to be questioned for any thing past; they had a promise also that the
honor of women and maids should be preserved; and such Ministers and others,
as had fled thither for safety, had Pasports given them, and they were suffered
peaceably to depart.

The Siege of Rochel, Anno 1573.
ABout the beginning of the same year Rochel was also besieged; The Townsmen
often sallied out, and there were very hot skirmishes betwixt them and the
besiegers; in one of which there came a young Gentleman, who with horrible
blasphemy boasted that he was one of the Admirals murderers, showing his
Courtelace, Gods judgment on a bloody Persecutor.
which he said, he brought from that conflict, with it threatening to slash the
Rochellers; yet, when it came to trial, his heart failed, and he ran away; but
one of the City soldiers pursuing him, slew him, stripped him, and left his
naked body in the field, the dogs tearing his face before next morning.

In one months space the enemy discharged above thirteen thousand Cannon shot
against the Rochellers, and made many assaults, wherein they still went away
with the worst. Then came the Duke of Anjou to the Army to be the General* A
famine.
The siege having continued some months, the Rochellers began to want
victuals, which famine, after awhile, much increased upon them, but behold the
admirable Providence of God! when all other Provision failed them, An
extraordinary Providence.
there came an infinite number of small fishes never before seen in that
Haven, as it were yielding themselves to the mercy of the poor People, which
gathered them every day so long as the siege lasted, but presently after the
publishing of the Edict for peace, they went away, Rochel delivered.
and were never seen afterward.

During this siege came the Ambassadors from Poland to fetch their new King; by
whose means a truce was granted to the Rochellers, and lastly Articles of peace
were agreed upon, whereby the Army was withdrawn, and Rochel enjoyed her
Privileges; Yet this is further very remarkable, that all the chief persons
that were employed in the Massacre of Paris and other places, Gods judgments
on Persecutors.
were drawn forth to this siege, by God, there to receive the reward of all
their impieties, some of them being slain, and others receiving there those
wounds whereof they shortly after died; Amongst whom were the Duke de Aumale,
and Cosseins, Marshal of the Field, that first entered the Admirals lodging;
Gods judgment on the Duke of A^jou see in my book of Examples.
three Masters of the Camp; diverse great Lords and Gentlemen; above sixty
Captains; as many Lieutenants and Ensigns, and above twenty thousand common
souldies.

Anno 1574. King Charles himself, that was at least the countenancer of all
these horrible Massacres, being in the prime of his youth, about twenty four
years old, fell sick of a languishing disease; his Physicians let him blood and
purged him, but to no purpose; for by degrees he so faded away, as caused great
astonishment to many. He long strugled against his disease, but at last was
feign to betake himself to his bed, and the two last weeks of his sickness,
much blood issued from diverse parts of his body, and once he rolled himself in
his own blood, and a little before he died, The Kings sickness and death.
he desired his mother to pursue his enemies to the uttermost, with great
vehemence reiterating his speeches; saying, Madam, I pray you heartily to do
it, and so he breathed forth his soul, May the thirtieth, Anger implacable.
Anno Christi, 1574.

I shall here add a few words also of the great miseries which the people of
God endured in Rochel, Anno Christi, 1628. expecting help from England, which
proved but a staff of reed, Rochel besieged. Anno 1628
which whilst they leaned upon, it ran into their hands; The City being
besieged by the King of France his Army, the inhabitants were brought to such
extremity, that for want of other meat, the Citizens and Soldiers, A terible
famine.
having eaten up all the horses, dogs, cats, rats and mice, lived two months
with nothing but Cow-hides and Goats-skins boiled; then did they eat up all the
old gloves, and whatsoever was made of leather: yea, the poor people cut off
the buttocks of the dead, and did eat them. Young maids of fourteen or sixteen
years old, did look like old women of one hundred years old. All the English
that came out, after the surrender of the City, looked like Anatomies; The
prizes of things were as follows; a Bushel of Wheat twenty pounds; A pound of
bread twenty shillings; a quarter of mutton above six pounds; A pound of
butter thirty shillings; An egg eight shillings; An ounce of Sugar two
shillings and six pence; A dried fish twenty shillings; A pint of French wine
twenty shillings; A pint of milk thirty shillings; A pound of grapes three
shillings, etc.

Margaret Pierrone.
Anno 1593. There was one Margaret Pierron of the Town of Sansay in France, who
by her maidservant was accused to the Jesuits, for not going to Mass, and
for keeping a Bible in her house, in reading whereof was her whole delight; The
Jesuits, complaining hereof to the Magistrate, caused her to be apprehended,
yet had she some notice of it beforehand from her friends that advised her to
fly from the danger; but God had a purpose that she should bear witness to his
truth, so that she was taken and cast into prison; After a while the Judges
sent for her, saying, Margaret, Are you not willing to return home to your
house, and there to enjoy your husband and children? Yes, said she, if it may
stand with the good Will of God; Then, said they, if thou will do but a small
matter thou shall be set at liberty; Tentation.
If, said she, it be not contrary to Gods glory and mine own salvation, you
shall hear what I will say to you. No such thing, said they, for all that we
require is but this, that a Scaffold being set up in the chief part of the
City, you shall there crave pardon for offending the Law, and a fire being by,
you shall burn your Bible in it without speaking a word. I pray you my
Masters, said she, Tell me, is my Bible a good Book or no? Yea, said they, we
confess it is: Why then, said she, would you have me cast it into the fire?
Only said they, to give the Jesuits content: imagine it to be but paper, and
then you may burn it, and you may buy you another Bible at any time, and
hereby you may save your life. Thus they spent above two hours in persuading
her, that thereby she might do a less evil, and a greater good would come of
it: But she confidently answered, that by the help of God she would never do
it: What will the people say (said she) will they not say, She chooses to be
burnt rather than to burn her Bible.
Yonder is a wrethed woman indeed, that burns the Bible wherein all the
Articles of Christian Religion are contained? I will certainly burn my body
rather than my Bible.

Then did they commit her close prisoner, fed her only with bread and water,
and her friends were debarred from coming to her: but when nothing could remove
her from her constancy, she was condemned to be set upon a scaffold; to have
her Bible burnt before her face; her self to be strangled, and her body to be
dragged through the streets to a dunghill, which sentence she underwent
cheerfully, and so slept in the Lord.

Collected out of the History of the Tragical Massacres of France under Henry
the second, Francis the second, Charles the ninth, Henry the third, and Henry
the fourth. Translated out of French. Here place the ninth Figure.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Persecution of the Church of Christ in the Valtoline, Anno
Christi, 1620.
THe Grison Lords, who were the Sovereign Magistrates of this Country, had by
sundry Decrees granted liberty to the Protestants to exercise their Religion
freely: But when as the Minister of Tell, with his Congregation, Popish
treachery.
were met together about the service of God, the bloody Papists rising in arms,
set upon them, slew one, and beat others so cruelly with staves, that they
were forced to desist from their purpose: Shortly after they murdered some
others, Cruelty.
and conspiring with some other bloody villains, they set guards upon all the
passages of the valley, that so none of the Protestants should escape them;
then ringing their bells, they raised all the Country, and if any Protestants
stirred out of their houses, they murdered them in the streets: they also
brake into the houses of others, drew them out of their beds, and murdered
them. Some of the Protestants retired to the houses of Papists that were near
of kin, or otherwise engaged to them, to secure themselves, but there they were
betrayed and murdered: Some they strangled; some they shot; Of some they beat
out their brains, and others they drowned in the river Alba.

A noble Gentleman that had hid himself in the river, A Noble Gentleman
murdered.
was found by them, who requested them to spare his life, for his dear
childrens sake: But they told him that this was no time for pity, except he
would abjure his faith, and swear by the Popes Bull: Nay said he, God forbid,
that to save this temporal life, I should deny my Lord Jesus Christ, who with
his precious blood upon the Cross redeemed me at so dear a rate; Christ
preferred before all.
and having through his grace so long freely and publicly professed him, that
I should now hazard the loss of eternal life, to which I was elected before
the foundation of the world; I say God forbid. Hereupon in a barbarous and
savage manner they murdered him. They brake also into the Palace of the
Governor, and murdered him; women and maidens they defloured; and of all the
Protestants in that part of the Country, there were only three that escaped
over the horrid and vast mountains of the Alps into Rhetia.

These wicked villains having thus dispatched the Protestants in this place,
they marched to another, coming just at the time when the Protestants were at
Church hearing a Sermon: They were guided to the place by two Friars; the
Protestants seeing them coming, shut the Church doors, barricadoing them up
with benches: these villains labored to break open the door, but when they
could not readily do it, they clambred up into the windows, through which they
shot with their muskets at the people, whereby they wounded and killed many:
The Minister being* a man rarely endued with learning and piety, Protestants
murdered at Church.
according to the shortness of time, exhorted them with lively reasons to
persevere in the truth notwithstanding all the danger; but in the mean time
these barbarous Papists had forced open the door, where they fell to murdering
of all without respect of quality, sex, or age: Some Lords and Gentlemen were
here slain, the Minister was shot to death; diverse Ladies and children gate
into the Belfree to save themselves; but these hell hounds set fire to the
place, and miserably burnt them all.

At Sondres.
These savage wretches having thus glutted themselves with innocent blood in
this place, they marched to Sondresse: The Papists in that place hearing of
their coming, went to the Justice, protesting that they would guard him from
danger, and that they would not suffer such villainies to be committed amongst
them: Then did they beat their Drums, ring their Bells, and arm themselves
under pretense of securing the Protestants, who trusting to their promises,
mixed themselves amongst them to stand for their own defense; These Popelings
concealing their mischievous intent, killed now one, then another, Popish
treachery.
as if it had been by accident, so that though diverse of them were slain, yet
they found not out the mystery of the practice: yet some, both men and
Gentlewomen sought to escape, but all passages being shut up, they were met
with and cruelly murdered. Then did they more openly discover their malice,
killing the Protestants where ever they met them: hereupon some eighteen of the
Protestants, together with some Ladies and young children gat together; and the
men being well armed, they marched close together, repulsing their enemies, and
at last came to a Church in the mountain of Sondresse, unto which place a
Minister, and some others, in all, about seventy three men were gathered
together, and after their prayers made unto God, they passed the Valley of
Malaneo, which was beset by the enemy on two sides; but such as kept the
passages, were by Gods special providence, A special Providence.
so astonished that they fled away; and the Protestants, though they were
pursued to the tops of the mountains, yet did miraculously escape with safety.

Then did the Pesants join with these villains to rob and plunder the houses
of the Protestants, and amongst them, diverse Noblemens houses richly furnished
with great abundance; They ran up and down also through fields, woods and
mountains, searching every bush for the Protestants; and as they found any of
them, they presently murdered them.

A noble Lady.
There was an honorable Lady that not long before came out of Italy to enjoy her
liberty of conscience, whom they exhorted to change her Religion, which she
refusing, they advised her that yet at least she would* do it out of a care of
her young infant which she held in her arms, which otherwise, together with
her self should presently be slain: But she with an undaunted courage answered:
I have not departed out of Italy, Courage, and constancy.
my native country, nor forsaken all the estate that I had there, to renounce
now the faith which I had wrought in me by the Lord Jesus Christ; yea I will
rather suffer, if it were possible, a thousand deaths; And how shall I have
regard in this case to my infant, since God my heavenly Father spared not his
own Son my Lord Jesus Christ, but delivered him up to death for his love to
me, and such sinners as I am? and so giving her child to one, she said, Behold
my child, the Lord God, who has care of the birds of the air, is much more
able to save this poor creature, although by you it should be left to these
wild mountains: Faith.
Then unlacing her gown, she opened her breast, saying, Here is the body which
you have power to kill; but my soul, on which you have no power to lay your
hands, that I commend to my God; and so she was presently slain, and hewed in
pieces; The infant being a lovely and sweet Child, they spared, and delivered
it to a Popish Nurse to be brought up. A special Providence.


These miscreants finding such sweetness by the plunder of the Protestants;
they spared none, plundering their houses twice or thrice over: Some noble
Matrons had their rings pulled off their fingers; and if they refused presently
to draw them off, Horrible cruelties.
they would cut off either their hands or fingers from them. Some women with
their children were dragged to the tops of high Mountains, and threatened to be
thrown down headlong with their children if they would not promise to go to
Mass; and though one amongst them was found, that through terror, promised
them to do it, yet did they throw her down with the rest without all pity.

One Dominico Berto of sixteen years old, Dominico Berto* Barbarous cruelty.
they set upon an Ass with his face to the tail, and the tail in his hands
for the bridle, and thus with many jears they led him to the Marketplace; then
they cut off his nose, ears, and cheeks, then burned many holes in several
parts of his body with hot irons, continuing these torments till in that
barbarous manner they had killed him. Yet through the wonderful goodness of
God, some Ministers with their wives and children, by great travel, dangers, A
special providence.
and difficulties amongst the craggy and high mountains, were delivered out of
the hands of these bloody persecutors.

Theophilus Messino was shot with a Musket, but being not slain, they set open
his mouth with a gag, filled it with gunpowder, Theophilus Messino.
and giving fire to it, tore his head miserably; his son was slain with many
wounds.

Another being wounded and stripped naked, was carried out and thrown into the
woods; yet afterward he gat up and went home to his own house, where he had
mountains of gold proffered him if he would turn Papist, yet, through Gods
mercy, he continued faithful to the death. Constancy.


A young Gentleman, too much addicted to the vanities of the world* being
earnestly solicited to forsake the Protestant Religion, stoutly refused,
whereupon they shot him with a Musket, Tentation resisted.
and having layn a while, and then raising himself up, he besought them to
dispatch him, that he might render his soul to his Creator.

Diverse men and women were thrown down from Bridges into the river Adda, and
drowned for their constancy in the truth.

Prodigious cruelties.
Some had their mouths s^i^ up to their ears, others had the flesh cut from
their faces; others were slashed in other parts of their body till they dyed;
and others were often put to the strappado, and then hewn in pieces.

A noble Virgin that was come to Sondres for Religion sake, these villains took
and carried her through the streets with the greatest shame and disgrace that
could be: A noble Virgin.
they put a mitre of paper on her head, besmeared her face with dirt, buffeted
her on the cheeks, then exhorted her to call upon the Saints; but she smiling
thereat, said, My trust and my salvation is only in my Savior Jesus Christ,
and upon him only will I rest; as for the Virgin Mary, An excellent speech.
though she be blessed above all women, yet is she not omniscient, and
therefore knows not our requests: yea she her self had need of the merits of
her own son, without which she could not have been saved, etc. They still
continuing to scorn and deride her, she manfully said, I willingly endure all
this as it becomes me to do, desiring no better usage, seeing the same was done
to my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and to his Apostles, and to thousands of
the holy Martyrs. Then was she carried away and murdered in the fields.

Some Ministers and many other godly Christians, men and women, noble and
ignoble were murdered sundry ways. Many hid themselves in holes, and caves,
and woods, out of which they durst not come, but by night only to get them
food; yet were they so watched that many times they were murdered: Others in
those places were famished for want of food; Others living upon roots, herbs,
grass, etc. contracted diseases whereof they dyed, so that the mountains and
woods lay scattered with dead carcasses everywhere.

Then came there a letter to these blood-suckers from a Governor, that they
should with all their power, A wicked Edict.
murder, strangle, and massacre without all pity and mercy all the Lutherans
wheresoever they were; whereupon these murderers having slain all in Tyrane,
Bruise, Tell, Sondres, and Malen^^, they went to Berbenno, where they presently
murdered sundry persons of good rank and quality, and that with great cruelty,
contrary to their faith and promise given them; the like they did in Caspano
and Trahen, and diverse other places, showing neither pity nor favor to any:
Popish perfidiousnesse.
In one house they slew a man and his wife; and seeing an infant of three years
old lying in a Cradle, the child being a girl of a sweet and amiable
countenance, and seeming to smile upon them, they took her by the heels, and
dashed out her brains. Then did these villains march to Bra^e, where also they
murdered many; shooting some, drowning others, stoning others, burning others,
and grinding their very bones to powder: Amongst others, finding an aged Matron
of eighty years old, they much solicited her to hear Mass, wishing her to
have respect to her age; to whom she answered with a noble resolution; God
forbid that I, who now of a long time have had one foot in the grave, Courage
and constancy.
should forsake my Lord Jesus Christ, who has so long time preserved me in the
knowledge and profession of his truth, and to put my trust in creatures, and
instead of his holy Word to receive the traditions of men, whereupon they
instantly slew her.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Persecution of the Church in Scotland, which began Anno
Christi, 1527.
MAster Patrick Hamilton of an ancient and honorable family, Patrick Hamilton.
called Abbot of Fern, as one hating the world, and the vanity thereof, left
Scotland, and went into Germany, and the fame of the University of Wittenberg
being greatly divulged, thither he went, and became familiar with those great
lights and notable servants of Jesus Christ, Martin Luther, and Phil.
Melancthon, whereby he greatly increased in godly knowledge and learning; from
thence he went to the University of Marpurg, which was then newly erected by
Philip Lantgrave of Hessen, where he was intimate with other learned men,
especially with Francis Lambert, by whose instigation he was the first that
there publicly set up conclusions to be disputed of concerning faith and good
works; By reason of his learning and integrity of life he was had in admiration
by many; But the zeal of Gods glory did so eat him up, that he could not rest
till he returned into his own Country, Zeal.
where the bright beams of the true light, which by Gods grace was planted in
his heart, began most abundantly to break forth, as well in public as in
secret.

In process of time the fame of his doctrine troubled the Clergy, and came to
the ears of James Beton, Archbishop of Saint Andrews, who grew impatient that
by this means the kingdom of darkness was disturbed; and therefore he so
labored with Patrick Hamilton, that he gat him to Saint Andrews, where after
diverse days conference he had his freedom and liberty, the Bishop seeming to
approve his doctrine, acknowledging that in many things there needed a
reformation in the Church; But withal, fearing that their Kingdom should be
endamaged, they labored with the King, who was then young and much led by
them, to go on Pilgrimage to Saint Dothesse in Rosse, that so by reason of his
absence no intercession might be made to him, Popish subtilty.
for the saving the life of this innocent servant of Jesus Christ, who not
suspecting the malice that lodged in their hearts, remained as a Lamb amongst
Wolves.

The King being gone, upon a night Master Hamilton was seized upon by the
Bishops officers and carried to the Castle, and the morrow after he was brought
forth unto judgment, and was condemned to be burnt for the testimony of Gods
truth; The Articles for which he suffered, were about Pilgrimages, purgatory,
prayer to Saints, and for the dead, etc. His condemnation.
And that his condemnation might have the greater Authority, they caused it to
be subscribed by all those of esteem that were the^e present, and to make their
number great, they took the subscription of very children if they were of the
Nobility.

Immediately after dinner the fire was prepared, and he was led to execution;
yet most men thought that it was only to terrify him, and to cause him to
recant. But God, for his own glory, the good of his servants, and for the
manifestation of their beastly tyranny, had otherwise decreed: for he so
strengthened him, that neither the love of life, nor fear of that cruel death
could once move him to swerve from the truth which he had professed. At the
place of execution he gave to his servant that had long attended him, Constancy.
his Gown, Coat, Cap, and his other garments, saying, These will not profit in
the fire, they will profit thee; After this of me thou can receive no
commodity except the example of my death, which I pray thee to beat in mind;
for though it be bitter to the flesh, and fearful before men, yet it is the
entrance into eternal life, which none shall possess which denies Christ Jesus
before this wicked generation; and so being tied to the stake in the midst of
coals and timber, they gave fire to some powder, which with the blast scorched
his left hand and the side of his face, but neither killed him nor kindled the
wood and coals; till they ran to the Castle for more powder, and more
combustible matter, which being at last kindled, with a loud voice he cried:
Lord Jesus receive my spirit; how long shall darkness overwhelme this Realm?
and how long will thou suffer the tyranny of these men? His Martyrdom.
The fire was slow, and therefore put him to the greater torment; but that
which most grieved him was the clamor of some wicked men set on by the Friars,
who continually cried, Turn thou Heretic; call upon our Lady; say Salve
Regina, etc. To whom he answered, Depart from me and trouble me not thou
messenger of Satan; And speaking to one Campbel, a Friar that was the
Ringleader, who still roared on him with great vehemence, he said to him;
Wicked man, thou know the contrary, and have confessed the contrary to me; I
appeal thee before the Tribunal seat of Jesus Christ; after which words he
resigned up his spirit unto God, Anno Christi, Gods judgment on a persecutor.
1527. And within few days after the said Friar died in a frenzy, and as one
that despaired.

Anno 1534. The said Archbishop of Saint Andrews, convented before him David
Straton a Gentleman, and Master Norman Gourlay; The first of these having a
Fisher-boat that went to sea, the Bishop of Murray demanded tithe fish of him,
David Straton, Norman Gourlay.
to whom he answered, that if they would have tithe of that which his servants
caught in the sea, they should take it in the place where it was caught, and so
caused his servants to throw the tenth fish into the sea again; All this while
he had nothing in him for Religion. But when hereupon he was summoned to answer
for Her^sie, it troubled him exceedingly, and then he began to frequent the
company of such as were godly, and there appeared a wonderful change in him,
Stratons conversion.
so that whereas before he despised the word of God, now all his delight was in
hearing of it read to him, and he was a vehement exhorter of all men to peace
and concord, and contempt of the world. He much frequented the company of the
Lord of Dun Areskin, whom God in those days had marvellously illuminated:
hearing the text read, (for he could not read himself) He that denies me
before men, or is ashamed of me in the midst of this wicked generation, I will
deny him before my Father and his holy Angels; At those words being suddenly as
one revived, he fell upon his knees, and steadfastly lifting up his eyes and
hands to heaven, at length he burst forth into these words; O Lord, I have been
wicked, and justly may thou withdraw thy grace from me; but, Lord, for thy
mercy sake, His prayer.
let me never deny thee nor thy truth for fear of death or any corporal pain.
Being afterward together with Master Norman brought to judgment in holy
Roodhouse, the King himself being present, Tentation resisted.
much means was used to draw this David Straton to make a recantation; but he
persevered in his constancy, still denying that he had offended, and so they
were both condemned to the fire, and after dinner Anno 1534. they were both
first hanged, and afterward burnt.

Not long after the burning of these two holy men; There was one Deane Thomas
Forret, who used to preach every Lords day to his Parishoners, out of the
Epistles and Gospels as they fell in order: Thomas Forret.
This was counted a great novelty, for none used to preach but the Friars, and
therefore they envying him, accused him to the Bishop of Dunkelden for an
Heretic, and one that showed the mysteries of Scripture to the vulgar people.

The Bishop instigated by the complaint of the Friars, called the said Deane
Thomas before him, to whom he said, My joy Deane Thomas, I love you well, and
therefore I must give you counsel how to govern your self; The Deane thanked
him; and then he proceeded, My joy Deane Thomas, I am informed that you preach
the Epistle and Gospel every Sunday to your people, and that you take not your
dues from them, which is very prejudicial to the Churchmen; and therefore my
joy Deane Thomas, I would have you take your dues, or else its too much to
preach every sunday; for by so doing, you make the people think that we should
do so also; Its enough for you when you find a good Epistle or Gospel, to set
forth and preach the liberty of holy Church, and let the rest alone.

Thomas answered, My Lord, I presume none of my Parishoners complain for my
not taking my dues; and whereas you say its too much to preach every Sunday, I
think it is too little, and wish that your Lordship would do the like. Nay,
nay, Deane Thomas, said the Bishop; let that be, for we (...) not ordained to
preach; Then said Thomas, whereas you bid me preach when I meet with a good
Epistle and Gospel; I have read them all over, and I know (...) ^ad ones
amongst them, but when your Lordship shows me such, I will pass by them. Then
said the Bishop, I thank God I never knew what the Old and New Testament was;
Gross ignorance.
and Deane Thomas, I will know nothing but my Portuise and Pontifical. Go your
ways and let all these fancies be; for if you persevere herein, you will
repent you when it is too late.

I trust, said Thomas, my cause is good and just in the presence of God, and
therefore I care not what follows thereupon; and so he went his way; But
shortly after he was summoned to appear before the Cardinal, His martyrdom.
by whom he was condemned and burned for a chief Heretic and teacher of
Heresies.

But notwithstanding all their bloody tyranny, the knowledge of God did
wonderfully increase in that Kingdom, partly by reading, partly by brotherly
conference, which in those dangerous days was much used to the comfort of many,
which so enraged the Popish party, that Anno 1538. there were burned in one
fire four persons of good quality.

Jerome Russel, Alexander Kennedy.
The year after there were apprehended Jerome Russel, a man of a meek and quiet
nature* and Alexander Kennedy of about eighteen years old; these two poor
servants of Jesus Christ being brought before the Archbishop and his
Associates to judgment, Kennedy at first was faint, Humane infirmity.
and would feign have recanted, but when all place of repentance was denied
him, the Spirit of God (which seasonably comes in with comfort,) began to
refresh him, yea the inward comfort began to burst forth, as well in his
visage, as in tongue and words; for with a cheerful countenance and joyful
voice, falling on his knees, he said, O eternal God, how wonderful is that love
and mercy that thou bear unto mankind, Joy in tribulation.
and to me a vile Caitiffe and miserable wretch above all others! for even now
when I would have denied thee, and thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, my only
Savior, and so have cast my self into everlasting damnation, thou by thine own
hand have pulled me from the very bottom of Hell, and made me to feel that
heavenly comfort which takes from me that ungodly fear wherewith before I was
oppressed. Now I defy death, do with me what you please, I praise God I am
ready; Then did they rail upon him and Jerome, who also said unto them, This
is your hour and power of darkness; Now sit ye as Judges, and we stand
wrongfully accused, and more wrongfully to be condemned; But the day will come
when our innocence will appear, and ye shall see your own blindness, Their
condemnation and martyrdom.
to your everlasting confusion. Go forward and fulfill the measure of your
iniquity. Shortly after they were condemned to die, and as they went to
execution, Jerome comforted Kennedy, saying to him; Brother, fear not; greater
is he that is in us, than he that is in the world; the pain that we are to
suffer is short, and shall be light, but our joy and consolation shall never
have an end. Let us therefore strive to enter into our Master and Saviors joy,
by the same straight way which he has taken before us. Death cannot hurt us,
for it is already destroyed by him for whose sake we now suffer. And thus
passing cheerfully on, they constantly triumphed over death and Satan, in the
midst of the flaming fire where they gave up their spirits to God.

Anno 1543. Cardinal Beton coming to Edinburgh, caused many godly persons to be
called before him, and when he could prove nothing else against them, he caused
four men to be hanged upon suspicion that they had eaten a Goose upon a Friday:
Popish cruelty.
and a woman with her child sucking on her breast, to be drowned for refusing
to pray to the Virgin Mary.

Many others he caused to be banished, others to be imprisoned at Saint
Johnstons, John Rogers.
amongst whom was one John Rogers a godly and learned man, that had fruitfully
preached Christ Jesus to the comfort of many in Angus and Meannes, whom he
caused to be murdered in prison, and then thrown over the walls, giving it out
that by attempting to escape, he had broken his neck.

CHAP. XXXIX. The Life of Master George Wiseheart, or Wischard, who died, Anno
Christi, 1546.
GEorge Wiseheart was born in Scotland, and brought up first at School, from
whence he went to the University; after which he traveled into several
Countries, and at last came to Cambridge, where he was admitted into Bennet
College; He was tall of stature, His Character.
and of a melancholy constitution; He had black hair, a long beard, comely of
personage, and well-spoken, courteous, lowly, lovely, willing to teach,
desirous to learn; for his habit, he wore a Frize gown, a black fuftian
doublet, plain hose, course Canvas for his shirts, falling bands, etc. all
which apparel he gave to the poor, some weekly, some monthly, some quarterly;
saving a French Cap that he wore, which he kept a twelvemoneth. He was modest,
temperate, fearing God, hating covetousness. His charity was extraordinary,
His charity.
he forbore his food one meal in three, one day in four, that he might the
better relieve the poor. His lodging was upon straw, and he had course new
Canvas sheets, which when once foul, he gave away; He had by his bedside a
tub of water, in which in the dark night he bathed himself; He taught with
great modesty and gravity, so that some about him thought him severe, and
would have slain him, but the Lord was his deliverer; and he; A special
providence.
after due correction for their malice, by good exhortation amended them; His
learning was no less sufficient than his desire of it; he was alvvayes ready
to do good to his ability; both in his private Chamber and public Schools, he
read diverse Authors, yea he alvvayes studied how to do good to all.

Anno 1544. Some of the Nobility of Scotland, coming to treat with King Henry
the eighth, about the marriage between his son Prince Edward, and their young
Queen Mary, at their return, Master Wischard went with them into Scotland,
being a man of admirable graces, and singularly learned both in Divine and
humane sciences; He first preached in Rosse, and then in Dundee, where with
great admiration of all that heard him, he went over the Epistlle to the
Romans, till at the instigation of the Cardinal, one Robert Misle, a principal
man there, Popis^ malice.
and formerly a Professor of Religion, inhibited him from preaching, requiring
him that he should trouble their Town no more, for he would not suffer it; and
this was spoken to him in the public place; whereupon he mused a space, with
his eyes bent unto heaven, and afterward looking sorrowfully upon the speaker
and people, he said, God is witness that I never minded your trouble, but your
comfort; yea your trouble is more dolorous to me then it is to your selves: A
Prophecy.
But I am assured that to refuse Gods Word, and to chase from you his
Messenger, shall not preserve you from trouble, but shall bring you into it:
for God shall send you Ministers that shall neither fear burning nor
banishment. I have offered you the word of salvation; with the hazard of my
life I have remained amongst you: Now ye your selves refuse me, and I must
leave my innocence to be declared by my God; If it be long prosperous with you,
I am not led by the spirit of truth: But if unlookt for trouble come upon you,
acknowledge the cause, and turn to God who is gracious and merciful; but if
you turn not at the first warning, he will visit you with fire and sword; and
so he came down from the Pulpit. Some Noble men being present, would have
persuaded him to stay, or to have gone with them into the Country, but by no
means would he stay till he had past the River Tay.

Then went he into the West-countrey, where he made offers of Gods Word, He
goes into the West.
which was gladly received by many, till the Bishop of Glasgow, by the
instigation of the Cardinal, came with his Train to the town of Air to resist
Wischard; The Earl of Glencarne and some other Gentlemen hearing of it, came
thither also with their retinue, and when they were all come together, the
Bishop would needs have the Church himself to preach in. Some opposed, but
Wischard said, Let him alone, his Sermon will not do much hurt, let us go to
the Market-Crosse, and so they did, He is opposed by the Bishop.
where he made so notable a Sermon, that his very enemies themselves were
confounded.

Wischard remained with the Gentlemen in Kyle, preaching sometime in one place,
sometimes in another, but coming to Machlene, he was perforce kept out of the
Church; Some would have broken in, but he said to one of them, Brother, Jesus
Christ is as mighty in the fields as in the Church, and himself often preached
in the Desert, at the Seaside and, other places. Its the Word of Peace God
sends by me: the blood of none shall be shed this day for the preaching of it;
and so going into the fields, he stood upon a bank, were he continued in
preaching to the people above three hours; and God wought so wonderfully by
that Sermon, The power of the Word.
that one of the wickedst men in all the Country, the Lord of Sheld was
converted by it, and his eyes ran down with such abundance of tears, that all
men wondered at it. Presently news was brought to Wischard that the plague was
broke out in Dundee, which began within four days after he was prohibited
preaching there, and raged so extremely, His Prohesie accomplished.
that its almost beyond credit how many died in twenty four hours space; This
being related to him, notwithstanding the importunity of his friends, he would
needs go thither, saying, They are now in trouble, and need comfort; Perhaps
this hand of God will make them now to magnify and reverence that Word of God,
which before they lightly esteemed.

Coming to Dundee, the joy of the faithful was exceeding great, and without
delay he signified that the next day he would preach; His second* coming to
Dundee.
and because most of the inhabitants were either sick, or employed about the
sick, he chose the Eastgate for the place of his preaching, so that the whole
were within, and the sick without the gate; His text was Psalm. 107. He sent his
Word and healed them, etc. wherein he comfortably entreated of the profit and
comfort of Gods Word, the punishment that comes by the contempt of it, the
readiness of Gods mercy to such as truly turn to him, and the happiness of
those whom God takes from this misery, etc. By which Sermon he so raised up the
hearts of those that heard him, that they regarded no death, but judged them
more happy that should then depart, rather than such as should remain behind;
considering that they knew not whether they should have such a Comforter with
them. He spared not to visit them that lay in the greatest extremity, and to
comfort them. Charity.
He provided all things necessary for such as could take food, the Town being
very bountiful to them, through his instigation. But whilst he was thus busying
himself for the comfort of the afflicted, the Devil stirred up the Cardinal,
who corrupted a desperate Popish Priest, called John Weighton, to slay him. And
on a day the Sermon being ended, and the people departed, suspecting no danger,
He is in danger of being murdered.
the Priest stood waiting at the bottom of the stairs with a naked dagger in
his hand, under his gown, but Master VVischard being of a sharp piercing eye,
seeing the Priest as he came down, said to him, My friend what would you have?
Gods Providence.
and withal clapping his hand upon the dagger, took it from him; The Priest
herewith being terrified, fell down upon his knees, confessed his intention,
and craved pardon; A noise being hereupon raised, and it coming to the ears of
those which were sick, they cried, Deliver the Traitor to us, or we will take
him by force, and so they burst in at the gate, but VVischard taking him in his
arms, said, Whosoever hurts him shall hurt me, for he has done me no
mischief, He preserves the murderer.
but much good, by teaching me more heedfulnesse for the time to come; and so
he appeased them, and saved the Priests life.

When the plague was almost quite ceased, he took his leave of them, saying,
that God had almost put an end to the battle, and that he was now called to
another place; for the Gentlemen of the West had written to him to meet them in
Edinburgh, where he should dispute with the Bishops, and should be publicly
heard, which he willingly assented to: but first he went to Montrosse, to
salute the Church there, where he sometimes preached, He goes to Montrosse.
but spent most of his time in private meditation, in which he was so earnest,
that night and day he continued in it; during which time, the Cardinal again
conspired his death, causing a letter to be sent to him, as if it been from his
familiar friend, Meditation.
the Lord of Kinnur, Popish malice*
desiring him with all possible speed to come to him, for that he was taken
with a sudden sickness; In the mean time he had provided sixty men armed to
lie in wait within a mile and na hall of Montrosse to murder him as he passed
by that way, The letter coming to his hands by a boy, who also brought him an
horse to ride on; accompanied with some honest men his friends, he set
forwards; but suddenly stopping and musing a space, he returned back again,
which they wondering at, A Prophecy.
asked him the cause; to whom he said; I will not go, I am forbidden of God, I
am assured there is treason: Let some of you go to yonder place and tell me
what you find; which they doing, found out the treason, and hastily returning
back, they told master Wischard of it, whereupon he said; I know that I shall
end my life by that blood-thirsty man's hands* but it will not be on this manner.

The time approaching wherein he should meet the Gentlemen at Edinburgh, he
took his leave and departed; by the way he lodged with a faithful brother
called James Watson of Inner Gowry; in the night time he gat up and went into a
yard; which two men hearing, privily followed him; There he walked in an Alley
for some space, breathing forth many sobs and deep groans, then he fell upon
his knees, and his groans increased; Then he fell upon his face; Those that
watched him, hearing him weeping and praying, in which posture he continued
near an hour; His fervent Prayer in the night.
then getting up he came to his bed again; Those which attended him, making as
though they were ignorant of all, came and asked him where he had been? but he
would not answer them; the next day they importuned him again, saying, Be plain
with us, for we heard your mourning, and saw your gestures; then he with a
dejected countenance, said, I had rather you had been in your beds; but they
still pressing upon him to know something; he said, I will tell you; I am
assured that my warfare is near at an end, and therefore pray to God with me
that now I shrink not when the battle waxes most hot; When they heard this,
they fell a weeping, saying, This is small comfort to us; Then said he, God
shall send you comfort after me. This Realm shall be illuminated with the
light of Christ's Gospel as clearly as any Realm since the days of the
Apostles; A Prophecy.
The house of God shall be built in it, yea it shall not lack, in despite of
all enemies, the top-stone; Neither will it be long before this be
accomplished; Many shall not suffer after me, till the glory of God shall
appear and triumph in despite of Satan: But alas! If the people shall
afterward prove unthankful, then fearful and terrible shall the plagues be
that shall follow.

He comes to Leith.
Then went he forward on his journey, and came to Leith, but hearing nothing of
those Gentlemen that were to meet him, he kept himself private a day or two:
then did he grow very pensive, and being asked the reason of it; he said, What
do I differ from a dead man, but that I eat and drink? Hitherto God has used
my labors for the instruction of others, and to the disclosing of darkness,
and now I lurk as a man ashamed that dare not show his face: hereby they
perceived that his desire was to preach, whereupon they said to him, Faith, and
Courage.
It Is most comfortable to us to hear ^ou, but because we know the danger
wherein you stand, we dare not desire it; But said he, if you dare hear, let
God provide for me as best pleases him; and so it was concluded that the next
day he should preach in Leith; his text was of the Parable of the Sower, Mat.
13. The Sermon ended, the Gentlemen of Louth^^^, who were earnest Professors of
Jesus Christ, would not suffer him to stay at Leith, Hi^ departvre from Leith.
because the Governor and Cardinal were shortly to come to Edinburgh, but took
him along with them, and so he preached at Brunstone, Languedine, and Ormstone;
then was he requested to preach at Eneresk near Muscelbrugh, where he had a
great confluence of people, and amongst them Sir George Douglas, who after
Sermon, said publicly, I know that the Governor and Cardinal will hear that I
have been at this Sermon: but let them know that I will avow it, and will
maintain both the doctrine, and the Preacher to the uttermost of my power; This
much rejoiced those that were present.

Amongst others that came to hear him preach, there were two Gray-friars, who,
standing at the Church door, Popish malice.
whispered to such as came in: which Wischard observing, said to the people, I
pray you make room for these two men, it may be they come to learn; and
turning to them, he said, Come near, for I assure you, you shall hear the Word
of truth, which this day shall seal up to you either your salvation or
damnation; and so he proceeded in his Sermon, supposing that they would be
quiet; but when he perceived that they still continued to disturb all the
people that stood near them, he said to them the second time with an angry
countenance; O Ministers of Satan, and deceivers of the souls of men; will ye
neither hear Gods truth your selves, nor suffer others to hear it? Depart and
take this for your portion; A Prophecy.
God shall shortly confound and disclose your hypocrisy within this Kingdom;
ye shall be abominable to men, and your places and habitations shall be
desolate. This he spoke with much vehemence, and turning to the people, he
said, These men have provoked the Spirit of God to anger; and then he proceeded
to the end of his Sermon.

Afterward he preached in diverse other places, the people much flocking after
him; In all his Sermons foretelling the shortness of time that he had to
travel, and the near approaching of his death.

Coming to Haddington, his auditory began much to decrease; He goes to
Haddington.
the cause, as it was conceived, was this, The Earl Bothwell, who had great
observance in those parts, by the instigation of the Cardinal, had inhibited
both those of the Town and Country from hearing him. Presently after, as he
was going to Church, he received a letter from the West-countrey Gentlemen, and
having read it, he called John Knox, John Knox: See his li^e in my first part.
who had diligently waited upon him since he came into Lothaine, to whom he
said that he was a weary of the world, because he saw that men began to be
weary of God; for says he, the Gentlemen of the West have sent me word, that
they cannot keep their meeting at Edinburgh; John Knox wondering that he should
enter into conference about these things so immediately before his Sermon,
contrary to ^his custom, said to him; Sir, Sermon-time approaches, I will
leave you for the present to your meditations. Then did Master Wischard walk up
(...) down about half an hour, his sad countenance declaring the grief of his
mind: at last he went into the Pulpit, and his Auditory being very small, he
began on this manner: O Lord, how long shall it be that thy holy Word shall be
despised, and men shall not regard their own salvation? I have heard of thee, O
Haddington, that in thee there used to be two or three thousand persons at a
vain and wicked play: A Prophecy.
and now to hear the Messenger of the eternal God, of all the Parish can scarce
be numbered one hundred present. Sore and fearful shall be the plagues that
shall ensue upon this thy contempt; with fire and sword shall thou be plagued;
yea thou Haddington in special, strangers shall possess thee; and you the
present inhabitants shall either in bondage serve your enemies, or else you
shall be chased from your own habitations, and that because ye have not known,
nor will know the time of your visitation.

This Prophecy was accomplished not long after, when the English took
Haddington, made it a garrison, enforced many of the inhabitants to fly:
oppressed others; and after awhile, a great plague breaking forth in the Town,
whereof multitudes died, the English were at last forced to quit it, who at
their departure burnt and spoiled great part of it, leaving it to be possessed
by such as could first seize upon it, which were the French that came as
Auxiliaries to Scotland, with a few of the ancient inhabitants, so that
Haddington to this day never recovered her former beauty, nor yet men of such
wisdom and ability as did formerly inhabit it.

That night was Master Wiseheart apprehended in the house of Ormeston, His
apprehension by Bothwell.
by the Earl Bothwel, suborned thereunto by the Cardinal. The manner was thus;
After Sermon he took his last farewell of all his friends in Haddington; John
Knox would feign have gone with him; but he said, Return to your children, and
God bless you; One is sufficient for one sacrifice; Then went he the Lord of
Ormestons with some others that accompanied him. After Supper he held a
comfortable discourse of Gods love to his children, then he appointed the 51.
Psalm to be sung, and so retired to his chamber.

Before midnight the house was beset: and the Earl Bothwell called for the
Lord of the house, and told him that it was in vain to resist, for the
Governor and Cardinal were within a mile with a great power; but if he would
deliver Master Wischard to him, he would promise upon his honor that he should
be safe, and that the Cardinal should not hurt him; Master Wischard said, Open
the gates, the Will of God be done; and Bothwell coming in, Wischard said to
him, I praise my God that so honorable a man as you, my Lord, receive me this
night; for I am persuaded that for your honors sake you will suffer nothing to
be done to me but by order of Law? I less fear to die openly, than secretly
to be murdered: Then said Bothwel, I will not only preserve your body from all
violence that shall be intended against you without order of Law, Bothwels
promise.
but I also promise in the presence of these Gentlemen, that neither the
Governor, nor Cardinal shall have their will of you, but I will keep you in
mine own house, till I either set you free, or restore you to the same place
where I receive you; Then said the Lairds, My Lord, if you make good your
promise, which we presume you will, we our selves will not only serve you, but
we will procure all the Professors in Lothain to do the same, etc. These
promises being made in the presence of God, and hands being stricken by both
parties, the Earl took Master Wischard and so departed.

Master Wischard was carried to Edinburgh; But gold and women easily corrupt
fleshly men; for the Cardinal gave Bothwel gold; He is carried to Edinburgh.
and the Queen, that was too familiar with him, promised him her favor, if he
would deliver Master Wischard into Edinburgh Castle, which he did; Bothwel
falsifies his promise
and shortly after he was delivered to the blood-thirsty Cardinal: who, seeing
that it was forbidden by their Cannon Law for a Priest to sit as a Judge upon
life and death; he sent to the Governor, requesting him to appoint some
Lay-Judge to pass sentence of death upon Master Wischard.

The Governor would easily have yielded to his request, but that David
Hamilton, a godly man told him, that he could expect no better an end than
Saul, if he persecuted the truth which formerly he had professed, etc. Hereupon
the Governor sent the Cardinal word, that he would have no hand in shedding
the blood of that good man; The Cardinal being angry, returned this answer,
that he had sent to him of mere Civility, and that he would proceed without
him, and so to the great grief of the godly, the Cardinal carried Master
Wiseheart to Saint Andrews, and put him into the Tower there; He is carried to
St. Andrews.
and without any long delay he caused all the Bishops, and other great
Clergymen to be called together to Saint Andrews.

Feb. ult. 1546. Master Wischard was sent for to appear before them, to give an
account of his seditious and Heretical doctrine, as they called it; The
Cardinal caused all his retinue to come armed to the place of their sitting,
which was the Abby-church, whither when Master Wischard was brought, there was
a poor man lying at the door, that asked his alms, to whom he flung his purse;
when he came before the Cardinal, there was a Dean appointed to preach; whose
Sermon being ended, Wischard was put up into the Pulpit to hear his charge: and
one Lawder, a Priest, stood over against him, and read a scrowle full of bitter
accusations and curses, so that the ignorant people thought that the earth
would have opened and swallowed up Wischard quick: His accusation*
but he stood with great patience without moving, or once changing his
countenance; The Priest having ended his curses, spat at Master Wischards face,
saying, What answerest thou? thou Runnagate, Traitor, Thief, etc. His patience.
Then did Master VVischard fall upon his knees, making his prayer unto God;
after which he said, Many and horrible sayings unto me a Christian man, many
words abominable for to hear, have ye spoken here this day, which not only to
teach, but even to think, I ever thought it a great abomination, etc. Then did
he give them an account of his doctrine. Answering every Article as far as
they would give him leave to speak.

But they without having any regard to his sober and godly answers, presently
condemned him to be burnt. After which sentence he falling upon his knees, said,

O immortal God, how long will thou suffer the rage, and great cruelty of the
ungodly to exercise their fury upon thy servants, which do further thy Word in
this world, His Prayer.
whereas they on the contrary seek to destroy the truth, whereby thou have
revealed thy self to the world, etc. O Lord, we know certainly that thy true
servants must needs suffer for thy names sake persecutions, afflictions, and
troubles in this present world; yet we desire that thou would preserve and
defend thy Church which thou have chosen before the foundations of the world,
and give thy people grace to hear thy Word, and to be thy true servants in this
present life.

Popish subtilty
Then were the common people put out, the Bishops not desiring that they should
hear the innocent man speak, and so they sent him again to the Castle, till the
fire should be made ready; In the Castle came two Friars to him, requiring him
to make his Confession to them, to whom he said, I will make no confession to
you, but fetch me that man who preached even now, and I will speak with him;
Then was the Sub-Prior with whom he conferred a pretty while, till the
Sub-prior wept, who going to the Cardinal, told him that he came not to
intercede for Master Wischards life, but to make known his innocence to all
men; at which words the Cardinal was very angry, saying: We knew long ago what
you were.

The Captain of the Castle with some friends coming to Master Wischard, asked
him if he would break his fast with them: yea, said he, very willingly, for I
know you be honest men; In the mean time he desired them to hear him a little;
and so he discoursed to them about the Lords Supper, He administreth the
Sacrament.
his sufferings and death for us, exhorting them to love one another, laying
aside all rancor and malice as becomes the members of Jesus Christ, who
continually intercedes for us to his Father. Afterward he gave thanks, and
blessing the bread and wine, he took the bread and brake it, giving it to every
one, saying, eat this, remember that Christ died for us, and feed on it
spiritually; so taking the Cup, he bade them remember that Christ's blood was
shed for them, etc. Then he gave thanks and prayed for them, and so retired
into his chamber.

Presently came two Executioners to him from the Cardinal, one put on him a
black linen coat, the other brought him bags of powder, which they tied about
several parts of his body, and so they brought him forth to the place of
execution; over against which place, the Castle windows were hung with rich
hangings, and Velvet Cushions laid for the Cardinal and Prelates, who from
thence fed their eyes with the torments of this innocent man; The Cardinal
fearing lest Wiseheart should be rescued by his friends, caused all the
Ordnance in the Castle to be bent against the place of his execution, The
Cardinals fear.
and commanded his gunners to stand ready all the time of his burning; Then
were his hands bound behind his back, and so he was carried forth; In the way
some beggars met him, asking his alms for Gods sake: To whom he said, My hands
are bound wherewith I was wont to give you alms: but the merciful Lord, who of
his bounty and abundant grace feeds all men, vouchsafe to give you necessaries
both for your bodies and souls. Then two Friars met him, persuading him to pray
to our Lady to mediate for him; to whom he meekly said, Cease, tempt me not, I
entreat you: and so with a rope about his neck, and a chain about his middle,
he was led to the fire: then falling upon his knees, he thrice repeated; O thou
Savior of the world have mercy upon me; Father of heaven, His Prayer at death.
I commend my spirit into thy holy hands: Then turning to the people, he said:
Christian brethren and sisters, I beseech you be not offended at the Word of
God for the torments which you see prepared for me; but I exhort you that ye
love the Word of God for your salvation, His exhortation to the People.
and suffer patiently, and with a comfortable heart for the Words sake, which
is your undoubted salvation and everlasting comfort; I pray you also show my
brethren and sisters which have often heard me, that they cease not to learn
the Word of God which I taught them, according to the measure of grace given to
me, for no persecution or trouble in this world whatsoever; and show them that
the doctrine was no old wives fables, but the truth of God; for if I had taught
men's doctrine, I had had greater thanks from men: but for the Word of Gods sake
I now suffer, not sorrowfully, but with a glad heart and mind: For this cause
I was sent that I should suffer this fire for Christ's sake; behold my face, you
shall not see me change my countenance: I fear not the fire; and if
persecution come to you for the Words sake, I pray you fear not them that can
kill the body, and have no power to hurt the soul, etc. Then he prayed for them
which accused him, saying, I beseech thee father of heaven, forgive them that
have of ignorance, or of an evil mind, forged lies of me: He prays for his
Persecutors
I forgive them with all my heart; I beseech Christ to forgive them that have
condemned me this day ignorantly: Then turning to the people again, he said, I
beseech you brethren, exhort your Prelates to learn the Word of God, that they
may be ashamed to do evil, and learn to do good, or else there shall shortly
come upon them the wrath of God which they shall not eschew; Then the
Executioner upon his knees, said, Sir, I pray you forgive me, for I am not the
cause of your death; and he calling him to him, kissed his cheeks, saying, Lo
here is a token that I forgive thee; My heart, do thine office; and so he was
tied to the stake, and the fire kindled.

The Captain of the Castle coming near him, bade him be of good courage, and to
beg for him the pardon of his sin; to whom Master Wischard said, This fire
torments my body, but no whit abates my spirits; then looking toward the
Cardinal, he said, He who in such state from that high place, feeds his eyes
with my torments, within few days shall be hanged out at the same window to be
seen with as much ignominy as he now leans there with pride; and so his breath
being stopped, A Prophecy.
he was consumed by the fire.

This Prophecy was fulfilled, when after the Cardinal was slain, the Provost
raising the Town, came to the Castle gates, crying, What have you done with my
Lord Cardinal? Where is my Lord Cardinal? To whom they within answered, Return
to your houses, for he has received his reward, and will trouble the world no
more: But they still cried, We will never depart till we see him; Then did the
Leslies hang him out at that window to show that he was dead, and so the people
departed.

But God left not the death of this holy man long unrevenged: for the people
did generally cry out of the cruelty used against him, especially John Lesley,
brother to the Earl of Rothes, and Norman Lesley his Cousin, fell foul upon
the Cardinal for it: but he thought himself strong enough for all Scotland, The
Cardinals pride, and carnal confidence.
saying, Tush, a fig for the fools, and a button for the bragging of Heretics.
Is not the Lord Governor mine, witness his eldest son for a pledge at my
table? Have I not the Queen at my devotion? Is not France my friend? why should
I fear any danger? yet he had laid a design to cut off such as he feared and
hated, which was discovered after his death by letters and memorials found
about him. He kept himself for his greater security in his Castle; and on a
Friday night there came to the Town of Saint Andrews, Norman Lesley, William
Kircaldy, John Leslley, and some others; and on the Saturday morning they met
together not far from the Castle, waiting till the gate was opened, The Castle
surprised.
and the drawbridge let down, for the receiving in some lime and sand, to
repair some decays about the Castle, which being done, Kircaldy, with six more,
went to the Porter, falling into discourse with him, till the Leslies came also
with some other company: the Porter seeing them, would have drawn up the
Bridge, but he was prevented, and whilst he endeavored to keep them out at the
gate, his head was broken, and the Keys taken from him; The Cardinal was asleep
in bed, for all night he had for his bedfellow, Mistress Mary Ogleby, who was a
little before gone from him out at the Postern gate, Popish uncleanness.
and therefore the Cardinal was gone to his rest.

There were about one hundred workmen in the Castle, which seeing what was
done, cried out, but, without hurt, they were turned out at the wicket gate;
Then William Kircaldy went to secure the Postern lest the Cardinal should make
an escape that way: The rest going to the Gentlemen's chambers, who were above
fifty, without hurting them, they turned them all out at the gate; They which
undertook this enterprise were but eighteen men. The Cardinal being awaked with
the noise, asked out at the window what was the matter? Answer was made, that
Norman Lesley had taken his Castle: Then did he attempt to have escaped by the
Posterne, but finding that to be kept, he returned to his chamber: and with the
help of his Chamberlain fell to barrica-doing up the door with chests, and such
things: Then came up John Lesley and bids open the door: The Cardinal asked,
who was there? He answered John Lesley: The Cardinal said, I will have Norman,
for he is my friend: Content your self, said the other, with those that are
here: and so they fell to breaking open the door; in the mean time the Cardinal
hid a box of gold under some coals in a secret corner. Then he said to them,
Will ye save my life? John Lesley answered, It may be that we will. Nay, said
the Cardinal, swear unto me by Gods wounds that you will, and then I will open
the door; then said John, that which was said, is unsaid, and so he called for
fire to burn down the door, whereupon the door was opened, and the Cardinal
sat him down in his chair, crying, I am a Priest, I am a Priest, ye will not
slay me? Then John Lesley and another struck him once or twice; But Master
James Melvin, a man that had been very familiar with Wischard, and of a modest
and gentle nature, perceiving them both to be in choler, plucked them back,
saying, This work and judgment of God although it be secret, ought to be done
with great gravity: And so presenting him the point of his sword, he said,
Repent thee of thy former wicked life, but especially of sheding the blood of
that notable Instrument of God, Master George Wisheart, who though he was
consumed by the fire before men, The Cardinal slain.
yet cries it for vengeance upon thee, and we from God are sent to revenge it;
for here, before my God I protest, that neither the hatred of thy person, the
love of thy riches, nor the fear of any hurt thou could have done me, moves
me to strike thee; but only because thou have been, and still remainest an
obstinate enemy against Jesus Christ and his holy Gospel; and so he thrust him
through the body, who falling down, spoke never a word, but I am a Priest, I am
a Priest: Fie, Fie, all is gone.

The death of this Tyrant was grievous to the Queen Mother, with whom he had
two much familiarity, as with many other women; as also to the Romanists,
though the people of God were freed from their fears in a great measure thereby.

Anno 1550. There was one Adam Wallace, Adam Wallace.
a man that had no great learning, but was zealous in Godliness, and of an
upright life; him the Bishop of Saint Andrews caused to be apprehended, and
carried to Edinburgh, where after a while he was brought to judgment before
Duke Hamilton, Huntly, and diverse others; The Bishops and their instruments
accused him: First, His accusation.
that he took upon him to preach; to which he answered, that he never judged
himself worthy of so excellent a Vocation, and therefore never took on him to
preach; yet he denied not, that in private places he used to read the Word, and
out of it to exhort such as were willing to hear him. Knave, quoth one, What
have you to do to meddle with the Scriptures? I think, said he, its every ones
duty to labor to know the will of God, and to get assurance of his salvation,
which is to be found in the Old and New Testament. What then, said another,
shall we leave to the Churchmen to do? To whom he answered, their work is
publicly to preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ, The Ministers work.
and to feed the flock which he has redeemed with his own blood, as all true
Pastors are commanded to do, etc. The Bishops being angry hereat, caused his
charge further to be read; as that he denied Purgatory, praying to Saints, and
for the dead, etc. To which he answered, that he had often read over the Bible,
and yet found no mention of Purgatory, nor command to pray to the Saints, or
for the dead; Therefore I believe, said he, they are but mere inventions of
men, devised for covetousness sake. Then did they ask him what he thought of
the Mass? He answered, I say as my Lord Jesus Christ said, That which is
greatly esteemed before men, is abomination before God; Then cried they all
out, His Martyrdom.
Heresy, Heresy, and so and so adjudged him to the fire, which he patiently
underwent the same day upon the Castle-hill.

Henry Forest.
Anno 1553. Henry Forest was accused of Heresy, but when they brought him to
trial, nothing could be proved against him, whereupon they sent him to Friar
Langius to be confessed. The Friar amongst other questions, asked him what he
thought of Patrick Hamilton, who had been formerly burned for Religion? He
answered, that he was a good man, and that his Articles were to be maintained.
This wicked Friar discovered his Confession, which was taken as a sufficient
proof against the poor man, who thereupon was condemned to be burnt. Popish
perfidiousnesse.
As he went to the place of execution, he complained of the Friar who had
betrayed him, saying, Let no man trust the false Friars after me; They are
despisers of God, and deceivers of men; and so in the flames he resigned up his
spirit unto God. His Martyrdom.


Anno 1558. Andrew Oliphant accused one Walter Mill, formerly a Priest; Walter
Mill.
who being at Prayer, Oliphant said to him, Rise up Sir Walter; But when he
had ended his prayers, he said, My name is Walter: I have been too long one of
the Popes Knights. Then said Oliphant, Thou keep my Lords too long here,
therefore make an end. He answered, I must obey God rather than men: When he
was brought forth to judgment, they asked him concerning Priests marriage: he
answered, It is Gods Ordinance, that they which cannot abstain, Popish
uncleanness.
should marry. But you abhor it, vowing chastity, which you cannot keep, but
take other men's wives and daughters; Then they asked him if there were not
seven Sacraments? he answered, Give me two, and take you the rest; after other
questions they asked him if he would recant? He answered, I am corn and not
chafe, I will not recant the truth: Then they commanded him to go to the
stake; but he said, By the law of God I am forbidden to lay hands on my own
self, therefore do you put me into the fire, and you shall see my resolution.
Having made his Prayer to God, he said to the people; Although I have been a
great sinner, yet it is not for that, but for Gods truth contained in his Word
of the Old and New Testament that I now suffer; His speech at death.
and God out of his abundant mercy does honor me so far, as to make me
amongst other of his servants, seal his truth with my blood; Dear friends, as
you would escape eternal death, His Martyrdom.
be no more seduced with lies of Archbishop, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, etc. but
only trust in God, and so he quietly slept in the Lord; and was the last man
that died for Religion in Scotland.

Collected out of the History of the Reformation in Scotland. CHAP. XL. The
Persecution of the Church in Ireland, Anno Christi, 1642.
THough the barbarous cruelty used by the Irish against the English, go usually
under the name of Rebellion, yet I rather look upon it as, and choose to call it
a persecution, because their cruelties were exercised upon Protestants only, so
far as ever I could hear; neither were the English Papists murdered, yea
they joined with the Irish in murdering of their brethren. Besides, the
Jesuits, Priests, and Friars were the chief instigators to these murders,
stirring up continually all sorts, both of the Gentry and Communalty, to show
the utmost of their zeal therein; and when their design was so surely laid,
that they thought it impossible to be prevented, they did in their public
devotions recommend by their Prayers the good success of a great design,
tending much to the advancement of the Catholic cause; and that they might
stir up the people with the greater animosity and cruelty to put it in
execution, they everywhere declaimed loudly against the Protestants, saying,
That they were Heretics, not to be suffered any longer to live amongst them;
that it was no more sin to kill one of them, than to kill a dog; Popish malice.
and that it was a mortal and unpardonable sin to relieve or protect any of
them.

They also with much acrimony represented the severe courses taken by the
Parliament of England to suppress the Romish Religion, and utterly to
extirpate the Professors of it: Popish lies.
They told them that in England they had caused the Queens Priests to be hanged
before her face, and that they held herself under a most severe discipline; and
that the like cruel Laws should be made against Popery in Ireland, etc.

When their plots were ripe for execution, we find their first proceedings
against the English very various; some of the Irish only stripping and
expelling them; others murdering man, woman, and child without mercy; yet all
resolving universally to root out all the Protestants out of Ireland; yea, so
deeply malicious were they against the English Protestants, The malice against
the English.
that they would not endure the very sound of that language, but would have all
such punished as spoke English; and the names of all English places they would
have changed into old Irish.

In many places they killed the English Cowes and Sheep, merely because they
were English: sometimes they cut off their legs, or cut out a piece of their
buttock, and so left them to live in pain: yea in some places, what they could
not devour, they killed, and left in great multitudes stinking in the fields.

The Priests gave the Sacrament unto diverse of the Irish, upon condition that
they should neither spare man, Popish malice and cruelty.
woman nor child of the Protestants, saying, that it did them a great deal of
good to wash their hands in their blood. One Halligan a Priest, read an
excommunication against all those, that from thenceforth should relieve or
harbor any English, Scotch, or Welsh man, or give them alms at their doors,
whereby many were famished to death. The Friars with tears exhorted them not to
spare any of the English; they boasted, that when they had destroyed them in
Ireland, they would go over into England, and not leave the memorial of an
English man under heaven.

They openly professed, that they held it as lawful to kill a Protestant, as to
kill a sheep or a dog. One of their Priests said, that it was no more pity or
conscience to take their lives or estates from them, than to take a bone out of
a dogs mouth.

The day before this Massacre was to begin, the Priests gave the people a
dismiss at Mass, with free liberty to go out and take possession of all their
lands, which they pretended to be unjustly detained from them by the English.
As also to strip, rob, and despoil them of all their goods and cattle; the
Protestants being as they told them, worse than Dogs, for they were Devils, and
served the Devil, and therefore the killing of such was a meritorious act, and
a rare preservative against the pains of Purgatory; for that the bodies of such
of them as died in this quarrel should not be cold, before their souls should
ascend up into heaven, so that they should not need to fear the pains of
Purgatory; and this caused some of these Murtherous Cains to boast, after they
had slain many of the English, that they knew that if they should dye presently
they should go strait to Heaven.

The chief Gentlemen of the Irish, when this persecution first began, persuaded
many of their Protestant neighbors, that if they would bring their goods and
cattle to them, Popish perfidiousnesse.
they would secure them from the rage of the common people; and hereby they got
abundance peaceably into their hands, whereof they cheated the Protestants,
refusing to restore them again; yet so confident were the Protestants at first
of their good dealing in regard of former familiarity, that they gave them
Inventories of all they had; nay dug up such of their best things as they
had hidden in the ground, and deposited them in their custody. They also gat
much into their hands by fair promises, and deep oaths and engagements, that if
they would deliver them their goods, they would suffer them with their wives
and children quietly to depart the Country; yet having got what they could,
they afterward murdered them.

Having thus seized upon all their goods and cattle, ransack't their houses,
and gotten their persons under their power, the next work was to strip man,
woman, and child stark-naked, and so to turn them out of doors, Prodigious*
cruelties
not suffering them so much as to shelter themselves under bushes, or in the
woods, strictly prohibiting all the Irish, under great penalties, not to give
them any relief as they passed in the high ways; and their great design
herein was, that they on whom they would not lay their hands and cruelly
murder in cold blood, might miserably perish through cold, nakedness, and
want; and therefore if any of them gat any old rags to cover their nakedness
with, they stripped them again and again, sometimes twice or thrice over, the
Irish women being very active herein, yea they taught their very children to do
the like; yea they would not leave to the women so much as a smock or an
hairlace: So that many of them being starved, fell down dead in the high ways:
Others that gat to any English town, by reason of famine, and cold suffered by
the way, Many starved and strip^.
died so soon as they came thither.

In the town of Colerain, of these miserable people, that fled thither for
succor, many thousands died in two days, so that the living being not able to
bury them, laid the Carcasses of those dead persons in great ranks in waste and
wide holes, piling them so close and thick as if they had packed up herings
together.

One Magdalen Redman deposed that she, and diverse others Protestants, amongst
whom were twenty two widows, were first robbed, and then stripped stark-naked,
and when they had in an house covered themselves with straw, the bloody Papists
threw burning straw in amongst them on purpose to burn them; Then did they
drive them so naked in to the wild woods in frost and snow, so that the snow
covered their skins, where a long time it lay unmelted, and some of their
Children died in their arms with the extremity of the cold; and whereas some
of these poor souls went toward the Burre for shelter, the cruel Irish turned
them back again, saying, they should go to Dublin; and when they went toward
Dublin, they beat them back, saying, they should go to the Burre, and so tossed
them to and fro, that some of them died; those which through many difficulties
gat to the Burre, many of them died there; and those that survived, lived
miserably by reason of their many wants.

Yet though these bloody Villains exercised such inhumane cruelties toward
the poor Protestants, they would commonly boast, that these were but the
beginnings of their sorrows; and indeed they made it good; for having disarmed
the English, robbed them of their goods, and cattle, stripped them of their
clothes, and having their persons in their power, they furiously broke out
into all manner of abominable cruelties, horrid massacres, and execrable
murders, so that it would make any Christians ear to tingle, and his heart to
ache to hear the mention of them.

For there were multitudes murdered in cold blood, some whilst they were at
plough, others as they sat peaceably in their houses, others traveling upon
the high ways; Horrible murders.
all without any manner of provocation given by them, were suddenly destroyed.

In the Castle of Lisgool were about one hundred and fifty men, women, and
children consumed with fire. At the Castle of Moneah were one hundred slain
altogether. At the Castle of Tullah, which was delivered to Mac Guire upon
composition, and faithful promises of fair quarter, as soon as he and his
entered the Court, they began to strip the people, and most cruelly put them to
the sword, murdering them all without mercy.

At Lissenskeah they hanged and killed above one hundred of the Scottish
Protestants, Popish perfidiousness.
showing them no more favor than they did to the English. Yea the County
thereabouts being well planted and peopled, was in a most horrible manner quite
destroyed. In the Counties of Armagh and Tyrone, where the Protestants were
more numerous, their murders were more multiplied, and with greater cruelty,
if it were possible, than in other places.

An Irish Monster.
Mac Guire coming to the Castle of Lissenskeah, desired in a friendly manner to
speak with Master Middleton, who admitting him in, as soon as he was entered, he
first burned the Records of the County which were kept there; then he demanded
one thousand pounds which was in his custody of Sir William Bal^ores, which as
soon as he had, he caused Master Middleton to hear Mass, and to swear that he
would never alter from it, and then immediately caused him, his wife and
children to be hanged up: hanging and murdering above one hundred persons
besides in that place.

At Portendown Bridge there were one thousand men, women, and children carried
in several Companies, and all unmercifully drowned in the River, the Bridge
being broken down in the midst, and the people driven and forced on till they
tumbled down into the water. Yea in that Country there were four thousand
persons drowned in several places, Multitudes drowned.
the barbarous Papists driving on the poor souls, when they had miserably
stripped them, unto the places of their sufferings like swine; and if any were
slack in their pace, they pricked them forward with their swords and pikes; yea
to terrify the rest, they killed and wounded some; and when they were cast
into the river, if any assayed to swim to the Shore, the Rebels stood and
shot at them.

In one place one hundred and forty English were taken and driven like cattle
for many miles together. Other companies they carried out under pretense of
safe conduct, thereby causing them to march cheerfully till they had got them
to some place fit for execution, and then murdered them there. One hundred and
fifteen men, women, and children they sent with Sir Philem Onenles Pass, till
they had brought them to the bridge of Portendowne, Popish treachery.
and then forced them all into the water, and such as by swimming, or other
means sought to escape, they either knocked them on the head, and after
drwowned them, or else shot them to death in the water. One Mistress Campbel
being forced by them to the River, A just reward.
and finding no means to escape their fury, suddenly clasped one of the chief
of them in her arms, and so both tumbling into the River, they were drowned
together. At another time one hundred and forty Protestants being thrown in at
the same place, as any of them swam to the shore, the bloody villains with the
butt-ends of their muskets knocked out their brains.

At Armagh, O Cane gat together all the Protestants thereabouts, pretending to
conduct them to Coleraine; but before they were gone a days journey, they were
all murdered, and so were many others, though they had protections from Sir
Phileme O Neale. The aged people in Armagh were carried to Charlemount, and
there murdered.

Presently after, the Town of Armagh was burnt, and five hundred persons of all
sorts were there murdered and drowned. In Killoman were forty eight families
murdered. In one house twenty two Protestants were burned; In Kilmore all the
inhabitants were stripped and massacred, being two hundred families: Some they
set in the stocks till they confessed where their money was, and then massacred
them; The whole County was a common butchery, Prodigious cruelties.
where many thousands perished in a shor time, by sword, famine, fire, water,
and all other cruel manner of deaths that rage and malice could invent.

To many, these bloody Villains showed so much favor as to dispatch them
presently, by no means allowing them so much time as to pray. Others they
imprisoned in filthy Dungeons full of dirt and mire, and there clapping bolts
on their legs, suffered them to perish at leisure. One told John Cowder that
they would kill him, They deny them liberty to pray.
but first bid him say his prayers, and when he kneeled down to pray, they
presently cut off his head. When some others upon their knees begged but leave
to pray before they were slain, they would bid them bequeath their souls to
the Devil; others would ask them, why do you desire to pray? your souls are
already with the Devil; and so would immediately slaughter them. At Casel they
put all the Protestants into a loathsome Dungeon, where they kept them twelve
weeks in great misery. Some they barbarously mangled and left them langushing
upon the high ways, crying out but for so much mercy as to be dispatched out
of their pain; some they hanged up twice or thrice: Others they buried alive.
Some when they were half-hanged, they cast into pits, covering them with a
little earth, Some buried alive.
where they sent out most lamentable groans for a good while after.

In Queens County, an English man, his wife, five children, and a maid, were
all hanged together, then put into a hole; the youngest child being not dead,
put up the hand and cried Mammie, Mammie, and yet without mercy they buried it
alive.

Thomas Mason in Laugal was extremely beaten and wounded, yet his wife and some
others carried him away, whereupon these Villains cruelly hacked, slashed and
wounded them, and then dragged the said Mason into an hole, and there threw
stones on him with the weight whereof they kept him under: there he lay
languishing and groaning till his own wife, to put him out of pain, stopped
his breath with her handkerchief.

At Clownes seventeen men were buried alive, yet so as their pitiful cries were
heard afar off.

Some were deadly wounded, and so hanged upon tenter-hooks. Some with ropes
about their necks were drawn through the water. Some were hung upon
tenter-hooks.
Some with ropes about their middles were drawn through woods and bogs.

In Castle Cumber one of these cutthroats took two boys, wounded them, and
hung them upon a butchers tenters. Some were hanged up, and taken down several
times to make them confess their money, which when they had done, they
presently murdered them. Some were hung up by the arms, and then with their
swords they made experiment how many blows an English Protestant would endure
ere he died. Some had their bellies ripped up, and so were left with their guts
running about their heels.

An ancient woman coming toward Dublin, was stripped seven times in one day,
Blasphemy.
and they bade her go and look for her God, and bid him give her clothes again.

In Kilkenny they cruelly beat an English woman, till they forced her into a
ditch, Many had their bellies ripped.
where she died; then they took her child, a girl of about six years old, ripped
her belly, and let out her guts.

One they forced to go to Mass with them, yet afterward wounded him, ripped his
belly, took out his guts, and so left him alive.

A Scottish man they stripped and knocked on the head, who afterward coming to
himself, went into the Town naked; Then did they again take him and hewed him
all to pieces; They also ripped up his Wives belly, so that a Child dropped out
of her womb. Many other women great with child they hung up, then ripped their
bellies, and let the Infants fall out. Sometimes they gave their children to be
devoured of Swine and Dogs. One John Stone with his son, two sons in law, and
their wives, they took and hung them all up; and one of the young women being
great with child, they ripped her belly, took forth her child, and used such
beastly barbarous actions to her as are not fit to be mentioned. At the Newry
they ripped up a woman's belly that was great with two children, throwing them to
be devoured of swine. Also another woman being delivered of a child in the
fields, they which had formerly killed her Father and Husband, killed her also
with two of her children, and gave the newborn infant to be devoured of Dogs.

In the County of Armagh they Robbed, stripped, and murdered abundance of
Protestants, whereof some they burned, some they slew with the sword, some they
hanged, and some they starved to death; and meeting Mistress Howard, and Mistress
Frankland with six of their children, and themselves both great with child,
with their pikes they killed and murdered them all, ripped open the Gentlewomens
bellies, took out their children, and threw them into a ditch. A young Scottish
woman's child they took by the heels, Children had their brains dashed out.
and dashed the brains out against a tree; the like they did to many other
children.

Anne Hill going with a young child on her back, and four more by her side,
these cruel persecutors pulled the child off her back, trod* on it till it
died, stripped her self and the other four children stark naked, whereby they
died of cold.

Some others they met with, hanged them up upon a Windmill, and before they
were half dead, cut them in pieces with their Skeins. Many other Protestants,
especially women and children they pricked and stabbed with their Skeins, Forks
and Swords, slashing, cutting and mangling them in their heads, faces, breasts,
arms and other parts, yet killed them not, but left them wallowing in their
blood, to languish, starve and pine to death, and when they desired them to
kill them out of their pain, they refused; yet sometimes after a day or two,
they would dash out their brains with stones or clubs, which they accounted as
a great favor.

One goodwife Harvey at Kilkenny was forced to go to Mass, yet afterward,
together with her children was stripped, and one of her daughters had her belly
ripped that her intrails fell out; and her self was so beaten and wounded, that
she hardly escaped with life.

The Castle of Lisgoole being set on fire by these merciless Papists, a woman
leaped out at a window to save her self from burning, but they presently
murdered her; Many burned.
the next morning her child was found sucking at her breast, which they
murdered also. And whereas many Protestants with their wives and children fled
into vauls and cellars to hide themselves, they were all murdered there. One
Jane Addis they stabbed, and then putting her child of a quarter old to her
breast, bid it suck English bastard, and so left it to perish there.

One Mary Barlow had her husband hanged before her face, and her self with six
children were all stripped stark naked in frost and snow, after which, sheltring
themselves in a Cave, Some perish by famine.
they had nothing to eat for three weeks, but two old Calves skins, which they
beat with stones, and so eat them hair and all, her children crying to her
rather to go out and be killed than to famish there.

In the cold weather many thousands of Protestants of all ranks, ages, and
sexes, being turned out stark naked, perished of cold and hunger, thousands of
others were drowned, cast into ditches, bogs, and turf-pits. Multitudes were
enclosed in houses, which being set on fire they were burnt miserably. Some
that lay sick of feavors they drew out of their beds and hanged them. Some men,
women, and children they drove into boggie pits; and if any of them endeavored
to get out, they knocked them on the heads.

Some aged men and women, these Barbarians enforced their own children to carry
them to the river where they were drowned: yea some children were compelled
unnaturally to be the Executioners of their own Parents: Unnatural cruelties.
wives were forced to help to hang their own husbands, and mothers to cast
their own children into the water, after all which themselves were murdered.
In Sligo they forced a young man to kill his own father, and then hanged him
up: In another place they forced a woman to kill her husband, then caused her
son to kill her, and then immediately hanged the son; and this they did that
they might destroy both soul and body. Yea such was their detestable malice
against the English Protestants, that they taught their children to kill
English children; One of these Villains wives was very angry with their
soldiers, because they did not bring the grease of a fat Gentlewoman, Children
kill English children.
whom they had slain, with them for her to make candles of.

The Irish women that followed the Camp, egged on the men to cruelty, always
crying out, kill them all, spare neither, man, woman, nor child. They took the
child of one Tkomas Straton, being about twelve years old, Some boiled in
Cauldrons.
and boiled him to death in a Cauldron. One Goodwife Lin and her daughter were
carried into a Wood, where they first hanged the mother, and then the daughter
in the hair of the mothers head. Some women and children of the Irish, meeting
an English woman great with child, stripped her to her smock, then pulled off her
smock, and so rent and abused her, that the poor woman falling into labor,
both she and her child died under their hands.

In some places they plucked out the eyes, and cut off the hands of the
Protestants, Some had their eyes pulled out
and so turned them out into the fields to wander up and down till they
perished. The very women in some places stoned the English women to death,
together with their children. One man they shot through both his thighs; then
digging a hole in the ground, they set him in it upright upon his feet, and
then filled up the hole, leaving out only his head, where they left him till he
pined and languished to death. Of another man they held his feet in the fire
till he was burned to death.

In Munster they hanged up many Ministers in a most barbarous manner. One
Minister they stripped stark naked, and drove him through the town, pricking
him forwards with darts and rapiers, and so pursued him till he fell down dead.

Neither did all the malice that they bore to these poor Christians, end with
their lives when they had slain them, but extended after death to the denying
burial to their carcasses, casting some into ditches, leaving others to be
devoured of ravenous beasts and fouls; yea some that had been formerly buried
they dug up, and left them as dung upon the face of the earth.

These barbarous Villains vowed that if any Parents dug graves to bury their
children in, they should be buried therein themselves. They stripped one
William Loverden naked, then killed him before his wife and children, cut off
his head, and held it up for them to gaze at; and when his wife had buried hin
in his garden, they dug him up, and threw him into a ditch. Diverse Ministers
bones that had been buried some years before, they dug up, because they
were, as they said, Patrons of Heresy.

Poor children that went out into the fields to eat weeds and grass, they
killed without all pity. And a poor woman, whose husband was taken by them,
went to them with two children at her feet, and one at her breast, hoping to
beg her husband, but they slew her and her sucking infant; brake the neck of
another, and the third hardly escaped: And which was a great aggravation of
their wickedness, they exercised all this cruelty upon the English Protestants
who never provoked them thereto, yea that had always lived peaceably with
them, administering help and comfort to them in distress, putting no difference
betwixt them and those of their own Nation, and cherished them as friends and
loving neighbors. Notwithstanding all which courtesies, they now showed them
no favor or pity. Alas, who can comprehend the fears, terrors, anguish,
bitterness, and perplexity that seized upon the hearts of the poor
Protestants, finding themselves so suddenly surprised without remedy, and
inextricably wrapped up in all kind of outward miseries, which could possibly by
man be inflicted upon humane creatures! What sighs and groans, trembling and
astonishment, what shrikes, cries, and bitter lamentations of wives, children,
servants and friends, howling and weeping, finding themselves without all hope
of deliverance from their present miseries! How inexorable were their barbarous
tormentors that compassed them in on every side, without all bowels of
compassion, or the least commiseration and pity! One Ellen Millington they put
into an hole, fastening her in with stones, and left her there to languish to
death, bragging how many of them went to see her kick and toss in the hole.
Yea they boasted upon their success, that the day was their own, and that ere
long they would not leave one Protestant Rogue living, but would uttery destroy
every one that had but a drop of English blood in them; their women crying out,
Slay them all, the English are fit meat for dogs, and their children are
bastards. Yea so implacable was their malice, that they vowed that they would
not have an English beast alive, nor any of the breed of them. How grievous was
it to any Christian heart to hear a base Villain boast, that his hands were so
weary with killing and knocking down Protestants into a bog, that he could not
lift up his arms to his head! Another boasted that he had been abroad and had
killed sixteen of the rogues. Others boasted that they had killed so many, that
the grease and fat which stuck upon their swords, might well make an Irish
candle. Yea two boys boasted, thar at several times they had murdered and
drowned thirty six women and children.

These merciless Papists having set a Castle on fire, wherein were many
Protestants, they rejoycingly said amongst themselves, O how sweetly do they
fry!

At Kilkenny when they had committed many cruel murders, they brought seven
Protestants heads, amongst which one was the head of a Reverend Minister, all
which they set upon the Market-crosse, on a Market day, triumphing, slashing,
and mangling them; and putting a gag into the Ministers mouth, they slit up his
cheeks to his ears, and laying a leaf of a Bible before it, they bid him
preach, for his mouth was wide enough; it cannot be imagined with what scorn
and derision they acted these things, and with what joy and exultation their
eyes beheld the sad spectacle of the Protestants miseries; what greedy delight
they took in their bloody executions.

An English woman, whom they had stripped stark naked, gat a little straw,
which she tied about her middle to cover her nakedness; but these impudent
villains set fire to it, boasting what brave sport they had, to see how the
fire made the English Jade dance.

At Kilmore they put many Protestants, men, women, and children together into a
thatched house, and then set fire on it, boasting of the lamentations and
outcries that they made whilst they were in burning, and how the children
gaped when the fire began to burn them; taking pride, and glorying in
imitating those cries.

They took one Mistress Maxwel being in labor, and threw her into a river,
Prodigious cruelties.
boasting that the child's arm appeared, and that it was half-born when the
mother was drowned.

These bloody Persecutors took great pleasure and delight in their cruelty, and
to increase their misery, when they butchered them, they used to say, Thy soul
to the Devil. One of them coming into an house with his hands and clothes all
bloody, made his boasts, that it was English blood, and that his skeine had
p^^cked the clean white skins of many of them, even to the hilt thereof. When
any of them had killed a Protestant, many of them would come one after another,
each of them stabbing, wounding, and cutting his body in a most despiteful
manner, and then leave it naked to be devoured of dogs, beasts, and fouls; and
when they had slain any number of them, they would boast that they had made the
Devil beholding to them, in sending so many souls to hell.

But its no wonder that they carried themselves so toward these innocent
Christians, when they spared not to belch out their execrable blasphemies
against God and his holy Word.

In one place they burnt two Protestant Bibles, and then said it was hellfire
they burnt. Bibles burnt.
Other Bibles they took, cut in pieces, and then burnt them, saying, that they
would do the like to all Puritan Bibles. In the Church at Powerscourt they
burnt the Pulpit, Pues, Chests and Bibles belonging to it. Others of them took
the Protestants Bibles, and wetting them in dirty water, did several times dash
them on the faces of the Protestants, Blasphemies.
saying, I know you love a good lesson, here is an excellent one for you, come
to morrow and you shall have as good a Sermon as this. Others they dragged by
the hair of the head into the Church, there stripped and whipped them in a most
cruel manner, saying, If you come to morrow you shall hear the like Sermon.
They took the Bible of a Minister called Master E^ward Slack, and opening it,
they laid it in a puddle of water, and then stamped upon it, saying, A plague
on it, this Bible has bred all the quarrel, and that they hoped within a few
weeks all the Bibles in Ireland should be used as that was, or worse.

They did most despitefully upbraid the Profession of the truth to those
blessed souls, whom neither by threats nor terrors, pains nor torments they
could draw to forsake their Religion. And though some by extreme torments were
drawn to profess the change of their Religion, yet did they find no more
favor with these hell hounds, who with great scorn used to say, Aposttaes
murdered.
That it was fit to send them out of the world whilst they were in a good mood.

At Claslow, a Priest with some others, drew about forty or fifty English and
Scottish Protestants to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and then he told
them that they were in a good faith, and for fear they should fall from it and
turn Heretics, he with his companions presently cut all their throats.

John Nicholson and Anne his wife, being received into the Protection of one
Fitz Patrick, he labored to persuade them to go to Mass, and to join in the
present massacre; but they professed, that rather than they would forsake their
Religion they would die upon the swords point; Constancy, and Courage.
Then he would have had the woman burn her Bible; but she told him, rather than
she would burn her Bible, she would die the death; whereupon the Sabbath
morning after they were both of them cruelly murdered; but he that acted the
villainy was so tormented in conscience, Gods judgments on Persecutors.
and dogged with apparitions of them, as he conceived, that with inward horror
he pined away.

In the County of Tipperary near the Silver works, some of these barbarous
Papists met with eleven English men, Protestants, ten women, and some children,
whom they first stripped off their clothes, and then with stones, poleaxes,
skeins, swords, etc. they most barbarously massacred them all; this was done on
a Sabbath evening, the day having been very fair and clear; but just at that
time God sent a fearful storm of thunder, lightning, wind, hail and rain, so
that the murderers themselves confessed, that it was a sign of Gods anger
against them for this cruelty, yet they persisted in their bloody act, hacking,
hewing, flashing and stabbing them, so that most of them were cut in pieces
then tying withs about their necks, they threw them into an hole which they
made for the purpose; yet it pleased God, that one Scottish and an English man,
though they had many grievouous wounds, and were left for dead, after a while
revived, and with much difficulty escaped with their lives; but as God showed
his great mercy in preserving them, so he showed his just judgment upon Hugh
Kennedy, the chief of those murderers, who presently fell into a most
desperate madness and distraction, neither resting day nor night, till about
eight days after he drowned himself.

In the County of Mayo, about sixty Protestants, whereof fifteen were
Ministers, were upon Covenant to be safely conveyed to Galway by one Edmund
Burk and his soldiers; but by the way this Burk drew his sword, Popish
perfidousnesse.
teaching thereby the rest of his company to do the like; and so they began to
massacre these poor Protestants, some they shot to death; some they stabbed
with their skeins, some they thrust through with their pikes; some they cast
into the water and drowned, the women they stripped stark naked, who lying upon
their husbands to save them, were run through with pikes, so that very few of
them escaped with life.

In the town of Sligo forty Protestants wete stripped and locked up in a Cellar;
and about midnight a Butcher, provided for the purpose, was sent in amongst
them, Many knocked on the head
who with his axe knocked them all on the heads.

In Tirawly, thirty or forty English, who had formerly yielded to go to Mass,
were put to their choice whether they would die by the sword, or be drowned?
they chose the latter, and so being driven to the Seaside, these barbarous
villains with their naked swords forced them into the Sea; the mothers with
their children in their arms wading to the chin, were afterward overcome by
the waves, where they all perished.

But present death was counted too great a favor, and therefore of some they
twisted withs about their foreheads till the blood sprang out at the crown of
their heads: Others they hanged, and let down several times, etc.

The son of Master Montgomery, a Minister, aged about fifteen years, met with
one of these blood-suckers, who formerly had been his schoolmaster, who drew
his skein at him, whereupon the boy said, Good Master, A boy murdered by his
Master.
whip me as much as you will, but do not kill me; yet this merciless Tiger,
barbarously murdered him without all pity. A Scottish man was first wounded,
and then buried alive in a ditch.

In the Town of Sligo, all the Protestants were first stripped, and robbed of
all their estates; afterward they were summoned to go into the Goal, and such
as refused, were carried in; and then about midnight they all were stripped
stark naked, and there most cruelly and barbarously murdered with swords,
axes, skeins, etc. some of them being women great with child, their infants
thrust out their arms and legs at their wounds; after which execrable
murders, they laid the dead naked bodies of the men upon the naked bodies of
the women in a most immodest posture, Berbarous cruelty, and impudence.
where they left them till the next day to be looked upon by the Irish, who
beheld it with great delight; Also Isabel Beard, great with child, hearing the
lamentable cries of those that were murdered, ran forth into the streets,
where she was barbarously murdered, and was found the next day with the child's
feet coming out of the wounds in her sides: many others were murdered in the
houses and streets: But by Gods just judgment the river of Sligo, which was
before very full of fish, whereby many were nourished, for a long time after it
afforded no fish at all. A Prior also that had a hand in the murder of Isabel
Beard, and of casting her into the river, presently after fell mad.

About Dungannon were three hundred and sixteen Protestants in the like
barbarous manner murdered: About Charlemount above four hun^dred; about Tyrone
two hundred and six.

One Mac Crew murdered thirty one in one morning: Two young Villains murdered
one hundred and forty poor women and children that could make no resistance:
An Irish woman with her own hands murdered forty five.

At Portendowne Bridge were drowned above three hundred. Many drowned.
At Lawgh were drowned above two hundred: In another place three hundred were
drowned in one day. In the parish of Killamen there were murdered one thousand
and two hundred Protestants.

Many young children they cut into quarters and gobbets: eighteen Scottish
infants they hanged upon a clothiers tenterhooks. One fat man they murdered,
and made Candles of his grease; They made candles of their grease.
of another Scottish man they ripped up his belly, took one end of his small
guts, tied it to a tree, and forced him round about it till he had drawn them
all out of his body, saying, that they would try whether a dogs or a Scotchmans
guts were the longer.

By the command of Sir Philem O Neale, Master James Maxwell was drawn out of
his bed, being fick of a Feavor* and murdered; and his wife being in
childbirth, the child half borne, Prodigious cruelties.
they stripped her stark naked, drove her about a flights shoot, and drowned her
in the Blackwater; the like, or worse they did to another English woman in the
same town. They took one Master Watson, and cutting two collops out of his
buttocks they roasted him alive. Of a Scottish woman great with child, they
ripped up her belly, cut the child out of her womb, and so left it crawling on
her body.

Master Starkey, Schoolmaster at Armagh, being above one hundred years old,
they stripped stark naked; then took two of his daughters being Virgins, whom
they stripped stark naked also, and then forced them to lead their aged father
under the arms a quarter of a mile to a turspit, where they drowned them all
three, Popish uncleanness.
feeding the lusts of their eyes, and cruelty of their hearts with the same
object at the same time.

In some places they showed the like cruelty to the English beasts, which they
would not kill outright, but used to cut collops out of them, delighting to
hear their roaring, Their cruelty to the cattle.
and so the poor cattle would sometimes live two or three days in that torment.

To one Henry Cowel, a gallant Gentleman, they proffered his life, Henry Cowel.
if he would marry one of their base Truls, or go to mass, but he chose death
rather than to consent to either. Also to one Robe^t Ecklin, Constancy.
a child about eleven years old, Robert Ecklin. A child's constancy.
they proffered his life if he would go to Mass, but he refused, saying, That
he saw nothing in their Religion for which he would change his own.

Many of the Protestants they buried alive, solacing themselves in hearing them
speak to them, whilst they were digging down old ditches upon them.

They used also to send their children abroad in troops armed with long wattles
and whips, Childrens beastly cruelty
wherewith they used to beat dead men's bodies about their privy members, till
they beat them off, and then would return very joyful to their Parents, who
received them, as it were in triumph for their good actions.

If any women were found dead, lying with their faces downwards, these brutish
persons used to turn them on their ^acks, Popish uncleanness.
viewing and censuring every part of them, especially those parts that are not
fit to be named, which also they abused so many ways, and so filthily, as chaste
ears would not endure the naming rhereof.

They brake the backbone of a young youth, and so left him in the fields,
Monstrous c^ue^ty to a boy.
and some days after he was found, having, like a beast, eaten all the grass
round about him; yet neither then would they kill him outright, but removed
him to a place of better pasture, wherein was fulfilled that saying, The tender
mercies of the wicked are cruelty.

In the County of Antrim they murdered nine hundred fifty four Protestants in
one morning, and afterward about twelve hundred more in that County. Near
Lisnegarvy they forced above twenty four Protestants into an house, Many burnt.
and then setting fire on it, they burned them all, counterfeiting their
outcries in derision to others.

Sir Philem O Neal boasted that he had slain above six hundred at Garvagh: and
that he had left neither man, woman, nor child alive in the Baronry of
Munterlong. In other places he murdered above two thousand persons in their
houses, so that many houses were filled with dead bodies.

Above twelve thousand were slain in the high ways as they fled toward Down.
Many died of famine, many were starved to death for want of clothes, being
stripped of all in a cold season; Some thousands were drowned. So that in the
very Province of Ulster there were about one hundred and fifty thousand
murdered by sundry kinds of torments and deaths. One hundred and fifty
thousand murthe^red in Ulster.


These bloody Persecutors themselves confessed that the Ghosts of diverse of the
Protestants which they had drowned at Portendown Bridge, were daily and nightly
seen to walk upon the river, sometimes singing of Psalms, sometimes brandishing
naked swords, sometimes screeching in a most hideous and fearful manner; Gods
judgments on persecutors.
so that many of the Popish Irish which dwelt near thereabouts; being
affrighted herewith, were forced to remove their habitations further off into
the Country.

The Popish English were no whit inferior, yea rather exceeded the natural
Irish in their cruelty against the Protestants that lived amongst them, within
the pale, being never satisfied with their blood till they had seen the last
drop thereof.

Anne Kinnard testified that fifteen Protestants being imprisoned, and their
feet in the Stocks, a Popish boy being not above fourteen years old, slew them
all in one night with his skeine. Another not above twelve years old, killed
two women in another place. An English Papist woman killed seven men and women
of her neighbors in one morning. Boys and women murderers.
And it was usual for the Papists children to murder the Protestants children,
and sometimes with their wooden Swords, sharp and heavy, they would venture
upon people of riper years.

An English woman, who was newly delivered of two children, some of these
villains violently compelled her in her great pain and sickness to rise from
her bed, and took one of the infants that was living, and dashed his brains
against the stones, and then threw him into the River of the Barrow; the like
they did by many other infants. Many others they hanged without all pity.

The Lord Mont Garret caused diverse English Soldiers that he had taken about
Kilkenny to be hanged, Soldiers hanged.
hardly suffering them to pray before their death; they dyed very patiently,
and resolutely in the defense of the Protestant faith; and one of them, being
an Irish man, had his life offered if he would turn Papist, but he rather chose
to dye, Constancy.
and so was executed with the rest.

Some of these Persecutors meeting a poor young Girl that was going to see her
friends, they first half-hanged her, and then buried her quick.

One Fitz Patrick enticed a rich Merchant that was a Protestant, to bring all
his goods into his house, promising safely to keep them, and to redeliver them
to him. But when he had thus gotten them into his possession, he took the
Merchant and his Wife, and hanged them both: Popish perfidiousnesse.
the like he did by diverse others.

Some English men's heads that they had cut off, they carried to Kilkenny, and
on the market day set them on the Cross, where many, especially the women,
stabbed, cut, and slashed them, every one accounting themselves happy that could
but get a blow at them.

One of the heads being a Ministers, a woman struck so hard with her fist, that
the same night her hand grew black and blew, and so rankled, that she was lame
of it a quarter of a year after: Gods judgments on Persecutors.
Another woman that looked on those heads with much rejoicing, presently after
fell so distracted, that neither night not day she could rest, but cried out
continually that she saw those heads before her eyes.

One English* Protestant, saying, that he would believe the Devil as soon as
the Pope, they presently hanged him up in an Apple Tree till he dyed.

A poor Protestant woman with her two children going to Kilkenny upon
business, these bloody miscreants baited them with Dogs, stabbed them with
skeins, Some worried with dogs.
and pulled out the guts of one of the children, whereby they dyed; and not far
off, they took diverse men, women, and children, and hanged them up; and one of
the women being great with child, they ripped up her belly as she hanged, so
that the child fell out in the cawle alive. Some after they were hanged, they
drew up and down till their bowels were torn out.

How many thousands of Protestants were thus inhumanely murdered by sundry
kinds of deaths in that one Province of Ulster we have heard before; What the
number of the slain was in the three other Provinces, I find not upon Record;
but certainly it was very great; for I find these passages in a general
Remonstrance of the distressed Protestants in the Province of Munster. We may
(say they) compare our woe to the saddest Parallel of any story; The Munster
Remonstrance.
Our Churches are demolished, or which is worse, profaned by Sacrifices to
Idols: our habitations are become ruinous heaps: No quality, age, or sex
privileged from Massacres, and lingering deaths, by being robbed, stripped naked,
and so exposed to cold and famine. The famished Infants of murdered Parents
swarm in our streets, and for want of food perish before our faces, etc. And
all this cruelty that is exercised upon us, we know not for what cause,
offense, or seeming provocation its inflicted on us, (sin excepted saving that
we were Protestants, etc. We can make it manifest that the depopulations in
this Province of Munster, do well near equal those of the whole Kingdom, etc.

And thus in part we have heard of the merciless cruelties which the bloody
Papists exercised toward the Protestants; Let us now consider at least some of
Gods judgments upon the Irish, whereby he has not left the innocent blood of
his servants to be altogether unrevenged. Gods judgments on Persecutors.
Some particular instances have been mentioned before: as also the apparitions
at Portendown Bridge which affrighted them from their habitations, concerning
which it is further testified, Apparitions at Portendown B^idge.
that by their own confession, the blood of those that were knocked on the
head, and then thrown into the River at that Bridge, remained for a long time
upon the stones, and could not be washed away; as also that ofttimes they saw
apparitions sometimes of men, sometimes of women rising breast-high above the
water, which did most extremely screech and cry out for vengeance against the
Irish that had murdered them there.

Catherine Coke testified upon oath, that when the Irish had barbarously
drowned one hundred and eighty Protestants, men, women, and children at
Portendown Bridge, about nine days after she saw the apparition of a man bolt
upright in the River, standing breast-high, with his hands lift up to heaven,
and continued in that posture from December to the end of Lent, at which time
some of the English Army passing that way saw it also, after which it vanished
away.

Elizabeth Price testified upon oath that she and other women whose husbands
and children were drowned in that place, hearing of these apparitions, went
thither one Evening, at which time they saw one like a Woman rise out of the
River breast-high, her hair hanging down, which, with her skin, was as white
as snow, often crying out, Revenge, Revenge, Revenge, which so affrighted them
that they went their way.

Diverse Protestants were thrown into the river of Belterbert, and when any of
them offered to swim to the Land, they were knocked on the head with Poles,
after which their bodies were not seen of six weeks: but after the end thereof,
the murderers coming again that way, the bodies came floating up to the very
Bridge where they were.

Sir Con mac Gennis with his company slew Master Turge, Minister of the Newry,
with diverse other Protestants, after which the said Mac Gennis was so
affrighted with the apprehension of the said Master Turge his being continually
in his presence, that he commanded his soldiers not to slay any more of them,
but such as should be slain in battle.

A young woman being stripped almost naked, there came a Rogue to her, bidding
her give him her money, or he would run her through with his Sword. Her answer
was, You cannot kill me except God give you leave, A Miracle.
whereupon he ran three times at her naked body with his drawn Sword, and yet
never pierced her skin, whereat he being confounded, went his way and left her;
This was attested by diverse women that were present and saw it.

But besides these forementioned judgments of God which befell them for their
inhumane cruelties; we may observe how the hand of God has been out against
them ever since, and that in a special manner, by emasculating and debasing of
their spirits; whereby it has come to pass that ordinarily a few English
Soldiers have chased multitudes of them, and generally in all the battles and
fights that have been betwixt them, they have always been beaten, though the
ods was great of their side; And as they made themselves formerly drunk with
the innocent blood of the unresisting Protestants; so now God has given them
their fill of blood in jealousy and fury. Many thousands of them have perished
by the Sword of War; And how heavy has the hand of God lain further upon them
this present year, 1650. in that terrible and universal plague that has been
scattered all over the Nation, whereby many thousands more of them have
perished, and God is still fighting against, and probably will continue their
destruction, till they either shall truly be humbled for their horrid sins, or
be utterly consumed from the face of the earth!

Amen; Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. These particulars were attested
upon Oath by sundry persons before Commissioners appointed to take their
Examinations. Here place the tenth Figure.

CHAP. XLI. A continuation of the History of the Waldenses from the year 1560.
ending with the late persecution in the Valleys in PIEMONT.
ANNO Christi 1561. the Duke of Savoy published an Edict in favor of the
Evangelical Churches in the Valleys of Piemont, An Edict in favor of the
Protestants.
wherein he granted an indemnitie to the people of the Valleys of Angrognia,
Bobio, Villaro, Valguicchiardo, Rora, Tagliaretto, and La Rica di Boneti at the
end of La Torre, Saint Martino, Perosa, Roccapiatta, and Saint Barthelemo, from
all former actings, and restoring them into his favor, as if they had never
acted any thing against his Highness; receiving them into his safeguard and
protection: He granted them also to have preaching Assemblies, and other
Ministerial Offices according to their Religion in their wonted places, etc.

But in the year 1565. Another Edict was published at the instigation of the
Popish party, whereby all men who lived in the Duke of Savoy's Dominions, and
would not conform to the Romish Religion, A cruel Edict.
were enjoined to come and declare the same to their respective Magistrates
within ten days after the publication thereof, and two months after to leave
the Country, having one years time given them to dispose of their goods
movable, and unmovable, during which time they should enjoy the revenue
thereof, etc.

The tidings of this cruelty so wrought upon the hearts of the Protestant
Princes of Germany, that they sent an Embassy to the Duke of Savoy to
intercede in their behalf: Amongst whom the Prince Elector Palatine was
exceeding zealous, The Elector Palatine intercedes for them.
sending one of his Counselors of State, a person of singular worth, to the
Duke of Savoy, to mediate in their behalf; at whose return the Prince being
informed by him of the unworthy dealing of that Court, and finding that
notwithstanding all their fair promises, they did not at all cease from
persecuting these poor people, he wrote a very smart and pathetical letter to
the said Duke, challenging him for breach of promise to himself and the other
Germane Princes, in that he suffered his Ministers still to persecute and
banish those poor innocent people, merely upon the account of Religion,
concluding that such severity was neither pleasing to God nor man; neither
(says he) is it the way to bring men to the true knowledge of God, which
should be done by persuasions, and Scripture-proofs, not by persecutions, etc.
Wherefore I pray your Highness that you will give us an evidence of that which
you have for us, by delivering those poor people who are now in the Galleys,
and by recalling those who have been lately banished, as you promised by your
Letters. Have compassion upon so many poor wandering Exiles, deprived of all
their goods and estates: Call them home, and restore them to their habitations;
and grant them, and the other inhabitants of your Highness Countries the
public exercise of their Religion, which they prefer before their necessary
food: Free them from their false accusations, that they may live in peace under
your Highness Government, etc. If your Highness will grant me this request, I
doubt not but you shall experimentally find the favor and blessing of God,
and you shall oblige us to you in all things: If otherwise, you will both
provoke God to lift up his hand against you, and estrange from you the
affections of those who desire to do you pleasure and service, etc. Dated 1566.

Now that you may see upon what occasion the Prince wrote this letter, you are
to understand that Castrocaro (one of their Popish Governors) being extremely
troubled that the Prince Electors Ambassador had obtained several promises at
the Court for the poor peoples advantage, did immediately after the said
Ambassadors departure, publish through the Valley of Lucerna, They are cruel^y
dealt with
two Ordinances: By the one he commanded all the inhabitants throughout his
Government, that were not Natives, to depart within a day after the publication
thereof, upon pain of death, and confiscation of their goods: By the other, he
prohibited upon the same penalty those of the reformed Religion, inhabiting
Lucerna, Bubbiana, Campiglione, and Fenile, to hear Sermons at Saint Giovanni;
and for their not submitting, he imprisoned and tormented a great number of
them in the Castle of La Torre, which dealing made the poor people to make
their address to the Duchess of Savoy, who pitying their condition, wrote to
the said Castrocaro in their behalf, commanding him in the Dukes name to set at
liberty the imprisoned, and to cease to molest them in the enjoyment of their
ancient habitations and privileges.

This Letter stopped the fury of Castrocaro for the present: but it was far
from working any change of affections in him, as was evident by his
after-actings: For in the year 1571. he did so incense the Governor of Bobio
against the poor inhabitants of the Valley, that he did not only grievously
molest them upon all occasions as they came under his clutches, but also wrote
bitter Letters to the Duke against them, improving the uttermost of his parts
and power for their ruin and extirpation: and certainly Castrocaro had then
effected his design, had not the Duchess upon the joint supplications of the
Evangelical Churches, very effectually interposed for them, Gods Providence for
them
and procured the continuation of their just and undoubted privileges.

Anno 1571. Many of the poor Protestants of the Valleys were grievously
molested under pretext that in the former War of France against those of the
Religion, they had joined themselves to the Protestant Troops. But King Charles
the 9th being moved with compassion toward them, King of France intercede; for
them.
wrote a Letter to the Duke of Savoy in their behalf, requesting him to receive
them with gentleness into his grace and favor, and to re-establish them in
their estates, etc. The subject of which Letter was not only satisfactory to
those for whom it interceded, but also to all other faithful ones of the
Valleys, out of the great hopes they had of future tranquillity. But it
endured no longer than till their Enemies had an opportunity of molesting them,
which they greedily embraced upon the news of the horrible massacres in France.

For Castrocaro did thereupon so threaten the poor Protestants, that they
retired themselves, with their families, and movables, Popish malice.
to the tops of the neighboring Mountains, and into all other places where
they hoped for safety: Gods mercy.
But the Duke of Savoy not approving the cruelties exercised against the
Protestants in France, sent to those his Subjects, who were thus withdrawn,
commanding them to return to their houses, and habitations, promising that they
should suffer no prejudice, nor incur the least danger thereby. Neither indeed
were their sufferings great afterward, so long as Madam the Duchess was
living, who was a refuge to them upon all occasions.

After the death of this Princess which happened October. 19. 1574. the Popish
party came forth like Lions, improving the uttermost of their endeavors to
devour and destroy this poor people upon all occasions; but the goodness of
God was so great toward them, that they always found some considerable friends
about the Duke, who inclined his heart to gentleness and moderation: But after
the death of this (...) Emanuel, who died Aug. 30. 1580. Charles Emanuel his
son, having invaded the Marquisate of Saluces, Monsieur L' Esdiguier^s by way
of retaliation, seized upon the Valleys of Piemont: But the French Army was no
sooner gone home, than there was a rumor spread throughout the Valleys, that
the Duke was resolved to take this occasion to extirpate all the Protestant
Churches, because they had taken an Oath of fidelity to the French King,
neither was it groundless: for the thing was really propounded in the Dukes
Council, but it pleased God so to order affairs, that the leading men amongst
them did not at all approve of the business, yea the Duke himself did extremely
mislike it: and after he had retaken Mirebuc, he did not a little revive the
spirits of the Representatives of the Protestants of Lucerna, who met with him
at Villaro on purpose to assure his Highness of their fidelity, The Duke
favors them.
and to beg the continuance of his grace and favor, to whom (in the presence
of a great number of his Lords) he returned this Answer: Be but faithful unto
me, and I will be sure to be a good Princ^, nay a Father unto (...)* and as to
the liberty of your Conscience, and the exercises of your Religion, I shall be
so far from innovating any thing against those liberties in which you have
lived unto this present, that if any offer to molest you, have recourse to me,
and I shall effectually relieve and protect you.

These words being spoken in such a presence, and in so obliging a manner, were
very advantageous to the poor peoples interest, for some time after, Satan's
malic^
they served to counterballance the threats of their fiercest Enemies: Yet were
there some amongst the Popish party that thought it an unpardonable sin to
suffer them to live one year in peace, and on the contrary an acceptable
service to molest them, either by secret stratagems, or by open force and
violence.

Such was the condition of this poor people from the year 1595. to the year
1602. at which time all the Masters of Families in the Valley of Lucerna,
professing the Protestant Religion, were cited to appear before Count Charles
of Lucerna, the Governor Ponte, the Arch Bishop Broglia, and others, and were
by them commanded in the Dukes name, either to go to Mass, or to quit Lucerna,
and all their pretensions thereto, without the least hopes of ever obtaining
favor to return, or in case of disobedience, to prepare themselves for
inevitable mischiefs and calamities: which threats were pressed with so much
violence, that it caused many of the poor creatures to submit, at least
seemingly, to the change of their Religion, though many others of them were the
deeplier rooted by these shakings.

From Lucerna the aforenamed Lords removed their seat to Bubiana where they
found the Reformed so stiff in their Principles, Popish subtilty prevented.
that they could not remove them an hairs breadth from the same, wherefore they
caused the chief of them to be summoned to appear at Turin, thinking that the
Dukes presence might prevail more with them than all their threatening
speeches: The persons thus summoned were Master Valentine, and Mr. Boules, his
brother, with one Peter Morese, and Samuel Falc, who were brought one after
another before hi Hisghnesse: Mr. Valentine was the first, whom the Duke
persuaded to embrace the Roman Catholic Religion, and to draw others to do the
like, promising him great rewards and preferments if he obeyed, etc. To this
Mr. Valentine answered, that next to the service of God, Courage and Constancy.
he had no greater desire then to obey, and please his Highness, in whose
service he would willingly adventure his person and estate, when ever there
should be occasion: But as for his Religion which he knew to be true, and
confirmed by the Word of God, he could not abandon it without disobeying God,
and wounding his own Conscience, so as never to enjoy any comfort in his soul
afterward: and therefore he humbly entreated his Highness to be satisfied with
what he could do with a good conscience: and to leave him to the liberty of his
Religion which he valued above his life: the Duke replied, that he also doubted
not of the truth of that Religion which he professed, and that such as embraced
it, should find how much they had gratified him in so doing, yet would he not
force the Conscience of any man, and so he gave them leave to depart.

CHAP. XLII. The Marquisate of Saluces described, with its several troubles and
Persecutions.
THe Marquisate of Saluces is on the South side of the Valleys of Predmont,
containing in it several Cities, and considerable Valleys, very fruitful in
all sorts of fruits. Its most Northerly Valley is that of Po, where the famous
River Po has its rise, and source; one only Mountain separates this from the
Valley of Lucerna on the North side: In this Valley were those ancient
Churches, viz. Pravillem, Biolets, and Bietone, who retained the purity of
Christian Religion for several hundreds of years, and lived in great union with
their neighboring Churches.

Anno Christi 1561. The Church of Dronier, which was one of the most
flourishing, understanding that the public exercise of the Reformed religion
was permitted in France, obtained Letters from the Kings Council to Sieur Lovis
of Birague, Governor of that Country in the Duke of Nevers absence, whereby he
was ordered to provide for the Petitioners a convenient place for the public
exercise of their Religion: But not long after their Adversaries, by their
importunity, prevailed so far that the said letters were revoked: They are
favored, but again molested.
This occasioned the said Church to send Monsieur Francis Galatee, their
Minister, into France, with some others, to recover (if it were possible) their
former privileges. But this falling out in the time of their troubles in
France, all that they could obtain, was only bare promises. In the mean time
they received many hortatory and consolatory letters from the chief Ministers
in the Churches of France, and amongst others from those of Grenoble, Lions,
etc. to persuade them to patience, and perseverance in that truth which they
had embraced: which accordingly they did, notwithstanding all the malice and
subtilty of their adversaries: So that their Churches were continued and
upheld, They are encouraged.
convenient order being had for the preaching of the Word, administration of
the Sacraments, exercise of their discipline, etc. only there wanted in some
places liberty of having General Assemblies, and public Sermons.

For the better safety of their Ministers in the places that were most
dangerous, Their prudence.
one Pastor had the charge of the faithful in several Cities and Communalties,
which rendered their residence and exercises less visible to their Adversaries:
Hereby the Gospel (through Gods mercy) made a very considerable progress at
Dronier, Verzo, and some other places of mo^e no^e. The Church of Aceil in the
Valley de Mairi was extraordinarily peopled, and enjoyed more liberty than the
others, by reason of the situation of the place: but Satan the Enemy of
Christ's Church and Kingdom, perceiving such a growth of the reformed Religion
in those places, Satan's policy.
ceased not to employ all his power and policy to hinder the same; and therein
he made use of instruments for the effecting of it: viz. first the
Anticodemites, whose ringleader was Baronius, who lived at Valgrane and
thereabouts, accommodating himself to the times: Dissembling Hypocrites.
For when the Church had rest and ease, he wrote strange things, and cried out
of the abuses in Popery: But in times of persecution he usually played the
Hypocrite, and labored to draw others to do the same, by which means he had a
multitude of followers, and amongst them the Lord of Valgrane, and Maximilian
de Saluces, who set his name to Baronius to add luster to his writings against
the Ministers, reproaching them for that they would not give way to any
dissimulation in their Disciples, whereby they exposed them to great
extremities. This Lord had some learning and knowledge of the truth; but to
avoid the bearing of the Cross, he thought it convenient to dissemble, and
condemned those who any way gain said the Papists. They are confuted.
Yet Monsieur Gelido, Minister of Aceil, opposed them both, very learnedly in
several letters that he wrote unto them: So did Monsieur Truchi, Minister of
Dronier, together with other Pastors of the Neighboring places, demonstrating
both by Scripture Testimonies, and by the Example of the Primitive Church, that
they had done nothing but what they ought to do, and what every faithful
Christian was bound to, and consequently that the opinion of Baronius and his
followers was pernicious to the Church in times of persecution.

The other instruments that Satan made use of to the prejudice of the Church,
were the Roman Clergy, with their passionate Proselites, who would feign have
done to these godly Christians, as their brethren in iniquity had done to their
neighbors in the Dukedom of Savoy: viz. Banish, imprison, kill, and confiscate
the goods of the Protestants: But (through Gods mercy) they were hindered by the
Kings Edicts, confirming to those his Subjects of Saluces a peaceable
habitation, without being molested for their Conscience and religion, or
questioned for any thing they did in their private houses (provided they
abstained from the public exercise of it) by which means their Ministers had
opportunity of assembling in small Companies, baptizing, marrying, comforting
the sick, and instructing every one in particular; which provoked their
adversaries to bend themselves chiefly against the Ministers, thinking that if
they could find out any means to extirpate them, Popish policy.
they should easily prevail upon the common people, having none to animate and
instruct them.

Accordingly they published an Edict of October. 19. 1567. in the name of the
Duke of Nevers, Governor for the King on this side the mountains, injoyning
all of the religion there inhabiting or abiding, that were not the Kings
natural Subjects, to depart, together with their families within the space of
three days, and never to return thither to inhabit, pass, Persecution renewed.
or otherwise to abide without a special safe conduct, upon pain of life, and
confiscation of their goods.

Now the greatest part of the Ministers not being natural subjects to the King,
by this Edict were to quit the Marquisate, o^ to obtain a safe conduct, or
lastly to incur the penalty: A safe conduct they could not obtain, and yet they
thought themselves bound in Conscience not to abandon their people; wherefore
continuing with their Congregations, two of them were apprehended and
imprisoned: viz. Monsieur Francis Truchi, and Monsieur Francis Soulf, where
they were detained four years, four months, and odd days, the poor people
being not able by any means to obtain their deliverance, though they
continually solicited de Berague their Governor, Gods Providence.
and others that had undertaken the management of these affairs: yet the Lord
was so pleased to restrain the power of their Enemies that they could not take
away their lives: yea by degrees they obtained for them a more spacious and
convenient prison than that whereunto they were at first confined.

To procure their full deliverance the Churches of the Marquisate sent their
supplications to the King by the aforesaid Minister Galat^e, and another; who
set out July 27. 1571. and went as far as Rochel to implore the intercession of
the Queen of Navar, as also to entreat the assistance of diverse others in
several places: Gods mercy.
and the great Patrons of the reformed religion disputed their case before the
King, and in the end obtained Letters under the Kings own hand for their
enlargement, October. 14. 1571. which was accordingly effected; but it was four
months after before it could be done.

When Sieur Galatee returned, he was overjoyed, as well for the prosperous
success of his negotiations, as for the great hopes of a profound peace,
founded upon the smooth promises of his Majesty, and upon the alliance which he
had made by the marriage of his sister to the King of Navar, who professed the
reformed religion. But this joy lasted but from the month of May 1572. to the
beginning of September. at which time there arived the lamentable news of the
massacre of many noble persons, and multitudes of others who were most
inhumanely murdered in diverse places of France, The massacre of Paris.
to the great astonishment of all the faithful in those parts.

About the same time there arived letters from the King to the Governor
Birague, by which he was required to have an eye, that, at the arival of the
news of what happened at Paris, they of the Religion should make no combustion;
remitting the rest of his pleasure to those instructions which he had sent him
by the bearer, the contents whereof were, that he should put to death all the
chief of the Protestants within his jurisdiction, whose names he should find in
the Roll that should be presented to him.

Birague having received this command, together with the Roll aforementioned,
was much troubled, and immediately called his Council together, whom he
acquainted with the Kings Orders: whereupon some were of opinion that they
should be immediately executed: But others, seeing the King in his late
Patents, not many months before, had enlarged the Ministers that were
imprisoned, and had ordered that those of the reformed Religion should not be
any ways molested for their Conscience sake: as also upon consideration that
nothing had occurred since that time worthy such a change, they therefore
thought it sufficient to secure the persons of such as were enrolled, A special
providence.
and to defer execution for a while, and in the mean time to inform the King
that they were persons of Honor, faithful to his Majesty, living peaceably
with their neighbors, and inoffensive in their lives: adding that in case his
Majesty was resolved that they should be put to death, there was yet time
enough to execute his pleasure therein.

This advice Birague approved of, and accordingly apprehended some, but others
escaped, and concealed themselves: and in the mean time he dispatched a
Messenger to the King, to inform him as abovesaid, and to know his further
pleasure. This Messenger met another at Lions, where the King had sent to
Birague to advertise him, that in case his former Order was not already
executed, he should desist from it, and only have a special care that those of
the Religion should make no insurrection, nor have any public exercises.

But they of the reformed Religion in the Marquisate were not a little troubled
when they heard of the cruel massacre of their brethren in France without
distinction of age, sex, or quality, insomuch as diverse of them fled; many
Papists also secretly caused the families of their kind^ed and friends of the
Religion to retire their families and themselves till such time as Birague had
published the Kings pleasure, after which they returned by little and little:
and though their public exercises were prohibited, yet they were well
satisfied with the assurance of their lives, and estates, besides that they had
the liberty of private exercises in their families.

This was the condition of the Protestant Churches in Saluces during the time
that it was under the Dominion of the King of France, which continued to the
year 1588. at which time the Duke of Savoy took the possession, who, for a
while suffered them to enjoy their privileges in general: But in particular,
some of the chief Members of the Church of Dromier, being cited to Turin, were
so befooled with subtle Artifices, that one part of them promised to go to
Mass, which gave a considerable blow to the said Church, yet it lost not its
courage in general, although the great failings of the former encouraged their
adversaries to attempt the like upon others by both words and letters.

Anno Christi 1597. the Duke of Savoy wrote his Letter to them, wherein he told
them how desirous he was that all his Subjects in the Marquisat of Saluces
should embrace the Romish Religion, The Dukes letter to draw them to Popery.
and finding that his exhortations had prevailed with some, he hoped that they
would have the same effect upon the rest, desiring that laying aside their
Heretical obstinacy, they would embrace the true Religion out of respect to
Gods glory, and their own good, making large promises to such as should submit,
and telling them that it should return to their great advantage.

The Churches of the Marquisat having received this letter, they answered,
Their answer.
first, that they returned his Highness many thanks for that he had suffered
them to enjoy their Religion hitherto as he had found them in the year 1588.
when he took possession of the Marquisat. Secondly they humbly entreated him to
continue to them the said benefit, as also to grant them his protection, seeing
that they knew that their Religion was founded upon the holy Scriptures,
according to which they ordered their lives and conversations, so as none had
any just occasion of offense: and considering that even the Jews and other
enemies of Christ were suffered to live in peace, and to enjoy their Religion,
they hoped that those which were found Christians, faithful to God, and loyal
to their Prince, should not be denied the same privilege.

After this answer they lived a while in peace, and the Duke took a voyage into
(...), after which followed a War, so that they continued as aforetime But
after the exchange of the Marquisat was established upon him, his soft Letters
were turned into sharp Edicts, wherein he commanded all those of the Religion
within the Marquisat, that every one should go, and declare to his ordinary
Magistrate within the space of fifteen days whether he would renounce his
religion, A cruel Edict
or go to Mass or no; which if they would do, they should not only enjoy their
habitations, and Estates, but many other favors also: But if they resolved to
persist in their Religion, they were enjoined to depart out of his Highness
Dominions within the space of two months, and never to return without express
permission, and that upon pain of death, and confiscation of all their goods:
yet they were permitted within the said term of two months to transport their
goods as they should think meet.

This unexpected Edict being published through the Marquisate, July 1601. much
troubled those of the reformed Religion, who immediately sent Deputies to his
Highness to obtain a revocation, or at least a moderation of it: and indeed
they had some hopes given them by diverse persons of quality, so that many of
the poor people resting upon this broken reed, let slip much of the said
prefixed time without preparing for their departure, whereby they were the more
amazed when they understood, not many days before the time was expired; that
all hope of favor was now wholly taken away: yet most of them prepared for
their departure; some recommending their goods to their kindred and friends who
remained in the Country, others leaving all they had at random, except what
they could carry with them to serve for their present necessities.

In these two months space they who were resolved to depart, were continually
set upon by their friends and kindred, Popish subt^^ty.
with all manner of persuasions to divert them from their purposes, especially
when they presented themselves to the Magistrate to give in their answer in
writing: For then they were caused to stand in a certain Pew in public view,
where the Magistrates had either Monks, or other Ecclesiastics, who ceased not
to urge them by all possible arguments and motives thereby to shake their faith
and constancy: Amongst others, a certain Capuchin Friar called Philip Ribo* who
a little before had been employed in the same manner in the Valley of Perosa,
being now employed in this place, ran up and down, using all subtilties
imaginable, especially among those who through feebleness of age, weakness of
sex, or want of estates, might probably make them more easy to be seduced:
they caused them also to be brought before the Magistrate one by one, that so
the constancy of some might not encourage others: Yea hardly were Husbands
permitted to declare for their Wives and Children; and they* so sifted the
tender ones that it was hard for them to escape without making shipwreck of
their Faith and Religion; and to promote their design they prohibited all upon
pain of death, not to dissuade others from revolting. Yet through Gods mercy,
they were so fortified in their spirits* that most of them withstood the
tentations, and went forth as Providence guided them* not knowing whither they
went. Some steered their course beyond the Alps to France, Courage, and
constancy.
Geneva, and other places: Others retired themselves into the Valleys of
Piedmont, and remained there without trouble, They are banished.
though the Edict required that they should depart out of his Highnesses
Dominions.

In the beginning of this Persecution, the adversaries fearing some resolute
union amongst these poor persecuted souls, to prevent any combustion, they gave
it out in the Churches of the Mountains, that though the Edict was general, yet
the intention thereof was only to unlodg those in the lower Plains, Popish
subtilty
in the great Villages, and other public places: and that such as inhabited
amongst the Mountains might be sure to live in peace and quiet: This indeed was
a cause that at the first there was not such an universal union amongst those
of the Reformed Religion that were destinated for slaughter, as they could have
desired: But this fraud at length appearing occasioned a more close union
amongst them: Neither was it without cause: for at last they spared those in
the Mountains no more then those of the Plains: only that they made no enquiry
after the Church of Pravillelm, and the quarters thereabouts, who thereupon
trusting to the ancientness of their possession, troubled not themselves to
make any declaration to the Magistrate, or to prepare themselves for their
departure, as if the Edict had not at all concerned them: Neither indeed were
they disturbed till all the rest were departed out of the Province, and
scattered in several places: But at length they were given to understand, that
seeing they had not yielded obedience to the Edict, they were liable to the
punishment therein appointed: and therefore some warned them to have a care of
themselves both in general, and each particular: Hereupon they repaired to the
Syndicks of the Communalty, requesting them to intercede for them, showing the
reasons why they conceived not themselves concerned by the Edict, and therefore
they had not offended out of any malicious intention.

The Syndicks accordingly made many journeys about this business, but brought
back nothing but sad and uncomfortable messages; so that at last they were
forced to fly. They are forced to fly.
One part of them (the men having ordered their Families which they left in
their houses) retired into the Western Mountains: They are forced to fly.
Those who were fit to bear Arms (being about two hundred) with their Arms
retired into the Castell^nie of Casteau Dauphine which was near at hand: but
those of Dauphine, and who were less disposed, retired themselves into their
highest Forests.

Yet before their departure they declared to their Popish neighbors, that
being forced to retire themselves by reason of the threats which were given
against them for their Religion; and being unable to take their families along
with them, they entreated them to take care of them; withal telling them, that
they would make a sudden return, either of the good or evil that should be done
to their Relations, either by themselves, or by their permission. This so
prevailed with the Papists, that either out of fear, or for some other reasons,
they so far solicited, and prevailed with their Superiors, that the others
had liberty of returning to their ancient habitations withour being molested,
and that for many years together.

CHAP. XLIII. The Artifices and wicked practices used to consume and destroy
the Faithful in the Valleys of Piedmont.
THe Popish Clergy have several persons under pay, whose business it is to
kindle strifes and quarrels amongst the Protestants, and to engage them in
suits of Law one against another: Popish subtilty.
and when they see them reduced to poverty and despair, they secretly offer
them all the favor imaginable, provided that they will either openly revolt,
or remain as Spies amongst their brethren to betray them: and the better to
dispose them hereto, they assure them that they shall get a full victory over
their Enemies, in case they will employ some Churchmen to recommend their
affairs to the Judges, who in all public employments are preferred before the
Protestants, and made their superiors, that so they may overruled them as they
list.

The Popish Clergy also knowing that young men are apt to be in love, which
captivates reason, they propound to them by their Emissaries, a match with some
Papist, whose portion and other advantages they amplify by officious lies, and
so they inveigle some poor souls, sometimes without, and sometimes against the
consent of their Parents, and friends: and if any amongst the Protestants be so
wicked as not to regard the admonitions of their Ministers and Elders, so that
they are forced to excommunicate them, these Monks and Priests persuade them to
embrace the Romish Religion, where they shall be protected against such as
pursue them for their crimes: yea they promise that they shall be set over them
in all public Offices, by which means they may have power in their hands to be
revenged of them. This was the practice of the Monks in the year 1640, 1641,
etc. even toward some who were manifestly convicted of Witchcraft, who,
revolting to Popery, had their lives spared, and were set at liberty: yea they
have often rewarded them with money, merchandises and other things; withal
exempting them from all manner of Taxes: and when the Protestants complained
hereof, the Duke of Savoy indeed gave them a favorable answer by his Edict,
dated in June 1649. but they could never obtain the putting of it in execution.

But of all the means used for these last sixty years to root out, and ruin
the Protestant Churches in the Valleys of Piedmont, there has been none like
that of the Missionaries established by Pope Clement the 8th, Anno Christi
1596. For the Monasteries of these firebrands have ever been as so many
Citadels in the Valleys, wherein very many wicked instruments have been
harbored, who never ceased to contrive mischief by their lies, calumnies and
slanders wherewith they have filled the ears of the Magistrates and Princes,
who have always given more credit to them, than to the true complaints of
these poor people in their own just defense, whereupon they have published many
bloody Edicts against them: and though the Protestants reiterated their humble
supplications to his Highness, and therein declared their own innocence, and
the boldness of those Missionaries, which was grown to such a height as was
altogether intolerable, yet have they prevailed nothing: and that which makes
these Monks the more confident, is, that they know they are not to be punished
by any Magistrate for whatsoever they say or do against the Protestants; no not
when they steal away their Children from them: whereas the Protestants are put
to death if they speak but the least word against these Missionary Priests, or
but go about to dissuade any, though of their own families from turning Papist.
Yea by the Dukes Edict any one witness is sufficient against a Protestant, and
a reward of an hundred Crowns is promised to any that will come and witness
against them, whereby all those are encouraged, who either out of revenge,
envy, or covetousness, shall report such false things against them as by the
Romish Friars they shall be directed to.

By virtue of this Edict the Monks have made bold upon all occasions both in
the streets, yea in the very Curches, and that in the Sermon time to set upon
the Protestant Ministers, with all the most base, vile, and unsufferable
speeches they could possibly devise, knowing that no man durst either censure
their zeal, or witness against them for what they said or did against the
Protestants, for fear of the severe penalties ordained against the favorers of
Heretics. Nay, if their abusive carriage could but draw any word out of the
Ministers, or out of any other man's mouth that did not please them, they had
their hired witness in a readiness to bring the Minister, or other Protestant
to the stake, and that without redemption.

These men got an Edict from Madam Royal, of Jan. 16. 1642. having made her
believe that the Papists were compelled to contribute toward the maintenance
of the Protestant Ministers, with some other such like fictions; upon which
they obtained an Order for the Officers called Castellani, to give the
Missionaries all the Writings they should demand of them; by means whereof they
usurped power over the said Castellani, and so over the poor Protestants,
compelling the Castellani to make most unjust Ordinances against these poor
people: As for example; when the question is concerning their habitation, the
Missioners do persuade them that come to witness the truth, that so to do is
to favor the Heretics, whereby they will fall irrevocably under the censure
of Excommunication; whereas its a meritorious work to witness against them by
such officious lies as are suggested to them by the Popish Clergy: Nay, the
Judges themselves durst not pass a righteous sentence, when it reflected in
the least upon the Catholic party. And that they may have the opportunity of
negotiating with the Protestants, they procure of his Highness every year,
Popish subtilty.
the Assignations of Grain, and other Impositions, that so they of the Reformed
Religion, being obliged to make their payments to these Publicans, they may
have the advantage to show favor, and give ample rewards to such as will
comply with their superstitious Idolatry, and to lay heavy burdens upon the
backs of those that are true to their Principles.

Mention might here be made of their frequent falling into the said Valleys
with Troops of Armed men, under pretense of quartering them there; whereby they
have miserably surprised, and made a prey of them: As likewise the cunning
stratagems which they have used in all their Treaties, which have been as full
of Jesuitical Equivocations, as of lines and sentences, following therein their
old Maxim, that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics.

To this may be added their diligent search, and strict enquiry after all
Protestant Books and Writings, which they commit to the fire with much
devotion, lest they should discover their rotten principles, and the
wickedness of their actions to the world.

Another stratagem they have to allure men to revolt, wherein are proffers of
great rewards made, and published in the Princes name; as may be seen in the
Dukes own letter, wherein are these words. To encourage the Heretics to turn
Catholics, it is our pleasure, and we do hereby expressly command, that all
such as shall embrace the Holy Roman Faith, shall enjoy an exemption from all,
and every tax for the space of five years commencing from the day of their
conversion, etc. Which term of five years he has sometimes lengthned out to
ten or fifteen years; whereas indeed the burden that they took off from these
Revolters, they laid upon the backs of those that persevered in their Religion,
the better to break and destroy them.

But as if all this were too little to compass their ends, the Duke erected a
Congregation for extirpating the Heretics, who were to judge concerning the
rights of the Protestants. Their meeting place was in the Archbishops house,
the Bishop himself being President, together with the Dukes Confessor, and
diverse others, every one of them hired by the Court of Rome, to undermine the
liberties of the Protestant Churches, by robbing them of their Ancient
Privileges under sundry pretenses, and upon false Informations. And the better
to disguise their proceedings, they usually incense the Duke by grievous
accusations, and so procure grievous Edicts from him against the poor
Protestants. These were they who procured from Charles Emanuel, Anno Christi
1602. An Edict, wherein he enjoins the Protestants upon pain of death to banish
from amongst them all manner of Schools both public and private, (as Julian
the Apostate had formerly done to extirpate the Christian Religion) And by
another Edict of December. 18. 1622. he forbade them to receive any strangers
amongst them that should be either Ministers or Schoolmasters, as also from
sending their youth into Foreign Schools suspected of Heresy. He also
debarred all manner of Protestants from public Offices, either great or small.
In another Edict, all Protestants were commanded either to go to Mass, or to
depart within two months after the publication thereof: And by another Edict
the same was commanded, and but fifteen days given them.

Another order was given out, November. 18. 1634. enjoining the Protestants of
Campiglione, to leave that place within twenty four hours, and that upon pain
of death, which was executed without mercy. The same was done Anno Christi
1655. by Gastaldo, who gave no longer than twenty four hours to those of the
Valleys of Saint Martino and Perosa, to depart upon pain of death; and to those
that lived beyond Pelice, but three days.

Many times when these Missionary Fathers could not possibly persuade his Royal
Highness to an open Persecution against the generality of the Protestants,
then they usually tormented them one by one upon sundry false pretenses, whom
they delivered up to the Inquisitors, who contrary to all Forms of Justice,
forthwith condemned them, without so much as hearing them, or letting them know
their accusers.

Anno Christi 1622. They took one Mr. Sebastian Basan, and after the
Inquisitors had cruelly tempted and tormented him for the space of fifteen
months, they burned him alive at Turin, November. 23. 1623. where he dyed,
singing the praises of God in the midst of the flames.

Anno 1655. These Missionary Fathers stole away very many of the Protestants
children in the time of the Massacre; whom they would not afterward restore,
though his Highness had promised it by his Patent; which practice is the most
execrable of all the Turkish tyrannies: Yet there is this difference, that the
Turks do so only to their own Subjects, whereas the Popes Ministers do it to
those over whom they have no right at all. Two instances may be given (amongst
many others) of the subtle insinuations of the Jesuits to withdraw men from
the truth; There were two Ministers, the one Mr. Peter Gros, the other Mr.
Francis Aguit, with whom they had thus prevailed: But the Lord in mercy showing
them the greatness of their sin, Humane frailty.
they made a public Recantation in a full Congregation, August. 28. and 29.
1655. at Pinache in the Valley of Perouse, wherein they testified their extreme
sorrow for their defection through infirmity, from the true Religion, during
the time of their Imprisonment at Turin, together with their abjuration of
Popery, which they conclude thus.

Do not think us unworthy your holy communion, although we have been an
occasion of offense: Repentance.
Suffer us to pour into your bosoms a torrent of tears to deplore our
condition, and to assure you in the anguish of our souls, that our grief is
greater than we can express: Help us by your holy prayers to the Lord, and
publish our repentance in all places where you conceive our sin has been, or
shall be known, that so it may be evident to all the world, that from the very
bottom of our souls we grieve, and sorrow for it, and that in the presence of
God, and of his holy Angels, and in the sight of those who have been witnesses
of our conversion, we do abjure, and detest the Mass, the authority of the
Pope, and in general, all sorts of beliefs, and worships dependent upon them;
we recant whatsoever we may have pronounced to the prejudice of the Evangelical
Truth, and promise for the future, through the Grace of God, to persevere in
the profession of the Reformed Religion to the last moment of our life, and
rather to suffer Death, and Torments than to renounce that holy Doctrine that
is taught in our Church according unto the word of God: even as we swear, and
promise, with our bended knees upon the earth, and our hands lifted up to the
Eternal, our Almighty God and Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. As we desire his
assistance to do this, even so help us God. Amen.

The Motives of the late Persecution in the Valleys of Piemont, Anno Christi
1655. with the publication of that bloody Order of Gastaldo, and the flight of
the Protestants in the midst of Winter.
THe chief Officers, and Gentry of Savoy are moved to endeavor the extirpation
of the Reformed party, Reason* why they persecuted the Protestants.
chiefly for these Causes: 1. That by evil entreating the Reformed Churches,
they may conserve the Papal authority, of which they have oft-times so much
need, to cover and cloak their Incestuous marriages contracted by Dispensations
from the Pope: and thus they become engaged to maintain Popery, for fear of
being declared guilty of Incest. 2. Because the Courtiers for persecuting the
Reformed party are rewarded with Prebendaries, Bishoprics, Abbeys, and
Priories, especially such as are members of the Council for extirpating of
Heretics. 3. Under this pretext, the poor people of the Valleys become a prey
to the said Courtiers, who daily rob, and spoil them, extorting the best part
of their livelishood by sundry subtle devices. 4. The Gentry of Lucerna (who
are very poor) promote this work all they can by perpetual calumnies against
them, rendering themselves by such good Offices capable of meriting, and
receiving those pensions which are assigned them by the Court of Rome for the
same purpose. 5. For this end of late they have made the Gentlemen of the
respective Valleys subordinate to the Monks, and Mass Priests, who teach and
appoint them what to do, as to the bearing of false-witnesse against their
Neighbors, sowing discord amongst them, murdering of some, procuring the
Assasination of others, stealing, and carrying away their children, etc.
without the performance whereof they refuse to pay them their yearly Pensions.
6. But the chief ground of all why the Court of Savoy strives so much to
extirpate this poor people, is, the Design that they have to wrest Pignorolio
out of the hands of the King of France, to which the habitation, and liberty of
those people are a great hindrance: For they, inhabiting the neighboring parts
of Pignorolio, both in the Plain and Mountains, cannot, upon the account of
conscience, be brought to make any agreement with the Spanish party for
assaulting, and surprising that place: Hence the Court of Savoy seeks all
manner of occasions to root them out, especially those of Lucerne, Fenile,
Bobio, Campiglione, Bricheras, and Saint Secondo, which are near Pignorolio,
and to deprive it thereby of all sorts of commodities which it receives from
the Valleys, which alone does furnish it with more than all the neighboring
Valleys which belong to the Duke. Now if these people were extirpated, and
others put in their places, men forward to execute their Designs, they might
easily seize on Malange, a narrow passage above Pignorolio, on that side which
looks toward France, where a very few persons would be able to hinder the
French Armies from relieving Pignorolio.

Upon these, and the like grounds the Court of Savoy has sought their
destruction, though its true, that in all the persecutions which they have
raised against them, especially in this last, 1655. those ravening wolves
approached in sheeps clothing, the better to deceive, and destroy the innocent
Lambs of Christ. For these Evangelical Churches had, long before that fatal
year, cleared themselves of all those calumnies which the Council for the
extirpation of Heretics, to the end that they might enjoy their promised
Pensions, had cast upon them. Yea, his Royal Highness had now given an ample
testimony of his being fully satisfied in this point, and by an authentic
Decree published Anno Christi 1649. had confirmed all former Confessions; which
confirmation was again renewed Anno 1653. confirming the Grants made to them in
the years 1603. and 1620. without any addition, or diminution, amplification,
or restriction whatsoever.

Now as these poor people sought for an Interination of these Grants, His Royal
Highness, knowing that the delay thereof proceeded not from any negligence of
their part, but was occasioned by the multitude of Troops that were then
quartered upon them, whereby they could not possibly have the convenience of
assembling, etc. out of his goodness toward them, he declared by an Edict, of
May 19. 1654. that his intention was that they should enjoy the Concessions as
effectually as if they had been again interinated, upon condition that they did
procure the Interination thereof within three months following. So that till
this time of May 19. 1654. none can say that those of the Reformed Religion had
committed any thing whereby to be deprived of the benefit of their Concessions;
yet contrary to all their expectations, shortly after, viz. January 25. 1655.
this infamous Order was published by Andrew Gastaldo, Doctor of the Civil Law,
A bloody Order.
Mr. Auditor Ordinary, etc. That every Head of a Family, with its members of
the Reformed Religion, of what rank, degree or condition soever, none excepted,
inhabiting and possessing estates in the places of Lucerna, Lucernetta, St.
Giovanni, La Torre, Bubbiana, and Fenile, Campiglione, Bricherassio, and S.
Secondo, within three days after the publication thereof should withdraw and
depart, and to be with their families withdrawn out of the said places, and
translated into the places and limits tolerated by his Highness, during his
pleasure, as namely Bobbio, Villaro, Angrogna, Rorata, and the Country of
Bonetti, under pain of death, and confiscation of houses and goods, situated or
being out of the said limits; Provided, if they make it not appear to us within
twenty days following that they are turned Catholics, or that they have sold
their goods to the Catholics. And that it was not the mind of his Royal
Highness by any Act whatsoever to enlarge the said limits: But on the contrary,
he declares by these presents, that the said Acts are mere usurpations,
contrary to the intention as well of his Orders, as of his Magistrates,
published to that end; and that therefore the transgressors have incurred the
punishment therein contained: Besides, in the aforesaid places favorably
tolerated, he wills that in every one of them shall be celebrated the holy
Mass, forbidding those of the pretended Reformed Religion any ways to molest,
either by deed or word, the Missionary Fathers, or their Attendants, much less
to dissuade any that would turn Catholics, under the same pain of death,
giving it in charge particularly to the Ministers of the said pretended
Religion, inviolably to observe the same, upon pain of answering it in their
proper names, etc.

It Is easy to conjecture the miserable inconveniences of a flight in the
midst of winter, especially to such a people amongst whom were many aged and
decrepit, many sick and diseased, besides a multitude of women big with child,
or newly brought to bed, together with a number of tender Infants, yet all
forced to fly, and none being in capacity to succor another. Yet did these
bloody beasts in the most violent and rigorous winter-season chase and drive
out of their houses all on a sudden those poor people, who scarce had clothes
to cover their nakedness, much less were they provided to resist the
extremities of cold, and hunger; thinking hereby either to force them to change
their Religion, Popish cruelty
or to cause them to dye in the craggy Rocks and snowy Mountains; yea, they
were so subtly malicious as to choose those very days, when by reason of the
multitude of violent waters in the Plain, and of snow upon the Mountains, they
judged it impossible for those silly sheep ever to escape.

But these poor people considering that the Apostasy propounded was the way to
eternal damnation, chose rather to follow Christ in bearing his cross, and to
hazard their temporary lives, rather than to lose their souls for ever; yet
that they might leave no lawful means unattempted, they presently dispatched
their Deputies to the Governor, to represent to him the strangeness of this
command, to force them with their Families to abandon their ancient
habitations; as also that it was impossible for so many souls as there were in
number to subsist in the said place, to which by the Edict they were confined,
they being scarce sufficient to supply in any sort those that inhabited them:
As likewise, that this command was contrary to all their former Concessions,
upon which account they protested and appealed to his Royal Highness. But the
Governor knowing well the intention of the Council for the extirpating of
Heretics, would neither admit of the one or of the other. Hereupon the poor
people, seeing they could obtain nothing of him, entreated him to grant them at
least some time to have recourse to the Duke by humble supplications; but this
also was denied, unless they would draw up their Petition by a model which he
should prescribe, which indeed was prejudicial both to their just Rights and
Consciences. These poor people (I say) seeing this, to the end that they might
remove all pretext for accusing them of Rebellion, under that color to ruin
and destroy them; hoping also that at last they might find some means to lay
their griefs at the feet of his Royal Highness, and that his Clemency and
Justice would in the end re-establish them in their ancient habitations, They
go into banishment.
they chose rather to suffer this violence; and therefore recalling their
Protestation, thereby to testify their profound respect to their Prince, they
quitted their houses, and goods, and retired with their Familes, their Wives
and Children, great and small, young and old, whole and sick; yea, halt, lame
and blind; draging after them such as were infirm by sickness or age through
Rain, Snow, Ice, Waters, and a thousand difficulties.

Oh think with your selves, what bitter tears, what wringing of hands, what
smitting upon the breasts, what mournings, sighings, and lamentations there
were in the families of these miserable and distressed Creatures, who were now
reduced to the utmost of extremities; before them were a multitude of violent
and roaring waters, on each hand most barbarous and snowy mountains; behind
them, men sevenfold worse than the Egyptians, ready to butcher and destroy
them; yet recommending themselves, Souls and Bodies to Gods protection, they
are resolved to undergo the worst of temporary miseries, rather than by denying
their Religion, Constancy.
to damn their Souls.

This their Constancy and Resolution was no small comfort to other Churches,
and a matter of great astonishment to their Persecutors; the rather considering
the great advantages they might have purchased by quitting their Religion; as
Pardon for all crimes, Liberty if in Prisons, exemption from all manner of
Taxes, etc.

They were no sooner departed from their houses, but a number of Thieves and
Robbers entered them, spoiling and pillaging whatever the people had left
behind them, pulling down their houses, cuting down all their trees, and
turning their habitation into a desolate wilderness; of which violence the poor
people complained to the Duke, and received from him such an answer, that they
apprehended his intentions were not that they should wholly quit their houses
till their cause might be heard and judged; in confidence hereof, they
sometimes returned to their houses to guard them from these Robbers, and to
husband their ground, that so they might have wherewithal to pay their Taxes;
yet for this they were branded with Rebellion, though they had neither taken up
arms, nor acted any other hostility, every one living peaceably without giving
any cause of offense.

Gastaldo having thus driven these poor people from their ancient inheritance,
without legal citing them, hearing their plea, Popish cruelty
or giving them the least time to provide for so sad a flight; their last
refuge was to have recourse to the Lord by fervent prayers, and to their Prince
by humble supplications; which was done not only by those that were driven from
their houses, but by the other Churches of the Reforned Religion, the cause
being common to them all. But alas! they found both his and all other his
Ministers ears stopped to their wosull cries; neither could they obtain so much
as admittance into the presence of his Royal Highness.

Amongst other cunning Artifices used by their malicious Adversaries to
imbitter the spirits of his Highness, and the Duchess his Mother against these
poor Protestants, this was one; John Ressan, President of the Province of
Pignorolio, having for many years born a deadly spleen against the popish
Priest of Fenile, hired one to assassinate him; and then by his Secretary, he
spread it abroad all over the Country that the Protestants were the Authors of
the murder, who yet five days before were driven out of Fenile, which report
flew far and near, being entertained as an undoubted truth by those Papists who
lived far off, increasing also with carriage, though upon the place the author
of this murder was well known, so that by all their reports they were not able
to fasten any blemish in the minds of the dead Priests friends and Kindred, nor
to hinder them from apprehending both the Master and his Secretary; by which
means the innocence of the Reformed party was so cleared to the world, that the
Marquess of Pionessa, in his Letters, wherein he sought all the devices he
could to lay something to their charge, never mentions this for fear of
blemishing the credit of all the rest.

Shortly after one Berru basely murdered Peter Rovier Consul of Mean; and then
fled to Pignorolio, where he was met by the aforesaid Rissan, who was lately
returned from Turin, where he had been imprisoned for the former murder, and
now had his liberty no otherwise than upon good security, because the said
Berru and some others had taken their oaths against his Secretary [ D. Agot]
and himself, for being guilty of the aforementioned assassination; but after
some private conferences had between them Rissan, so wrought upon that wretched
Berru, by gifts and promises, that he was persuaded to return back with him to
Turin, and there not only to retract his former oath, but to swear that he had
been solicited thereto by the two Pastors Ledger and Mechelin, as also by
Antonio, and Francis Danna, chief Elders of the Church of S. Giovanni; by means
of this devilish retractation and calumny, Rissan and his Secretary were
discharged in the very heat of the War between the Papists and Protestants, so
that they had the opportunity of forging what lies they pleased against the
Protestants, both at Lucerna and Turin, without the least contradiction, which
accordingly they did to the purpose; for at Lucerna there were published at the
same time two personal Citations against the said Ledger, Mechelin, and Danna;
and as for Berru, he was also at the same time, as a recompense for his
perjury, discharged, and set at liberty, though he had been convicted of two
murders, the one the aforementioned, and the other at S. Giovanni, upon one
Giovanni Bertot, a Protestant. After this base action, he came to the said
Ledger, and many other Pastors of the Valleys, Popish dissimulation.
and chief men, and leaning upon his staff, and bemoaning his condition, he
protested to them that he could scarce stand upright, by reason of the many
blows which he had received from the Papists to force him to forswear himself
against the said Ledger and the rest; but as he could not in conscience do so
wicked an act, so he had withstood them to the utmost; telling them plainly,
who so urged him, that he would rather be torn with wild horses than do it;
and that they thereupon seeing his constancy, had beaten him most unmercifully,
and then cast him out into the open streets, where he had miserably perished,
had not a certain Jew pitied him, and took him up, as he was grovelling on the
ground, and ready to give up the ghost.

In the mean time the Treaty of Peace being concluded at Pignerolio, Aug. 1655.
Mr. Ledger and the rest against whom the Process had been made, as against
Criminals, staying a while at Pignorolio, chanced to hear of it, and thereupon
went presently to the Prefect Rissan, entreating him to tell them if it were
true that Berru had thus accused them; Rissan made them such a doubtful answer,
that they judged it high time to have immediate recourse to the Senator
Prerrastino, beseeching him to declare to them the truth of the whole matter,
and to appoint them a set time and place to make their justification: Hereupon
he told them plainly that Berru had accused them for suborning him to swear
falsely against De Agot; and his Master; and withal he showed them a copy of the
Citation against the said Ledger, and the rest of his Accomplices, which was to
banish them out of the Dukes Dominions, if they did not appear personally at
Turin to answer to such interrogatories as should be proposed to them about
that business. Upon this Sieur Ledger, by the assistance of David Ledger, a
Minister, handled the matter so, that the said Berru was shortly after
apprehended, as he was lurking in the Highways, with a purpose to murder the
said Ledger upon the first opportunity. This wretch being thus apprehended, used
all the devices imaginable to have got out of their hands; though they assured
him, that all that they intended was only to make him verify what he had
already confessed before a full Assembly of their Ministers and others. Ledger
being assured that Berru was in safe custody, went and declared the whole
matter to the Senator Perichvini, and to Referendano Tarquin, yea and to Rissan
himself, who was on a sudden not a little surprised at it; afterward he told
it to the French Ambassador, and to the Ambassadors of the Evangelical Cantons,
and with much ado he got leave to bring the said perjured person to Pignorolio;
where he hoped to obtain leave of coming face to face against him in open
Justice, importuning all the Dukes Ministers of Justice, and the French and
Switzers Ambassadors for their intercession, the last whereof openly protested,
that in case of refusal, they would complain that Justice was denied them; yet
could they prevail no further, Popish injustice.
but that there should be a letter written to Turin about it: from whence after
a while they had an answer, that nothing could be done in it; and so Ledger was
fain to content himself, that he and the rest that had been accused were
declared as persons altogether innocent, and clearly acquitted from the
accusation that Berru had made against them.

Upon this and the like feigned accusations, the Deputies of these poor people
and their Supplications were miserably rejected at the Court of Savoy: For when
they instantly beseeched the chief Ministers of State at Turin, that they might
be admitted into the Dukes presence, there to cast themselves at his feet, the
Council for extirpating of Heretics would not suffer them to have audience of
his Highness, and contrary to all equity they usurped the cognizance of this
business, which belonged not to them, they being of the adverse party; nay,
they were not suffered to come in personally before them to plead their own
cause, but were forced to send in their Procurator Gibellino, a Papist, who,
knowing that Excommunication is the certain punishment of all those that any
way favored the Heretics, durst not speak a word till he had fallen down on
his knees and begged leave of the Archbishop, who was President of that
Council; and the conclusion was, that those of the Valleys were commanded to
make no more requests to his Royal Highness, unless they would send Deputies
with procuration, and power to accept and promise all that should be ordered
them; yet they (like the importunate widow) sent again their Deputies to Turin,
with their requests, and with order to endeavor to get audience of his Royal
Highness; they also, beside other intercessions, instantly requested Madam
Royal to have pity on them, and to procure the same for them; they wrote also
other Letters to diverse Princes of the blood to mediate for them about the
same; but all in vain, for they could get no answer from any of them; and the
Marquess of Pionessa slighted their supplications, thirsting violently after
the blood of these poor creatures; yet that he might not openly discover the
black design of the Council for extirpating of Heretics, Popish subtilty.
before the hour of its execution, he disguised his answers to them in such
doubtful terms, that though he gave them but cold comfort, yet he left them not
without some glimmering hopes at least of a day of audience for the hearing of
their complaints, that so during this interval of time all things might be in a
better readiness for the day of slaughter, as you shall hear in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. XLIV. A Narrative of the bloody cruelties which were exercised against
the Protestants of the Valleys of Piemont during the heat of the late Massacre
in April, Anno 1655.
UPon Saturday April 17, 1655. whilst the deputies of the Protestants were by
the subtilties of Pionessa, detained at Turin, as you heard before, there
arrived a great Army at St. Giovanni, which was now, with La Torre, and all the
lower parts unpeopled, and in a sad and lamentable condition; this Army
continued there for some hours, and in the dusk of the evening fell into La
Torre, where they met with none of the Protestants, only about eight or ten
persons, not thinking of an enemy, were seeking up and down for something to
satisfy their hunger; but so soon as they came near to the Convent they were
saluted with a volley of shot, which killed Giovanni Comb, and hurt Peter
Rostain, whereupon the rest, seeing the danger fled for their lives.

The next day being the Sabbath, the enemy ranged about through the
Communalties of La Torre, Popish cruelty
and St. Giovanni, plundering and pillaging all before them; and the day after,
heir number being increased, to about Fifteen thousand, they set upon the
Protestants in several quarters amongst the little hills of St. Giovanni, and
La Torre. But the poor people, being prompted thereto by the Law of Nature, The
Protestants defend themselves.
stood upon their own defense, and the enemy was vigorously opposed on every
side; in one place by Captain Jahier, and in other places by the Officers of
St. Giovanni, Angrognia, Roccapiatta; and their Troops. Tuesday April 20. The
Popish Army made three several attempts to take away the Bell of St. Giovanni,
and to burn the Church; but those of the poor people in arms did so
courageously resist them, that they were driven to a shameful retreat, with the
loss of about Fifty of their men; and had not their Cavalry defended the Plain,
they had been utterly routed: But of the Protestants party there were only Two
slain, upon whose dead bodies they basely revenged themselves.

Wednesday the 21. which was the fatal day to the Protestants, the Marquess of
Pianessa held the Deputies of the Valley of Lucerna in parley till noon, and
then entertained them with a large Dinner, and sent them away with many fair
promises, that there should be no hurt done to any except those of St. Giovanni
and La Torre, as being the places specified in the Order of Gastaldo; Popish
subtilty.
but for the rest, if they would but quarter a few Troops as a token of their
obedience, and that but for a short time, they might be fearless of the least
inconvenience. Hereupon the Agents of Angrogna bestired themselves to persuade
their own party from making the least resistance; the same did the Agents of
Villaro and Bobio: But no sooner were those Troops entered, but they put all to
fire and sword, slaying all they met with that had but the likeness of mankind,
and that in the most barbarous manner they could possibly devise: As you may
see by this extract of a Letter written by some of those poor Protestants,
wherein they thus write; The Army having gotten footing, became very numerous
by the addition of a multitude of the neighboring inhabitants, who hearing that
we were given for a prey to the Plunderers, fell upon us with an impetuous
fury: To these were added a great number of Outlaws, Prisoners, and other
Offenders, who thought hereby to have saved their souls, and filled their
purses: We were forced also to receive five or six Regiments of the French
Army, besides some Irish (to whom as it was said, our Country was promised) and
several other Troops of Highway-men, and Vagabonds, under a pretense of coming
into the Valleys only for fresh Quarters.

The multitude being licensed by Pianessa, encouraged by the Monks, and led by
our wicked Neighbors, Barbarous cruelty.
fell upon us with such violence on every side, and in so treacherous a manner,
especially in Angrognia, Villaro and Bobio ( to whom Pianessa had plighted his
troth, that if they would but quarter one Regiment, they should be secure from
all harm) that in a moment of time all was turned into a confused heap, and the
inhabitants constrained after skirmishes that they made in the way, to fiye for
their lives, together with their Wives and little children; and that not only
the inhabitants of the Plains, but of the Mountains also, who had otherwise
been certainly betrayed and surprised. Yet was not all their diligence
sufficient to preserve very many of them from destruction; for in many places
they were hemmed in on every side, that there was no way left for their flight,
but they were most inhumanl^ massacred. In one place they cruelly tormented One
hundred and fity Women and Children, and afterward chopped off the heads of
some, and dashed out the brains of others against the rocks: Multitudes of
Prisoners they took; and such of them from fifteen years of age and upward who
refused to go to Mass, they hanged up some, and nailed the feet of others to
trees, with their heads hanging downwards, all which they constantly endured.
Mr. Gross, one of the Pastors, with some of his Family they sent to Turin: They
made such havoc of all, that there were neither any Cattle or other Provision
left in the Valley of Lucerna; Yea, in the Communalties of St. Giovanni, La
Torre, etc. a Franciscan Friar and another Priest set fire on houses and
Churches that they left not one of them unburnt. In these desolations the
Mother was bereaved of her sweet Child, the Husband of his dear Wife. Those
which were richest amongst us are forced to beg their bread; yea, they are
weltring in their own blood, and deprived of all outward comforts; and whereas
there were some Churches in St. Martino, that were always formerly as a
Sanctuary to the persecuted, they are now commanded to quit their dwellings,
and every soul of them presently to depart without any respite, and that under
pain of death.

The pretense of these strange Massacres and cruelties are, that we are Rebels
to the Duke's commands in not p^^forming a pure impossibility by immediate
departing from our Habitations in Bubiana, Lucerna, Fenile, Bricheras, La
Torre, St. Giovanni, and St. Secondo. As also for our frequent petitioning his
Royal Highness to take pity upon us. To conclude, Our beautiful and flourishing
Churches are left desolate, and that without remedy, unless the Lord work
miraculously for us, etc.

The truth is, the cruelties which were there excuted would exceed the belief
of any man, were they not so fully proved, by the formal attestations of eye
witnesses, by the woeful cries of so many desolate and poor wretches who have
been miserably robbed of their Relations, Houses, Lands, and all other
comforts; yea, by the formal oath of one of the chief Commanders of the Army
that acted these cruelties, signed with his own hand in the presence of two
authentic witnesses, and the voluntary confession of one of the Soldiers, who
told some of his Comrades that many times, during the heat of the Massacre, he
had surfetted with eating the boiled Brains of the Protestants.

The Declaration of Monsieur du Petit Bourg, first Captain of the Regiment of
Gransey, subscribed with his own hand at Pignerol, Nov. 27. 1655. in the
presence of two other Commanders.

I Sieur du Petit Bourg being commanded by Prince Thomas to go, and join my
self with the Marquess of Pianessa, who was then at La Torre; upon my
departure I was requested by the Ambassador to speak to the Marquess, and to
use my endeavor to accommodate the troubles which were amongst those of the
Religion in the Valleys of Piemont, which accordingly I did, entreating him
with much earnestness that he would give way thereunto, and I doubted not but
I should be able to effect it: but he refused this my request, and that diverse
times, notwithstanding all the endeavors I could possibly use to persuade him
thereto; and instead of the least mitigation, I was witness to many great
violences, and extreme cruelties exercised by the Bandets, and soldiers of
Piemont upon all sorts, of every age, sex, and condition, whom I saw massacred,
dismembered, hanged up, burnt, and ravished, together with many horrid
confusions, which I beheld with horror and regret: and without any distinction
of those that resisted, and such as resisted not, they were used with all sorts
of inhumanity, their houses burnt, their goods plundered; and when prisoners
were brought before the said Marquess, I saw him give order to give them no
quarter at all, saying, his Highness was resolved to have none of the Religion
within his Dominions. And whereas in his Declaration he protests that there was
no hurt done to any but during the fight, nor the least outrage committed upon
any persons that were not fit to bear Arms: I will maintain that it is not
so, having seen with my eyes many persons killed in cold blood: as also women,
aged persons, and young children, miserably murdered, etc.

The attestation of diverse persons of honor, and integrity, who were for the
most part eye, and ear witnesses of the ensuing barbarous cruelties which were
exercised upon diverse members of the Evangelical Churches in the Valleys of
Piemont in the late Massacre 1655.

Sarah Rastignole des Vignes, about sixty years of age, Women tipped up.
being overtaken by diverse soldiers, was commanded to say her prayers, and
when she had done they bade her say Jesus Maria, which the poor woman refusing,
one of the soldiers thrust a sickle into the lower part of her belly, and ripped
her up to the navel, and then dragged the poor creature upon the ground, being
half dead, till another came and cut off her head; the daughter in Law of this
poor woman who hid her self in the snow for two days after without any
succor, was an eyewitness hereof.

Martha Constantine of Giovanni, after that she had seen several others most
cruelly put to death, was her self, first ravished, Base cruelty.
and afterward had her Breasts cut off, and part of her Privities by some of
the soldiers, who fried them, and set them before some of their Comrades,
making them believe they were Tripes, but when they had eaten a good part, they
told them what they were, which caused a quarrel amongst them; and they that
had eaten them were so sick, that some of them died soon after. This was
certified by a Papist to one Andrea Javel of Einachia.

A man of Thrassaniere being taken prisoner, received diverse stabs in the soles
of his feet, Horrid cruelty.
and in his ears by two of the soldiers, who afterward cut off his privy
members, and then applied a burning candle to the wound, frying it with the
flame thereof, that so the blood might be stopped, and the torments of that
miserable creature prolonged. Then tore they his nails off with burning
pincers to force him to renounce his Religion: But when nothing would do, they
tied one of his legs to a Mule, and dragged him through the streets till he was
almost dead, and then binding a lord about his head, they twisted it with a
staff till his eyes and brains dropped out, and then cast his carcass into
the River.

Peter Simond of Angrogna about eighty years of age, was tied neck and heels
together, and so violently thrown down a fearful Precipice, but by the way,
falling upon a cragged branch of a Tree, he there hung in a most languishing
condition for diverse days together (a most lamentable spectacle to behold)
being neither able to help himself, nor capable of receiving help from others,
the Precipice being inaccessible.

Esaias Garcino of Angrogna, of ninety years old, had first his body cut, and
hacked in small pieces, and then his head chopped off.

The wife of Daniel Armand of La Torre, had her body torn and cut in pieces,
and the parts of it strawed along the highway, and hung upon the hedges.

Captain Pola of Plancalier took two poor women of La Torre, and with his
Fauchin ripped up their bellies, and left them grovling upon the Snow in this sad
and lamentable condition till they died.

The soldiers of Bagnols cut off, first the nose, then the fingers, and lastly
the hands of a very old, and decrepid woman, and so left her languishing in
this woeful condition, not having so much as an hand to feed her self with, till
she died.

They took also many little children, and tender infants, and flung them down
the steep Rocks, whereby they were dashed to pieces.

Magdalen Bertino of La Torre they stripped stark-naked, tied her head between
her legs, and threw her down one of the Precipices.

Mary Reymonde^ of La Torre, a lame woman, was found in a Cave with all her
flesh sliced off from the bones, and chopped as small as herbs to the pot.

Magdalen Pilot of Villaro being exceeding decrepit, and blind with old age,
was cut in pieces in a Cave near Castelus.

Anna daughter to Giovanni Charboniere of La Torre had a long stake thrust into
her privities by some of the soldiers, who each man in his turn carried her
upon their shoulders till they were weary, and then stuck the end of the stake
into the ground, and so left her hanging in the air: A terrible spectacle to
every one that passed by.

Giovanni Andrea Michialin of La Torre being taken Prisoner, escaped
miraculously, having first seen three of his children torn in pieces limb from
limb before his eyes, and the fourth, being about six weeks old, snatched out
of the mothers Arms, stripped of its swaddling clothes, and its brains dashed
out against the Rocks.

Jacob Perrin, an Elder of the Church of Villaro, and David his brother being
taken Prisoners in their Beds, were carried to Lucerna, and cast into the
Marquesses Prison, where they were most barbarously and cruelly handled, the
bloody Soldiers stripping off the skin on their Arms and Legs, in long slices
like leathern points, till the flesh was left quite bare: after which they were
miserably starved to death in the same Prison, and their Carcasses left to rot
there.

Giovanni Pelanchion, a young man about twenty five years old, having been
taken Prisoner, made an escape; but being taken again by the Soldiers, they
tied one of his Legs to the tail of a Mule, and so dragged him through all the
streets of Lucerna; and because the poor wretch sometimes lifted up his hands
and head, through pain and anguish that he suffered by the grating of his body
against the ragged flints, the bloody and merciless villains batter^d and
bruised his body with stones and brick-bats, crying, that he was possessed with
the Devil which kept him from dying. After which they cut off his privy
members, and crammed them violently down the poor Creatures mouth, and down his
throat to stop his breath, and at last chop't off his head, and so drawing him
to the Rivers bank, they left him there unburied.

Magdalen the daughter of Peter Fontana, a beautiful Girl about ten years old,
being taken by some of these lecherous Brutes, because her body was incapable
of being forced in an ordinary way, they tore her in so inhumane a manner, that
afterward she was found half dead, wallowing in her own blood.

A poor woman apprehending her danger, having a sucking child in the Cradle,
took the child and Cradle upon her head, and fled: some of the Soldiers seeing
her, pursued; and she perceiving that she was like to be overtaken, left her
Cradle in the way, supposing that those Butchers could not have such hearts of
Adamant as to hurt her innocent babe, and so hid her self in the cleft of a
Rock not far off: But these hell hounds finding the Infant in the Cradle, took
it out, and tore it in pieces, and afterward finding the Mother, they first
ravished her, and then cut off her head, and left her dead body upon the Snow.

At Villa Nova the daughter of Moses Long, about ten years old, as she was
slying upon the Snow, some Soldiers of Piemont took her, broached her upon a
Pike, and roasted her alive with a fire made upon a broad stone: and after a
while they cut off a slice of her flesh, intending to have eated it; but
finding it not well roasted, their stomachs would not serve them to eat it.

Jacopo Michelino, one of the chief Elders of the Church of Bobio, being taken
Prisoner, had his two hands tied to his privy members, and so hung upon a Gate
in a shameful posture; but the shame was nothing to the torments, the whole
weight of his body hanging upon so tender a part, which caused most exquisite
and almost incredible pain: and this they did to force him to renounce his
Religion; but when this prevailed not, they took him down, and carried him away
amongst other Prisoners: And afterward having with incredible constancy
endured a world of other cruelties, he at last exchanged this life for a better.

Peter Gros, during the time of his imprisonment, saw two of these poor
Protestants of La Sarcena, hanging in a most hideous manner, merely by their
privy members, and their hands tied behind them, till their very bowels were
almost torn out, and so at last they dyed with horrible pain and anguish.

Giovanni Rostagnal of Bobio, being eighty years old, had his Nose, Ears, and
other parts of his body cut off, and so he was left languishing upon the Snow
for a long time, till at last he gave up the Ghost.

Daniel Salvagio and his Wife; Giovanni Durant, Daniel Revel, Lodwick and
Bartholomew Durant, all brothers, and Paolo Reynaud, being taken by the
Soldiers, had their mouths and throats stuffed with Gunpowder, and then
setting fire to it, their heads were torn all to pieces.

Jacob Di Rone, a Schoolmaster of Roras, being stripped stark naked, after they
had torn off his Nails with Pincers, and made a thousand holes in his hands
with a Daggers Point, they dragged him by a cord fastened about his middle
through the Bourge of Lucerna, and at every step he took, one Soldier on one
side cut off a piece of his flesh with a Fauchin, and another on the other side
gave him a great blow with a staff, crying, What say thou now Barbet? will thou go to Mass? To which the poor creature with admirable constancy, as long
as he was able to speak, answered, Much rather death than the Mass; dispatch
me quickly for the love of God. A while after came a notorious cutthroat, who
as soon as he saw him, cried out, Lo, here is the Minister of Roras, withal
giving him a deadly blow athwart the head with a Back-Sword: From thence they
dragged him to the Bridge, and cutting off his head, they threw him into the
River of Pelis.

Paolo Garnier of Roras being taken by these murderers, they first violently
pulled out his eyes, then cut off his privy members, thrusting his yard into
his mouth, and in this posture they exposed him to public scorn for several
days together; afterward in a most inhumane manner they flead him alive, and
then cutting his skin in four parts, they hung it in the windows of four of
the principal houses of Lucerna.

Daniel Cardon of Roccappiata being taken by some of the Soldiers, they cut
off his head, took out his brains, and frying them in a Pan, eat them up; they
cut open his breast also, and were taking out his heart to fry and eat that,
but that they were frighted by some of the poor peoples Troops that were coming
that way.

Margaret Revel of La Cartere, aged eighty five years; Mary Di Pravillerm, aged
ninety years, and blind, both of S. Giovanni, were taken, and in a most
barbarous manner were both burned alive.

Madona Lena, aged eighty years, and blind, and Jeanna Batzan, aged ninety
years, both of La Torre, were used in the like cruel manner, and burned

A widow of La Torre, who had lain very sick for three years together, was
taken by some of these bloody villains, together with one of her daughters, and
were drawn upon a Carr through the streets of La Torre, and as they passed
along, some of these bloodhounds stabbed their bodies with Pitchforks, others
bruised them with flints and stones, and then they threw them into the River of
Angrogna, where they threw stones and bats at them till they dyed.

Paolo Giles of La Torre, as he fled for his life, was shot into the neck by
one of them, after which they slit his face through the chin and nose, and when
they had slain him, they left his carcass to be eaten by the dogs.

Some of these Murderers having taken eleven men at Garcigliana, heated a great
Furnace red hot, forced these poor creatures to throw one another into it, and
when it came to the last man, they themselves threw him in also.

These sons of blood pursued, and hunted out multitudes of these poor
Protestants amongst the Rocks and Mountains, by the traces of their bleeding
legs and feet, which were cut and mangled with the ice, and flints which they
met with in the way, and having found them, basely murdered them.

Michel Gonet of Lucernetta, aged ninety years at least, was burnt alive by the
Mountains of Bobio, whither he had fled to hide himself.

Bartholomew Frasche of Fenile, was taken by the Soldiers, and after they had
slashed and mangled his legs, they thrust a poisoned knife through his heels,
and in this woeful plight they dragged, and threw him into the common Prison at
Turin, where he lay in continual torment till he dyed.

Giovanni Baptista Oudri, an Old man, was cruelly murdered at La Sarcena,
after he had been barbarously abused by them.

Magdalena La Peire, a woman of about thirty five years of age, being pursued
by these Villains, and knowing what measure she should meet with if she fell
into their hands, chose rather to throw herself down a dreadfuly Precipice,
whereby she dyed.

Margeret Revella, aged about eighty five years, together with Marie Di
Pravillerm, about ninety years old, and blind, were both burnt alive.

Mary Davi was basely murdered by them.

Michel Bellino, with Anna Di Pol Bochiardino, and a servant of theirs, were
beheaded.

The daughter of Peter Mallonat, a Councellor of Saint Giovanni, together with
her brother, an infant of eight months old in her Arms, were rolled down a
steep hill, and two days after they were found dead upon the Snow.

One Giovanni, with his wife and child, were hurled down a mighty Rock, the
mother holding the child in her Arms, and three days after they were found
dead; only the child was alive, and clasped so fast in the dead Mothers Arms,
that they had much ado to get it out.

Joseph Chiairet, having received a wound in the flight, was flayed alive, and
his grease taken out of his body: The like was done to Paolo Carniero.

Mattheo Turin was massacred at Lucernetta, and his body devoured by dogs.

Margeret Saretta was stoned to death, and her dead body cast into the River.

Cypriano Bastia was cruelly starved to death, and his body cast to the dogs.

Antonio Bertino, had first his nose, paps, and privities cut off, and then his
head cleft in twain.

Two Children were first murdered, and then burnt to ashes.

Joseph Pont was first wounded in his back, and then had his body cut off in
the middle.

Daniel De Maria being found in a place where he had hid himself, and lay sick,
had first two of his children murdered before his eyes, and then himself
barbarously slain.

Judith, a widow of eighty years old, was dragged up and down upon the ground,
and at last had her head cut off.

Three Infants of Peter Fine were stifled in the Snow.

A maid that was an innocent, was first stripped stark naked, and then had a
long stake driven through her belly, whereof she dyed.

Luce the wife of Peter Besson, being near the time of her lying down, as she
fled for her life, was so affrighted with the shreeks of some that were
massacred, that she fell in travel upon the Mountains where she was, and
afterward was found dead with the new born infant, and two other sucking
children lying by her.

Francis, the son of Mr. Gros a Minister, being taken, had his body cut into
small Gobbets, whilst he was alive, and that in the presence of his wife; and
then they took two of his small children, and most inhumanely murdered them.

The Sieur Thomas Margher being forced to fly from his house, being an Elder
of La Torre, was miserably starved to death with hunger and cold.

Judith Ravelin, with her seven children, were all barbarously murdered in
their beds.

Anna, a widow of about seventy five years old, was cut in pieces by the
soldiers.

The wife of Gaspar Fayol, being taken, was forced to labor hard for them by
cutting down the corn, and at last as she was so at work, they came behind
her, and cut off her head.

Jacob Rosseno refusing to say Jesus Maria, was first cruelly beaten with
cudgels, and clubs; and having received several shots in his body, they at last
clave his head.

Two children, both of them dumb, were most unmercifully murdered.

Susanna, the daughter of P^olo Giacquin, resisting a soldier that would have
ravished her, and by chance pushing him down a rock, was hewed in pieces by
others of them.

Giovanni Pullius, a poor Pesant of La Torre, being taken by the Soldiers,
after all manner of reproaches, and scorns cast upon him by the Friars, and
others, in words, and actions, was by the command of the Marquess of Pionessa
dragged by the hangman to a place near the Convent, where the Marquess
commanded the hangman to place the ladder against a tree, and to prepare for
his Execution, at which time the Monks, and Priests ceased not to use all the
arguments which the Devil and their own wicked wits could possibly furnish them
with, to shake the Faith, and Constancy of this poor creature; yet could they
not prevail; yea by all his gestures, and expressions he showed the inward joy
of his soul that he was counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ: and
though they often pressed him to remember the sad estate that he should leave his
children and family in, yet he always answered that it was his hearty Prayer
to Almighty God that his children might follow their fathers steps, and die
like himself: whereupon the Priests seeing all their labor lost, assisted the
Hangman to end this poor man's life, and hasted to turn him off the ladder.

Sieur Paolo Clement, an Elder of the Church of Rossana, was shortly after
brought by the Monks and Priests to this same place, and showed the dead body
of the other, thinking thereby to scare him from his Principles, and
profession: but he answered them with undaunted courage, that they might kill
the body, but could never be able to prejudice the soul of a true Believer. He
told them also that God would assuredly avenge the innocent blood that they had
spilt: and so having by some ejaculations prepared to resign up his soul unto
God, he desired the Hangman to do his work: three or four days after the
Marquess of Pianessa coming that way, one of the soldiers discharged a
Musket at his dead body, whereupon there gushed out a stream of fresh blood,
which the Marquess observing, said to some about him, This blood cries for
vengeance: Afterward they took both these dead bodies, and hung them up naked
by one foot near to La Torre, and when any prisoner of the Protestants passed
that way, they forced him or her to go and kiss their Privities, that they
might put alike scorn both upon the living and dead: But by reason of the
multitude of bullets that were shot through them by the soldiers, they at last
fell to pieces.

Daniel Rambaut of Villaro, having a numerous family, was taken, and carried to
Paysana with diverse others of his Neighbors, where he was cast into prison,
and after awhile was importunatly set upon by the Monks, and Mass Priests,
both with promises, and threats, to pronounce Jesus Maria; and when they could
not prevail, the Tormentors first cut off his fingers one by one, and then his
hands, and lastly gave him a deadly wound in the stomach, and then they dragged
his carcass to the Rivers side, and left it to be devoured by Dogs, and wild
Beasts.

Peter Chabriolo being taken by the Soldiers, they hung a great quantity of
Gunpowder about his body, and then giving fire to it, tore him all to pieces.

Antony the son of Samuel Calieris, a dumb, and innocent creature, was
inhumanly butchered as he was sitting by the fire side.

Peter Moninat, and his wife, lying both of them extreme sick, were murdered
by the Soldiers, who finding in the same house one of their children a poor
infant, lame and impotent, they cut off its legs, and so left it in that
miserable plight: they had also another poor girl, who had been dumb from her
cradle, which not long after was found starved to death for want of sustenance.

Daniel Benech of Villaro was taken by the Soldiers, who cut off his nose,
ears, and other parts of his body, till they had slain him, and then they left
the mangled pieces upon the hedges, and bushes in the same place. Two of his
children were also stifled in the Snow.

Mary the Widow of Daniel Pelanchion of Villaro, being taken by the Soldiers,
after they had basely abused her, they almost shot her to death, and then threw
her into the River: But this poor woman being not quite dead, with much pains,
and hard shifts, got out of the River again, hoping to be somewhat revived by
the warm Sun which she laid her down in: but some of these bloody Villains
spying her, they fastened a rope to her feet, and dragged her to the Bridge,
where they hung her up by the legs, and so shot her to death, afterward
leaving her stark naked upon the Rock.

Mary the wife of Daniel Monino was taken by the soldiers, who having broken
her jaws in pieces, they gave her a deep cut in the neck, so that her head was
half off, and so they left her in that languishing condition, till after
extreme torments endured for diverse days together, she at last yielded up the
Ghost.

Mary the Widow of David Nigrino (a poor beggar of Villaro) together with her
daughter who was an Innocent, were both inhumanly massacred in the Village of
Bozza, and their dead bodies were thrown into the Woods.

Susanna the Widow of Samuel Bals of Villaro, was by the Soldiers basely
abused at their pleasure, and afterward they shut her up between two stone
walls, where she was miserably pined to death.

Susanna the wife of Jacob Calvio being sorely wounded by the Soldiers, after
which flying into a Barn to hide her self, the Soldiers perceiving it, set
fire on the Barn, and burnt her to ashes.

A child of Daniel Bertino, who had been dumb, and an Innocent from the womb,
was burnt in a Barn at Balmedaut.

Paolo Armand, being extreme sick and weak, was by these Barbarians hacked in
pieces.

Andrea Bertino, a very old, and lame man, had his breasts first cut off, and
then was cruelly murdered by these bloody villains, who to testify their
malice against him for his constancy in Religion, after he was dead they cut
out his bowels, and with their Halberds hacked his body in pieces.

Daniel the son of David Michialino, being taken by the Soldiers, after much
other cruel usage, had his tongue pulled out with great violence and torments.

Constantia Bellione had her body hacked, and mangled in most parts thereof,
and then was shot to death with several bullets in her bowels: and after she
was dead they cleft her head with a Hanger.

Judith Mondon was beaten to death in a savage manner with clubs and staves.

David Paglias, and Paolo Genre endeavoring to fly, each of them having a
little infant in his arms, being at last tired, and out of breath, were
overtaken by the Soldiers, and both men and infants inhumanly murdered.

Micheli Genre, a young man of Bobio, was thrown off the Bridge of La Torre,
where, as he was praying with his hands lifted up to heaven, he was partly
stoned, and partly drowned.

David Armand was knocked, and beaten about the head with an hamer till he died.

Jacob Baridono, being taken prisoner at Villaro, and from thence carried to La
Torre, after the Tormentors had sufficiently, and cruelly afflicted him with
burning Matches between his fingers, his lips, and other parts of his body,
till with intolerable pain he died, they caused his dead corpse to be carried
out by two of his Fellow Prisoners, and by them to be thrown into the river
Pelice: but thinking that too honorable a burying-place for an Heretic, they
forced them to fetch it out again, and to lay it on the rivers brink, where,
after they had exposed the same to all manner of ignominies, it was at last
eaten up by Dogs.

Margeret the wife of Joseph Garniero, Courage and Constancy.
having received a shot in one of her breast, as she was giving suck to her
little child with the other, was yet so courageous that with many pathetical
expressions she exhorted her husband to endure the Cross with patience, and to
hold out to the end; neither did she desire any favor of the murderers, but
only that they would spare the life of her innocent Babe: which accordingly
they did: but withal gave the mother another shot in her body whereof she died,
and afterward the infant being found alive in the dead mothers arms, was
miraculously preserved.

Isaiah Mondon having a long time hid himself in the cleft of a rock, where for
many days together he had nothing but a few leaves of unwholesome Herbs to eat,
was at last found out by the Soldiers, and most unmercifully handled by them:
and from thence they drove him toward the Town of Lucerna, being almost half
dead: at last when the poor creature could march no further, he fell down upon
his knees, and beseeched them to dispatch him speedily, which accordingly they
did; for partly with their Swords, and partly with their Pistols, they put an
end to his miserable life, crying out in a scoffing manner, Kill the Barbet,
kill the Barbet, who refuses to become a Christian.

Giovanni Barrolino and his wife were cast alive into a poole, and often
plunged, and thrust under the water with staves, and pitchforks, and at last
were dispatched with stones and brickbats.

Mary Revel receiving a shot in her body, fell down in a manner dead, yet
afterward she recovered so much strength as to get upon her knees, and as she
was praying to God, the bloody enemy dispatched her.

Giovanni Salvagiot as he was returning from Bagnol, after the peace was
concluded, as he passed by a Chapel, because he put not off his hat, and made
obeisance thereto, was murdered, and his body left unburied.

Giovanni Gayo, and diverse other men, women, and children hid themselves in a
Cave, where for a time they continued in safety: but at last were discovered by
some of these Bloodhounds; whereupon they fell upon their knees, and begged
their lives of them, most of the murderers having been their neighbors, and
familiar acquaintance, and such as had pretended great friendship to them: But
the mercy of these men proved extreme cruelty: For the kindest salute they
could afford their old acquaintance was with Swords, Muskets, and Pistols:
which the poor people perceiving, and not desiring to behold the lamentable
misery each of other, they kneeled down in a Ring, and thrust their heads into
Fern, and such like stuff as they had prepared to lie upon, in which posture
they were all miserably shot to death, and their dead bodies afterward
horribly mangled, and cut in pieces.

Jacob Barral and his wife having been taken prisoners by the Earl of Saint
Secondo, were three or four days after carried forth: and having first cut off
the woman's breasts, they shot them to death.

Antony Guiguo went to Periero with a purpose to change his Religion; but it
pleased God so to touch his heart, that he repented of the resolution, and
sought to make an escape: But as he was flying, some Troops of the Marquess of
Galeas caught him, and used him most cruelly because he would not yield to go
to Mass: and as they carried him prisoner toward Praly, passing by a
Precipice, the poor man to avoid his tormentors, leaped down from the Rock, and
so was dashed in pieces.

Very many others there were which might here have been inserted, whereof some
were drowned, some burnt, some slain with the sword, some shot to death, some
starved, some smothered in the Snow, some pined, some killed with staves, some
cut in pieces: but I am weary with reckoning up their names, and I suppose the
Reader also is tired with these cruelties: yet are their names written in red
letters in the Calendar of Heaven, though their Popish adversaries would have
them written in the dust: and whosoever desires to see more, may find a larger
Catalogue in Master Moorlands History of the Peresecutions in the Valleys of
Piemont.

CHAP. XLV. A true Narrative of the War in the Valleys of Piemont between the
Popish, and Protestant party upon the occasion of the Massacre.
IN the former Chapter you have a faithful Narration of what cruelties were
exercised against the Reformed party in the Valleys of Piemont from the first
arrival of, the Marquess of Pianessa's forces at St. Giovanni, which was April
17. 1655. to the 21. of the same: by which time they had made such havoc of
the poor people, that there was now only the little Communalty of Roras which
was left entire, and untouched: But that they also might in all things be made
like unto their suffering brethren of the other Churches, and that it might
appear that the destruction was designed to be universal, the Earl of
Christophle upon that very day, being April 21. sent three hundred Soldiers
secretly by the way of Villaro, to surprise them of Roras, and to put them all
to the sword: This party being got upon a little hill called Rumer, belonging
to Roras, it pleased God that they were met with by some Soldiers belonging to
Captain Joshua Gianavel (whom God raised up at that time as a choice
Instrument for the preservation of the poor scattered remnant of his people).
These Soldiers being but seven or eight of them, yet having been beforehand
placed in ambuscado at a convenient Post to prevent the inrode of the enemy,
they fired upon them, and plied them so hard, that many of them were killed
upon the place, and the rest, supposing by the great number of bullets that
flew about their ears, that the men in Ambuscado were six times more in
number than indeed they were, they fled back in great disorder, and confusion:
which the others perceiving, they fell upon their Rear, and chased them at
least three quarters of a League amongst the Rocks, and Woods, doing notable
execution upon them in their flight.

The Members of this little Church of Roras, to take away all occasions of
exceptions, presented their complaints to the Marquess of Pianessa, who, that
he might have the better opportunity to deceive, and surprise them, answered,
that those of his Soldiers that went to Roras, Popish subtilty and
perfidiousnesse.
were but Thieves, Robbers, and Out-lawes, that herein had wholly disobeyed his
Orders; adding that they had done him a singular favor in driving them out of
their Country; and that he would take a course to prevent their being
disturbed for the future: and hereupon he published an Order whereby he
straightly charged his Soldiers, not to give them any further causes of
complaints, nor to molest them in any kind hereafter. Yet perfidiously, the
very next day he sent a party of five hundred chosen men to put his first
bloody design in execution.

As these men were passing over a little hill of Roras, they were so saluted by
eleven Musketeers of the Protestants, A special Providence.
and six men with slings under the conduct of Captain Gianavel, who had
divided them into three Squadrons, that the enemy was soon put to flight: and
this poor handful of despicable men pursued them for an whole League, slaying a
very great number of them, without the loss or hurt of any one of themseves,
which shows the admirable Providence of God in preserving, and prospering those
that fight his battles.

The Marquess of Pianessa, though he had failed this second, yet was resolved
to make a third attempt; and still to deceive them, he made new promises, and
protestations that no injury in the world should be offered them, and that in
regard of the Intercession of the Earl of Christophle, their Lord and Patron,
he would protect, and defend them; yet the very morrow after he sent a party of
seven hundred men, who first seized upon, and secured all the passes, that none
might escape their bloody hands, and then most barbarously burnt, and destroyed
whatsoever they met with through all the Communalty of Roras.

Hereupon seventeen housekeepers, whose hearts God had marvelously
strengthened, and encouraged for their poor Brethrens preservation, seeing what
they must expect, and that nothing but death, and destruction waited for them,
unless some admirable providence prevented it: as also calling to mind those
signal deliverances which God had vouchsafed to his ancient people of the Jews
in their greatest straits: they unanimously resolved to cast themselves with
their lives, and estates into the hands of the same God, resting upon his
gracious promises, and freely submitting to his good will and pleasure for the
issue of their undertaking. The Captain of this valiant party was the
aforesaid Gianavel, who marching up with this little Band, suddenly surprised,
and dexterously carried away their Court of Guard with their Sentinel from off
a little hill where they were placed: At which bold attempt, the enemy being
not a little amazed, withdrew from the place where they were, resolving to
march through a little meadow, and so to get to Villaro or La Torre: But being
not nimble enough, the others met with them at Piampra, and there slew many of
them, without the loss of any one of their own, and took from them all the
Cattle, and other things which they had plundered from the neighboring places.

Pianessa seeing all his designs thus frustrated, and that his specious
promises were but as so many watchwords to bid these poor people to stand upon
their guard; he speedily sent to all those of Lucerna, Bubbiana, Barges,
Bagnol, Famolas, Cavors, and the adjacent places, who wete able to bear arms,
to come and join with a good part of his own Army, to environ these poor people
on every side. But God, who infatuates men's Counsels as he pleases, though the
time of their Rendezvouse was punctually assigned them, yet they came two hours
too late; all except the Troop of Bagnol, which was conducted by one Mario, a
notorious persecutor, and an inveterate Enemy to the Reformed Churches: This
Mario with his ragged Regiment of Theives, Outlaws, and a great number of Irish
Rebels, assaulted this poor people on the upper and lower part of the Canton of
Rumer, who were not about Seventeen in number; yet the Lord was pleased so to
encourage them, that they presently gat upon the top of the mountain, and there
after a long skirmish forced their enemies, though full of fury and malice, yet
to give back, and to fly as far as the Cliff called Pairo Capello; in which
fight and pursuit they killed above Sixty of them, and wounded many more, and
many of them being laden with plunder, as they fled amongst the Precipices of
the Rocks, fell down, and were dashed in pieces. Those of them that were
lighter, and nimbler, gat safe to Pairo Capello; but when they came there they
found greater difficulties to contest with than before; for being closly
pursued and compassed in on every side, they were forced to take the Ropes
wherewith they had bund up their plunder, and tying them to shrubs, to slide
down the Rocks by them, and to fall into the River that ran below; but by
reason of the violence of the torrent, and the great confusion that was amonst
them, one falling on the neck of another, and such as could not swim, catching
hold of them that could, the greatest part of them were there drowned. Captain
Mario also amongst the rest threw himself into the River, and had not several
of the Soldiers that could swim excellent well, ventured their lives to fetch
him out, he had gone with the rest to receive present pay from the Devil.

This Captain Mario, having thus escaped, Gods Judgments on persecutors.
was carried to Lucerna in his shirt, without either Hat or Shoos, as a man at
his wits end; and shortly after he fell into a desperate disease, whereof he
died: But before his death he often cried out in a most despairing manner, that
he felt a grievous burning in his bowels, as a just Judgment upon him for
having burnt so many innocent persons, and their habitations.

The Protestants after this gallant action, being somewhat weary with their
hard service, as they were marching back to refresh themselves, they spied
another company of Murderers coming from Villaro, whereupon forgetting their
weariness, they placed themselves in Ambuscado: when the Enemy drew near the
place, they perceived some of them; but not being able by their colors to
discern of what party they were, they called to them for THE WORD; the
Protestants answered not, but beckned to them to come nearer, which they did in
a careless posture, supposing them to be friends, and when they came near, the
others suddenly discharged upon them, and slew many of them upon the place, and
the rest they pursued near to La Torre, and Villaro. After which signal
Victory, Captain Gianavel rallied his men upon an high ground not far off, and
in the very sight of his enemies, he caused them to kneel down, and with a loud
voice to give thanks unto the Lord for this very great mercy in their
deliverance.

Three days after, the Marquess of Pianessa, being highly incensed by this
success of the Protestants, sent to the people of Roras, expressly charging them
to change their Religion, within the space of Twenty four hours, and that upon
pain of death, and of having their houses burnt to the ground: To which they
answered, That they would much rather choose death, than to obey any such Order.
The Marquess vexed at their resolute answer, presently dispatched away Eight
thousand men, besides the Militia Forces of the neighboring Commonalties; who
according to his order were divided into three Squadrons, the one to set upon
the poor people on the side of Villaro, the other upon the Mountains of Bagnol,
and the third on that part which looks toward Lucerna; which accordingly they
did, not only murdering man, woman and child, but exercising all manner of
cruelties upon them, taking much pleasure (like bloody villains) in torturing
those poor creatures, and in tossing their little Infants from off their Pikes
and Halberts, and dashing their brains against the Rocks, whose cries would
have melted an heart of Adamant, but theirs were harder; the number thus taken
and slain was about One hundred twenty six, the rest almost miraculously
escaped their bloody hands.

Having thus shown their valor upon naked men, women and infants, and being
glutted with the prey that they found in the Country, they turned their houses
into ashes; and such as survived they sent prisoners to Turin, amongst whom was
the Wife and Children of Captain Gianavel, and so they marched back to Lucerna
with great joy and acclamations.

Shortly after Pianessa wrote to Captain Gianavel promising him great
preferment if he would change his Religion; Otherwise, threatening that his Wife
and Children should be burnt: He also promised a great sum of money to any that
should bring him the said Gianavel either alive or dead. To this Captain
Gianavel presently answered, That there was no torment so violent, nor death so
cruel, that he did not much prefer before the abjuration of his Religion; and
that all these promises and threats did but the more fortify him and
strengthen his Faith: And for his Wife and Children, he told the Marquess that
though he had gotten them into his power, yet he could but kill their Bodies;
And as for their Souls, he recommended them, together with his own into the
hands of God, in case it so happened that he should fall into his power.

This Captain Gianavel having gotten together a small party of men upon part of
the Alps called La Pellas des Jamies, May 22. went out in the evening to a
place about three leagues off, not far from Bubiana, where he first sought God
by prayer, and afterward being informed of the number and strength of the
enemy, finding them too many to be attachqued by such a handful of men, he
turned toward Lucernetta, where he was furiously assaulted by the Garrison of
Lucerna, but he courageously encountered them without the loss of any one man,
only himself was shot into the leg, by a Soldier that had hid himself behind
a tree, with a purpose to have slain him; but the Captain perceiving whence the
shot came, lame as he was, he made to the place, where he quickly dispatched
him for his pains.

Whilst these things were acting, the Irish Rebels in the Marquesses Army,
thinking to make themselves Masters of Babbiana, under a pretense of protecting
them against the Barbets, the Peasants of the place perceiving their drift,
took occasion to quarrel with them, and after drove them out, killing a great
number of them.

May the 26. 1655. Captain Gianavel wrote to Captain Jahier and the rest that
were retired into Val Lucerna, to meet at a Rendezvous at Angrognia, which
accordingly they did, and the day after they marched together to a place in the
Plain called Garcigliana, thinking to have entered the Town; but they met with a
great party of Horse and Foot, yet they disputed it with them a long time, but
being overpowred, they were forced to retreat; though they got six yoke of
Oxen, and many other small Cattle, and some prisoners, and that with the loss
of one only man in the retreat.

May 28. They marched to St. Secondo, where, having first kneeled down, and
prayed for a blessing upon their undertaking, encouraging one another, they
attaqued the place with incredible valor; and the better to secure themselves
against their enemies, who had lodged and fortified themselves in houses, they
got Planks, Barrels, and such other things as they met with to keep off the
bullets, which were poured out upon them out of those houses, and so quickly
made themselves Masters of the doors of those houses, to which immediately they
set fire, and so forced their entrance, putting all the Soldiers they found to
the sword; and no marvel; for they had been extremely provoked to this rigor
by the others cruel usage of their Wives and Children: Besides every room of
those Houses was filled with the plundered goods of the Protestants; yet did
they not meddle either with Women or Children.

Then did they set fire on the Town, and plundered the Churches, which they
found full of their own goods and cattle, and carried away seven of their
Mass-Bells.

Many Irish slain.
At this time they slew about four hundred and fifty of their enemies, and
amongst others a whole company of Irish Rebels, who chose rather to be burnt
than to crave Quarter. Of the Protestants there were only seven slain, and six
or seven more slightly wounded, whereof they soon recovered.

Monday June the fourth, the Captains Jahier, Laurentio, Gianavel, Genolat,
Benet, and other officers of the Protestants went to Angrognia, and having
called a Council of war, they concluded the next day to alarm the enemy at
Briqueras, and Saint Giovanni: and accordingly the Captains Laurentio and
Jahier went by the way of Reccapiatta, that by the help of the thick woods
wherein they shrouded themselves, they might the better approach Briqueras, and
having gotten upon a little hill near the Town, Captain Laurentio made there a
stand to hinder any relief that might be sent them from Saint Secondo, and
Captain Jahier marching down, set fire on several Houses and Barnes.

At the sight of this fire, they of Briqueras gave notice to those of Cavors,
Fenile, Bubiana, Campiglione, and other neighboring places, whereupon the
enemy quickly advanced toward them, and were as soon beaten back again: in
the mean time there came a party of about twenty Horse and stood at Saint
Secondo, lest the Reformed party should Salley out that way, really believing
that they had a design upon Briqueras: But Captain Jahier marched with his
company by the way of Saint Giovanni, and Captain Laurentio went an higher
way, yet both met at the place appointed, where Captain Gianavel was engaged
with the Enemies from Lucerna, and La Torre, against whom he had defended
himself very stoutly: Then did Captain Jahier charge them on the Flanck, and
Captain Laurentio on the Front, seasonably interposing his company in that
place where the enemy had thought to have surrounded Captain Gianavel, so that
the Popish party was soon routed, leanving one hundred men behind them,
besides many that were wounded, the Reformed party having but one slain upon
the place.

June the second, three hundred of the Enemies went from La Torre to fetch a
Convoy into the Fort of Mirebuc, situate between the Frontires of Dauphine, and
Piemont: But Captain Gianavel being at Malbec, though he had but nine
soldiers with him, fell upon them, and fought a great while with them to the
great astonishment of his Enemies: but at last was forced to retreat without
the loss of a man, only four were slightly wounded.

Afterward Captain Gianavel with a small party marched to La Palle des
Guienets, from whence he sent to some that were retired into Villora, requiring
that all those of the Reformed Religion should within twenty four hours come
out of the said place where Mass was celebrated, and that upon the pain of
being dealt with as enemies, and that such as through weakness had abjured,
and would persist in their abjuration, should depart thence upon the same
penalty. Hereupon all the Papists fled presently out of Villaro, and the
Protestants came in to Captain Gianavel, and such of them as were able to bear
Arms followed him cheerfully: the rest contributed according to their
abilities toward the maintenance of him, and his Troops. Those which through
frailty had abjured their Religion went over the Mountain into the Valley of
Queires; yet not long after they returned like so many wandering Sheep to the
true Shepherd of their souls, and testifying their repentance, were again
received into the bosom of the Church.

After those of Lucerna were retreated, the Captains Jahier, and Gianavel,
with some other Officers called a Council of War, wherein they resolved to
sally out, and if it were possible, to surprise those of La Torre, most of
which were Irish. But the enemy having timely notice, was so prepared, that
they killed some who had passed the Bridge at Angrognia, which so encouraged
them that they thought to have enclosed all the small body of Protestants, and
to have cut them all off: but after many assaults to no purpose, they were
forced to retreat to La Torre with the loss of very many of their Soldiers,
besides many others that were dangerously wounded.

The next day the Captains, Jahier, and Gianavel went before La Torre, against
whom many of the Soldiers came out; but not sallying forth in a full body,
they were all slain upon the place, which their Captains seeing, they thought
fit to send out no more: whereupon the Protestants retreated toward Angrognia,
to a place called La Verne, where a few houses were yet left unburnt.

The next day was spent in the review of their Army, and holding a Council of
war, where they resolved to send a party against the Communalty of Crusol,
the inhabitants whereof had made Incursions upon them, and committed many
Outrages in the beginning of the Massacre: and accordingly they marched all
night, being four hundred ninety and five men, and passing by La Torre
undiscovered, a little after midnight they arrived at Crusol, where they took
four hundred head of Cattle, six hundred sheep and Goats, with much other
booty, and that without the least resistance: For the Inhabitants of Crusol,
being terribly affrighted, had cast themselves into the mouth of a most fearful
Rock, whence they could not be gotten out: and so the Protestants returned over
one of the Alps of Villaro, where arriving the next day toward evening, they
divided the spoil amongst the Soldiers.

Presently after their departure the enemy from Lucerna, Cavors, Briqueras, and
other places to the number of eight hundred, having heard of their design
against Crusol, marched to their relief: but finding that they were gone too
far to be overtaken, they resolved not to lose their labors, and so fell a
plundering the poor people (though their friends) much worse than the
Protestants had done, and afterward falling out amongst themselves about
dividing the spoil, they destroyed one another instead of doing hurt to the
Reformed party.

The very same day that this enterprise was against Crusol, the enemy at Saint
Secondo advanced to burn the rest of the houses at Roccapiatta, and being
advanced as far as to the little hill of Angrognia, they thought to have
surprised the rest of the forces left under the command of Captain Laurentio,
and Captain Jahiers brother: But they having timely intelligence of it,
marched presently to the top of the Mountain with one half of the Souldery,
leaving the other half under the command of Captain Bennet of Saint Germano,
who also with all possible expedition, took his Post upon the said little hill
with seventeen of his men, and placed the rest in Ambuscado. But the enemies
hearts misgiving them, they shamefully retreated, at which time they took one
Giovanni Pietro Ragio as he was coming from Pinachia, and binding his head with
a cord, they strained it with such violence, that they made it sink into his
brains, and so they sent him to Turin, where he ended his days shortly after
by a languishing, and miserable death.

Eight days after, Captain Gianavel, having waited three whole days at
Angrognia for the coming of Captain Jahier, that with joint forces they might
assault the Town of Lucerna, when he came not, he resolved to assault it
himself, and so marching all night, he arrived at Lucerna by break of day. His
first work was to cut off the Pipes that conveyed water into the Town, and brak
down the Bridge that no relief might come to them from Bubiana, Barges, and
Bagnol: then did he assault the Town, and quickly defeated two of the
out-guards: but the Regiment of Monsieur de Merolles, and diverse others being
got into the Town the night before, he was constrained to give over the
enterprise, and to retreat, whereas if Captain Jahier had come in time, and
joined with him, probably they had carried the place,

June the eighth, Captain Gianavel being left alone at Angrognia only with his
own Company, and some few others, was assaulted early in the morning by the
Soldiers of La Torre and others, one part of them getting upon the top of the
Mountain, and the other part going the lower passage to possess themselves of
the Gate of Angrognia by the way of Saint Bartholomew, intending suddenly to
fall upon Captain Gianavel and his small company, having already devoured them
in their hopes: But it pleased God that at the sound of the Trumpet, when all
should have fallen on, Captain Gianavel soon awaked, and having first sought
unto God by prayer, A special Providence.
he fell upon the enemy, and gat the advantage of the place from them, and
after a short Dispute, forced them to turn their backs, though there were at
least two thousand five hundred of them, and all the Captains company was not
above three hundred, yet did that handful of men pursue them as far as to the
descent of Angrognia, into the Woods, and steep places of the Rocks, where they
slew a very great number of them.

Captain Gianavel seeing it impossible to think of any further attempt for the
present, entreated Captain Jahier to give over for that day, and to refresh
himself and his Soldiers: but he being at that time more passionate than
prudent, refused his good counsel, and picking out one hundred and fifty choice
men, sweetly took his leave of Captain Gianavel (little thinking that it should
be his last) and so marched down into the plain, where he burnt several of
their Houses who had formerly burnt, and destroyed so many of the Protestants,
bringing away with him a good Booty of Cattle, and other Goods.

This valiant Captain who hitherto had been so successeful in all his
attempts, His Charactea
thinking in the close of the day to Crown all his former undertakings, as he
was now near the execution of his Design, Lo a Squadron of Horse surrounded
him and his forty five men (for at this time he had no more with him) at a
Country house, not far from Ossac: and though he and his men did all that
could possibly be expected from them, killing three Captains, with the
Commander in chief of that Squadron, besides many others, yet he at last and
thirty five of his followers, all lost their lives; and the enemies in great
Triumph, cut off Captain Jahiers head, and the heads of his sons, and carried
them to Turin, presenting them to the Duke and his Mother, who rewarded them
with six hundred Ducatoons for their good service therein.

Captain Jahier deserves to be renowned, especially for his great piety, and
zeal for the service and honor of God, and the preservation of his poor
afflicted Church and Members. He was of so undaunted a spirit, that the terrors
of death, and the most cruel torments could never affright him. He was bold as
a Lion in his enterprises, but meek, and humble as a Lamb in the midst of his
Victories, always lifting up his hands toward Heaven, from whence he
acknowledged all his help to come, and always recited fit and comfortable
passages out of the Scriptures (wherein he was admirably versed) for the
encouragement of all his followers, and the strenthening of their faith upon
all occasions. As to his outward parts, and accomplishments, he was a man of a
sound understanding, and good judgment, and above all, of a wonderful active
spirit, which had he but used with moderation, he had been hardly to have been
paralleld.

The death of so brave a Commander, and the wound of Captain Gianavel, in that
juncture of time did not a little startle the Protestants: A special Providence.
But necessity often puts inconsiderable men upon bold enterprises: for these
poor men did not despond, nor lose their courage, but assembling shortly after
in a Mountain of Angrognia, they descended into the plain, where twice they
were assaulted with violence, the last of which was by a dangeros Ambuscado,
where the enemies were at least six thousand, and they not above one hundred:
But God of his infinite goodness so encouraged their hearts, and guided their
hands, that they slew very many of their enemies, and amongst them many
principal Officers, whereas the Reformed party lost only one Michael Bertino,
a Sergeant of Angrognia, and had but one common soldier wounded. The son of
the said Bertino seeing his father fall dead at his feet, was so far from
being discouraged, that he immediately stepped into his fathers place with
these words, Though my father be dead, yet be of good courage my fellow
soldiers, for God is a father to us all.

Monday following they had a very sharp dispute at La Torre, and about
Tagliaretto, where they killed and wounded a great number of their enemies,
without the loss of any of their own men. Indeed in this time the enemies
reaped their Corn in the plains of Saint Giovanni, but they could not carry
it away but with the loss of many of their lives.

About the same time there came to them one Monsieur Andrion, a Major of a
Regiment of Horse, with two other Gentlemen that were strangers, who were
followed with some Volunteers, whose friendly visit of their poor afflicted
Brethren, and their good advice in such a juncture of time, was taken (as it
deserved) very kindly: and God made it a singular means to uphold the fainting
spirits of some weak Brethren, who seeing others come in to the help of the
Lord against the Mighty, went on with a great deal more cheerfulness, and
alacrity: and these staid with them till the peace was concluded at Pigner^l.

July the eleventh 1655. Sieur John Ledger, Pastor of the Church at Saint
Giovanni, who deserves to be remembered for the great pains, and many services
performed by him in the behalf of the Churches of the Valleys, having notice
that the enemies were of opinion that he was come back from his journey with
Arms and Money, and Ammunition, and thereupon presuming that they would
suddenly make some notable attempt to prevent what they so much feared, he went
to Colonel Andrion, and pressed him to put his design in execution.

The poor people had as yet no standing Army: but the Bands of each Commonalty
were quartered at a great distance the one from the other; and certainly they
had been cut off every man of them within a few days, had not their Sentinels
been very watchful; and above all, if Captain Charforan had not on the one
side timely discovered the enemy, an the poor people on the other side been
exceedingly heartned to the Battle by the great valor, and singular conduct of
the Sieurs Andrion, Michelin, and Ledger.

The Enemy was very numerous, having been lately reinforced with many Troops.
They encamped themselves within half a League of the Reformed party, and early
in the morning they divided themselves into four Brigades, three whereof fell
upon the Protestants with a marvelous Resolution in three several places at
once: the fourth stood still, ready to succor their friends if there were
need. The fight continued at least four hours without intermission, and was the
sharpest that ever was fought in the open field: and that which made the
enemies more fierce, was, their hopes to have beaten back the Protestants from
their Post called the Castelas, which if they could have effected, they had
been certainly Masters of the Valleys Perosa, Saint Martino, and Lucerna: But
the poor people having lifted up their hearts by earnest supplications to the
Lord of Hosts (as they used to do upon all such occasions) Major Andrion, and
the two other Captains which he had brought with him, gave forth such orders
as were necessary, encouraging their men exceedingly, so that without budging a
foot, they kept their ground, all save a few who were either quite tired, or
faint for want of food, or that wanted powder, or flints in their firelocks:
But these, the Sieurs Mechelin and Ledger employed in rolling down great stones
upon their enemies heads as they came to attacque them, which proved very
successeful, doing much execution upon the enemy, and causing them to abate
much of their fury; and whereas in the beginning of the fight they cried
always, Advance, Advance, ye relicts of Jahier: the Protestants now began to
cry as fast, Advance, Advance, ye relicts of Saint Secondo, and withal they ran
upon those murderers as so many Lions, and caused them to turn back, and fly
toward La Torre and Lucerna as fast as they were able, leaving behind them
fifty five upon the place, and about forty that were killed in the flight,
besides many others who were carried either dead, or dangerously wounded, to
Lucerna. Themselves confessed that in this encounter they lost at least three
hundred men, amongst which were many Officers of a Bavarian Regiment.

When such multitudes of dead, wounded, and dying men were brought into
Lucerna, the Syndick, who was indeed a Papist, but not so superstitious as many
others, said to some, Hitherto the Wolves devoured the Barbets: But now the
Barbets devour the Wolves; which words being reported to Monsieur Marolles, the
Commander in chief in Lucerna, he threatened to imprison him, and to give him
the Strappado for them, which so terrified the poor man, that he presently
sickened, and within a few days died.

Two days after this great fight, the enemy being much enraged for their great
loss, spread themselves all over Angrognia, and began to set the Corn on
fire, which being seen by the Company of La Torre, who at that time were upon
the Mountain of Tagliaretto, they speedily gave notice to those of Saint
Giovanni, and Angrognia, who hasted thither, and charged them so fiercely, that
they forced them to fly, and to leave most of their Ammunition behind them:
and in the mean time Captain Belin assaulted the Town of La Torre, killed
the Sentinel, and soldiers upon the works, and gave the Town such an hot
Alarm, that most of them fled toward the River of Pellice; and probably if he
had had a few more men with him, he had at that time made himself Master of La
Torre.

July the eighteenth, the General of the Protestants gave Order to fall upon
the Town of La Torre, which accordingly was put in execution. Captain Belin
gave the first onset, who being followed with many other Officers, and
Soldiers, they quickly made a considerable breach in the Garden-wall next to
the Convent, which so encouraged the rest, that they fell on with an invincible
resolution, and in a short space burnt both the Convent, and most of the Town
down to the ground. Those in the Fort finding themselves hardly beset, began to
Parley about surrendering of it upon honorable terms: But some horse coming
seasonably to their relief from Lucerna, which the Protestants might have
prevented if they had been so careful as they should have been, they were
frustrated of attaining their desires.

Besides these, there were diverse other battles fought in diverse places where
the Reformed party had considerable advantages against their enemies, but for
brevity sake they are here omitted.

CHAP. XLVI. A brief account of the Intercessors to the Duke of Savoy in the
behalf of these poor people, and the success thereof.
UPon the first supplication of that terrible Order of Gastaldo, which was a
forerunner of the Massacre, the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland, being their
near neighbors, and therefore could soonest take notice of it, wrote their
Letters to the Duke of Savoy in the poor peoples behalf. To which the Duke of
Savoy shortly after gave a complemental, but cold answer, which was little
better than a plain denial of their request, and mediation.

April the 29. being the Lords day, news of the horrible Massacre was brought
to the Council of Zurick, who immediately gave Order for a Public day of
Humiliation through all their Territories, as also for making a Collection for
their relief: resolving to give notice of this doleful news to their
Protestant friends; and amongst others, they wrote to the States General of the
united Provinces, acquainting them with the sad condition of this poor people,
entreating them to consider of some expedient for the accommodating their
affairs.

May the fifth they sent Monsieur Gabriel Weis, Captain General of Berne as
their Deputy to the Duke of Savoy, who in very respectful terms requested him
to re-establish those who had survived the Massacre in their ancient
privileges, the free exercise of their Religion, and for the enlargement of
their Prisoners, delivering him a letter to the same purpose. The answer which
the Duke (or rather his Mother) gave, was, that though they were not obliged to
give an account of their actions to any Prince in the world, yet out of respect
to the amity which they had compacted with his Masters the Cantons, they had
given order to the Marquess of Pianessa to acquaint them with the truth of
those affairs: and shortly after when Major Weis spoke with the Marquess, he
labored to justify all his proceedings, and to lay the load upon the backs of
the poor people, protesting that he never intended to force their Consciences,
and that all the reports about such strange cruelties exercised toward them
were mere forgeries, etc.

Major Weis replied that the Massacre was so notorious, that it could not be
denied, and that their right of habitation in those places was founded upon
Justice, being granted to them by the Dukes Predecessors, and purchased by them
of the present Duke for six thousand Ducatoons. The Marquess answered that all
those Grants were upon condition that the Romish Religion should be freely
exercised amongst them, which yet they would never suffer. Master Weis still
pressing their sad condition, and the necessity of finding an expedient for
accommodation, etc. the Marquess desired him to apply himself to the poor
people, and to cause them to desist from Hostility, which would be the way to
obtain favor from the Duke: and no marvel though he moved this: For about
this time (through Gods mighty assistance) these poor people began so to
prevail, that their enemies began to fear what the success might be, and
therefore the Marquess labored to get the sword out of their hands by such a
stratagem as this.

Major Weis went to Perosa, propounding these things to the poor people: who
returned humble thanks to the Cantons for what they had already done in their
behalf; and said, that if the six Evangelical Cantons would engage that the
Treaty should be carried on upon honest and honorable terms, they were ready
to hearken to it; Otherwise they were resolved never to trust those who had so
often deceived them, and whose principle was, that Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics.

With this answer Master Weis returned, and sued for the enlargement of the
Prisoners, or that at least he might be suffered to speak with them: but
neither the one nor other would be granted; whereupon he returned to his
Masters, and upon his report to them, being discouraged from any farther
proceedings, they resolved to expect what would be done by other Princes, and
States.

May 1655. Letters were brought to Oliver Lord Protector of Enland of this
doleful news, whereupon he invited all the people of England to seek the Lord
by Humiliation, and Prayer, and withal, moved them to a liberal Contribution
for the succor of these poor souls. He sent also Master Samuel Morland as his
Envoy to the King of France, and Duke of Savoy to meditate on their behalf. He
wrote also to the King of Denmark, to the States of the United Provinces, and
to the Evangelical Cantons of the Switzers, requesting all their Mediations in
the behalf of these poor people.

May the twenty sixth 1655, Master Morland set out on his journey, and June the
first he came to the King of France at La Fere, to whom he delivered the Lord
Protectors Letters, wherein he solicited his Majesty to improve his power, and
interest with the Duke, that the cruel Order of Gastaldo might be recalled, and
the poor people restored to their ancient liberties, and habitations. The King
of France three days after returned an answer to the Lord Protectors Letter,
and Master Morland proceeded in his journey to the Court of Savoy, and arrived
at Rivole, where the Court was, June the 21. and demanded audience as the Lord
Protectors Envoy, which accordingly was granted: and at his appearing he made a
speech in the behalf of the poor people, and delivered the Lord Protectors
Letter.

Madam Royal, the Dukes Mother answered, That she could not but extremely
applaud the singular charity of his Highness the Lord Protector toward their
Subjects, whose condition had been presented to him so exceeding sad, and
l^mentable, as she perceived by Master Morl^nds discourse it was; yet withal
she could not but extremely admire that malice should proceed so far as to
clothe their fatherlike chastisements of their rebellious Subjects with so
black a character, thereby to render them odious to all their neighboring
Princes, and States with whom they desired to keep a good understanding,
especially with so great and powerful a Prince as the Lord Protector. Adding
that she doubted not but when the truth of all passages should be made known to
him, he would rest satisfied with the Dukes proceedings. Yet for his Highness
sake they would pardon their rebellious Subjects, and grant them such
privileges, and graces, as should show to the Lord Protector how great a
respect they bore both to his person, and Mediation: And withal Master Morland
was requested to go to Turin, where by the Dukes Order he was entertained with
all outward demonstrations of Civility, and respect imaginable during his abode
there.

Master Morland after a while pressed for his dispatch, and had it, and so
according to the Lord Protectors Order he went to Geneva.

There was Collected in England, and Wales toward the relief of these poor
souls the full sum of thirty eight thousand, ninety seven pounds, seven
shillings, and three pence, the greatest part whereof was at several times
transmitted to them; and what remained, being about nine thousands pounds, was
put out to Interest, that so both the Principal, and the Improvement might be
disposed of for their best advantage: and further to show what effects the Lord
Protectors intercession had, I find that presently after, the King of Sweden,
the King of Denmark, the States of the United Provinces, the Prince Elector
Palatine, the Elector of Brandenberg, the Duke of Wittenberg, and many other
Protestant Princes and States did either by their Letters to the Duke of Savoy,
or otherwise, declare their deep resentment of the bloody Massacre, especially
the Lantgrave of Hessen wrote most zealously in their behalf. They had also
many Consolatory Letters written to them from sundry particular Churches, viz.
From Franckfort, Zurick, Hanaw, Flushing, Middleburgh, etc. and large
Contributions according to their respective abilities. Diverse Commissioners
also were sent from England, and Holland to join with those of the Evangelical
Cantons for the procuring a well-grounded peace for those poor people: but
before they came, the Switzer Ambassador had concluded a Treaty with the French
Ambassador; and betwixt them, they had hudled up a Peace, the woeful effects
whereof these poor people were quickly sensible of; and to this day they labor
under heavy burdens laid upon their shoulders by their Popish Taskmasters: they
forbid them all manner of traffic for their sustenance: they rob them of
their goods, and estates; they drive them from their ancient habitations, and
force them to sell their Birthright for a mess of Pottage: They banish their
Ministers, that the Shepherds being gone, they may the more easily devour them:
they ravish their young women, and maidens, they murder the innocent as they
pass along the highways upon their occasions: they continually mock and
revile them, and threaten another Massacre, sevenfold more bloody than the
former: Through the malice and subtilty of their Popish adversaries their
Valleys are no other than a Dungeon, to which the Fort of La Torre serves as a
door, whereby at their pleasure they may let in a Troop of murderers utterly
to destroy and extirpate those innocent people: and notwithstanding all those
large supplies that have been sent them from England, and other States, yet so
great are the necessities of those poor hungry creatures, and so grievous are
the oppressions of their Popish adversaries, who lie in wait to bereave them of
whatsoever is given them, that some of them are yet ready ever and anon to eat
their own flesh for want of bread: their miseries are more sad, and grievous
than can be expressed; they are dying, even whilst they live: When that which
was collected for them is once spent, they must inevitably perish, unless the
Lord in whose hand are the hearts of Princes, shall incline the heart of their
Prince to pity these his poor, harmless, and faithful Subjects, who are so
far from thoughts of Rebellion, that could they but enjoy the freedom of
their Consciences in peace, they would be the first that would be ready to
sacrifice their lives for the good, and safety of his Royal Highness.

How long Lord, Holy, just, and true, etc. Rev. 6.10. If any desire to see a
fuller account of these things, together with the Letters and Transactions
about them, they may find them fully and faithfully set down by Master Samuel
Morland in his History of the Evangelical Churches in the Valleys of Piemont.

Here place the Eleventh Figure.

CHAP. XLVII. A brief Description of Piemont, and the Valleys thereof.
PIemont is so called, because it is situated a pede montium, or at the feet of
the Alps which separate Italy from France: It Is but a little spot of earth, yet
very pleasant, and of incredible fruitfulness. It Is bounded on the East with
Millan, Montferrat, and the Commonwealth of Genoa: on the South is the
Mediterranean Sea: On the West, and North part it has the Alps for a Bulwark,
by which it is separated on the West side from Provence, and Dauphine, and on
the North from Savoy, and the Country of Valley. It Is almost all covered with
high mountains, and watered with four great Rivers, viz. Po, Tanaro, Stura, and
Dora, besides which there are about twenty eight Rivers more, great and small,
which render it exceeding fruitful in Cattle, Wine, Corn, Hay, Nuts, and many
other fruits in great abundance.

The principal Valleys are, on the North part those two, Aosta, and Susa; on
the South side Stura and some others: and in the midland, Lucerna, Angrogni^
Roccapiatta, Pramol, Perosa, and Saint Martino. The Valley of (...)* been, and
still is a part of Dauphine as far as La Capella, which is situated at the
lower end thereof, and divides it from Perosa: which was the ordinary passage
of the French Armies into Italy.

These Valleys, especially that of Angrognia, Pramol, and Saint Martino are
strongly fortified by nature, by reason of their many difficult passages
through Rocks and mountains: as if from the beginning it had been designed by
the all-wise God to be as a Cabinet, wherein he would keep some rare Jewel.

Those Valleys of Piemont which have been for some hundreds of years inhabited
by the Waldenses, are Lucerna, Perosa, and Saint Martino* Lucerna contains
fifteen miles in length: the highest Communalties thereof, viz. Bobio, Villaro,
and La Torre are for the greatest part mountains: but Lucerna, Saint Giovanni,
Fenile, Campiglione, and Garcigliana, though they have both on the North and
South side a little of the mountains, yet they extend themselves into a very
fair Plain.

Angrognia is but a little Valley on the North side of Lucerna, as also Rorata,
and Vallon, which are on the South side of Lucerna wholly within the mountains:
So is also Roccapiatta, and Pramol, which are enclosed between the Valleys of
Lucerna and Perosa.

The Communalty of La Torre took its name from an high Tower which stood upon a
little hill near Bourg: But Francis the first, King of France, considering how
prejudicial it might be to the affairs and interest of France, and the safety
of Pignorole, he caused it to be demolished. But the Duke of Savoy rebuilt it,
Anno 1652. which afterward served as a slaughterhouse of many poor innocent
souls.

Bricheras, which is joined to the Valley of Lucerna, is on the East of
Angrognia, and Saint Giovanni, and on the South of Roccapiatta, almost all in
the Plain.

Perosa, and Saint Martino are on the North of Lucerna, Angrognia, and
Roccapiatta, situated in such sort that the Valley of Perosa is at the lower
end, and on the East are the Valleys of Saint Martino, and Pragela.

The Valley of Perosa is about six miles long: and its distributed, part in the
mountains, and part in the Plains, and very fruitful hills. At the lower end of
it are the Communalties of Port, Saint Germano, and Villaro: In the middle,
Pinachia, and in the higher part that of Perosa, where is the City and Citadel
of Perosa, whence the Valley takes its name.

The Valley of Saint Martino is eighth miles in length, on the West of the
Valley of Perosa, included between the Valleys of Lucerna, and Clusone, in the
highest part of the Alps, which border upon the Valley of Queyras, containing
eleven Communalties: viz. Rioclaret, Faet, Rodoreto, Salsa, Macel, Maneglia,
Chabrans, Traverses, Bovile, and Saint Martino, which gives the name to this
Valley. This indeed is the poorest, yet the strongest of all by reason of its
situtation.

In these Valleys before the late horrid Massac^^^ 1655. there were fourteen
Churches of the Protestants which Co^^^^^ed two Classes, or Colloques, and
those two Classes, one Synod for their Ecclesiastical Government. The one was
the Colloque of Lucerna consisting of the Churches of Saint Giovanni, La Torre,
Villaro, Bobi, Rorata, and Angrognia, to which was annexed that of Roccapiatta,
which is between the Valley of Lucerna, and Perosa, situated upon those little
hills which separate the two valleys.

The other was the Colloque of the valley of Perosa, and Saint Martino,
containg four Churches in the valley of Perosa, viz. Villaro, Saint Germano,
which made but one Church, Pinachia, La Cappella, and Pramoh* in the valley of
Saint Martino, were three Churches, viz. Villa Secca, Maneglius, Prasi.

The Church of Saint Giovanni contains within it a very fair Plain, and little
hills, very fruitful, and abounding with Corn, Vines, Chestnuts, Figgs, Olives,
and other fruits, but it wants Pastures, and Woods, so that they have not many
Cattle, but only some Oxen to till the ground, and to carry their wine to
Turin, and other places to sell. This Church has annexed unto it Lucerna,
Lucernetta, the Vineyards of Lucerna, Fenile, Bubiana, and Bricheras. In the
City of Lucerna the third part of the Inhabitants were Protestants. In
Lucernetta, and the Vineyard of Lucerna, almost all the Inhabitants professed
the Reformed Religion time out of mind.

Fenile is lower on the other side of the River Pelice toward the South, being
a more fatt and fertile soil than any place in St. Giovanni, in all sorts of
Fruit and Grain.

Bubiana, as to the Plain, is like to Fenile, and nearly adjoining to it: but
the Protestants have often been driven out of it, so that what they possessed
was mostly in the hills, where they have little Corn, and Wine; but abundance
of Chestnuts: So that the inhabitants, which were about fifty Families, were
generally poor, living by their hard labor, and by their profit which they
made of wood, which they carried to sell to the towns of Babiana, and Lucerna.

The hills of Bricheras, where there have been always Protestant Families, are
like those of Saint Giovanni.

The Church of La Torre is the same for situation and quality with that of
Saint Giovanni, containing one Plain, where is the Town of La Torre, and hills
adorned with the same kind of fruits as those of Saint Giovanni.

The Church of Villaro adjoyns to that of La Torre, but is a little higher
toward Dauphine, containing a little Plain where is the Town, and the hills
adorned with Vines, and Chestnuts.

The Church of Bobio is near to that of Villaro, being a little higher toward
the Mountain on the West, but as fertile as that of Villaro: and being
environed with many Mountains, and having fat Pastures, the Inhabitants had
many oxen, Kine, and smaller Cattle, together with milk, and wool in abundance,
as also they had many Chestnuts, which being cleansed, and dried, they sold, or
exchanged for other Commodities.

The Church of Rorata is a little Valley, situated on the other side of the
River Pelice, on the West of Lucerna, being bounded by the Mountains of
Villaro. It abounds in Pastures, and is very fruitful* especially in Chestnuts.

The Church of Angrogna is North-West to that of St. Giovanni, toward Perosa,
in a Mountainous Count^y, but fruitful in Chestnuts, Corn, and Pastures,
environed with fruitful Mountains, which yielded good Pastures in the Summer
season.

The Church of Roccapiatta contains four parcels, viz. that of Roccapiatta, St.
Bartholomeo, Perustine, and La Inverso delle Port. In these three latter there
grow abundance of rich Wines, Chestnuts, and other good fruits. In Roccapiatta
they have Corn, Pasture, and Fruits, but no Wine.

The Church of Villaro, and St. Germano is situated in the lowest part of
Perosa, about a mile from Pignorolio: the West and North part of Villaro on
this side the River Clusone, belong to the King of France, and St. Germano to
the Duke of Savoy on the other side of the said River, which running through
the whole length of the said Valley, separates the Kings Territories from those
of the Dukes. These two places of Villaro, and St. Germano contain a little
P^ain on both sides the River, the rest is in hills, yielding Corn, Wine, and
Fruits.

The Church of Pinachia is within the French Dominions, adjoining on the West
part to that of Villaro, and contains a fair, and beautiful Plain, on the
North-side fenced with pleasant hills: On the West is the Town, and fort of
Perosa; on the South, the River Clusone, and some hills, but scarce any Plain
at all. It abounds with Corn, Wine, Nuts, Grass, and other Fruits.

The Church of La Capella is on the West of that of Pinachia in the upper end
of the Valley of Perosa; on the West it joins to the Valley of Pragela (which
belongs to the King of France) On the East to the Citadel of Perosa: It has
several very fruitful hills in it: It has annexed to it Pomare, and Inverso
del Perosa, and some other small Villages, called Le Mean, making a little
Communalty at the foot of the Valley of Pragela.

The Church of Pramol is situated on a Mountain between the Valleys of Lucerna,
and Perosa, at the feet whereof grow a few (...), and good Fruits: In the
highest part is Corn, and much wood, and Pasture ground.

The Church of Villa Secca is at the lowest part of the Valley of St. Martino,
where there is almost no Plain but where the river Germanasco takes its
course; the Hills which lie South from the said River are very cold, so that
there grow no Vines: but those on the North which lie open to the South-sun are
hot, and so have many Vines. In general, its tolerably fruitful in Corn,
Fruits, and Pasture.

The Church of Maneglia which is on the West part of Villa Secca, comprehends
three little Communalties, viz. Maneglia, Machel, and Salsa: All are in a
mountainous place, but exceeding fruitful in Corn, Pasture, etc. except only
in the highest parts thereof.

The Church of Prali is situated in the uppermost part of the Valley of Saint
Martino, and contains two Communalties, viz. Prali, and Rodoret, bounded on the
South with the Alps, and the Valley of Lucerna; On the West by the Valley
Queyras in Dauphine; and on the North by the Valley of Pragela: Here is nothing
but Hay and Grass.

Generally in all these Churches (except on the tops of the mountains) there
are plenty of Fruits, especially of Chestnuts, and in some places there are
vast spaces of Ground yielding almost nothing else: as in the little Hills of
Bubiana, and all along the Valley of Lucerna, and in the South parts of the
Valley of Perosa: So that the Inhabitants in those places dry, and cleanse great
quantities of them, part whereof they keep for their own use, and the rest they
sell, or exchange for Corn, and that, quantity for quantity, with the
Inhabitants of the Plain, it being a great part of their food in Piemont. They
also dry these Nuts in an Oven, or on a Kilne, and make thereof an excellent
sort of Bisquet, which they first string as they do their Beads, and so hang
them up in a moist place the better to preserve them. These they frequently
make use of instead of Maqueroons, and such sweetmeats.

Of the late Persecution of the Church of Christ in Poland, Anno Christi 1656.
THe All-wise, and holy God, whose ways of Providence are always righteous,
though often secret, and unsearchable, has made it the constant lot, and
portion of his people in this world to follow his Son in bearing his Cross,
and suffering persecutions. For they that are borne after the flesh, do always
persecute them that are borne after the spirit. But scarcely have any sort of
the Churches enemies more clearly followed the pernicious way of Caine herein,
than has that Antichristian faction of Rome, that Mother of Harlots and
Abominations, whose garments are died red with the blood of Saints, which they
have always cruelly shed, and made themselves drunk with. And amongst those
chosen and faithful witnesses, the Lord seems very signally to have raised up
those Christians, who (though dispersed in diverse Countries) have been commonly
known by the name of Waldenses, who for some Centuries of years have lived
amongst their enemies as Lambs amongst Wolves, to bear their testimonies to the
Truths of Christ, against the Apostasies, and Blasphemies of Rome; for which
they have been killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep for the
slaughter.

One part of this little flock, and remnant which the Lord has left, and
reserved, are scattered partly in the Valleys of Piemont, of whose Tragical
sufferings you have had a faithful account in the precedent Chapter: the other
part of this poor, but precious remnant, have been dispersed in the Kingdoms
of Bohemia, and Poland, whose sufferings, together with the Lords signal
Providence about them, are now to be spoken of, as they have been related to
the Lord Protector O.C. and the State here by two godly persons delegated by
those persecuted Churches, which are now the sad Monuments of their enemies
rage, and of the Lords sparing mercy.

These sometime flourishing Churches were by degrees worn out by the constant
underminings, and open outrages of the Antichristian party; being first driven
out of Bohemia into Poland: and then after their taking root, and spreading in
Poland into a numerous company, they were forced out of their chiefest Cities
there, and at last by the Jesuited, and enraged Popish Army, were persecuted in
their few hiding places with fire and sword.

Their Ministers were tortured to death by most exquisite, and unheard of
Barbarism, by cutting out of the tongues of some, pulling out the eyes, and
cruelly mangling the bodies of others. Yet did not their rage, and brutish
cruelty reach only to the Ministers, but to private persons also; yea, even to
women, and to young children, whose heads they cut off, and laid them at their
dead mothers breasts.

Nay their rage brake out, not only against the living (not one of whom they
spared that fell into their hands) but also against the dead, plucking the
bodies of Honorable persons, and others out of their graves, tearing them to
pieces, and exposing them to public scorn.

But the chiefest eyesore, and object of their fury was the City of Lesna,
which after plundering and murdering of all whom they found therein, they
burned to ashes, and laid it in the rubbish. Only the Lord in mercy having
alarmed the City by the report of their enemies approach, the greatest part of
the Inhabitants (being three famous Churches) saved themselves by flight, and
are now wandering up and down in Silesia, the Marquisate of Brandenburg,
Lusatia, and Hungary, poor, destitute, afflicted, and naked, the relation
whereof you have in this ensuing Narrative written in Latin by some of
themselves, and called Lesnae Excidium.

The History of the destruction of Lesna faithfully related.
LEsna a City of great Poland, almost thirty years ago began to be famous both
far and near; but now being suddenly and utterly razed has nothing left beside
the name and fame thereof. For the fuller discovery of this business from the
beginning, we must briefly relate the Original and progress of this town.

When above seven hundred years ago, Mieczislaus, then Duke of Poland, took to
wife the daughter of Boleslaus Duke of Bohemia, and together with her received
the Christian Faith, it happened that among those of the Bohemian Nobility that
accompanied him, there was one Peter de Bernstein, whom, because he was a
person endowed with many virtues, Mieczislaus was willing to detain him in
Poland, and to that end bestowed upon him rich possessions, the chief whereof
was a Village called Lezsyna, (i. e. a grove of hasle-trees) upon the very
confines of the lower Silesia, being situate twelve miles from Wratislavia,
five from Glogaw, and ten from Posnania. From this place therefore of his
residence, Peter de Bernstein taking the rise of his denomination, according to
the custom of the Nation, he and all his posterity were called Lezscynii, and
were afterward admitted to all sorts of Dignities in the Realm; so that of
this family there were never wanting some or other that were Captains,
Governors of Castles, Palatines, Marshals, Chancellours, Bishops, or
Archbishops, even to this day: and besides this, for their noble management of
affairs in several Embassyes to the Roman Emperor, they were adorned with the
title of Earls of the Empire, which they still enjoy. But Leszcyna it self
begun by little and little to change its name, and by contraction was called
Lessna, and their neighbor Germans called it Lissa* This Village, something
above one hundred of years ago had the dignity and title of a market town
granted to it by the famous King Sigismund, and tradesmen were invited hither
out of the neighboring Silesia, and so the use of the German tongue was
brought in together with them. As for Religion, it was reformed in Lesna about
the same time, by the most illustrious Count Andrew, Palatine of Bernstien,
according to the rites of the Bohemian Confession, which it has retained to
this day, and became as it were the Metropolis of the Churches of that
Confession, throughout all the greater Poland. And when, after the year 1620. a
very sharp persecution was raised against the Professors of the Gospel in
Bohemia; and not long after the Ministers and Nobility were banished, they were
fain to seek refuge in Poland, whom that most pious Noble man, the Lord Raphael
de Lesna, Palatine of Belse, received under his protection, appointing Lesna,
Wlodava, and Baranovia for their places of refuge. But for as much as the
greater part did seat themselves at Lesna because of the neernesse thereof, and
not long after, a far greater company flocked thither out of Silesia (for there
also the butchery of souls grew wonderful fierce, in the years 1628. and 1629.)
it came to pass that Lesna, by the addition of many streets, grew into a large
City, having three market places, four Churches, a large School, above twenty
streets, one thousand six hundred houses, two thousand freemen of the City, and
abundance of other company. There was built also a very fair Church for the
service of God according to the rites of the Augustane Confession, which had
over it three Pastors, learned men; and a School for the mother tongue with
some Schoolmasters, beside the Free-schoole, which had a learned man of the
forementioned Confession appointed over it, by the title of Prorector. The
Citizens also having ordered themselves according to the best policy they
could, there were found out handsome ways for a public revenue that made no
noise, and were little felt, and without any man's damage or burden, so that
they were able for some years to maintain workmen for the compassing of the
City about with a Bulwark and Trench, and for the building of gates with walls
and fair turrets: And lastly, there was built a very fair Courthouse in the
middle of the marketplace of the old City; there was scarce the like in all
great Poland, except at Posnania. In a word, Civility, trading, merchandise
(for all things were here bought and sold) and Religion did so flourish here,
that this City did not come behind any City in Poland for its admirable
pleasantness. All this was matter of joy, not only to those pious Christians
that were scattered out of several places for the Gospels sake, and here
gathered together under the protection of God, but to others also that came
hither from all parts, as strangers: but it galled the enemies of the Gospel
extremely, so that it made them leave no design unassayed for the overthrow of
this City of refuge for the godly. At the first ( Annis 1628, and 1629.) they
made use of several accusations and slanders to King Sigismund the third,
suggesting to him that it was a confluence of all sorts of men that were
enemies and traitors to his Majesty; that it was good to nip them in the bud,
etc. But through the prudence of that great Senator, the Lord of the place,
whose wisdom went beyond their envy, and who knew well enough how to
counter-work all malicious projects of that kind, all those their
battering-rams were at that time used in vain.

But, Anno 1653. after that the Swedes were broken by the Emperors army in
Germany, and were driven out of Silesia, new plots were hatched at Glogaw to
send out one or two of the Emperors regiments, who should suddenly invade
Lesna, sack the town, and put the inhabitants to the sword, or at least scatter
them. But it pleased God so to order it, that this plot was discovered by some
of themselves two days before the appointed time, and so vanished into smoke,
though the smoke of their devices did not yet cease to rise. For after the
death of the most illustrious Prince Palatine of Belse, when his estate was
divided amongst his sons and heirs, and the County of Lesna fell to the
illustrious Lord Boguslaus, his third son, then newly returned from traveling,
the Plotters were not wanting so to lie in wait to ensnare this candidate of
great wisdom and virtue, that after they had wearied him for some years with
the promises of honors (unto which there was no door of entrance but by
entertaining the Roman Catholic Religion) at last they enticed him to profess
Popery. But however they heaped many honors upon him, procuring him some
Captainships, afterward the Generalship of great Poland, and lastly the
Arch-treasurership of the Realm, yet could they not procure his hatred of the
Professors of the Gospel, and the dissipation of his subjects, which was the
thing they hoped for, but he still preserved entire to his Lesna those
privileges both Civil and Religious, which his father, of blessed memory, had
promised, offered, or confirmed to them. They attempted therefore this other
device: The Bishop of Posnania ventured to redemand the old Parish Church,
because it was of ancient foundation, and pretended that it might not any
longer be left to the use of Heretics. The Lord Treasurer answered, that his
Grandfather ( Andrew Palatine of Brenstien) had built another Church for the
Catholics (whose number was very small in the town, scarce ever above three or
four Citizens) to exercise their Religion in, and endowed it with revenues to
that purpose, that the greater number of Citizens might enjoy the greater
Church. But all was in vain, though he doubled the maintenance of the Roman
Parish Priest: for Anno 1652. they brought the Lord Count before the tribunal
of the Realm, where the cause must needs go against him, the very same persons
being accusers, witnesses and Judges; yet he obtained that this Church should
not suddenly be taken away from his Subjects the inhabitants of old Lesna until
they had built themselves a new one. This building they presently set about
with the help of foreign Churches: (according as they were in a capacity to
help, things being every where in confusion) But when the adversaries saw that
it went on apace, and that this was like to be bigger than the other (for so
great now was the multitude of Citizens of this Confession, that the old Church
was not able to contain them) they began again to mutter and threaten, that
this might not be endured, that the Heretics should have a bigger Church than
the Catholics; that they did but build this also for the Catholics, etc.

At length the irruption of the Swedes into Poland (Anno 1655. gave them the
long wished for occasion of oppressing and rooting out not only the Lesnians,
but also all the Professors of the Gospel (or as they were wont to be called,
the Dissenters from the Roman Religion) throughout Poland. For although the
Papists themselves had transacted with the Swedes at their coming out of
Pomerania (in the agreement of Uscia) and had delivered to them expressly and
by name the chief Cities, Posnania, Kalisch, Fraustat, Meseritz, and Lesna, and
the rest, after some weak resistance, had yielded themselves up to the Swedes,
yet while the King of Sweden was slowly, and as it proved, dangerously busied
in Prusia, they took counsel together for the resuming of their arms, to fight
for the liberty of their Country, and the Catholic Religion (as they call it)
to drive the Swedes out of the Country, and to root out all the dissenters in
gross. That this their purpose might make the quicker progress, and be set on
the more strongly, there were Jesuits and Monks sent out every way, to
intimate these things to the multitude, and to encourage them to so glorious an
undertaking, compelling those that were slow with the thunderbolt of
Excommunication, and promising the relaxation of the pains of Purgatory, and
eternal rewards to them that were forward. To this end King Casamire being
recalled out of Silesia, they commanded the Nobility to flock to him, and to
give the King of Sweden a meeting in his return out of Borussia. The Commonalty
also they stirred up against the Professors of the Gospel, making themselves
their furious leaders; and such was their success, that in lower Poland a
great number of families (it is not yet known how many, because the furious
tumult still continues) almost within the compass of a month (in February and
March) were miserably butchered, men and women, young and old being murdered
without distinction, all, save such as could escape into the neighboring parts
of Hungary, and so save their lives by flight. But the Nobility of the greater
Poland, most of them having retired themselves into Silesia, began there to
gather themselves into small companies, in the beginning of April, and to break
forth; by whose coming the rest being encouraged, made a great slaughter of the
Swedes that were garrisoned in the small towns, so that General Muller was fain
to go forth with an army of Swedes to restrain them.

As for Lesna, the hereditary Lord thereof, the Treasurer of the Kingdom, was
gone into Borussia to salute the King of Sweden some way to take care for the
safety of his Country: But about the beginning of April he returned to Lesna
without seeing him, the King then being full of action, and ranging up and
down. This business procured much more envy both to himself and the City, as
if he had plotted with the Swedes against his Country, having never been true
and faithful either to the Church or his Country: therefore they breathed out
flames, and belched out threats so much the more fiercely both against him and
his City. However there were not wanting such as by private messages gave him
hope of pardon, if he would but withdraw himself from them, as afterward he
did. But the enemies prepared themselves to destroy that so populous a City by
force (if they could) or else by flames, furnishing themselves with many sorts
of weapons for that purpose. Of this doing although the inhabitants of Lesna
had notice by several messengers, yet a fatal security prevailed with them to
think that there was no fear of such an enemy as was not furnished either with
Infantry or Artilery for such a design. Upon Easter day a (...) of Poles broke
into some territories (belonging to an eminent Professor of the Gospel) near
Lesna: for whom they made diligent search, but finding that he was from home
(for he had retired himself to Lesna for Religion sake) they plundered all his
movable goods, and took his ^ervant ( Martin Multz, a Bohemian) and hanging a
great stone about his neck, threw him into the river that ran by, and so
drowned him.

On the third Holy Day in Easter the report was very hot that the Swedes had
lost all, and that the King was slain: upon which account when the Lord
Treasurer did betake himself to Wratislavia in Sil^sia, the Citizens of Lesna
were something afraid, although the Commanders of the Swedes that were there in
Garrison (being three co^ours of horse) did encourage them; as did also the
Administrator of the City and County of Lesna, who requiring anew the oath of
fidelity from the Citizens, did promise them to stay with them, and bid them be
of good courage. Being lifted up with this hope, and drawn on with the promises
of new Auxiliary forces to come very suddenly to them, they promised themselves
all manner of security, so that no man took any care to get out of the way, or
to carry any thing of his goods to a safer place: yet they kept strong guards
night and day, sometimes the third part of the Citizens, and sometimes half
being upon duty. The Swedish horse also ever and anon made excursions to see
what the enemy was a doing, and whether they were near. But they never brought
back any other news, but that there were no footsteps or signs of any enemy
appearing: Yea, even that very day in which the Poles came in the afternoon,
the Swedes returned with good booty, but not a word of the enemy. But about
three days after upon Thursday, April the 27. an army of the Polonian
Nobility, mixed with a rout of peasants, showed themselves unexpectedly out of
the Woods, and anon they drew forth into the open field, and so set themselves
within sight of the City, about five or six furlongs from the Suburbs. When
this was perceived, the alarm was given, and the Citizens hasten to their
arms, and place themselves on the walls; yet not knowing who they were, and
with what intent they came, and wondering much, why, according to the custom
they did not send forth a Trumpeter. (For that which they did bruit abroad
afterward, and many perhaps believed, that the Lesnians gave the occasion of
hostility by killing their Trumpeter, is just nothing: Heaven and earth will
bear witness that this was devised merely to color over the hainousness of
the fact:) At length they begin their work with firing a Brick-kiln, that stood
not far from the Suburbs. Then the Swedish Troopers (about one hundred and
fifty in number) which were already mounted and gone out of the City, going a
little farther, encountered with the Enemy in light skirmishes, for the space
of two hours; in which many of the Poles, and some of the Swedes were slain.
But while the Swedes were earnest with the Citizens for some help, as it were
to defend the Suburbs from further burning, some were drawn forth (about
seventy of the younger Citizens) who mixed themselves rashly and confusedly
among the Horsemen; which when the Poles saw, they feighned a flight,
returning toward the Wood: But as soon as they perceived that they had drawn
them far enough from the Walls, they wheeled about, some fetching a compass to
come behind the Lesnians, and so to get between them and home, and the rest
returning straight upon them, fell on in a full body. The Swedish Horse when
they saw this, turned their backs, leaving the Foot to the mercy of the Enemy;
but the Poles followed them so close at heels, that two Colors (about four
hundred men) passed through the Suburbs to the very gate, and wanted but little
of entering the City it self with them, had not some good confident fellow,
ventured to step in between, and bar the Gate against them, while others of the
Citizens sent a shower of Bullets among them, and so beat them back: So the
Poles being glad to stop, yea, and retire (just at Sunset) set fire on the
outward parts of the Suburbs, and burnt some Granaries and Wind-mills, thereby
making the whole night light to us; while themselves returned through the Wood
to Oseczno, which the Germans call Storoknest. The City being thus filled with
fear, spent the whole night without sleep; the men in watching upon the Walls,
and the women in gathering themselves together in the Marketplaces and
Churchyards, and other open places, and there wearying Heaven with Psalms and
Prayers to God.

When the morning came, and no enemy appeared, the Citizens went forth and
fetched in the slain to bury them; among whom were found about forty Citizens,
but above a hundred of the Poles, and among them their chief Commander himself,
Cresky, who formerly had taken Pay under the Swedish General Banier, and was
accounted more expert then the rest: In the mean time it was hotly reported
that the Administrator of the County and many of his Retinue were wanting and
gone; whereupon the courage of the Citizens began to fail, and they went to the
Senate, to desire leave to send away their wives and children, that if the
enemy should come again they might be the more courageous in defending
themselves, not being daunted with the outcries and tears of the women. Some
dissuaded them with good reasons, saying, That those that should be sent forth
under pretense of convoying the rest in safety, would not return again, and so
the rest of the Citizens should be left in greater fears; That the Spartans of
old were wont to take their wives and children to the war, with them, that
having them in their eyes, they might fight the more stoutly for their safety.
But all was in vain, though the Swedish Commanders also endeavored to hinder
the flight of the richer sort, which they could not do, being overcome with the
cries of the multitude. There were some Ecclesiastics also who desired leave
to depart for a few days, because that the Antichristian fury was bent chiefly
against them: But the Senate left it to their consciences, whether in such a
case they could leave the people then when they would most need instruction and
comfort; especially if wounded and dying. But the others persisted in their
importunity, and there went out before Noon about three hundred Wagons, which
were all that could be got in the City.

After this there followed some quietness, with hopes that the Enemy would
return no more, having found by experience how well able the Lesnians were to
defend themselves and theirs; and perhaps they had never returned indeed (as it
was know afterward) had they not been encouraged by that Hight of the
Citizens: For two days after the twenty eight of April, there was a Letter
delivered to the Consul from the Commanders of the Polish Forces, in which they
demanded the surrender of the City, and gave them hope of good usage; but if
they would not embrace that offer, they then threatened to destroy them with
fire and Sword, having now such an addition of Foot soldiers, that they were
able to take the City by storm. They added moreover that they had received a
Letter from the Lord Treasurer, wherein he entreated them to spare his Lesna
upon their submission, saying, that he had already given them a command to set
open their Gates. If ever there were indeed any such command, it must needs
have been suppressed by some one; so that the Citizens never knew of it;
otherwise they would have provided a little better for the safety of themselves
and their goods. But so it must needs be, that our sins (through others
treachery) should be brought to punishment. This message of the Poles to the
Senate did wonderfully daunt the Citizens; For these things were not kept
secret, but before the Consul could call together the Senate and the Commanders
of the soldiery, the report thereof had run through the whole City, as also
that there was very little Gunpowder left, and they had not wherewithal to
defend themselves; so that the Citizens being taken with a pannick fear, cast
away their weapons and courage together, and betook themselves to flight;
especially when presently after, they who were on the Guard, discovered the
Body of the Enemies coming the same way they came before; For they forsaking
every man his station, hasted home, advising their wives, children, and
neighbors to fly, themselves leaving their weapons upon the Walls, or at the
Gates; or afterward casting them away in the fields, that they might not be a
burden to them. When the Swedish soldiers saw the Citizens thus in amaze and
running away, they also soon mounted, not to meet the Enemy (as before) but to
run away too from the face of the Enemy. Then followed the Senate in such a
trembling fit of fear, that every one run out at the Gate that was next him, or
over the very Forts and Ditches; so that in one hours space, a most populous
City was left destitute of inhabitants: Save a company of sick and aged people,
and a few others that could not so suddenly get away, or for some other cause
were necessitated to await the issue. But all hastened to those Moorish woods,
by which Poland is parted from Silesia, in such confusion, that when the
nearest passes (toward Thorlang and Krosken) were not wide enough, they
tumbled by Troops to other passes ( Strizwik, Prybisch, and Hundsloch) that
were more remote. The Swedish Troops went to Fraustad, and from thence, taking
the Garrison along with them, toward Meseritz: But the passage through the
Moors was very difficult, in regard that the company crouding one upon another,
as if the Enemy were just at their heels, did not only many of them stick in
the deep Mud (in vain crying out for help to those that passed by, every one
being solicitous only for his own preservation) but were also mired and lost!
Here children lost their parents, and parents their children, wives their
husbands, and one friend another; so that they could scarce find one another
again; in two, three, and four days time.

The Enemy by a Trumpeter, who was sent to Posnania gate enquired what the
Citizens meant to do; to whom John Kolechen, a learned Citizen, and well
acquainted with many of the Nobility (in confidence whereof, having sent away
his wife he adventured to stay) came forth and answered, That the Gates stood
open, the Swedish Enemies were gone, and the rest of the Citizens stood to
their courtesy, and desired their favor.

A little after that, came the illustrious Grzymaltowsky with many of the
Nobility to the same Gate, and when the aforesaid Kolechen, with another in his
company, had gone out to them and scarcely persuaded them that the City was
forsaken, and that there was no treachery; they went in, and when they were
disposed into the next fair houses, they were entertained with a noble supper
(which was prepared to sweeten them a little, if it might be) and had plenty of
Wine out of Dlugosses Cellar, who was a rich Senator.

At last when they were half Drunk, they set upon Kolechen with threats, and
would have made him their Prisoner, but that he escaped wonderfully out of
their hands, and saved himself by flight. But they durst not stay all night in
the City, for fear the Swedes and Citizens should set upon them unawares out of
some Ambuscado; and so they returned to their own company, and in the morning
with many hundred Wagons they came back, killing all they met, and setting
themselves to plunder the City. Here then you might have seen strange examples
of barbarous cruelty on the one side, and blockish folly on the other. For
though no man made resistance, yet like Mad Dogs they flew upon all that either
came out or were drawn out of the holes wherein they had hid themselves. Of
some they pulled out their eyes; Of some they cut off their Noses and Tongues;
Of others they cut off their Hands and Feet; others they stabbed and slashed,
and so butchered them with innumerable wounds, that it could not be known who
they were: And (which was more) they spared not his Highness, Prince Frederick,
Landgrave of Hassia, though dead, whom they had slain half a year before at
Costena, and who was decently Embalmed by the Lessians, and kept laid up in the
Chapel of the New-Church upon a Scaffold, till he might be transported to his
own Country: They first rifled his Coffin, which was handsomely adorned, taking
away his silver and guilt keys, and all the silk that was about it; then they
set upon the Princes corpse, and took away his silk robe, lined with Ermines,
and so left him once again naked, and lying on the ground. But (after the
burning of the City, his body being found in the same place, untouched by the
fire) he was clothed again by the ancient Lesnians, and put up in his Coffin,
and buried in a certain place, where he is still honorably kept. But that mad
rabble showed abundance of folly in this, that whereas they might have made
Lesna their nest (the Swedes having Garrisoned themselves in the strongest
places of the Province) or at least might have gathered together the richest of
the plunder; (for there was such abundance of victuals, wares, housholdstuff of
all sorts, and treasure that was brought hither from other places, as to a
place of safety, that a thousand Wagons could scarce have carried it away in
many days) yet such was their over-eager desire of their destroying this hated
City, that the very same day; yea before noon, they set fire to the City and
Suburbs in every street, (for the Wagons which they brought with them were not
empty, but loaded with Torches, Pitch, Straw, and such other combustible
matter) and so cruelly destroyed that most pleasant City, together with all
that abundance of all sorts of things that was in it.

This fire lasted three whole days, and there were those that took care that
nothing should escape it; for when the New-buildings of the New-churches, did
not easily take fire, they brought Straw, Pitch, and dry wood; and put under
the roofs and the inside of the steeples, and so forced them to take fire: And
they came again upon the third day (1. May) and whatsoever was left they set
fire to again. They burnt also the very Wind-mills, whereof there were seventy
about the City; and a very pleasant Park of the Countesses, which lay close by
the Castle; that every place might be filled with spectacles of cruelty, and at
length it might come to be said, En cineres ubi Lesna fuit!

Where fairest Lesna stood of old,
Now naught but Ashes we behold!
The Citizens sadly beholding these flames some miles off, ran thither next day
by Troops; whether out of a desire of quenching the fire (if it were possible)
or else to save something out of the flames; (for most through fear had gone
away empty handed) but the Enemy came upon them; and although they stoutly
defended themselves, and slew many of their Enemies, yet many of themselves
were slain; and many others also on the days following, when some Villages
that belonged to the County of Lesna, and were inhabited by professors of the
Gospel, were in like manner burnt down. There perished in these flames many
aged and sick people, that could not get away; besides such abundance of
houses, household stuff of all sorts, precious wares, corn (many thousand
bushels whereof were brought hither) libraries and other things, that the loss
would amount to many Tuns of gold; and many thousands were thereby reduced to
mere beggary. But that which was saddest of all, was, that the Church of the
faithful, that was here gathered together out of diverse places and Countries,
to enjoy the pure worship of God, was so utterly overthrown, that it cannot but
cry out with Sion of old, when it was rased by the Babylonians, Lament. 1. and
3. O all ye that pass by, behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger!
For he has sent a fire into my bones, and it prevails against me; he has
made me a desolation, so that I am not able to rise up; my children are
desolate, because the Enemy prevailed. Sion spreads forth her hands, and
there is none to comfort her. I called for my lovers, but they deceived me.
Mine Enemies chased me sore, like a Bird, without cause. They have cut off my
life in the Dungeon. Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: Thou
said, Fear not; It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because
his compassions fail not.

It must not be concealed what wonder happened the first day of the burning of
the City about evening, at Czirna (which is the first Town of Silesia, next to
Lesna, about two miles distant) Some of the Lesnians went out to look upon the
sad smoke of their Country; and as they were looking, there fell from the
clouds which carried the smoke over Silesia, together with the soot, a leaf of
burnt paper, which when they took up, they found to be a leaf of the Bohemian
Bible, containing the 6 th. and part of the 7 th. chapters of Matthew; where
those words of Christ came first to sight, With what measure ye meet, it shall
be measured to you again; with many other of Christ's exhortations to trust in
the fatherly Providence of God. This leaf was presented to the Lord of the
place; and a Lesnian Physician, who was there by chance, that read and
interpreted it, and diverse others, can bear witness to the truth hereof; and
the Lord of the place laid it up among his rarities! What now should Sion do,
but cry out under the cruel oppression of the Enemy, Render unto them a
recompense, O Lord, according to the works of their hands, Lament. 3.64. And
indeed God began to revenge his peoples wrongs the fourth day after, when they
furiously assaulted Costena, a Town four miles from Lesna, where they were
often repulsed stoutly by the Swedish Garrison; and having suffered a great
slaughter (about five hundred of them being wanting) they were forced to retire
in great confusion. The like also they met withal at Kalissia, and other
places, being slain and put to flight by the Swedes. Herein it happened unto them
much after the same manner, as it did to Tilly formerly when he had ruined
Magdeburg, the God of vengeance manifesting himself the avenger of his people:
And now they begin to acknowledge and upbraid one another with their folly; the
Nobles, in that they have spoiled their mart and treasury; and the Clergy, in
that it is happened otherwise than they intended. For their purpose was, utterly
to ruin the Heretics (as they term them) with their nest; but now that they
see the nest spoiled, and the birds saved, it is much more matter of grief and
vexation than of joy to them. For here God performed what he promised of old to
Baruch, I will give thee (in the midst of thy Countries ruins) thy life for a
prey, Jer. 45.5. So God gave to thousands of his worshippers, who were snatched
out of the midst of those ruins, their life for a prey, having set bounds to
the fury of the Devil, which he could not pass; as he did of old, when he gave
Job into his hands, as to all that he had, but so, that he should spare his
life. Blessed be the name of the Lord. Truly we have cause to say with David
(Psalm 124.) If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up
against us, then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled
against us, then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our
soul; then the proud waters had gone over our soul: Blessed be the Lord, who
has not given us a prey to their teeth: Our soul is escaped, as a Bird out of
the snare of the Fowlers; the snare is broken, and we are escaped; our help is
in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. Oh the wonderful
providence of our God! which then saves when he seems to have forsaken, and
then makes alive where he seems to have killed. We had been undone, if we had
not been undone: We had been undone in our lives, those furies gathering
together soon after, in far greater troops, if we had not been undone in our
estates, which were left to them for a prey by our flight (which the fatherly
providence of God, foreseeing greater evils, procured, by sending that fright
among us.) Blessed be the Name of the Lord again and again: We notwithstanding,
with other afflicted ones, in what Nation soever, whom that proudest Babylonian
flood of waters seeks to swallow up, will not cease to cry, How long, O Lord,
will thou be angry with thy people? How long shall thy jealousy burn like
fire? O remember not against us former iniquities; let thy tender mercies
speedily prevent us, etc. Psalm 79. And with the souls of those that were slain
for the word of God, that lie under the Altar of Christ's merits, for whose
faith we are killed, How long (O Lord) holy and true, do thou not judge and
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth! Rev. 6.9, 10.

The Delegates of these poor persecuted Protestant Churches coming over into
England to move for a Contribution toward the relief of their distressed
Brethren, Published this ensuing Narrative.
The utmost Fury of Antichrist against the Protestants or Reformed Church of
the Bohemian Confession in Poland, set down in a brief (but faithful)
Narrative, and according to the truth of the matter.

THe Spouse of Jesus Christ, she who in the Cradle was besprinkled with the
blood of a Protomartyr, has always brought forth into the world men like Abel
or Stephen, that so there might never be wanting to cry from the earth unto
God, and that the wounds of that Rose which lies among the Thorns of
Persecution might not be concealed. Every age, and every year in each age, and
every month and day in each year, has produced new inundations of blood unto
this day; and yet the little flock of the Lord has always increased under
persecutions, one while here, another there, shifting their seats and
habitations. While it pleased God by the means of Wicklef to kindle the light
of the Gospel in Great Britain, John Huss asserted the truth of Jesus Christ in
the midst of thick darkness of Popery in Bohemia, many thousands being stirred
up by God to receive it, who despising all the cruelty of Tyrants, received it
with joy, until by Gods assistance they took rooting in the Kingdom, and grew
up into flourishing Churches. In a short time after, Antichrist breathing out
his fury, the Truth was banished out of Bohemia, and the Confessors being
driven out, transplanted the Gospel into Poland; where being favorably
entertained by King Sigismond, they in a short time increased to so great a
number, that being little inferior to the Papists, they were able to boast of
an equal authority and privileges with them. Hence it came to pass that the
Kings at their Coronations were wont, not only to promise, but solemnly to
swear protection to such as disagreed from the Roman Religion, and therefore
they proceeded not to open persecutions, save only in those Cities where the
Jesuits had seated themselves in power (to wit) Cracovia, Posen, Lublin, Vilna,
etc. where, by their disciples, and by stirring up the common people to fury,
the Churches of the Reformed Professors were a good while ago demolished, and
diverse Ministers cruelly massacred. Nevertheless the malice of the Enemies
being no whit allayed, they were many ways afflicted, first indirectly,
afterward by pretenses under color of Law, until those Churches being worn
out by degrees, and overthrown, were not many years ago reduced to a very
inconsiderable number, especially when as in the Reign of the late King, the
Enemies being confident they might do any thing, brought things to this pass
at length, that there were no more than twenty one Congregations remaining in
the Greater Poland, and those also ready to perish. But among these twenty one
remaining Churches, the chief, and as it were the Mother of them all, was that
of Lesna, which was divided into three Congregations, the Bohemian, the
Polonian and the German; each of which had their own Pastors, but the
Communicants jointly were about two thousand: Therefore it was that this Church
was in the first place exposed to the Enemies malice, and of late designed to
the slaughter, as well by reason of its being very much frequented and grown
famous, as also because of the Synod there usually celebrated, as likewise a
famous University and Printing House, and books frequently published to the
world. When therefore in the year 1655. the Swedish Army out of Pomerania drew
near to the borders of Poland, and the Nobility were summoned to Arms,
according to the custom of the Country, it came to pass that the Papists
brake forth into many furious expressions, crying out, That the Heretics had
invited the Enemy, and therefore they were first of all to be put to the sword
and extirpated; which reports, though most falsely scattered abroad (for the
searcher of the heart and the reins knows, that we never so much as dreamt of
it) yet they easily found credit among the sworn Enemies of the Gospel, who
sought nothing more than our ruin. Hereupon they who first consulted to agree
with the Swedish Army, being terrified by its power, concluded about the
surrender of all Great Poland into the Kings protection, and namely, the Royal
Cities of Posen, Calissen, Meserick, etc. to which also Lesna was expressly
added: In a little time after they endeavored to cast off the Swedish Yoke,
and turned their Arms not against the Swedes, but first against our Evangelical
Professors, as conspiring with the Swedes upon the account of Religion, and
none of them scrupled to take revenge upon them. They first of all set upon
those of Lesna, with resolution of putting all to the sword, and destroying
that Heretical City by fire, and they had effected both, unless God had by
sending some persons before, who by signifying the coming of the Enemy, and
with what intent they came, had possessed the Citizens with a Panick fear, so
that leaving all their Estates, they every man fled; and thus within the space
of one hour, a most populous City abounding with all manner of wealth, was left
without Inhabitants, who in a miserable condition wandered then into the
neighboring Woods and Marshes into Silesia. But the Polish Nobility with
their Army entering the City, did what they pleased, slaying a number of
decrepit old people, and sick persons that were not able to save themselves by
flight; then the City it self was first plundered, and afterward so destroyed
by fire for three days together, that no part of it remained beside rubbish
and ashes. In what manner they would have handled the Citizens, especially
their Pastors, they showed by their heroic actions performed in other places,
by the most savage slaughtering of diverse Ministers of the Church, and other
faithful Members of Christ, of both Sexes; for of all that they laid hold on,
they gave not one man quarter, but very cruelly put them to death with most
exquisite tortures. They endeavored to force Master Samuel Cardus, Pastor of
the Church of Czuertzinen, to renounce his Religion, after they had taken him,
and miserably handled him with all manner of cruelty; but he stoutly resisting,
they first put out his Eyes, and led him about for a spectacle, then they
pulled off his Fingers-ends with pincers; but he not yet condescending to their
mad Fury, they found out a new kind of torment, poured molten Lead into his
mouth, and at length while he was yet half alive, they clapped his Neck between
folding Doors, and violently pulling them together, severed his Head from his
Body. They took John Jacobides, Pastor of the Church of Dembnick, and Alexander
Wartens his Colleague, and another that was in company with them, as they
passed through the Town of LUBIN, and hurrying them up and down for diverse
hours, and grievously handling them after the manner of Tyrants, then last of
all cutting their Throats with a Razor, threw them headlong, while they were
yet breathing, into a great pit, which had been beforehand prepared for their
Martyrs, and stifled them by casting down Dung and Dirt upon them. They a great
while pursued Andrew Oxlitius a young man designed for the Ministry, whom
after long seeking, they at last found in the open field, and in the end having
taken him, they cut off his Head with a Sith, chopping it into small pieces,
and the dead carcass also they slasht in a barbarous manner. The same fate
befell Adam Milta, a Citizen of Lesna; but they more grievously handled an old
man of above seventy, whose name was Simon Priten, and many others, whose names
it were too tedious to relate. Of that barbarous execution which they did upon
the weaker Sex, there were besides other examples, horrid Trophies of Cruelty
erected in the said City of Lesna: a pious Matron there, who was the mother of
three children, not being able quick enough to leave the City, and being slain
in the open street, they cut off her hands, and feet, and cutting off her
childrens heads, they laid two of them at her breasts, and the third by her
side. In like manner, another woman having her hands and feet cut off, and her
tongue cut out, being enclosed and bound in a Sack, lived the space of two
days, making most miserable lamentation. Grief forbids us to add more; for
they behaved themselves so furiously toward us, that there remains not an
example of any one man saved of all those that happened to fall into their
hands. It is notoriously known how that fury of theirs tyrannized also over the
dead; some they dragged out of their graves, and cut in pieces, as at Zichlin;
others they exposed naked for a public Spectacle, as at Lesna; of which
outrageous action we had an example, even in the dead body of the most Serene
Landgrave of Hassia, which was drawn out of the grave, who was heretofore slain
in a most barbarous and tyrannical manner at Koscian, but buried by our Friends
at Lesna. The like was acted also upon the Body of the most Noble Arciszevius,
heretofore the valiant Admiral of the Hollanders in Brazile, which was likewise
dragged out of the grave, and being stripped of the grave-clothes, was found
after the firing of Lesna. There are diverse other examples, which the Christian
Reader may find in the Book, Entitled, Lesnae Excidium, faithfully written,
and lately set forth in print; but they are such examples only as are commonly
known; for who is able to relate all things in particular? as burning men
alive, drowning others with stones tied about their necks, etc.

Now Lesna being destroyed, the fury of the Enemy proceeded to the persecutions
of others; they in a short time utterly demolished all our Congegations, not
only driving away the Pastors, but also either burning or leaving most of the
Temples desolate, as at Karmin, Dembnick, Skochy, Czriuczin, etc, yea and the
Auditories themselves were either slain (as in the Town of Skochy, where there
was a very flourishing Church of the Bohemian Exiles; Sixty persons, both men
and women were cruelly put to death) or else they were scattered abroad, so
that there remained not one place wherein the Worship of God may be celebrated.
Lo, this is the most miserable state and condition of our Churches; moreover
our Contrymen, to the number of five thousand, besides youths and children,
being dispersed in banishment (which has now befallen most of us the second
time) especially throughout Silesia, as also through the Marck, Lusatia,
Hungary, etc. find no comfort, but much misery, and are there exposed to the
hatred and envy of men. We that are Pastors dare not openly minister to our
Auditories with the Word and Sacraments, but only in private Meetings, or in
Woods among Fenny places, God only seeing us, who is witness of these
calamities, and our comfort in extremities. Indeed being thus destitute of all
things, we lead a wretched life in banishment, being afflicted with hunger and
nakedness, and are become next to the most miserable Waldenses, the greatest
spectacle of calamity to the Christian world; for so it has seemed good to
that Sovereign Wisdom that governs all things, that we should be inheritors of
the Cross and persecution of those men from whom we have derived the original
of our Doctrine and external Succession: For truly we are the remaining Progeny
even of the Waldenses, with whom being raised from the ashes of blessed Huss,
and with whom combining into the same holy Fellowship of the Faith and
afflictions of Christ, we have for two whole ages and more, been perpetually
subject to the like storms of Calamities, until at length we fell into this
calamity, greater than ever was known in the memory of our Fathers, and which
threatens us with utter destruction, unless God prevent it. The truth is, this
business constrains us to amazement and tears, greater than can be expressed in
words, to set forth our affliction and sorrow: If there be any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels
and mercies, we desire that this affliction of Joseph may be recommended,
especially to all that are of the household of Faith. Let them not suffer those
to perish whom the same Faith, and the same Spirit of Christ has joined with
them in so near a relation; we beseech them in the name of Christ, that they
would rather make haste to relieve those who are ready to perish, we being
assured that we suffer this persecution upon no other account, than for the
confession of the Truth, from those Enemies who have acted such things as these
are against us in times past, and are now at length by Gods permission, pouring
out their fury upon us.

Signed in the name of the said distressed Churches, by their Delegates and now
Exiles for the Cause of Christ; Adam Samuel Hartman, Pastor of the Church of
Lesna in Poland, and Rector of the famous University there. Paul Cyril a late
Member of the University of Lesna.


A BRIEF REPRESENTATION OF THE Protestant Cause in GERMANY.
In what Case it has been, since the Peace of MUNSTER; and how it stood in the
year 1657. and how it is now this present year 1659.
THe Justice of the late civil wars in Germany, which were composed at the
Peace concluded in Munster and Osnaburgge in the year 1648. was grounded upon
this; That the Protestants were necessitated to enter into a League or mutual
union together, for the maintaining of their rights and privileges in the
Empire, against the infections thereof, and manifold disturbances of their
profession, which contrary to former agreements at Imperial Dyets, did befall
unto them in many places by the Popish and Jesuits practices, whereof they
could obtain no redress by any peaceable Treaties: Therefore finding that
there was a design formed in the Conclave, and by the house of Austria, to be
put in execution, tending by little and little to wear out and deprive them of
their liberties; they formed an union among themselves, to stand upon the
defense of their rights, and to oppose the power of the house of Austria, by
whose means, both in Germany and in Bohemia, the Jesuits did drive the design
of rooting out Protestants. The head of this union (who by his place was bound
to appear in it) was the Elector Palatine: but he being a soft man, of no
experience in war, and beset in his Counsels and enterprises with such as did
betray him, the cause was soon overthrown; and by his overthrow, the intended
persecution against Protestants to root them out, what by power, and what by
policy, was openly carried on by the house of Austria; which moved the King of
Denmark Christian the IV. and after him the King of Sweden, to come upon the
Stage: the Dane was soon overthrown, but God gave such success unto the
Swedes, to the Landgrave of Hessen their associate, and to the French; (who
joined with them to balance the power of Austria, after the Elector of Saxony
had made his peace at Prague with the Emperor, and deserted the Protestant
interest): that from the death of King Gustavus, they continued the war with
various successes till the year 1648. at which time the Swedish being masters
in Bohemia, and the Emperor brought so low, that he saw little hopes to
recover his strength without a Peace, he yielded to the conditions which the
Protestants and the French stood upon. The Swedish stood upon their
satisfaction, and to keep a foot in the Empire, to be able upon all occasions
to secure or help the Protestant party; And the Protestant Princes they stood
upon the settling of all things and of themselves in their former rights and
possessions, as before the war; and chiefly upon this point the reformed party
and the Landgrave of Hessen, who headed them, stood, that thence forward the
reformed Protestants ( alias called Calvinists) should have equal freedom and
liberty of conscience, for the exercise of their profession in the Empire, with
the Papists and Lutherans. This condition being obtained, and a way determined
to give the agrieved parties in point of damage further satisfaction, Armies
were dismissed, a new convention of States was held at Nurenberg, to settle the
remaining matters within the Empire, which at Munster and Osnabrugge could not
well be handled, by reason of the Treaty with foreign States, and afterward
a Diet was called at Ratisbon, to confirm all what formerly had been treated
on and concluded, and to put the remainder of grievances in a way to be
rectified: To which effect at the dissolution or rather adjournment of the
Imperial Diet at Ratisbon, a Committee of Deputies from all the States of the
Empire, of equal number of both parties, (that is, so many of the Protestants
as of the Popish party) were named to meet at Franckford, and prepare (by way
of disquiry of rights) the matters then remaining undecided, that at the next
Session of the Diet, there might be a full decision and determination of them;
but before these Delegates did meet, the Elector of Mentz did broach a new
quarrel with the Elector Palatine, tending to abridge him of much of his right,
and to make him inconsiderable to the Protestant party; but the King of Sweden
his cousin (for he is a younger brothers son of the house Palatine) and the
Landgrave of Hessen his Brother in Law, did appear for him so far, that the
Emperor and the Elector of Mentz fearing a new breach on his behalf, did leave
him unmolested. Soon after the composure of this quarrel, the Committee of
Imperial Deputies, met according to the appointment of the last Diet at
Ratisbon, and they have continued at Franckford, debating and disputing one
with another concerning their respective rights, in the several cases which
remained undetermined. This meeting of Deputies has agitated matters in the
years 1655 -- 56 -- 57. till these new affairs were come into consideration,
which the King of Sweden his war with Poland has occasioned: for from that
time that he went into Poland and prospered there, the Deputies although they
did not dissolve their meeting, yet did in a manner alter the course of their
treating one with another, as looking much upon the event of that war, till the
death of the late Emperor has altered the Scene, and a Diet for the election
of a new Emperor has been called.

The King of Swedens war with Poland, did alarm the Popish party in Germany,
and the house of Austria extremely: and did terrify the States of the
Low Countries, lest if he should be master of the Baltic Sea, their Trade
should be thenceforward under his power, with whom they had no friendly
correspondence, by reason of some reciprocally conceived injuries, for which
they could not trust him. This moved those of Holland who are the chief traders
in those Seas, to stir up enemies against him, and openly to appear for, and
correspond with Dantzick to oppose him: and it is known to the Swedish, that
they have dealt underhand with the Muscovite, with the Polish King, with the
Austrians, and above-board with the King of Denmark, to combine against him; by
which means after that he had conquered Poland, his forces were distracted,
first to oppose the Muscovite in Livonia, who besieged Riga; and afterward to
put himself in a defensive posture against the Austrians, who came to the
assistance of the King of Poland; and lastly, to retire from Poland into
Germany, to oppose the Danish forces, who had invaded his Territories of
Bremen. Being come into Germany upon this design, he did conquer from the King
of Denmark the last Summer all Hostein and Jutland, and although by these
conquests he was able to live in his quarters in the Winter: yet his enemies
being round about him on all hands, and he having neither money, nor convenient
places to recruit his Army, it was expected, that in the spring the Combination
of his enemies who compassed him about, would have swallowed him up: but God
was pleased to appear for him, and direct him in a way to escape and overcome
these difficulties: For in January last, he formed his design to assault the
other Territories of the Danish King; namely the Islands which lie between
Germany and the Continent of Sweden, and to that effect had prepared his men to
march over into Fuenen, either by a bridge of Ships if the Sea were not frozen
so as to bear: or over the Ice, if it should be strong enough: having then
notice gotten, that toward the latter end of January the Ice did bear, he took
of horse and foot not above six or seven thousand, and therewith did march over
the Sea into Funen, where the Danish King had placed his chief forces to defend
the place. And although some dangetous and dreadful accidents did befall him in
that his march over the Sea, yet he went on and fought the Danish forces more
in number than he had with him, which on firm land stood in a readiness to
receive him, and beat them, took the chief Commanders prisoners, and the spoil
of the Island, which is one of the richest that belongs to that Kingdom. Having
made himself Master of that Island, he went forward to the next Island, over
the Sea, called Langland, where he found a body of five hundred men to resist
him, but being charged, they were instantly defeated; so he went from thence to
the next called Laland, and from thence to Falster, and from Falster to Zeland,
the frost still continuing to make a bridge for him in all these marches. And
from the time he came into Funen, till he entered Zeland, he spent only five or
six days. In Zeland (where the King of Denmark was at Coppenhagen) M. Medows,
the public Minister of the State, sent from thence to reside with the King of
Denmark, came to him and desired him to admit the King of Denmark to a Treaty;
this he condescended unto, and by the interposition of M. Medows and of the
French Ambassador (for he would not admit the Hollands Ambassador to be a
Mediator) the place was concluded about the twentieth of February, after twelve
days treaty. The conditions are, That he restore to the King of Denmark all
what he had taken from him in Germany, namely Holstein, and Jutland, and the
Islands of Fuenen, Langland, Laland, Falster, and Zealand; and in lieu thereof
the King of Denmark quits unto him all his rights in the Provinces of Haland
and Schonen, and of Blieken, which are the Continent of Sweden, on the North
side of the Sound; and does moreover surrender unto him the Island of Bornholm,
and the Lordships of Bahusen, and of Drunthen in Norway, which lie most
convenient to cause the Trade of Sweden to flourish. Some other conditions
there are, but less considerable. The Peace being concluded and ratified by
both Kings, the King of Denmark feasted the King of Sweden for certain days,
and at several times both Kings were together alone, for the space of two or
three hours at a time, whereby it is conceived that they have contracted a
nearer and stricter alliance together, than the Public Treatise can mention.
This being done, the King of Sweden went into his own Country; and has
convocated the States of his Kingdom at Gottenburg, to dispose of his affairs
with their advice, and to take up further resolutions in time to come.

This unexpected and miraculous success of the Swedish Kings enterprise, has
disappointed all the Counsels and plots of his adversaries against him, for
which he is obliged to none but unto God alone: and from hence his friends have
just cause to gather, that God has raised him out of his straits, and
redoubled his strength to make further use of him toward the advancement of
the common cause of Protestants, in whose behalf he concluded the Peace at
Munster, and which he thinks himself in conscience and honor obliged to see
maintained for the Protestant interest; tanquam altera pars paciscens, as in a
letter of his to the Emperor he did express himself. So that it seems the
Protestant cause in Germany will find in him a Protector of so much courage
and resolution, and conduct, as any that could be expected or desired: And it
is known to all that know him, that he is earnestly bent to take away the
differences, and advance the reconcilement of Protestants within themselves:
and that he makes no difference between Lutherans (as they are called) and
Calvinists, but makes use of both alike, according to their abilities, as he
finds them fitted for employment to foreign affairs: for within the Kingdom
of Sweden, no foreigners, and none but Lutherans, are to be admitted to the
civil charges of trust; others are employed in military charges, both there and
elsewhere, according to their deserts.

But presently after the Elector of Brandenburg was by subtle artifices
withdrawn from the King of Sweden, and joined with the Emperor, and the King
of Poland against him: the King of Denmark was prevailed with to break his
late-made League, and the States of the United Provinces have joined with the
Dane against him; and God having taken away his great friend Oliver Lord
Protector, he has conflicted with many and great difficulties, and yet
hitherto God has upholden him from sinking under them. What the issue will be,
time must discover.

FINIS.
A Table of all the principal Things contained in this General MARTYROLOGIE.
A
ANabaptists wickedness Page 281 Anger implacable 355 Apostasy dangerous 43,
50, 53, 82, 171, 183, 202 205, 210, 264, 324, 349 Apostates wickedness 6, 15,
177
B
BIbles, and sacred Scriptures burnt 7, 62 204, 210, 283, 332, 333, 334, 388
Bibles in French first printed 118 Blasphemy 16, 44, 72, 84, 86, 172, 186 189,
190, 209, 290, 295, 310, 334, 336 337, 338, 339, 348, 384, 388*
C
CHarity of Christians 70, 92, 96, 103, 285, 286, 293, 303, 320, 323, 367, 369
Chastity eminent 52 Children martyred 44, 48, 51, 72, 73, 91, 99, 110, 346, 391
Children encouraged by their parents to sufferings 23, 24, 75, 88, 95, 98, 315
Christ preferred above all 132, 269, 283 350, 359 Christians slandred as the
Authors and causes of mischief 31, 34, 37, 41, 46, 56, 63, 80, 87, 98, 105,
112, 115, 136, 174, 177, 179, 325 Christians murdered in Churches 65, 93, 329,
360 Christians reproached 82, 241 Comfort at death 177, 193, 196, 266, 270,
279, 282, 289, 320 Conscience evil 92 Constancy of Gods children 18, 39, 42,
44, 53, 63, 73, 76, 78, 81, 92, 94, 95, 117, 132, 147, 171, 188, 204, 209, 254,
264, 266, 269, 270, 272, 277, 288, 301, 304, 305, 341, 361, 364, 415
Conversions strange 47, 48, 58, 179, 268 279, 286, 287, 289.299.303 329, 364
Courage and Constancy of Gods children 7, 9, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 51, 52, 57,
63, 66, 67, 71, 73, 77, 83, 85, 86, 98, 99 103, 118, 142, 189, 191, 192, 256
259, 269, 288, 290, 291, 292, 293 295, 299, 302, 317, 319, 321, 323, 326, 360,
362, 370, 389, 400, 406, 429 Cruelty of heathens to Gods people 7, 9, 31, 52,
65, 69, 71, 76, 77, 83, 84. Cruelty of Heriticks to them 87, 89, 91, 93, 94,
95, 96, 97. Cruelty of Papists to them 103, 105, 108, 110, 111, 113, 115, 125,
126, 134, 135, 137, 143, 146, 153, 171, 173, 183, 184, 188, 201, 203, 206, 207,
208, 209, 240, 241, 242, 272 279, 282, 286, 288, 292, 297, 298 305, 308, 309,
etc. 323, 325, 328 330, 332, etc. 344, 361, 380, etc. 414, etc. 421, etc. 451.
D
Devils subtilty 59 Dissimulation 199, 252, 341, 342, 343, 345, 402, 416.
E
Edicts good 145 Edicts, and Laws cruel 49* 62 70, 97, 106, 137, 155, 160,
164, 173, 175, 179, 198, 199, 319, 335, 362, 397, 405, 413. Envy 94 Examples
prevalent 98
F
Faith of Gods children 77.78, 190, 193, 266, 304, 331, 336, 338, 361 False
witnesses 282 Famines terrible 69, 157, 159, 298 352, 355, 356. Fasting, and
Prayer 122 Fidelity 193 Flattery 73, 249 Flight in time of persecution 51
Flight refused 287, 300, 317
H
Heretics profane 90, 100 Heretics proud 97 Heretics subtle 96, 97
Heretics impudent 98 Heroical acts 274, 292 Humane frailty 41, 51, 63, 66,
120, 134, 249, 267, 273, 296, 319, 327, 366 Humility 275 Husbands malice
against his wife 40 Hypocrisy 68, 70, 248, 316, 350
I
Idolatry gross 276 Idolatry reformed 282 Jews murdered refusing to fight on
the sabbath 8 Ignorance 256, 285, 365 Jmage of Apollo broken with lightning 85
Ingratitude 36, 184, 281, 348 Inquisition, begun 118, 236. Joy unspeakable 44,
193, ^67 Joy in tribulation 128, 190, 209, 270, 294, 296, 302, 336, 366.
Judgments of God 16.116, 154, 157.
L
Life refused 266 Love of Christians 54.115
M
Meekness of Christians 287 Ministers M^rtyred 53.56, 80 88, 172, 187, 280,
284, 285, 286, 290 293, 298, 310, 311, 329, 336, 340, 346, 350, 351, 352
Ministers sheltred in times of Persecution 198 Miracles. Miracles of mercy 13
23, 32, 41, 49, 51, 63, 83, 87, 121, 279 282, 285, 288, 320, 322, 324, 337
343.395.
N
Nobility true 72
O
Ordination of Ministers 174
P
Patience of Gods children in sufferings 19, 40, 50, 66, 191, 203, 271, 274
292, 296, 323, 338, 349, 373 Perfidiousness 15.243. See Popish perfidiousness.
Persecution spreads the Gospel 104, 156, 164, 174, 178, 328. Persecutors
plagued by God 13, 26, 28 48, 53, 54, 59, 67, 69, 70, 84, 89, 100 112, 116,
125, 138, 139, 168, 175, 176 177, 210, 211, 257, 277, 283, 284, 297 305, 321,
326, 328, 330, 354, 355 364, 389, 392, 393, 394, 433 Persecutors converted
27.64.322 Plagues terrible 54.69.158 Popish malice 103.104.106.115.119
120.173.175.178.179.208.235.251 279.284.289.300.320.326.329 367.399 Popish
Prrfidiousnesse 122.124.125 131.145.149.150.151.159.183
201.233.264.290.298.299.316 335.338.339.340.362.378.380 390.393 Popish subtilty
113.114.122.124 128.140.147.151.170.172.174 180. etc. 199.203.206.207.233
237.239.290.296.306.331.351 364.405. etc. 432 Popish uncleanness
113.138.139.144 207.336.376.378.391.392 Prayer in times of danger ^5.10.11
126.129.130.287 Prayer powerful and prevalent 44.^9.123.191.294.370
Predictions and Prophesies 195.265.324.368.370.371.372.375 Pride 62.92.148
Profanness 93.118.121.123.135.139.17^.207 Providence special
14.40.52.54.58.61.78.85.88.91.92.93.96.114.116.118.120.123.124.125.126.128.129
130.134.145.167.178.179.184.202.251.255.259.261.264.265.266.269.277.286.289.292.299.303 307.316.317.325.326.328.330.331 332, 338.347.351.352.354.360.361.367.369.404.432.433. Prudence of Chris^ians 119.326.401
R
REcovery after falls 43.53.79.202.249.251, 256.264.267.273 296.320.328 Riches
are snares 50
S
Scismaticks plagued by God 90 Scismaticks bloody 86 Scismaticks profane 90
Scismaticks subtle 86 Scisme comes from pride 54, 172 Scriptures, see Bible
Sectaries dangerous 48 Sin the forerunner of persecution 56.61.100.180.341 Son
dutiful and loving 346 Southsayers wickedness 49, 55, 79, 80 Speeches
excellent 293.295, 300.304.317.322 327.334.352.362 Stories excellent
33.78.88.95.125.322 353 Subtilty of the Churches enemies 16.18.20.23.82.84.87
Success no sign of a good cause 189.278 Sympathy 95 Synods 173
T
TEntations resisted 77.79.94.95.99.132; 176, 187,
190,.203.265.268.270.271.272.284.291.293.300.322.327.336.361.365 Thanksgiving
for mercies 129.154 Thanksgiving for sufferings 266* 300 Treachery rewarded
45.323.359 360
V
Visions 53.56
W
WAldenses their opinions 103 Wife loving to her husband 171 Wisdom of
Christians 84 see prudence Witnesses false, plagued by God 47 Women's courage
356.360
Z
ZEal 8.19.41.45.46.50.51.53.58 63, 76.79.86.107.116.117.131
133.135.^51.258.268.275.289.290.291.295.299.300.304.315.319.321.324.345.363
FINIS.
This Book being printed most of it by the printed Copy, I looked not over the
Proofs, and so through the carelessness of the Correctors and Compositors many
faults have escaped, which I pray thee to amend with thy pen before thou
read the Book ERRATA in the general MARTYROLOGIE.
PAge 29 line 14 read him for them. l 40 r India for Indian. p 36 l 25 r whom
for who. p 37 l. 17. put in, cease to. l 21 put in, to. p 45 l 6 r were for
was. l 14 r Decree for degree. p 62 l 22 r adorning for adoreing. p 67 l 4 r
this for his. l 5 r com for cow. l 8 r they for the. p 79 l 16 r that for the p
81 l 29 r stake for stalk. p 84 l 41 r also for all. p 94 l 28 r Torturers for
tortures. l 36 r Courtiers for Countries. p 106 l ult. put in, whosoever. p 114
l 37 r they for the. p 115 l 10 r was for were. l 15 r Prince for Princes. p
117 l 17 r which for with. l 23 r belief for relief. p 118 l 3 r edified for
edifying. p 120 l 1 r they for the p. p 121 l 25 put in, whereupon. p 122 l 26
r enjoined for enjoyed. p 128 l 41 r slaying for staying. p 132 l 31 r children
for child. p 133 l 17 r receiving for receive. p 135 l 32 r sixty for sixthly. p
137 l 39 r opened for opening. p 147 l 34 put out, was. p 149 l 7 r retaining
for restraining. p. 151 l 16 r their for they. p 152 l 11 r represented for
presented. p 153 l 37 r approach for reproach. p 154 l 1 r die for are. l 31 r
Bertrand for B^trand. p 156 l 1 r Bosnia for Bosina. l 7 r when for where p.
158 l 41 r root for rout. p 159 l ult. r delivered for discovered. p 160 l 15 r
Maundy for monday. p 161 l 29 r upon for of, Cities for City. p 163 l 5 r
buried for burnt. l 14 r they for the. l 29 r two for second. p 164 l 1 r
Catholic for Cathe. p 186 l 42 r they for the. p 189 l 2 r breast for breasts.
l 8 r was for were. p 193 l 8 r hoary for heavy. p 198 l 7 put out should. p
202 l 9 r were for was. p 139 l 15 r this for his. l 17 r for never no man, r
no man ever. p 271 l 41 put in, free. p 279 l 8 put in, one. l 28 r sent for
set. p 297 l 16 r zeal for seal. p 303 l 24 put in, her. p 304 l 13 put in,
took. p 308 l 7 r girls for gilts. l 11 r burnt for burn. l 16 r goodly for
godly. l 30 r macerating for macecrating. p 309 l 28 put in, of. p 334 l 3 r
mouth for mouta. p 351 l ult. r Parisians for Persians. p 375 l 18 put in,
brought p 378 l 9 put out, and so. p 383 l 21 r short for shot. p 387 l 35 r
leave for have. p 404 l 12 r whom for where. p 468 l 6 for Infections r
Infractions.

Other literal faults are easily amended.


