ENGLANDS COVENANT PROVED Lawful and necessary Also at this Time, both by
Scripture and Reason. TOGETHER With sundry Answers to the usual Objections
made against it.

By S. C. Preacher at B. F.

Eccles. 5. 4. When thou vowest a vow unto GOD, defer not to pay it; For He
has no pleasure in Fools; Pay that which thou have vowed.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton in Pope's Head Alley, 1643.

Courteous Reader,
AT the first impression hereof, the time prefixed by the Parliament, for the
Cities taking of this Covenant, being almost elapsed, and my immature
conceptions not ready for the birth, yet importunity like an overhasty Midwife,
would needs deliver me of it: whereupon I presumed that it would have perished
in the birth, or have found no better entertainment than a misshapen Embryon:
but beyond my expectation it has been accepted of, approved, and (as I
understand) given satisfaction to many, and was now this second time put unto
the Press before I knew of it: Had the Stationer given me but some few days
warning, I would according to my poor abilities have added something for the
enlargement of it: but presuming yet that some abler Person may happily
undertake the work: in the interim this is once again sent abroad, that so
the Ignorant may be informed of the weightinesse of avow, and Covenant: that
the doubtful may be resolved concerning the Lawfulness of this in hand; and
that all may be excited to the careful performance of what they bind
themselves to hereby: If in any of these thou receivest satisfaction, and
Benefit, praise God, and pray for him who is

Thine in the Lord S. C.
July, 28, 1643.
ENGLANDS Covenant*
THe Reasons that have induced the Parliament to frame, and propose this
present Covenant to be taken by all the well-affected Subjects of this Kingdom
(as I conceive) are especially two.

1. By reason of Gods hand which lies so Judah, they have pitched upon this
course as a special means to pacify Gods wrath by a general Covenanting
with God to endeavor a Reformation of our hearts, and lives.

2. Observing the incessant and indefatigable Plots of the Popery instead
thereof: They have therefore thought fit by this Covenant, to lay a stronger
engagement upon every one to detect and discover, and oppose whatsoever may
tend to the prejudice of the one, or to the furtherance of the other: but
withal considering that the major part of those which are to enter into it
either for want of Information may scruple some part of it, or do it aubitante
conscientia, with a doubting Conscience, which will make it a sin to them) or
through inconsiderateness may do it hand over head, without understanding, or
a just prepondering of the strong engagement which they Covenant, and by the
Application of this present to those Rules, to prove the lawfullnesse of it: as
also by showing the great engagement that a sacred Vow, lays upon the
Conscience of the undertakers of it, to deter all, either from a giddy
taking, or a rash and inconsiderate breaking of the same.

Vows and Covenants are of 2. sorts Unlawful and sinful. Lawful and good.


A sinful Covenant is a bond whereby we engage our selves to something that
is evil: such was that of those wicked Jews, 23. Act. 12. who bound
themselves under an Oath of execration, that they would neither eat, nor
drink, till they had killed Paul.

A Lawful Covenant is either Civil. Religious. Mixed.


A Civil Covenant is a bond whereby we engage our selves each to other in
civil respects: Civil.
such as was that betwixt Abraham and Abimelech, 21. Genesis 27. etc.

A Religious Covenant is a bond whereby we engage our selves to God, Sacrum.
to yield obedience to Him in those things which are agreeable to his will, 2 Chronicles. 29. 10, 10 Ezr. 3. 10. Nohem. 29.

And this Religious Covenant is either Universal, Singular.


A Universal Religious Covenant is a bond of all the Faithful whereby they
engage themselves to the service of God in abstaining from sin, and
endeavoring to keep all his Commandments: this Covenant is made by all in
Baptism, and renewed so often as we come to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. A singular Religious Covenant is a bond wherein some one Person for
some special cause does engage himself to God.

And it is either Absolute, and perpetual. Conditional, and Temporary.


An absolute perpetual Covenant is a bond whereby we engage our selves,
absolutely to God, and during the whole term of our lives, from which we can
never be released: such was that of David 119. Psalm. 106. I have sworn and I
will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments. A Conditional
and Temporary Covenant is a bond whereby we engage our selves, upon some
condition, and for a certain time only, which being expired, or the
condition unperformed we are freed from the same: whereof we have examples,
1 Samuel 1. 11. v. 18. Act. 18.

A mixed Covenant which is partly Religious, Mixtum
and partly civil, is a bond whereby we engage our selves both to God and
men: Such is this Covenant now appointed to be entered into: and such was that
2 King. 11. 17. Iehoiada made a Covenant betvveen the Lord and the King: and
the King, and the People, that they should be the Lords People: betvveen the
King also and the People: thus having considered the several sorts of
Covenants, I shall come in the next place to collect such requisites, and
ingredients, as are necessary to the constitution of a Lavvfull Covenant, that
so by examining this present Covenant thereby, we may more clearly be
convinced of the lawfulness of the same.

Which Ingredients are especially these:

1. That the Subject matter of it be lawful, or else it is no Covenant, De Lic^^
but a conspiracy, and they which enter into it are like Simeon and Levi,
brethren in evil, or like those wicked Jews, which bound themselves by an
Oath, and a curse that they would neither eat, nor drink till they had killed
Paul, 23. Act. 12.

i. e. the matter of it must be true: so in Judgment also, i. e. knowing it to
be true, 4. Ier. 2. or else we are guilty of perjury: so in vows, and
Covenants which are sometimes accompanied with an Oath, we must be well
informed of the lawfulnes of the matter thereof, or else we make our selves
guilty before God: and that of Sol^mon may be applied to such persons, 20 Prove.
25. It Is a snare for a man to devour holy things, and after the vow to enquire.

Solomon, 5 Ec. cles. 4, 5. When thou vowest a vow defer not to pay it, for
God has no pleasure in fools. Pay therefore that which thou have vowed?
Better it is that thou should not vow, then that thou sholdest vow and not
pay* 30. Number. 2.

De possibilibus.
what is it but to profane the sacred name of God? and bring down his curse
upon us: this was the sin of those after the flood which covenanted among
themselves, to build a Tower which should reach up to Heaven: a thing
impossible, if God had not confounded their Language: and it was also an
aggravation of their sin, who vowed that they would neither eat, nor drink
till they had killed Paul: which being out of their power, made their vovv the
more unlawful unto them.

5. The Persons which bind themselves by a vow, must be sui such as have power
of their own heads; and be not under the jurisdiction of another, or else
they must be careful to take along with them the consent of their Governors,
if they mean to free themselves from sin: a Maid in her Fathers House, or a
woman that has an Husband may not vow without the consent of their superiors,
30. Nu. 3. etc. the Reason is because they are not at their own disposal, and
therefore not able to perform their vows without the approbation of another,
verse 13.

Having thus showed the several sorts of Covenants, and what is required to
make a lawful one; I shall now come to apply this present Covenant to these
rules, and thereby not only vindicate it from all unlawfulnes, but also show
the usefullnesse, if not necessity of it, at such a time as this is; for which
end I shall take it in sunder, and clear the lawfulness of it in each branch,
that so it may appear to be free from just exception in the subject matter of
it, which is the first thing required in a lawful Covenant.

First, in the first part of it we profess our hearty sorrow etc. 22. Isa. 12,
Wherein we see that same thing which is undertaken in this Covenant, imposed
as a duty by God himself, who does not only require a sense of, and sorrow
for our sins, but a resolute endeavor of Reformation also; wash you, make you
clean, take away tbe evil of your works, from before mine eyes, etc. Isay
16. Or else our humiliation is but hanging down our heads like a bull rush for
a day, 58. Isa. 5. mere mocking of God, and deluding our own souls.

2. That we do abhor and detest the late wicked, and of the like nature:
this branch no one may take which has in any measure been privy to the said
Plot, till they have first unburthened their Conscience, by acknowledgeing what
they have been privy to, and craving pardon for the same; otherwise they
devote themselves to the curse of God, who will be a swift witness against
such perjured Persons: and whose flying role will enter into their Houses, and
remain therein, and consume them with the timber thereof, and stones thereof,
5 Zach. 4. But for such persons as are free from the guilt of so foul a blot,
they not only may, but ought to profess their detestation of so horrid a Plot,
as in the execution must necessarily have tended to the death and ruin of so
many Innocents: and had the Plotters obtained their ends; would without all
question have ended in the dissolution of the Parliament. And therein in the
Fatal period of Religion, Laws, Liberties and all future free Parliament,
also; as the Commission granted to them, will clearly evidence and evince.

Design we are to understand, such as are destructive or prejudicial to the
Parliament, City or Kingdom, as this former would have been: and this no one
that is friend to any of these, or to himself in them can refuse to promise.
Some of the very Heathen from the light, and Principles of Nature it self,
have refused to survive their Countries Liberty: and shall not Christians put
to their helping hands, to wrest the Liberty of their Religion from the
attempts of Papists: the Liberties of the Parliament from the Complotters of
their ruin, and the Liberties of the City, and Kingdom fromthe Power of
Tyrannical Oppressors, which is all that we promise to do when we engage
our selves to a timely discovery of the like designs? The Kingdom is a Ship:
the Parliament our Steeres men: the City the principal Cabin: and Religion
the precio us Fraught wherewith God has laden our Ship, and he is a Traitor
to all these which shall refuse to tie himself to endeavor their preservation.

4. That we do in our Consciences believe that the Forces raised by the two
Houses of Parliament, are raised and continued for their just Defense: and for
the Defense of the true Protestant Religion, and Liberties of the Subject
against the Forces raised by the King: by the belief here spoken of (as I
conceive) we are not to understand such a Faith, as is grounded upon
indubitable and infallible Principles, as we believe the Articles of our
Religion: but only such a credence as is grounded upon probable Arguments, and
Reasons, which first working upon our Judgments do afterward convince our
Consciences to believe the same. Now that we have sufficient reason thus to
believe, let us but a little call to mind the Plot of bringing up the Army out
of the North: The attempt made against the five Members: the withdrawing of the
King from his faithful Council: the active instruments which have been
employed into foreign parts to provide Arms, Ammunition, and Commanders, the
bringing of them over from time to time, their design: to seize upon many of
the strong Holds of the Kingdom: the putting of the Arms into the hands of
untrusty Commissioners of Array: the Arming of the Papists contrary to Law: the
correspondence held with the Scottish, and Irish Papists, and Rebels: the
endeavor to raise a party in this City to seize upon the Persons of some
principal Members of Parliament and City: and the late Plot as bad, if not
worse then all the rest if by Gods mercy it had not been strangled in the
birth: these are sufficient Arguments to induce us to believe that it was but
high time for the Parliament to raise Forces, and to continue them for their
just Defense: Again consider also the setting up of Masses in York, and
Oxford: the many Jesuits, Priests, and J^suited Papists that are in the
Adverse Armies, whose Romish Plots are only to advance the Catholic Cause,
and ruin our Religion. Besides the granting of so many Commissions for Array;
which were so destructive to the Subjects Liberty: the pillaging and plundering
of the Houses and Estates of the best Subjects, and burning of their
Habitations, and we cannot but be convinced, it was high time to raise and it
is just to continue these forces for the defense of the true Protestant
Religion, and the liberties of the Subject, and hereupon we do declare, vow
and covenant, that we will according to our power and vocation, assist these
Forces thus raised and continued by both Houses of Parliament against the
forces raised by the King without their consent: If we be upon the former
grounds, or the like once convinced, that these forces are justly raised and
continued for the ends aforesaid, then it will necessarily follow that we are
bound in Conscience to be aiding and assisting to them according to our power
and vocation, i. e. with our persons, if we be fit, and have a calling
thereunto, or with our purses according to our abilities if we be not set to
serve in person: and with our advice and prayers also for their good success;
and he is no true friend either to Parliament, Religion or Liberties, that upon
information shall refuse to make this Vow: Besides, it is but high time that
men should by such a sacred Bond be quickened unto this assistance in these
times, wherein so many grow weary of the work, and by withdrawing their
persons and purses from assisting do much endanger the Cause of God.

5. That we will likewise assist all other persons that shall take this Oath
in what they shall do in pursuance thereof, neither can this be justly
scrupled, for if we enter into this Covenant our selves, and in pursuance of
any thing contained in it, we shall stand in need of the assistance of others:
As we shall desire, so we cannot but think our selves much injured if we
find not assistance from them, and then the Law of requital does require, that
when occasion is offered we shall not withdravv our help from them also:
besides, by this Union among our selves, the common Cause of God, and the
Kingdom will be much strengthened, and every undertaker in it will be much
encouraged when they see so many by so strong a Bond to be engaged to their
help. Again, it cannot be conceived but that this Covenant will excite and
provoke the hatred of the adverse Party against the undertakers of it
exceedingly, whereof we had late experience in our Brethren of Scotland so much
hated and prosecuted under the Name of Covenanters, and therefore we have need
to tie our selves to mutual assistance for our better support against the
Odium and rage of the Adversary.

6. That we will not directly or indirectly adhere unto, nor shall willingly
assist the forces raised by the King, without

The second thing required is, that it be known to be lawful at the time of
the taking of it, for which end the Parliament has long since caused it to be
published in Print, that so all men might see it, and have time fully to
inform themselves of the lawfulness of it; And in case that any doubts should
arise, they might repair to those which are fit and able to resolve them, that
so no scruple might remain at their taking of it.





Lastly, the persons that enter into it are either such as have power of their
own heads, or that have the consent of their Superiors: and therefore having
all the Ingredients that are required to make up a lawful Covenant and Vow, it
must necessarily follow that it is lavvfull: but let us a little further
consider whether there be not a kind of necessity also that this, or the like
Covenant should be entered into at such a time as this, which I conceive will
fully appear if we consider.

First, That there is no readier nor more effectual way to pacify the
displeasure of God and to procure a removal of these judgments which lie so
heavy upon us then by sorrowing for our sins acknowledging God Justice, and
vowing a R^formation this Isa, Hezekiah Josiah, and Nehemiah knew, and
therefore had recourse to this means, which accordingly they found sucessefull.

Secondly, It will appear to be necessary if we do but consider the restless
attempts of the adversaries to corrupt and seduce incautious persons, to their
own, and others ruin, they have had their emis^aries, and instruments in
every City, and town, to propose the specious baits of honors Offices, Riches,
Favor, Friends, and what not? that so they may inveigle the simple by working
upon every humor, to betray both Church, and Commonwealth into their power and
therefore it cannot but be necessary that by the sacred bond of a Vow, we
should be fortified against such inticements.

If we do but consider the pronesse that is in our natures Sirens songs which
would enchant us, to rush upon our own destruction, and to prefer selfe-ends
before the peace and welfare of Church and State.

It cannot be imagined that this late Plot is as yet fully discovered,

And therefore this Covenant is necessary that so such persons out of a deep
sense of that great guilt, which they pluck upon themselves, in case they
swear falsely therein, may be brought to an acknowledgem^nt and confession, of
what they know about it, and to crave pardon for the same, before they enter
into this Covenant, which would be a great means to prevent much mischief
that may otherwise ensue, in case it remain undiscovered.

It cannot be doubted but that many both in this City, the time to come, that
so by withdrawing the fuel, this fire of contention may the sooner be
extinguished.

It is evident that this war continuing longer, then was at first expected, the
spirits of many well affected Persons are

Thus having cleared these two principal points, concerning the lawfulness
and necessity of this Covenant, I shall briefly in the last place, endeavor to
answer such Objections as are usually made against it, which are especially
these.

We are bound by our Oath of Allegiance and the late Protestation to defend the
Kings person, honor, Object.
and estate, and how then can we enter into this Covenant?

This Covenant ties us not to any thing that may be prejudicial unto them. Ans.


By it we are bound to assist the Parliament forces, Obj^.
against the forces raised by the King, unto which his person is adjoined, and
in assisting against his Forces, his person may be endangered.

Several Petitions have been tendered to his Majesty to retire his person from
their Company, Ans.
and thereby to secure it from danger: if notwithstanding the same, he shall
suffer himself to be overruled by evil Counselors the guilt will lie upon
those which have seduced him; it is necessary for the Parliament, to raise
forces for the apprehending of those Traitors against his Majesty and the
Kingdom, which are protected against Justice, and who are so strong that the
ordinary Ministers of Justice cannot lay hold upon them* to bring them to a
Legal Trial, and therefore, as is usual in cases of Rebellion, an Army is
sent against them, which the King himself ought to assist, and not endanger his
person amongst the other. Object.


But the King commands me to assist his forces, and forbids me to be aiding
to the other, and I am bound to obey him.

The King is to be considered under a double notion or capacity, Answ.
either as a King, or as a man; as a King he can command nothing, but what the
Law commands, and then every Subject is bound to obey him therein; but as he is
a man his Judgment may be corrupted, and his passions may mislead him, so
that he may command that which is destructive both to himself and the
Kingdom; and herein he is the best Subject that disobeyes him. The Amalekite
that said that he killed Saul, at his own command, was justly put to death by
David as a Traitor for that fact, 2 King. 1. 15, 16. And if a King in his
passion shall proffer violence to a man's person, or command another to do it,
I am bound by the Law of nature to defend my self against him, and it is no
breach of my Oath of Allegiance to do it.

But taking up of Arms against the King, Object.
has been generally cried down by the godly and Learned.

1. Here is no taking up of Arms against the King, Answ.
but against his evil Counselors, who have imbittered his spirit against his
great and faithful Counsel, and do still captivate his person amongst them.
And till such be brought to condign punishment, we can never enjoy either
Religion, persons,

2. Many Learned Divines have affirmed, and sufficiently vim vi repellere, as
was done by the Netherlanders, and Protestants in France: neither was it
condemned in Queen Elizabeth by our English Divines, when she sent auxiliary
Forces to both those places, to assist them against their own Kings: and did
not King Charles also send a Navy for the relief of Rochell when the poor
Protestants were besieged therein, by their own King: and has he not also
declared the Scots to be his good and faithful Subjects though they took up
Arms to defend their Religion, and Liberties against oppression.

In this Covenant we bind our selves to assist all others, in what they shall
do in pursuance thereof:

What if they do any unlawful Act in the pursuance of it? Quest.


In the pursuance thereof does necessarily imply, Answ.
that it must be done lawfully, and therefore that Word was inserted in the
late Protestation, and must be understood here also.

But how will it appear that it is lawful for the Parliament to raise Forces
without, Quest.
much less against the Kings consent.

An. This question is so fully, and largely discussed, and the thing proved to
be lawful both in case of Law, Answ.
and Conscience, by Mr. Prin in his third part, and by diverse of our Divines
in their Answers to Dr. Fern, that I shall refer the Reader to seek for
satisfaction there, where it may be had abundantly, if they come with
unballanced Judgments and shut not their eyes against that light which shines
therein.

Thus these usual objections being answered, I shall add only thus much, that
if there be any which have not already entered into this Covenant, seeing the
lawfullnes and necessity of it by this which has been premised, they will no
longer defer to do it, but speedily undertake, with all cheerfulness and
alacrity, as the men of Judah did in Asa's time, 2 Chronicles. 15. 14, 15. and not
only so, but that they will endeavor also to draw as many as possibly they
can to do the like.

The work is great and needs many hands to help it forward:

Multorum manibus grande levatur onus. The Enemies are vigilant and active to
disunite us, they cast in many bones of Division: therefore we have need by
this Covenant to cement our selves together, or else we are undone. Divide,
and impera is the Old Motto.

And lastly, that having once entered into it, we must resolve with our
selves, that we can never be freed from that tie which it lays upon us, and
that therefore we must be always mindful of it, and careful to observe it
in every part, and branch thereof, that our hearts being knit together in a
firm bond of mutual assistance, and love the God of love, and Peace may be
with us, and for us.

Amen.

