All that thou sees't and read is Divine:
Learning thus used is water turned to wine:
Well may we then despair to draw his mind,
View here the case; in the Book the Jewel find.
(...) sculpsit P. V. A. M. fecit



A COLLECTION OF THE LIVES OF Ten Eminent Divines, Famous in their Generations
for Learning, Prudence, Piety, and painfulness in the work of the Ministry.
Whereunto is added, the Life of GVSTAVUS ERICSON, King of Sueden, who first
Reformed RELIGION in that Kingdom, and of some other Eminent Christians.

By Sa. Clarke, Preacher of the Gospel in St Bennet Fink, London.

Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ,

1 Cor. 11. 1. Brethren, be ye followers together of me, and mark them which
walk so, as ye have us for an ensample,

Phil. 3. 17. Ministri vita censura, and Cynosura.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller, at the Gilded Acorn near the Little
North-door in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1662.

To the Candid Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER,
I Here present thee with another Volume of the Lives of Ten Eminent Ministers
of Jesus Christ, and of some other Christians. The acceptance of my former
Labors in this kind, has encouraged me to make some further progress herein.
We see how diligent the Papists have been to write and publish the Lives of
their Rome-canonized Saints, though most of them were but Ignes fatui that led
men into Boggs of Error, or blind leaders of the blind, as the Pharisees
were in our Saviors time, till both fell into the ditch: How much more
diligent and careful should we be, to perpetuate the Memories of those who
were fixed Stars, not in the Antichristian, but in the true Church of Christ:
And truly, if any Church in the Christian world, since the Reformation, much
more (through Gods great mercy) has the Church of England abounded with such:
And now what does the Lord require of us, but that we should be followers of
those, Heb. 6. 12.
who through faith and patience inherit the Promises. Good examples are for
imitation, bad for evitation. Good examples put a kind of life into men: Even
tired Jades seeing other Horses to gallop, will easily be put into a gallop
also; and experience shows, that its a good means for our quickening, duly to
observe the examples of such as have been forward in godliness, according to
that of the Apostle, Phil. 3. 17. Mark them which walk so as you have us for an
example. Its the Spirits end in guiding some men in the right way, and that
eminently, that by their walking therein, they might excite others to follow
them: And its also a special end of Regestring the Histories of the Saints
departed, Romans 15. 4.
For whatsoever was written aforetime, was written for our learning; and this
is the best learning which we can reap from such Records, to imitate their
Excellencies, and (if it be possible) to outstrip them therein. God in his
wisdom has not Regestred them, that they should be known only as matter of
Story for our delight, but for our direction and imitation; and to show that
the things which he requires of us are possible, seeing they have been done by
others before us; as also to show the way and means more plainly how to do
them, and to declare how grateful and acceptable they are when done. For the
Scriptures are not penned altogether in a commanding style, but have sweet
alluring Examples mingled with the Precepts. There are four ways (says an
eminent Divine) of teaching, Doctor Sibb^.
Rule, Reason, Similitudes, and Examples: The two former enjoin, but work not
upon the affections; and as for Smilitudes, they are for illustration, only
Examples conform us in a sweet alluring manner; and that we may receive good
from good Examples, these Rules are to be observed:

1. We must eye and pry into them, which is the very end why God has left us a
continual succession of good Examples.

2. We must eye them, not to observe their weaknesses, to discover their shame,
for this is a poisonous disposition; neither may we observe them thereby to
take liberty to the flesh, from what is amiss in them; but we must eye them, as
we look into Glasses, to dress, and adorn our selves thereby.

3. We must eye them for imitation: We must look upon the best, and the best in
the best. We must not compare our selves with those who are inferior to us in
Gifts and Graces: For he that thinks himself good by comparison is not good at
all. 1 Cor. 11. 1.
St. Paul says, Brethren, be ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ: He
propounded to himself, the most excellent pattern of all, even of Christ
himself, and he blamed the Corinthians, because they measured themselves by
themselves, 2 Cor. 10. 12.

4. We must labor for soft and sanctified hearts; for a stony heart will
receive no impression.

5. We must look to every one that has any good thing worthy imitation: For in
every Christian there is something imitable; and therefore St. Paul longed to
see the Romans, that he might be comforted by their faith, Romans 1. 12.

6. Lastly, In things concerning which there is no certain rule to direct us,
we ought to imitate the Examples of the most holy and sober Christians, as in
the fashion of our apparel, the length of our hair, etc.

And as good examples are very profitable, so there is much danger in those
that are evil, which by reason of the corruption of our natures, are great
incentives, and allurements to sin. Nemo errat uni sibi, sed dementiam spargit
in proximos, accipitque invicem, says Seneca. No man erres to himself also,
but disperseth, and communicates his folly to his Neighbors alone, and
interchangeably receives the like from them. And as evil Examples are hurtful
in all, so they are most pernicious in superiors: For seldom do these tall
Cedars fall, but they beat down all the low shrubs about them. Thus Magistrates
by their evil example corrupt their subjects, Parents their children, Masters
their servants, and especially Princes their people, seeing all the Country,
either for fear or flattery, is apt to conform to their Examples. Ea conditio
est Principis, ut quicquid faciat, praecipere videatur, says Quintilian.
Princes actions stand for precepts, and their examples have the power of a Law
to draw their subjects to imitation. As the Heliotrope moves after the Sun, so
do subjects follow the manners of their Princes.

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur Orbis. Alexander the Great used to carry
his head on the one side, whereupon his Nobles and Courtiers in imitation of
him did the like. The common people (says one) are like a flock of Cranes, as
the first flies all the rest follow after; or as a Beast, where all the body
follows the Head. Rulers sins do much hurt, as by imputation -- Delirant Reges,
2 Samuel 24.
plectuntur Achivi, so by imitation; For man is an Apish creature, apter to be
led by his eyes, than by his ears. Magis intuentur quid fecerit Jupiter, quam
quid docuit Plato, satth St. Augustine. Height of place ever adds two wings to
sin, Example and Scandal, whereby it soars higher, and flies much farther. Oh
therefore how cautious should Rulers be lest they be partakers of other men's
sins, 1 Timothy 5. 22. They have enough of their own to answer for. Potentes
potenter torquebuntur. Let them take heed lest the iniquity of their heels (of
those that follow them at heels) does compass them about, Psalm. 49. 5.

And as the evil examples of Great ones are very pernicious, so are their good
examples very profitable: Such as were the Kings of Judah, such were the
subjects; like Prince, and like Priest, like people. Before Vespatians time the
Romans were grown to great excess, and profuseness in their apparel, household
stuff, and attendants, having by their Conquest of the East, learned the
Eastern vices; and though many good Laws were made against it, yet could they
not be restrained: But so soon as he came to the Empire, being a sober,
moderate, and temperate Prince himself, all that former vanity grew out of
fashion.

I am not ignorant how some of late have endeavored to bespatter, and to bring
an Odium upon the Names of some of our former Worthies (whose Lives I have
formerly published) as though they were Fanatics, Anabaptists (because they
would not have their children baptized by Popish Priests) enemies to the State,
Traitors, etc. But the memory of them shall be blessed, when the names of these
their traducers shall not. This is no new thing: Indeed its an old trick of the
Devil and his instruments, to belie Gods Children, and to represent them in the
ugliest hue they can devise, thereby to make them the more odious: Jaer. 20. 10.
Thus Doeg dealt by David: The Priests and Prophets by Jeremy: Dan. 3. 12. and
6. 13.
The Persian Courtiers by Daniel, Amos 7. 10.
and his Companions: Amaziah by Amos: Hamon by the whole Nation of the Jews:
Esther 3. 8.
Tertullus by Paul: Act. 24. 5.
And the Heathen Idolaters by the Primitive Christians, whereof you may see
many Examples in my Mirror, p. 44, 45. But though the credit of the Saints may
be Flyblown for a season, and somewhat obscured, yet as the Moon wades out from
under a cloud, so shall their innocence break forth as the light, etc. Psalm.
37. 6. Buried it may be in the open Sepulcher of evil throats, but surely it
shall rise again. A Resurrection there shall be of Names as well as of Bodies,
at the farthest at the last day.

But I fear to exceed the length of an Epistle, and therefore I shall conclude
with the words of the holy Apostle St. Paul, 2 Cor. 13. 14.
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of
the Holy Ghost be with you all. So begging your prayers, I rest

From my Study in Thredneedle-street, October. 10. 1661. Yours to serve your
Faith and further your Joy, SA. CLARKE.

Upon this Book of Lives.
Who e're shall please to cast a glancing-eye
On these unpolish't, and rude lines which I
Expose to public view, may chance t'admire
A woman's hand should dare so to aspire.
But why should man and wife divided be,
Who long have lived in love, and unity?
For mine own part I do not know the reason,
Except a woman's verse be out of season.
Indeed I almost blush thus to be seen
Amongst so many Worthies as have been
Famous for Learning give them but their right,
Yet let me dare amongst them to throw my mite.
Of these Examples sure I am there is need,
To back our faith, and strengthen us indeed
Against such traps and nets as now are spread
To catch Gods people in the ways they tread.
Yet if these Worthies rather chose to dye
Than known Truths to betray, or once deny,
Then let us tread their path, which path is blessed,
That when we dye we may with them have r^st.
And now to him that wrote this Book
Due praise, and thanks I give:
And pray that it may never dye,
But when he dies may live.
To the Reverend, etc. Upon his Book of Lives.
Will not the rest of mankind blush for shame,
When they shall read, what under every name
Is there related? may not Ushers graces
Raise conscious blood into our modern-faces?
(He honored more his Dignity and See,
Then they did him; God send more such as he)
May not Crook, Whitaker, and painful Hill
Shame Drone-vinedressers who want skill or will?
May not, or rather, will not every story
U^b^aid the present age, and stain our glory?
When those that are not over-vicious shall
Run hazard to be styled Fanatical:
And these much more, whom you present to view
May probably be called Fanatics too.
For Moses and the Prophets are despised,
Apostles, and Evangelists not prized:
What wonder then, if those whom here you raise
Even from the dead to guide in holy ways
Shall be reproached, scorned, and neglected,
And that example which they gave, rejected?
Yet, Sir, your pi^us labors sober men
Will prize, and praise God for your happy Pen,
Whereby that pr^cious treasure once contained
In earthen v^ssels, now broke by deaths hand
Is for our use preserved i^ good part,
And we therewith enriched by your Art.
Let them who would your labors rightly prize
Endeavor to untwine these mysteries.
Candles put out, yet shining bright and fair,
Cities demolished, yet standing are;
Salt turned into dust, yet seasons much,
Uncanonized Saints, yet truly such.
J. C.

The Names of those Divines, and Others, whose Lives are contained in this
Volume.
MR. John Carter, who dyed Anno Christi 1634. Mr. Samuel Crook, who dyed Anno
Christi 1649. Mr. John Cotton, who dyed Anno Christi 1652. Dr. Thomas Hill, who
dyed Anno Christi 1653. Dr. William Gouge, who dyed Anno Christi 1653. Mr.
Thomas Gataker, who dyed Anno Christi 1654. Mr. Jeremy Whitaker, who dyed Anno
Christi 1654. Dr. James Usher, Primate of all Ireland, who dyed Anno Christi
1655. Mr. Richard Capel, who dyed Anno Christi 1656. Dr. Robert Harris, who
dyed Anno Christi 1658.
In the second Part.
Gustavus Ericson, King of Sueden, who dyed Anno Christi 1562. Mrs. Jane
Ratcliffe, who dyed Anno Christi 1638. Mr. Ignatius Jurdaine, who dyed Anno
Christi 1640. Mrs. Margaret Duck, who dyed Anno Christi 1646. Mrs. Margaret
Corbet, who dyed Anno Christi 1656. Mrs. Elizabeth Wilkinson, who dyed Anno
Christi 1654.
Being sometimes occasionally absent from the City, these faults have escaped
the Corrector, which I pray thee mend with thy Pen before reading of the Book.
PAge 29. line 4. read (...) for (...), p. 33. l. 8. r. strenuous for pervous,
p. 77. l. 1. put in, when so ne, etc. p 87. l. 1. r. conscionably for
conscionable, p. 91. l. 4. put out, an, p. 129. l. 15. put out, was, p. 140. l.
1. put in, of, l. 20. r. her for his, p, 144. l. 22. put in, occasion, p. 149.
l. 20. r. familiarly, for familiarity, p. 150. l. 29 r Bishops for Bishop, p.
156. l. 23. r. strange for strong, p. 157. l. 11. r. days, for life, p. 233.
l. 31. r. knowing for know, p. 312. l. 4. r. wrote for wrough^, p. 318. l. 25.
r. jure human^, and juris human^, p. 342. l. 17. r. bury for b^y, l. the last,
r other, for to her, p. 315. l. 8. r the restless, for restless the, p. 369. l.
17. r. Sabbath for Sabbath, l. 27. r. Lubeckers for Lubecks, p 435. l. 21. r.
the so^l, for the sold, p. 439. l. 7. r. M^t. 6. 3. for M^t. 3. 6. p. 443. l.
11. r. which for when, p. 451. l. 15. put in by that, l. 24 p^t in, he, p. 452
l. 13. p^t out, used, and put in, to, p. 457. l. 3. put in, of, p. 468. l. 29.
r. you, for yours, l. 529. l. 11* r. breeding for being.

Mr. JOHN CARTER.

The LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. JOHN CARTER, Who died Anno Christi, 1634.
MAster John Carter was born at Wickham in Kent, His birth.
near Canterbury, about the year of our Lord, 1554. He was descended but of
mean Parents, yet were they Religious, and of good report, who not being able
to maintain him at the University, wholly upon their own charge; there was one
Mr. Rose, His education.
a rich man in Canterbury, who taking notice of his Piety in those his tender
years, of his ingenuity, studiousness, and proficiency in all School-learning,
even beyond the pitch of a Grammar Scholar; and finding him hopeful, and
likely to prove a precious instrument in the Church of Christ, he took him into
his care, sent him to Cambridge, and contributed such sums of money to him from
time to time as were needful. He goes^ ^ Cambridge.
He was admitted into Clare-Hall, and was Pupil to Dr. Bing, a famous Civilian,
and Master of that House.

Presently after his first admission into that House, His Proficiency.
he was taken notice of as one of singular Learning, and ripeness for his
years. Amongst the rest that were of his year he had a Theme given him to make
upon this Subject, Frugalitas virtutum maxima: and when the young Students
brought in their Theams, the Lecturer took, and read them, and when he came to
Carters Theme he stood, His Industry.
and paused awhile, and at last, said before them all: Here is the best Theme
that ever I read; and gave him some money for his encouragement, and highly
commended his Industry; and always after cast a favorable eye upon him, and
sought opportunities to do him good.

When Mr. Carter had taken his degrees of Bachelor, Gods providence.
and Mr. of Arts, his Tutor, Dr. Bing (out of his singular love to him for his
Piety and Learning) gave him a Chamber in his own Lodgings, where he continued
a year, or two, which conduced much to the completing of him for the work of
the Ministry; and all the while that he continued a gremial in the lap, and
bosom of his Mother, the University, he held constant Meetings with diverse of
his famous Contemporaries, and that every week, as with Dr. Chaderton, Dr.
Andrews (afterward Bishop of Ely) Mr. Culverwell, Mr. Kewstubs, and diverse
others, whom God raised up and fitted to send forth into his Harvest, to gather
his Corn, then ripe for the Sickle, into his Barn. Note.
At their meetings they had constant Exercises; first, They began with prayer,
and then applied themselves to the Study of the Scriptures; one was for the
Original Languages, another task was for the Grammatical Interpretation;
another for the Logical Analysis; another for the true sense, and meaning of
the Text; another gathered the Doctrines, and thus they carried on their
several employments, till at last they went out, like Apollos, eloquent men,
and mighty in the Scriptures: and the Lord was with them; so that they brought
in a very great Harvest into Gods Barn.

Mr. Carter would not run before he was sent, His Ordination.
though he was so excellently qualified for the work; he durst not venture upon
the exercise of the holy work of the Ministry, till he had, not only an inward,
but an outward call also, viz. an assignation, approbation, and solemn
admission by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. When he was
ordained, the Bishop (who in those days was primus Presbyter, or Praeses)
seeking to oppose him, asked him this Question, Have you read the Bible
through? Yes (said he) I have read the Old Testament twice through in the
Hebrew, and the New Testament often through in the Greek; and if you please to
examine me in any particular place, I shall endeavor to give you an account of
it. Nay (said the Bishop) if it be so, I shall need to say no more to you; only
some words of Commendation and encouragement he gave him, and so with other
assistants, he Ordained him.

Anno Christi, 1583. the Vicaridge of Bramford in Suffolk, He fixes (...)
Bramford.
near Ipswich, fell void, and Mr. Rose of Canterbury, beforementioned, procured
the Presentation thereof for Mr. Carter of the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury,
in whose Gift it was. The Salary at first was only twenty Marks per annum, but
afterward the Church raised it to twenty pound per annum, and that was the
most that ever he had there, yet he accepted of it, and being settled in it, he
set himself to do the work of Christ faithfully with all his might, as a
workman that needed not to be ashamed.

Every Lords day he preached twice very powerfully, His great pains.
and Chatechised the younger sort. He also preached a Lecture every Thursday,
to which multitudes from Ipswich, and other adjacent places, did resort: And
God gave such success to his Ministry, His Success.
that by his labors many sons and daughters were from time to time begotten
unto God. Many precious Christians that remain unto this day, acknowledge that
their Conversion was by Mr. Carters Ministry.

Before his Sermons he made but a short Prayer, His Prayers.
and that always in the same words: After Sermon he used to be large, and full,
and expressed himself with great variety of phrases, and with much fervency,
and always he concluded with the Lords Prayer.

He was very diligent in visiting the sick, Hi^ Charity.
especially the poorer sort; and he never went to the house of any poor
creature, but he left a Purse-Alms, as well as a Spiritual-Alms of good, and
heavenly advice, and prayer. No poor body ever came to his door that went away
empty; his wife also looking to that as carefully as himself.

Every Saturday throughout the whole year he gave the Milk of his Cows to the
poor of the Town; and indeed he gave more to the Poor every year, then the
Revenue of his slender Vicaridge came to in the whole: yet God so blessed him,
that whilst he was in Bramford, he quickly paid Mr. Rose of Canterbury all the
money that he had disbursed toward his Education in the Uuniversity; and before
he left Bramford he purchased about twenty pound per annum; Gods blessing only
makes rich.

He had but two sons, His children.
and he brought them both up in Learning, and maintained them in the University
in good fashion.

He was sound, His zeal.
and orthodox in his judgment: An able, and resolute Champion against all
manner of Popery and Arminianism; as also against Anabaptism, and Brownism,
which did then begin to peep up, and infest the Church, to tear and rent the
seamless coat of Christ.

He was always a Nonconformist, His nonconformity.
one of the good old Puritans of England. He never swallowed any of the
Prelatical Ceremonies against his Conscience: So that he was often troubled by
the Bishops, but God raised him up friends that always brought him off, and
maintained his Liberty. He was prudent, and of a peaceable spirit, and never
censured any that could, and did conform, if he judged them conscientious, and
saw any thing of God in them.

At his first coming to Bramford, he saw of the travel of his soul. He had a
plentiful harvest, many souls being daily added to the Church, by his
powerful Ministry, and holy life. But after he had abode many years amongst
them, the people began to be glutted with heavenly Manna, and loathed it, so
that there grew a great decay in their first love: and about the year 1615. or
something before, His enemies.
there arose up a generation of malignant spirits, who were haters of a plain,
powerful, and searching Ministry, and of the life and power of Godliness:
These were the Gentry, and chief of the Parish. These rose up against Mr.
Carter, pressed him to Conformity, complained of him to the Bishop, and
threatened that they would either bring him to conformity or eject him.

At this very juncture of time, Gods providence.
through Gods gracious Providence, the Rectory of little Belsted fell to be
void. A very small Village, some three miles from Ipswich, and a solitary
place; the means indeed was better then Bramford, yet short of a competency,
and of the deserts of so eminent a Pillar in the Church of Christ: it being but
about fifty pound, and at the most not worth above sixty pound per annum.

The Patron (Mr. Bloss) became a Suitor to Master Carter to accept of it, which
he refused again, and again, being resolved rather to endure persecution at
Bramford, to grapple with all difficulties, and to die there, rather then to
remove. But Gods providence overruled him. At Bramford he saw that he must be
outed, and Mr. Bloss would take no denial: yea, and he found favor in the eyes
of the Bishop; so that he was instituted without subscription, or submitting to
the Ceremonies: and then at last, God (as it were) taking him by the hand, and
pulling him whether he would or no, he removed from Bramford, after he had done
faithful Service in the work of the Ministry for about thirty four years in
that place, His remove to Belsted.
and was settled at Belsted Parsonage, where be continued eighteen years before
God caused him to rest from his Labors; and in all that time he discharged his
holy Function just as he had done in Bramford in his younger years; though his
Congregation here was but small: yet it pleased God that many Fish came within
the compass of his Net from Ipswich, and other neighboring Towns, where they
were destitute of faithful Shepherds, so that his later Crop in Gods
Harvest-field, was very considerable.

Little Belsted was a Tusculanum to him, where in his old age he had much
secret, His Communion with God.
and sweet communion with God in the house, and, as an Isaac, with him in the
Fields, which was a beginning of that glorious Communion which he now enjoyes
with God in the mountains of Spices. He being dead, yet speaks; and his works
praise him in the Gates. His works.
For from the Press we have his Learned, and pithy Commentary on the Sermon of
Christ in the Mount: and two short, but substantial, solid, and profitable
Catechisms: one, Milk for children: the other, Winter evenings Communication.

His pains in the study of the Revelations were indefatigable. He wrote much in
a little room; but these Labors of his yet never saw the light. Many Ministers
that privately did converse with him, lighted their candles at his.

For his carriage and deportment in his Family, His Family Duties.
it was sober, grave, and very Religious. He there offered up the Morning and
Evening Sacrifice of Prayer, and praise continually: so that his House was a
little Church. Thrice a day he had the Scriptures read, and after that the
Psalm, or Chapter were ended, he used to ask all his children and servants what
they remembered, and whatsoever Sentences they rehearsed, he would speak
something out of them that might tend to their edification. For his own, and
his Wives habit, it was very plain, and homely, of the old Fashion, His
humility.
yet very cleanly and decent; insomuch, that all that came to his house would
say, they had seen Adam and Eve, or some of the old Patriarchs.

In all his house also, there was nothing but honest plainess. He was such an
one as Jacob, a plain, sincere, I had almost said a perfect man; I am sure a
true Nathaneel, in whom was no guile.

He never used any Plate in his House, but Vessels of Wood and Earth; Pewter
and Brass were the highest Metals for his Utensils. All the time of his
housekeeping he used constantly at his Table a little wooden Salt, which with
age was grown to be of a duskish black, which was much taken notice of by all
Comers.

He never made Feasts, His hospitality.
yet always had wholesome, full, and liberal Diet in his house, and all fared
alike: He, and his wife did never think that his children, and servants, and
poor folk did eat enough.

The righteous man (says Solomon) is merciful to his Beast: So he was
careful even for the bruit Creatures, that they should be fed to the full. All
his cattle were like to the first Kine that Pharaoh saw feeding in the Meddow,
they were fat-fleshed, and well favored; insomuch, as some godly people used
to say merrily: If they would be a Cow, or a Horse, or a Hog, or a Dog, they
would choose Mr. Carter for their Master.

He had a sharp wit, His conversation.
and was sweet, mild, affable, and pleasant in his conversation; yet were
there not any of his most facetious passages, that did not savor of holiness.
His communication and discourse was always heavenly, His secret Duties.
and his eyes were frequently lifted up toward heaven: He did not eat, or
drink without praising God with his mouth, and eyes. His whole Conversation was
in Heaven.

Besides his Family Duties, and Prayers, he prayed constantly in his Closet at
his first going to his study, and before he came forth to Dinner and Supper. He
prayed very loud, His Prayers
and mostly very long: for the extension of his voice he had a double reason;
one that by his earnest speech he might quicken, and raise up his own heart,
and devotion: the other, that he might give a good example for secret prayer to
his children, and servants; and he never closed any Prayer, without adding the
Lords Prayer; and his ground for that practice was this; He judged his own best
Prayers imperfect, and that of Christ most perfect, and comprehensive of all
our necessities.

That you may be the better satisfied concerning his sense, and judgment in
this matter, take this transcript out of his Printed Commentary upon Mat. 6. 9.
Where after he has set forth the excellency, and perfection of Christ's Prayer,
he adds, Christ now directs us to the right performance of the Duty of
Prayer. Of the Lords Prayer.
After this manner pray ye: Or as St. Luke sets it down, When you pray, say.
Not binding us strictly to use these words always, and none other, but to use
the matter, manner, and like affections: But as for them who cannot so well
enlarge their suits in other words, or for those also who can, and do it, and
yet remain still unsatisfied, as not having done it sufficiently (and who can
do it sufficiently?) the Lord Christ has left this most excellent help to use
the very words of this Divine Prayer, as the most worthy servants of God have
ever used to do: And learn we here by the way, that an absolute necessity lies
upon us (which ought to be our greatest glory and comfort) to pray in these
words, or in this manner. For it is the undispensable Commandment of our Lord
Christ: After this manner pray.

He had a special dexterity in comforting afflicted Consciences; His skill in
comforting afflicted Conseences.
resolving doubts, and answering questions; when some came to him (not long
before he changed this earthly for an heavenly Mansion) and told him of the
rigor of the Prelates, how it grew higher every day, how they persecuted
conscientious Ministers, and Christians: Of their Innovations, and of the Book
for Liberty of Sports on the Sabbath days, tending to the fearful profanation
thereof: He used these expressions: I have had a longing desire to see, or hear
of the fall of Antichrist: But I check my self, I shall go to Heaven, and there
news of it will come thick, thick, thick.

When others came to him, and pressed him with importunity to tell them his
Judgment concerning the future state of the Church, saying to him, that he had
traveled much in the study of the Revelations, and they were persuaded that
God had revealed something more then ordinary to him. What do you think (said
they) shall we have Popery once again, or no? He answered, You shall not need
to fear fire, and faggot any more: but such dreadful divisions will be amongst
God people and Professors, A^ Prediction.
as will equalize the greatest persecutions.

A man meeting him near his house, called to him, saying, Oh Mr. Carter! What
shall I do? My wife is entering into her Travel, and I think she will die with
very fear: Mr. Carter answered, Make haste, run to your wife, and tell her that
I am going to my Closet as fast as I can to pray for her; therefore bid her not
faint, but to be of good courage and comfort. His Prayers successful.
The man accordingly ran to his wife, and told her what had passed between Mr.
Carter, and him. Presently her fears vanished, God gave her strength, and she
was delivered immediately, and safely: and strait after, her Husband went to
Mr. Carter (even before he came out of his Closet) and told him what God had
done for him.

Another time, a poor man met him by the way, and cried to him piteously,
saying, Mr. Carter! What shall become of me? I work hard, and fare hard, and
yet I cannot thrive, I continue bare, and know not how in the world to live.
His gracious speeches.
He answered him: Yet still you want one thing, and I will tell you what you
shall do, Work hard, and fare hard, and pray hard, and I will warrant you shall
thrive.

There dwelled in that Parish a Tanner, that was a very godly man, and one that
had much familiar society with Mr. Carter. This man as he was very busy in
Tawing of a Hide with all his might, not so much as turning his head aside any
way: Mr. Carter coming by accidentally, came softly behind him, and merrily
gave him a little clap on the back: the man started, and looking behind him
suddenly, blushed, and said, Sir, I am ashamed that you should find me thus: To
whom Mr. Carter replied, Let Christ when he comes find me so doing: What (said
the man) doing thus? Yes (said Mr. Carter to him) faithfully performing the
Duties of my Calling.

Being at Dinner at Ipswich at one of the Magistrates Houses; diverse other
Ministers being at the Table also: One amongst the rest (who was old enough,
and had learned enough to have taught him more humility) was very full of talk,
bragged much of his parts, and skill, etc. and made a Challenge, saying, Here
are many Learned men, if any of you will propound any question in Divinity, or
Philosophy, I will dispute with him, resolve his doubt, and satisfy him fully.
All at the Table (except himself) were silent for a while: then said Mr.
Carter, (when he saw that none else would speak) to him, calling him by his
name: I will go no further then my Treacher to puzzle you: Here is a Sole: His
acuteness.
Now tell me the reason why this Fish that has lived always in the salt water,
should come out fresh? To this, this forward Gentleman could say nothing, and
so was laughed at, and shamed out of his vanity.

At another time a certain man came to him, and made his moan, saying, I have
lost the greatest friend that I had in the world: I had (in a manner) all my
livelihood from him: To whom Mr. Carter answered: When the Fountain is dried up
in one place, God will open it in another.

To one of his Sons he said, Son John, God has always brought water for me out
of the hard stinty rock. Those covetous hard hearted men, who have been enemies
to my person and Ministry, have many times come in, and given me countenance
and maintenance.

His eldest son, whom he had bred up to the Ministry, and who proved a blessed
Instrument in the Church of Christ, being dead, Mr. Carter took care of his
eldest son, sent him to Cambridge, and walking with him toward the Stable,
took his last leave of him, in these words in Latin, Cave, mi fili, fastum,
ignaviam, Antichristum, My son, beware of Pride, Sloth, and Antichrist.

His usual saying was, a Traveller must have a Swines belly, an Asses back, and
a Merchants purse: Meaning that he must be content with any fare, bear all
injuries, and provide for vast expenses. We are Pilgrims and Travelers here,
and we must prepare for wants, wrongs, and spoiling of our goods.

It might well be said of him, Semper erat ubi non erat: His heart was where
his head was, and now his soul is, to wit, in Heaven.

His whole life was nothing else but a Communion day. Old Jacob seemed to live
in him: and sure the Spirit of God breathed as much in him, His fruitfulness.
in his words, and writings (holiness dropped from his Pen in every ordinary
Letter that he wrote) in his actions, and Soliloquies, as in any man's in these
latter times. He was always instilling precious precepts, exhortations,
instructions, or consolations into those with whom he had occasion to converse.

A godly woman told his Son, that she had been servant to a Religious
Gentleman, to whose house Mr. Carter did often resort, and that she was won to
Christ at first, by hearing the Heavenly speeches, and sweet principles that
dropped from him as she was warming his Bed, and as she waited upon him in his
Chamber.

He was always most just, His Justice.
and exact in his dealings. He put a Clause in his Will, for the faithful, and
careful payment of his Debts: yet when his Son John, and his daughter Eunice,
whom he made his Executors, enquired what his Debts were, he could find
nothing that he owed, except to the Smith for shooing of an Horse or two.

His Son, when he came to look over his Library, found two or three Books (not
one of them worth a Groat) upon which he had written, This Book was borrowed of
such an one: Let it be restored: or if the owner cannot be found, allow
something to the poor for it, and that liberally.

Once, being in a journey many miles from home, in changing a piece of Gold at
a Shop, he took an half Crown piece instead of a shilling, neither he nor the
Shopkeeper knowing it: but as soon as he came home, he found the mistake;
whereupon he could not rest satisfied, but the next day took a long journey
back again on purpose to that Town, to carry back the half Crown again.

He was of a sweet, mild, and gentle nature, and of a gracious spirit. A
loving, and faithful Husband to his wife, and a tender, and indulgent Father
to his children; and if he failed in any thing, it was in his carriage to his
Servants; for truly he carried not himself to them as a Master to his servants,
but as a familiar friend to his friends. He would make them to sit down with
him at his Table, and would drink to them at his meals.

He, and his Wife were married together almost threescore years, and in all
that time there was never heard any distastefull word to pass betwixt them.
Neither indeed could it be otherwise: For he lived, and walked with her as a
man of knowledge: he was to her a Prudent, Faithful, and tender guide; and she
was humble, and meek, reverenced, and highly esteemed him. Every word he spoke
was an Oracle to her, and her will ever closed with his Judgment.

He lived to the age of fourscore: His Age.
When his youngest son John was born, who was the youngest of nine, he called
him the Son of his Age, and yet he lived to see him forty years old before he
died himself, being forty years old when he was born.

He was much, His Fastings.
and frequent in secret Fastings, and when he kept such a day, he told none of
his house of it, save his wife only, and she would not eat any thing that day
on which he fasted, but oft-times she was with him in his retiring chamber to
join with him in prayer; yet could it not be concealed from the rest of the
Family, because at night he supped not, but only had a Toste, and a draught of
ordinary Beer to sustain nature.

On the Sabbath Days he never had any Roste meat at Dinner, because he would
have none thereby kept from the Public Ordinances; the Pot was hung on with a
piece of Beef, and a pudding in it, and that was their constant Lords Days
Dinner, for well-nigh sixty years together.

His Church at Belsted stood in a very solitary place, His retirements.
whereof he always kept a key, and would often resort thither all alone. A
Gentleman once espying him as he went toward the Church on a private day, hid
himself, till Mr. Carter was past, and gone into the Church, and then he came
close up to the Church wall, desiring to peep in at some window to see what he
did, and to listen if he said any thing; and this Gentleman afterward told his
Son John, that he first prayed, then read a Chapter, and after that prayed
largely, and very heavenly, as if he had been in his Family, or in the public
Congregation.

He vigorously held on the constant course of his Ministry to the last. His
vigor.
It may be said of him, as of Caleb and Joshua; he was as sit for service in
Gods Harvest-field at fourscore, as he was at forty.

Indeed some abatement of bodily strength there was, as old Age did steal upon
him. After his afternoon Sermon on the Sabbath days he would be something
faint, and commonly when he came home he would call for some comfortable
draught, and when he had lifted up his eyes to heaven, and taken it, he would
say to them about him, These are crutches to shore up a ruinous house: but in
his Intellectuals, and spiritual strength there was no decay.

Old Mr. Benton of Wramplingham in Norfolk, a holy man of God, being upon
occasion in Suffolk in those parts, could not but give a visit to his old
friend, Mr. Carter of Belsted; and being with him, he heard him discourse with
such holy gravity, and a mixture of all kind of Learning, sollidity, and wit,
that he stood amazed at it, and said, Mr. Carter, I see you are like unto the
Palm and Cedar Tree, you bring forth more fruit in your Age. I thank you (said
Mr. Carter) you tell me what I should be.

And now the time of his departure was at hand: His sickness.
Some fortnight, or three weeks before his Translation, there appeared some
decays in his body, and memory, which now began to fail him. He would sometimes
(but rarely) call to go to Sea, and to his better Country. Yet he sat up from
morning till night, and commonly walked up and down the room, and never failed
to perform Prayer, and other Family exercises, so that none could discern any
considerable defect either in his spiritual, or natural strength: Only in this,
that when he had done, he would presently call to begin again; and say to his
daughter Eunice, who was now the stay of his house, and the staff of his old
age (God having taken away his dear wife about two years before) Daughter,
shall we not go to prayer? and when she answered him, Sir you have been at
Prayer already, and you are weary, he would reply, I fear we have not done what
we should do.

It was one of his constant and ordinary Petitions in every Prayer, that God
would vouchsafe him a merciful, and easy passage out of this life, and the
Lord did most graciously answer him therein.

February the 21. Anno Christi, 1634. being the day before the Sabbath, in the
evening he called very earnestly for Paper, Ink, and two Pens: For (says he)
by Gods grace tomorrow I will preach twice: But (God knows) he was not in a fit
condition for study; yet with that resolution he went to Bed, and God gave him
some rest that night. In the morning upon the Sabbath day he did rise from his
Bed, as he used to do, and came out of his Bedchamber into the Hall, and after
Prayer, he called for his ordinary breakfast, which he used before he went to
Church (for still he held his resolution for Preaching) which was an Egg; he
took it into his hand, but alas! it would not down: whereupon he said to his
daughter.

Eunice, I am not able to go to Church, yet I pray thee, lead me to my Bed, I
will lie down a little and rest me. So he rose up out of his chair, and walked
up and down, she supporting him, and when he came to the Parlour door, before
he put his foot over the threshold: Oh Eunice! says he, What shall I do? Put
your trust (says she) in that God of whom you have had so much experience, who
never yet did leave you, nor forsake you. Yea (says he) the Lord be thanked.

So he gathered up his strength, went to the Bedside, sat down upon it, and
immediately composed himself to lie down. His Death.
He lifted up one of his Legs upon the Bed without any great difficulty, laid
down his Body, and rested his Head upon the Pillow. His Daughter still stood
by, expecting when she should lift his other leg upon the Bed, thinking that he
had been fallen asleep: and she was not mistaken, for so he was. It proved his
last sleep, and before she could discern any change in him, his soul had taken
its flight into heaven, even into the Arms, and embraces of his Blessed
Savior, whom he had faithfully served all his life long; being about fourscore
years old.

He intended a Sabbaths labor for Christ, and Christ gave him rest from his
labor, even the rest of an eternal Sabbath. When his daughter began to speak
to him, and to lift him, she found that his breath was departed, yet was there
not any change in his countenance at all: his eyes and his mouth continuing in
the same posture they used to be in his sweetest sleeps.

Thus the Lord gave unto his faithful Servant the desire of his soul, and a
return of his Prayers, such an easy passage, as that his death could not be
discerned from a sweet natural sleep.

Not many days before his death he called his daughter and said to her,
Daughter, Remember my love to my Son John: I shall see him no more in this
life: and remember me to the rest of my children, and Family, and deliver this
message to them all from me: Stand fast in the faith, and love one another.
This was the last message that ever he sent to them.

He ended his life with a Doxology, breathing out his last, with these words,
The Lord be thanked.

When he had thus yielded up his Spirit into the hands of his heavenly Father,
his daughter Eunice dispatched away a Messenger to his Son John at Norwich: for
so had her Father given order before he died, that his body should not be put
into a Cofsin till his Son John came: and God carried him through the journey
in hard weather, so that through Gods good providence, he arrived at Belsted
early on the Tuesday, and going into the house of mourning, he found the Body
of his deceased Father still lying upon the bed: they uncovered his face, and
sweetly he lay, and with a smiling countenance, and no difference appearing to
the eye between his countenance alive and dead, only that he was wont to
rejoice, and to bless his Son at their meeting, and now he was silent. His son
fell upon his face and kissed him, and lift up his voice and wept, and so took
his last leave of him till they should meet in a better world.

February the 4th. in the afternoon, His Funeral.
Anno Christi, 1634. was he Interred, at which time there was a great
confluence people from all the parts thereabout, Ministers, and others, all
taking up the words of Joash King of Israel: Oh my Father! my Father! the
chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof!

Good Mr. Samuel Ward, that famous Divine, and the glory of Ipswich, came to
the Funeral, brought with him a mourning Gown, and offered very respectfully to
have preached his Funeral Sermon, now that such a Congregation was gathered
together, and upon such an occasion.

But his Son, and daughter durst not give way unto it: for so their Father had
often charged them in his life time, and that upon his blessing, that there
should be no Sermon at his burial: For (said he) it may give occasion to speak
some good of me that I deserve not, and so false things may be uttered in the
Pulpit.

Mr. Ward rested satisfied with this, and accordingly did forbear: But the next
Friday at Ipswich, he turned his whole Lecture into a Funeral Sermon for Mr.
Carter, in which he honored him, and lamented the Churches loss, to the great
satisfaction of the whole Auditory. Gloria fugentes sequitur.

Glory is like your shadow! follow it, and it will fly away from you; but she
from it, and it will follow you.

And so it proved with Mr. Carter: His Humility.
He was most eminent for Humility: Humble he was in his habit, and humble in
all his deportment: For though his Gifts called him before great men, yet his
most ordinary converse was with those of an inferior rank; in whom he saw most
of the power of godliness. So that he might truly say, with David, Psalm. 119.
63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
precepts.

He wrote very much; but he left nothing behind him save what is Printed, His
Works.
and his Exposition upon the Revelations; and a Petition to King James for the
taking away of burdensome Ceremonies out of the Church. Nothing else but a few
broken Papers, which he regarded not. Probably he burnt the rest, when he saw
his appointed time draw near, merely out of a low opinion of himself, and his
own gifts.

He avoided all things that might tend to outward Pomp, and ostentation: He
would have no Funeral Sermon: He left order in his Will not to be buried in the
Church, but in the Churchyard; where he, and his wife, that glorious pair, he
interred together without so much, or rather so little as a poor Gravestone
over them.

He had learned of Christ to be meek and lowly in heart: He was humble in his
Life, and humble in his Death, and now the Lord has highly exalted him.

He kept a constant Diary, His Diary.
or day book, in which every day he set down Gods extraordinary dispensations,
his own actions, and whatsoever memorable things he heard, or read that day.

He cast up his Accounts with God every day: and his sins were blotted out
before he came to his last reckoning; his day of refreshing came, and he rests
from his labors

Plus vivitur exemplis quam preceptis, says Seneca; Examples of the dead, are
Sermons for the liv^ng:

He was a true child of Abraham, and the blessing of Abraham fell upon him. I
will bless them (says the Lord to him) that bless thee, and I will curse them
that curse thee. Some years after his death, his Son John being at Bramford,
there was an ancient Gentleman, that had lived there long, and was Mr. Carters
old Friend, who spoke thus unto him, Mr. Carter, I have nowli^ to see the
downfall of all your Fathers opposites, Note.
and enemies; there is not one of them, but their Families are scattered, and
come to ruin. Let all the enemies of Gods faithful Messengers hear and fear,
and do no more so wickedly.

It may be truly said of him, and his faithful Yoke Fellow, as it is written of
Zacharias and Elizabeth, they were both righteous before God, walking in all
the Commandments, and Ordinances of the Lord blameless; and truly the world
will, and can testify, that neither of them did ever do that thing that was
evil, or unjust, or scandalous, or uncomely, even their enemies themselves being
Judges, they were as to men, without blemish: their life was a sweet savor,
and they went out of this life as a fragrant persume.

This Life was drawn up by Mr. John Carter, Junior, now also with the Lord, one
who degenerated not from the steps of his Learned, and holy Father, and by him
was sent to me some years since, together with this ensuing Epistle: which I
have the rather inserted, to provoke, and stir up others, who can in this way,
revive the memories of the Dead Saints, to do it, which will be a more lasting
Monument to them, and far more beneficial, and advantageous to the Church of
God, than any sumptuous, and costly Funerals, or Grave-stones whatsoever.

To his Reverend Brother, and fellow Labourer in the Lords Vineyard, Mr. Samuel
Clark, Pastor of Bennet Fink, London.
Worthy Sir,
THat which Naomi spoke to Ruth concerning Boaz* He has not left off his
kindness to the living, and to the Dead: It is fully verified of your self:
You cease not to show kindness to the Living, and to the Dead. To the Living;
by your Preaching, and Ministry you make Saints daily. To the Dead Saints you
show kindness, by perpetuating their Names to their honors, and the good of
many: And herein you are a greater gainer: you shine your self by making others
shine. Amongst the rest of those that honor you I am one, though I never saw
your face, otherwise then in the Frontispiece of your Learned Books.

In the first part of your Marrow of Ecclesiastical History, we had
information, that you did resolve to add a second Part; and to put in the Lives
of such godly Divines, and others, as were eminent in these latter times, if
you were furnished with faithful Informations. Hereupon, diverse did set upon
me with very great importunity, to write the Life of my dear Father, and to
send it up to you. Truly worthy Sir! I was desirous of the thing, but durst not
undertake the work: I was sensible of mine own weakness, and also that his
sayings, and doings had (...) slipped the memories of this Generation, that I
should have brought to light such an imperfect thing, as rather would have been
a blemish to so eminent a Saint, than any Honor. Hereupon I laid aside all
thoughts of meddling, or attempting such a thing. I know that he is glorious in
heaven, and on earth too, so far as his name is spread.

Now, good Sir, let me be bold to give a short account of my self. Some few
days since I went about to make a new Diary for my self, I was desirous in the
first place, to set down some passages of my Father, for mine own satisfaction,
and use. I began so, and before I was aware, it amounted to so much, as I
thought better that that should be published, than nothing at all: and at last
my Spirit grew restless: I could not satisfy my self, till I had digested it
into some order, and made it public. And now, Sir, here it is; I present it to
your judicious view; accept it in good part from a mere stranger.

My humble request to you, Worthy Sir, is this, that, though I slipped the last
opportunity, yet if you shall set forth any more Lives; or if you shall have a
new Impression of any of the former, that you would extract so much of my
precious Fathers Life, as you shall judge fit, and place it where you please in
your Ecclesiastical History. Your Monuments will be lasting in after Ages, when
my poor Pamphlet will be worn out with time. Pardon my boldness: The Lord
lengthen out your days, for the good of his Church, and the honor of his
Saints.

Your most observant friend and brother, that truly Honors you, JOHN CARTER.


The Life and Death of Mr. Samuel Crook, who died An. Christi 1649.
SAmuel Crook was born at Great Waldingfield in Suffolk, His birth.
Jan. 17. Anno Christi 1574. He was a Prophet, and the Son of a Prophet, even
of that great, and famous Light, Dr. Crook, a Learned, and Laborious Divine,
who was sometimes a Preacher to the Honorable Society of Greys-Inn; A
Gentleman well descended, and of an ancient Family.

This our Samuel was in his younger years trained up in Merchant Tailors School
in London, His education.
and having perfected his Studies there, he was sent to the University of
Cambridge, and admitted into Pembroke-Hall, where he was first Scholar, and
afterward chosen Fellow of that House, being chosen by the unanimous consent,
and suffrage of all, but the Master, upon whose refusal, he was soon after
Elected, and admitted one of the first foundation of Fellows in Emanuel
College, where, until this day his name is precious, being preserved in their
Library amongst their choicest Ornaments of that House in the Catalogue of
their first Fellows, thus written; Mr. Samuel Crook, Batchelour in Divinity.

From his very youth he was highly esteemed in that University, His Proficiency.
both for his candid, and ingenuous behavior in a comely person, as also for
his pregnant parts, ready wit, great industry, and answerable proficiency in
all kinds of Polite Learning, which renders a man more expedite, and exquisite
for any worthy, and noble employment, and is more especially preparatory, and
introductory to the Study of Sacred Divinity: which being observed, and taken
notice of, he was first made choice of to be the Rhetoric Reader, His
Preferment.
and afterward was advanced to be Philosophy Reader in the Public Schools,
both which places he performed with general applause.

Amongst his other youthly employments, His youthly ^abours.
he translated Virg^ls Eclogues: the first, and second Books of his Aeneids:
Juvenals first Satyr, and most of the memorable speeches both in Virgil, and
other Poets; All which were clear demonstrations of his ingenious capacity, and
ingenuous sufficiency.

And, to show that his heart; even in his youth was drawn Heavenward (from
whence his wit was sanctified) he translated diverse of David's Psalms, and
composed several Sacred Hymns of his own: Some of which he sung with tears of
joy, and desire in his last sickness, having a sweet voice, and good skill in
Music.

In his younger years also, he was a constant, and diligent hearer, and great
admirer of that man of God, Mr. William Perkins, and a Reverend Observer of all
the most eminent men of that Time, who were famous in their Generation,
carefully, and safely laying up in the faithful Treasury of his Memory what he
heard from them; which was an evident presage of his future abilities, and that
he was likely to become a skillful Master Builder in the House of God, and an
excellent Instrument of winning many souls unto Christ.

He was acute in the Greek, A good Linguist.
and well skilled in the Hebrew and Arabic Tongues, which he sparingly made
use of, only upon necessary occasions, not for ostentation, to amuse such
hearers as seem to be most pleased with what they least understand; but for the
more full, and clear opening of the Text, and giving the genuine interpretation
thereof from its Divine O^lginals, whose full sense, and native Elegancies
(proper to every Language) cannot always be expressed to the life without
recourse to the Fountains. For as St Austin says, Habet omnis Lingua sua
quaeque propria genera locutionum, quae cum in aliam linguam transferuntur,
videntur absurda: Every Lnnguage has its proper kind of speeches, which being
translated into another Tongue, seem to be absurd.

He very well understood, and spoke the Italian, French, and Spanish Tongues,
and had read very many grave, and witty Authors in each of them, whereof, by
the excellency of his wit, What use he made of them.
he made admirable use even in Divinity (which now a days many illiterate
persons, most audaciously, and presumptuously defile with unhallowed hearts,
and unwashed hands) he being able by an holy Alchimy (as was said of Virgil,
Aurum de stircore: he could draw gold out of a Dunghill) to make every thing
serve to his powerful persuasions, wherein he excelled.

He likewise studied History, A good Artist.
Politics, and Physic, of all which he made excellent use in his
amplifications, illustrations, and insinuations of more Divine Subjects. Every
thing furnished him with more moving expressions of his sweet notions in
Prayer, and Preaching, which made him a burning as well as a shining Light with
greater brightness and lust^e.

While he was yet a Fellow in Emanuel College, in a due compliance with the
pious Statutes of that House, His Ordination.
he entered into the Office of the Ministry, Sept. the 24th Anno Christi 1601,
which he took not upon him as a shelter to save a Fellowship, but to gain souls
unto God: For which purpose he immediately betook himself to that Evangelicall
work of Preaching, for the most part at a place called Coxton, His preaching.
not far from Cambridg, and in some other places thereabouts; where (besides
the prosecution of his other studies, and performance of sundry exercises in
the College) he had preached twenty eight Sermons within the space of eleven
months: which was a rare thing in those times, when the Fellows of Houses were
rather hinderers than furtherers of so good a work, if undertaken by younger
men.

After he was transplanted from that Nursery, His Gratitude.
and settled in a Pastoral charg^ many miles distant from that University, to
show his thankful acknowledgment of the honorary supports of his breeding
received from those famous Seminaries, he gave to the Library of Pembroke-Hall,
Great Basils Works, Greek and Latin in two Volumes in Folio, with these Verses
written in them, which discovered a specimen of his happy strain, and Genius of
purer Poetry, as well as his grateful mind: Quae mihi formasti teneros
impuberis annos
Grandaeva, at gravida ingeniis foelicibus Aula
Pembrochiae, Fas sit minimo, veneranda tuorum
Ingentis tenuem officii deponere partem.
And to Emanuel College Library he gave all the Councils in Greek and Latin of
Binius Edition in Folio, in five Volumes, with these verses: Sacra (...), and
studiis Domus hospita sacris
Emanuel, mihi quae juvenilibus arbitra caeptis
Culturam, comites, victum, and gratissima Musis
Otia porrex^i! sic te nascentia porro
Faecundam claris mirentur saecula na^is,
Donato ut liceat tantillum reddere tantis.
And to the University Library he gave all Gregory Nazianzens, and Gregory
Nissens Works, Greek and Latin, in four Volumes in Folio, with these Verses:
Accipe parva tui (...) Matter Alumni
Sic te perpetua florentem pube, Nepotum
Sera Manus, Sophiae lumen, morumque Magistram,
Artis Praesidium, Britonum decus, Orbis amorem:
Delicias Regum, and fidei venerentur Alylum.


Having thus traced his ways, and procedure in the University, we must now
follow him into the Country: For in September Anno Christi 1602, he was by the
clear, and good providence of God (without the concurrence of the plottings,
and contrivances of cunning, His remove to Wring^on.
or insinuating friends) fairly, and freely called to the Pastoral charg of a
great Flock at Wrington, a Market Town in the County of Sommerset, being
presented thereunto by that Honorable, and famous Knight St Arthur Capel of
Little Hadam in Hertford shire, Great Grandfather to the Lord Capel now living.

There did he (in obedience to his Call) forthwith settle himself, and
immediately he set upon the work for which he was sent, His Industry and
^rudence.
viz. to instruct, and turn unto righteousness that great people, who had never
before enjoyed the blessing of a Preaching Minister, or Ministry amongst them
(which therefore required the greater skill, and industry of the spiritual
Husbandman to manure, and manage, such an incultured plot) so that he was to
them (if not to the whole Country adjacent) the first that by preaching the
Gospel, brought Religion into credit, and discovered to them the Heavenly
Canaan, which before was to most of them a Terra incognita, as an unknown land,
and thereby left them much richer both in spirituals, and temporals than he
found them. Insomuch that, he might at length, in a proportion, say of that
place as Augustus, the Emperor, did of Rome, Lateritiam reperi, marmoream
reliqui: I found it built of bricks, but I left it built of marble.

Mr. Crook having thus pitched, His Contentment.
and fixed his Pastoral staff, as he never sought higher, or other earthly
preferments (though his capacity, and credit was well known to be such as made
him capable of, and opened a ready way for it) so he never accepted of any
additions, or accessions of maintenance, or honor, though they were Honorably
proffered by such Persons as were able to have advanced him.

As for the course of his Ministry, and deportment: his progress was answerable
to his beginings: yea, his works were most, His holy life.
and best at the last: For as he Preached, so he practiced: his whole life
being but one continued Commentary upon his Doctrine, and an exemplary Sermon
consisting of living words, or of words translated into works, as will further
appear in its due place.

Few men ever came into a place with greater expectation, His esteem
which yet he not only satisfied, but exceeded it. Few men could draw after
them those affections, and admiration which he did; which also were so far from
cooling, and diminishing, as that they increased, and that deservedly, to his
last, rather than decreased amongst all that had learned Christ in humility,
and truth.

And as for those few silly seduced ones, who were carried away toward his
latter end, with a spirit of giddiness, through the secret, and subtle
insinuations, and whisperings of false Teachers, in corners (who with as much
ignorance as confidence delude the simple, by great swelling words of vanity,
and uncouth phrases, abhorrent from Christian Religion, sobriety, and truth,
and which wise men lament, while fools, who are ignorant of the depths, and
methods of Satan, applaud, and admire) endeavored in their virtigenous fits,
to eclipse his credit, and splendor: yet his pious, and affectionate Essays
to reclaim them with the spirit of meekness, as also his fervent Prayers, and
yearning Bowels for their reducing, turned all their revilings to his greater
luster, and glory, amongst all such as were able to discern of things that
differ, and willing to approve the things that are excellent.

Not long after Mr. Crook's first settling in this his Pastoral charge, His
Marriage.
he happily married a Wife of his own Tribe, and after his own heart, who was
the eldest daughter of that Reverend Mr. Walsh, an holy, and painfu^l Minister
in Suffolk, a great, and rare Light in his time, and famous for his
Ministerial labors, his fervent zeal, His Wives characte^.
and abundant charity. She was a very prudent, and gracious woman, a most
loyal, loving, and tender wife, zealous and active for his encouragement,
credit, and comfort in all things, especially in his Ministry; to which she
constantly bore such hearty respect, and reverence, as did much quicken, and
enlarge him in the work of the Lord. She was also continually studious, and
careful to free, and ease him of all emergent occasions, avocations, and
businesses of ordinary concernment, that so he might with the more freedom
follow (what his soul most delighted in) his diviner employments, and enjoy
himself, and friends in his necessary relaxations. In a word, her behavior was
such as becomes holiness, a teacher of good things to the younger women, and
in her Family a worthy pattern, and a great promoter of godliness in all that
conversed with her, and to her Husband a meet help indeed, and so she continued
all the days of their conjugall relation. Children he left none, besides those
spiritually begotten unto Christ by his labors in the Gospel.

His great delight, His great pains.
and indefatigable pains in preaching so many years so frequently, was almost
beyond all example: for he constantly preached (if in health) thrice a week,
besides his extraordinary labors on many emergent occasions which he
cheerfully embraced, as rejoicing in all opportunities of doing good, and that
abroad as well as at home.

In all his Sermons (which were many thousands) his expressions were choice,
His manner of preaching.
grave, solid, weighty, savoury, and seasonable: His applications home, and
pertinent, strongly enforced, and set on from Divine authority by a sweet, and
moving elocution, a masculine eloquence, fervent zeal, and strength of love to
the souls of the hearers.

He knew very well how to set forth (...), abstruse points plainly, and how to
manage (...), plain truths elegantly; not in the words of man's wisdom, but
which the Holy Ghost teaches: Always speaking in Christ, as of God in the
sight of God.

He was not like one that makes a Feast once a month, or once a quarter,
letting his Family beg or starve in the intervals; Nor like such as visit the
Pulpit twice every Sabbath day, yet bring no new matter with them scarce once a
month; but still are setting on the same dishes with a little new garnish,
even unto nauseousness: But our Mr. Crook, as he laid in richly, so he laid
out liberally, and prudently, like a ready Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of
God; or a good Householder, who brings forth of his treasury, things both new,
and old.

And albeit he could by his quick invention, profound Judgment, and faithful
memory (things rarely meeting in the same man) dexterously dispatch that with
little labor which costs other men much pains; yet he seriously professed with
rejoicing, that he never durst serve God with that which cost him nothing: well
knowing that industry adds weight, and respect both to the matter, and speaker,
whereby his words became as goods, and nails fastened by that great Master of
the Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd.

His Motto was, His Motto.
Impendam, and expendar: I will spend, and be spent, which he cheerfully
verified. For he counted not his life dear in comparison of preaching the
Gospel, and of finishing his course with joy, and the Ministry he had received
from the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God. When he was
told by his Physician (who was very careful to preserve his life) that he
might live longer if he would preach seldomer: Alas! (said he) If I may not
labor I cannot live: what good will life do me, if I be hindered from the end
of living? Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causam?

When through age, His Industry.
and weakness he was disenabled from traveling abroad any more to perfume
other Congregations with the sweet odours of his precious ointment: and when by
reason of his years, and infirmities, he might very well (as an emeritus miles)
have sued out (even in the Court of Heaven it self) a Writ of ease, and have
passed the rest of his days in rejoicing over his Triumphs, and Trophies: yet
would he never give over studying, and Preaching, till all strength of Body
gave him over. Yea he often preached, even when his legs almost refused to
carry him any more to Church, and that with much spirit, and unexpected
vivacity, even as a mighty man refreshed with the Wine of Gods Spirit. And
being (some years before his departure) sensible of the daily approaches of
Death (which he long expected) to his exhausted, and decayed body, almost ready
to be deserted of its Divine Soul; he did several times preach his own
Funeral Sermon (as supposing he should never preach more) and that not without
the tears, proceeding from the grief of his loving, and beloved hearers.

And when after such preaching, His hospitality.
and rejoicing in it, he invited (as his constant manner was) such Ministers,
and Friends as came to hear his Lecture, to his Table; he would force himself
to sit with them (although for the most part he was forced to be silent, by
reason of the expense of his spirits) and much rejoiced that he had once more
employed his Masters Talent, and enjoyed the precious society of Saints in whom
was all his delight.

He used often to say to his friends that rejoiced with him, and blessed God
for him, that he was nothing but a voice, as being troubled at the decays of
nature growing upon him more, and more, whereby his feeble body was disenabled
from serving his still active soul, and his Tongue being no longer able to
speak out, at least not so often as he would have had it.

In his Ministry he never strove for vain glory, His Self* d^niall.
nor of men sought he praise, disdaining to stoop to the lure of popular
applaus: and therefore he ever shuned those more gay, and lighter flourishes of
a luxuriant wit (which like beautiful weeds, make a fair show at a distance,
but stink nearer hand) wherewith the emptiest Cells affect to be most fraught;
Like those, who for want of wares in their shops, set up painted boxes to fill
up empty shelves. He fed not his flock with airy dews of effeminate Rhetoric
(which a masculine Orator would shake off from his pen, and lips (as St Paul
did the Viper from his hand) nor yet with the jerks, and quibbles of a light
spirit, which he ever abhorred as the excrementitious superfluities of frothy
brains, and unhallowed hearts: but he ever led them out into the green Pastures
of solid, and savoury truths, as their necessities, and capacities did require.
He had (and always administered (...), rational, unadulterated milk for Babes
in Christ, (...), and strong meat for grown men.

He was a wise Master builder, His prudence in his Ministry.
who intending to raise a strong, and beautiful Fabric, laid a solid
Foundation, able, and sufficient to bear, and strengthen all his
superstructures. He therefore began his Ministry with a pervous, and
perspicuous handling of such Texts as might discover to his People, the Divine
Authority, sufficiency, purity, and energy of the holy Scriptures, the ten
Commandments, Articles of the Faith, the Lords Prayer, the Doctrine of the
Sacraments, God in Trinity, his Decrees, Creation, Providence, of Sin, Christ,
the New Covenant, the Fall of Man, the Mediator, the Gospel, Faith, Vocation,
Regeneration, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Glorification; the
Church, the last Judgment, the Christian Warfare, and such like: All which in
process of time, he opened, and applied, sometimes more largely, sometimes more
briefly; but always profitably, and sweetly, as a workman that needs not to
be ashamed, but rightly dividing the word of truth in a practical way.

Out of all which in his more mature, His Catechism
and riper years, greatest strength of parts, and depth of judgment, he (after
many serious reviews) compiled that excellently compacted Systeme of Divinity
in a Catecheticall way, which he deservedly entitled, The Guide to true
Blessedness. And out of it he again extracted that lesser Catechism which he
often used, with very profitable, and delightful explanations, both in his
Congregation, and Family. A most profitable, course of teaching, and learning
the true knowledge of Christ.

He went also through many entire Scriptures (which does greatly try, and
improve a Divine) and the more obscure any place was, the greater was his
diligence, with happy success to bring light unto it. Difficulties which are
Lions in the way of the sluggard, proved but spurs to his Industry.

He went over many of the Psalms, as the 1t, 2d, 4th, 6th, 10th, 14th, 19th,
22d, 45th, 50th, 122d, 127. The twelve first Chapters of Isay, Lamentation the
3d, Habbacuk the 3d, the Prophecy of Malachy. Matthew the 5t, 6th, and 7th
Chapters. All the Examples both of good, and bad men in the Scriptures, for
imitation of the former, and detestation of the latter. All the Miracles, and
Parables of Christ; All St John's Gospel (an admirable Commentary:) The twelfth
of the Epistle to the Romans: the second Chapter of the Epistle to the
Ephesians: the 2d, and 3d to the Collossians: the 2d to the Thessalonians Chap.
2. The eleventh of the Epistle to the Hebrews: the 2d, and 3d Chapters of the
Revelations, with many more, besides very many Texts suitable to the times on
every occasion, being exceeding happy in the choice, and prosecution of them.

Whenever his Preaching day happened upon January the 17, His Humility.
(which was his birth day) he still noted his years complete, with this
Paenitentiall Epiphonema, (...), God be merciful unto me a sinner. A memorable
evidence of his pious sense of his own unworthiness in the sight of God, how
much soever he was cried up, and esteemed by men. No excellency of natural
abilities, no eminency of spiritual endowments, no acceptance of his labors
ever puffed him up; but that he still walked in all lowliness and humility
toward all men, even in his greatest exaltations in the hearts of men.

Much might be said of his long continued course of Catechizing, (that most
profitable, and speedy way of implanting knowledge) by which he set up so great,
and clear a light in his Congregation, as will not only discover the wisdom,
and excellency of the workman, and guide their feet in the ways of truth, and
holiness who have been enlightened thereby: but much facilitate the further
polishing of those living stones by succeeding builders.

His Heavenly and Divine spirit of Prayer seemed to excel all other his
excellencies, His powerful Pra^ers.
as will be attested by all that heard him in public, or private, and that
ever knew what a Prayer of Faith, elevated to the highest pitch by the Holy
Ghost, means, whether they ever found any to excel him, or many to come near
him. O! those penitent, unbowelling confessions, earnest deprecations,
petitions, panting-longings, and sighings after God, and his Grace; those
mighty powerful Arguments whereby he set all home, feeling Thanksgivings, and
divine raptures carrying up his soul to Heaven in the sacred flames of his own
Sacrifices; sweetly perfumed with the Incense of him who presents all the
Prayers of his Saints on the Altar of Grace.

He first brought conceived Prayer into use in those parts, wherein he was so
happy, so free from impertinent expressions, and unnecessary repetitions, so
rich in piercing supplications, patheticall thanksgivings, and gracious
wrestlings with the Almighty; yea, so dexterous to apply himself to prefer all
suits, and to fit every occasion (like an exquisite Archer, able to shoot to an
hairs breadth,) and so prompt, and full in expressing the very hearts of those
that indeed joined with him, in whatsoever they desired for themselves or
others, as if, by a kind of transmigration, their souls had passed into his,
and spoke the very bottom of their hearts by his Tongue, which their own could
not utter.

And this was such an opening, and warming of his hearers hearts before his
Sermons, and such a sweet closing up of all after his Preaching, as added much
to the power, and profit of all his labors, and was to him a transcendent
advantage in his whole Ministry. And truly his example took so well with all
the godly Ministers that heard him, that they accounted it their great
happiness, and honor to follow, and imitate him (with whom yet very few could
keep pace) in that most important part of a Ministers work, and office, whereby
they might be the more able to pour out their souls, and the souls of their
people into the bosom of the Almighty.

In the Orb of his public Ministry, ^is long labors.
this fixed Star shined brightly (without the least eclipse, or retrograde
motion) somewhat above forty seven years. A long time for such a Lamp to burn,
as he did: but his long continuance ministered a fair opportunity of bringing
many straggling sheep into Christ's fold, the great ^hepheard of our souls. Once
indeed the last Bishop of that Diocese gave a stop to his Tuesdayes Lecture,
but God in mercy to many, set it on going again, and cast him that interrupted
it out of his place, while this painful, and faithful labourer went on with
his work.

So much for his public Ministry: come we now to his private carriage.

His whole Life was exemplary. His holy life.
Take him as a Christian, raised by his Ministerial function to the height of
a Beacon upon an hill, and so his light was great, and his smell very fragrant.
He not only kept himself pure and unspotted of the world, but his light so
shined, that both good men glorified God by seeing his good works, and wicked,
and foolish men had their mouths stopped by his good conversation in Christ,
and were even enforced to give in testimony to it, maugre their malice against
his holiness, and worth.

In his Family, His Family carriage.
toward the Wife of his bosom, he walked as a man of knowledge, wisdom, and
great tendeness of love: Toward the rest of his household, as David professed
he would do in the 101 Psalm, and as a Bishop of Paul's description, 1 Timothy 3.
and Titus 1. Yea toward all, as a worthy pattern of love, zeal, humility,
meekness, temperance, patience, gravity, and of every good work.

What his constancy, His studiousness*
and diligence was in his study, the fruits of the great, and long travel of
his mind, his Works (which praise him in all the gates of Sion) do speak to all
the world, beyond that can here be spoken of him. For when all is said that can
be spoken of him, so much cannot be said as his own industry speaks.

In his more vacant hours he was far from being idle, His usefulness to others.
or unprofitable. Such as had the happiness (which was never denied to any that
desired it) to partake of his private discourses, never returned empty from his
full magazine, if they brought but vessels capable of the overflowings of his
rich mind, and heart. Very many excellent Lights in the Church have lighted
their Torches at his Celestial fire. Many young Scholars have been
marvellously improved by his prudent, and pious directions, and encouragements
in their studies, which now are become excellent instruments in the Church of
Christ.

If after his preaching he found no mention made of his Sermon, by which he
might collect, that probably some benefit had been reaped by it, he would be
much dejected, as if the fault had been in his preaching (even then when he
seemed to excel himself,) rather than in his hearers; and used to say, that if
he had preached better, they would have profited more.

If any Christians came to him for resolution in cases of Conscience, His skill
to comfort others
or for counsel in straits, or for comfort in spiritual desertions, or for
healing of a wounded spirit; as God had given him an excellent spirit of
discerning to judge of their condition, and of the most seasonable applicatives;
and an exquisite dexterity to speak a word in season to the weary, and fainting
soul; so he was never shie, coy, or difficult to be spoken with, nor lofty, or
supercilious to any to whom he gave access; but showed forth all tenderness,
pity, and compassion to them: he heard them fully, and patiently and wisely
administered to their several distresses, and' ever sent them away (as its said
that Titus Vespasianus did his suitors) not only not grieved, but very well
satisfied, and abundantly comforted.

He was very bountiful to his kindred that needed it, His Charity.
and then most when their necessities swelled highest. He was very charitable,
and open handed to the poor members of Jesus Christ: And albeit his charity
shined most to those of his own flock, yet was it not shut up from strangers,
but he was very liberal to them also as he found occasion. Yea, when he went
abroad to bestow the Gospel freely upon other Congregations adjacent, such
poor as he found to be hearers (unless they were known to him to take up
hearing as a cloak to cover their idleness, and neglect of their callings)
never went home empty handed, but he always warmed, and cheered them with his
bounty, as well as instructed them with his Doctrine.

How much he was given to Hospitality, His hospitality
Gentlemen, Ministers, Neighbors, Strangers, and the Poor, must needs give in
such an ample testimony as will hardly be credited by such as knew him not, and
are strangers to a bountiful heart. He spared from himself to administer unto
others; minding more the wooing of many to receive benefit by his Ministry
(some of whom might perhaps at first follow him for the loaves) than to lay up
largely for such as he should leave behind him: and choosing rather to be at a
continual charg to encourage men by his bounty) than to suffer them to be
unprovided for, when they came to partake of his Ministry.

When he conversed with Ministers, His humility.
his Humility usually put him into the place of a learner: but in learning he
taught, and by teaching he learned more. He was so good, and skillful a
Chymick, that he seldom parted with such company, till he had gotten something
by them: yet were they sure to be the greatest gainers, and he always
accounted it the best bargain, when others were gainers by him.

His constant, and continual preaching, seldom allowed him the much desired
opportunity of hearing others: but when he could enjoy that benefit, he
greedily laid hold of it: and then would this painful Be gather Honey from
every Flower, making a good use of the meanest gifts, and improving his own
rich Talent by dipping it into theirs. Nor was he ever heard to slight or
disparage the labors of any the least of his Brethrn, that sincerely
endeavored to bring in souls unto Christ: but always he encouraged them, and
as he found cause, informed, and directed them, and that in a prudent, and
taking way, to their great advantage.

In his mirth (to which he sometimes unbended himself to recreate his
overwearied mind, His mirth.
that with renewed strength he might return to his more serious, and severer
studies) he strictly observed the bounds of honesty, civility, modesty, and the
gravity of his place; well considering, that the least dead fly in the
Apothecaries choicest Ointment, causes it to send forth an unpleasing savor.

The Table was usually the place of his greatest liberty in this kind, His
Table-Talk.
yet even there he would still interlace mirth with some sprinklings of a more
serious wit, which might instruct as well as exhilerate, and make cheerful; and
contained all within the limits of sobriety, without biting sarcasmes, or
unbeseeming scurrility. And usually he closed all with reading some portion of
Scripture, and giving some short, and profitable instructions thereupon, which
might administer Grace to the hearers, and leave a sweet savor, and relish
upon their spirits, and whole converse.

To give you a true, His Character
and full Character of his whole deportment in few words. He was a good, and a
faithful Steward in his Masters house, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, a Pillar in the house of his God, never weary of his Lords work, but best
pleased when he had done most service. His conversation was immaculate, and
unblameable: His behavior uniform, and universally pious. He was grave without
austerity, pleasant without levity: Courteous without dissembling: Free in
discourse where he might profit, yet reserved where he saw cause: He was seldom
the first speaker although he was best able to speak. He loved useful
discourse, but abhorred froth, and babbling. He was witty without vanity,
facetious without girding, or grieving of others. He knew his place, yet was
not insolent: Resolute he was, but not wilful: He maintained his authority,
but was not haughty. A great Master he was of his own Passions, and Affections,
and thereby abundantly furnished with the more abilities, and embellishments
that most attract, and maintain the dearest love, the deepest reverence, and
highest respect. He was a great admirer of Learning, and Piety in others,
though they were far below himself in both: His affections were above, though
he were below: He conversed more with Heaven than with earth while he remained
on it, and is now a Crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, and a Royal Diadem
in the hand of his God, as being an ornament unto Heaven it self.

He lived in the world seventy five years (within one month,) His long life.
in which long race he saw many sad changes, and sore storms beating hard upon
the Church, tossed with tempests, and not yet at Anchor. But never was David
more distressed for his dearest Jonathan, than this man of Bowels was for the
calamities of the dear Spouse of Christ. His sympathy.
He was most incessantly inquisitive after the Churches estate in all
Countries; A sad lamenter of all her afflictions; A daily Orator, and mighty
Advocate for her at the Throne of Grace, and never enjoyed himself, but when he
descried her under sail toward some Creek, or Haven, wherein she might find
comfort, and rest: being much in Prayer and Fasting for her full reformation,
and perfect deliverance.

Some good hopes whereof he conceived in the prosperous achievements of the
Great Gustavus Adolphus, late King of Sweden (semper Augustus:) But when he by
the sad, and unsearchable providence of the only wise God, suddenly, and
untimely fell, in the full carier of his victories, and of the Churches hopes,
and that the Christian world was by his fall, hurled from the height of so
great expectation, he continually mourned over the unhappy setting of that
glorious Northern Star, as a sad presage of all the inundations of miseries
since befallen, and that still are rising higher, and higher upon the Church of
Christ, the quick, and deep sense whereof lay close upon his heart to his dying
day.

Neither was he without his sufferings, His afflictions.
and dangers in our uncivil Civil Wars. He was affronted by rude Ruffians, and
bloody minded Soldiers, who tyranized over him in his own house; not
permitting him quietly to enjoy himself, and his God in his private study, to
which he often retired, not only from their insolences, but from their
Blasphemies: Even thither would they pursue him with drawn swords, vowing his
instant Death for not complying with them in their bloody engagements. Yet it
pleased that gracious God whom he had so faithfully served, Gods providence.
to preserve him for further service, and to make that an hiding place for his
preservation which they intended for his slaughter house, and after all, to
bring him to his end in peace.

When he had faithfully served his Generation, His death.
by the will of God, in the Gospel of his Son for above forty seven years, he
was gathered to his Fathers in a good old Age, full of Days, and Honor, by a
blessed, and happy Death (the certain result of an holy life) December. 25. Anno
Christi 1649. the day formerly used for celebrating the Nativity of his great
Lord and Master, the Lord Jesus Christ.

The last Testimony of the Peoples great love to him must not be forgotten by
any that desire to preserve his precious memory in their hearts with honor.
His Funeral.
This amply appeared by their great lamentation, and mourning for him in his
sickness, and at his Death, and sad Exequies. His Funeral was extraordinarily
celebrated, not only by the voluntary confluence of the greatest number of
people that ever crowded into the spacious Fabric of that Church; and by many
hundreds more there assembled about the door, which were unable to get in: But
by multitudes of Gentlemen, and Ministers, all striving to out-mourn each
other, standing about his Hearse with tears, recounting his excellent Labors,
his fruitful Life, their great profiting by him (as sometimes the widows about
Peter, weeping, and showing the coats, and garments which Dorcas made while she
was with them) every one aggravating their griefs, and losses in his gain, and
striving who should honor him most in bearing his Body to the bed of Rest.

The Testimony given him at his Interment by him who performed that last office
of love with many tears, The Testimony at his Funeral.
and which he knowingly spoke from his long, and intimate acquaintance, and
conversing with him almost forty years together, take with you for a close in
that Ministers own words out of the Pulpit.

Although (said he) Funeral Orations are commonly, either the vain flourishes
of mercinary tongues, or the weak supports of an emendicated fame; and since
good men's works shall praise them in the gates, it is but to light a candle to
the Sun: and since bad men's works cannot be covered with so thin a daub; It is
but to paint arotten Post. Yet some Testimony is due to such as having obtained
a more eminent place in Christ's mystical Body, the Church, have also been
instruments of more than ordinary good to his Members. Samuel died a Judge, a
Prophet; a Great man, a Good man in Israel, and all the Israelites were
gathered together (to honor his Obsequies) and lamented him, and buried him, 1 Samuel 25. 1.

To say nothing then of so rich a Cargazoon, so full a Magazine, so rare a
subject of all commendable qualities, and admirable endowments, were a
frustrating of your eager expectations.

To say little, were a wrong to him that deserved so much; to say much, were
both a derogation from his merits, that may challenge, and an imputation upon
your Judgments and affections that will acknowledge more due, than I can now
deliver. Nevertheless, since the memorial of the Just is a sweet perfume, give
me leave to strew a few of his own flowers upon his Hearse, and I will discharge
your Patience.

His holy Life, and conscientious courses, his constant Labors thrice a week in
the Ministry of the Gospel (unless in times of sickness, or necessitated
restraint) for the space of forty seven years (wherein he could give an account
of above seven thousand elaborate Sermons preached by him) are so well known,
not only in this, or the neighbor Parishes, but through the whole County, and
the Country round about, that I need not mention them.

Few men ever ran so long a Race without cessation, or cespitation, so
constantly, so unweariedly, so unblamably.

All which time he was a burning, and a shining light, joyfully spending, and
being spent for the good of Gods people. Many, many of whom he has guided to
Heaven before him, who received the beginnings of spiritual life from his
Ministry; and many more shall walk in that light after him.

And from his splendent Lamp, diverse faithful Ministers (some Triumphant
before him, some Militant after him) have lighted their Candles: His Tuesdays
Lecture being more profitable to teach useful Divinity than an Academy,
whereby he did not only, Dolare lapides, sed artifices.

Two things (rarely met in one man) were both eminent in him: A quick
invention, and a sound judgment, and these accompanied with a clear
expression, and a graceful elocution. To which Integrity, and Humility being
joined, made him a transcendent Minister, and a complete Christian.

In his sickness (full of biting pains, which he bore with great Patience) it
was his greatest grief that God had taken him off from his labor, which was
his life and joy. His heavenly mind (like the heavenly bodies) counted his work
no weariness. If he were weary in work, he was yet never weary of work. His
spirit was still willing when the flesh was weak: And he often used to say in
his health, Si per hanc viam mors, sum immortalis: and in his weakness, Odi
artus, fragilemque hunc corporis usum desertorem animi.

And when he saw no more ability for labors, he accounted it superfluous to
live; and cheerfully, not only yielded, but patiently desired to die, in a
satiety, and fullness of life; not as meat loathed (as many times natural men
do) but as a dish, though well liked, that he had fed his full of.

He had his intellectuals strong in a weak body; witness his last Swan-like
song in this place, the sweet Doctrine of our Adoption in Jesus Christ, on Romans
8. 16. (so far he had gone in that Chapter) most clearly, and acuratly
delivered, and aptly distinguished from Justification, and sanctification: yet
that day, October 16. going to Church, and sensible of his own weakness, he
said to a dear Friend (who told him that he came to see, and hear him) perhaps
it may be my last; as to all our loss, it was indeed.

And as if his motion in Gods work, had been natural, he was more quick, more
vigorous toward his Center, and, like the Sun, showed his greatest light, when
he was nearest his setting.

His last Ministerial duty privately done in great weakness of Body (unable to
go to the Church) was the Baptizing of two children, wherein he streamed such
beams of Divinity; sounded such bowels of Humanity, showed such sweetness of
affection to his charge, that I seriously wished his whole Congregation had
heard him, in this departing farewell. And being told how well it was approved,
he replied with tears, in great humility, Lord, what am I? What am I?

To diverse of his loving Neighbors, visiting him, he often protested, that
Doctrine that he had taught them, was the truth of God, as he should answer at
the Tribunal of Christ, whereunto he was hasting, exhorting them to stand fast
therein, as he most affectionately prayed for them, professing of them with
joy, I have kind friends, kind neighbors, Lord reward them all, and grant they
may find mercy with him in that day.

His desire was to give to his Neighbors (if enough could have been had his
Printed Catechism, which (to my knowledge) has had the approbation, and
commendation of the profoundest, and accutest Judgments in both Universities;
and well it might, being a complete Body of Orthodox Divinity, and to have this
assertion of the Apostle Peter written before it, -- Exhorting, and testifying
that this is the true Grace of God wherein ye stand -- and to subscribe his
name to it.

After he had in himself received the sentence of death approaching (which he
cheerfully did, when he saw no more likelihood of Labor) he desired his
Friends not to pray for his life; but pray God (said he) for Faith, for
Patience, for Repentance, for joy in the Holy Ghost; and the Lord heard him in
that he desired, for he was a rare pattern in all these, as (amongst many
others) these gracious words of his may witness, Lord (said he) cast me down as
low as Hell in Repentance, and lift me up by faith to the highest Heavens in
confidence of thy salvation.

I wish our proud, presumptuous, impenitentiaries had heard him crying for
Repentance, and seen him weeping for Grace. It might, perhaps, have melted
their stony hearts.

As he was full of days, so was he full of grace, full of peace, full of
assurance: The Tuesday before he departed, This day seven night (said he) is
the day on which we have used to remember Christ's Nativity, and on which day I
have preached Christ, I shall scarce live to see it; but, For me was that Child
born, unto me was that Son given, who is, Wonderful, Councellor, the Mighty
God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace.

And no less full was he of true Honor for his worth, and work sake in the
hearts of all that feared God; his memory shall be blessed, and his name a
sweet perfume to posterity, when the names of his reproachful scorners (the
last brood of Beelzebub) shall rot, and stink, and be an abhorring to all slesh.

He is now come to the end of his labor, and the beginning of his rest. His
work was with his God, and his reward shall be from his God: Now he sees the
blessed, and blessing face of God, which is the glory of all sights, and the
sight of all glory.

Thus set this bright Occidental Star: A Star of the first Magnitude. One of
the first, and I dare say (without envy of any, that knew him, and that knows
himself) one of the most glorious Lights that ever shone in this Orb, or ever
is like to arise in this Horizon. O! how is such a public loss to be lamented!
Of such a Champion of Christ! Such an Atlas of the Truth! that set his
shoulders to support the shaken pillars thereof in these days of abounding, and
abetted errors.

Well may this Parish mourn, well may this Country, well may his Friends, his
Family: well may we of the Ministry bewail it, saying, O my Father, my Father,
the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof! Ah my Brother, my Brother! I
am distressed for thee, very pleasant have thou been unto me: Lovely and
gracious in Life, lovely and glorious in Death. -- Heu tua nobis
Morte simul tecum solatia rapta!


I end in one word of Exhortation,

You that have heard the joyful sound of this (now broken) silver Trumpet so
long, remember that by the space of forty, and seven years, he ceased not to
warn every one with tears: Remember what he has spoken while he lived:
Remember what he yet speaks being Dead? Hold fast the form of sound words which
ye have heard of him. Hold fast the faithful word which he has taught you.
Hold fast the profession of your Faith without wavering. Take heed of wolves:
Beware of Dogs: Take heed of men: Men of perverse minds, speaking perverse
things to draw disciples after them. Although the Prophets die, yet Gods word
spoken by them shall live for ever, and will do good to them that walk
uprightly, and shall take hold on them that obey it not.

So let us leave our Brother in the Bed of Honor, till the joyful morning of
the Resurrection of the just, when he, amongst them that have turned many unto
righteousness, shall shine as the Stars, for ever, and ever.

The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112. 6.

The issues of his brain and heart made public, were only these;

First, His Works.
that exquisite, and accurate, Guide to true blessedness (so often reprinted,
and so highly esteemed by all that read it through, with understanding, and
care.

Then (at several times) he gave way to four occasional, and select Sermons,
viz. The Waking sleep. The Ministerial Husbandry. The Discovery of the Heart;
and Death subdued.

That wherein he had taken most pains (which since is published in Print by Dr.
Burgess, and Mr. W. Gregory) is an excellent Treatise, wherein his main design,
in very apposite, and acutely distinguishing Characters, was to lay open, not
those more apparent, and obvious contrarieties of virtues in Holy, and vices in
wicked men, evident unto ordinary capacities upon the first aspect; but the
more hidden, and less discerned difference between the plausibly^ seeming
virtues of evil men, and the real Graces of the truly Godly: as likewise
between the reigning sins of Hypocrites, and the daily infirmities of the
Saints, which many times, even by quicksighted Spectators, are both mistaken.

In prosecution whereof, he first brings forth the Hypocrite in his best dress,
and attire, and then sets by him a Regenerate man living up to his Rule: adding
the differences between them, thereby to unmask the Hypocrite, and to detect
his Encroachments upon the name, and privileges of the Saints. Secondly, he
sets out a true Child of God, laboring under infirmities, and an Hypocrite
under the power of sin (which cannot consist with saving Grace) notwithstanding
all his flourishes, that so he may clearly distinguish a Christian in black,
from a Counterfeit in white, and between the bewailed weaknesses of the Saints,
and the wilful wanderings of the wicked.

A work no less needful to all, than grateful to the Soul-sound,
self-searching Christian, that labors for sincerity, and the assurance of it.
But the iniquity of the Times, full of Hypocrisy, and Atheism, hating, and
hindering such discoveries, and by all means discouraging those that would make
them (together with the Authors constant Employment, even unto the impairing of
his strength, and spirits in feeding his Flock) disabled him from completing
that admirable Piece.

Sundry other issues of his fertile, and excellent wit, and curious Invention
he left behind him, as diverse choice, and sacred Aphorisms, Anatomica,
Nosognostica, Pathologica, Therapeutica, Physiologica, and Prophylactica: As
also diverse Divine Emblemes, and Similitudes; all eminent demonstrations of his
exquisite abilities, and profitable improvements of them.

The Life and Death of Mr. John Cotton, who died An. Christi 1652.
JOhn Cotton was born at Derby, His Birth.
Anno Christi 1584. His Parents were persons of considerable quality, and of
good reputation. Their condition, as to the things of this life, competent:
neither unable to defray the expenses of his education in good literature, nor
so abounding, as to be a temptation on the other hand unto the neglect thereof:
and God, who had then predetermined this then tender plant, to be a Tree of
Life, for the feeding of many thousands, and to be a chosen Vessel to bear his
Name before the Nations, in way thereunto, he inspired his Parents with an
effectual solicitude concerning the ordering of this their Son in his
minority.

This care in his Parents was quickly above expectation answered in the
first fruits of their Sons proficiency, His education
who more, and more increased great hopes concerning him throughout the whole
time of his minority, wherein he was trained up in the Grammar School of Derby.

When he was about the age of thirteen, He goes to Cambridge.
he was admitted into Trinity College in Cambridg, where his industry was
great, and his profiting in the Arts, and Languages above his equals, so far
commended him to the Master, and Fellows, as that he had undoubtedly been
chosen Fellow of that College, had not their extraordinary expense about
building of their great Hall at that time put it by, or at least, deferred
their election, until some longer time.

From Trinity he was removed to Emanuel, that happy Seminary both of Piety, His
remove to Emanuel.
and Learning: and in that Society the Lord gave him favor, so that in due
time he was honored with a Fellowship amongst them; when he was elected to it,
after a diligent, and strict examination according to the Statutes of the
College; wherein this is not unworthy the taking notice of; that when the Poser
came to examine him in the Hebrew Tongue, the place that he made trial of him
by, was that portion of Scripture, Isaiah the 3d, wherein the Prophet declaims
against the pride, and haughtiness of the Daughters of Sion; which Text has
more hard words in it, than any other place of the Bible, within so short a
compass: and therefore, though a present construction, and resolution thereof,
might have put a good Hebrician to a stand, yet such was his ability, and
dexterity, as made those hard words facil, and easy, Gods providence.
and rendered him a prompt respondent. And this providence is further remarkable
about him, That whereas his Father (whose calling was toward the Law) was but
obscure, and had not many Clients that made use of his advice in Law-matters
before; it pleased God after his Sons going to Cambridg, to bless him with
great practice, so that he was very able to keep him there, and to allow him
full, and liberal maintenance; Insomuch as this blessed man has been often
heard to say, God kept me in the University.

Being thus advanced, His Industry.
he was in the place of improvement, beset with Examples as so many objects of
better emulation. If he slacken his pace, his compeers will leave him behind:
and though he quicken it, there are still those that are before him: But he
was, not only a lover of Labor, but Communicative of his Learning, and
therefore he proved a diligent Tutor, and had many young Students committed to
his care. He was a Didactical-man, both able, and apt to teach: and truly
ability to instruct youth argues a Wise man: and to be willing to teach, argues
a good man: For goodness is communicative: And such was his Academical
dexterity, His prudence.
that he could impart (as Scaliger speaks) the felicities of wit to his
hearers, so accomodating and insinuating the matter in hand, as that his Pupils
might both perceive their profiting, and taste the sweetness of that wherein
they profited. Thus by his School-stratagems he won the hearts of his Pupils
both to himself, and to a desire of Learning: they were each to other as the
Prophets, and the sons of the Prophets: his Pupils were honourers, and lovers
of him: and he was a Tutor, a Friend, and a Father unto them.

The manner of his Conversion, His Conver^ion.
according to his own relation was thus. During his residence in the
University, God began to work upon him by the Ministry of Mr. William Perkins
of blessed memory: But the motions, and stirrings of his heart which then were,
he suppressed, thinking that if he should trouble himself with matters of
Religion, according to the light he had then received, it would be an
hinderance to him in his Studies, which then he had much addicte^ himself unto.
Therefore he was willing to silence those suggestions, and inward Callings
which he had from Gods Spirit, and did wittingly defer the prosecution of that
work until afterward. At length, as he was walking in the fields, he heard the
Bell tolling for Mr. Perkins, who lay a dying, whereupon he was secretly glad
in his heart, that he should now be rid of him, who had (as he said) laid siege
to, and beleagured his heart. This became matter of much affliction to him
afterward, God keeping it upon his Spirit, with the aggravation of it, and
making it an effectual means of convincing, and humbling him in the sight, and
sense of the natural enmity that is in man's nature against God. Afterward
hearing Dr. Sibs (then Mr. Sibs) preaching a Sermon about Regeneration, wherein
he showed, First, what Regeneration was not, and so opening the state of a mere
Civil man, Mr. Cotton saw his own condition fully discovered, which (through
Gods mercy) did drive him to a stand, as plainly seeing himself, destitute of
true Grace, all his false hopes, and grounds now failing him: and so he lay for
a long time, in an uncomfortable despairing way: and of all other things this
was his heaviest burden, that he had wittingly withstood the means, and offers
of Grace and mercy which he found had been tendered to him; thus he continued
till it pleased God to let in a word of Faith into his heart, and to cause him
to look unto Christ for his healing, which word also was dispensed unto him by
the same Doctor Sibs, which begat in him a singular, and constant love to the
said Doctor, of whom he was also answerably beloved.

That which frist made him famous in Cambridge, was his Funeral Oration for
Doctor Some, His Ora^ory.
Master of Peter House, which was so accurately performed in respect of
Invention, Elegancy, Purity of Style, Ornaments of Rhetoric, Elocution, and
Oratorious beauty of the whole, as that he was thenceforth looked at as another
Xenophon, or Musa Attica, throughout the University.

Some space of time intervening, he was called to preach at St. Mary's, where
he preached a University Sermon, with high Applause from the Academical Wits,
insomuch as the fame of his Learning grew greater, and greater. And afterward
being again called to preach in the same place (as one Oration of Pericles left
his hearers with an Appetite after another) so the memory of his former
accurate Exercises, filled the Colleges, especially the young Students, with a
fresh expectation of such Elegancies of Learning, as made them flock to the
Sermon with an Athenian Itch after some new thing, as to the ornaments of
Rhetoric, and abstruser notions of Philosophy. But his spirit now savouring of
the Cross of Christ more than of humane Literature, and being taught of God to
distinguish between the Word of Wisdom, and the Wisdom of Words, his speech,
and preaching was not now with the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the
demonstration of the Spirit, and of power.

The disappointed expectation of the Auditory soon appeared in their
countenances, and the discouragement of their non-acceptance returned him unto
his Chamber, not without some sad thoughts of heart: Where yet he had not been
long, but lo, Dr. Preston (then Mr. Preston) knocks at his Chamber door, He
converted Dr. Preston.
and coming in, acquainted him with his spiritual condition, and tells him how
it had pleased God to work effectually upon his heart by that Sermon: After
which Dr. Preston ever highly prized him, and both fully, and strongly closed
with him: which real Seal of God unto his Ministry much comforted his soul,
far above what the present less acceptance of the Auditory had dejected him, or
their former acceptance had encouraged him.

His Concio ad Clerum, His great Learning.
or Latin Sermon, which he preached when he proceeded Bachelor of Divinity
(which was after he had been at Boston about half a year) was very much
admired, and commended. His Text was, Mat. 5. 13. Vos estis sal terrae: quod si
sal infatuatus fuerit, quo salietur? Ye are the salt of the earth; but if the
salt has lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? In handling of which
Text, both the weight of the matter, the elegancy of Phrase, Rhetorical
strains, grave, sweet, and spiritual pronunciation, rendered him yet more
famous. The like did his answering of the Divinity Act in the Schools, having a
very acute Opponent [Mr. William Chappel] to dispute with him. So that in
Cambridge the name of Mr. Cotton was much set by.

Unto this earthen vessel, His call to Boston.
thus filled with Heavenly Treasure, the Inhabitants of Boston in Lincolnshire,
made their address, saying, Come and help us. And in that Candlestick the
Father of Lights placed this burning, and shining Light: To whom he removed
from Cambridge about the twenty eight year of his Age. At his first coming, he
met with some obstructions from the Diocesan, then Bishop Barlo, who told him
that he was a young man, and therefore unfit to be set over such a divided
people: Mr. Cotton being ingenious, and undervaluing himself, thought so too,
and purposed to return to the College again: But some of his Boston Friends,
understanding that one Simon Biby was to be spoken with, who was near to the
Bishop, they presently charmed him, and so the business proceeded without any
further trouble, and Mr. Cotton was admitted into the place after their manner
in those days.

Two things are here not unworthy our observation, His Temptations.
which Mr. Cotton would sometimes speak of to his Friends: First, That in the
beginning of his Ministry he was exercised with some inward troubles which
much dejected him. And indeed, good spirits are much bettered by their
conflicts with the worst of spirits: Spiritual Preachers are often trained up
in the School of temptation. So true is that Theological maxim, Meditation,
Prayer, and Temptation make a Divine. This Dispensation of the All-wise God, he
afterward found, not only to be beneficial unto him, in preparing his heart
for his work: but also that it became an effectual means of his more peaceable,
and comfortable settlement in that place, where the people were divided amongst
themselves, by reason of a potent man in the Town, who adhered to another
Cambridge man whom he would faign have brought in. But when he saw Mr. Cotton
wholly taken up with his own exercises of spirit, he was free from all
suspicion of his being Pragmatical, or addicted to siding with this or that
party; and so both he and his party began to close more fully with him.

Secondly, Whereas there was an Arminian party in that Town, some of whom were
witty, and troubled others with Disputes about those points; by Gods blessing
upon his Labors in holding forth positively such truths, as undermined the
foundations of Arminianism, those Disputes ceased, and the Tenets of
Arminianism were no more pleaded for. Thus God disposes of the hearts of
hearers, as that generally they are all open and loving to their Preachers at
their first entrance.

For three or four years he lived, His troubles.
and preached amongst them without opposition. They accounted themselves happy
(as well they might) in the enjoyment of him; both the Town and Country
thereabouts being much bettered, and reformed by his Labors. But after he was
not able to bear the Ceremonies imposed, his Nonconformity occasioned his
trouble in the Bishops Court at Lincoln, from whence he was advised to appeal
to an higher Court: and employing Mr. Leveret (who afterward was one of the
Ruling Elders of the Church of Boston in New England) to deal in that business,
and he (like Jacob) being a plain man, yet piously subtle to get such a
spiritual blessing, so far insinuated himself into one of the Proctors of that
high-Court, that Mr. Cotton was treated by them, as if he were a Conformable
man, and so was restored unto Boston.

After this time he was blessed with a successful Ministry unto the end of
twenty years. In which space he on the Lords Days in the afternoons, went over
the whole Body of Divinity in a Catechistical way thrice, His Labors.
and gave the heads of his Discourse to those that were young Scholars, and
others in the Town, to answer his questions in public in that great
congregation: and after their Answers, he opened those heads of Divinity; and
finally applied all to the edification of his people, and of such strangers as
came to hear him. In the morning of the Lords Days he preached over the first
six Chapters of the Gospel of St. John: the whole Book of Ecclesiastes; the
Prophecy of Zachariah, and many other Scriptures; and when the Lords Supper
was administered (which was usual every mon^th) he preached upon, 1 Corinthians. 11.
and 2 Chronicles. 30. the whole Chapter, besides some other Scriptures concerning
that subject. On his Lecture days, he preached through the whole first, and
second Epistles of John, the whole Book of Solomon's Song; the Parables of our
Savior set forth in Matthews Gospel to the end of Chapter the 16th. comparing
them with Mark and Luke: He took much pains in private, and read to sundry
young Scholars that were in his House, ^is Industry.
and to some that came out of Germany, and had his house full of Auditors:
Afterward, seeing some inconvenience in the Peoples flocking to his House,
besides his ordinary Lecture on the Thursdays, he preached thrice more in
public on the week days: viz. on Wednesdays, and Thursdays, early in the
morning, and on Saturdays at three a clock in the afternoon. Only these three
last Lectures were performed by him but some few years before he had another
famous Colleague.

He was frequent in Duties of Humiliation, His holy Duties.
and Thanksgiving: Sometimes he continued five or six hours in Prayer, and
opening the Word: So indefatigable was he in the Lords Work: so willing to
spend, and be spent therein. Besides, he answered many Letters that were sent
him far and near, wherein were handled many difficult Cases of Conscience, and
many doubts cleared to great satisfaction.

He was a man exceedingly beloved, Gods providence.
and admired of the best, and reverenced of the worst of his Hearers. He was in
great favor with Dr. Williams, the then Bishop of Lincoln, who much esteemed
him for his Learning, and when he was Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, he went to
King James, and speaking of Mr. Cottons great Learning and worth; the King was
willing, notwithstanding his Nonconformity, to give way that he should have
his Liberty in his Ministry without interruption: which was the more remarkable
considering how that Kings Spirit was carried out against such ways. Also, the
Earl of Dorchester, being at Old Boston, and hearing Mr. Cotton preaching about
Civil Government, he was so affected with the wisdom of his words, and spirit,
that he did ever after highly account of him, and put himself forth what he
could in the time of Mr. Cottons troubles to deliver him out of them, that so
his Boston might still enjoy him as formerly; but his desires were too strongly
opposed to be accomplished.

About this time he married his second Wife, Mistress Sarah Story, His Marriage.
then a Widow. He was blessed above many in his Marriages, both his Wives being
pious Mat^ons, grave, sober, and faithful. By the first he had no children:
the last, God made a fruitful Vine unto him: His firstborn was brought forth
far off upon the Sea, in his passage to New England: So that he being childless
when he left Europe, arrived a joyful Father in America: In memorial whereof
he called his name Sea-born, to keep alive (said he) in me, and to teach my
Son, if he live, a remembrance of Sea-mercies, from the hand of a gracious God:
He is yet living, and entered into the Work of the Ministry. A Son of many
Prayers, and of great expectation.

The corruption of the times being now such, His troubles.
that he could not continue in the exercise of his Ministry without sin; and
the envy of his maligners having now procured Letters Missive to convent him
before the High Commission Court, which Letters a debauched Inhabitant of that
Town undertook to serve upon him (who shortly after died of the Plague.) Gods
judgment on a persecutor.
Mr. Cotton having intelligence thereof, and well-knowing that nothing but
scorns, and imprisonment were to be expected from them, according to the advice
of many able heads, and upright hearts (amongst whom that holy man of God, Mr.
Dod, of blessed memory, had a singular influence) he kept himself close for a
time, in, and about London, as Luther sometime did at Wittenberg; and Paraeus
since at Anvilla: Yet was not that season of his recess unprofitable: He ^lies
into New Engl.
For addresses during that time were made unto him privately by diverse persons
of worth, and piety, who received satisfaction from him in their Cases of
Conscience of greatest concernment. And when he went into New England, it was
not a flight from duty, but from evident danger, and unto duty: Not from the
profession of the truth, but unto a more opportune place for the profession of
it.

When Mr. Cotton arrived at New England, his manner of entrance unto them was
with much blessing. His arrival in New Engl.
For at his first coming he found them not free from troubles about settling the
matters both of Church and Commonwealth. At which time, being requested, he
preached before the general Court: His Text was, Haggai 2. 4. Yet now be
strong, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord, Be strong, O Joshua the son of Josedek,
the High Priest, and be strong all ye people of the Land, says the Lord, and
work: For I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts: A special providence.
And the Lord working mightily by this Sermon, all obstructions were presently
removed, and the spirits of all sorts, as one man, were excited unanimously,
and vigorously in the work of the Lord from that very day.

In order whereunto, the Court considering, that all the Members of that
Republic, were also Church Members, and therefore to be governed according to
the Law of God, they desired Mr. Cotton to draw an abstract of the Judicial
Laws delivered from God to Moses, so far forth as they were of Moral, i. e. of
perpetual, and universal equity; which accordingly he did, advising them to
persist in their purpose of establishing a Theocraty, i. e. Gods Government,
over Gods people. Magistrates and Ministers united.
From this time it was a usual thing for the Magistrates to consult with the
Ministers in hard and difficult cases, especially about matters of Religion:
yet so, as notwithstanding occasional conjunction, Religious care was had of
avoiding confusion of Councils. After which time how useful Master Cotton was
to Old England, to New England, to Magistrates, to Ministers, to People, in
Public, in Private, by Preaching, by Counsel, and resolving difficult
questions, all know that knew him, and consequently saw the Grace of God so
evidently manifested in him.

In the course of his Ministry in New Boston, His Labors.
by way of Exposition he went over the Old Testament to Isaiah the 30. The
whole New Testament once through, and the second time to the middle of Hebrews
the 7th. Upon the Lords Days, and Lecture Days, he preached through the Acts of
the Apostles: the Prophesies of Haggai, Zechariah, Ezra, the Revelations,
Ecclesiastes, Canticles: the second, and third Epistles of John, The success of
the Ministry.
the Epistle to Titus, both the Epistles to Timothy; the Epistle to the Romans,
with other Scriptures. The presence of the Lord being with him, and Crowning
his Labors with the Conversion of many Souls, and the edification of
thousands. Besides these aforementioned Labors, he has many pieces in Print,
which being well known, need not be here enumerated.

His youth was unstained, whence he was so much the more capable of being an
excellent Instrument in the Church in his elder days. He that will do good in
the Church, must have a good report of them which are without, lest he fall
into the reproach, and snare of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 7. St. Augustine tells us,
that A good life is requisite in respect of our selves, but a good name is
requisite in respect of others. We may be good men if we have a good
Conscience, but we are not like to do much good, if we have not a good name.

He was a general Scholar, His learning and studiousness.
studious to know all things, the want whereof might in one of his Profession
be denomitated ignorance, and piously ignorant of those things, the nescience
whereof made him more Learned. Deservedly therefore is his praise great in all
the Churches, that he not only gave himself to the acquiring of Learning, but
exceeded many that had done virtuously therein. He excelled in the greater part
of the Encuclopaidia.

Those which best knew his goings out, His piety.
and his coming in, cannot but give a large testimony to his Piety. He was a
Saint (above many of the Saints) manifestly declared in the Consciences of the
Godly amongst whom he walked, to be the Epistle of Christ, known, and read of
all men. In his house he walked with a perfect heart. He was an example to the
Flock; clothed with love, and humility amongst his Brethren: One of a thousand
in respect of his worth: But (as it is reported of Dr. Whitaker) as one of the
multitude in respect of his facile, and companionlike behavior. His Humility.
Both ability, and modesty in such a degree, are not ordinarily to be found in
the same man. Others with much affection beheld the beauty of his face, whilst
himself was as one who knew not that his face shined. He was a Father, Friend,
and Brother to his fellow-Elders, and a shining Light before all men.

He well knew that a Bishop ought not to be defective in the well government of
his Family: His Family carriage.
He must be one that rules well his own house: In conscience whereof, he
himself rising betimes in the morning, as soon as he was ready, he called his
Family together (which was also his practice in the evening) to the solemn
worship of God, reading, and expounding, and occasionally also applying the
Scriptures unto them, always beginning, and ending with Prayer. In case of sin
committed by child or servant, he would call them aside privately (the matter
so requiring) laying the Scriptures before them, and causing them to read that
part which bore witness against such an offense: Seldom or never correcting in
anger, that the dispensation of godly Discipline might not be impured, or
become less effectual, through the intermixing of humane passion.

He began the Sabbath, His Sabbath employment.
on the Saturday evening: and therefore then performed Family duties after
Supper, being larger then ordinary in Exposition, after which he Catechized his
children, and Servants, and then returned into his Study. The morning
following, Family worship being ended, he retired into his Study until the
Bell called him away. Upon his return from the Congregation, he returned again
into his Study (the place of his Labor, and Prayer) unto his private devotion;
where (having a small repast carried him up for his dinner) he continued till
the toling of the Bell. The public service being ended, he withdrew for a
space into his aforementioned Oratory, for his sacred addresses unto God, as in
the forenoon: Then came down, repeated the Sermon in his Family, prayed, and
after Supper sang a Psalm, and, toward bed time, betaking himself again to his
Study, he closed the day with Prayer. Thus he spent the Sabbath continually.

In his Study, His dependence on God.
he neither sat down unto, nor arose from his Meditations without Prayer:
Whilst his eyes were upon his Book, his expectation was from God. He had
learned to Study, because he had learned to Pray. An able Student is a Gospel
Student, because unable to Study without Jesus Christ. The barrenness of his
Meditation at some times, yea though his endeavor was most intense upon a good
matter, convinced him whence it was, that his heart musing upon the same
Subject at another time, his tongue became as the Pen of a ready writer. As he
was not (comparatively) wanting in parts, Learning, or Industry; so was he most
careful not to trust in them, but to fix his dependence wholly upon God.
Herein he was not unlike to blessed Bradford who studied kneeling. Another
Synesius, who was wont to divide his life between Prayer, and his Book. Like
unto Paul, Not sufficient of himself to think any thing as of himself, and
professing all his sufficiency to be of God. But we will give our selves (say
the Apostles) continually unto Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word. Men of
labor, they were, and men of Prayer.

As any weighty cause presented it self either in the Church, His Fastings.
Commonwealth, or his Family, he used to set days apart to seek the face of
God in secret: Such were the bowels of this spiritual Father, the Horsemen, and
Chariots of this Israel. He might say with Paul, He was in fastings often. His
conversation upon earth was a trading in Heaven. A demonstration of the praises
of him who has called him. A temperature of that holiness, sweetness, and
love, which continually gained upon the hearts of many spectators. The
habitual gracious scope of his heart in his whole Ministry, is not illegible
in that usual subscription of his at the end of all his Sermons, Tibi Domine.
Unto thy honor, O Lord. A taste of the divine Soliloquies between God and his
soul, you may please to take notice of from these two transcribed Poems left
behind him in his Study, written with his own hand.

A thankful acknowledgement of Gods providence.

In Mothers womb thy fingers did me make,
And from the womb thou did me safely take:
From breast thou have me nursed my life throughout,
That I may say I never wanted ought.
In all my meals my Table thou have spread,
In all my lodgings thou have made my bed:
Thou have me clad with changes of array,
And changed my house for better far away.
In youthful wanderings thou did stay my slide,
In all my journeys thou have been my guide:
Thou have me saved from many an unknown danger,
And showed me favor even where I was a stranger.
In both my Callings thou have heard my voice,
In both my matches thou have made my choice:
Thou gav'st me sons, and daughters them to peer.
And giv'st me hope thou wilt learn them thee to fear.
Often have I seen thee look with mercies face,
And through thy Christ have felt thy saving grace:
This is the Heaven on earth, if any be:
For this, and all, my soul does worship thee.
Another made by him (as it seems) upon his remove from Boston into that
wilderness of N. Engl.

I now may expect some changes of miseries,
Since God has made me sure,
That himself by them all will purge mine iniquities
As fire makes silver pure.
Then what though I find the deep deceitfulness
Of a distrustful heart?
Yet I know with the Lord is abundant faithfulness,
He will not lose his part.
When I think of the sweet, and gracious company
That at Boston once I had,
And of the long peace of a fruitful Ministry
For twenty years enjoyed.
The joy that I found in all that happiness
Does still so much refresh me,
That the grief to be cast out into a wilderness
Does not so much distress me.
For when God saw his people, his own at our Town,
That together they could not hit it,
But that they had learned the language of Askelon,
And one with another could chip it.
He then saw it time to send in a busy Elf,
A Joyner to take them asunder:
That so they might learn each one to deny himself
And so to piece together.
When the breach of their Bridges, and all their Banks
And of him that School teaches;
When the breach of the Plague, and of their Trade also arow,
Could not learn them to see their breaches.
Then God saw it time to break out on their Ministers,
By loss of health, and peace;
Yea withal, to break in upon their Magistrates,
That so their pride might cease.
A Disputation is well called the Sieve of truth: His Moderation.
So in his Polemical labors he was a seeker thereof in love: His scope was, the
Glory of God, Unity of the Church, and the edification of men, not the
ostentation of wit. It was his holy ambition, not to seem to be learned, but
indeed to be bettered. A sincere seeker of light, not of victory. Witness his
Brotherly acceptance of Dr. Twiss his Examination of Mr. Cottons Treatise of
Predestination, from whom he acknowledged that he received light thereby, and
was ready to attest the great abilities of the Doctor, that Star (if any in
this age) of the first magnitude. It is true, Mr. Cottons mind was then
exercised about the point of Reprobation. Touching the point of Election, it is
sufficiently known that he was not only Orthodox, but also clear. As there were
of old that pretended the Predestinarian Heresy to have had it is rise from St.
Austin, and Grevinchovius of late blushed not to say of famous Dr. Ames, who
was, Arminianorum malleus, Amesius Pelagianizat. Dr. Ames plays the Pelagian:
So, the wonder is less, if this sound, and judicious Divine has not escaped
the imputation of Arminianism from some, notwithstanding the redundant
Testimony of his Doctrine, and generally of all that knew him, to the contrary;
yea, that occasionally he has been heard to say, by Testimony yet alive, and
above exception, that he looked at Arminianism as another Gospel, and directly
contrary to the Covenant of Grace. What Melancthon sometimes said to Eccius,
may be here truly applied to him: Mr. Cotton in his Disputations sought not his
own Glory, but Gods Truth So able an Opponent was rare, so candid an Opponent
was more rare. He that fell into his hands, was likely to fall soft enough
ordinarily (except through his own default) not likely to lose any thing save
his error.

A man's wisdom makes his face to shine: His Wisdom.
He had an happy, a quick comprehensive, and benign understanding, as having
received the manifestation of the Spirit, for the service and profit of others.
To discover the mind of God, and therewith the sentence of Judgment, in matters
too hard for inferior Judges, was no small part, both of the worth, and
usefulness of him that was to minister before the Lord. So it seemed good to
the Father of Lights to make this happy Instrument, not only to excel his
Brethren, but in many respects, upon this account to excel himself: A Grace so
far acknowledged in him, as that all sorts, both the Magistrates, and private
Persons, whether learned, or unlearned, exercised with their respective Cases
of conscience, waited under God, in a special manner upon his lips for
knowledge, and sought the Law at his mouth. So equal a contention between
learning and meekness, is seldom visible in any one person. ^he consciences of
those that knew him being appealed to, he will be acknowledged amongst the
meekest on Earth in his days.

So conspicuous was this Grace in him, that multitudes beheld it, (...)
Meeknes^.
not without making extraordinary mention thereof. It is true, he had an
advantage above many in his natural constitution, and it is influence from his
education, heightened intellectuals, and moralities, was not inconsiderable;
but that which gave the being of meekness, which sanctified, and perfected all,
was the Grace of Christ. He was of an accute apprehension, and therefore
sensible of, but yet so little in his own sight, that he was not easily
provoked by an injury. Sensibleness of dishonor done to God by sin, or of what
the offender had done unto himself by sinning, left such impressions upon him,
as that his taking notice of any injury done unto himself, was not usually
taken notice of. He had well learned that lesson of Gregory: It is better many
times to fly from an injury by silence, than to overcome it by replying. It was
Grynaeus his manner, to revenge wrongs by Christian taciturnity. If inferiors
expostulated unnecessarily with him, he would patiently hear them, and give
them a brotherly account, pacifying their minds with a gentle, grave, and
respectiv^ answer. Take one instance in this kind instead of many; unto one of
his hearers, then sick of singularities, and therefore the less able to bear
sound Doctrine, following him home after his public labors in the
Congregation, and instead of better encouragement, telling him that his
Ministry was become either dark, or flat: He gently answered? Both, Brother,
without further opening his mouth in his own defense; choosing rather to own
the imputation, than to expostulate with the Imputer.

Disputations are great trials of the spirits of intelligent men. His Modest
Hooper and Ridley were patient Martyrs, but somewhat impatient Disputers. The
Synod held at Cambridge in New England, as matters were then circumstanced; was
unto this good man an hour of temptation, above what had ordinarily befaln him
in his Pilgrimage: yet such was his eminent behavior throughout, as argued in
the consciences of the Spectators singular patience, and left him a Mirror for
the temperament, mildness, and government of his Spirit. Pious meekness fits
for Church Society. Yet though he was so gentle, meek, and flexible, that men
might persuade him above what could be expected usually from a man of his
worth, in the things of God he was steadfast, and unmovable. The Sanctuary
cannot want the fire that is from Heaven, neither may it be touched with the
fire that is from Hell. Gentleness of disposition, when actuated by Christ,
makes us so much the more acceptable, and profitable unto man: But if the
Spirit withdraws his assistance, we fall short of reaching Gods ends, and the
seasonable suppressing of exorbitancies. If this good man had always had that
voice sounding in his heart, which one wished that mild Lantgrave of Hessen
might have heard from the Smiths forge: Duresce, duresce; Utinam and
Lantgravius durescat: Happily there are that think some disorders,
disturbances, and irregularities might, by Gods blessing, have been prevented.

But ordinarily, and in matters of greatest weight the Lord was with him.
Though his forbearance was both observable, and very imitable in things that
concerned himself; yet he could not forbear them whom he knew to be evil. An
experience whereof he manifested some Heterodox spirits, by their specious
discourses about Free Grace and subtle concealings of their Principles, so far
deceived him into a better opinion of them than there was cause, as that
notwithstanding they fathered their Errors upon him in general, and abused his
Doctrine to the countenancing of their denial of Inherent Grace in particular,
yet was he slow to believe these things of them, and slower to bear witness
against them. But so soon as the truth herein appeared to him, hear his own
words taken out of his Letter to Mr. Davenport; The truth is (says he) the
body of the Island is bent to backslding into Error, and Delusions: the Lord
pity, and pardon them, and me also, who have been so slow to see their
windings and subtle contrivances, and insinuations in all their transactions,
whilst they propagated their opinions under my expressions diverted to their
constructions. Yea such was his ingenuity and piety as that his soul was not
satisfied without often breaking forth into affectionate bewailing of his
infirmity herein in the public Assemblies, sometimes in his Prayer, sometimes
in his Sermon, and that with tears.

He was a man of an ingenuous and pious candor, His Candor.
rejoicing (as opportunity was offered) to take notice of, and to bear witness
to the gifts of God in his Brethren, thereby drawing the hearts of them to him,
and of others to them, and that to the encouragement of them, and the
edification of many. He did not think himself a loser by putting honor upon
his Fellow Laborers, but was willing that they should communicate with him in
the love and esteem of the people. He was not only a son of Peace, enjoying
continually the feast of a good conscience, His Peacemaking
with serenity and tranquillity of affections at home, but also a peacemaker,
quallified by the graces aforementioned to be a choice Instrument in the hand
of the Prince of Peace amongst the Churches, where if any difference arose, Mr.
Cotton was ready (being called thereunto) to afford his help for the composin;
of them; and had a singular faculty and ability therein, by reason of that
excellent wisdom, and moderation of spirit which God in Christ had given him,
whose blessing also did ordinarily crown his endeavors with good success.

He was one, the reality of whose profession gave many cause to bless God for
the kindness of the Lord showed unto all sorts by him. His Hospitality.
His portion in the things of this life, exempted him from being an object of
envy in that behalf; yet behold, Quantum ex quantillo, so much communicated out
of so little; we may not here be altogether silent concerning the Grace of God
bestowed upon him, whereby according to his power, yea above his power, he was
benificent unto others, but especially to those of the Household of Faith. The
Gospel opened his heart, his lips, and the doors of his house. He well
remembered that Scripture, There is that scatters, and yet increases, and
there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tends to poverty. As
also, The liberal soul shall be made fat. Amongst others, his Fellow Laborers
in the Ministry were entertained with peculiar contentment. By one instance see
his spirit in the rest, A certain Minister who had gotten into the fellowship
of that eminent man Mr. Arthur Hildersham, and many other godly Preachers,
being acquainted with their secrets, betrayed them into the Prelates hands.
This man coming afterward to Boston, and meeting with Mr. Cotton, this Ga^us
had not the heart to speak to him, nor to invite him to his house, which (he
said) he never neglected to his knowledge, to any stranger before, much less to
any of his own order.

Some years since there was brought unto Boston a report of the necessity of
the poor Saints at Sigataea, a little Church whereof the Reverend Mr. White was
their faithful Pastor, which suffered much extremity by reason of the
persecution of their then prevailing adversaries, forcing them from Bermudas
into the Desert Continent. The sound of whose distress was no sooner heard of,
but you might have heard the sounding of his bowels, with many others, applying
themselves to a speedy Collection, and sending it to them on purpose for their
seasonable relief, the sum was about seven hundred pounds, two hundred whereof
he gathered in the Church of Boston, no man in the Contribution exceeding, and
but one equalling his bounty. A special Providence.
And it was remarkable that this Contribution arrived there the very day after
those poor people were brought to a personal division of that little Meal then
remaining in the Barrel, and not seeing (according to man) but that after the
eating thereof they must dye a lingering death for want of food; and upon the
same day their Pastor had preached unto them (it being the Lords day upon that
Text, Psalm. 23. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. At such a time the
good hand of the Lord brought this succor to them from afar.

Whilst he was in Old England, His suffering^ from men.
his eminent piety, the success of his labors, and his interest in the hearts
both of superiors, inferiors, equals, drew upon him much envy, and his
Nonconformity added thereunto, so that he was delivered in a great measure to
the will of his Adversaries, who gave him not over till they had bereaved him
of much of his livelihood, his liberty, Country, and therewithal of the sweet
society of lovers, friends, and many ways endeared acquaintance, more precious
to him than life it self.

Yet the measure of the afflictions of Christ, appointed to be suffered by him,
was not so fulfilled; but lo, in the time of his exile, some Brethren, provoked
by the censure of Authority, though justly, and not without tears inflicted
upon them, singled out Mr. Cotton as the object of their displeasure, who
(though above other men) declining irregular and unnecessary interesting
himself in the actions of the Magistrate, and (while opportunity lasted)
endeavoring their healing, yet they requited him evil for good, and they (at
least some of them) who were formerly companions with him in the tribulations
of that Patmos, yea respecters of him, had taken sweet counsel together, and
they had walked in the house of God as friends. Hence was he with Tongue and
pen blasphemed by them, for whom he formerly entreated, and for whom, he both
then, and afterward wept, and put on sackcloth.

As touching any Tenet wherein he may seem singular, remember that he was a
man, and therefore to be heard and read with judgment, and happily sometimes
with favor. St. Hierom makes a difference between reading the writings of the
Apostles, and other men. They (says he) always speak the truth, these as men
sometimes err. But no man did more placidly bear a Dissentient than he. It
contributes much toward the fuller discovery of truth, when men of larger
capacities, and greater industry than others may be permitted to communicate
their Notions; only they should use this liberty by way of disquisition, not
of Position, rather as searchers after Scripture Light, than as Dictators of
private opinions.

But now this Western Sun hastens to his setting: Being called to preach at a
neighbor Church, he took wet in his passage over the Ferry, and, not many
hours after, he felt the effect of it, being seized upon with an extreme ilness
in his Sermon time. This sad providence when others bewailed, he comforted
himself in that he was found so doing. Decet Imperatorem stantem mori. It is
the honor of a Commander to dye standing. St. Austins usual with was, that
when Christ came, he might find him, Aut praecantem, aut praedicantem; either
praying, or preaching. Calvin would not that when the Lord came, he should
find him idle. After a short time he complained of the inflammation of his
lungs, His Sickness.
and thereupon found himself Asthmatical, and afterward Scorbutical (which both
meeting in a complicated disease, put an end to his days) insomuch that he was
forced to give over those comforting drinks which his stomach could not want.
If he still used them, the inflammation grew unsufferable, and threatened a more
sharp, and speedy death. If he left them, his stomach forthwith ceased to
perform its office, leaving him without hope of life.

By these Messengers he received the sentence of death, yet in the use of means
he attended the pleasure of him in whose hands our times are; his labors
continued whilst his strength failed: November the 18. he took in course for
his Text the four last verses of the second Epistle to Timothy, Salute Prisca
and Aquila, etc. Giving the reason why he spoke of so many verses together,
because otherwise he said, he should not live to make an end of that Epistle.
He chiefly insisted upon those words, Grace be with you all; so ending that
Epistle, and his Lectures together. For upon the Lords day following he
preached his last Sermon upon Joh. 1. 14. And the Word was made Flesh, and
dwelt among us* (and we ^eheld his Glory as of the only begotten Son of the
Father) full of Grace and Peace.

Now he gave himself wholly to prepare for his dissolution, making his Will,
and setting his house in order: When he could no more be seen abroad, all
sorts, Magistrates, Ministers, Neighbors, and Friends afar off, and those near
at hand, especially his own people resorted to him daily, as to a public
Father. When the neighbor Ministers visited him (in which duty they were
frequent) he thanked them affectionately for their love, exhorting them also as
an Elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, to feed the Flock,
encouraging them, that when the chief Shepherd shall appear, they should
receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away.

Finding himself to grow weak, according to that of James, he sent for the
Elders of the Church of Boston to pray over him, which last solemn duty being
performed, not without much affection, and many tears: Then (as Polycarp a
little before his death said, That he had served Christ fourscore and six
years, neither had he ever offended him in any thing) so he told them (through
Grace, he had now served God forty years, it being so long since his
conversion) throughout which time he had ever found him faithful to him; and
thereupon he took occasion to exhort them to the like effect, that Paul
sometime did the Elders of Ephesus, a little before they were to see his face
no more, Take heed therefore to your selves, and to all the Flock over which
the Lord has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God which he has
purchased with his own blood. Particularly he lamented that the love of many,
yea, and some of their own Congregation was grown cold toward the public
Ordinances, calling upon them so much the more for their watchfulness in that
respect; which done, he thanked them for their loving and brotherly assistance
to him in their holy fellowship, and commended them to the blessing of God.

His pious Consort, and those Olive Plants that sat lately about his Table,
now gathered together about the Bed of a dying Husband, and departing Father.
This was his last solemn transaction with man in this world: Silver and Gold
(though he wanted not) he had not much to give them, but the blessing of a
righteous Pa^ent he left with them.

That Reverend and Godly man, Mr. Wilson (who excels in Love, as Mr. Cot^on
did in Light) the faithful Pastor of that Church, taking his last leave of him,
and most ardently praying unto God that he would lift up the light of his
countenance upon him, and shed his love into his soul, he presently answered,
He has done it already, Brother.

His work now finished with all men, perceiving his departure to be at hand,
and having nothing else to do, but only that great work of dying in the Lord,
he wholly composed, and set himself for his dissolution, desiring that he might
be permitted to improve that little remnant of his life without impediment to
his private Devotions, and divine Soliloquies between God and his soul; and for
that end he caused the Curtains to be drawn, and a Gentleman, and Brother of
that Congregation that was much with him, and ministered to him in his sickness,
he caused to promise him that the Chamber should be kept private. But a while
after, hearing the whispering of some brethren in the Room, he called to that
Gentleman, saying, Why do you break your word with me?

Not long after (being mindful no doubt of that great helpfulness which he
received from that aforementioned His Death.
Brother throughout his visitation) he left him with this farewell, The God that
made you, and bought you with a great price, redeem your body and soul unto
himself. These words were his last words, after which he was not heard to
speak, but lying some hours speechless, he quietly breathed out his spirit into
the hands of him that gave it, December 23. Anno Christi, 1652. being entered
into the Sixty eighth year of his Age.

The Life and Death of Dr. Hill, who dyed Anno Christi, 1653.
MR. Thomas Hill was born at Kingston in Worcestershire, His Parentage.
of Godly Parents; and David accounted it his great honor and blessing to be
the Son of Gods Handmaid, Psalm. 86. 16.

His Parents dedicated him unto God from his Childhood, His Education
designing him to the work of the Ministry, and in order thereunto they trained
him up in School-learning in the Country; and being there well fitted, they
sent him to Emanuel College in Cambridge, where the Rose was not cankered in
the bud, his youth not corrupted, nor debauched, as too many are: But this
morning (like that 2 Samuel 23. 4.) was without clouds, not sullied with any
noted miscarriage; but on the contrary, as it is said of Sampson when young,
that the Spirit of the Lord began then to move him, Judge. 13. 25. So in his
then sober, and studious behavior, the Sun looked out betimes in that Summer
morning, and through Gods Grace (otherwise than it often falls out in nature) he
gave promising hopes of an after clearer day.

This being taken notice of by the Governors of the College, His Proficiency.
they thereupon, after examination had, chose him Scholar of the House, he (as
his Savior) still growing in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and
man. And then after some good time spent in his private studies in the
College, for his further perfecting, and the more happy seasoning of his
spirit, he went and sojourned with that man of God (now also with the Lord) Mr.
Cotton at Boston in Lincolnshire, where, by Gods rich blessing upon his most
godly directions, and example, and the society he had with him, and other
eminent Christians in that place, he was much improved and furthered, as
otherwise, so especially in Heavens-way, which happily went along with him to
his journies end.

Upon his return from thence to the College, He is chosen Fellow of (...)
it was not long before he was chosen Fellow with general approbation, though
upon a most strict, and double examination, more (I think) than ever was in
that College before, or has been since, though it still is, and ever has
been, according to the Statutes, very strict, and serious, and which has been
blessed to be a special means of holding up true worth, and learning in that
happy Society.

And now, through Gods good hand of providence, leading and strengthening him, A
careful Tu ^r.
he proved a diligent, painful, and successful Tutor of very many Pupils, and
diverse of them persons of quality, who since have proved great blessings both
to the Church and Commonwealth: And thus as he was before a pattern to young
Scholars, so after he was a Tutor, no diligence was wanting whereby he might
be instrumental to Gods Glory, and the good of those who were committed to his
charge.

But this our wise Master Builder, satisfied not himself as a Tutor in
polishing of builders, His labors in ^he Ministry.
but as a faithful and painful Minister, he laboriously endeavored to square
other lively stones for Gods Temple, 1 Pet. 2. 5. and so as he read to
Scholars in the College, he also diligently and conscionbl^ preached to a
neighbor Congregation [St. Andrews] in the Town, so that many poor souls long
after had cause to bless God for him.

Nor was he an Hireling to fly when the Wolf came, but when the Plague in this
time of his Ministry raged in the Town, he still continued with them in his
Ministerial employment, the better Shepherd he, who not only fed the sound,
but also healed and bound up the torn, and weak of the flock.

This Alabaster Box of precious ointment thus powered out, filled the whole
house with its odor, and the sweet fragrancy of it did spread abroad, so that
now he came to be more taken notice of by many both great, and good men, and so
by some of eminent worth, and honor, he was called to the Pastoral charge of
Tichmersh in Northamptonshire, His remove to Tichmersh.
where he labored faithfully in Gods Harvest for the space of about eight or
nine years, and partly by preaching and conversing up and down with others; but
especially with his own Parochial charge, he proved a great blessing, not only
to that Town, but also to the whole Country, in every place where he came,
spreading a good savor, and leaving it behind him.

During the time of his being at Tichmersh, he sometimes repaired to Warwick
Castle, to that Noble Robert Lord Brook, who highly esteemed him, and in whose
Family he grew acquainted with Mrs. Mary Wilford, His Marriage.
at that time Governess to the Lady Frances Rich (a young Lady of rare parts)
Daughter to the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Warwick, and mutual affections
growing betwixt them, he was married to her, who since his death, was
re-married to the Reverend, learned, and pious Dr. Tuckney, Master of St. John's
College, and Regius Professor in Cambridge, my much honored friend, so that
she has been made happy in the enjoyment of two such Husbands, as few women in
our times have attained to.

Whilst he was laboring (as aforesaid) in the work of the Lord, He is chosen
^o the Assembly.
for more public service he was chosen by the Parliament for one of that
County to attend, and assist in the Assembly of Divines, called together by
their Authority at Westminster; where being of very good use, he was often
ordered by the Parliament to preach before them at their public Fasts, and
upon other their more solemn occasions. He was also chosen by them to be one of
their Morning weekdayes Preachers in the Abbey at Westminster, besides his
constant Sabbath-dayes labors in another great Congregation [St. Martins in
the Fields] where he was a blessing to many thousands.

From thence he was ordered to be Master of Emanuel College in the University
of Cambridge, Chosen to be Matter of Emanuel.
which being not a sphere large enough for his activity, His remove to ^^iuity.
he was after a while removed to the Mastership of Trinity College, where what
great good he did, many that lived under him can give an ample Testimony; and
that happy change proclaimed, from that confusion (by reason of those
distracted times) in which he found it, to that orderly composure, and frame,
in which, through Gods blessing, he left it. How sollicitous he was for their
best welfare, His Industry.
his frequent preaching in their Chapel to them all, and his writing to their
Seniors, speaks out fully; and many can bear witness how humble, and loving he
was to them in his carriage, how studious to keep up College-Exercises, how
zealous to advance Piety and Learning; and for that purpose, to countenance,
and prefer such as he observed to be eminent in either.

As he was a University-man, His care of the University.
he was zealously careful.

1. Of its Honor (which the Parliament can witness) in an unkindly contest
about it; and also his care in collecting the decayed Antiquities of that
University, whose pains in that Argument, it is pity but that they were
communicated to the world.

2. Of its Privileges, as always, so especially in those two years together
in which he was Vice Chancellor, for which he suffered in some men's reputes
unjustly.

3. Of its Profit and Emolument, being a special means of procuring to it from
the Parliament, the Lambeth Library, which of right (as it was judged) fell to
that University; as also from a worthy Knight [Sir John Wollaston, Alderman of
the City of London] a yearly stipend for a Mathematick Lecturer, and also large
sums of money for the fitting of the Public Library, that it might be of
general use; for the accomplishment whereof, the University is more ways than
one his Debtor.

4. Lastly, Of the general good, and well-ordering of it. Surely it was his
careful thought in private with himself, as appeared by his making it the
subject of his discourse with others; scarce was there a time wherein he met
with his intimate, and judicious friends, but he would be asking or proposing
something that way. By this it appeared that his care was to keep up those
Universities, which some in those times would have ruined; De jure belli and
pacis lib. 3. cap 1^. Sec. 10.
upon which occasion G^^tius pronounces many Christians to be worse than the
Philistines; for they, 1 Samuel 10. 5. would let the company of Prophets alone,
even where they kept a Garrison.

As he was a Divine, he was sound in the Faith, orthodox in his judgment,
firmly adhering to the good old Doctrine of the Church of England, even that
which in that University was taught, and maintained by famous Whitaker,
Perkins, Daunant, Ward, and many others in their times; and in the other
University amongst other great Names there, His sound judgment.
he was a great admirer of the Right Reverend and Judicious Dr. Robert Abbot,
Bishop of Salisbury, and well were it if there he had many more such Admirers.
The Doctrines of Gods Sovereignty in his Decrees: Of his In-conditionate
Free-electing-love: Of his Free Grace against Free Will, and the power of
Nature in Spirituals: Of justification by the imputed Righteousness of Christ,
against the perfection of inherent Righteousness now attainable by us in this
life. Of perseverance in Grace, against the Apostasy of the Saints, and the
like, were not with this pious, and learned man (as they are now called by
some) Sects and Notions, matters only of learning and curiosity, and of the
Presbyterian Faction: But of the lifeblood of Faith, which at his death (as he
expressed to a Friend of his) he had singular comfort from, and in his life
firmly believed, constantly preached, and by his Pen endeavored to maintain
and defend, and that against the great daring Champion, of the contrary errors,
whom the abusive wits in the University, with (...) impudent boldness could
say, none there durst adventure upon, whose immodest scurrility, his learned
ananswer to that daring adversary, which he had made so fair a progress in) had
shortly consuted, had not he by his more sudden death been therein prevented.

As a Minister of the Gospel: His painfulness in the Ministry.
In his preaching he was plain, powerful, spiritual, frequent, and laborious:
For besides what in that kind he did, as to the University in St. Mary's, and
in the College Chapel, which was very happy in his often pains there; In the
Town he set up one Lecture every Sabbath morning in the Parish Church of St.
Michael, performed only by himself, and cheerfully frequented by a great
confluence both of Scholars and Townsmen; and another in the Church of
All-Hallows every Lords day in the afternoon, in which he did bear at least the
fourth part of the burden, and both of them Gratis, as there were many more
such Lectures there performed, much about the same rate, weekly by other pious
learned men, and more indeed than are in any Town or City, upon those terms in
all England, or are like to be there again; which is mentioned that God may
have the glory in the first place, and then for the honor of that Reformation,
which so many do traduce, and spit at; as also of those more noble spirited
Preachers, who so freely offered unto God that which did cost them so much, for
which of men they received nothing.

But that place of Cambridge did not bound the course of this our laborious
Preachers Ministry, but (as it is said of our Savior, Matthew. 9. 35.) That he
went about all Cities, and Villages teaching and preaching; and of St. Paul
Romans 15. 17. That from Jerusalem, and round about, and that to Illyricum (which
was in right line three hundred and thirty German miles, as Pareus upon the
place computes it) he did fully preach the Gospel; imitating herein, as Jerome
observes, his Lord and Master, that Sun of Righteousness, whose going forth is
from the ends of the Heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it, Psa. 19. 6.
In these their blessed steps our Brother trod, and followed them in his painful
Ministry, diligently preaching when he had occasion to be abroad in remoter
parts; but especially in many Towns and Villages nearer hand, round about the
University, being a means to set up Lectures in many of them, and very often
assisting in them; and as our Savior is observed by some Divines to have
preached more frequently the nearer he was to his departure; so this his
faithful servant, as it were presaging that his day would be but short, toward
his evening he made the more haste and speed in his journey toward his end, and
yet more abounded in this work of the Lord, and now finds That his labor is
not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Thus of him as a Minister.

And lastly, His activity for God.
as he was a Christian, he was active for God, as his Savior, Act. 10. 38.
Going up and down, and doing good; and though otherwise modest, yet when the
case required it, bold in a good cause. He was spiritual in communion, and a
quickner of those with whom he conversed. Fruitful in discourse, by which the
frame of his spirit might easily be discovered: Frequent in asking questions,
which was both his humility, and Christian good husbandry, thereby to improve
himself, his time and company.

Affable he was to others, His Character
of much humility, and low thoughts of himself, and of great integrity and
singleness of heart toward God, his Truth, Ordinances, ways, and servants; of
a very public spirit, and much affected with the various conditions of the
State, but especially of the Church and people of God.

He was a most loving Husband to his wife, and a dutiful son to his Parents,
and in his life time very helpful to his other Relations. His Charity.
Many poor, both of the University and Town do now feel the want of his bounty
which they tasted of in his life time; and both they, and others had done more
at his death (as appeared by his intentions of it in the draught of his Will)
had not the suddenness of his change prevented it.

In a long continued Quartan, His last sickness.
God had knocked at his door, which in the interim of his recovery awakened him
to get all within ready against the coming of his Lord, which, though to his
friends was unexpected, yet found not him unprepared. In his short sickness, he
expressed to an intimate Friend his great comfort, and joy in Gods
discriminating electing-love; and to a Reverend Doctor, about half an hour
before his departure, who enquired of him about the settling of his outward
estate, and inward peace, he readily, and without the least hesitancy,
answered, that thro^gh the mercy of God in Christ his peace was made, and that
he quietly rested in it; whereby it seems (as was said by one) he had his Faith
at his fingers ends, and having before given all diligence to make his calling
and election sure, though he was somewhat suddenly called out of this life, yet
had he an abundant entrance set open to him, into the everlasting Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, His Death.
departing quietly in the Lord, December. 18. 1653. As to himself he had lived a
fruitful and gracious life, and therefore (as Clemens Romanus speaks of some of
the first, and best Bishops) he closed up all with a happy and blessed death;
and as to others, he lived approved, and dyed desired, and very much lamented.

He was a great Friend to the publication of the lives of godly and eminent
Ministers, and Christians, and assisting to me in procuring information
concerning the Lives of some of those Worthies whom I have formerly printed.

Dr. WILLIAM GOUGE.

The Life and Death of Dr. Gouge, who dyed Anno Christi, 1653.
WIlliam Gouge was born in Stratford-Bow, His Birth and Parentage.
in the County of Middlesex, Novem. 1. Anno 1575. His Father Mr. Thomas Gouge
was a godly Gentleman. His Mother was the virtuous and pious Daughter of Mr.
Nicholas Culverel, a Merchant in London, and she was sister to those two famous
Preachers, Mr. Samuel, and Mr. Ezekiel Culverel; she had also two sisters who
were married to those two famous and learned Divines, Dr. Chaderton, the Master
of Emanuel College in Cambridge, and Dr. Whitaker the Regius Professor of
Divinity in the same University; so that by the Mothers side he came of a stock
of eminent Preachers.

Our William Gouge in his younger years was first trained up in Paul's School
London, His Education
and was afterward sent to a Free School at Felsted in Essex, where he was
trained up three years under the public Ministry of his Uncle Mr. Ezekiel
Culverel, by whose labors he was much wrought upon, and if not first begotten,
yet much built up in his holy Faith, as himself often expressed. From thence he
was sent to Eaton, where he was educated other six years, during all which time
he was more than ordinarily studious and industrious; for when other boys upon
play-dayes took liverty for their sports and pastimes, he would be at his book,
wherein he took more delight than others could find in their Recreations,
whereby he profited beyond many his equals.

At this time whilst he was a Scholar at Eaton, His early Piety
he was possessed with an holy fear of God, was conscionable in secret prayer,
and in sanctifying the Sabbaths, and was much grieved at the ordinary
profanation thereof by sports and pastimes which were then, and there too much
allowed, as he did oft-times in his life, with much thankfulness unto God
express.

From the School at Eaton he was chosen to Kings College in Cambridge, His
remove to Cambridge.
whither he went Anno Christi 1595. and at the first entrance of his studies he
applied himself to P. Ramus his Logic, and grew so expert therein, that in the
public Schools he maintained and defended him, insomuch as when on a time
diverse Sophisters set themselves to vilify Ramus, for which end the Respondent
had given this question, Nunquam erit magnus, cui Ramus est magnus, which some
of the Sophisters hearing, and knowing the said William Gouge to be an accute
disputant, and a stiff defender of Ramus, they went to the Divinity Schools,
where he was then hearing an Act, and told him how in the other Schools they
were abusing Ramus, he thereupon went into the Sophisters Schools, He defended
Ramus.
and upon the Moderators calling for another Opponent, he stepped up, and
brought such an argument as stumbled the Respondent, whereupon the Moderator
took upon him to answer it, but could not satisfy the doubt: This occasioned a
Sophister that stood by to say with a loud voice, Do you come to vilify Ramus,
and cannot answer the Argument of a Ramist? Whereupon the Moderator rose up,
and gave him a box on the ear, then the School was all on an uproar; but the
said William Gouge was safely conveyed out from amongst them.

When he was Senior Sophister, His Advancement.
he was chosen Moderator of the Sophisters Acts in the public Schools, which
was a place of great credit, and he began every Act with a solemn speech in
Latin which was not usual in those days, and it added much grace to the Act.

The said William Gouge took his degrees in order, performing for every one of
them, all those Exercises in the public Schools, which by the Statutes of the
University were required. And during his first three years, he kept the
College so close, that he lay not one night out of the walls thereof; and at
the three years end he was admitted Fellow, He is Fellow.
and then went to visit his Friends.

He was a very hard Student; His studiousne^s.
for as he was a lover of Learning, so was he very laborious in his studies,
sitting up late at night, and rising early in the morning.

He continued in the College for the space of nine years, and in all that time
(except he went forth a Town to his friends) he was never absent from morning
Prayers in the Chapel, which used to be about half an hour after five a clock
in the morning; yea, he used to rise so long before he went to the Chapel, as
that he gained time for his secret devotions, and for reading his morning task
of the Scriptures: For he tied himself to read every day fifteen Chapters in
English out of the Bible, He read 15 Chapters every day.
five in the morning, five after dinner before he fell upon his other studies,
and five before he went to bed; he has been often heard to say, that when he
could not sleep in the night time he used in his thoughts to run through diverse
Chapters of the Scripture in order, as if he had heard them read to him; and by
this means he deceived the tediousness of his waking, and deprived himself also
sometimes of the sweetness of his sleeping hours, though by that, which
administered to him better rest, and greater sweetness; for he preferred the
meditation upon the word before his necessary food with Job, and before sleep
with David.

The like practice he used in the day time when he was alone, His meditation of
the word.
whether within doors, or abroad; for which ed, as an help, he wrote in a
little book which he always carried about him, the distinct heads of every
particular passage in every Chapter of the Bible, that so, when in any place he
meditated on the word of God, and was at a loss, he presently found help by
that little book. By this means he made himself so expert in the Text, that if
he heard any phrase of Scripture, he could presently tell where it was to be
found.

Besides, he had his set times of study for the more difficult places of
Scripture, that he might find out the true meaning of them, by which he
attained to a great measure of exactness in the understanding of the Scripture.

During his abode in the University he did not only ply his own studies, He
instructed others.
but used also to send for others whom he observed to be ingenuous and willing,
and instructed them in the Arts, whereby he was a great help to many, and
brought them also to be better proficient.

While he was a Scholar in Kings College, He learned Hebrew.
there came a Jew to Cambridge, who was entertained in sundry Colleges to teach
them the Hebrew Tongue, and amongst the rest, in Kings College, and Mr. Gouge
took the opportunity of learning of him, as many other of the Students also
did; but most of them grew soon weary, and left him, only the said Mr. Gouge
kept close to him so long as he tarried. But when he was gone, those which
before had lost their opportunity, now seeing their own folly, they came to Mr.
Gouge, and entreated him to instruct them in the grounds of the said Language,
which he accordingly did, and thereby himself became an excellent Hebrician.

And as he was expert in the learned Languages, A general Scholar.
so was he likewise in the Arts, and all other necessary Literature, that he
might have nothing of these to learn when he should come to make use of them.

Being chosen a Lecturer both of Logic and Philosophy in the College, His
Diligence
he made conscience of observing all the times appointed by the Statute for
reading, and never omitted any of them, and his readings were so exactly
composed, that thereby he profited his Auditors exceedingly, and procured much
credit, and applause from them; but withal, some envy from his successors, who
by his example were now provoked to a more painful, and frequent reading of
their Lectures which in former times were performed seldomer, and in a more
perfunctory manner. He was so cautious, and strict in the whole course of his
life, that thereby he got the name of an Arch-Puritan, which was the term then
given in scorn to those who were conscientious in their ways.

In the first year of his Fellowship he began his Commonplace book for
Divinity, in which he made references of all which he read. He had also white
paper bound betwixt every leaf of his Bible, wherein he wrote such short and
pithy interpretations, and observations on the Text as could not well be
referred to any head in his Commonplace book.

He took such pleasure in, and was so addicted to a University life, that he
was resolved to have spent many more years than he did, if not his whole life
therein.

But his Father, after he had been two or three years Master of Arts, much
against his mind, took him from the University upon the occasion of a marriage
which he prepared for him; and God by his providence turned this to the great
good of his Church: For by this means, though it were somewhat late before he
entered upon the Ministry, yet it is very probable that he entered upon, and
exercised that sacred calling much sooner than he would have done, if he had
been left to his own choice.

His wife was the daughter of Mr. Henry Caulton a Citizen, His Marriage.
and Mercer of London, but an Orphan when he married her.

Having thus changed his condition, and entered into a married estate, that he
might not be distracted, nor impeded in his studies by worldly business, he
committed the whole care of his Family affairs to the management of his wife,
and still applied himself wholly to his studies, and to the weighty businesses
of his heavenly calling.

He lived with this his wife for the space of two and twenty years in much
love, His Children.
and peace, and had by her thirteen children, seven sons, and six daughters,
whereof eight lived to men's, and women's estate, and were all of them carefully
educated, and sufficiently provided for.

It was his earnest desire, His esteem of the Ministry.
and daily prayer to God for his sons that they might all be preachers of the
Gospel, so highly did he prize the function, that is so vilified and contemned
by too many others, for he himself found such comfort, and content in that
calling, that he thought no greater could be found in any other; and he often
professed for his own part, that the greatest pleasure he took in the world was
in the employments about the work of the Ministry, insomuch as he was wont to
say to diverse Honorable persons of his acquaintance, and particularly to the
Lord Coventry, Keeper of the Great Seal of England, that he envied not his
great place, and employment.

In the order and government of his Family, His Family government.
he was very exemplary. His house was another Bethel, for he did not only
constantly upon conscientious principles use morning and evening Prayer and
reading the sacred Scriptures in his Family; but also he catechized his
children, and servants, wherein God gave him a singular gift for their
edification; for in teaching them he used not any set form, but so, as that he
brought them whom he instructed, to express the principles taught them in their
own words; so that his children (as Gregory Nazianzen says of his Father)
found him as well a spiritual as a natural Father. Yea never any servant came
to his house, but gained a great deal of knowledge therein: So likewise did
diverse others, who at the request of their Parents were instructed by him.

He was in a special manner a strict and conscionable sanctifier of the Lords
day, His sanctifying of the Sabbath.
and that not only in the exercise of public duties incumbent upon his
Office, but also in the private sanctification of it in the duties of piety in,
and with his Family, and secret in his Closet; and for this end, as he did
forbear providing of Suppers the Eve before the Sabbath, that servants might
not be occasioned thereby to sit up late; so neither would he suffer any
servant to stay at home for dressing any meat upon the Lords day for the
entertainment of friends, whether they were great or mean, few or many.

On the Sabbaths, after his public labors were ended, diverse Neighbors
(wanting helps in their own Families) came to his house, where he repeated his
Sermons after so familiar a manner, that many have professed that they were
much more benefited by them in that his repetition, than they were in the first
hearing of them; for he did not use word by word to read out of Notes what he
had preached, but would by Questions and Answers draw from those of his own
household such points as were delivered; and this Exercise being ended, his
constant course was to visit such of his Parish as were sick, His visiting the
sick.
or by pain and weakness were dis-inabled to go to the public Ordinances, with
each of whom, he would discourse of some spiritual and heavenly subject
suitable to their condition, and after that, he prayed with them, wherein he
had a more than ordinary gift, being able in apt words and expressions to
commend their several cases unto God, and to put up Petitions suitable to their
several needs.

His usual course was to pray eight times in the public Congregation on the
Lords days; His frequent Prayers
for as he prayed before, and after each Sermon; so also before, and after his
reading and expounding the Scriptures, which he performed both in the forenoon
and afternoon. And in his Family his constant course was to pray thrice every
Lords day, and that in a solemn manner, viz. in the morning, and evening, and
after his repetition of the Sermons.

He was ordained Minister in the two and thirtieth year of his age, His
Ordination.
and about a year after, which was in June 1608. he was called to the exercise
of his Ministry in the Parish of Black-Friars London, where he continued to his
dying day, which was about five and forty years, and six months, never
accepting of any other Ministerial employment, though he had the proffers of
many great places: His manner of coming to Black-Friars, was thus,

That Parish being destitute of a preaching Minister, His choice to
Black-Friars.
Mr. Hildersam, a famous, pious and powerful Preacher, being in company with
some of the better sort of the Inhabitants of Black-Friars, who complained of
their want, he told them that there was one living in Stratford-Bow, who was
out of employment, whom he judged very fit for them. Hereupon diverse of them
went thither on the Lords day, where he frequently preached gratis, to help the
Minister that then was there, and upon hearing of him they liked him so well,
that making report thereof to their neighbors, he was by an un animous consent
(nemine contradicente) chosen to be their Minister, which election being made
known to him, he accepted of it, and ever after showed a great respect to the
Inhabitants of that place.

Before Mr. Gouge came to them, they had not so much as a Church of their own
to meet and hear the word of God in, nor any place wherein to bury their dead,
but by such means as he used, the Church and Church Porch, together with the
Ministers house, and Churchyard (all which they enjoyed before but upon
courtesy) were bought in; so as now, they all, as their proper Inheritance, do
belong to the Parish of Black-Friars. And five years after his coming thither,
the old Church being found too little to entertain those multitudes that
flocked thither from all parts of the City, to hear him, he was an instrument
of purchasing in certain rooms adjoining, whereby the Church was enlarged
almost as big again as it was before. The sum of purchasing, new building, and
beautifying of which Church amounted to above one thousand five hundred pounds,
all which was procured, partly by Collections at his Lectures, and partly by
the volunta^y contributions of his Parishoners, without any public Collections
in other places.

After this, there being diverse rooms under the said Church belonging to
several Landlords, he used such means as to purchase them also for the benefit
of the Parish, which he did the rather to prevent all dangers that by wicked
minded persons might have befaln Gods people in that Church, by any contrivance
in the rooms under the same.

Thus they who had nothing of their own at his first coming, have now, through
his procurement, the whole Church, the Church Porch, a Churchyard, a Vault to
bury their dead in, a very fair Vestry with other adjacent rooms, besides the
house wherein he himself dwelt so long as he lived; all which they hold as a
perpetual Inheritance.

They have also a Lease of certain Tenements of a considerable value for three
hundred years; all which were procured by his Prudence, Interest, and Industry.

Such was his love, and respect to this Parish, as though he was often proffered
places of far greater value, His self-denial*
yet he refused them all, often saying, That the height of his ambition was to go
from Blackfriars to Heaven.

At his first coming to Blackfriars, His Industry.
being in the thirty third year of his age, he preached constantly, besides
twice every Lords day, a weekly Lecture, viz. on the Wednesdayes in the
forenoon, which for the space of about thirty five years was very much
frequented, and that not only by his Parishioners, but by diverse City
Ministers, and by sundry pious and judicious Gentlemen of the Innes of Court,
besides many other well-disposed Citizens, who in multitudes flocked to hear
his heavenly Doctrine; yea such was the fame of Dr. Gouge his Ministry, that
when any Country Ministers, and godly Christians came to London about their
affairs, they thought not their business fully ended, unless they had been at
Blackfriars Lecture.

And it pleased God to give such a blessing to his Ministry, His success in the
Ministry.
that many of his Auditors, though living in other Parishes, upon Trial before
sundry Elderships, have confessed, that the first seeds of Grace sown in their
hearts, were by the blessing upon Dr. Gouges Ministry: And indeed herein God
wonderfully honored his labors, by making him an aged Father in Christ to
beget many Sons and Daughters unto God, and to nourish up others in the ways
of righteousness, thousands having been converted, and built up by his
Ministry.

He used also every month to preach a preparation Sermon before the Communion,
on the Eve before each monthly Sacrament.

He was eminently laborious and faithful in the work of his Ministry even to
his dying day, His painfulness.
preaching so long as he was able to creep up into the Pulpit, As a tree
planted in the House of the Lord, he was fruitful even in his old age, Psalm.
92. 13, 14. He often used to say in his latter days, that he could preach with
more ease than he could get up into the Pulpit, the reason whereof doubtless
was this, because as the increase of his Asthma dis-inabled him to go, so the
increase of his Intellectuals enabled him to preach with more ease than in his
younger days.

His preacing was alwaes very distinct: His manner of Preaching.
First, he opened his Text, giving the true and proper sense of it, then gave
he the Logical Analysis of it, and then gathered such proper observations as
naturally flowed from it, and properly and pertinently improved, and applied
the same; by which method his Ministry proved very profitable to his hearers.
Many have acknowledged that in regard of the Logical resolution of his Text he
went beyond all that ever they heard, as also in clearing difficult, and
doubtful places of Scripture as they came in his way. And as his method was
clear, so were his expressions plain, always delivering the solid points of
Divinity in a familiar style to the capacity of the meanest.

As for his life and conversation, His holy life.
it was holy and exemplary, himself practicing what he preached unto others,
and living over his own Sermons; his Doctrine, and his practice concurred, and
went hand in hand together.

Before these times of Examination of persons, before their admission to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, he used to go to the houses of the better sort
in his Parish, where he appointed a time for them, and their whole Families to
meet together, that he might examine how fit they were to be admitted to that
Ordinance: yea he appointed sundry small Families to meet together on a certain
day, that he might make trial of their fitness also; and then his manner was,
not to admit any of the younger sort to the Sacrament, till in his judgment he
found them fitted for it.

Though he addicted himself much to his studies, He is envied.
and carried himself peaceably, yet wanted he not those that did envy, and
malign him, and that took all occasions to do him what mischief they could: As
in the case of Sergeant Finch his book about the Calling of the Jews, which Dr.
Gouge only published, and the author himself owned it, yet for his publication
of it he was committed to prison, and kept there for the space of nine weeks
together.

King James being informed that the Sergeant had in that Book declared, and
endeavored to prove that the Jews should have a visible Kingdom which should
be above all other Kingdoms, which Doctrine he abhorred, he thereupon grew
extreme impatient: Bishop Neal also with others, provoked him against the
publisher of the Book, which so incensed him, that he would admit of no
Apology. Yet after a while, Dr. Gouge was moved distinctly to declare his
judgment, and opinion about that point of the calling, and conversion of the
Jews, which he did in these ensuing Propositions.

All that I can gather out of the holy Scriptures about this point is, His
judgment about the Calling of the Jews.


1. That the Calling of the Jews, imports more than a spiritual Calling to
believe in Jesus Christ, and to embrace the Gospel.

2. This their spiritual Calling may be called an outward glorious Calling, in
regard of the visibility and generallity of it; to put a difference betwixt the
promised Calling of the Nation, and the continual Calling of some few persons.
For in all ages since the rejection of the Jews, some few, here and there have
been called. Thus the Calling of the Gentiles in the Apostles time, when
Christians had no pompous Civil Government, was an outward glorious Calling, by
reason of the visible famous Church which they had.

3. It is probable that at, or after their Calling, they shall not be scattered
as now they are, but shall be gathered together into Churches, and be freed
from the bondage and slavery wherein they have been many years together.

4. To give them a Sovereignty over all the whole Church seems to me to be
derogatory to that absolute Sovereignty which Christ the head of his Church
has, in whom the promises of the perpetuity of David's Scepter, of the extent
of his Dominion, of the subjection of all Nations are accomplished.

5. To set down the distinct time, place, and other like circumstances of their
Calling, needs more than an ordinary spirit, and implies too much curiosity.

6. The point of the Calling of the Jews being no fundamental point of
Christian Religion, to be over stiff in holding one thing or other therein, to
the disturbance of the peace of the Church, comes near to Schism.

Upon which being examined by Archbishop Abbot, and his answer approved, he was
released from his imprisonment.

Ordinarily in the Summer Vacation he was with his Family in the Country; His
Labors.
but not so much for his own ease, as for the further service of Gods Church:
for besides his preaching every Lords day in the place where he resided, he
improved his time for the publication of those his Treatises which are now in
Print, viz. The whole Armor of God, Domestical duties, An Explanation of the
Lords Prayer, Gods three Arrows, of the Pla^ue, Famine, and Sword, upon
occasion of those Judgments then raging. The Saints Sacrifice of Thanksgiving,
upon his recovery from a dangerous sickness. To which is now added his
Commentary upon the whole Epistle to the Hebrews, which was the subject of his
Wednesdayes Lectures for many years.

While he was settled at Blackfriars, he Commenced Batchelour of Divinity Anno
Christi, 1611. which was the eighth year after he had taken the Degree of
Master of Arts.

Anno Christi 1628, He commenced Doctor.
he proceeded Dr. of Divinity, at which time eight London Ministers proceeded
Doctors, upon which occasion, Dr. Collins, the then Regius Professor, put up
Mr. Gouges Degree, and procured it to pass in the Regent-house before he had
any notice thereof, and without his consent, whereby he did in a manner force
him to take his Degree; yet so as when he heard what was done, he readily went
to Cambridge, and performed all his Acts, according to the Statutes of the
University, as he had done at the taking of all his former Degrees.

Such respect was generally showed to him, His public employments.
as that in sundry public Employments he was chosen a Trustee or Feoffee. As
in the year 1626, he was chosen one of the Trustees for Mr. Whetenhalls three
Lectures.

Also in the year 1616. he was chosen one of the Trustees for buying in of
Impropriations, and for many other pious, and charitable uses wherein indeed he
always approved himself a careful, and faithful Trustee, and in some cases,
by his great pains and cost, he procured to be settled for ever such pious
Donations, as would otherwise have been wrested away, and alienated from their
intended use.

The business about the buying in of Impropriations was this:

There was a select society of thirteen persons joined themselves together as
Trustees, Buying in of Impropriations.
to stir up, and encourage such as were piously affected to contribute toward
the buying in of Impropriations, and giving them freely toward the maintenance
of godly and able Ministers. And these were so faithful to their trust, as
albeit they met very frequently, and spent much time, and pains in consultation
about that business, yet did they never spend one penny out of the public
stock, for the refreshing of themselves* yea though they had sundry Agents, and
Messengers whom they employed about that business, and that both far and near,
yet did they never diminish that stock wherewithal they were entrusted to the
value of a penny; but themselves, at least most of them, contributed out of
their own purses for the discharge of all by-expences. And when they had the
opportunity of buying in any great Impropriation, and wanted money in stock to
go through with it, they did amongst themselves give, or lend so much as might
effect it; and amongst others, our Dr. Gouge at one time lent 300 l. gratis for
that use, besides the monthly contribution which he gave. By this means, in a
few years space, thirteen Impropriations were bought in, which cost betwixt
five and six thousand pounds, into which their care was to put godly, able, and
orthodox Ministers; and their design was to plant a learned and powerful
Ministry, especally in Cities, and Market Towns in several parts of the
Kingdom where there was the greatest need, for the better propagation of the
Gospel in those parts.

Indeed this was it that raised up so much envy against them, and made Dr.
Laud, the then Bishop of London to consult with Mr. Noy, the Kings Attorney
General about dissolving this Society, and hereupon Mr. Noy brought them all
into the Court of Exchequer, picking this quarrel against them, for that they
had made themselves a body Incorporate, without any Grant from the King. When
the Case had been debated by Learned Council on both sides, the result was,
that the Court adjudged their proceedings to be illegal, that their Trust
should be taken from them, and that what Impropriations they had thus purchased
should be made over to the King, and that the King should appoint such as he
thought meet, to dispose of those Impropriations which they had bought in.

The aforesaid Attorney that strictly examined all their Receipts, and
Disbursments, found that they had laid out of their own money, at the time when
they were questioned, a thousand pounds more than they had received, and
thereupon obtained an Order of the Court, that those debts should be first
discharged out of the Revenues of the Impropriations, before they should be
disposed to particular uses. Thus was their Trust quite wrested out of their
hands, and that excellent work fell to the ground.

Anno Christi 1653, Dr. Gouge was by the Authority of Parliament called to be a
member of the Assembly, He is chosen to the Assembly of Divines*
of Divines, wherein his attendance was assiduous, not being observed during
the whole time of that Session to be one day absent, unless it were in case of
more than ordinary weakness, ever preferring that public employment before any
private business whatsoever, and therein he was not one to make up the number
only, but a chief and useful member.

For he was chosen, and sat as one of the Assessors and very often filled the
Chair in the Moderators, absence, and such was his constant care, and
conscientiousness in the expense of time, and improving it to the best
advantage, that in case of intermission in the Assembly affairs, he used to
apply himself to his private studies: For which end it was his constant
practice to carry his Bible, and some other Books in his pocket, which upon
every advantage* he drew forth, and read in them, as was observed by many.

Episcopacy also being voted down by both Houses of Parliament, To the
Ordination of Ministers.
and so no ordinary way being left for the Ordination of Ministers, the
Parliament thought fit to set up an extraordinary way by Three and twenty
Ministers, who for the space of a year were to Ordain such as tendered
themselves according to the Rules prescribed by them, with the humble advice of
the Assembly, of which number Dr. Gouge was one, and acted with his Brethen
therein; at which time I observed his strictness in keeping of Fasts: For on an
Ordination day, which was always accompanied with Fasting and Prayer; in the
afternoon one proffered him a piece of a candied Orange Pill, which (though he
was then very ancient) he refused to accept of till the work of the day was
finished.

He was likewise chosen by a Committee of Parliament, To write Annotations on
the Bible.
amongst others, to write large Annotations upon the Bible, being well known to
be a judicious Interpreter of Scripture, and how well he performed that Task,
is, and may be evident to all that read his part, which was from the beginning
of the first Book of the King to Job. In which the Intelligent Reader may
observe such skill in the Original, such acquaintance with the sacred Story,
such judgment in giving the genuine sense of the Text, and such accuteness in
raising pertinent Observations, that without the help of any other
Commentators, a man may accommodate himself with the sense, Doctrines, and uses
of most of those Scriptures that came under his hand, in those brief
Annotations.

Before this, He refused to read the Book for Sports.
when the Book allowing Sports and Recreations on the Lords Days was by
public Authority enjoined to be read in all Churches throughout the Kingdom,
he, as sundry others, godly and faithful Ministers refused to read the same,
resolving rather to suffer the uttermost, than to manifest the least
approbation of so wicked, and licentious a practice, it being so contrary to
the express letter of the Scripture. His skill in Cases of Conscience.


By reason of his ability and dexterity in resolving Cases of Conscience, he
was much sought unto for his judgment in doubtful cases, and scruples of
Conscience, and that not only by ordinary Christians, but by diverse Ministers
also both in the City and Country, sometimes by word of mouth, and other
sometimes by writing: And indeed he was accounted the Father of the London
Divines, and the Oracle of his time.

He was likewise a sweet comforter of troubled Consciences, wherein he was
exceeding skilful, and dextrous, as many hundreds in the City have found from
time to time, being sought unto far and near by such as groaned under
afflictions and tentations, many of whom, through Gods blessing upon his
labors, were restored to joy and comforts out of unspeakable terrors and
torments of Conscience.

He was of a most sweet, His Meekness.
and meek disposition; yea such was his meekness of spirit, that it seems not
to be paralleld. For though he lived with his wife above twenty years, yet
neither child, nor servant, could ever say that they saw so much as an angry
countenance, or heard so much as an angry word proceed from him toward her all
her life long.

Some have observed, that toward his latter end in his visage he did much
resemble the Picture that is usually made for Moses. Certainly he was the exact
Effiges of Moses his spirit, and in this resembled him to the life, that he was
one of the meekest men that this Generation has known.

He was, A Peacemaker.
as a great peace-keeper, so a great peacemaker, having an excellent dexterity
in composing of differences, he was far from doing wrong to others, and as far
from revenging wrong done to him by others.

Notwithstanding which, he suffered much, both by the speeches, and also by the
actions of evil, and envious persons; yet his manner was, rather to pray for
them, than in any harsh manner to retaliate like for like. He always judged
that revilers, and injurious persons wronged themselves more than him.

Sundry scandalous and false aspersions were cast upon him, He is slandered.
yea by such persons as were guilty of those very crimes which they laid to his
charge. For some who lived by the unwarrantable trade of Usury, to justify
their own unlawful practices, have not stuck to charge the same upon him,
though he was always free from it, never putting out any money to use, either
by himself, or any other for him, neither directly, nor indirectly, as he has
been often heard to affirm, both in his life time, and not long before his
death.

Being chosen President of Sion College, His good Memory.
according to the custom, when he left his Office, he preached a learned and
polite Latin Sermon ad clerum, which he delivered by the strength of his
memory, without the help of his notes, which showed that though his body was
decrepit, and feeble, yet his intellectuals were vivid, quick and vigorous.

He was very charitable, His Charity.
especially to the godly poor, according to that direction of the Apostle, Gal.
6. 10. where he exhorts us to do good to all, but especially to the household of
Faith. He maintained some poor Scholars in the University wholly at his own
charge, and contributed liberally toward the maintenance of others. Indeed he
set apart a Sacrea stock as he called it, a portion for the poor,
proportionable to his receipts, which he faithfully distributed.

Yea he was of such a charitable, and bountiful a disposition, that though his
Father left him a competent estate, yet such were his annual disbursements for
his kindred, and others that stood in need of relief, that from the time of his
Fathers death till his children came to be of years, and so to call for their
portions, he laid up nothing of all his comings in; whereby it may appear, that
they, who out of envy cry up his estate to be greater than it was, do
consequently cry up his bounty and charity: For that whatsoever his estate was,
it was wholly laid out for the relief of such as stood in need (necessary
expenses for his Family only excepted) which as it does appear by his Papers so
in his life time he professed it to some of his Children; and truly as in other
things he excelled many others, so in this he excelled himself.

He was very conscientious in the expense of his time from his youth to the
very time of his death. His studiousness.
His custom was to rise very early both in the Winter and Summer. In the
Winter time he constantly rose so long before day, as that he always performed
all the exercises of his private devotions before daylight: And in the Summer
time he rose about four a clock in the morning; by which means he had done half
his work before others began their studies. If he happened to hear any at their
work before he began his studies, he would say (as Demosthenes spoke concerning
the Smith) that he was much troubled that any should be at the works of their
Calling, before he was at his.

He was a man of much temperance and sobriety, His Temperance.
both in his eating, drinking, and apparel: And for Recreations, howsoever
many pious persons do spend time therein, and that lawfully in warrantable
Recreations, yet he spent none of his so, whence it was that he was never
expert in any kind of sports: He has been often heard to say, that he never
took any journey merely of pleasure in all his lifetime. Study, and p^ins were
always, both in youth and age his chefest pleasure and delight; yea it was his
meat and drink to be doing the will of his heavenly Father, wherein he took as
much pleasure and delight, as natural men do in their eating and drinking, or
in their disports and pastimes.

Such was his deportment in his conversation, His Deportment.
that there was scarce a Lord, or Lady, or Citizen of quality, in, or about the
City that were piously affected, but they sought his acquaintance, and were
ambitious to enjoy his company, wherein they took much content, and found much
benefit to their souls thereby.

And whereas many persons of quality out of their great respect to him, came to
visit him, he would so endeavor to order their conference as might tend most
to their edification; and if their visits were merely complemental, he soon
grew weary, and accounted it a burden to him.

He was always of a very friendly, His Affabi^ity
and courteous disposition, in so much as the meanest, not only of his own
Parish, but of the City, found easy access to him, and he was as easy to be
entreated, yea ready to do what good he could to all.

And amongst other Graces his humility was very eminent, His Humility
and exemplary: Though others knew (...) when his face did not shine, yet he
knew not when it did. He that readily could observe the least glimpses or
appearances of any worth in others, would not acknowledge them in himself: He
was (as it was said of Nazianzen) high in employments, and abilities, but low
in his disposition, and resentment of his own worth. He was not observed to be
puffed up either with the multitudes that flocked unto his Ministry (which were
many and great) nor with any applauses of men; but would still say, That he
knew more by himself to abase him, than any could know to extol him; yea so
eminent was his Humility, that he charged his Executor, to whom he committed
the care of his Funeral, that there should no Green-staffe be laid upon his
Hearse, though this usual respect is given to those who in their lifetime were
Governors of the Hospital of Bridewell, one of which number this worthy Doctor
was, yea and a Benefactor too to that House: As also that he should not affixe
any Escocheons to his Hearse, though he was a Gentleman of an ancient Descent,
as if he had thought that the poverty of Christ was his Patrimony, and Coat of
Arms, and his interest in him, his greatest, and best achievement; or as if
both living and dead he would be (as the Apostle speaks) clothed with Humility.

He was much in Communion with God, His Fastings.
and contented not himself only with his constant, daily, and ordinary holy
duties, but was also frequent in extraordinary exercises. In the Bishops times,
when it was not permitted to keep Fasts in the public Congregations, he was
one of those Ministers who frequently holp private Christians in their more
retired Humiliations. In times of fears and dangers, he with diverse others, had
sometimes monthly, yea sometimes weekly Fasts, whereof many were kept in his
own house, and others of them in his Vestry; which he was observed to perform
with extraordinary reverence and awfulness of spirit. His Confessions were
accompanied with much sense of, and sorrow for sin, brokenness of heart,
self-abhorrency, judging of the creature, and justifying of God: His petitions
were pertinent, judicious, spiritual, seasonable, accompanied with faith and
fervency; like a true son of Jacob, he wrestled with supplications, and tears,
as resolving not to depart out of Gods presence without a blessing.

But there was none like him in Thanksgiving, His Thanksgivings.
when a man would have thought that he had spent the last drop of his spirits
and strength in Confession and Prayer; O! how would he recollect is spirits
when he came to the work of Thanksgiving, wherein he would be so large,
particular, warm, and vigorous, that in the end of the day when men's affections
grew flat, he would so revive and quicken them, as if the work had been then
but newly begun, and as if that had been the only work of the day; and herein
indeed he may be a pattern to all his surviving Brethren in the Ministry.

He was very inquisitive after the state, and condition of the Church of
Christ, both at home, and abroad, that he might accordingly order his prayers
in their behalf, of whom he was never unmindful in his addresses unto God. And
when he heard that it went ill with the Church of God in any place, like
another Nehemiah, His Sympathy
he sat him down, and wept, and mourned, and fasted, and prayed unto the God
of Heaven in their behalf.

His study was as great to advance Christ, His Faith.
as to debase himself. He used frequently to say, When I look upon my self, I
see nothing but emptiness, and weakness; but when I look upon Christ, I see
nothing but fullness and sufficiency. When the hand of his body was weak and
shaking, that of his soul, his faith was strong and steady. When he could not
hold the Cup at the Sacrament, nor scarce carry it to his own mouth by reason
of his Palsy hand, yet then with a firm an^ fixed affiance did he lay hold
upon Christ, and with a strong and eager appetite applied his blood to his
soul, and his manner was sweetly to breathe forth joyful Thanksgivings for his
refreshment by the blood of Christ, when he was returned to his house after the
Lords Supper; yea when he could hardly creep with his body to the place where
it was celebrated, and was forced many times to make use of the help of others
to support him in his passage thither, even then did his faith run swiftly, and
was upon the wing to carry him to Christ. When worldly suports failed him, when
health, and strength forsook him, he made Jesus Christ the staff of his old
age, often professing, as his great misery and impotency without him, so his
holy and humble recumbency upon him.

Great was his patience under the visiting hand of God, His Patience.
especially in his old age, when God exercised him with painful maladies.
Though by reason of the sharpness, and bitterness of his pains occasioned by
the stone, and acuteness of his urine, and that Lethalis arundo (as he often
called it) that deadly arrow in his side, which he knew could never be plucked
out but by death, I mean his Asthma, which he got by an excessive cold in
attending upon public employments: Notwithstanding (I say) by reason of these
he was often heard to groan, yet never did he once grumble against the
dispensations of God. Never did he complain of God for his sufferings, though
often of himself for sinning: He never cried out A great sufferer, but often, A
great sinner! and yet he would overtake that expression again, with the
discoursing of, and comforting himself in A great Savior, and in the depth of
his torments he would say, Well, yet in all these there is nothing of Hell, or
of Gods wrath. His sufferings were never so deep, but he could see the bottom
of them, and would say, Soul be silent, soul be patient; It is thy God, and
Father that thus orders thy estate; Thou art his clay, he may tread and
trample on thee, as pleases him: Thou have deserved much more: It is enough
that thou art kept out of Hell: Though thy pain be grievous, yet it is
tolerable: Thy God affords some intermissions, he will turn it to thy good,
and at length put an end to all; none of these can be expected in Hell.

He used often to make mention of the extent of obedience, His excellent
Speeches.
which he said, was not only to endeavor to do what God requires, but also
patiently to bear what Gods will is to lay upon his creature, as Christ
himself, though he were the Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which
he suffered. In his greatest pangs, he often used this speech of holy Job, Shall
we receive good from the hands of God, and not evil? He often commended his
soul unto Christ, and used to say, I am persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed to him against that day. When any of his Friends went
about to comfort him in those gifts which God had bestowed on him, and works
which he had wrought by him, he would answer, I dare not think of any such
thing for comfort; Jesus Christ, and what he has done, and endured, is the
only ground of my sure comfort. Many that came to visit him in his weakness,
professed that they went away better than they came, by reason of those savoury
and gracious speeches, and expressions that proceeded from him.

Though, toward his latter end, his fits of the stone were frequent and sharp,
having sometimes four or five of them in an hour, yet such was his desire to
finish that his so much desired Commentary upon the Epistle to the Hebrews,
that so soon as the bitter pain of his fit was over, he still returned to his
work, making some further progress therein. And thus he continued laboring in
that employment through many pains till Tuesday the 6. of December, His
Sickness.
Anno Christi, 1653. About which time, as his natural strength was exceedingly
decayed, so now also his Intellectuals began to fail, and for the following
three days, a drousiness seized upon him, insomuch that he could not hold up
his head to look into a Book, but slumbered away his time in a Chair; and upon
Friday being the third day after he had given over his studies, enquiring what
day it was, he cried out, Alas! I have lost three days. The day following
being Saturday he had no desire to arise out of his bed, neither indeed could
he, in regard of his weakness, which was such, and he was so sensible of it,
that he said, Now I have not long to live in this world, the time of my
departure is at hand, I am going to my desired Haven; the apprehension whereof
was no little joy unto him, for he had often said to such of his friends as
came to visit him in his sickness, I am willing to dye, having, I bless God,
nothing to do but to dye. Indeed sometimes he seemed to be in the same strait
with St. Paul between Life and Death, having a desire to depart that he might
be with Christ, which was best of all: but yet very desirous he was to finish
his Commentary upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, which he knew would be very
useful to the Church of God, and in that respect he was willing to live; and
God so far answered his desire in that particular, that he lived to finish it
within half a Chapter. But when he perceived that his time in this world could
not be long, O! how sweet, and joyful was the apprehension of Death unto him,
which he often termed, his best friend next to Jesus Christ. So that he came
willingly; he was not plucked and dragged to Death: Death was his familiar
acquaintance; it was his privilege as well as his task. When his good sister
said to him in his sickness, Brother, I am afraid to leave you alone; Why
Sister (said he) I shall I am sure, be with Jesus Christ when I dye. The
meditation of Death was not more frequent than sweet unto him. His soul was
upon the wing, and was bent Heavenward, even whilst it was in the cage of his
decrepit body.

Upon Saturday, though he kept his bed through weakness, yet was he more
wakeful, and his spirit more lively, and cheerful, than for several days
before, which questionless was from his joyful apprehension of his approaching
departure.

His speeches that day were more than ordinary Heavenly: He spoke much in the
admiration of Gods Free grace, and riches of his Mercy in Jesus Christ.

As while he lived he led a heavenly life, so about the time of his death, by
those comforts, and joys that he found in his soul, he seemed to be in Heaven,
even while he was upon the earth; and so he continued full of sweet, and divine
comfort, and heavenly expressions to the last of his understanding and speech,
which continued to Monday morning, when both of them failed him; from which
time he lay breathing, yet shorter, and shorter till eight of the clock at
night, about which time, in the presence of all his Children, and diverse of his
Friends, he quietly slept in the Lord, His Death.
making an happy change from earth to Heaven, which was December. 12. Anno Christi
1653, being 79 years old, after he had served God faithfully and painfully in
his Generation.

A Catalogue of the Books published by him.
Of Domestical Duties on Ephesians. 5. and 6. The whole Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. Of
the sin against the Holy Ghost, on Matthew. 12. 31, 32. Mar. 3. 28, 29. Upon the
Lords Prayer, called, A Guide to go to God. Gods three Arrows, Plague, Famine,
and Sword, on Number. 16. 44, etc. 2 Samuel 21. 1. Exodus 17. 8. The extent of Gods
Providence; Nov. 5. on Matthew. 10. 29, 30, 31. The Dignity of Chivalry, on 2 Chronicles 8* 9. The Saints Sacrifice, or a Comment on Psalm. 116. Two Treatises, 1.
The Sabbaths Sanctification. 2. A Treatise of Apostasy, on Luke 15. 31. The
Saints Support: A Sermon before the Commons in Parliament, on Nehem. 5. 19.
Mercies Memorial, Nov. 17. on Exodus 13. 3. The Progress of Divine Providence: A
Sermon before the House of Lords, on Ezekiel. 36. 11. A Funeral Sermon, on Ezekiel.
24. 16. The Right way: A Sermon before the Lords, on Ezra 8. 21. Two
Catechismes. A Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews.
My Reverend Friend Mr. Tho. Gouge, eldest Son to this famous Doctor, desired
me to insert this Life, amongst these other Worthies contained in this Volume.

The Life and Death of Mr. Thomas Gataker, who dyed Anno Christi, 1654.
MR. Thomas Gataker, His Parentage
or Gatacre (for so he wrote himself till of later years to prevent miscalling,
occasioned frequently by the view of the Letters, he changed it into Gataker)
was a branch of a very ancient Family, so firmly by Gods Providence planted in
Shropshire, that the Stock has continued in the same House, carrying the Name
of its owner, and known by the Title of Gatacre-Hall; by an un-interrupted
succession from the time of King Edward the Confessor.

His Father, Mr. Thomas Gatacre (being a younger Son of William Gatacre) was
designed by his Parents to the study of the Law, in order whereunto he was
admitted a Student in the Temple: And during his abode there, he, occasionally
went to visit some of his Kindred, who were then high in place, and power,
whereby he was often present at the examination of some Christian Confessors of
the Gospel, in those bloody times wherein Satan armed all his Forces to
suppress that dawning light which threatened ruin to his Kingdom of darkness.

The harshness and cruelty of those proceedings, together with the constancy of
those weak, yet sincere Christians, who with evidence of truth, and resolution
of mind maintained faith and a good conscience, were very prevalent with him
to facilitate his entertainment of that purer Doctrine of the Gospel which
began to shine into his soul.

This being apprehended by his Parents, fearing his change in Religion, they
sent him over to Lovaine in Flanders, and to win him to a compliance with them
in Religion, they settled upon him an estate in a Lease of an hundred pounds per
annum in old Rents; but like St. Paul, Phil. 3. 8. He counted all outward
advantages as nothing in comparison of the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

His Father therefore perceiving how fixed and unmovable he was in his choice
of Religion, in which yet he had nothing to except against, but only the
novelty of it, he recalled him into England, and in great displeasure revoked
his former Grant of 100 ^. per annum, which yet could not be effected without
his Sons consent: But this young Disciple had already learned the hard lesson
of self-denial, and of forsaking all to follow Christ, and therefore to
preserve his conscience pure and entire, he gave up that which was intended as
a bait to Apostasy. But the Lord, who h^^h promised to his faithful followers
reparation and satisfaction for all their losses for his sake, raised him up
Friends, by whose assistance, and encouragement, he pursued his studies at
Oxford, and in process of time, when, not only the clouds of ignorance and
superstition were dispelled, but also those bloody storms in the Marian days
were blown over, he took upon him the public Ministry of the Gospel, and was
household Chaplain to that great Favorite, Robert Earl of Lecester, and
afterward Pastor of St. Edmunds in Lumberd street, London: In which Parsonage
house by his wife (who was of an honest Family of the Pigots in Hertfortshire)
amongst other children, His Birth.
he had this Thomas, who was born September the 4. Anno Christi 1574.

In his Childe-hood he was so addicted to those means which his Parents applied
him unto, His Education
for the implanting in him the seeds of good Literature, that he rather needed
a bridle, than a spur: For his love of learning (equal to that admirable
capacity, wherewith the Father of Lights had furnished him) was so active in
the acquiring of it, that his Father was fain often gently to chide him from
his book. Neither were his nimble wit, sharp judgment, and vast memory
perverted to be the instruments of that debauchery wherewith the corruption of
our Nature does too often stain and desloure our first days: For he had a
lovely gravity in his young coversation; so that what Gregory Nazianzen said of
the great Basil, might be averred of him, That he held forth Learning beyond
his age, and a fixedness of manners beyond his Learning.

Having happily finished his Tyrocinnia of first exercises in the
Grammar-Schooles (wherein he overcame by his strange industry the difficulties
which th^se times (dest^tute of many helps which our present days do enjoy)
conflicted withal, His remove to Cambridge.
and outstripped many of his fellows which ran in the same course; before he
had completed sixteen years viz. Anno Christi 1590, he was by his Father
placed in St. John's College in Cambridge.

Not long after his settlement there, his Father (being called by God to
receive the reward of his labors) left him, not wholly destitute, and yet not
sufficiently provided for any long continuance of his studies in that place.
Gods Providen
But God who has engaged his truth and mercy to the upright, and even to his
seed also, Ps. 112. 1, 2. (especially when the Son does not degenerate, nor
thwart the Providence of God, by a forfeiture of his title to the Promises)
provided friends and means for him, who was by an hidden counsel then designed
to be an instrument of doing much service to the Church of Christ. Thus the
fruit was not nipped in a promising bud, by the Frost of want.

Now not from mere favor, His industry and preferment
but from merit (upon the proof of his Learning) he was (...) chosen Scholar
of that worthy Society, wherein he continued his studies with unwearied
diligence, and happy success, till he, with abilities answerable to his Degree,
commenced Master of Arts. For an instance of his industry, take this, viz. That
he was a constant Auditor of that eminent Light of Learning, Mr. John Boys, who
read a Greek Lecture in his bed to certain young Students that preferred their
nightly studies before their rest and ease. The notes of those Lectures he kept
as a treasure, and being visited by Mr. Boys many years after, he brought them
forth to him, to the no small joy of the good old man, who professed that he
was made some years younger by that grateful entertainment.

About this time was contracted that straight friendship betwixt our Mr.
Gataker, and that faithful servant of Jesus Christ. Mr. Richard Stock, which
continued to the death of this Reverend Minister, as appears by Mr. Gatakers
testimony given unto him at his Funeral.

An evidence of that good esteem which Mr. Gataker had now acquired for his
Learning and Piety was this, His remove to Sidney College.
That a College being then to be erected by the Munificence of the Countess of
Sussex, the Trustees of that Foundress (being persons eminent for Prudence and
Zeal) did choose him for one of that Society, and they transplanted him into
that new Nursery of Arts and Religion, being confident that he would (as indeed
he did by Christ's assistance) prove very fruitful both for the ornament and
benefit of that Seminary.

Indeed they laid hold of him before the house was fit for Inhabitants, fearing
lest so fair and promising a Flower should be taken up by some other hand. But
while the College was in building. (that he might not lose any opportunity of
doing good) he retired himself to the house of Mr. William Aylofes in Essex,
His abode in Essex.
who had prevailed with him to instruct both himself in the Hebrew Language,
and his eldest Son in that Literature which was proper to his age.

In this Family, His employment there.
partly by his own inclination, and partly by the encouragement of the
Governors thereof, he performed Family Duties for the instruction and
edification of the whole household, expounding to them a portion of Scripture
every morning, that the Sun of Righteousness might as constantly arise in their
hearts, as the day brake in upon them. In this Exercise, whereby he labored to
profit both himself and others, he went over the Epistles of the Apostles, the
Prophecy of Isaiah, and a good part of the Book of Job, rendering the Text out
of the Original Languages, and then delivering clear Explications, and also
deducing useful Observations.

Dr. Stern, the Suffragan of Colchester, on a time visiting the Mistress of the
Family (to whom he was nearly related) happened to be present at one of these
Exercises, at which time Mr. Gataker explicated the first Chapter of St. Paul's
Epistle to the Ephesians, which is known to be most pregnant of Divine My
steries: But this portion of holy Writ he treated upon with such happy
elucidations, that the judicious Doctor was much satisfied with his pains
therein, and admiring the endowments of Mr. Gataker, exhorted him instantly to
be Ordained to the work of the Ministry, whereby those his gifts might be
authoritatively exercised for the public good, and improved for the building
up of the Church, and withal, offered him his assistance in that business: But
Mr. Gataker, well weighing the burden of that Calling, and judging modestly of
his own abilities, which he conceived disproportionable for that Office (to the
full discharge whereof the Apostle has set, (...), Who is sufficient?) thanked
the Doctor for his kind offer, but deferred the matter to further
consideration: But afterward by the advice of the Reverend Mr. Henry Alvey,
His Ordination.
formerly his Tutor, and whom in this business he now took for his counselor,
upon his remonstrance of diverse reasons, and the importunity of Dr. Stern
afresh re-iterated, he assented to be Ordained by the said Suffragan.

The Fabric of Sidney-Sussex College being now finished, His return to
Cambridge.
he betook himself to the station, and employment whereunto he was before
designed, and to the work depending thereon, wherein his pains in seasoning
young Students with principles of Piety and Learning, His Diligence
were both great, and very successful: For some of them that watered their
Gardens at his Spring, or kindled their Lamps at his Light, grew up to great
eminency, as Mr. John Hoyl, and Mr. Thomas Pell, who were afterward worthy
Fellows of that Society.

About that time there were certain persons in the University, zealous of
promoting the glory of God, and of gaining souls to Christ, that lay in a sad
condition through the defect of Pastors able to teach, and lead the people in
the ways of truth, life, and peace, especially Mr. Abdias Ashton of St. John's
College, and Mr. William Bedel of Emanuel, who set on foot a design of
preaching in places adjacent to Cambridge, even to a considerable distance.
These men invited Mr. Gataker to be a partner in this good employment, who
being drawn, and encouraged by them, preached every Lords day at Everton (a
Village in the meeting-confines of Cambridge, His Ministe^^ial employment.
Bedford, and Huntingtonshire) where a decrepid man (who was reported to be
sixscore and ten years old) sustained the name of Vicar, Vix magni nominis
umbra. Here a Family of the Burgoines, resident in that place deserves this
honorable remembrance, that Mr. Roger Burgoine during that time, used Mr.
Gataker with great humanity, and respect, which by him was construed to be an
effect of his Piety.

After he had thus religiously employed himself for the space of half a year,
manifesting his public spirit therein, he had some causes that moved him to
retire from the University at the motion of Mr. Ashton before mentioned, who
had been his Tutor, whereupon he removed to Sir William Cooks Family, His
remove to London.
then resident in London.

This place and employment occasioned a more public discovery of his
Ministerial Gifts, with the singular approbation of many persons of note, not
only for their outward estate, but also for their affection unto, and
judgment in Religion. Hereupon the Lecturers place of Lincolns Inn falling
void, His call to Linconlus-Inne.
some principal persons of that Honorable Society (who had been his Auditors
occasionally elsewhere) made addresses unto him, inviting him unto that place,
offering their assistance, and alleging the facility of his Introduction by
the Lord Chief Justice Pophams interessing himself in the business, whom they
knew to have loved his Father Mr. Thomas Gataker (being once his intimate
friend, and contemporary in the study of the Law) and to favor this his son
very highly for his own worth and work in the Ministry: But he, according to
his usual modesty, declined the undertaking of it, and resisted the
importunities even of his Friend Mr. Stock; till Dr. Mountague, Master of
Sidney-College, repairing to London, and being made acquainted with the design
in hand (though ^e had it in his thoughts to invite Mr. Gataker back to the
College, that he might read an Hebrew Lecture which had a Salary annexed to it
by the Lord Harrington, ^e^) laying that aside, he pressed Mr. Gataker with
Arguments, and Authority, encouraging him against his own dissidence, and so
wrought him at last to an assent, that without any suit made by him the Lord
Popham should recommend him to that Society.

Thus was he chosen Preacher at Lincolns-Inne, where he spent ten years to the
great advancement of Piety amongst them, and with an happy Reformation of some
abuses of the Lords day, as he himself testifies in his Apologetical Discourse
against Lilly, p. 16, 17.

But notwithstanding that engagement, Mr. Gataker did not totally abandon the
Family of Sir William Cook, to whose Lady he was near by blood, and dear to
them both upon the account of his pious and profitable labors amongst them.
Therefore in the Vacation-times, being dis-ingaged from his attendance at the
Innes of Court, he resided in that Family, exercising his Ministry either in
their Chapel, or in the Parish Church as occasion offered it self; and this he
did with an Apostolical mind, not for filthy lucre, but freely, making the
Gospel a burden only to the Dispenser of it; yet such was the care and piety
of that Religious pair, that they also would not serve God with that that cost
them nothing: For aftewards, in consideration of those his pains freely taken
amongst them, they settled upon Mr. Gataker an Annuity of 20 l. per annum,
which also he received for some few years, but afterward he saw reason to
remit it to the Heir of that Family, forbearing to make use of his right he
had to it, and forbidding his Executor to demand any Arrears of that Annuity.

This is mentioned the rather to show the generous temper of this holy man of
God, His Self-deni^
who aimed at the spiritual good of others, more than at his own temporal
advantages, and how infinitely he was removed from the fordid acquisition of
gain, or the prostitution of his sacred Function unto secular designs, which
may stop the mouth of malice, and the impudent clamours of some, whose
consciences being either gauled or cauterized, spared not to traduce him for
covetousness: But his own pen wrote the best Apology, as indeed (according to
that of Nazianzen) they that will give him a just Character, have need of his
Eloquence.

Whilst he attended on that Flock at Lincolns Inn, Sir William Sidley, a
learned Mecaenas, and pious Patron of the Church, proffered him a fair
Benefice; and when Mr. Gataker declined the burden of a Pastoral charge, and
pleaded an unwillingness to be removed from those worthy Gentlemen (of whose
favor he had such good experience) he endeavored to persuade him that by
taking an assistant, all those inconveniences would be salved, and so he needed
not to desert that Society, which in Term^ time only required his labors and
attendance: But Mr Gataker, who poised the burden in the balance of the
Sanctuary, always judged one cure of souls to be sufficient for one man, and
therefore ventured the unkind resentment of the Noble Gentleman upon his
refusal, rather than the multiplying of preferments to himself.

After ten years labors profitably employed at Lincolns Inn, not only to the
great benefit of the then living servants of God, but also for the behoof of
posterity, especially by that his learned Tractate of Lots, there, and then
conceived, and formed (wherein what satisfaction is given to conscience in many
cases, let the judicious acknowledge.) Mr. Gataker thence removed to undertake
the Rectory of Rotherhithe in Surry, His rem^ve to Rotherhithe.
of the grounds, motives, and manner whereof he himself has largely given an
account to the world in his Apologetick against Lilly, p. 44, 48. of which this
is the sum;

The Rectory of Redrith in Surry (as it is commonly called) being void, and one
of an infamous life, laboring hard to succeed in it (in order to which, before
the former Incumbents death, he had set on foot a transaction with the mother
of certain Orphans in whose hands the Patronage was supposed to rest) some of
the Religious Inhabitants, valuing the means of Grace above all their other
outward enjoyments, cast their eyes, and thoughts upon Mr. Gataker, to gain
whom, to their own entreaties, they added the mediation of his good Friend Mr.
Richard Stock, who, when he had by many reasons remonstrated unto him that God
did give him a clear call to that place, whose honor, and Ordinances might
suffer prejudice by the intrusion of an unworthy man if he should refuse the
call, he at last suffered himself to be persuaded, and prevailed with to
undertake that charge; which being represented to Sir Henry Hobart, the Kings
Attorney General by Mr. Randolph Crew (afterward Lord Chief Justice) Sir Henry
that before favored other pretensions to gratify some Tenants of his in that
Parish, yet now did readily embrace the motion concerning the settling of Mr.
Gataker there, according to his own contentment; and withal wrote a Letter to
the Bishop for the removal of all obstructions that lay in the way, or that
might hinder his acceptance of the presentation of Mr. Gataker, which, being
signed with all the hands of the three brethren, who had right to that
Advocation, was tendered on his behalf.

The report of this his removal was no welcome news to many of that Honorable
Society, who would fain have retained him, and some of them offered an
enlargement of his maintenance for an argument to keep him, and others of them
represented the consistence of both employments by the help of an assistant:
But he that made not his Ministry a mere trade of living here, as Gregory
Nazianzene complained that some did in his time, and too many do in our times,
would not multiply his burdens, when he deemed himself unfit for the least, and
would not suffer himself to be wrought to any other resolution.

Therefore Anno Christi 1611, His Industry.
commending his former charge to the Grace of God, he betook himself to the
sole attendance of that Flock of which now the Holy Ghost had made him the
Overseer; and his industry in the discharge of his duty there was both constant
and great, notwithstanding that he was almost perpetually troubled with the
headache, wherewith God had exercised him from his very youth, and for which
he had only this poor comfort from his Physician, Dr. Goulston, his singular
good friend (with whom he communicated his studies upon Galen, and to whom he
contributed his assistance for the Edition of some parts of Galen) who often
told him, that the incurable disease of age would be the only remedy of his
distemper, because together with the abatement of natural heat, his
indisposition would grow less vigorous and violent.

To the work of his Ministry in public upon the Sabbaths, His Catechizing.
he added a Catechetical weekly Lecture on Fridays in the evening, which was
designed by him, to lay the foundation of saving knowledge in the hearts of the
children, of whom a certain number every Lecture day did give an account of
their knowledge by set Answers to Questions delivered out to them aforehand for
their instruction (this course of holding a form of sound words, agreeable to
the Doctrine of the Gospel consigned in holy Writ, of what importance it is, we
may gather from that ignorance, and those errors which have invaded the Church
in these our times; which mischiefs can hardly be imputed to any thing so much
as to the neglect of that useful duty of Catechizing.) But that exercise was
performed by him with such an accurate, and methodical explication of the whole
Body of Divinity, that Christians of riper years, and of long standing in
Christ's School, did resort to be partakers of those discourses, wherein their
well-exercised senses did find not only milk fit for babes, but also solid meat
suitable to grown men in Christ.

This course he continued till he had completed a pefect Summary of Divinity,
and gave it over when he saw that the least part of his Auditory consisted of
those for whose sakes he principally intended this work; his Parishoners being
grown at least to a neglect of his free labors in that kind.

Mr. Gatakers constant retirement in his study caused him to make choice of an
help meet for him that might oversee his Family, His first Marriage.
which was a necessary act of prudence; and therefore not long before he left
Lincolns Inn, he married the widow of Mr. William Cupp, to whose two daughters
he was so providently kind in their education, that he disposed of them in
marriage to two Divines of note in the Church, and continued such a fatherly
love to them, and theirs, that the world mistook them for his own children.
That wife dyed in childbed of a son that did bear the Fathers name, who, after
that he had seen the most remote parts of the world, wherewith we keep
commerce, returned home to his Father, and dyed in peace.

The same motive still being in force, he after a decent interval of
widow-hood, chose for himself the daughter of a Reverend Minister, His second
Marriage.
Mr. Charles Pinner, who was brought up in the worthy, and religious Family of
Mr. Ellis Crisp, brother to Mrs. Pinner; and it pleased God to give him a Son
by her, whom in process of time he dedicated unto God in the work of the
Ministry, but immediately to take away the mother, so that the mothers
Funerals, and the childs Baptism were celebrated together. Thus our wise and
gracious Father tempers the cup for his children, lest they should surfeit upon
earthly enjoyments, as they might easily do if they were unmixed with occasions
of sorrow.

Then did Mr. Gataker remain for many years in a disconsolate condition, His
third Marriage.
till at last he adventured and married a Gentlewoman of a very considerable
Family, being sister to Sir George, and Sir John Farewell, and a good esteem for
knowledge and piety. By her he had three children, whereof a son, and a
daughter were carried to the ground before their mother, but the third yet
lives to walk by the light of her Fathers life and Doctrine. This his third
wife being of a contemplative mind, fell into a consumption, which so wasted
her body, that her soul took its flight from thence into Heaven.

Last of all he took to wife a Citizens widow, His fourth Marriage.
whose comfortable conversation he enjoyed for the space of four and twenty
years, but without any issue by her. His love to her was one motive that
induced him to remove out of his Parsonage house into another habitation of his
own revenue. For, supposing that she might survive him, he would make a
convenient provision for her, that she might not be subject to the courtesy of
another for her removal; and that affection extended it self in his great
liberality to many of (...) kindred that were in need of help and support from
him, and that both in her life time, and since her decease.

He survived her two years within a few days, and because he numbered his days
with wisdom, and thereupon presumed that the time was approaching wherein his
soul should be married to the Lamb, he would not endure to listen to the motion
of some, who would have advised him to a new entanglement in the world.

Having thus related his several Marriages in a continued Narrative, let us now
step back to take notice of some passages in time that went before the last of
them.

Anno Christi 1620, He views the Low Countries.
having a justifiable curiosity to see our neighbor Churches in the United
Provinces, and something of the Spanish Provinces in the Netherlands, he took
advantage of the Truce between the King of Spain, and the Hollanders for a free
passage between both Countries. Thereupon with his entire friend, Captain
Joshua Downing, and an old acquaintance, Mr. Roger Hughs (his Mnason, whose
house he frequented at London) he took his voyage, taking also along with him a
Nephew of his, who was a young Student, to be a partner with him in his
Travels. His mother being then alive, had some fears, lest he being a known and
noted adversary to the Popish cause (which he had mortally wounded with many
and sharp weapons) should suffer inconvenience from that generation of Vipers,
whose violent, and virulent malice often prompts them to base course of secret
revenge; but God was his guide, his Sun, and his Shield, and so prospered his
journey, that within a months space (for they took Boat July the 13, and
returned safe August the 14,) he had viewed the most considerable places in the
Low Countries. In this his travel he gave better satisfaction to the English
Church in Middleburgh, where he gave way to the importunity of friends, who
were desirous to hear him as well as glad to see him, than he did to the
English Papists in Flanders, with whom he had diverse debates, wherein he drove
some to a confusion whom he could not draw to a conversion.

Anno Christi 1642. A violent fit of the Colic assaulted him, and brought him
to the very brink of the Grave; but it pleased God to bring him back again that
he might do him further service. For the year ensuing, before he had well
recovered his strength, he was called by the Parliament to sit as one of the
Assembly which was summoned to be consulted with about Religion; He is chos^n
to the Assembly.
where his endeavors for promoting truth, and suppressing error were sincere
and serious: And his study of peace with modesty was in this remarkable, that
when his Reasons delivered concerning Christ's obedience in order to our
Justification (wherein he differed from his Brethren, could not obtain assent
from the major part, which determined the Question contrary to his sense, his
great love of unity imposed upon him silence, and wrought likewise upon him
resolutions, not to publish his discourses upon that subject from Romans 3. 28.
that so he might not publicly discover dissent from the Votes of that Reverend
Assembly. I wish there had been the like prudence and modesty in some others,
who profess themselves to differ but in circumstantials.

During his attendance upon the work of that Convention, His Self denial.
the Earl of Manchester (being acquainted with his great worth, and fitness in
regard of his Learning of all kinds for Academical transactions) offered him
the Mastership of Trinity College in Cambridge, which is the greatest
preferment in that University. For that Noble Lord being entrusted by the
Parliament with the Reformation of that Academy, was not passionately
transported with a blind partiality of men's persons upon any sinister
respects, but desired to prefer them whom he judged most worthy, and most
hopeful to do Christ service in that place, and therefore being persuaded that
Mr. Gataker might (both in regard of his gravity, and vast Scholastical
abilities) be a choice ornament to that University, and fair copy for others to
write by, he was very desirous to place him there. But this good man, though
often importuned by many friends to accept of the motion, according to his
accustomed modesty, with many thanks to the Noble Earl, refused to undertake
that place, though of much honor, service, and outward advantage; pleading,
together with his unworthiness, the weakness of his body by reason of age, and
thereupon his inability to take journies: and because he looked upon himself,
as having one foot in the Grave, he humbly desired, that a younger man might be
thought upon, more likely to be longer serviceable than himself, in a place of
so great eminency and trust. And indeed the sense of his own weakness was not a
vain presage of his decays; His Distempers.
for not long after he was again surprised by the Colic, which before had
shaken him, and made his crazie body less able to endure new conflicts, and
these were so sharp, that his recovery appeared desperate, not only to his
other friends, but even to his Physicians also. Yet it pleased God though he
chastened him sore, not to give him over unto death. For his studies, which
seemed to be his meat and drink in his health, were his physic also when he
was sick: For whilst he was confined to his chamber, he prepared for the Press
his Dissertation de Tetragrammato, and a Grammatical discourse de Bivocalibus;
and though this for the subject be not comparable to the other, yet it may be
averred, that what he did by the by, and for the refreshment of his languishing
body, and mind, was of more worth than the main work of many Students.

After a long time that he had been a Prisoner in his own house, he, by Gods
assistance recovered so much strength as that he was able to go to Gods house:
and now he believed himself bound to employ his Ministerial Gifts in Gods
service, and therefore he again adventured into the Pulpit, where he spent
himself so far that he strained a veyn in his lungs, for which (being then
about Seventy three years old) he was let blood, by which, and other good means
God was pleased to carry him through that danger.

When he had recruited his veyns, and sinews with fresh abilities, he, being
unwilling to fall under that Woe, 1 Cor. 9. 16. for not preaching the Gospel,
acted more according to the willingness of his spirit, than was proportionable
to the weakness of the flesh; whereupon he fell into a relapse of spitting
blood (for which he again permitted a veyn to be opened) which laid on him a
necessity of forbe^ring the Pulpit; yet would he never forgo the
administration of the Sacraments, nor his usual short discourse at Funerals
suitable to the present (whenever he was solicited thereunto) though even
those shorter exercises of his lungs were painful to him, and wasted that oil,
which, like a burning light he spent for the enlightening of others.

The main of his time was now spent in his study, and that was not designed as
a mere entertainment of himself in a quiet privacy, but to the public benefit
of the Church for the present, and for posterity, as appears amongst other
works, by those exquisite Annotations upon the Prophesies of Isaiah, Jeremiah,
and the Lamentations; and we should have gained more by his later industry, if
the malicious slanders of the enemies of the truth had not diverted his time,
and studies to some necessary Apologies.

Neither did he, His care of his Flock.
when he was by the hand of God disabled to preach, betray his Flock into the
hands of Wolves, that would make a prey of precious souls, nor desert it. For
being troubled, lest the foundation that he had laid (after the example of the
wise Master Builder St. Paul) should either not be built upon, or destroyed, he
retained the title of Rector, with a charge beyond the Revenue (as it was
sometimes proved) till provision might be made of a faithful, and Orthodox
Minister, to whom he might comfortably devolve both the burden and the benefit.

To his care of feeding his Flock in public, His Family employments.
very agreeable was his diligence in instructing his Family in private; for on
Friday nights weekly after supper he used to expound that short Catechism
which he had published for the use of his Parishioners; in which course he so
laid forth the Nature and Attributes of God, the state of man, both entire and
corrupt, the means of his Fall, and Recovery; the nature of Faith and
Repentance, with the Doctrine of the Sacraments; that his Parlour was one of
the best Schools for a young Student to learn Divinity in; and indeed his
house was a private Seminary for diverse young Gentlemen of this Nation, and far
more Foreigners, who did resort to, and sojourn with him, to receive from him
direction, and advancement in their studies; and many who afterward were
eminent in the Churches, both here, and abroad, were brought up under his eye,
at least, as Paul was at the feet of Gamaliel.

Persons of note that had been his assistants were* Persons bred under him.
English.
Mr. Young, Mr. Goodal, Mr. Symonds, (of whom yet in these later times of
Division, Mr. Gataker has been heard to say, It was pity that our Church had
lost him, intimating his turning aside to ways of separation) Mr. Grayle, and
others who are yet living laborers in Gods Vineyard.

Of Foreigners that sojourned with him, Foreigners.
and were as ambitious of being entertained by him as if they had been admitted
into a University; these were some, Mr. Thylein, who was afterward a Reverend
Pastor of the Dutch Church in London (whose son was brought by his mother but a
fortnight before Mr. Gatakers decease, entreating the same good office in the
behalf of him, which the Father had with much comfort enjoyed) Mr. Peter's, Mr.
And. Demetrius, Mr. Hornbeck, Mr. Rich, Mr. Swerd, Mr. Wittefrangel, Mr.
Severinu^ Benzon, Mr. Georg de Mey, Dr. Treschovius, etc.

The strength of Mr. Gatakers memory was extraordinary, His great Memory.
as may appear by this, that though he used no Commonplace book, yet had he in
readiness whatsoever he had read, as is manifested by his manifold Quotations
in all his works.

His Gifts for edification may be conjectured by his works which are extant,
His great Learning.
in which he has showed himself like the ingenuous and industrious Be for his
rare extraction of all manner of knowledge from almost all Authors, and the
solid digestion of it first, and then storing it up for the public good. His
Polite Literature was admired by the great Lights of Learning abroad, as the
excellent Salmasius, and others with whom he held correspondence. And the
exercise of it with condescension to children has been enjoyed with wonder and
pleasure at his Visitation at Tunbridge School with the Right Worshipful
Company of Skinners, the worthy Patrons thereof; and that which made all his
knowledge both useful and grateful, was, that he was neither vain in
ostentation, nor morose, or illiberal in reservation of it. But beyond all, he
sacrificed his Talents to God, while he made Hagar serve Sarah, and contributed
the Egyptian spoils, all his foreign learning toward the building of the
Tabernacle: For with a strange felicity, he made his Humane Literature (both
his Moral and Critical studies) to become subservient to Religion, and
instrumental to the explication of heavenly Truths.

His Graces of sanctification were very eminent in every condition, to all
purposes, and toward all his Relations. In the private course of his life, his
Piety, Humility and Charity were very remarkable.

His Piety appeared not only by his diligence in preaching, His Piety.
but also by his own frequenting Gods Ordinances dispensed by others; in order
whereunto he did once a week at least, repair to some Lecture in London, so
long as he had liberty to look beyond the bounds of his own Parish: He
manifested his Piety also by his strict, careful, and conscientious observation
of the Lords days, which he wholly consecrated (except the seasons of repast)
unto holy duties, and employments; and besides he was free in his Contributions
upon diverse occasions to the maintaing of the Lords house of Prayer: And
because there is a connection between sacred persons and things, his love to
godly and faithful Ministers may be looked upon as an act of Piety, as well as
of Charity.

Another evident instance of his Zeal for Gods Glory, His Zeal.
was his constant consideration of the state of Gods Churches abroad, with a
diligent enquiry how it fared with them, and a tender sense of their
affliction, which begat his meditation on Amos 6. 6. entitled, Sorrow for
Sion: As also his earnest desire of a Reformation of things amiss amongst our
selves, was doubtless acceptable unto God, though this sinful Nation is yet
unworthy to have it accomplshed. One special effect and property of his Piety
was, His holy life.
that holiness of life expressed in a constant tenor of good duties, with the
abridgement of his liberty in things indifferent, especially of Recreations
(for he understood no Recreations besides study, and made the pleasanter part
of his study, the sauce to the more severe) that he might give no scandal to
the good, nor encouragement to the bad; alleging often those two golden Rules
of St Paul, All things are lawful, but all things are not convenient, or
expedient; and all things are lawful, but all things edify not, 1 Cor. 9. 6.
and 10. 23.

His Humility appeared,

1. In that low esteem he had of his own gifts, His Humility
which yet all others that knew him admired: He was a true Moses, that took not
any notice of that shining luster of his own countenance. Like a fair ear of
Corn laden with grain, he bended his head downwards: For he had nothing of the
Pharisaical temper, either to advance himself, or to vilify his Brethren of
meaner gifts.

2. In his freedom from ambition of outward advantages. For he declined not
only large means in the Country, but also both Ecclesiastical Dignities, and
Courtly preferments. For he studiously waved the counsel of some who had given
notice of him to that hopeful Prince Henry (whom God only showed to this Land,
and then snatched him away to himself) and had it in their design to make way
for his being admitted Chaplain to his Highness; and for the same reason he
constantly declined public appearances, insomuch as he could not, without much
reluctance, be drawn by those who had most interest in him unto more solemn
Assemblies.

3. In his meek conversation with, and condescension to the meanest Christians:
For he refused not familia^^^y to converse with the poorest Christian that
repaired to him for counsel or satisfaction in their doubts.

His Charity was large, His Charity.
though for the most part secret, both in giving, and forgiving to poor
persons: For he would not permit it to blaze, only allowed it to shine when his
example was requisite to lighten and lead others to glorify God, and gratify
men. In redemption of Captives, relief of poor Protestants, especially of the
Ministry; to the repairs of public and common losses, and general calamities,
and to the setting forward of any good work he was strangely liberal, the fruit
whereof the Lord returned into his own bosom, according to that promise, The
liberal soul shall be made fat. Yet did he not so exhaust himself in his life,
but that in his last Will and Testament he did also bequeathe unto the poor of
the Parish of Redrith 50 l. To ten of his Brethren in the Ministry, whose wants
and necessities, especially if occasioned by the iniquity of the times, he gave
50 l. i. e. to each of them 5 l. and to eight Ministers Widows 5 l. apiece, in
all 40 l. to them. Thus his good works both went before him, and followed him
also unto Heaven, whereby also he has left behind him the perfume of a good
name, for the imitation of them that survive.

Justice is presupposed unto Charity: His Justice.
For God hates robbery for sacrifice, Isa 61. 8. And Mr. Gataker was exactly
just in giving every man his due, though very frequently he remitted of his own
right, so that he was, according to the Hebrew phrase, a just man, that is a
kind, equitable person, of a mild disposition, no severe exacter of his own,
and a free dispenser of Gods gifts, so that his Righteousness endures for ever,
both to his honor upon earth, and to his happiness in Heaven.

In, and about his death, to which the course of his declining days leads us,
His Patience, and Faith.
his Patience and Faith were very eminent; the later attended with a deep sense
of his own sins, which he acknowledged unto God, and to him only was that
Confession needful: For as to men, his conversation was, as ^ Bishop^ ought to
be, Irreproveable, 1 Timothy 3. 2.

The first step to his decease (for morbus est via ad mortem, His Sickness.
sickness is the rode way to death) was a fainting fit that surprised him on
Friday night, July the 7, or rather on Saturday morning, July the 8, yet of
this he made no great account (for he disturbed not the rest of a servant by
calling for assistance) because he had at sundry times such faintings, wherein
he gave Nature leave to work out her victory over those vapors, or viscous
humors that oppressed her. Yet thus far he made use of it, that he compared his
infirmity to that of Seneca, which according to his relation, the Physicians of
that age called, meditationem mortis, and wished that it might prove to him a
preparation to his dissolution. The indisposition, not ceasing with the fit,
discovered it self within a short time to be a Tertian Ague, which how gentle
soever, yet falling upon a person of his age, and crazie temper (who had long
supported a weak frame with a very regular course of diet) made his condition
doubtful to his Physician, who was one of learning and worth, that employed his
best care and skill about that Patient, whom he looked upon as a considerable
person to the whole Church.

July the 17, His preparation for death.
Having published his Will, and taken such order as he thought fit for the
settlement of his outward estate, he composed himself to God; his Tertian
growing too strong both for Nature and Art, resolved it self into an almost
continued Feavor, the extreme heat whereof was very painful unto him; yet
during those conflicts he showed a sweet calmness of mind, a heart weaned from
the world, to which he had no affection, though his memory exactly served him
for ordering his charity even to the last; and in one word, he represented a
soul wholly submitting to Gods good pleasure.

He professed more than once, that no outward thing troubled him so much, as
the condition of that Reverend Minister Mr. Sainthill, who had but lately
undertaken that charge at Redrith upon the uncertain Title of Mr. Gatakers
life, which now failing so soon, besides the expectation of his Friends, that
Minister he foresaw was like to be unsettled, and thereby to suffer some
inconvenience.

Though Friends, and Physicians gave him encouraging words at their visits, yet
he, being sensible of his inward decays, could not be flattered into (...)
hopes of long continuance here, earnestly contending that he was not to expect
Miracles. His expectation of Gods dismissing of him, hence was so fixed, that
being consulted whether he would appoint any (...) person to perform the last
office for him? He not startled at the Question, appointed that Mr. Ash should
be entreated to do that work, because he had done the same at his last wives
Funerals; and one opportunity casually offered it self to set forward that
design. For July the 18, Mr. Ash, out of his kind respect to Mr. Gataker, sent
him two Funeral Sermons preached by him, one at Mr. Whitakers, the other at the
interment of Dr. Spurstows only child. This gave occasion to Mr. Gataker, in
the return for that favor, to request the last that he could be capable of.

Upon the receipt of a Letter to that purpose, Mr. Ash on the Saturday
following, ^is words to Mr Ash.
visited his dear and dying Friend, who then told him, that he found him
conflicting with his last Adversary; and that though he knew the sting was
pulled out, yet nature would struggle. These, and other of his expressions, Mr.
Ash presently wrote down, and related them at the end of his Sermon.

That day in the afternoon being July the 22, His return to Mr. Baxter.
he called for some Papers of Mr. Baxters which were sent to him by the Author,
with a desire of his judgment concerning them. He wished some short Notes (for
the perusal of them had been his last work) to be read over to him, in which he
altered something: And having dictated a Letter to that his Learned and Reveren
Friend, he appointed that that with the Animadversions enclosed, should be sent
to him. So vigorous was his mind in a body drooping, and dropping into the
dust.

He had now given over the use of Physic as to any prolongation of his life:
He waits for Death.
For he said that he would struggle no more, because he found that what was
prescribed for the refreshing of nature, did rather oppress it, and therefore
he was resolved to wait the Lords leisure. An ancient servant that waited on
him, desiring leave to rectify the bed-cloaths, and saying withal, Sir, your
head does not lie right; he answered, It will lie right in my Coffin.

July the 25, Death seizes on his leg.
at one a clock in the morning, Death began to seize on his left foot, from
which the spirits retiring, he felt the deadness of that part, and a very sharp
pain in the part of the leg adjoining to it. Hereupon he called for his Son,
and told him, He feared that he should have a difficult death. He then
commanded two Surgeons to be sent for to look upon his leg, whom he required to
tell him, whether or no his Foot were any whit discolored. It seems he had
conceived some fear of a Gangrene, but being satisfied by them that there could
not be any ground for such an apprehension, he rested with patience. In the
evening of that day being visited by Mr. Santhil, and lying in great anguish by
reason of the violence of his heat, he prayed for pity and patience; support
here, and a comfortable issue.

July. 26. Early in the morning, The vigor of his natural parts.
being full of pain, gasping, and panting, he cried out, How long Lord, How
long? Come speedily. But though Death had made an encroachment upon his outward
perishing part, yet his inward man felt no decay. For with a full use of
reason, he that morning ordered the continuance of a weekly relief to certain
poor persons, as also of^some small monthly Pensions to some widows for a
season: He also caused his Physician to be consulted with about taking
something that might procure rest, and was erected to a more cheerful
disposition: He also enquired after News, and dicoursed freely, yet confessed
himself to be in pain.

About three a clock that afternoon, His last charge to his Relations.
feeling some great change after the putting forth of Nature, he called his
Sister, Son, and Daughter to receive his last charge, and when they were come,
he thus spoke unto them; My heart fails, and my strength fails, but God is my
Fortress, and the strong Rock of my salvation: Into thy hands therefore I
commend my soul, for thou have redeemed me, O God of truth: Then turning his
discourse to his Son, he said, Son, you have a great charge, look to it:
Instruct your wife and family in the fear of God, and discharge your Ministry
conscientiously. To his Sister (a Gentlewoman two years elder than himself) he
said, Sister, I thought you might have gone before me, but God calls for me
first, I hope we shall meet in Heaven, I pray God to bless you. His Daughter he
admonished, to mind the worldless, and God more, for that all things without
Piety, and the true fear of God are nothing worth. He advised also that his Son
Draper (being a man of means) should entertain some godly Minister into his
house to teach his children, and instruct his family. He exhorted them all to
love and concord, which (he said) he hoped the rather, because he had clearly
settled his estate, so as to prevent differences. He enlarged himself in each
of these a little, wishing them all to lay to heart the words of a dying man.
After this he desired that all should withdraw, and leave him to his rest,
which he hoped was at hand: But all his conflicts were not yet accomplished.

July the 27, His voice began to be less intelligible, the putrid preternatural
heat having furred up his mouth, as is usual in Feavors; yet both his
understanding, and senses were very quick and active: About six of the clock in
the evening he called for his Son to recommend his soul unto God by prayer, and
endeavored to express what he desired, but could not do it so clearly as to be
well understood; yet by his gestures he gave assurance that he understood
perfectly, and concurred fervently with the devotions used on his behalf.
Within an hour after, Nature being quite spent, he gave up the ghost, His Death.
and was translated into that Rest which he so often and earnestly had desired
to find in another World, because he could obtain none in this.

Thus after forty three years inspection of this pious and diligent Pastor of
Redrith, he left his Flock, returning to the great, and chief Shepherd of our
souls, from his gracious hands to receive an incorruptible Crown of glory,
having almost completed fourscore years.

For his Person, His Character
the express whereof (though he was often importuned by dear Friends) he would
never allow to be taken either by pencel, or sculpture. He was of a middle
stature, of a thin body, and of a lively countenance, of a fresh complexion,
that looked young when he came to preach at ^incolns Inn, and yet was gray
betimes, which made him to be thought elder than he was, because he had long
appeared ancient in the eyes of the world; of a choicely temperate diet; of a
free and cheerful conversation, addicted much to study, yet not secluding
himself from fit company. He was of a quick apprehension, sharp reason, solid
judgment, vast memory, which (through Gods mercy) continued fresh to the last
of his days. He was Helluo librorum, one that did not vainly increase his
Liberary for ostentation, but chose books for use, which also he made of them
so happily, that he had conquered a strong portion of learning, which he made
to serve him upon all occasions. He was not so great a treasurer, as a free
dispenser of those riches of the mind, which he did communicate readily,
expeditely and clearly. He was an ornament to the University, and of that
Society designed for the study of the Law; a Light of the Church, the salt of
the place where he abode; a loving Husband; a discreet Parent; a faithful
Friend; a kind Neighbor; a courteous entertainer of strangers; a candid
encourager of Students; a stout Champion for the Truth, yet a lover of peace,
preserving the unity of Charity even where there was difference of judgment;
an Adversary to novel fancies, as well as to antiquated superstitons in
Religion; of a Christian Magnanimity in despising the world, and therefore
resolute, through bad report, as well as good, to maintain a clear conscience.
In brief, he was a faithful Shepherd, and a fit mirror for Pastors, as well as
an exact pattern for people; who having almost completed eighty years, departed
full of (...); but being dead, yet speaks in his living Monuments of sound
Learning.

His Printed Works are these:
Of the Nature, and use of Lots, in 4o. A Just Defense of the same against Mr.
Jo. Balmford, His Works.
in 4o. Tho. Gatakeri Londinatis Antithesis, partim Guilielmi Amesii, partim
Gisberti voetii de sort Thesibus reposita, in 4o. A Discourse of
Transubstantiation, with a Defense thereof, in 4o. David's Instructor. The
Christian man's care. The Spiritual Watch. The gain of Godliness, with
Self-sufficiency. The Just man's joy, with signs of Sincerity. Jacobs
Thankfulness. David's Remembrancer. Noah's Obedience. A Memorial of Englands
Deliverance in 88. Sorrow for Sion. Gods Parley with Princes, with an appeal
from them to him. Eleazers Prayer, being a Marriage Sermon. A good Wife Gods
gift. A Wife indeed. Marriage Duties. Deaths Advantage. The benefit of a good
Name, and a good end. Abraham's Decease. Jeroboams Sons Decease. Christian
Constancy crowned by Christ.


All these are Printed in one Volume in Folio.

The Decease of Lazarus, in 4o. St. Stevens last Will and Testament, in 4o. A
Defense of Mr. Bradshaw against Jo. Cann, in 4o. Gods eye on his Israel, in 4o.
A mistake removed, and Free Grace, etc. in answer to J. Saltmarsh in 4o.
Shadows without Substance, a Rejoinder adversus ^undem in 4o. Mysterious Clouds
and Mists, etc. an Answer to J. Simpson, in 4o. Mr. Ant. Wottons Defense, in
8o. A true Relation of Passages between Mr. Wotton, and Mr. Walker, in 4o. An
Answer to Mr. Geor. Walkers Vindication, in 4o. A Vindication of the
Annotations on Jer. 10. 2. in 4o. A Discourse Apologetical, in 4o. Marcus
Antoninus Imp. cum Commentario, in 4o. De Novi Instrumenti Stylo. Dissertatio
adversus Psochenii Diatribam, in 4o. Cinn us, sive Adversaria Miscellania, Lib.
6. in 4o. De Baptismatis Infantilis vi, and efficatia, Disceptatio inter D. S.
Wardum, and Tho. Gatakerum, in 8o. T. G. Stricturae in D. Davenantii Epistolam,
in 8o. De Tetragammato, in 8o. Ejusdem vindicatio adversus Capellum, in 8o. De
Bivocalibus, Dissertatio Philologica, in 8o. Animadversiones in J. Piscatoris,
and L. Lucii scripta adversaria de causa meritoria Justificationis, cum
responsione ad L. Lucii Vindicias, in 12o. Fran. Gomari Disputationes
Elencticae, de Justificationis materia, and forma, Elenchus, in 8o. Stricturae
in Barth. Wigelini Sangallensis de Obedientia Christi disputationem
Theologicam, in 8o. The Annotations upon Isaiah, Jeremy, and the Lamentations,
which was his work in the great Notes upon the Bible. Adversaria Miscellanea in
qibus Sacrae Scripturae and and aliorum Scriptorum lux redditur. Edente Carolo,
Thome Gatakeri filio. Fol.


The Life and Death of Mr. Jeremy Whitaker, who dyed Anno Christi, 1654.
JEremy Whitaker was born at Wakefield in Yorkshire, Anno Christi 1599, In
which place also he was trained up in the Grammar School; His Birth.
and it seems that the Lord betimes did draw forth his love toward himself,
for even whilst he was a School boy, his affections did flow out toward those
who were most religiously disposed, in whose company he used frequently to go
eight or ten miles to hear a wakening-soul-warming Sermon; His early seeking
God.
he used also to join with them in Prayers, and other holy exercises and
duties; and being able to take Sermon Notes, both understandingly, and largely,
he was very helpful to those private Christians in repeating what they had
publicly heard, being from his childhood full of affections in whatsoever
business he undertook. Thus this Plant of Gods own setting, did both blossom,
and put forth fruit quickly, which Providence did afterward make a very
fruitful Tree.

Whilst he was at the Grammar School, though his Father endeavored often, His
esteem of the Ministry.
and earnestly to divert his thoughts from the Office of the Ministry, yet was
he unmovable in his desires to be a Minister, and he never afterward repented
of this his choice, but would all his life long upon all occasions, magnify
that his Office, insomuch as he has often been heard to utter this speech, I
had much rather be a preacher of the Gospel, than an Emperor; and when a
motion was once made to him to be the Head of a College in the University, he
readily returned this answer, My heart does more desire to be a constant
Preacher, than to be the Master of any College in the world.

When he was sixteen years old, His remove to Cambridge.
being well grounded at the Grammar School, he was sent to the University of
Cambridge, and admitted a Sizar in Sydney-Sussex College, where he soon
discovered, and was taken notice of, and much valued for his pregnant parts and
Scholarship.

At twenty years of age he Commenced Bachelor of Arts, His remove to Okeham.
and a while after he was sent to Okeham (the chiefest Town in Rutlandshire)
there to teach the Free School.

At that time there was one Mr. William Peachy, the Minister at Okeham, a godly
man, and a painful Preacher of the Gospel, and eminent for his skill in the
sacred Languages, who dearly loved, and highly valued our Mr. Whitaker from his
first acquaintance with him; which he manifested by proffering to him his
Daughter in Marriage, as Mr. Whitaker has since told some of his Friends; he
was the rather inclined to accept of the motion, because she was the Daughter
of a pious, painful, and learned Minister of the Gospel; and occasionally has
told his Friends, that he was the better pleased with his choice, because of
that relation.

About four years after his coming to Okeham he married Chephtzibah, His
Marriage and Children.
the Daughter of the said Mr. Peachy, by whom God gave him four Sons, and three
Daughters. All his Sons he designed for the Ministry, but it pleased God in his
life time, to take one of them away whilst he was a Student in Cambridge; the
other three survived, and he lived to see two of them Ordained, and set apart
for the work of the Ministry; the third he appointed to be educated for the
same work.

Having staid about seven years at Okeham, His remove to Stretton.
he was removed to a Pastoral charge at Stretton in the same County, where he
continued about the space of thirteen years.

Whilst he continued Schoolmaster at Okeham, His great pains.
he undertook and preached a weekly Lecture there, besides many Sermons which
he preached occasionally in neghbouring Congregations: And during his abode at
Stretton, besides his Pastoral employment, wherein he preached twice every
Lords day, he also constantly preached his weekly Lecture at Okeham, and was a
principal prop to hold up some other Lectures in the Neighborhood. His manner
also was to set apart every Holy Day (if there were but one in the week) as a
day of seeking God in reference to the necessities of the times, His frequent
Fastings.
and no man was more free, and frequent in assisting in days of Humiliation in
private, both in Rutlandshire, and in the adjacent Counties whenever he was
called, and invited thereunto.

Such was his love to Christ, His Family Duties.
that his public employments (though many and great) did not take him off from
attending his Family duties, nor from more private exercises of communion with
God; his ordinary course in his Family was, together with Prayers, to expound
some part of the holy Scriptures, and that twice every day, besides other parts
of Scripture which he daily read in secret; so that usually he read all the
Epistles in the Greek Testament twice every fortnight; yea, when by reason of
extremity of pain, and weakness, he could not read himself, he herein employed
others for his help. Hence it came to pass that he was a man mighty in the
Scriptures, like unto Apollos, Act. 18. 24. as was observed by all that
conversed with him, or that heard him preach or pray, and this course he
earnestly commended to the practice of his dearly beloved eldest Son, as an
excellent means to make him both a ready, and a profitable Preacher.

Whilst he lived in Rutlandshire, came forth the Book allowing Sports on the
Sabbath, His Zeal and Courage.
which he refused to read, though it was with commands and threatening pressed
upon him. And afterward when he was called to give in his answer about a
contribution amongst Ministers to maintain the War against the Scots, he openly
told the Bishop, or his Chancellor, that his conscience would not permit him to
do it. This his answer exposed him to the hazard of losing both his Living and
Ministry, as the times then were; whereupon one of his neighbors, through
misguided love, (compassionating him and his Family) paid the money required,
and subscribed Mr. Whitakers name without his knowledge. This was long
concealed from him; but when he came to the knowledge of it, he expressed his
dislike with many complaints, and much grief of heart.

As he had early, so he had constant vigorous workings of heart toward the
calling and work of the Ministry, His delight i^ the Ministry*
and that upon this ground, because he always ways conceived, that therein a
Christian might enjoy most fellowship with Christ, and have opportunities of
doing him the best service; and he often considered Christ's speech to Peter, If
thou love me, feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs, Joh. 21. 15, 17.

He was never so well pleased with any employment as when he was about the
works of his Ministry: In the Pulpit he was (as it were) in his own element,
like a Fish in the water, or a Bird in the air. Though many times he went
thither halting, and full of pain, yet did he not manifest any sense of
distemper whilst he was in the Pulpit.

When an Assembly of Divines was to be chosen to consult, He is chosen to the
Assembly.
and advise the Parliament about Ecclesiastical affairs, he was, for his
eminent piety and learning, nominated for one, and how useful and advantageous
he was to those affairs, is well known to all that were Members of that
Assembly; and when Providence had thus brought him to London, he was (as Paul,
2 Cor. 11. 23.) In labors more abundant, than many, yea than most others.

Not long after his coming to London, He is chosen to Mary Magdalens Bermondsey
he was called, and chosen to the Pastoral charge of Mary Magdalen Bermondsey
in Southwark, about which he consulted with many godly and judicious Ministers,
and with their consent and approbation accepted of it, after which, for the
most part, his task was to preach constantly four Sermons every week, two in
his own Charge, one at Westminster, and one at Christ Church London; and after
he had laid down his Christ Church Lecture, at the importunity of the
Inhabitants, he took up one at Stepney, besides his preaching two Lectures
quarterly at Michaels Cornhill: Add to these his preaching monthly at the
morning Exercises, His great Industry.
or else he assisted on the Fast days in the conclusion of those Exercises;
besides his many occasional Sermons, as for preparation to the Sacrament in his
own Church, and at Funerals, both at home and abroad; yea, it is truly reported
of him, that he would never deny any request for preaching and praying, if
Godgave him bodily ability, or other unavoidable occasions did not necessarily
hinder him. Many week days he preached twice, even then when he attended the
work of the Assembly of Divines, to wit, the morning Exercise, either at
Westminster, or elsewhere, and upon some other occasion in the afternoon of the
same day. This may mind us of the commendation which St. Paul gave of
Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 30. For the work of the Lord he was nigh unto death, not
regarding his life. So its well known to multitudes, that this might fitly be
applied to painful Mr. Whitaker; yea many conceived that his painful
diseases, which hastened his removal from us, were occasioned, and increased by
his many constant, and indefatigable labors in this kind.

And though he preached so often, yet were not his Sermons j^june, wordy, empty
Sermons; but always full of Scripture strength, savoury, and affectionate, as
his Auditors can well testfie.

Neither is this to be wondered at, He was a Universal Scholar.
if we consider that he was a universal Scholar, both in the Arts, and original
Languages: By much study he had digested the whole body of Divinity; he was
well acquainted both with the Fathers and Schoolmen: An acute and solid
Disputant, excellently versed in Cases of Conscience, and second unto none in
his acquaintance with the sacred Scriptures.

Since our times of woeful desertion and Apostasy, both from Gospel Truths and
practices, he would undauntedly both in private Conferences, and in his public
Ministry express his dislike, yea his detestation thereof, to the faces of them
how great soever, who too much favored Heresies, Errors, and Ranting courses,
though he knew that thereby he did run the hazard of procuring many frowns to
himself.

He refused to sign and subscribe the late Engagement, His Zeal and Courage.
though thereby he was in danger of losing his Lecture at Westminster; and if
his Sermons preached there upon Ephesians. 2. 2* 3. concerning men's walking according
to the course of this world, etc. Fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, etc. could
be collected, and published, it would thereby appear, that Mr. Whitaker out of
his zeal for Gods glory, and love to his Lord Christ, was of an undaunted
courage, and full of Christian magnanimity. One further testimony whereof we
have in this following Story:

Since these stormy times began, wherein the liberty and livelihood of
Ministers has been so much maligned and struck at, as he was riding with one
of his intimate friends by Tiburn (which he had not seen, or not observed
before) he asked what that was? and being answered that it was Tiburn, where so
many Malefactors had lost their lives; he stopped his Horse, and uttered these
words with much aflection, Oh what a shame is it that so many thousands should
dye for the satisfaction of their lusts, and so few be found willing to lay
down their lives for Christ? why should not we in a good cause, and upon a good
call be ready to be hanged for Jesus Christ? It would be an everlasting honor,
and it is a thousand times better to dye for Christ, to be hanged, or to be
burnt for Christ, than to dye in our beds.

He did often, and zealously defend the Office of a Gospel Ministry both in
public, and in private, and that especially amongst those persons, and in
those places, where (as he conceived) there was most need. In one of his
morning Lectures at Westminster, this passage came from him with much
affection, Though (said he) I have read, and heard of some good men, who
unadvisedly in their passion, have persecuted the persons of some godly
Ministers (as Asa was angry with the Prophet, and cast him into prison) yet I
never knew, I never read, nor heard of any godly person who durst oppose the
Office and Calling of the Ministry. And whereas at the end of his Sermon, a
Soldier (expressing himself to be dissatisfied with what he had spoken) came
to him in private, and asked him, whether he meant this of the Ministry of
England, as now constituted? He returned him this answer, Although I will not
justify the calling of every individual Minister in the Church of England (as
you dare not justify the Saintship of every member in your Independent
Congregations) yet I will be ready when, and where you please, to maintain the
Office, and Calling of Englands Ministry at this day

And that he continued unmoved, His high esteem of the Ministry.
and unchanged in his judgment, and esteem of the Ministerial Calling to the
last, may be manifested by this passage in his last Will and Testament, which
is here set down in his own words, and written with his own hand, For my Son
Jeremiah, my desire is that he be bred a Scholar, and that the Lord would
spiritually incline his heart, freely to give up himself to the Lord to serve
him in the work of the Ministry, which Calling and Employment (though now
despised) I do esteem above all others in the world, and do commend it to all
mine, that if the Lord bless them with Sons, they would commend this Calling to
their Posterity.

And truly this deserves seriously to be considered, whether there be not
herein much to credit and encourage the Ministry of the Gospel, that a learned
man, and so eminent for piety, who also had thoroughly studied the Controversy
of the times, and had heard and read what could be said against the Ministry,
should yet upon his Deathbed give such a Testimony unto it, when he daily
expected to make up his account before God, and also give such great
encouragement to his Posterity, to addict themselves to this calling now, even
now, when such disgrace is cast upon it, and when the Ministers settled
maintenance is threatened to be taken from them: And may not those men, who knew
Mr. Whitakers worth, be hereby awed and moved to take heed how they oppose or
slight that Calling of men, whom he, living and dying, judged to be so highly
honored by God himself? To this also add, that it was an Ordained Ministry,
which he thus valued, which appears by these two lively Testimonies; 1. In that
he joined with that Classis whereof he was a member in Ordaining of Ministers,
2. In that he had an hand in the Book not long since published by the Province
of London in the defense of such a Ministry, not only by his assent to it, but
also by his assistance in drawing it up.

As Mr. Whitaker loved God dearly, Gods love to him.
so God loved him, which he manifested by those grace wherewithal he enriched
him; and truly love tokens are real Messengers of his love that sends them;
and what surer signs can we have of Gods love, then when he bestows upon us the
Graces of his Holy Spirit? Now of these the Lord had given him a more than
ordinary measure, and besides, what has been said before, there were five
Graces more which were very Orient, and shining in his Crown.

1. His tenderness of heart: His tender-heartedness.
Who ever knew a man of a more melting frame of heart before God, whether in
Confessions, Petitions, or Thanksgivings? Is there any one living that can say,
that I have at sometimes joined with him in Prayer, and he shed no tears? How
did his own sinfulness (though it was no more than the ordinary imperfections
of the fairest Saint upon earth) the evils of the times, and the testimonies of
Gods displeasure breaking out upon us, break his heart into pieces? We may
truly believe that for the space many years, he did never come off from the
serious consideration of these things with dry eyes; and how many thousands be
there of Gods children, that would account it a sign of much love from Christ,
if they could find such thawings in their frozen breasts?

2. His meekness of spirit, with which precious Jewel he was richly adorned:
His Meekness.
Who ever saw him transported by passion, on a fire through foolish anger, or
disgused by discontent? Though his zeal would wax hot, and burn in him for God
and his Glory; yet he was a man of a cool spirit, and meek, like Moses, in all
his own concernments; and this he has often manifested in a remarkable manner,
when disputing with men of dissenting Principles and opinions, yet his spirit
was so even that their unhandsome provocations could not discompose him, and
drive him into passion.

3. For his Patience, His Patience.
he may well be called a second Job. Many who saw him under those racking pains
in his last sickness, so frequently reiterated, and so long continued, were
confident that God did put him, and keep him in his Furnace to be a pattern of
patience unto Posterity. It is confessed that he did roar many times till his
throat was dry; but who ever heard him speak any one word of murmuring or
discontent, because of Gods afflicting Providence? He himself indeed would
sometimes through tenderness of conscience charge himself of impatiency,
because he made a noise in his extremity: but that expressed only Natures
sensibleness, not sinful frowardnes; and when (accusing himself causelessly) he
was minded of Christ's roarings, yet free from all sin, he would be silent.

I confess indeed, that in his desires to be dissolved he would take up Jobs
complaint, Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the
bitter in soul? which long for death, but it comes not, and dig for it more
than for hid treasures, etc. For my sighing comes before I eat, and my
roarings are powered out like waters, Job 3. 20, 24. But he always concluded
with submission to the good pleasure of God. When he had been asked how he did?
this was frequently his answer, The Bush always burning, but not consumed; and
though my pains be above the strength of nature, yet they are not above the
supports of Grace.

4. The Lord was pleased to vouchsafe him such a measure of the Spirit of Grace
and Supplications, His spirit of Prayer.
that his soul was never out of tune for that service. Most of his words when
he was under torment, were holy complaints and prayers to God. It will not be
impertinent or unprofitable, if I here set down some of them.

O my God help! Father of mercies pity! Do not contend for ever! Consider my
frame that I am but dust! My God that has made Heaven and earth, help me! Oh,
give me patience, and inflict what thou wi^t! If my patience was more, my pain
would be less. Dear Savior, where are thy bowels? why do thou make me an
astonishment to my self and others? Why do thou cover thy self with a thick
cloud, that our prayers cannot pass? Blessed is the man that endures
temptation. Lord this is a sad temptation, stand by me, and say, It is enough!
Am I not thy servant? Consider Lord that I am thy servant. O these bitter
waters of Marah! Lord drop sweet comfort into these bitter water of Marah. O
the blood of sprinkling, Lord, the blood of sprinkling Lord! That blood which
extinguisheth the fire of thine anger; O that it might allay my burning pains!
I am in a fiery Furnace: Lord be with me as thou wast with the t^ree Children,
and bring me out refined from sin! when I have sailed through the Ocean of
these pains, and look back, I see that none of them can be wanting. I fly unto
thee, O God, hide me under the shadow of thy wings till these terrible storms
be overpast.

5. God added Humility as a Crown to all his other Graces, His Humility.
which yet shone bright in the eyes of all that were acquainted with him:
Indeed he was clothed with Humility: And hence it was that he would converse
so familiarly with the poorest Christians, and with them who were of the lowest
parts for knowledge, even with babes in Christ. This his ordinary expression of
himself before God, did clearly demonstrate his great humility, Poor worm!
Sinful wretch! O pardon my transgressions for they are very great. Hereupon he
would weep much, when he was told how much he was prayed for, wondering at Gods
goodness, that so sinful a wretch, and worthless a creature should have so much
interest in the hearts, and prayers of the people of God. And his language in
his Will speaks how little he was in his own eyes; the words are these, I
desire that at my Funeral there may be no pomp; but that so poor a worthless
wretch may be privately laid in the ground.

And as his Graces were many, His Comforts ^aith and Joy.
so were his Comforts many, and great, which God vouchsafed as singular
manifestations of his love to this his dear Servant, and Child. O what Kisses
of Christ's Mouth, and what embraces from the Arms of his Love were bestowed
upon this Saint of the most High? He enjoyed all along his afflicted condition,
an uninterrupted assurance of Gods Fatherly love in Christ. In his addresses
unto God, he constantly claimed propriety in God, calling him, my God, and my
Father. His inward peace, and joy were the support of his heart under all his
grievous, and grinding pains. he was confident of mercies mixtures with all his
greatest distempers, not at all doubting of the sanctification of them to him
through Grace. Thus he spoke many times in his applications unto God, Consider,
and save me, for I am thine. How long, how long Lord, shall I not be remembered?
yea, I am remembered, blessed be thy Name. This is a fiery Chariot, but it will
carry me to Heaven: Blessed be God that has supported me hitherto; and he that
has delivered, will yet deliver. Thou Lord never forgettest them that put
their trust in thee. Always when the extremity of pain was over, he would with
smiles speak of Gods mercies. Though trembling took hold upon him when his
violent pains began, yet would he with confidence say, Now in the strength of
the mighty God, I will undergo these pains: O my God put under thine
everlasting Arms, and strengthen me. Many times he told a bosom friend of his,
that notwithstanding all his rentings and roarings (from which he expected no
deliverance but by death) he would not for a thousand worlds change estates
with the greatest man on earth, whom he looked upon as in a way of sin, and
enthraled thereto. And this much bespeaks Gods Fatherly indulgence toward him,
that Satan could never shake his confidence, nor assault his hopes all the time
of his irksome, irksome distemper. And this was further very remarkable, that
he counted all these inward cheerings, the fruits of Prayers that were made for
him, though God saw cause to deny that ease, and recovery to his body which was
so much begged; and withal, he valued those spiritual cordials, and
refreshings far beyond deliverance from the Gout, and the Stone, yea and Death
it self.

These things are the rather mentioned, to prevent that discouragement, or
offense which some may be too apt to take at the violence, and continuance of
his wasting and tormenting pains, notwithstanding his own godliness, and the
uncessant prayers, both ordinary and extraordinary, which were made unto God in
his behalf, for he found the sweet fruits of them in his own bosom, even when
he felt the continuance, and increase of his bodily grief.

Another thing very remarkable in holy Mr. Whitaker, His love to the Saints.
was his love to his fellow Christians, he was a man made up (as it were) of
love. His delight was in the Saints upon earth whom he esteemed most excellent,
and their society was a constant cordial to his spirit. His frequent visits of
them that were in trouble, and his stirring up of others to the like practice,
were testimonies of this his cordial love; which indeed was not verbal, but
real. He was also abundant in works of charity, His Charity.
few men of his estate did equalize him therein. He would often say, It is a
brave thing when a man together with a full estate, has a charitable heart.
Sometimes upon special occasions he has given away all the money that he had
in the house. It was not unusual with him to give twenty shillings to a poor
Saint, and he had many experiencences of Gods gracious returns in such cases.
By his last Will he gave twenty pounds to the godly poor of his own Parish.

There were two Cases wherein his loves were most enlarged to the people of
God, His Sympathy
whereof you may take these two Instances; The one when the sufferings were
public. He often told an intimate friend of his, that Englands late breach
with Scotland, and the blood that was shed, together with other sad
consequences thereof, had taken such impression upon his heart, that the sorrow
would never be removed till his death; and the sufferings both in Holland and
in England in our late Sea-sights were an heavy burden upon his spirit. The
other Case was in respect to the inward perplexity of such as were afflicted in
mind; having moved a special friend of his the week before his death, to
bestow a visit upon one in that condition, the very morning before his death
(when speech was grievous to him in respect of his great weakness) he asked him
whether he had remembered the party that was troubled in spirit? which was a
remarkable evidence of his strong love to such. And besides what has already
been mentioned, I might here set down his many wrestlings with God to prevent
the flood or troubles which he apprehended the Protestant Churches were now in
danger to be overflowed withal; as also his compassionate respect to
Congregations in the Country, which were like sheep wandering upon the barren
mountains without a Shepherd.

And as his love s^owed forth to the Saints, He was much beloved.
so was theirs no less toward him: Not to speak of the many frequent, and
friendly visits of godly men and women in the Neighborhood round about him;
there was scarce ever heard of any man that was so much prayed for both in
public and in private* both upon ordinary and extraordinary occasions, as he
was. There was no particular case so frequently, so affectionately spread
before God in most of the Congregations about London as his. Three days were
set apart by Ministers, and many other praying friends to seek God in his
behalf, one in private, and two in public, which also were observed much
better than such days usually have been of late; yea, in remote Countries,
besides the ordinary Prayers made for him, there were some Fasts kept also with
special reference to his afflictions. The multitude of people that came to his
Funeral, with the many weeping eyes, did clearly show how much he was beloved.
Here might also be remembered the readiness of the London Ministers to supply
his place at home, and his Lectures elsewhere, as also the willingness of his
Fellow-lecturers at Westminster to preach for him there, when he himself by
reason of weakness could not possibly do his own work, but its needless, for
still every where upon the naming of Mr. Whitaker, love is some way discovered
by such as had any knowledge of him.

Whilst he was able, he never neglected his Minsterial service; His delight in
Preaching.
he has often gone upon Crutches unto the Congregation of his own people, to
fulfill his Ministry; yea, once at least he adventured to preach at Michaels
Cornhil, when he was scarce able to get into the Pulpit, and his Friends with
much difficulty holp him out of the Church homewards; and at other times when
his legs would not serve him, he used to ride to Church. And when he was by
extremity of pains taken off from his Ministry, he would sometimes profess to
some special friends, that the pain felt was not so grievous to his spirit, as
his inability, by reason thereof, to manage his wonted work: Indeed it was his
meat and drink, to be doing the will of his Heavenly Father. Many times these
were his words, If I could but preach, I should be much better; and he would
rejoice with cheerfulness and thankfulness, when in the times of his weakness
he found not himself more distempered by his preaching, and would mention such
experiences, as arguments to move; and induce his friends to yield to his
preaching when they dissuaded him from it as prejudicial to his health.

Anno Christi 1654, Hi^ Sickness.
about the beginning of November, the violent pain of the Stone, did in such a
manner and measure arrest him, that from that time he continued Gods prisoner,
confined to his bed or chamber, till he was set free by a long expected, and
much desired death. Most Physi^ians in the City were consulted with, and were
from time to time very ready to serve him with their advice, who did
unanimously conclude, that his sharp pains proceeded originally from an Ulcer
in the Kidneys, but immediately from an ulcer in the neck of the B^^dder,
caused by a continual flux of ulcerous m^tter dropping down upon that part; and
by reason of the acuteness and quickness of the sense there, his pains were
almost continually in that place, though the fountain of them was from the
Kidneys.

About two months before his Death, his pains grew more extreme, yet Divine
indulgence vouchsafed at some times some mitigation of them, and intermission
both in the night and day: But notwithstanding the long continuance and
extremity of them neither his Faith nor Patience did abate, yea they much
increased, and grew higher; and as he grew nearer his end, so his longings for
death were much increased, yet accompanied with holy submission to the good
pleasure of his gracious Father.

These were some of his expressions, O my God break open the Prison door, His
holy Speeches.
and set my poor captive soul free: But enable me willingly to wait thy time! I
desire to be dissolved: never aid any man more desire life, than I do Death!
When will that time come, that I shall neither sin more, nor sorrow more? When
shall mortality put on immortality? When shall this earthly Tabernacle be
dissolved, that I may be clothed upon with that House which is from Heaven?
Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors,
and follow the Lamb whither soever he goes.

So great was his love to his God and Savior, that he maintained and expressed
high estimations, and honorable thoughts of his Majesty, when he was under the
most tormenting providence: He feared nothing more, than lest he should do or
speak any thing that should red^und to the dishonor of his Name. These were
some breathings of his large love, when through pain he was as in the fire, or
upon the rack: Good Lord keep me from dishonouring of thy Name by impatieency!
Oh, who would not even in burnings have honorable thoughts of God! who that
knows thee, would not fear thee, O Lord, love thee, and honor thee? Lord, thou
give me no occasion to have any hard thoughts of thee! Blessed be God, there
is nothing of Hell in all this! Blessed be his Name for Jesus Christ, and the
Revelation of the everlasting Gospel! Who knows the power of thy wrath? If it
be so heavy upon thy servant hoar, how heavy shall it be to all those who shall
endure it without mixture? Blessed be God for the peace of mine inward man,
when my outward man is full of trouble! This is a bitter Cup, but it is of my
Father mixture, and shall I not drink it? yea Lord, through thy strength I
will: This is my burden, and I will bear it.

Upon any abatements of his excruciating pains, he was constantly much in
blessing God, using these, and such like expressions: O! what a mercy is it
that there is any mitigation, any intermission! Lord make me thankful. And
turning himself toward those that stood by, he would bespe^k them thus; O help
me to be thankful! O lift up a Prayer for me that I may be thankful! O what a
mercy is this! How much worse might this affliction have been! I might have
been distracted, or laid roaring under disque^ness of spirit: By these, and
many such like expressions and workings of his spirit, who perceives not the
sparklings of his love to God? And to a dear friend he often said, Brother,
through mercy I have not one repini^g thought against God.

The Sabbath sevennight before God released him, though his pains were very
sharp, yet he bestowed most part of the time of public Ordinances, in prayer,
together with those that were about him, and his Petitions were most in the
behalf of Ministers, that God would cloth his Ordinances with his own power,
and enable his Ministers to speak to the souls of his people. Then did he also
with many tears bewail his detainment from the Sanctuary, and
Sabbath-opportunities of doing, and receiving good, which had been his delight:
Professing also, that his being taken off from service, was a greater
affl^ction to him than all his bodily pains. And because this apprehension (to
wit, of his present unserviceablness) did much afflict him; this therefore was
often suggested to him (which the Lord pleased to make a relief to his spirit)
viz. that now by the practice of Faith, Patience, Contentment, and
spiritualness (which he had formerly preached to, and pressed upon others) he
was very profitable unto them who visited him, and might also prove very
advantageous unto others who might be acquainted therewith, through Gods grace
by Christ.

So great was his tender respect to his friends, His tormenting pains.
that when his pains were coming with violence, he would entreat them to
withdraw from him, that they might not be grieved with his roari^gs; and he
used often to bless God, that his compassionate friends were not necessitated
to abide within the reach of his doleful lamentation.

As his death drew more nigh, so his fits of pain were more frequent, either
every half hour, or many times every quarter, yea two or three in a quarter of
an hour, which did exceedingly abate his strength.

The night before God took him out of this vale of tears, Mr. Ash hearing that
he was not likely to live another day, went early in the morning to take his
leave of him, whom his soul loved, at which time he found his bodily strength
much decayed; and perceiving that he could not speak without much difficulty,
Mr. Ash spoke the more unto him in reference to the approach of his happy hoped
for change, and his discourse (through Gods mercy) was very refreshing his
spirit. He told him also that many of his friends intended to set apart that
day in seeking the Lord for him, and asked him, in what things e^pecially he
desired to be remembered before the Throne of Grace? His answer was, Do not
complain, but bless God for me, and entreat him to open the prison door. Then
Mr. Ash laying his hand upon his cold hand, covered with a clammy sweat, took
his last farewell of him with an aching heart; and upon his departure from him,
the last words which Mr. Whitaker spoke to him were these; Brother, I thank
you, I pray God bless you, and I bless God for you.

That day was spent in addresses to God for him at Peter's Cornhill, where Mr.
Newcomen quickened and guided our prayers in his Sermon upon Joh. 11. ^. Lord,
Behold he whom thou love is sick; and Mr. Jenkin endeavored to moderate, and
regulate our sorrows from Luke 23. 28. Weep not for me.

Thus his friends having by prayers and praises (on his behalf) given him to
God, His Death.
and having prepared their hearts for the loss of him, the Lord was pleased
that evening to take him to himself, June 1654, being above Fifty five years
old.

After his death Mr. Holiard opened his body in the presence of Dr. Cox, Dr.
Micklethwaite, and Dr. Bevoir; (some other more ancient Doctors would have been
there, if, either their being out of Town, or present urgent occasions had not
hindered) being opened, they found both his Kidneys full of ulcers, and and one
of them was swelled to an extraordinary bigness through the abundance of
purulent matter in it. Upon the neck of his Bladder, they found a stone, (which
was about an inch and an half long, and one inch broad, weighing about two
ounces when it was first taken out and withal they found an ulcer which was
gangrenized, and this was judged to be the cause of his death. All other parts
of his body were found firm and sound.

He was so humble, that he feared lest Gods people praying for him, should
speak too well of him before the Lord.

He was a self-denying man, never daring to look after great matters in this
world; whereby he condemned many whose self-seeking in earthly advantages,
renders them very offensive and unsavory in the Church of Christ.

Mr. Calamy speaking of him says; If I should enter upon his Commendations, I
might truly say what Nazanien does of his Sister Gorgonia, that I have more
cause to fear lest I should speak below, than above the truth: For he was a
burning and a shining light in this our Israel: A Messenger, and an Interpreter
one amongst a thousand: A Bazal^el in Gods Tabernacle: A true Nathaniel that by
his integrity, humility, constancy, charity, publickness, and peaceableness of
spirit, and by his diligence and f^ithfulness in preaching the Gospel, made his
life both amiable and desirable. I will say of him, as it was said of
Athanasius, that he was (...), an Adamant, and a Loadstone. To all that
conversed with him, he was as a Loadstone to draw their hearts to love him: But
in the cause of God, and in reference to the truths of Christ, he was as an
unconquerable Adamant. He was a Jeremy, both in mourning for, and in witnessing
against the sins of the times. He was a second Whitaker, though not so eminent
in Learning as to be (what is said o^ (...)) Mundi miraculum, Academiae
Oraculum, the miracle of the world, and the Oracle of the University; yet he
was (which is also said of him) sound in the Faith; one that had no private
opinion, that did not in veteri via novam semitam quaerere, seek out new paths
of his own, but kept the old way, and the old path. That had a great wit
without any mixture of madness.

He preached no less by the heavenliness of his Doctrine than by the holiness
of h^s life; yea he preached as effectually by his death, as by his life or
Doctrine, for so great was the patience which God measured out to him, that
though in his extremity of torments he groaned, yet he never grumbled. Though
he often mourned, yet he never murmured; nay, though he often roared by reason
of the greatness of his pain, yet he always justified and m^gn^fied God
therein; and this he did so constantly, and in such a measure, that as it is
said of Job, so it will be said by the Saints that succeed us, for their mutual
consolation, and encouragement, Ye have heard of the Patience of Whitaker: He
had indeed an ul^^rated flesh, but a sound and whole spirit, and that enabled
him to bear his infirmity: he had a stone in the Bladder, but a very soft and
tender heart: he had a gangreene in his body, but a sound soul, unstained by
sin. I heard him often say with thankfulness, that under all his bodily
sufferings, he had a blessed calmness, and quietness in his spirit, that God
sp^ke peace unto him; that though he roared for pain, yet the Devil was chained
up from roaring upon him.

On the Death of my dear Friend, Mr. JEREMIAH WHITAKER.
IF Death be but a servant sent to call
The souls of Saints to their Original:
Dear Saint, thine was a Noble soul, to whom
Three Messengers were sent to call thee home;
A Stone, an Ulcer, and a Cangreene too,
Three Deaths to hasten that which one should do.
'^was not because thy soul was deeper set
Than ours, within its house of clay, nor yet
Because thou were unwilling to depart
Thither, where long before had been thine heart:
They were not sent to hale by violence
A soul that lingered when 'twas called hence.
God showed how welcome one Death was to thee,
Who did so meekly entertain all three.
Thus many Deaths Gods Israel did enclose,
The Sea before, behind a Sea of Foes;
On either side the jaws of Mountains high,
No way from Death, but unto Death to fly.
Not to destroy them, but to let them see
The power of love, which then would set them free.
Thus Jobs four Messengers which did relate
The doleful story of his ruined state:
And his three Friends which acted Satan's part
(He on his flesh, and these upon his heart)
Who by disputing him unto a curse
Would make his spirits torments the far worse,
Were by Gods wise disposal sent to show
The strength he on his Champion would bestow.
Thus Painters put dark grounds where they intend
To overlay with finest gold, and lend
By deeper shadows luster to that face,
On which they mean their choicest skill to place.
Thus workmen season much with Sun and wind
Those greatest beams which must the building bind,
Whilst smaller pieces happily are put in
When they come bleeding from the wood, and green.
Often where is greatest grace, God's pleased to send
Great conflicts those great Graces to commend.
As the six-fingred Giants sword did bring
The more renown to little David's sling.
The vanquished Lion, and the conquered Bear
Prepared that holy Head a Cr^wn to wear.
The Angel wrestled first, and then did bless
And made the greater servant to the less.
Pain was too great for thee, Gods grace for pain,
And made the greater serve the less again.
Thy pains served thee for glory, and did fit
The Head on which a Crown of life must sit.
This is Gods method to fetch joy from grief,
To turn our sorrows unto our relief,
To save by killing, and to bring to shore
By the ships planks which was quite broke before.
And thus a barren womb first took the seed
Which did six hundred thousand people breed.
That seed too must from knife and Altar rise,
And be before a fire a Sacrifice.
Great Preacher of thy Heavenly Fathers will
Thy tongue did many ears with Manna fill.
Thy life out-preach't thy tongue, O blessed strife!
Thy sickness the best Sermon of thy life.
Before each Doctrine must be proved a new,
Thine end was one great proof that all was true.
Before thou preached by weeks, but now by hours,
Each minute taught thy mourning Auditors,
Each patient groan, and each believing eye
Was a new Sermon in Brachygraphy.
When Nature roars without repining words,
Grace in the mouth when in the Bowels swords,
In midst of torments to triumph over Hell,
To feel Gods Arrows, yet his Praises tell.
Through thickest clouds to see the brightest light
In blackest darkness to have cleerest sight,
And with our Lord to cry, My God, My God,
Upon a Cross under the sharpest Rod.
This is indeed to preach; this is to show
Faiths triumph over Natures greatest woe.
Then welcome fiery Serpents, scorching sting,
Which did thee thus to the Brazen Serpent bring.
Then welcome Whale, which though it first devour,
Renders at last the Prophet to the shore.
Well might thou bear the stone which Death did throw,
Who had the white Stone the new Name to show:
Well might thou be with such an ulcer calm
Whose soul was healed before with Heavens Balm.
When spirits wounds are cured though Nature groan,
An heart of flesh can heal a back of stone:
Let conscience have her feast, and let flesh roar,
This pain shall make the others joy the more,
As many times those Flowers most fragrant smell
Which nearest to some noisome weeds do dwell.
Thus have you seen the Forge most clearly glow,
On which the Smith does drops of water throw.
Keen Frosts make fire the hotter, and deep night
Causes Celestial Lamps to shine more bright.
And by a dear Antiperistasis,
The Child's distress sweetens the Fathers kiss.
A wounded body yields to a sound soul,
The joys of this do the others pains control.
As in the day that the Sun beams appear
All other lesser Stars do disappear.
When Heaven shines, and Divine love does reign,
The soul is not at leisure to complain.
Internal joys his heart so well composes,
That they have judged their flames a bed of Roses.
Mr. Gataker, Mr. Whitaker.
But what shall England do from whence are lopt,
Two if her richest Acres to Heaven dropped.
By loss of these two Acres she is more poor,
Then if sh'had lost an hundred Lordships more.
'Twere a good purchase to gain these again,
By giving to the Sea all Lincoln Fen.
Two little Mines of Gold do far surpass
Huge Manors where the whole vesture is but grass.
Learn we by them what all men will once say,
One Perch of Heaven,'s worth the whole Globe of clay.
ED. REYNOLDS D. D.

The Life and Death of James Usher, Dr. of Divinity, Archbishop of Armagh,
Primate, and Metropolitan of all Ireland, who dyed Anno Christi 1655.
ALexander the Great commanded that no man should draw his Picture but Apelles,
the most exquisite Painter in the world; and that his Statue should not be made
in brass by any one but Lysippus, the most excellent Workman in that kind: So
truly, the Life and Death of this great and good man is fit to be written only
by the ablest Pen that can be found.

Reverend, and Learned Dr. Bernard, who was of my ancient acquaintance above
forty years ago in Emanuel College in Cambridge has written his Life and Death
excellent well. Yet as there can never too much be spoken, or written of him,
whom all the Christian world did admire for his Religion and Learning, so give
me leave out of him, with some other helps to set him forth, though not to the
life in his native colors as he deserves, yet according to my ability, that
his Name may be enrolled amongst those many other Worthies, both ancient and
Modern, men famous in their Generations, burning and shining Dr. JAMES USHER.

Lights in the Church, and very instrumental to Gods glory, which I have
formerly, and now also collected and published.

James Usher was born in Dublin, His Birth and Parentage.
the Metropolis of Ireland, in the Parish of St. Nicholas, January the 4, Anno
Christi 1580. His Father, Mr. Arnald Usher, was a student in the Law, one of
the Clerks of the Chanchery in that Nation, and a person of excellent parts and
endowments. His Mother was Mrs. Margaret Stainhurst, who in her later time was
seduced by some of the Popish Priests to the Roman Religion, they taking their
opportunity, whilst this her Son was upon some occasion in England; and they,
by their subtilty, had engaged her in such vows, that when her Son came back he
could not possibly reclaim her, which they have often boasted of in Print; yet
her Sons hope was, at least upon her Death bed, to have prevailed for the
reducing of her to the Truth: But it pleased God, that she dyed suddenly at
Drogheda, when he was absent at Dublin, whereby, to his no small grief those
his hopes were frustrated and disappointed.

His Grandfather by his Mothers side was James Stainhurst (whose Christian name
he bore) who was chosen three times Speaker of the House of Commons in the
Irish Parliaments, in the last whereof he made the first motion for the
founding and erecting of a College, and University in the City of Dublin. He
was also Recorder of that City, one of the Masters of the Chancery, and a man
of great wisdom, and integrity.

His Uncle was Richard Stainhurst, a man famous in France, and other Nations
for his great learning, which he manifested in several Books published by him,
one of them, when he was eighteen years old, between whom, and this Reverend
person there passed many learned Letters.

His Uncle by his Fathers side was Henry Usher, who was trained up at
Cambridge, and proved a prudent and learned man: He was afterward Archdeacon
of Dublin, at which time he was first sent over into England to Queen
Elizabeth, and the Council, with a Petition for preserving the Cathedral of St.
Patricks Dublin from being dissolved, wherein he prevailed, the fruits whereof
this his Nephew reaped afterward, being made Chancellor of it, and receiving
his subsistence from it for many years. The second time he was sent over by the
Council of Ireland to Queen Elizabeth to procure her Patent for the founding of
a College, The College at Dublin founded.
and University in Dublin, wherein he prevailed also: So that the College (of
which this worthy person was the first fruits) had its being from his
Grandfathers motion, and his Uncles industry.

He had a brother named Ambrose Usher, who, though he dyed young, yet was a man
of excellent parts, very skilful in the Oriental Languages, who had translated
the Old Testament from the beginning, to the Book of Job, out of the Hebrew
into English, which is still preserved under his own hand; but upon the coming
forth of the New Translation in King James his time, he desisted from making
any further progress therein.

Our James was taught first to read by two of his Aunts, His Education
who were blind from their Cradles, and so never saw letters, yet were they
admirably versed in the sacred Scriptures, being able suddenly to have given a
good account of any part of the Bible. At eight years old he was sent to the
Grammar School, where he had the happiness to meet with two excellent
Schoolmasters, A special Providence.
Sir James Fullerton, afterward Ledger Ambassador in France, and Sir James
Hamilton (afterward Lord Viscount Clandeboise) who was Usher of the School.
These two learned men were sent over by King James out of Scotland upon an
other design, though they were disguised in this employment: And indeed they
came very opportunely by the good hand of Gods Providence, for this youths
founding in learning, at such a time when there was a great defect of learned
Schoolmasters, which he often acknowledged as a special mercy of God to him
therein.

At ten years old was the first time that he could remember to have found in
himself any evidences of his saving conversion unto God, His timely Conversion.
which was instrumentally wrought by a Sermon which he heard preached upon Romans
12. 1. I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, etc. About the same time
also meeting with some notes taken from famous Mr. Perkins his Works being not
then printed) concerning the sanctification of the Lords day, proved, through
Gods blessing, so effectual with him, that ever after he was the more strict in
the observing of it. About the same time also he read over St. Augustines
Meditations, which so affected him, that he wept often in the reading of them.

This young, Satan's malice.
yet hopeful plant, thus inuring, and accustoming himself to secret duties in
his tender years, the Devil, that grand enemy of our salvation, thinking to nip
him in the bud, assaulted him with diverse terrors and affrightments, both
sleeping and waking, Prayer powerful.
hoping thereby to discourage, and take him off from the same: But he (with St.
Paul) betook himself to prayer with earnestness to be delivered from these
Satanical delusions, and assaults, and at last was heard in that which he
feared, by being freed from them, and strengthened against them with more than
ordinary courage, and comfort; which made such an impression in him, as that he
could not forget it to his old age.

The Devil now finding that he could not be affrighted out of his course of
godliness, Satan's subtilty
made use of another engine, which was to allure him with the bait of pleasure,
some of his friends teaching him to play at Cards, wherewith he was so much
delighted, that it began to prevail over his love to his book; yea it came in
competition with his love to God, and care to serve him; Gods mercy.
which being seasonably by Gods Spirit discovered to him, he presently gave it
over, and never played afterward.

At twelve years old he was so affected with the study of Chronology and
Antiquity, that, reading over Sleidans Book of the four Empires, and some other
Authors, he drew forth an exact Series of the times wherein each eminent person
lived; and during the time of his abode at School, which was five years, he was
thoroughly instructed in Grammar, Rhetoric, and Poetry, wherein he so excelled,
and with which he was so delighted, that he was fain to take himself off, lest
it should have hindered him from more serious studies.

At thirteen years of age he was admitted into the College of Dublin, His
admission into the College.
being the first Student that was initiated into it; and as it seems, it was so
ordered upon design by the Governors thereof, upon their observation of his
pregnancy, and rare parts, that it might be a future honor to the College to
have his name recorded in the Frontispiece of their Admission Book, and so
accordingly he was the first Graduate, the first Fellow, the first Proctor, etc.

At the same time Sir James Hamilton, His great proficiency.
hitherto Usher of the School, was chosen Fellow of the College, and thereby
became his Tutor, who oft-times admired his accuteness and proficiency, whereby
in a short time he equalized his Instructers. Here he first began to study the
Greek and Hebrew Languages, in both which he afterward excelled, and made
himself in a little time Master of the Arts, most of which he modelled in a
method of his own, especially that of Music.

At this time the education, and helps which that College afforded were very
eminent: For though at first there were but four Fellows, yet the Tongues and
Arts were very exactly taught to all the Students who were divided into several
Classes. Each Tutor read Aristotle's Text in Greek to his Pupils; yea each
Fellow read three Lectures a day, at each of which there was a Disputation
maintained either upon the present, or the precedent Lecture, and sometimes
they were ordered to dispute More Socratico.

On Saturdayes in the afternoon each Tutor read a Divinity Lecture in Latin to
his Pupils, dictating it (as they did all other their Lectures) so
deliberately, that they might easily write after them, to their great benefit
and advantage.

At fourteen years old he was judged fit, His admission to the Sacrament.
and admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and his usual custom was,
the afternoon before, to retire himself in private, and to spend it in a strict
self-examination, and deep humiliation for all his sins; wherein he had such
enlargements of heart, that a stream of tears flowed from his eyes, His
preparation thereto.
which afterward he often recalled to mind, both as a provocation, and censure
of himself: When he was of elder years, there was a certain pl^ce by a water
side whither he often resorted, sorrowfully to survey his sins, and with floods
of tears to confess, and bewail them; wherein he found so much sweetness and
communion with God, that he thirsted for such comfortable opportunities, and it
was his usual custom to spend Saturdayes in the afternoon in these duties.
Amongst other sins he much bewailed his too much love to humane learning, which
made him as glad when Monday came that he might renew his studies, as he was
when Sabbath day came, wherein he was to apply himself to the service of God;
and it cost him many tears that he could not be more heavenly-minded at that
age.

At fiftten years old he had made such a progress in the study of Chronology,
His skill in Chronology.
that he drew up in Latin an exact Chronicle of the Bible as far as to the
Books of the Kings, which did not much differ from that of his late Annals,
excepting his enlargements by some exquisite observations, and the Syncronismes
of Heathen story. About this time also he was much afflicted with a strong
temptation, which moved him to question Gods, love to him, because he was so
free from afflictions, which was occasioned by some inconsiderate passages
which he met with in some Authors, and long was he under some trouble before he
could get rid of it.

Before he was Bachelor of Arts he read Stapletons Fortress of the Faith, and
therein finding how confidently he asserted Antiquity for the Popish Tenets,
withal, branding our Church and Religion with novelty in what we dissented
from them, he was much troubled at it, not knowing but that his quotations
might be right; and he was convinced that the Ancientest must needs be best, as
the nearer the Fountain the sweeter, and clearer are the streams; yet withal,
he suspected that Stapleton might mis-report the Fathers, or wrest them to his
own sense; and therefore he took up a settled resolution, that in due time, if
God prolonged his life and health, he would trust only his own eyes by reading
over all the Fathers for his satisfaction herein; His study of the Fathers.
which work he afterward began at Twenty years old, and finished that vast
labor at Thirty eight, strictly tying himself to a certain portion every day
what occasions soever intervened.

Whilst he was Bachelor of Arts, he read diverse of the Works of the Fathers,
and most Authors which had written the Body of Divinity both Positively and
Polemically in consuting the Popish errors, and had read many of their Authors
also, by which means he was so well acquainted with the state of those
controversies, that he was able to dispute with any of the Popish Priests, as
he often did with the principal of them.

Anno Christi 1598, The Earl of Essex newly coming over Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, and being chosen Chancellor of the University of Dublin, there was a
solemn Act appointed for his entertainment, and Mr. Usher being then Bachelor
of Arts, answered the Philosophy Act with great applause and approbation.

About this time his Fathers intention was to send him over into England to the
Innes of Court, He is designed to the study of the Law.
for the study of the Common Law, which was a great trouble to him, yet in
obedience to his Fathers will he assented, and resolved upon it; but it pleased
God that his Father shortly after dyed, viz. August the 12. Anno Christi School,
so that then he being at liberty to make choice of his studies, devoted, and
applied himself wholly to Divinity, His study of Divinity.
and thereupon was chosen Fellow of the College, being before incapable of
taking the Oath which was required of all Fellows at their Admission, viz. that
the present intent of their studies should be for the Profession of Divinity,
unless God should afterward otherwise dispose their minds.

And here again was an other occasion of disturbance to his mind ministered to
him. His contempt of the world.
For his Father left him a good estate in land; but finding that he must have
involved himself in many Suits of Law before he could attain to the quiet
enjoyment of it, to the interrupting of his other studies, he gave up the
benefit of it to his brothers and sisters, suffering his Uncle to take Letters
of Administration for that end, resolving to cast himself upon the good
Providence of God, to whose service in the work of the Ministry he had wholly
devoted himself, not doubting but he would provide for him; yet that he might
not be judged weak or inconsiderate in that Act, he drew up a note under his
hand of the state of all things that concerned it, and directions what to do
about it.

When he was nineteen years old he disputed with Henry Fitz-Simonds, His
Disput^ with a Jesus
a Jesuit, in the Castle of Dublin, as himself acknowledges in his Preface to
his Book called Britanno-mochia Ministrorum; the occasion of which Dispute was
this, The Jesuit by way of challenge, as it was interpreted, gave forth these
words, That he being a Prisoner was like a Bear tied to a stake, but wanted
some to bait him: Whereupon this eminent man (for so he was though very young)
was thought fit, and able to encounter him, though at their first meeting he
despised his youth, as Goliath did David. Mr. Usher proffered to dispute with
him about all Bellarmines Controversies, for which a meeting was appointed once
every week, and it fell out that the first subject proposed was De Antichristo,
about which they had two or three solemn Disputations, and Mr. Usher was ready
to have proceeded further; but the Jesuit was weary of it, yet gives him a
tolerable commendation, and much admired his abillities in such young years:
concerning which he says, There came once to me a youth of about eighteen
years of age, one of a too soon ripe wit, scarce you would thank that he could
have gone through his course of Philosophy, or that he was got out of his
childe-hood, yet was he ready to dispute upon the most abstruce points of
Divinity. And afterward the same Jesuit living to understand more of him,
says, that he was A catholicorum doctissimus, the most learned of such as were
not Catholics; being (as it seems) unwilling, or ashamed to call him Heretic.

Anno Christi 1600, He is Master of Arts, and Catechist.
when he was about twenty years old he commenced Master of Arts, and answered
the Philosophy Act, and was chosen Catechist of the College, in which office he
went through a great part of the Body of Divinity in the Chapel by way of
Common place; and Ministers being scarce at that time, there were three young
men of the College chosen out, and appointed to preach in Christ Church before
the State: One was Mr. Richardson, afterward Bishop of Ardah, who was
appointed to preach an Expository Lecture upon the Prophecy of Isaiah every
Friday. Another was Mr. Welsh, afterward Dr. of Divinity, who was designed to
handle the Body of Divinity on Sabbaths in the forenoon; the third was our
learned Usher, who was to handle the controversies for the satisfaction of the
Papists on the Lords days in the afternoons, which he did fully and clearly,
always concluding with some emphatical Exhortation, that it tended much to the
edification and confirmation of the Protestants in their Principles, as many of
them in their elder years have acknowledged.

Having thus preached for a while as a Probationer, he refused to continue it
any longer, having not as yet received Ordination: He also scrupled to be as
yet Ordained by reason of his defect of years, the Canons requiring twenty
four, and he being yet but twenty one: But by some grave and learned men he was
told, that the Lord had need of his labors; and so upon their persuasions and
importunity, his age being dispensed with according to some former presidents,
he was ordained at the usual time, the Sabbath before Christmas day, His
O^dination.
Anno 1601, by his Uncle Henry Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, with the assistance
of some other Ministers.

The first Text that he preached publicly upon before the State, His first
Sermon after it.
after his Ordination, was Rev. 3. 1. Thou have a name that thou live, and
art dead, which fell out to be the same day upon which was fought the Battle of
Kinsale, which being a day specially set apart, by prayer to seek unto God for
his blessing and assistance in that engagement, and being his first fruits
after his entrance into the Office of the Ministry, God might in a more than
ordinary manner make his labors efficatious and prevailing; the rest of that
Epistle to the Church of Sardis he finished afterward.

It was well known that if the Spaniards had gotten the better that day, the
Irish Papists had designed to murder the English Protestants both in Dublin
and other places, Tentation resisted,
but especially the Ministers. Hence (said he) arose a tentation in me to have
deferred my Ordination till the event of the Battle had been known, that so I
might the better have escaped their fury; but I repelled that suggestion, and
resolved the rather upon it, that dying a Minister, and in that quarrel, I
might at least be the next door to a Martyr.

The Spaniards being (as was said before) overthrown at Kinsale, and the hopes
of the Irish, as to that design, being frustrated, they began generally to
subject themselves to the Statute, which was now put in execution, in their
coming to Church; and that it might tend the more to their profit, the Lord
Lieutenant, and his Council, desired the Ministers at Dublin, so to divide
themselves, that (in imitation of what he had already begun at Christ Church)
there might be a Sermon on the Lords days in the afternoon at every Church
upon those Controversies. St. Katherines (a convenient Church) was assigned for
Mr. Usher, who removed accordingly, and duly observed it; and his custom was,
that what he had delivered in one Sermon, he drew it up into Questions and
Answers, and the next Lords day, several persons of note voluntary offered
themselves to repeat those Answers before the whole Congregation, which made
them more clear and perspicuous to the Popish party.

It pleased God by his, and the labors of others of his Brethren in the
Ministry, A great Reformation.
not only in Dublin, but in other parts of the Kingdom, that the Papists came
so diligently to Church, that if they had any occasion to absent themselves,
they used to send in their excuses to the Churchwardens, and there were great
hopes in a short time to have reduced the whole Nation to Protestanisme: But on
a sudden, the execution of the Statute was suspended, and the power of the High
Commission Court (then erected, and used only against the Papists) was taken
away; whereupon the Papists presently withdrew themselves from the public
Assembles, Popery increases.
the Ministry was discouraged, all good men's hearts were grieved, and Popery
from that time forward increased, till like a great Deluge, it had overflowed
the whole Nation.

Upon this, His Zeal.
the spirit of this holy man (like Paul's at Athens) was exceedingly stirred in
him, insomuch as preaching before the State at Christ Church upon a special
solemnity, he did with as much prudence, courage, and boldness as became his
young years, give them his opinion of that abominable Toleration of Idolatry;
making a full and clear application of that passage in Ezekiels Vision, Chap.
4. 6. where the Prophet, by lying on his side, was to bear the iniquity of
Judah for forty days. A Prediction.
I have appointed thee (says the Lord) each day for a year. This (said he) by
the consent of Interpreters, signifies the time of forty years to the
destruction of Jerusalem, and of that Nation for their Idolatry; and so (said
he) will I reckon from this year the sin of Ireland, and at the end of the time
those whom you now embrace shall be your ruin, and you shall bear this
iniquity, wherein he proved a Prophet: For this was delivered by him, Anno
Christi 1601, and Anno 1641, was the Irish Rebellion, and Massacre; and what a
continued expectation he had of a great judgment upon that his Native Country,
I, says Dr. Bernard, can witness from the year 1624, at which time I had the
happiness first to be known to him; and the nearer the time approached, the
more confident he was of the event, though as yet nothing that tended toward
it was visible to other men.

The Body of Divinity which is printed in his name is highly commended by Mr.
Downam, His Body of Divinity.
who set it forth, and so it is by a stranger, Ludovicus Crocius, who much
desired that some English man would turn it into Latin for the benefit of
foreign Churches, but it was not intended by him for the Press. It was begun
by him in public, but finished some years after in private in his Family,
constantly instructing them twice a week, unto which persons of quality and
learning resorted, and diverse of them took Notes, whereby several Copies were
dispersed abroad, some imperfect and mistaken, and many passages are in it
which were not his, neither is the whole so polished as his other Pieces which
were published by himself; and indeed he was displeased that it came forth
without his knowledge, yet understanding how much good it had done, he connived
at it.

Shortly after the aforementioned defeat given to the Spaniards at Kinsale,
Soldiers favorers of Learning.
the Officers of our English Army gave 1800 pounds to buy Books for the College
Library at Dublin (then Soldiers were advancers of Learning) the ordering of
which was committed to Dr. Challoner, and this Lord Primate, who made a journey
into England on purpose to buy Books with it. He then met with Sir Thomas
Bodly, who was buying Books for his Library at Oxford, and they were very
helpful each to other in procuring the rarest Pieces. In his journey he visited
Mr. Christopher Goodman, who had been Professor of Divinity in Oxford in King
Edward the sixths days, then lying on his deathbed at Chester, and he would
often repeat some grave and wise speeches that he heard from him.

After this he constantly came over into England once in three years, His great
diligence.
spending one month at Oxford, another at Cambridge, in searching the Books,
especially the Manuscripts, in each University (amongst which, those of Corpus
Christi College in Cambridge, he most esteemed) the third month he spent at
London, intending chiefly Sir Robert Cottons Library, and conversing with
learned men, amongst whom, even in those his younger years he was in great
esteem. In his after-years he was acquainted with the rarities in other
Nations: There was scarce a choice Book in any eminent persons Library in
France, Italy, Germany, or Rome it self, but he had his way to procure it, or
what he desired, transcribed out of it, so that he was better acquainted with
the Popes Vatican than some that daily visited it. His Correspondents.
The Puteani fratres, two learned men in Paris holp him much with many
Transcripts out of Thuanus, and others, between whom and him, many Letters
passed. Now, though the reading of the Fathers all over was a vast work, yet
the pains he took out of the common road of learning in searching of Records,
and all the Manuscripts he could get throughout Christendom, together with the
knotty study of Chronology and Antiquity, was equal with, if it did not exceed
the other. Many Volumes he also read only to attain to the knowledge of the
use of words in several ages, as Galen, Hipocrates, etc. and most of the
Records in the Tower of London: Besides there was scarce the meanest book in
his own Library, but he remembered it, even to admiration, and had in his head
readily whatsoever he had read.

The first Church-preferment which he had, His first preferment.
was given him by Archbishop Loftus a little before his death, which was the
Chancellorship of St. Patricks Dublin, unto which he took no other Benefice. In
that place Mr. Camden found him when he was writing his Britannia, Anno Christi
1607, and in his observations concerning Dublin, says of him, Most of these I
acknowledge to owe to the diligence, and labors of James Usher, Chancellor of
the Church of St. Patricks, who in various learning, and judgment far exceeds
his years. In this preferment, though the Law required not his preaching, His
constant preaching.
but only in his course before the State, yet would he not omit it in the
place from whence he received his profits, and though he endowed it with a
Vicaridge, yet went he thither in person, viz. to Finglas a mile from Dublin,
and preached there every Lords day, unless he were detained upon some
extraordinary occasions; and the remembrance that he had been a constant
Preacher, was a greater comfort to him in his old age, than all his other
labors and writings.

His experiments in Prayer were many, His prevalency in prayer.
and very observable, God ofen answering his desires in kind, and that
immediately, when he was in some distresses; and Gods Providence in taking
care, and providing for him in his younger years, as he often spoke of it, so
it wrought in him a firm resolution to depend upon God in his latter days,
what ever extremity he might be brought into.

Anno Christi 1607, He is Bachelor in Divinity, and Professor.
when he was twenty seven years old he commenced bachelor of Divinity, and
immediately after be was chosen Professor of Divinity in the University of
Dublin: At first he read twice a week, and afterward once a week without
intermission throughout the year, going through a great part of Bellarmines
Controversies. In this employment he continued thirteen or fourteen years, and
was a great ornament to his place. Three Volumes of those his Lectures written
with his own hand he has left behind him, and it would be a great honor to
that University where they were read, and benefit to many others if they were
published.

When he performed his Acts for his degree, His strong memory.
Latin Sermon, Lectures, Position, and answered the Divinity Act, he wrote
nothing but only the heads of the several Subjects, putting all upon the
strength of his memory, and present expressions, as also he did his English
Sermons. His readiness in the Latin Tongue was inferior to none in these
latter times, which (after seventeen years disuse, from the time that he left
his Professors place) appeared when he moderated the Divinity Act, and created
Doctors to all men's admiration.

The Provostship of the College of Dublin falling void, His Self-denial
he was unanimously elected thereto by all the Fellows, he being then about
thirty years of age, but foreseeing that upon the settlement of Lands belonging
to it, and the establishing of other matters, he should be much impeded and
distracted in his studies, he refused it, and so another was sent out of
England to fill it. The revenues of it were very considerable, whereby we may
see how mean and little the things of the world seemed in his eyes even in
those his younger years.

About this time the Irish Prelates, especially Dr. Hampton, Episcopal subtilty.
his predecessor in the Sea of Armagh, had obtained King James his grant for
reducing Ireland to the same Ecclesiastical Government of the Church of
England; the principal occasion whereof was this, The English Prelates a little
before had used a great deal of severity against the Non-conformists, their
High Commission, and other Courts, and Canons, had driven many worthy and
learned men into other Countries, and some of them went into Ireland; the Irish
Bishops being weary of this resort, are desirous to advance their power to the
same height with the English Hierarchy, combined together, and obtained King
James his Commission to Sir Arthur Chichester, Earl of Belfast, a famous
Soldier and prudent Governor, who was at this time Lord Deputy, and bore the
Sword* there eleven years together with very much honor, and esteem in that
Nation. For the effecting of this, a great Assembly of the whole Nation was
convened. In the Commission the King required them to consult with Mr. Usher,
whose learning, judgment, and esteem would much conduce to the promoting of
that work: But if he approved it not, the King required that they should
proceed no further, for that he would not be the author of any Innovation
amongst them.

This reserve troubled the Prelates exceedingly, and therefore they resolved to
carry it closely; the Kings Letters to them, they transmitted from one to
another, but acquainted not Mr. Usher with them, intending to surprise him when
the Assembly was met; they should come prepared and fortified, he would be
taken on the sudden. Howbeit God that intended him for so great a good at that
time in crossing their design, that many faithful laborers in his Vineyard
might not by this their power be displaced, by a special Providence gave him
some light (though but very little) into the matter; and the manner was thus,

Mr. Usher going to visit one of them, A special Providence.
found him perusing the Kings Letter; but upon his coming, he laid it down in
his window, closed at both ends, only there was an open place in the middle,
and as they were discoursing together, Mr. Usher glancing his eye upon it,
espied his own name, and some other words about himself, of which he could not
pick out the meaning; but yet he judged them to be of importance, as
Discipline, Ireland, England, etc. Mr. Usher thought it not prudence for him to
take notice of those hints, neither could he handsomely fish out the business
from the Bishop, A holy practice.
wherefore he went another way to work; and indeed the surest way, by seeking
counsel from God, communicating the matter to Dean Hill a very godly man, whom
he requested, that with some others, they would seek unto God for his
assistance, for he believed that something was in brewing that he might not
know of. Herein imitating the practice of wise Daniel, Chap. 2. 17, 18.

This done he studied the Rights of the Irish Church, some fruits whereof we
have in that Learned Piece of his called, The Religion professed by the ancient
Irish and Britains. Yet he heard nothing till the Assembly was summoned, and
himself the next day was to be present at it; then went he to the Lord Deputy
to know the occasion of their meeting. The Lord Deputy would not believe at
first that he could be a stranger to it; but afterward, when Mr. Usher had
assured him that he had no information from the Bishops about it, he was much
displeased, and told him that without him all the the rest were but Ciphers,
for that the King had referred the whole business to his judgment, whether the
power of the Hierarchy should be established there as it was in England.

The next day the Kings Commission and Letters were read in the Assembly, and
Speeches were made concerning the excellency of the Kings intention to reduce
that Kingdom to one uniformity with England in Ecclesiastical Government; they
also told him what honor the King had put upon him, whose esteem, learning and
judgment the King so much depended upon for the promoting so great and good a
work. Mr. Usher replied, that he believed that in a business of so great
concernment wherein he was so far interested, the Kings intentions were that he
should have convenient time to consider of it before he delivered his opinion,
which he also humbly desired.

The Bishops answered, that his judgment was sufficiently known by his
practice, and that they expected no more from him but his consent, and
concurrence with them. He replied, that the matter concerned more than himself,
For (said he) if I had all men's consciences in my keeping, I could in these
disputable cases give Laws unto them, as well as unto my self; but its one
thing what I can do, and another thing what all other men must do.

Then they asked of him if he had any thing to say why they should not satisfy
the Kings desire? His Speech in the Assembly.
He, after a short pause, wherein he lifted up his heart unto God for
direction, told them that if they would grant him no longer time, he would as
well as he was able give them his judgment, if that Honorable Assembly would
grant him three Requests, 1. A free hearing without interruption. 2. Liberty
for him to answer any man that should be unsatisfied. 3. That there might be a
final determination of the business at that meeting. These being all granted,
Mr. Usher undertook to prove, that such a Jurisdiction could not be introduced
into that Kingdom, neither by the Laws of God, nor by the Civil, or
Ecclesiastical Constitutions of that Kingdom, nor yet without the violation of
the Kings Prerogative in that Nation: All which he performed to admiration. But
before he descended to particulars, he showed the difference between Conformity
as it was set up in England, and as it would be, if it were set up in Ireland.

The Kings (says he) and Queen of England imposed those Ceremonies, that
thereby they might decline the charge of Schismatics, wherewith the Church of
Rome labored to brand them, seeing it did appear hereby that they left them
only in such Doctrinal points, wherein they left the truth. Again, hereby they
would testify how far they would willingly stoop to win and gain them, by
yielding to meet them as far as they might in their own way: But (says he) the
experience of many years has showed, that this condescension has rather
hardened them in their errors, than brought them to a liking of our Religion:
This being their usual saying, If our Flesh be not good, why do you drink of
our Broth?

As for Ireland, wherein the English Canons were never yet received, and the
generality of the Inabitans were Popish Recusants, and even in Popish Kings
times, there was no receptions of the Popes Ecclesiastical Constitutions,
because he encroached upon their temporals, if such Laws now should be set up
under so Religious a Protestant King, this would be to set the Pope on
Horseback, amongst them, which needed not.

The Lord Deputy, The success of his Speech.
when he had finished his Speech, and answered what was objected against it,
told him that he was much affected with every part of his learned speech, but
that he was more especially concerned in that which touched upon the Kings
Prerogative part; wherein he had discovered such hidden flowers of the Crown,
as he thought the King himself knew not; and therefore (he said) as he would
endeavor to preserve his Majesty's right therein, whilst he was his Deputy, so
he would present them to the King, and take care, that it should be very hard
for any that came after him to rob him of them.

By this we may easily see, that he was then so far from a Prelatical spirit,
that on the contrary he was an Advocate for, and Patione of godly and
conscientious Non-Conformists.

Anno Christi 1612, he proceeded Dr. of Divinity being created by Archbishop
Hampton, He is Dr. of Divinity.
his Predecessor; one of his Lectures for his Degree was upon the seventy weeks
to the slaying of the Messiah, mentioned Dan. 9. 24. the other out of Rev. 20.
4. concerning the meaning of the Prophecy, that the Saints should reign with
Crist a thousand years, which in these times would be very seasonable; but its
lost.

Dr. Hoyle (who died Professor of Divinity in Oxford, after he had many years
been the like in Dublin) said, that when he went out Dr. of Divinity, he
thought Tully himself could not have excelled him in Eloquence (had he been
alive) not only in his composed speeches, but in those which occasionally fell
from him upon the by.

Anno Christi 1613, He published his Book, De Ecclesiaram Christianarum
successione, and statu, magnified so much by Causabon and Scultetus, in their
Greek, and Latin verses before it. It was solemnly presented by Archbishop
Abbot to King James, as the eminent first fruits of that College at Dublin.
Indeed its imperfect, for about three hundred years from Gregory the 11, to Leo
the 10, viz. from the year 1371, to 1513, and from thence to this last Century,
which he intended (after the finishing of a Book, which he was now about) to
have completed: But the Lord prevented him.

Anno Christi 1615, The Articles. of Ireland.
there was a Parliament in Dublin, and consequently a Convocation of the
Clergy, at which time those learned Articles of Ireland were composed and
published, and Dr. Usher being a member of that Synod, was appointed to draw
them up; they were highly approved of the m^st Orthod^x Divines. They determine
according to St. Austin against the Doctrine of the Pelagians: Prove the Man of
sin, spoken of 1 Thessalonians. 2. to be the Bishop of Rome; and for the Morality of
the Sabbath; of both which this most learned Doctor was very confident, and often
wished that some of our learned men of late had spared their pains when they
went about to prove the contrary. In defense of the last of these, he wrote a
most excellent and learned Letter to Dr. Twiss, who had desired his judgment
about it.

He wanted not enemies who sought to scandalize him to King James under the
Title of a Puritan, His enemies.
which was very odious to him in those days, seeking hereby to prevent his
further promotion; but God so ordered it, that it proved an occasion of his
advancement; for King James being jealous of him upon that score, by reason of
the eminency of his learning, fell into serious discourse with him, and therein
received such abundance of satisfaction, both of the soundness of his judgment
and piety, that notwithstanding the opposition made by some great ones, He is
made Bishop by the King.
without his seeking, he made him Bishop of Mead in Ireland, which just then
fell void whilst he was in England, and the King often boasted that he was a
Bishop of his own making.

Whilst he was thus Bishop Elect, He preaches to the Parliament.
he was chosen to preach before the House of Commons, Feb. 18. 1620, in
Margarets Westminster: The Sermon by order of the House was printed, and it is
a most learned one.

Upon his return into Ireland, he was consecrated Bishop of Mead at Droheda by
Archbishop Hampton, with the assistance of two Suffragan Bishops, according to
the custom; at which time there was given him an Anagram of his Name, as he
was then to write himself, which was this, James Mead, I am the same; and he
made it good ever afterward. His preferment did not cause him to grow slack in
his constancy of preaching, as it did too many, who having caught the Fish,
laid aside the Net: But, as Possidonius says of St. Austin, His constant
preaching.
he was still the same; which he bound himself the rather unto by the Motto of
his Episcopal Seal, Ve mihi si non Evangelizavero, Woe is me if I preach not
the Gospel, which he continued in the Seal of his Primacy also.

He had many Papists in his Diocese, His success in his Ministry.
whom he endeavored to reclaim by private conferences, and at length they were
willing to hear him preach, so it were not in a Church, which he condescended
to, and preached in the Sessions House, and his Sermon wrought so much upon
some of them, that their Priests forbad them hearing him in any place ever
after.

Anno 1622, there were some Papists censured in the Star Chamber for refusing
to take the Oath of Supremacy, at which time he was called thither to inform
them of it before the sentence passed, which occasioned that learned, Speech of
his upon that subject, since printed with his English works.

While he was Bishop of Mead, His answer a Jesuit.
he answered a challenge sent him by the Jesuit Malone; and his going over
into England to Print it, occasioned another learned Tractate of the
Universality of the Church of Christ, and the Unity of the Catholic Faith, in
a Sermon preached before King James on Ephesians. 4. 13. Till we all come in the
unity of the Faith, etc. And Gods providence so ordered it, He is made Primate
of Ireland.
that whilst he was thus busied in England, Archbishop Hampton dying, he was
made his successor, Primate of Ireland, Anno Christi 1624, and he was the
hundredth Bishop of that See.

Being thus promoted to the highest preferment his Profession was capable of in
his native Country, he was so far from being puffed up with Pride, that he was
more humble, and frequent in preaching, and it so fell out, that for some weeks
together overtoyling himself in the work of the Ministry to the overwasting of
his spirits, whic he did at the request of some Essex Ministers, who importuned
him to preach on the week days, because they could not come to hear him on the
Sabbaths, he fell into a Quartane Ague, which held him three quarters of a year.

After his recovery, His disputation with a Jesuit.
the Lord Mordant (afterward Earl of Peterborough) being a Papist, and
desirous to draw his Lady to the same Religion, he was willing that there
should be a meeting of two eminent persons of each party to dispute what might
be in controversy between them. The Lady made choice of our Lord Primate, and
prevailed with him, though newly recovered from the aforesaid long sickness,
and scarce able to take such a journey. The Jesuit chosen by the Earl went
under the name of Beaumond, but his true name was Rookwood (brother to Ambrose
Rookwood, one of the Gunpowder Traitors.) The place of meeting was at Drayton
in Northamptonshire, where there was a great Library, so that no Books of the
ancient Fathers were wanting upon occasion for their view. The points to be
disputed on, were concerning Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints,
worshipping of Images, and the visibility of the Church. Three days they were
in this Disputation, three hours in the forenoon, and two hours in the
afternoon each day; and the conclusion was this, After the third day of
meeting, the Lord Primate having been hitherto opponent, now the Tables were to
be turned, and the Jesuit according to his desire, was to oppose, and the Lord
Primate to answer: But when the time came, and the Jesuit was expected, instead
of coming, he sent his excuse to the Lord Mordant, which was, that all the
Arguments which he had framed in his head, and premeditated, so that he thought
he had them as perfect as his Pater Noster, were now slipped from him, and he
could not possibly recover them again; and that he believed it was a just
judgment of God upon him, for undertaking of himself to dispute with a man of
that eminency and learning without a license from his Superior. The Lord
Mordant converted.
The Lord Mordant seeing his tergiversation, upon some further discourse with
the Lord Primate, was converted, and became a Protestant, and so continued to
his death. One Challoner, a Secular Priest, afterward writing a book against
this Beaumond by way of scorn, bids him beware of coming any more to Drayton,
lest he meet with another Usher, to foil him again, to the dishonor of his
profession, and himself.

The Lord having made his labors so succesful, the Countess of Peterborough
had him always in great respect, and upon his losses in Ireland, and other
distresses here, she took him home to her own house, with whom be lived about
nine or ten years, and then died there.

Anno Christi 16^6, in August, he went back into Ireland, where he was
entertained with all the expressions of love and joy that could be.

The discourses which daily fell from him at his Table in clearing difficulties
in the Scripture, His fruitful conference.
and other subjects (especially when learned men came to visit him) tended
exceedingly to the edification of the hearers, so that it might well be said of
him, as the Queen of Sheba said to Solomon, Happy are these thy servants that
stand continually about thee, and hear thy wisdom. And such was his humility
withal, as that he would, in practical subjects, apply himself to the capacity
of the poorest, and weakest Christian that came to him for information, and
satisfaction of their doubts. His Humility.
Nay some times, he was more propense to communicate himself to such, than to
others that were more learned; which strangers have wondered at, as the
Disciples marvelled at our Saviors talking with the poor woman of Samaria,
Joh. 4. 27. and answering her questions, rather than taking notice of them.
Indeed he was a Mirror of Humility: For though he was higher than any other
from the shoulders upward, yet might many of his inferiors learn humility of
him, as may appear in these few amongst many other examples.

1 In his public preaching, no man more denied himself to preach Christ,
Examples of it*
insomuch as some that affected that frothy way of preaching by strong lines
(as they call them) were much ashamed after they had heard him preach in
Oxford, wherein he reproved, and decried the Corinthian vanity in this kind.
Also in one passage of his at the Court before the King, he taught the Bishops,
and Doctors that then heard him, thus; Great Sch^llars (said he) possibly may
think that it stands not with their credit, and reputation to stoop so low,
etc. But let the learnedest of us all try it when we will, and we shall find,
that to lay this ground work right, that is, to apply our selves to the
capacities of a common Auditory, and to make an ignorant man to understand
these Mysteries in some good measure, will put us to the trial of our skill,
and will trouble us a great deal more, than if we were to discuss a
Controversy, or handle a subtle point of learning in the Schools. He was
indeed another Paul, who determined to know nothing but Christ, and him
crucified. Neither was his speech or preaching with the enticing words of man's
wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of power, 1 Cor. 2. 2, 4.

2. In his private conversation he framed himself to the capacity of the
meanest that conversed with him. He had an excellent gift of expressing himself
both in Latin and English, and as he could sore with the Eagle in Polemick
discourses when he met with Giants, so he would stoop to the lowest Pigmies in
practical subjects, and would apply himself to the poorest and weakest
Christians. He was no Dictator, nor would impose upon other men's judgments or
consciences, but was as ready to receive from others, as to impart to them, and
would much incline to vulgar Christians, rather than unto others that were more
learned.

3. In his demeanor and behavior he had high thoughts of others, and as low
of himself, and that in every condition of his life, both in prosperity and
adversity. Godly persons of what rank soever, had great power with him, he
would put them in his bosom, visit them in their sickness, supply their wants,
beg their prayers, and countenance their cause and persons. In his passage for
Ireland, he sometimes lay at N^sson for wind, where sundry times he preached to
a plain Country Auditory: And whereas there were in that part of the Country
(where I lived about five years when I first began my Ministry) diverse plain
Christians, which were never called but by their Christian names; yet indeed
were such as had not a bare form, but the life and power of godliness in them,
so that I was never acquainted with more knowing Christians for men and women
of their rank; these he grew into familiar acquaintance with, would entertain
them in his chamber, discourse with them, answer their questions, and satisfy
their doubts: And when he was made Archbishop, some of them told him, that now
they must know their distance, and durst not be so familiar with him as
formerly: To whom he answered, that he was the same man still, and they should
be as welcome to him as formerly, and accordingly used the same familiarity
with them as he had wont to do: And when he lay at Chester, he would as soon
preach at the request of Mr. Ashbrook, and Mrs. Kirkman (a godly woman of the
meaner rank, whom I well knew) as at the entreaties of the Mayor and Aldermen
of that City, whereby he demonstrated, Psalm. 16. 3. and 119. 63.
that his delight was in the Saints, and that he was a companion of all them
that feared God; and this indeed was one reason that he rose so high; he
honored God, and therefore God honored him, 1 Samuel 2. 30.

Whilst I lived in Warwickshire, not much before the long Parliament begun, my
self with two other neighbor Ministers made a journey to Oxford (where he then
was) on purpose to desire his judgment in some cases wherein we could not so
well satisfy our selves; we found him at his lodgings in Christ Church, where,
before he would admit any speech with us, he caused us to put on our hats, to
sit down by him, and then to speak our minds; when I told him that we were
come to request his judgment in some difficulties, he presently stopped me,
saying, Mr. Clarke, I shall freely tell you my judgment in any thing but about
the Et caetera Oath, concerning which I did speak occasionally, declaring my
mind about it, and I have newly received a Letter from two Doctors (whose
names I forbear to insert out of respect to them) who take me up as if I was a
Schoolboy, (and withal he pulled the Letter out of his pocket) adding, that
in that regard he would say no more about that matter, etc. I replied, that we
were sufficiently satisfied about that Oath, but the Questions we had to
propound were of another nature, wherein he gave us very full and clear
satisfaction.

His custom was to pray four times a day, His frequen^ Prayers.
in, and with his Family; in the morning at six a clock, in the evening at
eight, and before dinner and supper in his Chapel, at each of which he was
always present. On Friday in the afternoons there was constantly an hour spent
in his Chapel in Catechizing upon the Principles of Religion for the
instructing of his Family; and on Sabbaths in the evening, the Sermon which he
had preached in the forenoon was repeated in his Chapel by one of his
Chaplains.

In the Winter evenings his constant manner was to spend two hours in comparing
of old Manuscripts of the Bible, His Indust^
in Greek and Latin, in which work, five or six assisted him, and the variae
lectiones of each were taken by himself with his own hand.

Anno Christi 1626, A Tolerati^ of Popery d^sired.
in Michaelmas Term there were some Proposals made, and offered to be assented
to by the Irish Papists, upon condition of a more full Tolleration of their
Religion, for the raising and maintaining of five hundred Horse, and five
thousand Foot; wherein the Protestants also must have born some share: To
consider hereof, a great Assembly of Papists and Protestants of the whole
Nation was appointed in the Lord Deputy Faulklands time. The place of their
meeting was in the Hall of the Castle in Dublin. At which time the Bishops, by
our Lord Primates invitation, met at his house, where he, and they drew up, and
unanimously subscribed a Protestation against the Toleration of Popery; A Copy
whereof, because it deserves perpetual remembrance, is here inserted. The
Judgment of the Archbishops, and Bishops of Ireland, concerning the Toleration
of Popery, which is applicable also against the Toleration of other Heresies.
The Religion of the Papists is Superstitious and Idolatrous, The Bishops
judgments against it.
their Faith and Doctrine erroneous, and Heretical, their Church in respect of
both Apostatical. To give them therefore a Toleration, or to consent that they
may freely exercise their Religion, and profess their Faith and Doctrine is a
grievous sin, and that in two respects; For,

1. It is to make our selves accessory, not only to their Superstitions,
Idolatries, Heresies; and in a word, to all the abominations of Popery, but
also (which is a consequent of the former) to the perdition of the seduced
people, which perish in the Deluge of the Catholic Apostasy.

2. To grant them a Toleration, in respect of any money to be given, or
contribution to be made by them, is to set Religion to sale* and with it, the
souls of the People, whom Christ our Savior has redeemed with his most
precious blood. And as it is a great sin, so also a matter of most dangerous
consequence, the consideration whereof we commend to the Wise and Juditious;
Beseeching the Zealous God of Truth, to make them who are in Authority, zealous
or Gods glory, and of the advancement of true Religion; zealous, resolute, and
courageous against all Popery, Superstition, and Idolatry, Amen.

Ja. Armachanus, Mal. Cashlen, Anth. Medensis, Tho. Hernes and Laghlin, To.
Dunensis, etc. Georg. Derens. Rich. Cork, Cloyne, Rosses, Andr. Alachadens.
Tho. Kilmore, and Ardagh, Theo. Dromore, Mic. Waterford and Lysm. Fran.
Lymerick.
This Judgment of the Bishops, Dr. George Downham, Bishop of Derry, at the
next meeting of the Assembly, which was April the 23, 1627, published at Christ
Church before the Lord Deputy and Council in the midst of his Sermon, with
this preamble, viz.

Are not many amongst us for gain, and outward respects, willing, and ready to
consent to a Toleration of false Religions, thereby making themselves guilty of
a great offense, in putting to sale not only their own souls, but also the
souls of others: But what is to be thought of Toleration of Religion, I will
not deliver my own private opinion, but the judgment of the Archbishops, and
Bishops of this Kingdom, which I think good to publish unto you, that
whasoever shall happen, the world may know that we were far from consenting to
those favors which the Papists expect.



After he had published it, the people gave their votes with a general
acclamation, crying, Amen. The judgments of the Bishops prevailed so much with
the Protestants, that now the Proposals drove on very heavily; and after much
debate of things, the L. Deputy finding the discontents of both parties
increasing, desired our Lord Primate, as the fittest person, both in regard of
his esteem in the Assembly, and being a member of the Council, and therefore
concerned in promoting of the Kings business, to sum up the state of things,
and to move them to an absolute grant of some competency that might comply with
the Kings necessities, without any such conditions, with which upon their
answer, he would cease moving any further; which (upon very little warning) he
did with much prudence, according to his double capacity of a Privy
Counselor, and a Bishop: A copy of which Speech desired of him by the Lord
Deputy, was immediately transmitted into England: But it not being prevalent
with the Assembly, to induce them to supply the Kings wants, it was dissolved.

Not long after the Lord Deputy Falkland being called back into England, Lord
Falklands esteem of him.
when he was to take Boat at the water side, he reserved our Lord Primate as
the last person to take his leave of, and fell upon his knees on the sands, and
begged his blessing, which reverend respect showed to him, gained a greater
reputation to himself, both in Ireland and England; and indeed from his younger
years, the several Lord Deputies had always a great esteem of him.

It was no small labor to him to answer those many Letters which came to him
from foreign parts, His incessant pains.
and our own Nations upon several occasions; some for resolution of
difficulties in Divinity, others about Cases of Conscience, and practical
subjects. Twelve of the most eminent Divines in London (who at his being here,
were wont to apply themselves to him as to a Father, as Dr. Sibbs, Dr. Preston,
etc. between whom, and him there were most entire affections) wrote to him for
his directions about a Body of practical Divinity, which he returned them
accordingly.

He much endeavored the augmentation of the maintenance of the Ministry in
Ireland, His care of (...) Ministry.
and for that end he had obtained a Patent for Impropriations to be passed in
his name for their use as they should fall, but it was too much neglected by
themselves, whereby his desires were frustrated.

He preached every Lords day in the forenoon, His constan^ preaching at
catechizing.
never failing unless he was disabled by sickness, in which he spent himself
very much: In the afternoons his directions to Dr. Bernard, his assistant,
were, that before public Prayers he should Catechize the youth, and that after
the first, and second Lesson, he should spend half an hour in a brief and plain
opening the Principles of Religion in the public Catichisme; and therein he
directed him to go, first through the Creed at once, giving but the sum of each
Article, the next time to go through it at thrice, and afterward to take each
time one Article, as they might be more able to bear it; and to observe the
like proportionably in the Ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and the
Doctrine of the Sacraments: The good fruit of which was apparent in the common
people upon their coming to the Communion, at which time, by orde^, the
receivers were to send in their names, and some account was constantly taken of
their fitness for it. His order throughout his Diocese to the Ministers, was,
that they should go through the Body of Divinity once a year, which he had
accordingly drawn out into fifty heads. When any public Fast was enjoined he
kept it very strictly, preaching always first himself, and therein continuing
at least two hours, in a more than ordinary manner enlarging himself in prayer;
the like was done by those that assisted him in the duty.

His expenses for Books was very great, His expenses in Books and Manuscripts.
especially whilst he enjoyed the revenues of his Archbishopric, a certain
part whereof he laid aside yearly for that end, but especially for the
purchasing of Manuscripts and other Rarities, as well from remote parts of the
world, as near at hand. He was the first that procured the Samaritan Bible
(which is only the Pentateuch) to the view of these Western parts of the
world. It was sent him from Syria by the way of A^eppo, Anno Christi 1625. He
had four of them sent him by a F^ctor whom he employed to search for things of
that nature; and these were thought to be all that could there be had. One of
these he gave to the Library of Oxford: A second to Leyden (for which Ludevicus
de Dieu returns him public thanks in a Book that he dedicated to him:) A third
he gave to Sir Robert Cottons Library: And the fourth, after he had compared it
with the other, he kept himself. The Old Testament in Syriack, an other Rarity
also, was sent him from those parts not long after.

It might happily seem incredible unto some, to relate how many years agone, A
Predi^^^
he confidently foretold the changes which since are come to pass both in
Ireland and England, both in Church and State, and of the poverty which himself
should fall into, which he often spoke of in his greatest plenty. Some took much
notice of that Text which he preached of in St. Mary's in Cambridge, Anno
Christi 1625, upon the late Kings Coronation day, and the first annual
solemnity of it, out of 1 Samuel 12. 25. If you still do wickedly, you shall be
consumed, both you, and your King. Others of the last Text that he preached on
at the Court immediately before his return into Ireland, 1 Cor. 14. 33. God is
not the Author of confusion, but of peace, as in all the Churches of the
Saints: In his application, he spoke of the confusions, and divisions which he
was confident were then at the doors.

In his Book called Ecclesiarum Britannicarum Antiquitates, p. 556, ^he has
this remarkable passage, after he had largely related the manner of the utter
destruction of the British Church and State by the Saxons about the year 550,
as he found it in Gildas, he gives two reasons why he was so prolixe in setting
it down, 1. That the Divine Justice might the rather from thence appear to us,
the sins of persons of all sorts and degrees being then come to the height,
which occasioned, not only shaking of the foundations of the British Church
and State; but the very destruction, and almost utterly overturning of them. 2.
That even we now might be in the greater fear that our turn also is coming, and
may be minded of that of the Apostle, Romans 11. 22. Behold the goodness and
severity of God: On them which fell, severity, but toward thee goodness, if
thou continue in his goodness: Otherwise thou also shall be cut off.

He often acknowledged that sometimes in his Sermons he has resolved to
forbear speaking of some things, but it proved like Jeremiahs fire shut up in
his bones, Jer. 2^. 9.
that when he came to it, he could not forbear unless he would have stood mute,
and proceeded no further. He was very bold and free in the exercise of his
Ministry, sparing sin in none, yea even before Kings he was not ashamed to do
it. He often (to his utmost) stood in the gap to oppose Errors and false
Doctrines; he withstood to the face any Toleration of Popery and Superstition,
His zeal against Popery.
by whomsoever attempted: He was so fervent in his preaching, that that of the
Psalmist might be applied to him, The zeal of thy house has eaten me up.

Anno Christi 1624, Predictions.
he spoke before many witnesses, and often repeated it afterward, that he was
persuaded that the greatest stroke to the Reformed Churches was yet to come;
and that the time of the utter ruin of the Roman Antichrist should be when he
thought himself most secure, according to that Text, Revel. 18. 7. When she
shall say, I sit as a Queen, and shall see no sorrow, etc. His farewell Sermon,
in, or very near the place where he had lived in England, was then much
observed upon Jam. 1. 25. Sin when it is finished brings forth death; wherein
he spoke of the fulness of the sins of this Nation, which certainly would bring
great destruction: Adding, that the Harvest of the earth was ripe, and the
Angel was putting in his sickle, Rev. 14. 18. applying also that of the Epha in
the Vision, Zach. 5. when it was filled with wickedness; and that of the
Amorites, who when their iniquities were come to the full, were destroyed. He
often also hinted the same in his private discourses, and many that heard them,
laid these his sayings up in their hearts, and by what has already fallen out,
do measure their expectations for the future.

At the last time of his being in London, He lame our Divi^
he much lamented, with great thoughts of heart, the woeful dis-unions, and the
deadly hatred which he saw kindled in the hearts of Christians one against
another, by reason of their several opinions in matters of Religion; and
observing how some opposed the Ministry, both to Office and maintenance: Others
contemned the Sacraments: Others raised, and spread abroad Damnable Dectrines,
Heresies, and Blasphemies: Upon which considerations he was confident, that the
enemies which had sown these up and down the Nation, were Priests, Friars, and
Jesuits, and such like Popish Agents, sent out of their Seminaries from beyond
the Seas in sundry disguises, who increasing in number here in London, and
elsewhere, do expect a great harvest of their labors; and he was persuaded,
that if they were not timely prevented by a severe suppressing of them, the
issue would be either an inundation of Popery, or a Massacre, or both; adding
withal, how willing he was, if the Lord so pleased, to be taken away from that
evil to come, which he confidently expected, unless there were some speedy
Reformation of these things.

An. Christi 1634, A little before the Parliament began in Ireland, His
Humility.
there was a Letter sent over from the late King to the Lord Deputy, and
Council, for determining the question of the precedence between the Primate and
Archbishop of Dublin; the question was nothing as to their persons, but in
relation to their Sees. This good man out of his great-humility, was hardly
drawn to speak to that Argument; but being commanded, he showed in it a great
deal of learning, and rare observations in matters of Antiquity, so that the
business was de^ermined on his side, who afterward by another Letter (procured
without his seeking) had the precedence given him of the Lord Chancellor. These
things took little with him, but were rather burdens to him who was not in the
least elated, or puffed up thereby. 'At that Parliament, he preached the first
day of it before the Lord Deputy, and the Lords and Commons, in St. Patricks
Dublin. His Text was, Genesis 49. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor
a Lawgiver from between his feet till Shiloh come, and to him shall the
gathering of the people be.

At the beginning also of the Parliament Anno Christi 1639, he preached before
the same Auditory on Deuteronomy. 33. 4, 5. And Moses commanded us a Law, even the
Inheritance of the Congregation of Jacob, and he was a King in Jesurun, when
the heads of the people, and the Tribes of Israel were gathered together. Both
which Texts as they were pertiment, so were they handled with rare Judgment
and eminent Learning.

The Lord was pleased to make his Labors very successful, His Labors
successful.
some few instances whereof, I shall here set down; some of which I had from my
Reverend Friend Mr. Stanly Gower, the last from my own knowledge.

A Lords eldest son, who from his cradle had been trained up in Popery, but was
of excellent parts, and learning was at last prevailed with by his Father to
sojourn for a while with this learned Prelate in Drogheda; The prudent Prelate
studied nothing more than how he might take him by craft (as the Apostle did
the Corinthians, His Pru^
2 Cor. 12. 16.) and therefore did not presently fall into discourse with him
about his Religion, but recreated himself for a time in discoursing with him
about some Philosophical questions, and Schol-points, in which studies he
perceived the Gentleman was well versed, and took much delight in them: This he
continued till at last he gained so far upon his affections, that of his own
accord he moved some discourse about matters of Religion; and then finding him
studious, he did not presently go about to instruct him in the Truth, but
sought to puzzle him with doubts about his own Religion: By this means the
Gentleman's conscience began to be awakened; nor were his scruples removed,
though he had recourse to a Monastery hard by where they were debated; so that
at last he came with tears to the Learned Primate for satisfaction, and he
promised to deal faithfully with him; but (says he) those whom you trust do
not so, for they will not suffer you to see with your own eyes, nor to
understand the Scripture but according to their Churches Commentaries. Then did
he advise him to go amongst them, and to ask them, whether he that understood
the Originals might examine their Interpretations, and to bring him word what
they said. Accordingly he did so, and brought him word, that they were divided
in their judgments.

Then did the learned Prelate wish him no longer to trust to their implicit
Faith, and he would demonstrate to him how much they perverted the sense of the
Scriptures, and abused the writings of the Ancient Fathers, whilst they sought
to make the world believe that the Fathers and Councils were wholly for them,
and against us: And if (says he) you distrust your own lear^ing and reading,
and will make choice of anyother, who you think can say more, I will make this
good which I have said before the best of them all.

This was an introduction to much confidence which the Gentleman had in him;
Prayer powerful.
and it pleased God after much temptation which he had to the contrary (as he
confessed) to direct him to betake himself to prayer; after which time, he
acknowledged that he understood more of the way of truth, both when he
conferred with the Primate, and when he meditated apart, than ever he could
attain to before; and the issue was, that he came into the Church unlooked for
of the Primate, and after Sermon, made a confession of his Faith, offering to
seal the truth of it (if they pleased to admit him) by receiving the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, which was then to be administered.

The Papists, especially the Priests were so enraged hereat, for losing such an
one of whom they conceived so great hopes, that they made much disturbance,
insomuch as the Gentleman, for safety, was sent over into England to Oxford,
that he might decline their fury; and the forces of the City were raised to
prevent the present danger: and the Lord Deputy hearing of it, sent a Troop of
Horse, and (as it was said) thereupon dissolved one of their Monasteries.
Another was this,

The Lady Falkland, about the time of the late Queens coming out of France to
be married to King Charles, turned Recusant, and on a time was gotten into the
company of Father Fisher, Father Sweet, and Father Swetnam in Drury Lane, and
by some means or other, Dr. Featly, and Mr. Gataker were procured to meet them
there; the Lord Savil, brother to this Lady, as he also was going that way,
accidentally met with Dr. Usher, and entreated him to go along with him to this
meeting; the Bishop consented, and by the way requested the Lord Savil at their
first entrance privately to give notice to his Sister, the Lady Falkland, that
she should take no notice of him, and says he, I will do the like to the
Ministers, and as for the Jesuits I believe, they know me not at all.

At their first entrance, His Disp^^^tions wit^ ^hree Jesus
they found them engaged about Image Worship; the Jesuits denied that they gave
them Divine worship; the Ministers were proving that they were no fit mediums
to worship God by. After they had tugged at it, and were wearied, and ready to
give over that Question, Bishop Usher said, But Gentlemen, pray you tell me, do
not you give them Divine worship? they answered no: How then (said he) will you
be tried? they answered, By the Council of Trent. Indeed (said the Bishop) that
Council does require the giving of worship to them, but who shall expound what
that honor, and worship is, and assure us that it is not Divine? Will you be
determined by Thomas Aquinas? they said, Yes. Then was the Book sent for, and
he turned presently to that place where he concludes, that the same reverence
is to be given to the Image of Christ, as to Christ himself, and by
consequence, seeing Christ is adored with the worship of Latria, his Image also
is to be adored with the same worship. Now (said the Bishop) have you any
higher worship than the Latria that you give to God? Upon this one of the
Jesuits whispered to the Lady Falkland to know his name that thus disputed? she
answered, that he was a Country Minister. No (quoth the Jesuit) there is more
in him than in both the other. Try him (said she) further.

That Question being laid aside, that of Free Will was taken up; the Bishop
sat silent as before whilst the state of the Question was canvassed between
the Ministers and Jesuits, and much ado there was about it, so that they had
like to have broken off, without coming to any issue; the Bishop seeing that,
said; Gentlemen, if you will give me leave I will bring you to the point in
difference presently by this similitude. If you make Free Will to be the Horse,
I will make Grace to be his Rider. Now true it is, my Horse can go of himself,
but he knows not whither I intend to go: Besides he is dull, and tired, and I
spur him on; my spur does not properly go, but it makes my Horse to go. You may
easily apply it: They are foiled.
But the Jesuits had enough, and listed not to encounter him any farther,
pretending a necessity to be gone, and so left the place; So mightily it
pleased God by him to convince them.

Another was this: Another Disputation.
A Protestant Knight in Ireland, had prevailed so far with his Lady, who was
then a Papist, as to admit of a Parley about their Religion, and she made
choice of one for her, that was called amongst them, the Rock of Learning. The
Knight made choice of this our Primate to encounter him, and upon the day
appointed many persons of note were there assembled; the learned, and prudent
Primate before the Disputation began, spoke thus to the Lady, Madam (said he)
let us know the end of our meeting. Is it that this Gentleman, and I should try
our strength before you? If so, then it is like that we can speak Languages,
and quote Authors which you do not understand, how then will you know who gets
the better? Therefore this is not our end: If this Gentleman desires to show
his learning and reading that way, if he please to come to the College of
Dublin, where there are men that will understand us both, and can judge between
us, I shall willingly deal with him at those weapons: but now our business is
something else: It is supposed that we two, whom your Husband and you have
chosen, can speak more for the defense of our Religion than you that chose us,
and your desire is to know, by hearing our discourse in your own Language, how
to rectify your judgments. Now therefore I will give you a rule, which if you
please to remember, you shall be able to discern which of us two have the truth
on our side, and it is this:

The Points we will discourse of shall be such, without some knowledge whereof
no man may in an ordinary way attain to the end of his Faith, the salvation of
his soul. In these you may easily lose your selves, not only by Heresy, which
is a flat denying of them, but by Ignorance also, by a bare not know of them.
The word of truth contained in the Scriptures, is the rule both of Faith and
Life, common to small and great, concerning these things: Now whilst we keep to
the true sense of the Scriptures in these points, you may understand us both;
but when we shall fly to subtle distinctions to evade plain Texts, or fly from
the Scriptures to take sanctuary in Authors which you know not, assure your
selves that we are at a loss, and seek victory rather than truth. Keep this
Rule, Madam, in you mind, for this Gentleman dares not deny it to be a true
one, and then you will be the better for our meeting. And now Sir (said he to
the Jesuit, her Champion) I am ready to engage with you in any such points.

The Dispute was begun, and after a short encounter, the Jesuit was driven to
those shifts; whereupon the Primate said, Madam, do you understand my Argument
that I propounded to this Gentleman? She answered, Yes, and do you (said he)
understand this Gentleman's answer? She answered, No indeed, It is too high for
me: But (said the Primate) I do, and can answer him in his own way, but then
you would not understand me neither: Therefore Sir (said he to the Jesuit) I
pray you help the Lady to understand your answer as she does my Argument, then
I will further reply. But it pleased God within a while, so to disable the
Jesuit from proceeding, that he left the place with shame; A special Providence.
and the Lady by this, and some further endeavors, became not only a good
Protestant, but a very gracious woman.

The last instance I shall give of the successfulness of his labors, The
success of his Ministry.
is this, About twelve or thirteen years ago we had an Ordination of Ministers
in our seventh Classis; at which time (according to our custom) we called in
the young men that were to be Ordained one after an other, and examining of
them about the work of Gods Grace in their hearts, three of them acknowledged
that they were converted by Gods blessing upon the labors of this our Lord
Primate, whilst he preached at Oxford, where they then were Students about the
beginning of the long Parliament.

Anno Christi 1640, A special^ ^vidence.
He came out of Ireland into England, being invited thereto by some eminent
persons, wherein the special providence of God did manifest it self for his
preservation, it being the year before the Rebellion brake out in Ireland; as
if (according to the Angels speech to Lot) nothing could be done there till he
was come hither, and escaped to this his Zoar.

His Library (which was very great) in the first year of the Rebellion, viz.
1641, was in Drogheda, which place was besieged four months by the Irish
Rebels, and they made no question of taking it, and some of their Priests and
Friars talked much what a prize they should gain by that Library; but the
barbarous multitude spoke of burning it: But it pleased God to hear the
Fastings, and Prayers of his people within, and in a wonderful manner to
deliver them, and so all his Books and Manuscripts were sent him that Summer to
Chester, and from thence were brought safe to London.

The sufferings he now lay under were many and great. His Suff^
All his personal estate was lost, and that which belonged to his Primacy in
Ireland was destroyed, only for the present he was preacher in Covent Garden.

Anno Christi 1641, The great business of the Earl of Strafford came in
agitation, upon which a scandal was raised of him, by a rash, if not a
malicious Pen in his Vocal Forest, A scandal clea^ed.
as if he had made use of a pretended distinction of a personal and Political
conscience to satisfy the late King that he might consent to the beheading of
the said Earl, telling him, that though the first resisted, yet he might do it
by the second; but to clear him of this, a person of quality affirmed under his
hand, that some years agone a rumor being spread of the death of this Reverend
Prelate (whose loss was much lamented at Oxford) when this concerning the Earl
was then by one objected against him, the late King answered that person in
very great passion, and with an oath Protested his innocence therein. Besides,
he left under his own hand a relation of that whole business, a true Copy
whereof follows.

That Sunday morning wherein the King consulted with the four Bishops, viz. of
London, Durham, Lincoln, and Carlisle) the Archbishop of Armagh was not
present, being then preaching, as he then accustomed to do, every Sabbath in
the Church of Covent Garden, where a message coming to him from his Majesty, he
descended from the Pulpit, and told the Messenger, that he was then, as he saw,
employed in Gods business, which as soon as he had done, he would attend upon
the King to understand his pleasure: But the King spending the whole afternoon
in the serious debate of the Lord Straffords Case with the Lords of his
Council, and the Judges of the Land, he could not before evening be admitted to
the Kings presence.

There the Question was again agitatated, Whether the King in justice might
pass the Bill of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford. For, that he might
show mercy to him was no Question at all, no man doubting, but that the King
without any scruple of conscience might have granted him a pardon, if other
reasons of State (in which the Bishops were made neither Judges nor Advisers)
did not hinder him. The whole result therefore of the Bishops determination,
was to this effect; That herein, the matter of Fact, and the matter of Law were
to be distinguished; that of the matter of Fact, he himself might make a
Judgment, having been present at all the proceedings against the said Lord;
where, if upon hearing all the allegations, on either side, he did not conceive
him guilty of the Crimes wherewith he was charged, he could not in justice
condemn him. But for the matter in Law, what was Treason, and what was not, he
was to rest in the opinion of the Judges, whose office it was to declare the
Law, and who were sworn, therein to carry themselves indifferently betwixt him
and his subjects, etc.

Upon his losses in Ireland, Offers (...) to him (...) abroad*
and the straits he was brought into here, two Offers were made unto him from
Foreign Nations; the one from Cardinal Ri^hlieu, only in relation to his
eminent learning, with a promise of large maintenance, and liberty to live
where he pleased in France amongst the Protestants. The other from the States
of Holland, who proffered him the place of being Honorarius Professor at
Leiden, which had an ample stipend belonging to it; but he refused both.

And now by reason of the disturbance of the times he was perpetually removing,
having with St. Paul, no certain dwelling place, and some of those evidences
mentioned by that great Doctor of the Gentiles to prove himself to be the
Minister of Christ, were applicable to him, 2 Cor. 6. 3, etc. In much patience,
in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in tumults, or tossings to and
fro; in labors, in watchings, and fastings. By honor and dishonor: by evil
report, and good report: as deceivers, and yet true: as unknown, and yet well
known: as dying, and behold we live: as chastened and not killed: as sorrowful,
and yet always rejoicing: as poor, yet making many rich: as having nothing,
and yet possessing all things, etc.

Anno Christi 1642, He goes to Oxford.
He obtained leave of both Houses of Parliament to go to Oxford for his study
in that Library. Anno Christi 1644, the late King coming thither, he preached
before him on the fifth of November. His Text was Nehem. 4. 11. And our
Adversaries said, they shall not know, neither see, till we come in the midst
amongst them, and stay them, and cause their work to cease. In his Sermon he
advised his hearers to put no repose in the Papists, who (says he) upon the
first opportunity will serve us here, as they have done the poor Protestants in
Ireland, which much offended some that were there present.

In March following he went from thence into Wales to Cardiff in
Glamorganshire, And into Wales.
where for a time, he abode with his Daughter: But Septem. 16. Anno Christi
1645, he removed from thence to St. Donnets (the Lady Stradlings) and by the
way meeting with some Soldiers, He is abused by Soldiers.
they used him barbarously, plucked him off his horse, and brake open two of
his Trunks full of Books, taking them all away: amongst these he lost two
Manuscripts of the History of the Waldenses, most of his Books he recovered
again; but these Manuscripts, though the meanliest clad, he could never hear
of, which gave suspicion that some Priest or Jesuit had lighted upon them. The
loss of them grieved him much, they being of use to him for the finishing of
that Book, De Ecclesiarum Christianarum successione, and statu.

Not long after he fell into a painful sickness, His Sickn^
wherein he bled four days together, so that he swoonded, and all hope of life
was past, and a rumor was spread abroad that he was dead, which occasioned
grief to many; and it was so far believed at Court, that a Letter came over for
a successor in his Primacy in Ireland: But it pleased God that he recovered,
and June 11, Anno Christi 1646, he came to London, where the Countess of
Peterborough gladly received him.

After a while he was chosen to be preacher to the Honorable Society of
Lincolns Inn, He is chos^ Lincolns (...)
where he continued diverse years with great honor, and respect from them, till
at the last, losing his sight, so that he could not read his Text, and his
strength decaying, he was advised by his friends to forbear, and to reserve
himself, and the remainder of his strength for the writing of Books, which were
yet expected from him. No spectacles could help his sight, only when the Sun
shone he could see at a window, which he hourly followed from room to room in
the house of his abode: In Winter the casement was often set open for him to
write at. This Summer he conceived would be the last, wherein he should make
use of his eyes; the Winter following he intended to have an Amanuensis to
write for him, and a competent salary was intended for him whom he should
choose to that work: But the Lord was pleased to prevent it by taking him to
the sight of himself.

After he had left Lincolns Inn, His last Sermon.
he was prevailed with to preach in several places, as in Graies Inn, Nov. 5.
Anno 1654, which he then thought might have been his last Sermon, and it was
taken as an honor by that Honorable Society, whereof he had been admitted a
member at a Reading above thirty years before: He preached also at the Temple
at Mr. Seldens Funeral, and at two other places in the City, both which the
Lord was pleased to make very effectual in the conversion of diverse that were
his hearers: And indeed seldom did the Sword drawn by him return empty. The
last Sermon which he preached was about Michelmas, Anno 1655, at Hammersmith.

He complained that he was much troubled, finding himself unable to continue
his Ministry; his thoughts were on it in the day, and his dreams in the night,
and though he had been a preacher about fifty and five years, and so, like the
Levites might well be excused from this service of the Sanctuary, and have
employed himself (as his manner was) in directing of others, yet he resolved,
if God continued his life the Summer following, to return to it again in some
small Church or Chapel.

He sought not great things for himself: In the time of his distress by reason
of his losses in Ireland, the Parliament for some years was bountiful to him;
but the two last years of their sitting, it fell out to be suspended. But after
they were dissolved, the care of him was renewed by the Lord Protector, by
whose Order a constant competent allowance was given him, which was continued
till his death, besides very considerable sums extraordinary.

All that knew him, His Cha^^
found him very communicative, not only of his studies for the advantage of
their minds, but of part of his stipend, for the relief of their bodies; and
indeed in works of charity he more needed a bridle, than a spur.

He was not so severe in his judgment about Episcopacy, He owns ^^ther Refo^
Churches*
as to disown other Reformed Churches, but declared that he loved and honored
them, as true members of the Church universal, and was ready for the Ministers
of Holland, France, and^. to testify his Communion with them.

He was a man of a most exemplary moderation, meekness, A Peace ^^ker.
humility, and ingenuity. Anno 1641, he drew up an Expedient to accommodate
some of our differences in Ecclesiastical Affairs, which some moderate men of
both parties were ready to subscribe. But in matters of Doctrine for the
substantials, it was often his charge, that Ministers should not preach any
thing, as to please men, but God, who has put them in trust, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
For such as seek to please men, His Zeal.
are not the servants of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. And in defense of those truths, no
man was more resolute and constant than he, not giving place by way of
subjection, no not for an hour, Gal. 2. 5. but in circumstantials, he thought
it to be our duty with St. Paul, to please all men, and not our in all such
things, 1 Cor. 10. 31. to edification and concord. He was in these things
always the same, holding fast the form of sound words in Doctrine and practice
to the last.

The night before he left London, His Humility.
Oh! the humble expressions he used of his own unworthiness, demeaning himself
as if he had been the least of Saints, which he uttered with many tears: He
wished those about him to prepare for afflictions and trials, which he was
persuaded, were not far from them. Having abode at London one and fifty days,
for so it was punctually noted by himself in a Book, it being his custom, with
David so to number his days, both for the place where, and the manner how he
spent them, he returned to Rygate, Feb. 13. 1655, to the Countess of
Peterboroughs.

March the 20 following, His last Sickness.
was the first day of his sickness, upon which day (as every day) he had been
well busied. Most part of it, as long as he had light, he had spent at his
study, proceeding in his Chronologia sacra, clearing all the doubts in his
Annals of the Bible, in which he had gone as far as to the Book of Judges,
where the last words he wrote were these, Hic praeterea notandum, but returned
not to make any further progress. From his study he went to visit a sick
Gentlewoman in that Family, and prescribed to her most excellent preparatives
for death, with other most holy advice in practical matters, in which he spent
three quarters of an hour, but in such an heavenly manner, as if, like Moses
upon Mount Nebo, his eyes had been strengthened to take a prospect of the
heavenly Canaan.

That night about eight a clock, he first complained of his hip, judging it to
be a spice of the Sciatica, which he had been troubled with about five and
thirty years before, contracted by sitting up late in the College Library at
Dublin; but by the application of an ointment, he was presently eased of that
pain, so that he took some rest that night. In the morning he complained of a
great pain in his side, whereupon a Physician was sent for, who used such means
as he judged fit for him; but the pain continuing, and his spirits decaying, he
wholly addicted himself to prayer, only upon the abating of the torment, he
advised those about him, in health to prepare for sickness, and death, that
then they might have nothing else to do but to dye; and after a short
settlement of the things of this world, he took great content in his
approaching death.

A Minister there present assisted him with his prayers, His Dea^
but afterward he desired to be left to his own private. The last words he was
heard to utter which was about one a clock in the afternoon, and a little
before his death) were these; praying for the forgiveness of his sins, he
added, But Lord in special forgive my sins of Omission: Herein he had his wish,
which he often used, that he might dye as holy Mr. Perkins did, which expired
with crying for mercy and forgiveness.

But did he pray for pardon of his sins of Omission? and yet he was a person
that was never known to omit an hour, but was always employed in his Masters
business, either in preaching, reading, writing, or hearing others (as of late)
to read to him; either resolving doubts, or exhorting, instructing, and
counselling such as came to visit him; yet did he dye with this humble
expression, Lord forgive my sins of Omission. A speech that may give us all
matter of solemn meditation, and imitation.

March the 21. Anno Christi 1655, this glorious Sun set, and from earth was
translated to Heaven, having been Primate of Ireland just one and thirty years,
and a Preacher five and fifty years, and having lived about seventy five years.
What he had to leave was only his Library, and diverse imperfect Copies of his
intended Works, which death prevented his finishing of.

The Lord Protector (as he was then called) gave him an honorable burial at
the public charge, His Funeral.
in the Chapel of Henry the seventh at Westminster, and extended to his, what
was before intended for himself in the grant of some of the Lands belonging to
the Primacy of Armagh for the term of one and twenty years.

He was highly admired, His learning admired.
and much honored by all the famous Lights of his time through the Christian
world. Spanhemius Divinity-Professor at Geneva, Anno Christi 1639, in his
Epistle Dedicatory to him, before his third Part Dubiorum Evangelicorum, spends
above two leaves in extolling him: Some of his expressions are; Your very great
parts, Most excellent Usher, are known, not only within your own Country, but
in ours, and wheresoever else there is honor given to Piety, or price set upon
learning, etc. He speaks much of his Charity to strangers, his Humility, Piety,
Works, his Library, of which he made such use for the public good, that it was
not so much his own as the Library of all learned men: In a word (says he) the
name of Usher with us is a name of Piety and Virtue, it is of great Renown at
our Geneva, etc.

Gerard Vossius frequently admires him as a man of vast learning, worthy of an
everlasting Monument. The high merits (says he) of this most excellent, and
throughout most learned man, both of the Church, and of the whole Commonwealth
of Learning, deserve an everlasting grateful memory: A man so excelling in the
knowledge both of Humane and Divine things, that I cannot speak any thing so
high of him, but his worth does surpass it.

Bochartus and Simplicius, call him frequently, Magnum Usherium, Usher the
Great.

Morus in his Oration at Geneva dedicated to him, styles him, The most
Excellent servant of God, The most Reverend man of God; the Athanasius of our
Age. Thy breast (says he) is a breathing Library: Thou art to Britain as
Austin was to Hippo: Farewell Britains great Honor.

Ludovicus de Dieu in his Animadversions on the Acts, dedicated to him,
entitles him, To the Excellent Prelate, worthy of an Eternal memory, etc.

Paulus Testardus Blesensis styles him, Seculi, and Ec^clesiae decus eximium,
the greatest honor of the Church and Age.

Arnoldus Bootius, says of him, That he did excel with a most singular
Judgment in the Oriental Languages, and in all other abstruse, and deep
learning: Venerable to all Europe, whose Authority prevails much with all men,
etc.

Mr. Seldom says of him, The most Reverend Prelate James Usher, a man of great
Piety, singular Judgment, learned to a Miracle, and born to promote the more
severe studies, etc.

Dr. Prideaux calls him, The most rich Magazine of solid Learning, and of all
Antiquity.

Dr. Davenant speaks thus of him, A man of singular Piety, abounding with all
manner of Learning.

Sir Roger Twisden acknowledging the assistance he had from him in his History,
says thus, This we owe to the most worthy Archbishop of Armagh, in whom, with
incredible learning, and rare knowledge of Antiquity, his most courteous
conversation, and wonderful sweetness, in instructing the unskilful, mixed with
a certain serious Episcopal gravity, were seen to strive one with the other,
etc.

There was an eminent Character given of him by a the whole University of
Oxford in the year 1644, His Character
by solemn Order in the Convocation, which was given in charge to sixteen
eminent persons, of whom seven were Doctors chosen with the Vice Chancellor and
Proctors, to see his Effigies cut, and an Elogium worthy of him, to be prefixed
to his Annotations on Ignatius his Epistles (there then in the Press) and at
the charges of the University, and in the public name of it. Indeed it was
omitted to that book, but was aftewards affixed to his Book De Symbolis; the
Elogium is this, James Usher Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of all Ireland, the
most skilful of Primitive Antiquity, the unanswerable Defender of the Orthodox
Religion, the Maul of Errors, in preaching frequent, eloquent, very powerful,
a rare example of an unblameable life.

Yea for his learning, His learning ^cknowledged ^y Papists.
his very Adversaries being Judges, those of the Church of Rome have
acknowledged. A certain Jesuit in a Book called Hyberniae Vindiciae, writing
against Dempster, a Scotchman, who had undervalued the Irish for learning,
after he had reckoned up many Learned men of his own, and other Orders of that
Nation, at length he adds this of our Primate, And if I should put in men of a
different Religion, I might truly say, Scotland never saw another Usher, whose
sublime wit, and most courteous behavior, I wish that unlucky education amongst
Sectaries had not been his stepmother. Diverse others of his Popish Adversaries
might be mentioned, but I forbear, and shall add only the Testimony of Dr.
William Chapel, sometime Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge, and
afterward Provost of Trinity College, Dublin, who was very judicious, and a
great learned man: He gave three reasons why he thought our Primate to be the
greatest Scholar in the Christian world.

1. Because of his rare natural parts, having a quick invention, a prompt wit,
a strong memory, a clear understanding, a piercing judgment, and a ready
utterance. Seldom (said he) do all these meet in an eminent degree in the same
person; but in him they so concurred, that it is hard to say in which of them
he most excelled.

2. Because few men had made so rich an improvement of these parts; nor indeed
had such means, by reason of the choice Libraries which he had the use of, viz.
his own, Dr. Challoners, the University Library at Dublin, which he had
frequent access unto, besides the University Libraries, and Sir Robert Cottons
in England He had also taken indefatigable pains in studying, and that for many
years together, which few other men's bodies and brains could bear.

3. Because in these, and in the Universities beyond the Seas, he was so
esteemed; and whosoever conversed with him, found him a skilful Linguist, a
subtle Disputant, a fluent Orator, a profound Divine, a great Antiquary, an
exact Chronologer; and in brief, a living, and walking Library: Insomuch that
the greatest Professors admired the concatenation of so much learning in one
person.

A Catalogue of the Books published by him.
De Ecclesiarum Christianarum successione and statu, in 4o. Epistolarum
Hybernicarum Syloge, in 4o. Historia Goteschalci, in 4o. De Primordiis
Ecclesiarum Britanicarum, in 4o. Ignatii Epistolae cum annotationibus, in 4o.
De Anno Solari, Macedonum, in 8o. Annals Veteris Testamenti in Fol. Annals
Novi Testamenti, etc. in Fol. Epistola ad Cappellum de variantibus textus
Hebraici lectionibus, in 4o. De Graeca Septuaginta Interpretum versione
Syntagma, in 4o. A Sermon before the House of Commons, Feb. 18. 1618. A
Declaration of the Visibility of the Church, in a Sermon before King James,
June 20. 1624. A Speech in the Castle in Dublin the 22 of Nov. 1622. An Answer
to Malon the Jesuit, in 4o. 1631. The Religion professed by the ancient Irish
and British, in 4o. 1631. Immannel, or The Incarnation of the Son of God, in
4o. 1639. A Geographical Description of the lesser Asia, in 4o. 1644.
Confessions and Proofs of Dr. Reynolds, and other Protestant Divines about
Episcopacy, in 4o. 1644. A Discourse of the Original of Bishops, and
Archbishops, in 4o. 1644. His small Catechism reviewed, in 12o. 1654. His Body
of Divinity, in part his, but published without his consent, in Fol. A Method
for Meditation, or a Direction for hearing the Word. Annals of the Old and New
Testament, with the Synchronismes of Heathen Story to the destruction of
Jerusalem, in Fol.
The Life and Death of Mr. Richard Capel, who dyed Anno Christi 1656.
Mr. Richard Capel was born in the City of Gloucester, His Birth, and ^arentage.
Anno Christi 1586; of good Parentage, descended from an ancient Family of the
Gentry of his own name, in Herefordshire, and of alliance to the Lord Capel,
(but he had learned with brave Philpot, to tread that under his feet.) His
Father was a stout man, and an Alderman of that City; a fast friend, first to
Mr. Thomas Prior, and afterward to Mr. John Workman, (having had a principal
hand in drawing of him thither) both of them men of great sufficiency for the
preaching of the Gospel, and instruments that the Lord made much use of, for
the advancement of the true saving knowledge of himself, and for the setting up
of the real, and substantial power of godliness in that City, during the time
that they exercised their M^nistry there. His elder Brother yet lives, and is
an Alderman in that place. His Education.


After he had been trained up at School, and well fitted for it, His Preferment
at Oxford
he was sent to the University of Oxford, where his diligence, and proficiency
was such, that he was chosen Fellow of Magdalen-Colledge, and had the breeding
up of some there, who afterward proved excellent, and eminent Scholars: as Dr.
Frewen, (who was always a thankful man to him for his education) and famous
Mr. Pemble, who ended his days at his house, His attendance at Count.
etc. His attendance at Court upon the chiefest favorite (in the days of that
learned King James) gave him opportunity of advancement, i^ his thoughts had
been bent that way: but he sought not great things for himself; yet continued
at Court till the death of Sr. Thomas Overbury, that learned Knight, and his
very good friend, and then he had adieu to that course of life.

As for his inward storms they were very many, His Tem^^^tions.
and exceeding bitter, (which also were accompanied with many bodily
infirmities, which attended him in his younger years) but it was well for him
that he bore the yoke in his youth: and there was none that knew so much of his
temptations and desertions, as that eminent, and learned Divine, Dr. Harris, by
reason of that intimate acquaintance he had with him in those days (being his
kinsman) which also was occ^sioned the more, by the often recourse he had then
into those parts, for the fetching of some spiriruall refreshing from that man
of God, Mr. John Dod, who was both able, and willing to speak a word in season
to a broken and co^rite heart.

For the eminency of h^s parts, His excel^ (...).
there were very few that could match him. The most, even of our most
high-flown Eagles, have commonly some peculiar gift wherein they most excel,
and by it ^o very good service to Christ, and his Church: but this man had
grasped all good learning, and made every thing his own so evenly to see to,
that he was very expert in the same, and would (with Cato the elder) be up in
the height, in all that ever he was to act in.

Melancthon used to say that Pomeranus was the Gramarian: that himself was the
Logician: that Justus Jonas was the Orator: but that Luther. was all in all:
here was one that was not inferior to Luther. If he pleased to turn to the
School, or to Case-Divinity: to Augustine, or Chrysostom: to Galen, or
Hippocrates: to Aristotle, or Tully: to History, or Philosophy: to Arts, or
Tongues: who could tell but himself, which of them he was best versed in? He
was a very living Library, a full storehouse of all kind of good literature, no
less than a little University, the mirror of those parts, and above the envy
of most. The least draught of his Pencil, would have told any Protogenes, he
had been the Apelles. He excelled in all that ever he would set his hand to,
unless it were in his utterance in the public Congregation, and therein indeed
he had a great defectiveness.

God (...) him great understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to
do. H^s knowledge of the times.
He stood upon the Watchtower, and saw what was hid from most men's eyes; and
being quick of sent, in the fear of the Lord, he gave timely notice to some
that stood in place: which had it been heeded, we had never been so fearfully
pestered with those Hydraes heads that are now starting up afresh daily to the
great disturbance of our people.

Simler said of Melancthon at his going from the University of Tubing, that
none of the learned men there, how many soever they were, had so much learning,
as to know the great learning that was in that man. Too too many amongst us
were even sick of the same disease, that knew not the depth that was in this
man's breast. A universal Scholar.
There were many men in this one man, even all Scholarship epitomized in this
profound Clerk: and yet for all this, he had that great blessing, which he
himself observed as a singular favor vouchsafed to Dr. John Reynolds, that
great Oracle of Oxford, that he never set on foot any manner of new opinion.

The like is observed of learned Dr. Whitaker, st^led the Oracle of Cambridge,
His-Modesty.
and the miracle of the world. A mercy that most men of superlative parts use
not to be too rich in. There is scarce any strong brain, without some strong
fancy. If the great wits of our times had kept themselves close to the steps of
these rare Divines, we had never seen the sorrows that we now sigh, and groan
under, and would be glad to be rid of if we knew how.

For the excellency of his preaching he excelled most men. Hi^ excellent
Preaching.
He was an In^erpreter one of a thousand. His understanding was strangely
opened, for the understanding and opening the Scriptures. He would bolt out
that out of the holy Book of God, that would not come into any other man's
consideration; yet it should be genuine, and evidently appearing to be the
dri^t, and meaning of the Holy Ghost.

An intelligent man could never sit at his feet, H^s communi^iveness.
or be in his company, but he should meet with that there that would never fall
from any other man's mouth, nor ever drop from any other man's Pen. His words
were as Goads, and as Nails fastened by the Master of the Assemblies. They were
edged with so much reason, re-enforced from the lively Oracles, that they could
not fall to the ground in vain. It Is no marvel therefore that the Cream of the
whole Country where he lived (as they could have opportunity) would hang upon
his Ministry.

Yet he used to be very plain in all his expressions. His plain preaching.
He would not deliver what he had from God in an unknown tongue, nor yet in
words, and phrases which were too sp^uce, and trim. He had learned his lesson
we^l of that great Apostle, and Doctor of the Gentiles, who came not with
enticing words: nor with any other, but such as the very Catechu^n^ni, the
youngest beginners might understand. He kept close to the footsteps of our
choicest Worthies: as famous Mr. Dod (who used to say, that so much Latin was
so much flesh in a Sermon) Mr. Cleaver, Mr. Hildersam, and such other holy men
of God, led by the self same Spirit. He would deliver the whole, and wholesome
truths of God, in such an holy, and wholesome way, that it bred very good blood
in the hearts of his hearers. He would stoop so low as to speak to the poor
Country people in their own proper dialect, so as they could not but even see,
and feel, and find out God, and be occasioned to speak of him all the week
after. If he met with a deep mystery, he would make it plain to the shallowest
capacity. Whatever Subject he sell upon, he would handle it so Divine-like,
that the hearts of his Auditors would be wrapped up into Heaven, whilst they
heard him winding, and turning a point of Divinity, like a workman that needed
not to be ashamed.

Whereas, now adays, whilst some of our great Divines, Note.
seem to be too much taken up with quaint, and Historical flourishes, there is
a sensible decay of the power of God amongst us. An Exotic, or strange tongue
in the public Congregation (whatever men think of it) is set out as a sign of
Gods displeasure, 1 Cor. 14. 21, 22. It feeds such humors as should rather be
purged out. It had no good effect in the Church of Corinth. Men's wits will wax
wanton, when they be not overawed by the plain power of Gods Word. When
Preachers keep not close to the very words of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6.
3. and to the Doctrine that is according to godliness: but love to be tampering
with another Doctrine, though not with another in the main; but even in the
manner of delivery only, (as when it savours too much of the pomp of humane
eloquence (says Calvin) when it differs from the style of the Holy Ghost,
(says Danaeus) the people be in danger of turning aside to vain jangling, to
perverse disputings, desiring to be teachers, and such like matters. The Gold
upon the Pill may please the eye; but it profits not the patient. The Paint
upon the Glass may feed the fancy; but the room is the darker for it. The Sword
of Gods Spirit can never wound so deep, as when it is plucked out of these gaudy
Scabbards. Nakedness deforms too too many in these days; but it is the best
garnishing, and Ornament the truth can have. A sober dress best becomes a grave
Matron. There be words as well as things which the Holy Ghost teaches, 1 Cor.
2. 13. The Arrows fetched out of Gods own Quiver will pierce the deepest, and
make the people fall the soonest under Christ. The weakness of God is stronger
than men. Paul's weapons were mighty. The sincere milk of Gods Word will make
Christ's Babes to grow best.

This curious age is too too much given to the affectation of words, and
phrases, and cadencies: and holy Dr. Sibs was wont to say, that great
affectation, and good affections seldom go together. The swelling words of
vanity may tickle the ear, tip the tongue, and please in matters of discourse:
but when it comes to push of Pike, they afford but little comfort. Mr. Capel
had another manner of wisdom than that of words. He was an able Minister of
the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the Spirit, that has given, does
give, and will give life, 2 Cor. 3. 6. Having this hope then, he used great
plainness of speech: and by the manifestation of the truth, he commended
himself to every man's conscience in the sight of God, and thereby has so well
seasoned the Country where he lived, that the fruit of it (without doubt) will
remain, and be seen many years after.

His Prayers were lively, and fervent. He was a man that had a very large
measure of that Spirit of grace, His ^ervent Prayers.
which is a Spirit of Supplication. He was so well fitted with abilities to
open his mind to God, as if (with blessed Bradford) he had been almost ever
upon his knees. He could tell his own errand, or any other man's, at the Throne
of grace, with as good freedom, and to as good purpose, as any man living. He
would not be rash with his mouth when he came before God, nor set out what he
had to say there, with painted eloquence, or Court-like complement: but his
mouth used to be filled with such savoury Arguments, as very well became an
humble Suppliant. He was far from those battologies, and miserable
extravagancies, that too many prayers are stuffed with. He would pour out his
soul to God at all manner of times, upon all manner of occasions, with all
manner of Prayer, and Supplication, and with that admirable variety of all
sorts of quickening and feeling meditations, that it would even ravish the
hearts of those who had the happiness to be partakers with him therein.

Yet for all this, Set forms of Prayer lawful
he was clear in his opinion for the lawfulness of the use of set Forms of
Prayer, according to the tenet of all our best, and most judicious Divines, and
according to the practice of all Churches, even the best reformed, says Mr.
Rogers, now, and in all former ages. So says Mr. Hildersam: yea, and Mr. Smith
himself says upon the Lords Prayer (though as then he was warping, and
afterward wandered far in the ways of Separation) that it was the practice of
the ancient Church, and of all the Reformed Churches in Christendom: of the
Churches immediately after the Apostles; nay (says he) of the Church in the
time of the Apostles, as may probably be gathered out of 1 Cor. 14. 26. This
has also been the practice of the best lights that ever were set up in the
Churches of Christ. It is very well known that the flower of our own Divines
went on in this way, when they might have done otherwise if they had pleased,
in their Prayers before their Sermons. Nay, Mr. Dod himself would seldom end
his devotions in his own Family but with the use of the Lords Prayer. Nay yet
more, Mr. Cartwright (Hist. Christ. p. 3. p. 535.) thinks it very probable that
Christ his own self made use of a set Form at meals.

It is not good to cast stones of offense in the way of our weak Brethren, who
being of meaner parts, want ability, memory, and audacity to conceive Prayer,
especially before others, that they be not taken off from, nor disheartened in
this so comfortable, and necessary a service of God: nor may we lay a trap, or
snare for our own feet. Who knows what times may pass over him? If God should
plunge us into the Ditch, and leave us laboring in the noose, the loftiest of
us all may be faign to take relief from, and to make use of these poor
contemptible props, and crutches (as some deem, and call them) When the soul is
so troubled that it cannot speak; but Chatter only, like a Crane, and Swallow,
Psalm. 77. 4. When it is so full of grief that it can do no more than sigh, and
groan, and make a confused noise, as Psalm. 55. 2. it will then be glad to catch
at any thing to give it self vent by. Dr. Harris tells us of a second Bradford,
that in time of his distress, was fain to adopt Mr. Bradfords words, and to
spread them before God as his own, because he had said more for him (as he
thought) than he could say for himself. I knew (says mine Author) a rare, and
eminent Divine indeed, that would be as often upon his knees as any man that
ever I conversed with, that would sometimes be in such damps, that had no more
to set before God to give his heart ease by, than the words of David in the one
and fiftieth Psalm. Well might then this knowing Divine of ours, that had been
so tossed with tempests, be tender of that, that might be so useful for poor
trembling hearts in a stormy day.

Get to God therefore as thou can. Sad judgments be upon our people.
Spiritual judgments are the forest judgments. What if thou have but the same
words? as Christ, Mat. 26. 44. thou may be heard as he was, Heb. 10. 11. The
song of Moses was a new Song, because tendered to God with new affections, Rev.
14. 3. and 15. 3. What if thy petitions be broken, and confused? as Exodus 14.
10, 11, 12. This poor man cried, says David, Psalm. 34. 6. when he was in a
poor case indeed, like a Bedlam, 1 Samuel 21. 13. and yet he was heard.

The little lisping children have sometimes a grant of their requests, when
those that are of greater maturity seem to be set aside. Whilst Moses held up
his hands (though in a poor way) Israel prevailed. Who can tell what God may
do? Abraham left asking, ere God left granting, even for a filthy Sodom.
Remember Mr. Latimers, once again, once again: Tug, and wrestle. We may come
to see, and our people may be made to know, that their heart is turned back
again to the God of their Fathers, 1 King. 18. 37. But to return to Master
Capel.

He was of a sound, and settled judgment. He pitched at first upon a good
foundation, His sound judgment.
and being nourished up in the words of Faith, he continued in the things he
had learned, and been well assured of, knowing from whom he had received them,
as 1 Timothy 4. 6. He was well grounded in his opinion: one that stood like a
brazen wall, as firm as a very Rock in the midst of all the dashings and
clashings of tempestuous times. He saw with a clear eye through all the painted
glosses of those that were given to change; and therefore was not moved at all
with any thing that was said or done in that kind; he was true to his
Religion, and clave close all along to his first principles, His constancy
holding fast the Faith that was once, and (as he himself would often express
it) but once delivered to the Saints. He lived and dyed a true Orthodox Divine,
according to the known Doctrine of the Church of England. He knew full well,
for all the great talk of the Gospel, as though it were but newly dropped out of
the clouds, that there is not any other Gospel, but the everlasting Gospel,
Rev. 14. 8. that was preached before unto Abraham, Gal. 3. 8. and has been
entertained all along still by Gods faithful people, and shall be so
continually to the end of the world. Yet some there be that are no mean
pretenders to the Gospel, and notwithstanding the same, are in great danger of
perverting the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as Gal. 1. 7.

This constant, and stable man was set up as a sure Sea-mark. Let us stand to
his steps though we stand alone. God and a good conscience are always good
company. Elijah was but one, yet did he very good service. One Athansius in the
East, one Hillary in the West, was of mighty great use in a staggering time.
What if we meet with storms. It is but a poor Religion that is not worth
suffering for. It will turn to a Testimony, Luke 21. 13. When the wild humor
is spent, men will return home again. A Statue of Mercury will be looked upon
then. Those poor silly souls that be tossed to and fro, and whirled about, and
about again with every wind of Doctrine, The danger of inconstancy in Religion.
Ephesians. 4. 14. will be glad of such a sight in the day of their visitation;
whereas they which know, or should know more of God, be not steady in their
steering, but vary in their course, poor bewildred hearts will be at their wits
ends, not knowing which way to turn, nor to whom to go, nor whom to walk after.

As there is but one God, so there is but one Faith, and one Baptism, and one
way to eternal life, and one Rule for us all to walk by, why be we not then all
of one heart? why walk we not all in one tract? So many men as we see, so many
minds there be. Every month almost produces a new Faith. It is easy to swim
with the Tide: To persuade the heart of the rectitude of that that is favored
by the times, and yet to pretend still that it is from more light. We may talk
of the Spirit, but its certain that Schism is a fruit of the Flesh. The old
way is the good way, Jer. 18. 15. He shall stumble, and ensnare his feet that
swerves from the ancient paths. What is got by gadding? Men itch for change
still, and there is no rest but with our first Husband, Hos. 2. 7. It is good
to be all of one mind in God. Where there is not unity in Judgment, there is
scarce unity in affections. We are too fierce against such as close not with
our Notions. It was Bell, Book, and Candle once: It is not much better now.
Wild fire flies amain: We cannot all cut to a thread; there will be some
variation in the Compass: But whilst we aim at the white, the odds is to be
passed by without bitterness. Why should there be such huge Rents and Divisions
in the Church? Where is our mutual forbearance? We have not yet learned our
Lesson well, to wait one for another till God shall reveal it, Phil. 3. 15.
Whilst we be so sharp in our contests, Satan makes his Markets: Religion goes
to wrack; our differences are widened. Some are ready to give up all, seeing
there is no better Harmony: Others could well wish themselves out of the world,
that they might be delivered (as Melancthon said) from the implacable
difference, even amongst some Divines. Oh! that we could hearken unto God, who
would have the truth followed, but in love, Ephesians. 4. 15. If the Word will not
prevail, the Cross will come, and make a Hooper, and a Ridley embrace one
another.

Let us fall upon that one, How to be constant therein.
and only solid way of God, it will ever be our glory. Get we to God, he can
stablish our unresolved hearts, 2 Cor. 1. 21. See that the judgment be so
rightly set, Isa. 33. 6. and the heart so firmly knit to God, and his Truth,
and then we shall not waver. Tamper not with opinions, 2 Pet. 3. 17. nor with
opiniative men, 1 Timothy 6. Romans 16. 17, 18. Nor yet with Books that scatter
Tares. This grave, and prudent Divine gives a very good caution to this purpose
in his Treatise of Temptations, from famous Mr. Dod, a man of vast experience.
An honest heart may be sorely puzzled with a forked Argument. The Martyr could
dye for Christ, that could not dispute for him. Some pretend that they must try
all things: But they speak besides the Book. Who will try Ratsbane, or a sharp
Sword whether it will pierce into his bowels? Some think that they can withdraw
when they see danger; but Satan is subtle: Venom will get ^n before we be
aware, and error will stick, and eat like a Gangrene. What gets the Fly that
plays with the Candle? They that nibble at the bait, shall hardly escape the
hook. Again, gingle not with terms that be improper in matters of Religion;
they savor of singularity, breed rents and divisions between Preachers and
people, and take off the mind from things more essential. Learned men have
observed, that Heretics gat great advantage by the unwary speeches of the
Fathers. Some of Calvin's expressions that were not so well pondered, have done
no great good to some in our times. Nestorius fell into his Heresy by
defending an improper speech of his; and Eutyches thinking to mend it, fell
into the other extreme. Dr. Thomas Tailor speaks much to this point to very
good purpose in his Progress to Holiness, p. 134, 135, 154. and concludes, that
if we will keep the faith of our Fathers, we must keep the words of our Fathers.

Our Mr. Capel was a man of a single heart: His single-heartedness.
He was (with Jacob, Genesis 25. 27.) a plain man, i. e. A downright honest man,
as the Original signifies. A very Nathaniel, an Isralite indeed, Joh. 1. 47. in
whom, though there was some infirmity, yet there was no guile. He had much of
the wisdom that is from above, and was as far from Hypocrisy as most men
living. If all others were of his temper, Momus had no need to complain of the
want of a window into any man's breast. He was what he was indeed, and in truth,
without dissimulation: He was very high in his conformity to those Primitive
Christians, Act. 2. 46. and left a brave President to all that would be what
they should be in this particular.

We of this doubting and deceitful Generation had need to look about us,
Hypocrisy complained of
and see what was here set before us in very legible Characters, that we may
learn to be more above board in our dealings. We are fallen into an age, like
that of the Prophets, wherein every one has too much of the Hypocrite. We may
well cry, Help Lord, for the faithful fail: with a double Heart and double
tongue do they speak. The most be for all Tides and Times, as mutable as the
Weathercock: For any manner of Mode, so as they can serve their own turns by
it. Some can be any thing but what they should be. We have need to beware of
men where every brother will supplant. The Hypocrite with his mouth destroys
his Neighbor, Prove. 11. 9. It is indeed good to be wise as Serpents, but
withal we should be innocent as Doves. Though it be just with God that the
deceiver shall be deceived, and some like it well, yet is it not just in those
that do it. They that turn aside to crooked ways, shall be led forth with the
workers of iniquity, Psalm. 125. 5.

Plain dealing is a Jewel, yea though it be in sin, as this acute man tells us,
in his ^entat. Part. 3. Its a dainty fine thing in our confessions, repentance,
and in all wherein we act. He that uses it (what ever men say or think) shall
neither live, nor dye a beggar. Downright honesty is the best policy. It is
delightful to God, Prove. 12. 22. and it will be a comfort to us, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
This is our rejoicing, and we never eat ^ur meat with more gladness, than when
we do all with singleness of heart, Act. 2. 46.

Mr. Capel was a very useful man in his life. He was (with Melancthon) born for
the common good, His Usefulness
and lived for the public benefit of the whole Country.

Whilst he was at his Pastoral charge, he gave himself fully, and wholly to
Reading, to Exhortation, and Doctrine; and his profiting appeared unto all men:
so that he was generally, and that justly reputed a man approved of God, His
frequent preaching.
rightly dividing the word of truth: It is well known what pains he took, and
to how good purpose, during the whole time of his abode there, which was about
one and twenty years. He preached constantly twice every Lords day; and besides
preached a Lecture constantly every week, though he had but an infirm body,
till by reason of sickness he was taken off: And then besides his Sabbath-dayes
work, he preached only upon the Festival days. His lips were touched with a
coal from the Altar. It may truly be said of him, as it was of Musculus, that
his words pierced like a two-edged sword. He could when he pleased be a
Boanerges, a son of Thunder; but his bent was most to be a Barnabas, a son of
Consolation. He was a true Evangelical Preacher, and comforted many a drooping
heart by his labors in public, and gave abundance of satisfaction in private
to many troubled spirits that used to resort to him out of all Countries, both
far and near.

He also showed himself to be a Tree of Gods own planting, He leaves the
Min^stry
by bringing forth more fruit still in his age. When the times were such (some
flying so extremely high, the Ceremonies being pressed with rigor, and
grievous penalties inflicted) that he (being tender in matters of Conformity)
must needs quit his Pastoral charge, at Pit^^combe.
which was Novem. 27. 1634, he betook himself then to his little Cell (as
Samuel did to his Ramah) that had never been looked upon if he had not come
thither (no more than Islebium, and Bretta, if not for Luther and Melancthon)
and there he had more health and cheerfulness of spirit than formerly, which he
improved well for the public advantage: For,

There he fell upon the Practice of Physic. He practices Physic.
He indeed had bent his studies that way before hand (foreseeing what would
follow) yet would he do nothing in that kind (it not being his Calling) so
long as that great work of the Ministry lay upon him: But when he had quit the
more special tie of the care of men's souls, he then took himself to be at more
freedom, and having a License sent him by the Bishop of Gloucester to
authorize him, he fell upon the cure of men's bodies; and being of great
sufficiency, his fame was quickly spread abroad. He was looked upon as a very
Trismegistus, or a second Aesculapius* He could do much at the diving into a
disease, and in applying such medicines as were proper and fit. Not like some
that will be tampering with that Profession, and give their doses at adventure.
He was quick, yet in cases of difficulty and danger he would weigh things well.
In desperate diseases he would adventure far, according to the rules of Reason,
what he gave should be safe. He mixed all with his own hands, he would stoop to
the meanest, and serve all at an easy rate. His Receipts amounted not to the
half, nay not to one quarter of a common Apothecaries Bill. He was blessed by
God with great, and good success, and had resort, especially toward his latter
end, out of his own, and other Countries, so that he had not leisure to sit at
his own meals in quiet. Yea many times he was quite tired out till God called
him to rest.

His words were seasonable and savoury: His fruitful discourses.
His tongue was a Tree of life: His lips fed many. Whosoever came near him,
should have something dropping (if he did but heed it) that was worth carrying
away with him. It is true, he would be pleasant, and jest more freely than many
did, or could well like. (Some of his best friends wished that it had been
otherwise) but there will be something of humane infirmity cleaving to us all
in this world. Yet the times are to be considered, and the nature of a many
with whom he had to deal, that could no more away with a downright blow, than
some can away with sound Doctrine. Yet there was never a prudent heart but it
might have picked sweet out of that which some did most of all distasie. It is
said, that Erasmus did more hurt to the Pope by his jesting, than Luther did by
his ruffling: So this man gave a deadlier blow to the iniquity of the times in
his jocular way, than most others can do in their most serious undertakings;
yet would he be as serious as any man living upon a just and fit occasion, and
would be as tender to trouble the spirits of the meanest as heart could desire.
Urbanus Regius having had one days discourse with Luther, said, that it was
one of the sweetest days that ever he had in his life: Some can say as much of
this rare man, when they had him (as all might have had him) in the right veyn.

He was singular in that faithful advice and counsel which he used to give to
all of all sorts upon every emergent occasion. An excellent Counselor.
It was said in old time, They shall ask counsel of Abel, 2 Samuel 20. 18. and so
they ended their matters. The common conflux of almost all in those parts, was
still to his house. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, Prove. 27. 9. so did
the sweetness of this man by his hearty counsel. To some he was as another
Nestor; others found him ever a most faithful Achates, and such made him (as
Tully did his Atticus) their constant Assylum, and his dexterous counsel (like
Ariadnes thread) led them out of many a perplexed Labyrinth. He was (as that
famous Augur in Homer) one that could see things past, and present, and guess
shrewdly also at those that were to come. Oldmens counsels (they say) are young
men's lances: Mr. Calvin's were very profitable, so were Mr. Capels: Many a young
beginner, and tired conflicter, did fetch all their best weapons out of this
man's Armory.

He preached the Gospel freely for the most part of his last twenty years. He
preached freely.
Freely he had received, and freely he would give. Not that he thought it
unlawful for a Minister to take maintenance, or to take that maintenance by
Tithes, which has been publicly set aside in this Land; for his Tithes he
paid himself, and that freely and duly too (all the whole time of his preaching
thus freely) and that to one who did not much in the work of the Ministry; and
he did it upon this ground, because he knew it to be his due. I will not
dispute this point at this time with those that be hampered in their opinions,
but heartily wish them, with all those that in these times are such enemies to
Tithes, and are so extremely defective in making conscience to pay them, to
consider what has fallen from the Pens of holy men that have been far enough off
from being this way interessed. Tithes asserted
Mr. Cartwright says plainly, that they that take away the Tithes of the
Ministers, and turn them to their own use, would doubtless crucify Christ
again if he were here upon earth. Beza speaks of some that leave Christ, as the
Soldiers did, which crucified him either stark naked, or but sorrily clad; and
so to do (says he) is not to love God, but the goods of God more than God. Dr.
John Reynolds says, Our Ancestors provided houses, Glebe-lands, Tithes, and
other profits for the maintenance of Pastors; and a little after he says, The
Churches Goods allotted to the maintenance of Pastors and Teachers, are not
profane, but sacred; and therefore the sin of them that purloyn them, is
Sacrilege, not Theft, wherein God is spoiled, Prove. 20. 25. It is a snare to
devour that which is holy, and after the vows to enquire. Ananias and Saphira
were made a dreadful spectacle, for filching of a little of that that was set
apart for God. The Eagle fired her whole Nest by one poor piece of flesh
plucked from the Altar. The people of this Land are cursed with a Curse, and
they will not see the cause of it, viz. Their robbing of God, Mal. 3. 8, 9. in
Tithes and Offerings. When shall we prove God, and see if he will not pour us
out a blessing, as he has promised, Mal. 3. 10. It would be a great joy to
some that will get nothing by it, to hear Gods Israel once again tuning it out
before the Lord, as Deuteronomy. 26. 13, 14. I have brought away the hallowed things
out of mine house, I have not taken away ought thereof, for any unclean or
common use, as Junius reads it. For then they might say with heart and hope,
Lord look down from thy holy habitation, and bless thy people, and the Land
that thou have given us, as Deuteronomy. 26, 15.

The practice of this judicious man will sway with some, who was such a burning
and shining light, the more to be admired that it blazed so long, and so
clearly too, without any of this sublunary Oil. His mind was so fully satisfied
with his small gain in the practice of Physic, together with what he had of
his own temporal estate, that he would accept of nothing for his preaching of
any man living, though tendered, and never so much pressed upon him. He took not
himself bound (as the case stood) to labor in the work of the Ministry, there
being another Incumbent in that place. What he did was merely in love to God
and men's souls. Indeed he met with many diversions, as the tempests of the
times; his own domestic troubles, age creeping on, store of sick and sad
people, and recourse of all sorts, so that he had scare an hour free for study;
yet nothing would take him off from this employment, till God took him off from
all his labors.

As he preached, His holy life.
so he lived down the iniquities of the times. He did not only cry them down
by his public Ministry, but gave them a more deadly blow by his contrary
walking. Noah condemned the world more by what he did, than by what he said,
H^b. ^1 7. The way which Mr. Capel took, put some to a stand, caused others to
relent, and repent, and encouraged others in the good and right way, whilst
they had his pattern that could not be contradicted. Now that he is gone, such
have a harder task; but God will carry on his own work.

He was eminent for Self-denial: His Self-denial.
Indeed Self-denial is in every man's mouth, but hardly to be found in any man's
practice. Self has ever been, is, and will be the great Diana, notwithstanding
all men's fair pretenses. We read of him that could give smoothe and golden
words, Ruth 4, 4. 6. but when it came to the point, he would not mar his
Inheritance. Self has too great a stroke in the best of us all, both Preachers
and Professors, both in Church and Commonwealth. It began to work betimes. St.
Paul tells us in his days, that all sought their own things, Phil. 2. 21. and
it is now grown to a greater head in our age, when we neither eat, nor drink,
nor fast, nor pray, nor, do any thing to speak of, but too too apparently we
seek our selves therein. How much then was this brave man to be admired, seeing
all that knew him, can bear him witness, how far he excelled in this rare
Grace! he could deny himself in his own understanding, and go after God in a
way that he knew not, as Abraham, Heb. 11. 8. he could deny himself in his own
will, when he that is above would lead him in a way that he would not, as Joh.
2^. 18. He could deny himself in his own affections also, when he came to be
crossed in what he could have most desired, ever ruling them by reason, and
Religion, as a wise man should do, subjecting himself to bear with quietness
what could not be holp, without raising too much dust. It is strange to see how
far he could deny himself in apparel, diet, attendance, and what not!

He was very exemplary for his contempt of the world. His contempt of the world.
He had gotten the start of most men in that particular. He used to be beating
upon this point mainly, both in his public preaching, and in his private
conference, and showed the reality of what he pressed when he came to act
himself. Indeed he could not say as Luther did, that he never had been tempted
unto covetousness, but he kept himself from any noted taint in that kind; nay
from the least suspicion of that foul crime, with famous Dr. Whitaker. When he
had things under his hand, he still charged his servants to do what few men
practice, that they should never set up Corn, nor bring home Cattle, but take
as the Market would afford. All that knew him knew that he was far enough from
increasing his estate by any indirect means; and never was there any man more
willing to part with money upon a just and fit occasion. It is well known that
he gave over a Living of good value, one of the best in those parts above
twenty years before his death, and betook himself to a poor little corner, from
which he would never be withdrawn, no more than Musculus from his Berne. And
even there he might have picked men's purses if he had been that way given: But
many, and many a time he put back money, and took but a small matter from those
that were able, and would have been willing to have given him more; they sought
to force him to take it, but he would utterly refuse it.

He was no less exemplary fo his great humility. His Humility.
This was the Grace that graced all the good that was in him. He would be often
speaking of what he had heard concerning Dr. John Rainolds, that he was as
learned a man as any was in the world, as godly as learned, and as humble as
godly. Mr. Capel loved, and reverenced this Doctor, and trod in his steps. He
could speak with Tongues more than most men, yet would he never make use of
them in the public Congregation. He used to honor all men; to acknowledge the
gifts, and parts of those that were far below him, and to rejoice in them, as
Hooper did in the blind Boy. He would not meddle in things that were too high
for him, nor entrench upon that that was beyond his sphere. He would not stand
in the place of great men. He could refuse honors, as Musculus did, and
contented himself with plain; and mean things. Its observed by Cajetan, the
Flower of the Cardinals, that he would never be in his silks and braveries, but
kept his old fashions to his lives end. Melancthon would not disdain to do
that, which his meanest servant would scarcely have put his hand to. So was it
with Mr. Capel, and he would bear things that went awry without distempering
himself about them. His Moderation.
Moderation he pressed, and moderation he practiced. Staupicius told Luther
concerning his behavior, that in the first three years, he did all things
according to the utmost rigor, and that would not do: In the next three years
he did all according to the Laws and Counsels of the Ancients, and that would
not hit: And in the last three years, he did all according to the will of God,
and yet neither would that succeed; and then he was fain to be content with
what he could have.

Thus you have a taste, and but a little taste (in this that has been said) of
the precious Liquor that was powered into this earthen vesssel. To which might
be added the quickness of his apprehension, the strength of his Memory, his
sense of the public evils, his passing by of wrongs and offenses; his special
regard to such as loved their Wives and Ministers, and the like: but where
should I make an end? These, and his other eminent parts, virtues, and graces
deserve to be laid in oyl-colours by the most skilful Pencil.

Toward his latter end he met with some pinching griefs, His Patience.
which he did bear with invincible patience, and fortitude: He willingly
submitted, because it was Gods will to have him so exercised. All of us must
expect to drink of the self-same cup: our last days usually are our worst
days, as Moll^rus observes; the clouds will then be returning after the rain.
We must be taught to know, and speak it out, that we are but Pilgrims: we must
be more truly and thoroughly taken off from the world; more ripened, and
mellowed, and seasoned for God, and be made more serious in all our
undertakings. Melancthon used to say, That if he had no cares, he should have
no Prayers. Our comfort is, our time is but short; the most and best of our
treasure is gone before: Our hope is laid up in Heaven. Get we more communion
with God, more faith, more patience, and let us put on the whole Armor of God,
and then we shall be able to stand, and to withstand in the evil day, and in
the end shall be more than Conquerours through him that has loved us.

This clear-sighted, and understanding man foresaw storms approaching, and
rejoiced that he should be in his grave before they sell, whither also he came
as a shock of Corn gathered into the Barn in due season. The Sabbath day was
the last day of his life, the strict observation whereof he often pressed? He
would say that we should go to sleep that night (as it were) with meat in our
mouths.

That Sabbath day being September the 21. 1656, His Death.
he preached twice, taking his leave of the world by pressing faith in God.
That evening he repeated both his Sermons in his Family, somewhat more largely
than ordinary. He read his Chapter also, went to prayer, and so to bed, and
dyed immediately, by that the words were well out of his mouth, being
threescore and ten years old. Who can desire to dye better than Stephen did,
calling upon God: He would often say, That if God saw it fit, one had better to
dye of a quick, than of a lingering Death: And God answered his desires.

His Works.
A Treatise of Temptations. Capels Remains.
The Life and Death of Dr. Robert Harris, who dyed Anno Christi 1658.
Robert Harris was born in a dark time, His Birth.
and place at Broad-Campden in Glocestershire Anno Christi 1578. His Father had
the repute of a very wise, and understanding man, and his Mother of a very
devout, and charitable woman, under whose wings he spent his childhood: but he
acknowledged it as a matter of grief to him all his life, that he preferred his
play before reading the Scriptures to his parents at their call. So soon as he
was fit for it, he was set to a Free School at Chipping-Cambden, where he met
with a double discouragement; the first was from the often change of his
Schoolmasters by reason of the small salary that came to them: The second
proceeded from the fierce and cruel carriage of others, which (as he used often
to say) was the bane of many young Scholars; and though for his own part, he
remembered not that he had smarted under a Rod in any School, yet the sight of
the severity used to others, brought such a trembling and sadness upon his
spirit, that he could not shake it off to his dying day.

From thence he was removed to the School at Worcester, His going to ^xford.
under the care of Mr. Bright, and on the Sabbaths he heard that Reverend and
Learned Dr. Robet Abbots; and being furnished with School-learning, he went
from thence to Magdalen-Hall in Oxford, being allied to the Principal, Mr.
Lyster.

There he showed a more than ordinary desire of Learning, and having but little
help either from the Principal, or his Tutor, he followed his private studies
with the more earnestness; yet all this while he enquired little into the ways
and truths of God.

His Tutor not long after leaving the Hall, he earnestly solicited the
Principal, that he might be committed to the care of one Mr. Goffe of Magdalen
College, who was noted for a very good Logician and Disputant, but withal he
was accounted a Puritan, which made the Principal (who was Popishly affected)
to dissuade his choice; but he (not out of love to Religion, but Learning)
persisted in his desires, and prevailed.

Mr. Goffe having thus received him into his charge, required him, that with
the rest of his fellow-Pupils, he should join in reading the Scriptures,
Repetition of Sermons and Prayer; which new course, he being unaccustomed to,
was somewhat troubled at it, observing that none of the Seniors embraced that
way, and yet it was such as he knew not how to contradict. This caused him often
to betake himself to his private Prayers, wherein he begged of God, either to
discover to him the falsehood, if his Tutor had any design upon him to corrupt
him, His Convers
or if this course were pleasing to God, that then he would confirm him in it;
and it pleased God after a while so to resolve him, that he bought a Bible, and
with indefatigable pains he applied himself to the reading of that, and other
good Authors in Divinity.

Shortly after Mr. Goffe refuses to continue his Tutor, only agrees that they
would conjoyn their studies together, Mr. Goffe reading Philosophy to Mr.
Harris, and Mr. Harris reading Greek to him, and from Greek they proceeded to
Hebrew, in which study some other of the Fellows joined with them, whereof one
afterward was President; and besides these studies, his Tutor and he agreed to
read Calvin's Institutions by turns, which course they continued as long as
their other occasions, and exercises would permit.

Having for a while been Bachelor of Arts, he was willing to try his fitness
for the Ministry, because otherwise his Father would have him to the study of
the Law; and having prepared a Sermon, he proffered his pains at
Chipping-Cambden; Woeful ignorance.
but such was the woeful ignorance of those times, that in the greater Town he
knew not where to procure a Bible to carry with him into the Pulpit; yet at
last being directed to the Vicar there, he indeed had a Bible, but it could not
be ^ound, having not been seen of some months before; yet search being made he
was furnished with a Bible, and after Prayer made, he took for his Text those
words, Romans 10. 1. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is
that they might be saved; His first Sermon.
and his Sermon was highly commended, and yet himself would say, that he was a
loser by the bargain. 1* Because his heart swelled upon it. 2. Because his
carnal Friends hereupon called on him to give over University studies, and to
come amongst them, as having learning enough.

His Father also (having many other children to provide for) was willing to
ease his charge, and therefore applied himself to some persons of eminency both
in Church and State, to get some preferment for him: But he, being willing to
decline public employment for the present, humbly entreated his Father, that
what he would hereafter bestow upon him for a Patrimony, he would be pleased
for the present to allow it him for his maintenance in Oxford, that he might
perfect his studies there, which his Father at last condescending to, His
return (...) Oxford.
he returned with joy to Oxford. But behold Gods providence! He had not been
long at Oxford before a fearful Plague brake out in that place, which so
scattered the University that few were left remaining, in which case he was
again put to his shifts; loath he was to return home, and whither else to
betake himself he knew not; till at last, by a special Providence, he was
invited to the house of one Mr. Doyly, five miles from Oxford, a Gentleman of a
very ancient Family in that County, A special P^^^vidence.
and a great Friend to the Gospel, whose wife also was eminent for knowledge,
and piety, to them therefore Mr. Harris goes for the present.

Coming to Mr. Doylyes, he there met with one Mr. Prior, a prudent godly man,
and of an excellent spirit, who being much weakened by two wracking diseases, of
the Stone and Gout, and overburdened with preaching both on the Sabbaths and
Fasts, enjoined upon the occasion of the Plague, in mere pity, Mr. Harris holp
him a turn or two, which he performed with so good approbation, that presently
he was set upon, both by Mr. Doyly, Mr. Prior, and some others, that he could
not withstand their importunity, but was necessitated to preach with them, at
least during the continuance of those extraordinary Fasts. Mr. Harris pleaded
that he was not an Ordained Minister, and therefore durst not meddle with any
thing but preaching; neither with that, but till he could be Ordained. This
they assented to, and during his abode amongst them, he met with ample
requit^ls from the good Gentleman, and his Wife, and great encouragement from
the people.

About this time there was a fearful Eclipse upon the Church; Ministers
suspended.
many eminent Ministers were suspended both from their Office and Benefices,
and amongst them, those three bright shining Stars, Mr. Dod, Mr. Cleaver, Mr.
Lancaster. Upon this occasion Sir Anthony Cope, who had formerly placed, and
now lost Mr. Dod at Hanwell, and Mr. Cleaver at Drayton, became a Suter to his
brother Doyly (for so he was by marriage) for the enjoyment of Mr. Harris. Mr.
Doyly entertained this unwelcome motion with great regret, as being wholly
unwilling to part with one whom he so much prized, yet after a long debate, it
was judged most beneficial for the public, and therefore could not be resisted.

Mr. Harris went to Hanwell with much grief and fear, His remove to Hanwell.
where he found the temper of the Country to be this: Preach he might and
welcome, but they would own no man for their Pastor but those who were ejected:
At last it was concluded that Mr. Harris should preach to both Congregations
whilst Authority would permit, and so long as there was any hope of recovering
their former Pastors, this gave some satisfaction, yet was it not sufficient,
becasue Mr. Harris was not fully of their former Pastors mind.

Just at the same time it fell out that Mr. Whately came to Banbury, Mr.
Whately a^ Banbury.
and met with no less a share in the peoples displeasure, who though they could
not except against his Ministry (he being endowed with excellent parts) yet
they quarrelled, because his judgment about Ceremonies was not the same with
that of their former Teachers; and the truth is, they both had a sad time of it
for a great while, notwithstanding all the prudence and moderation which Sir
Anthony Cope, and Mr. Dod showed to the quieting of them.

After a while, Archbishop Bancroft finding that the silenced Ministers would
not yield, presented two Chaplains to Hanwell and Drayton, upon pretense of a
lapse: But Sir Anthony Cope, sitting then in Parliament, took one or two of the
House with him, and presented his two Clerks to the Archbishop, who after a
long contest, was content to admit his presentation; but Sir Anthony having
spoken in that Parliament against insufficient Ministers, not without reflection
upon the Archbishops, and Bishops, Archbishop Bancroft could not but resent
this, and therefore referred his Clerks to be strictly examined by his ablest
Chaplain. The Chaplain, having as it seems, his lesson beforehand, brings in
the Clerk designed for Hanwell (which Mr. Harris had declined) as altogether
insufficient, though a grave and discreet Divine. Mr. Harris was returned,
mediocriter doctus, moderately learned. The Archbishop being not satisfied with
this last account, desires Bishop Barlow, who was present with him, to make
some further proof of Mr. Harris, and the Bishop being an active and witty man,
was glad of the opportunity, and deals with Mr. Harris, first in Divinity, but
most in other Learning, and Greek, wherein the Bishops excellency lay, and both
of them so long Greeked it, till they were both gravelled for want of words,
whereupon they both laughed, and so gave over. The Bishop going in to the
Archbishop, in his report (as Mr. Harris expressed it) set him up as much too
high, as the Chaplain had set his Fellow too low. The Archbishop hearing the
Bishops testimony, was content to admit Mr. Harris, He is settled at Hanwell.
but upon condition that he might have Hanwell, which was easily assented to by
Sir Anthony, having before designed it for him, and Mr. Dod also was present to
testify his concurrent desire; the only stick with Mr. Harris was, that he was
fearful to succeed so famous a Divine; which answer was not pleasing to the
Archbishop, though at present he courted Mr. Dod.

A new Pastor being thus placed at Hanwell, and withal, Drayton being
furnished with a godly prudent man [Mr. Scudder] there were now three
neighbors, who were linked together, not only in judgment and affection, but
also in affinity; for Mr. Harris married Mr. Whatelyes sister, His Marriage.
and Mr. Scudder his wives sister, and these three for a while met weekly
together, and by turns translated and Analyzed e^ch his Chapter, till
multitudes of public employments caused them to desist.

Not long after there befell Mr. Harris his wife, upon the birth of her first
child, a long and sore affliction, His Affliction
which was (as Mr. Dod told him) but to season, and fit him for his work; and
Mr. Harris himself would often say, that he had been quite spoiled, had he not
thus been taken down; for young Ministers know not what ground they tread on,
till God lays them flat.

This, and some other clouds being blown over, the weather seemed now to clear
up, and his people began to relish his Ministry, and much comfort he found in
the neghbourhood of many godly Ministers, on one side he had Mr. Cleaver, a
very solid Text-man, on the other Mr. Lancaster, a very humble, and
self-denying man, who though by birth he was a good Gentleman, and had sometime
been Fellow in Kings College in Cambridge, Mr. Lancaster a learned and humble
man.
where he had read sundry public Lectures, and made many Speeches, and (as Dr.
Collins, that Master of Language used to say) delivered himself in as pure
Latin as ever Tully spoke, having no other Notes to help him, but what he
wrote upon his own nails; yet this good man, thus accomplished with all
learning, contented himself with a Living that was not worth 40 l. per annum,
and in his preaching made no noise of any learning at all. When I was young I
knew this Mr. Lancaster, he was a very little man of stature, but eminent, as
for other things, so especially for his living by Faith. Life of Faith
His charge being great, and his means so small, his wife would many times come
to him when she was to send her maid to Banbury Market to buy provision, and
tell him that she had no money; his usual answer was, Yet send your maid, and
God will provide; and though she had no money, yet she never returned empty,
for one or other that knew her to be Mr. Lancasters maid, either by the way, or
in Banbury Town meeting her, would give her money, which still supplied their
present wants.

But above all his Neighbors, Mr. Dods Character.
Mr. Harris still most respected Mr. Dod, and concerning him was fully of Mr.
Cartwrights mind, that he was the fittest man in England for a Pastoral
Office; he was able to speak to any man's capacity; he was never out of the
Pulpit, for all his discourses were Sermons, which he intermixed with such
variety of delightful expressions, and similitudes, as would take with any man.
The truth is, he was a very eloquent man both in English, and Latin, and so
facetious and pithy, that Mr. Harris used to say often, That if all his
Apothegmes were gathered together, they would exceed all that Plutarch had
written in Greek, and others since his time in Latin had published. For some
years Mr. Harris had the happiness to live with, and near this man of God, and
that in such a conjunction as greater could not be.

During the time of their converse, they studied together, How Mr. Dod prized
him.
and daily read a Chapter in the Original together. And after Mr. Dod was
restored to the liberty of his Ministry in another Diocese, he would not
expound a Text, preach a Sermon, answer a case of Conscience (whereof many were
daily brought to him) without the concurrence of Mr. Harris with him, so highly
did that eminent Divine prize him, and would often blame him for his
reservedness and unwillingness to put forth himself.

Mr. Dod being (as was said before) removed into Northamptonshire to Fausley,
God was pleased to supply his want by the resort of sundry young Students from
Oxford to Hanwell, so that Mr. Harris his house was a little Academy; and
amongst others, he took much comfort in Mr. Pemble (who would do nothing,
especially in Divinity, without his advice) as also Mr. Capel, who often resorted
to him in his grievous conflicts and temptations for advice and succor, and
also in his well known Treatise of Temptations.

Whilst he was at Hanwell he had frequent calls to London, His invitatio^ to
London.
sometimes to Paul's Cross, sometimes to preach before Parliaments, and other
sometimes at Country-Feasts, which occasioned many invitations to places there:
But of all the Auditories, that of Saviors in Southwark was most grateful to
him, and there he could have spent the remainder of his days if his voice
would have reached so great an Assembly. From thence he was invited to some
lesser Churches, but God had not yet finished his work by him at Hanwell, and
therefore something or other still interposed. Probably he had closed with
Aldermanbury, had not the then Bishop of London [Land] complemented him out of
it, commending his Conscio ad Clerum at Oxford, and promising him better
preferment than he thought he should merit. Some other offers were made to him,
but still he met with some cross Providence, which made him come to a
resolution to end where he began.

At Hanwell he went over many Scriptures, His Labou^ at Hanwell.
but his people found least good from that which cost him most pains, viz. his
Sermons upon the Colossians, which Epistle he preached throughout. Indeed at
that time he thought he could not speak too highly to a people who had been so
taught, but upon further trial he found that he could not go too low, so that
(as some of his hearers after told him) his pains upon that Epistle was wholly
lost as to them. His Sermons upon Historical Scriptures, best pleased most of
his auditors; but with himself, and the more spiritual sort, his labors upon
the Book of the Canticles prevailed most, the Notes whereof he was often
pressed to make public, which he refused upon a double account. 1. Because a
great part of them were lost, and dyed with Dr. Preston, to whom he had lent
them, and whom he used to call, A needlese engrosser of other men's Notes. 2. He
less satisfied himself in his elder years, in diverse passages of that
mysterious Book. Yet if the world were at leisure to hear old men speak, it
might be very useful to collect those dispersed Papers, and it is hoped that
some of his near Relations (who best know his hand, and method in writing) may
take some pains therein for the public good.

At Hanwell Mr. Harris continued preaching for about forty years, His frequent
preaching and success.
a constant, pain^ul, and faithful Preacher, both upon the ^abbaths, and other
occasions which fell out often; for when he came thither, he found that there
had been an accustomed course of preaching upon such Festival days (then so
called) which might not enter^ere with the Lecture or Market at Banbury, which
he also kept up, especially on Easter, and Whitson Mundayes, unto which,
multitudes of Christians resorted far and near, as the Doves to the windows,
yet without any superstition. And on the morrow, they were entertained with the
like Feast at Banbury by Mr. Wheatley. O, what a Fair of souls was then held
at Hanwell and Banbury by these two Brothers? How did Religion then flourish,
and Professors thrive like the Calves in their stalls? The truth is, these
Preachers carved out sound and wholesome food, and their hearers came with good
stomachs, expecting what they found, viz. Milk for Babes, and strong meat for
strong men, and accordingly did grow thereby. In those days godly Preachers
stuffed not their Sermons with aerie notions, and curious speculations, but
sought out profitable matter, which they delivered in sound words, and in plain
method of Doctrine, Reason, and Use, accommodating themselves to every man's
capacity, and God gave them a plentiful Harvest in that Country.

These his employments at home (together with his natural Bookishness) made him
less forward to engage in Lectures abroad, only he was one in a combination at
Dedington in Oxfordshire; and for sometime he kept a Lecture alone at Stratford
upon Avon in Warwickshire every other week, His Lectur at Stratford upon ^von
unto which there was a great resort both of the chief Gentry, and choicest
Preachers and Professors in those parts, and amongst them, that Noble and
Learned Knight, Sir Thomas Lucy of Charlcot had always a great respect for him.

About this time a great Living in the Country was offered him, about which he
was very indifferent, and indeed, was but very indifferently dealt with in it,
which occasioned him to say, That he never bore any thing more impatiently than
the abuse of Religion to base and private ends, and, that carnal policy, would
render Profession despicable at least, whilst some men took such a liberty to
themselves in equivocating and dawbing; and the reason of such men's success
was, not because they had more wit than others, but more boldness to say and do
what others durst not.

All this while he continued at Hanwell in much prosperity, and the Neighbors
thereabouts frequented his Sermons, amongst whom he received the greatest seals
of his Ministry: Religion flourishes.
But though he found so much encouragement from abroad, yet we must not forget
his people at home, who were so far brought into a conformity, that at
sometimes there was not a Family in the Town where Gods Name was not in some
measure called upon, nor a person that refused to be prepared by him for the
Lords Supper.

And as the Lord was thus pleased to bless, Gods blessing upon his outward
estate.
and succeed his labors, so he caused him to thrive in his outward estate
likewise, which himself could not but take notice of; for though his means was
not great, and his children many, for whose sakes he kept a Schoolmaster, and
the resort of Friends to his house not small, both on Sabbath days, and
Lecture days, yet was he in a thriving condition, which occasioned him to say,
That there was a secret blessing attending on housekeeping. For (said he) I am
not able to give an account of my expenses and of Gods supplies.

But now began those cloudy times, and his sadder days, when Troops and Armies
marched into those Quarters, about Edghil, where was fought a bloody Battle,
The Battle at Edgebill.
October. 23. 1642, upon the Lords day, in the Vale of the Red Horse, being
distant about four miles from him; yet it pleased God so to order it (which he
took for a great mercy) that he heard not the least noise of it (the wind
sitting contrary) till the public work of the day was over; nor could he
believe the report of a Battle, til a Soldier besmeared with blood and powder
came to witness it. From this very time his troubles increased: His Troubl^
Now was he threatened by this, then by the other Garrison, one while he was a
Roundhead, and then a Malignant, frequently oppressed with Soldiers that were
quartered upon him, yet still he kept his station, and some of his Guests would
join with him in Family Duties, which he intermitted not, when others would
scoff at them, because not mingled with Book-prayers. Every Sabbath he held on
the course of his Ministry, and most of those which quartered with him, being
Commanders and Officers, they showed themselves civil to him, and his; only at
one time there was a company who were so outrageous in swearing and blasphemy,
that he could not forbear preaching upon that Text, James 5. 12. Above all
things, my Brethren, swear not, etc. which so netled some of them, that they
damned themselves to Hell if they did not shoot him in case he preached again
upon that Text, which they judged to be purposely chosen against them; the next
Sabbath he proceeded purposely upon the same Text, His Courage.
wherein he backed what he had said before, and as he was preaching he saw a
Soldier take his Carbine, and fumble about the Cock as if he was preparing to
shoot; but Mr. Harris, apprehending that he did it only to disturb him, went
through his work, and heard no more news of his Soldier.

Thus he continued his labors in those sad times, He is chosen one of the
Assembly.
and though he was chosen a member of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster,
yet because, upon serious thoughts, he judged his presence less needful there
than in the Country, he continued his station there, till he saw his Tenements
in the Neighborhood fired, wood, and nurseries of wood destroyed, himself
threatened, and at last enforced by a Scottish Commander to shift for himself,
yea some of his own Neighbors were now ready to betray him, whereupon he went
to London, His remove to London.
and by Gods good providence came thither in safety, though a sad man.

When he came to London he went to the Assembly, where he found much more
undone than done: Indeed he met there with many excellent and learned men; but
his thoughts were sollicitous for his people, his wife and children, whom he
had left behind: and indeed he found little rest in his spirit, till the same
good hand of Providence had safely brought them unto him. Then went he with
more comfort to the Assembly, where he did Antiqum obtinere, hear all, and say
little.

Upon his remove from his house, both his Books, and his Notes (some few only
excepted which he had conveyed away beforehand) together with all his remaining
goods, were seized upon, and his Living given to another; but that might soon
have been supplied, many offers being made to him, from several places, and
Country Committees.

The first motion that he hearkened to was the Temple; He is settled at
Buttolphs Bishopsgate.
but upon trial, he found that Church too large for his voice, and thereupon
refused, and at last he was sent to Buttolphs Bishopsgate, where, though the
Congregation was too large for him, yet being necessitated to do something for
the maintenance of his Family, he remained there during his attendance upon the
Assembly.

After his continuance there for some time, He is sent to Oxford.
himself with four more Divines were commanded down to Oxford, which was then
under suspension by the Parliament; which employment, he often professed, that
he did earnestly decline, and that principally for two reasons;

1. Because the Committee for Hampshire had given him a free call to
Petersfield, He is chosen to Petersfield.
and thither he would willingly have gone.

2. Having long discontinued from the University, he looked upon himself as
very unfit for such a service; but in conclusion he was plainly told, that such
as would not be entreated, must be commanded, and so he was ordered to prepare
for his journey. This much troubled him, and therefore he first goes to
Petersfield, and acquaints them how the case stood with him, and because he
could not come suddenly to them, he desires them, either to pitch upon some
other Minister, or else to take the care upon themselves, to provide supplies
for both the Churches (for two they were) and to pay the Preachers out of the
Revenues of the place. The people liked neither of the offers, yet were content
to wait a while in hopes that he might come to settle with them, requesting him
in the mean while to provide them such supply as himself should approve of.
This proved a troublsome work to him, though for a time he sent them help from
Oxford, and thereabout; for preachers were now hard to be gotten, there being
more want of Ministers, than of places; yet at last two were procured, the one
of whom gave no good content. At last he was put upon it, either to relinquish
Oxon, or Petersfield; the former he could not decline, He leaves Petersfield.
and therefore he left the latter, though with great regret, because he could
not seal up such respect, and thanks as he conceived was due from him to that
Country. Neither had he less trouble in providing for Buttolphs Bishopsgate (it
being no easy matter to please Citizens) yet at the last they were supplied to
their content.

About this time many Libels were cast abroad in Oxford against other
Preachers, He is traduced.
and one amongst the rest reflected upon Mr. Harris, reckoning up his several
Livings, and great Revenues, wherein they mentioned what was past, present, and
to come, and happily if they had heard of the rest, which at several times were
offered him, they would have put them also into that Catalogue: Mr. Harris
being informed hereof, he wrote to some Friends (which Letters are already
extant) wherein he vindicated himself in the main, yet withal he professed
unto others, that it would, and should be to him matter of humbling, and
caution to him whilst he lived, that he had given the least advantage to such
as sought it; for though he stood clear in his own, and others consciences, who
best knew him, that he was far from allowing non-residency, and plurality of
Livings, yet to such as were ignorant of all circumstances, there was some
appearances of evil; which also he took the more to heart, because from that
time forward he found the affl^cting hand of God both upon him, His several
afflictions.
and his.

The Preachers that were sent to Oxford found but ill entertainment; on the one
hand they were aspersed, and libelled against by their own Mothers Sons, and on
the other hand they were challenged to a public Disputation by one Mr. Erbery,
A Disputation at Oxford.
a Sectary, and his associates. Mr. Harris was unwilling that this challenge
should be entertained,, having observed that disputes of that kind, send away
each party more strengthened in their opinions, than when they came thither;
yet his brethren being of another mind, they desired his concurrence, at least
so far with them, as to begin the work with prayer. This he condescended unto,
and the Disputation proceeded, and the issue was, that all were censured, some
for speaking, others for their silence, in which latter rank he was willingly
placed.

Not long after came the Chancellor of Oxon [the Earl of Pembroke] to visit
the University, who, according to the custom, bestowed Degrees upon some of
the Scholars, and amongst others, Mr. Harris was admitted Doctor of Divinity,
He commenced Doctor.
who yet, neither thought himself the better Scholar, nor the better Preacher
for this new honor, and had it not been that he was loath to slight the
favor from his betters, he had refused it: having learned, That an empty hand
from a Prince, and a naked title from his Chancellor, must be counted an honor.

At this time many Headships of Colleges (before made void) were now to be
supplied, and Dr. Harris professed, that seeing it was noised abroad, that
these Reforming Preachers came thither to play their own game, viz. to thrust
out others, and to invest themselves with their places, he therefore resolved
to keep to his old course; namely, to stand silent without opening his mouth
for any Headship at all, and presently the best places were all disposed of;
neither was any thing spoken of for Dr. Harris, till a Noble man, of the other
University, He is made Head of Trinity College.
made mention of him, as not fit to be forgotten, whereupon Trinity College was
assigned to him. This some of his Friends much wondered at, considering, that,
though he was the meanest in his own eyes, yet was he the oldest man, and one
that had suffered more by the times than any, if not than all the rest; yet he
himself said little to it, only he enquired who was the Head that was ejected,
and what was the nature of the place: for he was unwilling to entertain the
proffer, if the former Head could find favor to hold it, and thereupon he
forbore as long as he could be permitted; and as for the place, the smalness of
the College, and the situation of it gave him great content, who desired no
more than what would keep him from distractions in his studies, and the only
thing that he stuck at was, because there was a Parsonage annexed to the
College.

But when he understood that its distance from Oxford was not great, and the
conditions easy, viz. That he was required to preach but eight Sermons per
annum at it, he the more willingly inclined to it, though after acceptance, he
could not satisfy himself under two Sermons a week; and so at last there he
sat down, and took much content in the Fellows of that College, betwixt whom,
and him there was ever a very fair correspondence.

At the Parsonage he found most of the people (though they had been long
taught) very ignorant, and much addicted to their old Customs, and (which he
looked upon as a sad prognostic to the place) no sooner did any there look
Heavenward in any special manner, but the Lord presently took him away, some
few, and those very few excepted.

About this time a motion was made by the Committee at Oxford of removing him
to New College, which was now void, but as the motion began without him, so it
was stifled by him, the rather, when he heard that some exception was taken
above against him as being incapable of that place, He refused New College
because he was not a Winchester Scholar. The truth is (as he professed to
some of his Friends) he rather desired a little, than a great College, being
one who was very much addicted to privacy, and his Book, which made him often
say, That if Trinity College were a competency without the Parsonage, he would
not leave it for any place, except it were an Hospital: So much had he seen
into the vanity, and troublesomenesse of the world.

In his latter days journies began to be tedious to him, which occasioned some
well affected Citizens in Oxford (who were moved thereunto by a Sermon which.
Dr. Cheynell preached unto them) to make some overtures to him of reading a
Catechism Lecture, He is chosen to preach a Lectu^e in Oxford.
or of preaching upon the Principles of Religion (which liked him best) in one
of their Churches; in consideration whereof, they would maintain him an
assistant at his Parsonage. The motion was good, the exercise needful; the
only question was, how such a work would be accepted in such a place amongst
the Wits, and Scholars of the University; yet because he had bemoaned himself
to God in private, bewayling that his comfort was little in the place where he
preached, and made it his humble suit that God would not lay him aside, but
find some employment for him, whilst he had ability to perform it, because (I
say) he had prayed thus, and this motion presently ensued, he durst not reject
it, but set upon the work, wherein the Lord assisted, giving him strength even
beyond what could be expected from a man of his age, and caused his labors to
find great acceptance with his Auditors; and thus he continued preaching once
every Sabbath at his Parsonage, and once in the week this Lecture: besides
which he preached when his turn came in the University, and that both in
English, and in Latin also. Yet we are not come to the end of his labors; for
having now freed himself from worldly affairs, disposed of all his children,
and having left himself nothing else to do, but to prepare himself, and his
wife for their graves, who had lived about fifty years together, it pleased God
to exercise him in this strange manner.

His wife, His wives sore temptations.
who was born of Parents eminently pious, had been religiously educated, and
her self a constant worshipper of God all her time, who seldom rose from her
prayers with dry eyes, was delivered up by God to Satan's buffetings, and to
such hellish temptations, and horrors of mind, as struck a grief and terror
unto all the spectators, which occasioned him often to say, That God made
appear to all beholders, that the best man is no more than the Lord makes him
hourly. For as the receiving of Grace, so the keeping, using the comfort and
enjoyment of it, is all from him, which is not only true in supernatural
Graces, but in the gifts of Nature also; our wits, senses, fantasies, all are
in Gods hand; nor are the wisest men any thing longer than he pleases to
continue them so.

This good woman was a sad instance of all this, whose temptations were so
violent, so horrid, and withal so subtle, that they put the ablest, and most
experienced men to their wits end to answer them, and her poor self even beyond
her self: whilst she was in this perplexed condition, sundry eminent Preachers
and Professors visited her, and her husband (who had been a happy instrument of
satisfying many others) could give her no satisfaction. One day as she was
complaining that she could find no comfort, O (says he) What an Idol do some
make of comfort, as if their comfort were their Christ!

In the midst of these trials, Mercies mix^ with trials.
he yet took notice of these comforts and mercies, 1. That she was kept from
blaspheming the Highest (for so she styled God) and from hurting her self, and
others. 2. That this affliction awakened him and his children; for they
esteemed her the most conscientious and innocent amongst them all. 3. It put
him upon more work than his age could well bear, that so he might call out his
thoughts upon business, and not eat up his own heart with grief and care. And
lastly, it wrought in him an holy despair of all creature comforts; for now he
could neither enjoy child, nor friend, nor food, nor sleep, having her
continually before him in his eye, ear, and heart; and all friends fear^ng to
come in sight, lest they should wound themselves, or trouble her; only
continual p^ayers were offered up for her upon all occasions, which gave hopes
that the Lord might yet make her end comfortable, and conquest glorious.

However (her Husband would often say) That the difference was not great
whether comfort came at death, or an hour after, since comfort would come
assuredly. But leaving her under a general expectation of a blessed issue in
the best time, we return once more to her Husband now ready to enter into his
Haven of rest.

After a long and laborious life, which could not but be painful to him that
underwent it, we come at length to his last, long, and painful sickness, which
is the usual Harbinger of Death.

In the Summer he began to droop, and finding his decay, His last Sickness.
he sent for two Physicians [Dr. Bathurst, and Dr. Willis] who were well known
to him and his, by former experiences, and eminently known in the University;
to whom he professed, that he used means merely in obedience to God, but for
his own part he could live, and durst dye. His ^hysitians (as himself
confessed) had proceeded so far as Art and Learning could carry them, but
herein they would lose of their worth, that they had to deal with complicated
diseases, which were seldom removed, but most of all with old age, a disease
which was never cured. His first encounter was with a vehement Pleu^itical pain
in his left side, which was attended with a Feavor, as also with a great
defluxion of Rheum, and oppression of his lungs with Phlegm, and when after
diverse weeks all these his Assailants seemed well-nigh vanquished through the
tender care of his skilful Physicians, yet then that enemy which had so long
lodged in his bosom, brake forth into an Empyema, which he expectorated daily
in so great a measure, for the space of two months or more, that hereby
(together with some fits of his old diseases, the Stone and Strangury) he was
not able to speak much to those that visited him.

And herein indeed it fell out according to what he had often foretold in his
best strength, viz. That little was to be expected from him on his deathbed,
which occasioned him to write (fearing that his tongue might not then be able
to utter it) his advice and counsel to his Family many years before his death.
The truth is, he the rather forbore to speak, because he perceived that some
had a design to make his speeches public, which he was utterly averse to,
neither would he consent that any thing of his Life or Death should be written:
His Humility*
Nay, he could never be persuaded at any time to fit, that his Picture might be
drawn; so desirous he was that all of him might be buried with him. And albeit
he spit up those Lungs which he had wasted in the Pulpit, yet could not that
light of Grace be so smothered under a Bushel, but that oft-times the beams
thereof would shine forth, and himself would breathe forth himself in pithy
speeches, and savoury discourses.

In the beginning of his sickness, being desired to admit of company, he
answered, I am alone in company, its all one to me to be left alone, or to have
Friends with me; my work is now to arm my self for Death which assaults me, and
I apply my self (as I am able) for that great encounter. And accordingly he
spent his whole time in meditation, prayer, and reading the holy Scriptures,
especially the Book of Psalms, the Prophecy of Isaiah, H^s secret employments.
and St. John's Gospel, taking exceeding delight in the 10, 14, 15, 16, and 17,
Chapters of that Evangelist.

After which time his nights were long, and sleeps short; How he spent his time.
and when he could neither sleep nor sit up in his bed to read, his manner was
to command others to read to him, and then himself would collect the most
useful things that were contained in the Chapter, explaining such things as
were difficult, and sweetly feeding upon the rest.

His constant practice was, His counsel to his friends.
to exhort such as either visited, or attended upon him, above all things to
get Faith. It is (says he) your victory, your peace, your life, your Crown,
and your chief piece of spiritual Armor: Howbeit, get on all the other pieces,
and then go forth in the Lords might, stand to the fight, and the issue shall
be glorious; only forget not to call in the help of your General: Do all from
him, and under him.

On the Lords days he would not hinder any from the public Ordinances for any
thing that was to be done about him, His strict observation of the Sabbath.
till Sermons were ended, and then he would say, Come, what have you for me?
(meaning something of Repetition) unto which he would attend with such
diligence, as that he would sum up the heads of every Sermon, and say, O what
excellent truths are these! lay them up charily, you will have need of them.

When Friends came to visit him, he used to say, I cannot speak, but I can
hear: And when he was asked where his comfort lay? His answer was, In Christ,
and in the free Grace of God: One telling him, Sir, you may take much comfort
in your labors, you have done much good, etc. His answer was, All is nothing
without a Savior, without him my best works would condemn me. Oh, I am ashamed
of them, being mixed with so much sin! Oh, I am an unprofitable servant, I have
not done any thing for God as I ought; loss of time sits heavy upon my spirit.
His divine speeches.
Work, work apace; assure your selves, nothing will more trouble you when you
come to dye, than that you have done no more for God who has done so much for
you.

Sometimes he used thus to breathe out himself, I never in all my life saw the
worth of a Christ, nor tasted the sweetness of Gods love in that measure as now
I do. When he was asked what should be done for him? His answer was, Do not
only pray for me, but praise God, for his unspeakable mercy unto me, and in
particular that he has kept Satan from me in this my weakness. Oh how good is
God, entertain good thoughts of him. How ever it be with us, we cannot think
too well of him, or too bad of our selves.

And this sense of Gods goodness was very deeply imprinted upon his heart to
his very last; and therefore in all his Wills, this Legacy was always renewed,
Item, I bequeathe to all my children, and to their childrens children, to each
of them a Bible, with this Inscription, None but Christ. Being upon a time
visited by two Reverend Doctors, his choice Friends, who before they prayed
with him, desired him to tell them what he chiefly requested? He answered, I
praise God he supports me, and keeps off Satan; beg that I may hold out: I am
now in a good way home, even quite spent: I am now at the shore, I leave you
tossing on the Sea. Oh, it is a good time to dye in: Yet when his end
approached nearer, being often asked how he did? He answered, In no great pain
(I praise God) only weary of my unuseful life. If God has no more service for
me to do here, I could be gladly in Heaven, where I shall serve him better,
freed from sin and distractions. I pass from one death to another, yet I fear
none; I praise God I can live, and I dare dye* If God has more work for me to
do here, I am willing to do it, though my infirm body be very weary.

Desiring one to pray with him, and for him, that God would hasten the work; it
was asked whether pain, etc. put him upon that desire? He answered No, but I
now do no good, and I hinder others which might be better employed, if I were
not: Why should any desire to live but to do God service? Now I cease from
that, I do not live.

By this time the violence of his distempers disabled him, and the advice of
his Physicians was, that he should forbear speech, yet he called upon those
which attended him to read some part of the Scriptures to him constantly,
especially he put one of his Sons that was with him, to pray frequently, and
whilst his life and speech lasted, he used to conclude all the Prayers with a
loud Amen.

The nearer he approached to his end, the more he slumbered. Once when he
awoke, he found himself very ill, whereupon calling for his Son, he took him by
the hand, and said, Pray with me, it is the last time in likelihood that I
shall ever join with you; and complaining to him of his wearisomeness, his Son
answered, There remains a rest: To whom he replied, My Sabbath is not far off,
and yours is at hand, ere that, I shall be rid of all my trouble, and you will
be eased of some.

At length his ruinous house (which only inobedience to the will of God had
held out beyond his own desires, and all men's expectations, from the height of
Summer till the depth of Winter) comes to be dissolved. About Saturday in the
even, he began to set himself to dye, forbidding all cordials to be administered
upon what extremity soever, and gave his dying blessing to his Son (who only
of all his children was present with him) and (upon his request) enjoined him
to signify, when he had opportunity, to that Country, where he had lived
longest, that he lived and dyed in that Faith which he had preached and
printed, the comfort whereof he now found. Something else he began to speak,
but his distempers interrupted his purpose, and from that time he never
entertained any discourse with man, only he commanded the eight Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans to be read to him. And herein God was exceeding good to
him in the return of those Petitions which had been put up for him that
afternoon, by those two eminent Divines, and his dearest Brethren before
mentioned: For whereas his great distempers gave occasion to fear his death
would be exceeding painful, yet did it prove so easy, that his Son, and other
attendants could but guess at the particular time of his departure: His
breathings were easy, and even, his eyes open, and full of water, till at the
last (having lifted them up toward Heaven) they closed of themselves, and his
soul, without the least motion of resistance of the body, entered into
everlasting rest, His death.
whilst those whom he left behind were entering upon the day of their rest. For
then began he a perpetual Sabbath in Heaven, when they began theirs on earth,
betwixt twelve and one on Saturday night, December 11. Anno Christi 1658.

He dyed in a good old age, and full of days, having overlived fourscore
years: His loss was much bewailed by the College, by the City, and whole
University of Oxford. He was (as all that knew him confessed) a man of
admirable prudence, profound judgment, eminent gifts and graces, and furnished
with all qualifications that might render him a complete man, a wise Governor,
a profitable Preacher, and a good Christian.

First, look upon him as a Christian, for that was his, and is every man's
greatest Ornament. He was a man that had much acquaintance with God, much
communion with him in private meditation and prayer, accounting those his best
days wherein he enjoyed most converse with him.

In the time of his sickness, one asking him how he did? oh (says he) this
has been a sweet day, I have had sweet communion with God in Jesus Christ. He
was not like them who are all for promises and privileges, though in the mean
time they neglect duties: He made them his exercise, but not his Christ: He was
much in those severe parts of Religion, as private Humiliation, Mortification,
and Self-denial, whereby he gained the conquest over himself. The truth is, he
was (as far as is consistent with humane frailty) Master of his corruptions,
passions, reason, appetite, language, and all.

The Lord was pleased to work upon him in the Primrose of his life, His timely
Conversion.
though he certainly knew not, either the Preacher or Sermon whereby he was
converted. His course was in the days of his strictest examination to set down
in writing his evidences for Heaven, sometimes in Propositions from Scripture;
other sometimes in Sylogismes, and these he often subscribed to in a Book that
he kept for that very purpose. But these evidences were best read by others in
the course of his life, by his exact walking with God in piety, charity,
humility, patience, and dependence upon him. He was far unlike to those who sit
in Moses Chair, and teach what themselves practice not. He had well digested
that Fathers precept to Preachers, Either preach not at all, or live as you
preach. His life was a Commentary upon his Doctrine, and his practice the
Counterpane of his Sermons. What was said of that precious Bishop Jewel, was
true of him, That he adorned a heavenly Doctrine, with a heavenly life. In a
word, he did vertere verba in opera, he lived Religion, whilst many only make
it the subject of their discourse. He was much more than he seemed to be, not
loving to make a noise in the world, but accounting it better to do, than to
speak.

In his works of charity to the poor, he was no less discreet, His Charity.
than private. When he met with fit objects, his hand was more ready to give,
than his tongue to proclaim it. Indeed he was no friend to idle, lazy, canting
persons who live on the sweat of other men's brows. These he looked upon as the
Pests of the Commonwealth, nor could he think it charity to relieve such to the
prejudice of the public, and to their own destruction. But Gods poor, and the
Household of Faith lay near his heart. Whosoever shall survey his large Bills of
weekly, and quarterly allowances (besides) considerable sums given to poor
Ministers, and especialiy to their Widows, and Orphans, who never knew whence
it came) and shall add thereunto his Legacies bequeathed in his Will to
charitable uses, cannot (what ever others thought of him) but judge that his
charity exceeded the ordinary proportion of his revenues. Naturally he was of a
stout and masculine temper, yet through Grace, he attained to a great measure
of humility: He was mean, and low in his own eyes, His Humility.
and had more undervaluing thoughts of himself, than all the world besides had
of him. He was very sensible of that enemy, which he often complained of, viz.
Discouragement, which he used to style, The child of Pride and Unbelief. His
pithy ^p eches.
It must needs be acknowledged a great measure of humility that could keep a
man lowly under such abilities, seize, and such general applauses as he
met with in every place. His usual saying was, that he valued no man for his
gifts, but for his humility under them: Neither should he expect much from any
man, were his parts never so great, till he was broken with Afflictions and
Temptations.

It was his observation, that the humblest Preachers converted most souls, not
the choicest Scholars, w^ilst unbroken. He would sometimes use this speech,
which though a seeming contradiction, yet has it much truth in it, It is
better to be an humble Devil, than a proud Angel. He never affected popular
applause, variety of Pulpits, Printing, etc. as one conscious to himself of, I
know not what unworthiness; neither ever came he thus abroad, but when by
importunity he was haled to it.

2. Consider him as a man in his Morals, whether in the Government of himself
in particular, or of his Family, or his greater trusts, and in all you shall
find him like himself, excellent, and almost without a parallel.

In regard of himself, His Temperance.
he was exactly temperate, confining himself to hours for diet, sleep, etc. He
would often say, That he would rather pour liquor into his Boots, than into his
mouth between meals. He was a strict observer of those Laws of Sobriety, which
St. Paul had pressed upon Ministers, and which himself in his Drunkards Cup had
taught others. He used to eat seasonably and sparingly, which (without
question) was one great means of preserving such vigorous spirits to so great
an age: His only play time was Saturdayes in the afternoon, then he used to
unbend, and disburden himself by some innocent Recreations, but only ad
Ruborem. He was a man of an excellent deportment, and sweet behavior, whereby
he won much upon all with whom he conversed. Grave he was without affectation,
pleasant without levity: Indeed he never loved to hear himself talk, and
therefore by some was judged too reserved; but when he knew with whom he had to
do, he was communicative enough. No man was more candid, or fuller of civility;
none more open or free to entertain or return discourses. He was very cautious
before he struck a league of intimate friendship with any man; but when he had
once chosen, he was cordial, firm, and constant, his head, hand, tongue, pen,
feet, purse, all, were now no longer his own but his friends. It is said of the
French, that whatsoever clothes they wear, whatsoever Garb they accost you in,
becomes them so well, Mr. R. M.
as if nothing else did; and a great Critic in men as well as in Books, used
to say of our doctor, that whatsoever he did or spoke became him.

It was a rare thing to see him angry. His Patience.
If at any time the folly of others had discomposed him, or their sin had
provoked him, yet could he quickly command himself, and convert his passion
into wholesome instruction.

Though himself had great parts, both natural, and acquired, yet would he never
slight or undervalue, much less contemn, or discourage any whom he judged to
be right in the main. He was very sparing in his censures of others, gentle to
all, and severe only to himself.

He had a special gift of forgetting injuries, but would offer none. His memory
was never more faithful than in retaining civilities received, to which he
would industriously make what proportionable returns lay in his power. He much
feared lest he should give any occasion of suspicion that he either forgot, or
neglected any, because he could not readily recall men's names, which occasioned
him to say, That if he lived long he should forget his own name, with him in
Valerius.

At meals his manner was to be sociable, and facetious; yet still he took
occasion to enquire of the Public, and how it feared with particular Towns and
Families, whence he would always extract something for matter of Prayer or
Prayer or Praise in his Thanksgiving after meat.

In his Family he had that qualification of a good Bishop mentioned by the
Apostle, that ruled well his own house. Family Government.
He had an excellent method in the education of his Children, which was this:

In general, his care was to maintain his authority over them, yet even that
authority was equally tempered with lenity and gravity. He loved them without
fondness, and ruled them without rigor. In particular, so soon as they could
use their tongues, they were made acquainted with the Historical part of the
Scriptures. As soon as they could use their legs, they were set to School, and
when they could remember any thing of a Chapter read, or bring home any part of
a Sermon, his care was to instruct them in the Fundamentals of Religion. Their
childehood being past, he would call upon them for the practice of Religion,
and was a diligent observer of their private performance of Religious
exercises, wherein their Mother was no small help to him.

When they grew up to more maturity, he diligently observed their capacities,
inclinations, but especially their constitutions, when he could guess at that
sin which was like to prove their dilectum delictum, their darling corruption,
he accordingly suited their Callings, so as that sin might be least nourished,
and most beaten down. The rule which he gave them was this, When you are youths
choose your Callings; His advice^ his children
when men choose your wives, only take me along with you: It may be, old men may
see further than you. Thus whilst he condescended to them, and they submitted
to him, both parties were gratified.

Though he had a numerous issue, yet (through Gods blessing upon his estate) he
disposed of them to no mean employments. Many he sent to the Universities; some
to Merchandise, etc. To his Sons whom he bred in the University his Rule was,
Study work, more than wages: To those whom he bred in the City, he would say,
Do not waste a halfpenny, and you will not want a penny. And truly so well did
they all improve, as his advice, so their own time and parts, that they became
Masters of their particular Callings, which ministered unto him no small
comfort. He acknowledged it a great mercy to his dying day, that none of his
children were blemished, either in their bodies, or in their reputations. He
was one of them in whose children that Popish slander concerning the
ungraciousness of the children of the married Clergy, received a real
confutation.

Many of his Sons he buried in their prime, Gods blessing upon his children.
some at home, others in foreign parts, and some dyed shortly after himself,
yet all of them gave comfortable hopes to conclude upon a rational charity
(both by the pious Letters of those which dyed abroad, and from that particular
account which they gave of themselves who dyed at home) that they all meet in
Heaven; they which survive need not this attestation. Amongst the dead, there
was Mr. Tho. Harris of Magdalen College in Oxford, who was eminently learned
beyond his age, an Ornament to that Noble Foundation, whereof he was a member;
once the joy of his friends, and still their sorrow; and probably this arrow
from Gods hand stuck deep in the Fathers heart to his dying day.

For his servants, His servants Gods servants.
there are some yet living that served him in his younger days, who still
bless God that ever they came under his roof, where they received the
beginnings of Grace, and such a measure of knowledge as kept them from warping
in the late giddy times.

Whilst he remained with his ancient Flock, His good Government in the College.
his constant manner was to keep a Religious Fast before his administration of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And after he came to his small College, he
so prudently managed all his affairs, that he was both feared, and loved.
Indeed his government there was such as caused a wonder: For whereas that
College before, was famous for factions, during his time there was never any
complaint made to any Visitors; and no marvel, for the Foundation there,
honored him as a Father, and he looked upon, and loved them as his Children,
and accordingly he scaled up his love to them in his last Will and Testament.

He called Gifts, Bribery, and hated the very shadow of it. Examples are known
in the College of Gratuities refused long after fair, and free Elections.

But look upon him as a Scholar, His great Learning.
and there we have him in his proper Element. Though he left the University
early, and preached constantly, yet being of a retired disposition, a constant
student, and endowed with great parts, he became Master of all manner of
Learning to qualify a Divine. In the sacred Languages, especially in the
Hebrew, he was very exact.

His Conciones ad Clerum, declare him to have been a pure and Polite Latinist:
His first, which was preached and printed long since, has undergone the test,
and gained the approbation of all knowing men in that Language; the younger by
full forty years, is of as good a complexion, and of as vigorous a constitution
as its elder brother; and its hoped that in due time it may be made as public.

What his abilities in Disputation were, A good Disputant.
has upon several occasions been made to appear in that College Exercises in
the Chapel, where oft-times in the unexpected absence of the Opponents,
himself would ex tempore take up the Cudgels, and make good their ground. In
which Exercises he approved himself a subtle, clear, and ready Disputant,
without any grains of allowance either for his age or discontinuance.

Indeed his chiefest Learning lay where he made least show of it in public,
viz. in Chronology, Church History, Councils, Case-Divinity, and his insight
into the Fathers. His fervent Prayers.
But his parts were best seen in the pulpit. His gifts in Prayer were much more
than ordinary, wherein his affections were warm, and fervent, his Petitions
pithy and substantial, his language pertinent, unaffected, and without
Tautologies. Oh, how would he raise up a dull and sinking spirit! How would he
warm a cold and frozen heart! How would he carry a man out of himself, and by
degrees mount the soul heavenward!

His Sermons in Print are well known to the world, An excellent Preacher.
and his works praise him in the Gates. The particular excellencies of
Nazianzen, Basil, Chrysostom, Austin, Ambrose, Bernard seemed all to con^enter
in him. He taught Rhetoric to speak in our Mother Tongue, and (without
falsehood, or flattery) he may be styled, The English Orator. His Doctrines
carried light with them, and his Uses heat: His Reproves were weighty, and his
Exhortations powerful. But enough of this, lest we hear as he did who spoke
much in commendation of Hercules, Quis unquam vituperavit? who ever dispraised
him? yea, what either Christian or Scholar, but approved, or commended him? If
you would know the worth of his Sermons, read them (though read they come short
of what they were when preached) yea read them again and again, and endeavor
to read them with the same spirit they were preached, and you cannot but
acknowledge an excellency in them.

Amongst other his excellencies in preaching, which were many, these were not
the least, that he could so cook his meat that he could make it relish to every
palate: He could dress a plain discourse, so as that all sorts should be
delighted with it. He could preach with a learned plaineness, and had learned
to conceal his Art. He had clear Notions of high Mysteries, and proper language
to make them stoop to the meanest capacity.

His way in contriving and penning his Sermons was this: His method in
preaching*


1. He so contrived the parts of his Text, and points of Doctrine, as might
afford him most scope in his Application, wherein his, and indeed, a Sermons
excellency does consist; and therefore he used to say, That in a Sermon he
contrived the Uses first: He did often handle the same Texts, and the same
Points, and yet still would pen new Applications which might be most suitable
to the quallity and condition of the Auditory.

2. In penning, when he once began, he would never take Pen from paper, nor
turn to any Book till he had written all. All his younger days, for about
twenty years together, he wro^ght all, and could without much difficulty preach
the same verbatim. He was wont to say, That he had a fluid, and waterish
memory. I can (said he) quickly remember any thing of my own, and as quickly
f^rget it again. Yet questionless his memory was vast and tenacious; for though
sometimes he had but short Notes in his Bible, and that but seldom, yet did he
never use them, except when he preached a Clerum of late years, in which he
sometimes glanced upon his Papers. His custom was, presently after he had
heard a Sermon, to write down the heads thereof, and he scarce either forgot,
or misplaced any of them. Upon Fast-nights he would by the strength of his
memory repeat two, His strong Memory.
sometimes three Sermons that he had heard that day, in the same order as they
were delivered.

Speaking with a Friend about Memories, His pithy speeches.
he said, That his Memory never failed him: For (said he) I durst never trust
it.

He used to say, that a Preacher had three Books to study, 1. The Bible. 2.
Himself. 3. The People.

He looked much to the Ordinance, and Relation between Pastor, and People, and
would say, That preaching to them was but one part of the Pastors Duty. He was
to live and dye in them, as well as for, and with them.

He complained much of some men's too large insisting upon the Doctrinal parts
of their Points, whereby they left little or no room for Application; and found
that few, either in the Cities or Universities bended themselves to enlarge
upon their Uses, What Sermons are best.
which made their Sermons to differ little from Divinity-Lectures; and though
all Preachers could not enlarge themselves therein, yet he would often call
upon them to accustom themselves to it as being most profitable. He would
relate a passage of Mr. Dods concerning Mr. Cartwright (who often in his days
preached occasionally at Hanwell) Me thoughts (said Mr. Dod) when I heard the
Doctrinal part of his Sermon, I was in heaven: but when he came to apply it, I
sometimes thought that if I had been in his place, I could presently have
applied his Point more closely. Non omnia possumus omnes.

Many young Preachers resorted to Dr. Harris for counsel, His advice to young
Preac^ers.
both for direction in their private studies, and in their Sermons; and he used
to persuade them for many reasons to pen largely, and to keep their Notes for
all emergent occasions, often commending Mr. Dods words, who professed, That he
would rather preach an old Sermon ten times, than speak any thing new without
preparation. He would say, that he would have a Preacher to exceed himself
upon just occasion, and not always to keep the same pace, yet did not that
always hold in his own practice; for generally his hearers commended those
Sermons most which cost him least, and himself would say, That he never came
off with less comfort, and worse content to himself, than when he was in
appearance best provided: and he gave this reason for it, Not because he had
used such diligence in preparing (for that was his duty) but because he was
then aptest to depend upon himself, and to neglect his dependence upon God.

Many sought to him for advice in choosing Divinity Books, His advice about
Books.
to whom he would open himself freely. Some he persuaded to read Ames his
Medulla, Tileni Syntagma, Bucanus, and such like. To some others, he would
commeend Aquinas his Sums (which Dr. John Reynolds used to call That absolute
Body of Divinity) Melcheor Canus, and of late, Mr. Bowls his Pastor
Evangelicus. But above all, he would call upon every one to read the Text in
the Originals, and to Analyze Chapters. This he persuaded Mr. Pemble to, and
set him to practice it in the Book of the Preacher, or Ecclesiastes (which he
accounted a very hard Book, till he met with that brief, but pithy Exposition,
of that incomparable Divine, Dr. Edw. Reynolds) and after that upon Zachary.
When any consulted with him about Writers, he would ask what they aimed at in a
Writer, for several men had their several excellencies. For acuteness he used
to commend Mr. Baines, and his second, Dr. Ames, Mr. John Ball, Mr. Capel, etc.
If they aimed at the spiritual part of Divinity, he would leave them to Dr.
Si^s: If the rational, to Dr. Preston: If the Historical, to Bishop Usher. For
solid Preachers, he much prized Dr. Sandersons first Works (to his later he was
a mere stranger) Mr. Randal, Mr. Hildersam, Dr. Reynolds, etc. And for all the
requisites for a Preacher, both for method, matter, elocution, pronunciation,
all, he would often say, that he seldom met with an abler man than his Brother
Whateley of Banbury.

When his judgment was asked about Commentators, he used to answer, that he was
now more of Dr. Jo. Reynolds his mind than ever concerning Mr. Calvin; His
judgment of Mr. Calvin.
for upon experience (said he) I find that the most of the late Writers do but
descant upon his plain Song; and the Jesuits are very Plagiaries, who first rob
him, and then rail upon him.

Next to Calvin he used to commend sundry late Writers, And of other Writers.
as Pareus, Rivet, Mr. Cartwright especially, together with some Popish
Writers, as Maldonate (whose wit, and learning he preferred before his spirit)
before him, Learned Masius, modest Ribera, and (for ought he found by him)
honest Estius. And being asked about the best Editions, his answer was, that
what was said of Homer, was true of the Fathers, and the first Popish Writers,
viz. That was ever the best which was least corrected. Of the Ancient Fathers
he would say, That unless it were for their Polemical and Historical parts,
their Writings were more for Devotion and Affection, than for their judgment
and understanding.

About modern Authors this was his opinion generally; that what English men did
ex professo undertake, they did best perform it. No men excel them in
expounding Scriptures, in answering Papists, Arminians, etc. None equal to them
in the Pulpit, or in Practical, or Case-Divinity. And he held Cambridge very
happy in her Whitakers, Downams, Davnant, Perkins, besides many others. And for
Oxford, he would lay one Jo. Reynolds (to pass in silence a younger Reynolds,
and his son in Law, born a Schoolman) in the balance with hundreds, as a man
never sufficiently admired for his Humility, as well as for his Learning.

For the Schoolmen he liked many things in them, but not their awkward, and
ignorant quoting of Scripture, nor their multiplying of useless questions, with
needless obscurities.

For Lutherans, he commended diverse of them for their learning and industry,
but disliked their tartness.

For Arminius (though he were none of the best) yet he liked him better than
his Disciples and Successors, who were more desperate and dangerous in the five
controverted Points, than many of the Papists.

As for Socinianisme, he accounted it to be but a kind of blancht Mahometisme.
And this he observed in general, that those Papists who were most conversant in
the Scriptures, come nearest to us; the like he said of the Lutherans, as
Chemnitius, Gerard, Hemingius, etc.

He was sparing to deliver his judgment about our condition at home, His
judgment of our times.
yet some things lay sadly upon his spirit; as,

1. He complained that the power of Godliness, and exercise of Love, and
Self-denial, were much abated in these later days; and he much bewailed the
vast difference, both in garb and practice, betwixt new, and old Professors.

2. That the Indulgence that was showed to tender Consciences, was much abused
to profaneness, whilst men of no conscience most pleaded that liberty of
choosing their own Churches, and Teachers; and indeed, on the matter abandoned
all.

3. That the liberty of Prophesying which some pretended to, was abused to mere
licentiousness and confusion, whilst some would have none, and others all
Prophets and Preachers.

4. That in the University few could be called constant Students, but the most
made a short work of it, and posted into the Pulpit before they understood
their grounds, so that few were able to encounter our growing Errors.

5. That in the Church men were in their extremes, some pressing nothing but
Law, others preaching nothing but the Gospel, and Christ.

6. He complained of the want of Catechizing, and instructing youth in the
Principles, the want of which, he saw by experience was a great occasion of the
peoples giddiness.

7. But most of all he bewailed the readiness of many to side, and make
divisions. He loved not either to use, or to hear used, dividing names, and
titles; upon which occasion he often related Mr. Greenhams answer to the Lord
Treasurer Cecil, who being asked on which side the blame lay in that great rent
between the Bishops, and their Antagonists, answered, That the fault was on
both sides, and in neither side: For (said he) the godly wise on both sides
bear with each other, and concenter in the main; but then there be sel^ish*
peevish spirits, on both sides some, and these be they that make the quarrel.

This he applied to our times by reason of the distinction of Presbyterians,
and Independents, saying, Men of humble, and sincere hearts, though differing
in opinion, can, and do walk together, pray togther, and love one another; but
men who wholly look a^ their own interests, blow the coals, and make a stir, as
if the opions were irreconcilable, and as every one was disaffected to Christ's
cause that goes not their pace and path.

He professed freely, that for his own part he was not convinced of some things
that were earnestly pressed about Church Government: He did not conconceive any
one external form to be so essential to a Church, but that it might still
deserve that name, though under a Presbyterian, or Independent, or Episcopal
form, so long as it was kept within the bounds of those general Rules laid down
in the Scriptures. Its true, some of these had been abused to Tyranny, and the
rest might in time be abused also; but the use and abuse of things are far
different, and he would not commend either the one, or the other in their rigid
exactions in some cases.

For Presbytery, though he thought that Bishop Bilson could never (with all his
learning) disprove the being of Lay Elders in the Apostles times, yet he
thought withal, that it was not so easy a thing to prove the perpetuity of
such an Ordinance to the worlds end, especially so clothed and attended with
all those perquesites which some heretofore called for. He thought that there
was some reason in the distinction of Jure Human^, and Juris Human^, what ever
his application was who first used it: But for the thing it self, since it is
not altogether disproved, but allowed, yea once commanded, and not since
retracted (for ought he knew) he saw no reason why any man should, eo nomine,
be aspersed, because a Presbyterian, by any dissenting Brethren.

For the to her of Independency, he confessed that it was a Politic way, and
free from much trouble, and opposition: About Indpendencye*
For who shall oppose the Minister, when all are of his mind before they are
admitted? yet could he never satisfy himself (though upon occasion he often
desired it) in some particulars; As,

1. What warrant men have to take out of another Flock his best sheep, and to
entertain them without his consent, or testimony. He asks whether any man would
willingly be so served? whether this would not open a gap, that so soon as a
member is offended with his own Pastor (happily upon deserved reproof)
presently to fly to another Congregation.

2. To leave the cullen sheep in a hard condition: For how shall they be looked
upon? the answer must needs be, little better than Heathens: For the Minister
may preach to such, and what more may he do to these, when the chief are gone?

3. This way seemed to him to be very destructive to that relation between
Pastor and People.

4. He conceived this way of gathering of Churches into private places, and
companies, to be prejudicial to the public worship of God: Experience
declaring, that in many places of late, the public Ordinances are grown into
disuse, preaching only excepted, which might be afforded to Ca^ibals if they
would hear.

5. Lastly, For Congregations to consist of members at such a distance, as that
one should live in the North, and another in the South, etc. many miles
asunder, whereby inspection cannot be performed on the Pastors part, and on the
Peoples part, they can enjoy little communion and edification one from another;
this he used to say, that he did not understand, nor could he find any precept
for it in the Word, nor any president or practice of it in Antiquity, if we
speak of Churches constituted, and out of persecution, banishment, etc. These
things he neither wrote, nor spoke but with much fear, and grief.

Amongst other things, he did very much bewayl the great sleighting of solemn
Ordination of Ministers, About Ordination of Ministers.
the Office being so sacred, the work of the Ministry so important, and the
Minister of so public concernment. He wondered that when as in all other
Offices there is such solemnities at the Officers instalments, that a Minister,
and Ambassador of Jesus Christ should be silently admitted without Fasting,
Prayer, and some public solemnity.

As to private passages it were endless to write all his Observations: only
take these few;

He observed that such as often changed their Principles, and Faith professed,
usually fell from Scepticisme to Atheism.

That so much Humility as any man had, His excellent Speeches.
so much grace, and worth he had, and no more.

That nothing was to be accounted good in, or to any man, but that which was
his proper fruit, and done by virtue of his calling, from a principle of God,
and for God.

That the best man has no security from any one sin, or fall, or temptation,
any further, or longer than he was held up by Gods hand, and Christ's Mediation.

That God does oftentimes leave us to own Satan's suggestions for our own,
because we do not own God in his holy motions, and breathings.

That its just with God to deny us the comfort of our Graces, when we deny him
the glory of them.

In himself he observed, that what he forgot in the week, would unseasonably
press in on the Sabbath; so that he could, if he durst, contrive more worldly
business on the Sabbath, than he could dispatch all the week.

That he found no greater enemy than discouragement, which he called, The
child of pride and unbelief.

He used to say, that some duties which were often in men's mouths, he found very
difficult to him: As,

1. To deny himself in all his Selfs, was a work to be learning whilst he lived.

2. To live only by faith, and a bare promise without a pawn is a great work.

3. To give all to free Grace, and to Christ alone is a mighty work.

4. To love where we meet with unlovingness, and contempt, is no easy matter.

5. To do ones proper work without some present pay, and countenance from God
and man, is a hard task.

6. That its far harder to adopt others comforts, than their sorrows, and to
hold ones self exalted in another exaltation.

7. That to dye in cold blood, and to be active in it as an act of obedience,
is the work of a Christian.

In his sickness he would occasionally vent himself thus:

Its a hard thing to think ill of our selves, and well of God at the same time.

Its a hard thing for a Saint to forgive himself some faults, when God has
forgiven them.

Its hard to think holy thoughts long, and to confine them to another prayers.

We know but little of Christ's love, till all be perfected, and spread before
us in heaven.

For his children, he referred them to an old Will, which he had made Anno
Christi 1636, when they were many, and small, which because it may be of use to
many others, its here inserted.

The Advice and Counsel of Dr. Harris to his Family, annexed to a Will made by
him, Anno Christi 1636.
To my dear Wife and Children; My dear Selfs,
I know not what leisure I shall have to speak unto you at my Death, and I am
not, you know, very free in speech, especially in sickness and sadness, and
therefore now I will speak my heart to you, and I would have you to hear me
speaking whilst you live, in this my writing which I divide amongst you all.

First for you, my dear Wife, you shall find the substance of that I would say
to you printed to your hand in the Book of Martyrs, Vol. 2. p. 1744, to wit, in
John Careless his Letter to his Wife; keep the Book, and often read the Letter,
only one thing I add, if you marry again, remember your own observation, viz.
That second Husbands are very uxorious, second Wives very prevalent, and
therefore take heed that you do no ill office in estranging your Husband from
his natural children or kindred; you shall thereby draw upon him a great sin
and judgment, if you kill in him natural affections: I have said, and do with
all the strength and power that is in me, thank you for your faithfulness, and
resign you to the Husband of Husbands, the Lord Christ.

Now my poor Children, let me pour out my heart to you, and speak to your Souls
first.

For your Souls.
Trifle not in the main point, the Soul is immortal, you have to deal with an
infinite Majesty, you go upon life, and death, therefore here be serious; do
all to God in a serious manner. When you think of him, speak of him, pray to
him, any way make your addresses to his great Majesty, be in good earnest, and
have God, and have all.

1. More particularly, get your pardon in Christ: It is not impossible to get
it assured to you, if you will learn, 1. To deny your selves. 2. To live by
faith. 3. To understand the nature of the New Covenant. Settle your judgments
in these Points, and the thing is feasible.

2. Having gotten it, be still adding to your evidence, and enjoy your present
Assurance: Do all to God as to your Father.

Next to this, think how you and I shall endure the sight, the thought one of
another at the last day, if you appear in the old Adam; much less shall you
stand before Christ; unless you show the Image of Christ in you, and therefore
never cease till you be made New creatures, and study well what that is.

In the last place, strive for those Graces most, which concern your places and
conditions, and make head against those sins which most threaten you: As first,
Hereditary sins. I was naturally Melancholy, that is a humor that admits of
any temptation, and is capable of any impression and distemper: Shun as death
this humor, which will work you to all unthankfulness against God,
unlovingness to man, and unnaturalness to your selves. 2. Of your times, and
habitations. 3. Of your tempers and age. 4. Of your Callings.

I have made my own peace, my sins shall not hurt you, if you make them not
yours; you need not fear the success if you will oppose to sin, Christ is made
sanctification to you, he came to dissolve the works of Satan; he has overcome
for you, and has made as many promises for your sanctification, as your
justification: Gather those promises as they be set down, especially in the
Covenant with an oath, Luke 1. Press these to God, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

In short, do not talk and make a noise to get a name of forward men, but do
the thing; be constant in secret duties, and act Religion in your C^llings; for
it is not a name, or notion; It is a frame of nature, and habit of living by
Divine Rule. What it is, you will then know when you have it in truth first,
and in power next, and not before. Only this for the present, It is that you
must live, and dye by, that you must rise, and reign by; therefore, my
Ch^ldren, I give you that advice, which I gave your Brother, now with God; Be
more than you seem: Do more than you talk of in point of Religion: Satisfy
your own consciences in what you do; all men you shall never satisfy; nay,
some will not be satisfied, though they be convinced.

For your Bodies.
I was troubled with straightness of breath and breast, which was also
Hereditary, and therefore you must fear it the more.

The Remedies are, 1. Disclaim Hereditary sins. 2. Keep Heads clean, Feet warm,
and Hearts cheerful. 3. Be more frequent than I, and your Brother in exercise.
4. Shun late drinking or studying. 5. Use lighter Suppers.

For your Callings.
1. Choose well, 1. A profitable Calling for the public. 2. A full employment.
3. A Calling fit for your parts and means. It is better to be a rich Cobbler,
than a poor Merchant.

2. Use a Calling well, 1. Make it an help, not a snare to your souls. 2. Be 1.
Diligent. 2. Skilful. Any honest Calling will honor you, if thus you honor
it, and therefore you may be hopeful, because my self (who had not your parts
and helps) never found any thing too hard for me in my Calling, but
discouragement, and unbelief.

For your Company.
Abandon all infectious, flattering, self-serving companions, when onc^ you
have found them false, trust them no more. Sort with such as are able to do, o^
receive good. Solomon gives you the best counsel for this in many places. Read
the Proverbs, and remember him in this; 1. Forsake not an old Friend.

2. Be friendly, and faithful to your Friends. 3. Never trouble, or trust
Friends unless there be a necessity. 4. Lastly, be long in closing with
Friends, and loath to lose them upon experience of them.

For your Marriages.
In Marriage you lay the foundation of your present woe, or weal; therefore
here be not rash, go not alone, yet remember Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 2. First, study
whether you have a calling to Marry, yea or no, and advise well of that. If
none, forbear; if so, advise with friends, before your affections be engaged.
In your choice, 1. Aim at Grace. 2. Good nature and education; the best woman
is not ever the best wife. 3. Good parts of understanding, Huswifery, etc. As
for Portion, be it more or less, be upon certainties, and trust not words; and
for Parentage, let not the distance be too great, lest you despise, or be
despised: However be sure that the person likes not your fancy, but your
judgment.

For your Children.
Make it your chiefest work to make them, 1. Godly. 2. Useful. Bestow most of
their Portions in good Education; and if Grace make no difference, do you make
none in your affections, countenances, portions, partiality, this way ends in
nothing else but envy, strangeness, etc.

For your selves within your selves.
My desire has been to carry an even hand over you all, and have labored to
reduce you, as near as I could (all circumstances considered) to an equality,
and therefore my last request, and charge is, that you will live together in an
undivided bond of love; you are many of you, and if you join together as one
man, you need not want any thing: what counsel, what comfort, what money, what
friends may you not help your selves unto, if you will contribute your aides?
wherefore (my dear children) I pray, beseech, command, adjure you by all the
Relations, and dearness that has ever been betwixt us, that you know one
another, visit (as you may) each other, comfort, counsel, relieve, succor,
help, admonish one another. Whilst your Mother lives, meet there (if possible)
yearly. When she is dead, pitch upon some other place, if it may be, your
eldest Brothers house, or if you cannot meet, yet send to, and hear from one
another yearly. And when you have neither Father, nor Mother, be so many
Fathers and Mothers each to other, so you shall understand the blessing
mentioned, Psalm. 133.

For your Estates.
Be not troubled that you are below your kindred; get more wisdom, humility,
goodness, and you are above them; only this do, 1. Study work more than wages.
2. Deal with your hearts to make them less. 3. Begin below. 4. Join together to
help one another. 5. Rest upon the Promises, which are many, and precious this
way. 6. Sow mercy. Take of your Mother (to this end) -- a piece: give that in
works of mercy, and if all other means fail you, that shall maintain you; I
know, I know I say, and I am confident in it, that if ye will be humbled for my
barrenness, and will trust God in his own way, he will make comfortable
provision for you. Object no more, but trust him.

For the Public.
Bless God that you are born English men, and bear your selves dutifully, and
conscionably toward Authority. See God in the Magistrate, and hold Order a
precious things: And for the Church, neither set her above her Husband Christ,
nor below her Children; give her that honor, obedience, and respect that is
her due; and if you will be my Children, and heirs of my comfort in my dying
age, be neither Authors, nor Fautors of any, either faction, or novelty. Its
true, this is not a rising way, but it is a free, fair, comfortable way for a
man to follow his own judgment, without warping to either hand. Perhaps you
may hear variety of judgments touching my walk, when I sleep in silence, some
taxing me for too much, some for too little Conformity; but be not ye troubled:
I did what in my circumstances seemed best to me, for the present; howsoever
the event has not in some points answered expectation, yet I have learned to
measure things by another rule than events, and satisfy my self in this, that
I did all for the best, as I thought. Sure I am, my Savior Christ is perfect,
and never failed so much as in circumstance. To him I commit your Souls,
Bodies, Estates, Names, Life's, Deaths, All; and my self waiting when he shall
change my vile body, and make it glorious like unto his own, Amen. Even so come
Lord Jesus, Amen.

On the Memory of that Famous and Godly Minister, Dr. Robert Haris, my late
worthy Friend.
As once Elias in John Baptist came
Back to the Jews, in that Triumphant flame
Of Light and Zeal, wherein he did before
Without Deaths help up into Glory soar;
And by this Transmigration of his Grace,
Prepared paths before his Masters face:
Even so in thee (blessed soul) did breathe anew
Great Chrysostom, yea great Apollos too;
To thee those mighty Orators did give
Their Tongues to speak, to thee their life to live:
Nay, thou thy self did in thy self renew,
Thy Fort'ys vigor in Fourscore; we knew
When all thy strength decayed, thy Gifts did thrive,
The man is dead, the Preacher still alive;
Alive in his own Sermons in our love,
His Name alive below, his Soul above.
And may the younger Prophets still inherit
A double portion of their Fathers spirit;
That by a sacred Metempsychosis,
The gifts may now be theirs, which once were his;
That every Sermon which we hear, may be
(Rare Preacher) a true Pourtracture of thee;
Yea, may it of each following age be true,
The former are exceeded by the new;
Visions of young surpass old Prophets dreams,
The Fathers Light's outshin'd by Childrens beams,
That in their measures we may more, and more,
Th'unmeasur'd fullness of our Lord adore.
E. REYNER.

The Second Part: Containing the LIVES OF GVSTAVUS ERICSON, King of Sueden, who
was the first Reformer of RELIGION in that KINGDOM. AS ALSO Of diverse other
Christians, who were eminent for Prudence and Piety.

We desire, that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope unto the end.

That ye be not slothful, but followers of them, who through Faith and Patience
inherit the promises,

Heb. 6. 11, 12. LONDON, Printed for Will. Miller, at the Gilded Acron near the
Little North-door in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

The Life of Gustavus Ericson King of Sueden, who dyed Anno Christi 1562.
IN the days of Christian the Second, An Introduction.
King of Denmark who also laid claim to the Crown of Sueden, after the decease
of Swanto, the Lords of Sueden chose Steno Stur to be their Governor, against
whom Gustavus, Archbishop of Upsal opposed himself, loving his place, more than
his Country; and being crossed in his expectation, he promotes the interest of
Christian of Denmark, who to set forward his claim to the Crown of Sueden,
spent one year in the pursuit thereof by force of Arms, but effected little.
Nor did the Archbishop of Upsal get ought in Denmark, who saw that he played
his own game, nor could he escape the seizure of his Temporalities in Sueden
for his treachery against his native Country; whereupon the year following he
obtained the Popes sentence of Excommunication against the Governor of Sueden,
and all his partakers, for invading the rights of his Church and Bishopric;
and hereupon the King of Denmark takes courage to invade Sweden once more with
an Army under his General, who in a Battle overthrew the Suedes, and wounded
Steno their Governor, who thereupon retired to Stockholm (the Regal City) and
unto him repaired all such as intended to adventure their all in the defense of
their Country. The rest of the Suedes submitted to the Danish General, who
encouraged thereby, marched to Stockholm; but meeting with many difficulties in
his march, and when he came to the City, finding no hope to draw them to a
Treaty, and his Army being now much wasted, he sent to Denmark for Recruit; and
after a while the King in person comes to him, and so Stockholme is beleagured,
which yet held out bravely, so that the Danish Army being wasted, and the
remainder being wind-bound, and almost famished, a Treaty of peace is set on
foot, and at last agreed unto by both parties. But the King intending nothing
less than to stand to it, pretends that he could not come into Stockholme to
finish the Treaty till pledges were first given for the safety of his person.
This the Suedes assent to, and send him pledges of the Sons of the Nobles, who
were sent aboard his Ship, and the Kings mind, changing with the wind, away he
sails with them into Denmark, and there committed them to safe custody: And
after four years returns into Sueden with a great Army, and gives a second
overthrow to the Suedes in the Field, wherein the Governor Steno was slain:
then the King marching to Stockholme, finds the City standing upon its Guard
under the Government of Christina, the Wife of Steno; where for a while we
shall leave him in a long, and tedious siege, whilst we give you some account
of our Gustavus.

Amongst the pledges carried away, His parentage
and imprisoned as aforesaid, by the King of Denmark was this Gustavus, the Son
of Ericus, a Noble Suedish Lord now in Stockholme beleagured by the King. This
Gustavus was of a Noble Familiy, whose Grandfather having married the sister of
Steno Stur, the Governor, thereby he became incorporate into the ancient Stem
of the Kings of Sueden; and in his younger years he was trained up in the
Court, His Educatio^
under his Uncle Steno, who was no less valiant in the Field, than wise for
Government in peace. Under him did our Gustavus learn the principles of War,
which afterward he began to practice under Suanto, the next Governor. For
after the death of Steno the first, the difference between the Danes and Suedes
about the Government grew so high, that they fought two Battles, in both which
the Suedes were the Victors, Gustavus carrying the Royal Standard of Sueden,
though at that time he was but eighteen years old; and being now about the age
of twenty six, he was (as was said before) committed prisoner to the Castle of
Callo in Jutland, His imprisonment.
under the custody of Sir Ericus Banner, a Knight of Denmark, who kept him
warily that he might suffer no wrong, except from the King himself. This
imprisonment he had now endured for the space of four years with patience: But
having daily intelligence brought him of the Danes cruelty to the Suedes his
Countrymen, he concluded that his own condition was like to Ulysses in
Polyphemus his Den, being reserved but as a chief dish for the Tyrants palate,
when all the rest were devoured.

Having therefore upon a day obtained liberty to ride on hunting, His escape.
being eager in the chase (though he minded another game) he rode away, and
having changed his apparel as well as his course, passing through many unknown
ways and dangers, after a chase of three hundred miles, he arrived at last at
Lubeck, He comes to Lubeck.
one of the Hanse Towns, and that held correspondence with Sueden against the
Dane upon the same quarrel of being oppressed by them.

No sooner was Gustavus arrived at Lubeck, He is remanded by h^s Keeper.
but that his Keeper, Sir Ericus Banner, was come thither also in pursuit of
him, who demanded of the Magistrates the delivery of his Prisoner. Pleads for
himself.
Gustavus pleaded for himself that he was no lawful Prisoner to the King of
Denmark, but amongst others, was delivered by his Country as a pledge for the
safety of the Kings person during the Treaty between the King, and his
Countrymen, and that the King contrary to all right and faith, detaining him,
and the other pledges, had carried them captive into Denmark; that now he was
under the Public Faith of the State of Lubeck, to whom he was fled for refuge
against oppression, desiring to have the benefit of Law, and to have the matter
tried; diverse of the Senate of Lubeck were of opinion that Gustavus ought to be
returned to the Dane as his prisoner, and that it concerned not them to be
Judges of the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of his imprisonment: But the Consul
overruled the matter, who affirmed, that though originally they had not power
to determine the point, Defended by the Consul.
yet Gustavus being before them de facto a Freeman, and as such, had put
himself into the protection of the City of Lubeck, and had appealed to them for
Justice, it becomes them therefore to do herein according to Law; and that by
the Law of God, the Law Civil, and the Law of Nations, they ought to enquire
into the true state of Gustavus his Captivity, and to determine the same upon
grounds of Justice; otherwise they might make themselves parties to the King of
Denmarks oppressions (if the case prove so) before they understand what they
do. The Authority of the Consul, and the strength of his reasons prevailed so
far with the rest of the Senate, that they passed this definitive sentence,
Protected b^ Lubeck.
That Gustavus shall be protected by the State of Lubeck, till the cause be
tried.

This served Gustavus his turn for the present, but he knew not how short a
time it would continue: He knew that interests of Nations are soon changed,
especially of such petty States as Lubeck was: Besides, he had too much other
work to do, to continue long in one place, and thereupon secretly, without
giving notice to any, save to his good Friend the Consul, whose counsel he took
along with him, he gat aboard a Merchants ship, and sailed into the Bay of
Calmar, His escape Calmar.
into which he entered secretly, and finding that they stood upon their Guard
against the Danes, he discovered himself to the Lady Magnus, that held the
Castle, acquainting her with the manner both of his Captivity and escape; and
taking advantage of the reports which then came of the sad examples of the
Danish cruelty, and oppessions, he endeavored to persuade, and encourage the
Citizens to stand out in defense of the Liberties of themselves, their wives,
and children, and not to trust to the fair words, and glozing promises of the
Danes; but rather to endure a little hardship for a time, assuring them that
the face of affairs would be shortly changed. The Citizens willingly hearkened
to him, but some mercenary Soldiers, raising a muteny, had thought to have
slain him: But the plot being discovered, the muteny was suppressed, and
Gustavus advised for his safety to withdraw himself into his own Country, and
there to obscure himself, till a more convenient time should enable him to
carry on his design.

He knew this journey would be full of difficulty and danger; His Danger.
For his Way lay through Smalland, where the Danish Emissaries were very active
to draw the Suedes to moderation, and to submit to the Danish yoke: yet through
it he adventures, but with much grief of heart to see the Country people so
miserably deluded; insomuch that he could not forbear, but told them, That they
should consider the cases of many of their Countrymen, who had as fair
promises from the Danes, yet met with nothing but miserable bondage. Adding
that there was much less danger in standing the push of the Danish Pike, than
in committing themselves, and all that was dear unto them to so broken a Reed
as their fair words, which had not only failed, but mortally wounded the
Liberties of their Countrymen, who had given credit to them.

Say what he could, diverse Suedes of the better rank in those parts, being
pre-ingaged to the Danes, persuaded the people otherwise, saying, That the
Danes aimed only at the suppressing of such of the Suedish Nobility, as
combined themselves against the Kings Government: But as for the people, the
King was resolved to win them, and that they should never need to fear want so
long as Salt and Herrings lasted: But if they would not be prevailed with, they
were all but dead men, except speedily they forsook their Country, and fled.

Gustavus finding the people hereby so affrighted, that they had rather be
slaves with quiet, His remove^ to his own Country.
than hazard themselves in War, he found it not convenient for him to stay any
longer there, whereupon he secretly departed to Terno, amongst his own Tenants;
and having there provided himself of necessaries he went thence to Refsnass,
his Fathers house, where he concealed himself for the most part of that Summer,
yet at length he adventured to discover himself to one that had been a faithful
Friend to him, and once was Archbishop of Upsal; but in those troublesome times
had been laid aside, and now was retired to a Monastery at Gripsh^lm. This man
being now grown old, was fearful, and willing to be quiet, though upon hard
conditions, wherefore he dissuaded Gustavus from stirring, alleging the great
advantage that the King had, having an Army in the Field, and the Towns
generally under his command, affirming that the King desired nothing more than
to ingratiate himself with the people, for whose assurance he had granted
Letters of Grace, and a general pardon, and therein particularly mentioning
Gustavus himself; wherefore he advised him to give credit to the King, and to
submit to his Government. And for my part (said the old man) I dare engage to
procure from the King a special, full, and free pardon for you if you shall
desire it. Gustavus heard him with silence, but liked not his undertaking; For
(thought he) this old man may hope hereby to screw himself into the Kings
favor: Neither indeed did he like to adventure himself upon the Kings
promises, wherefore he resolved to wave this old man's counsel, and to retire
himself back to Rafsnass

All this while the King continued in the siege of Stockholme, where we
formerly left him, endeavoring, partly by force, partly by messages of Grace
to get possession of that City: For which end he first confirmed the agreement
which his General had made with the Lords in the Field, and then granted a
General pardon, and Act of Oblivion for whatsoever former faults. Then sent his
hearty commendations, and fair promises to the people in the Country by the
Suedish Lords that were of his party, yet in many places it met with little or
no respect at all. Nevertheless in continuance of time, by the often droppings
of his good words, serious Pro^^ses, Protestations, Execrations, Letters
Patents, and Declarations under the Kings hand and seal, an entrance is made
into the hearts of the men at Stockholm, The King admitted into Sockholme.
the Gates at length are opened, and the King admitted entrance, and
acknowledged by all to be their lawful King, and then was Crowned, and solemn
Feasts were held for all sorts of people, both Suedes, Danes and Germans.

This was a fair morning, but who knows what a great-bellied day may bring
forth? Plots to destroy the Suedish Lords.
The King all this while was contriving the ruin of the Suedish Nobility, and
now he has them in one place within walls, and a sufficient guard upon them:
But it must be done under the fairest pretense that may be, for the thing it
self, was ugly and ill-favored. Hence it was first resolved, that a Treason
should be supposed to be plotted by the Suedes to massacre the Danes, and
therefore the Danes, as in their own defense, should assassinate the Suedes;
but this was thought dangerous, and might in the event turn to the destruction
of the Danes in so populous a City, and who knows what men in despair may do?

Then another way was propounded, viz. That the King must look upon the Suedish
Lords as under the Popes curse, and sentence of Excommunication, and to draw
forth the Kings justice with more colorable zeal, the Archbishop of Upsal, who
had procured that sentence, must openly accuse the Suedish Lords as
excommunicated persons, for Treason against the King, robbery of the Church,
and as spoylers of the dignity and estate of the Archbishop, and therefore he
must demand Judgment against them? And this was approved of.

And the better to draw these Suedish Lords together, a Feast is appointed the
third day after the Coronation, at which also the Germans and Danes were
present, and then before them all, the Arcbishop of Upsal (though unwillingly
when he saw what would be the event) steps forth before the King, and accuses
the Suedish Lords of injury done by them to himself both in person and estate,
and demanded ^atisfaction for his damages. The King liked not this charge as
not being home enough, and therefore told him, that he forgot the Popes
sentence, the crime of Treason, and his own place, who ought in zeal to the
Church to have demanded punishment upon the persons offending. After which he
commanded the Guards to seize upon the Suedish Lords, The Suedish Lords
surpr^sed,
and (as some Writers say) showed them so much mercy as to let them live till
the next day; and in the interim he set Guards upon all the avenues to the City
that none might be suffered to depart out of it. And the next day being
November 8. Anno Christi 1520, and murdered
not by legal trial; but in a way of Butchery, and murdered
he murdered near a hundred of the Nobles, and chief men of Sueden, and
Citizens of Stockholm, and then letting loose the Soldiers upon the City and
Country, all sorts of persons, Ecclesiastical, Civil, Great, Mean, Men, and
Women, and Children suffered all manner of violences and deaths that Cruelty
could devise; Danish Cruelty.
their rage extending, not only to the living, but to the dead, toward whom
they used all the opprobrious indignities that could be, the lively Character
whereof may be described better by some Dane that saw it, or some that were
interessed in the Scicilian Vespers, or the Parisian Nuptials, or Irish
Massacre than by my pen.

After these horrid Murders, Covetousness.
and outrages, Covetousness began to ascend the Stage, the King seizing upon
all the estates, both of the dead and living, and to make all sure, the
Liberties of Sueden being thus brought into the state of a dead man, they
thought to buy them also so as they might never rise again: To which end, they
set Guards in all places, published Edicts, and did not only deprive the
Suedes of their Armor, but of their Arms and Legs also, saying in scorn, That
a Swede could plow his ground well enough with one arm, and a wodden leg.

But the last, Hypocrisy.
and worst of evils was abominable Hypocrisy. For this Christian Kings
conscience (forsooth) is pretended for what he did: He was touched with much
compassion, and would not have done it, but that his conscience tied him
thereto in zeal to the Church, and obedience to the Popes sentence of
Excommunication; and thus Religion is made the Patron of all these Villainies.
Yet all this quieted not the Kings conscience, but he hastes out of uecden,
possibly fearing lest the ground should open her mouth, and swallow him up, or
lest the fame of his cruelty should arrive before him in Denmark, and make that
Nation abhor, and vomit him out.

But behold how vengeance follows him! Now is he gone home, King of the three
Kingdoms of the Baltic Sea, and to secure Sueden, he had left Guards in every
place: But cruelty never conquered men's spirits; A Tyrant may be feared of all,
but is hated of all, and his own conscience so pursues him, that he can be
quiet no where. And so it fell out with this King; for within three years he
lost all his three Kingdoms without adventuring one drop of blood, or striking
one blow for them. The manner shall be after glanced upon; but my present work
is to show how Sueden, now under water, comes to lift up its head again.

This sad news at Stockholme coming to the ears of Gustavus now at Rafsness,
What Gustav^s then did.
and in particular the murder of his own Father Ericas amongst the rest of the
Nobles, he was not at all discouraged, but rather provoked with a desire of
revenge, and to rescue his Country from such barbarous Tyranny; yet what with
grief and detestation of such execrable cruelty, and doubt that many would be
affrighted thereby from appearing in their Countries cause, his spirit was much
troubled, and rendered less able at the present to determine upon the manner of
his proceeding; and therefore in all haste away he goes to the Mountain-people
with this news; but they, scarce civillized, are little sensible of their
Countries cause Gustavus therefore makes no stay there, but away he goes to a
Castle in those parts commanded by one Aaron Peter, a Noble man, whom once he
knew to be well affected to the Liberties of his Country, and to him he
discovered himself what he was, and what were his intentions, desiring his
counsel; but he found the man, and others in those parts so amazed at the news
of Stockholme, as that they forgot both themselves and the public, and were
rather willing to couch under any burden, than to make opposition against it;
yea so fearful they were of being suspected by the Danes, that they rather
desired to be esteemed wholly at their service, and especially Aaron Peter, who
(though he pretended pity and compassion to Gustavus in this condition) and
promised not only security to his person if he would abide with him, but his
best assistance in compassing the ends propounded by him; yet having drawn from
him the utmost of his resolutions, after a few days, wherein he had carried
himself fairly to avoid suspicion, Treachery.
he gets himself abroad, and away he went to the Danish Lieutenant Bruno, and
discovers to him the whole matter, as well concerning Gustavus his intentions,
as what counsel himself had given him. But Aaron forgot one point of policy,
which was, to let none know his intentions but his own heart; for he told his
wife, whither, and what he went about; who being more true to her Country, and
regardful of the Laws of common honesty and hospitality, than her Lord was,
when he was gone, told Gustavus, whither her Lord was gone, and to what
purpose, and therefore advised him forthwith to shift for himself, furnishing
him with her own horse to go to Suertso, A special providence.
to one that had been Gustavus his Colleague in the University. The day
following came Bruno the Dan^, with twenty Soldiers to apprehend Gustavus at
Aaron Peter's house; but his Lady told him that Gustavus was secretly departed
the day before; and so the prey being lost, Bruno returns without sport. Thus
God made a woman a great instrument in saving Sueden from miserable ruin.

Gustavus being come to Suertso found kind entertainment; but consideration
being had to the restless (...) pursuit of the Danes, it was thought convenient
that he should not stay long there (for now the enemy hunted upon hot sent) and
therefore he departed privately beyond the Dallcarls unto Retwick. These
Dallcarls are a people of Sueden strong and hardy, He goes to the Dallca^^es,
men of resolution, and being inured to work hard in the Mines, were fit for
action, whence (as some Writers note) they have their name of Dallcarls or
Carles, or robustious men of the Dales, having by reason of their privileges
this advantage, that they are numerous and rich. To these Gustavus applies
himself, and relates to them the particulars of the Massacre at Stockholme,
whereby the Suedes had lost much of their best blood; he told them also what
further danger the Nation was in, which he in good language set forth to the
life (for he could no less skifully manage his tongue than his arms.) The
Dallcarls pitying the state of their Country, and having respect to themselves,
and their friends, they told Gustavus, that they would adventure all that was
dear to them to be revenged on the Danes, and to vindicate their Nation from
bondage; only they desired him that he would engage their Brethren of the
Eastern Dales with them. This Gustavus willingly undertook, and forthwith
departed to Mora, the chief City of those Dales, whither coming about the
latter end of December, the next day he obtained audience of them, and told
them,

That he should not need to make any preface to gain their attention, His
speech to them.
being persuaded that the matter of his discourse would ease him of that
trouble; He therefore prayed them to take into consideration the perplexed
condition of the Suedish Nation in those later years, that through their own
distractions, and civil, or rather uncivil discontents they had betrayed the
Liberties of Sueden into the hands of strangers, who instead of seeking the
public weal, had wrought altogether for the advancement of their own interest,
the people of Sueden being in the mean time glutted with misery, and drunk with
tears, having themselves, their wives, children, and estates, prostituted to
Murders, Torments, Rapine, and all manner of contempt. I appeal (says he) to
the old men, they know it, they cannot forget it, and the young men may know
it, if they will ask their Elders. And shall there never be an end of these
miseries? Are the Suedes become a people always to be trampled upon, devoured,
and made food for foreigners? Call (I pray you) to mind the Government of
that Tyrant, Ericus of Pomerland, his Cruelties, Oppressions, and Extortions;
and remember that you, that you I say of the Dales, rose unanimously in defense
of your Country against him, and therein hazarded all that was dear to you,
even to your lives, and thereby compelled him with shame to return to his own
Country. And now look about you and consider, Are you in any better condition
under the enraged Danes? a people that bear an immortal hatred to our Nation,
and are themselves hateful to all Nations but themselves: Can you expect better
dealing now from them, than you have found hitherto after an hundred years
experience? Hear the cries of the Survivers at Stockholm, the fatherless and
widows, the dying groans of so many brave men of this Nation, under the cruel
torments, and unsatiable butcheries; the abhorred Massacre of all sorts,
degrees, and sexes, and ages, contrary to all Faith, Promises, Oaths,
Execrations and Engagements under hand and seal. It may be they will now
promise you Peace, Justice, and what not? Did they not give all these
assurances to our dead Friends at Stockholme? and yet they brake all bonds and
engagements, and will you believe their words? No, no; the Danes are still the
same men, or rather inhumane Monsters that ever they were; their hatred is now
broken forth into a flame, which will never be quenched, so long as the riches,
or any blood of the Suedish Nobility lasts, nor will ever cease till it has
run over all the Country. Do you not every day hear the sad news of this
approaching evil? Is it not almost come to your own doors? and will you sit
still till it has seized on your neck? Is it not much better (if we must dye)
to dye like Soldiers, than like slaves? Are the Danes more than men, and we
less than women? I am here present this day: Command my estate, person, and
life, and I will adventure all in this service, if you will join with me in any
way, though I should serve but as a private Soldier. For I had rather dye a
free Nobleman of Sueden, in the defense of my Country, than live to see it
underperpetual vassallage.

The Moreans being much affected with this speech, Their answer.
professed their readiness to appear in the defense of their dear Friends and
Countrymen, in whose liberties and lives their own were wrapped up. Yet they
prayed him, for the present, to retire himself to some place of privacy for his
own safety, till their neighbors of the Western Dales might be in a sit
posture to join with them, assuring him that in the interim they would not
slack their preparations.

Gustavus took this answer courteously, and away he flies to the Western
Dallcarles bordering upon the Mountains, to gain them into a posture; and there
also meeting with fresh news of the bloody cruelty of the Danes, he goes once
more amongst the Mountains, where having to deal with sharp weather, rough and
unknown ways, more trodden by wild beasts than men; yet indignation against
the enemies, and zeal for his Country, add new courage, and resolution against
all difficulties, and dangers, and at last he makes trial of the peoples mind
again: He meets with new difficulties.
But they, scarcely sensible of any thing but what was under ground, and
knowing no happiness above mining, nor any misery worse than it, turned a deaf
ear to all that he spoke, till at length Gustavus came to the house of Laurence
Olai, Sir Laurence Olai assists him.
an active, and brave Knight in those parts, who had sometime served Steno
Stur, the Governor, with much valor and faithfulness. He, joining with
Gustavus, told the Mountainers that Gustavus had given them true intelligence
concerning the Suedish miseries under the Danish cruelties at Stockholme, and
other places: Further adding, that he had received late information, that the
Danish King intended a Royal progress through all Sueden, to receive homage of
the people, and had by Proclamation enjoined Gibbets to be erected in all
places, and that Letters were coming down into the Country to provide quarter
for the Danish Soldiers that were to be as a guard to the King in his Progress.

This news wrought effectually upon them, and as they were considering what to
do, messengers came from the Country of the Dallcarles round about to seek
after Gustavus; but he was gone further out of reach, to Lima. Hereupon the
Mountainers resolve to join with those of the Dales to request Gustavus his
speedy return, whom they would make their Captain; and accordingly he came back
with the messengers, where he found the people assembled, who received him with
loud acclamations of joy, He Arms.
and made him Governor and Captain of the Dallcarles, swearing Fealty, and
obedience to him, assigning him a Lifeguard of choice young men for his honor
and safety.

Thus one great work is over. Gustavus had all this while to do with a people
whose principles were fixed in their manufactures; and though they had many
eyes, and could discern things nigh at hand well enough, yet could they not
discern the times, nor from thence make conclusions what they ought to do. For
God never made all men for all things. Miners are no good Statesmen, nor
Statesmen good Miners; and therefore its the less marvel that Gustavus spent
an whole year in this painful Pilgrimage, with continual labor and danger, and
all to make this people sensible of their condition, and willing to defend
their Liberties before it was too late; and yet could he prevail nothing, till
the Danish Feast at Stockholme (not above two months past) roused them out of
their security. But now Gustavus was in a posture for the Field, as a Captain
for the Liberties of Sueden, against a known enemy, or Tyrant rather, who
thought that he had settled his Government in Sueden, both by Law and Arms.

Nor indeed can this work be looked upon but as a special work of Divine
Omnipotency, Gods providence to the Suedes.
in compassion to an oppressed, and undone people, that so strong a principle
of Magnanimity, Zeal, and Constancy, should lead one man thus in this service
through all opposition and danger; but these are but small things in comparison
of what remained, and was further done by him.

Gustavus being thus engaged, proceeds to gather his Army, He raises an Army.
and to him Laurentius Olai joins, together with the friends and servants of
those Noble men who were murdered at Stockholme, and others disinterested who
were in danger of the Danish interdict, and with these he begins first to march
on Candlewas day, Anno Christi 1520, leading his men to the Copper mountains,
where he surprised the Governor and other Officers belonging to the Mines,
seizing upon all the Danish goods, Seizes on the Kings Treasure.
the Kings Revenue, and the Tenths, and so returned into the Valley.

By this means he gained in some measure a stock for the encouragement of his
Soldiers, whereby his Army increased daily, and he facing about, went to the
other Mountains, where, by general consent, he was made their Lord and
Governor: After which he divided his Army into two parts, leaving one in the
Mountains under the command of Peter Sueno, He divides his Army.
a famous Captain, to whom many of the Inhabitants joined themselves, and these
he kept as a reserve, to assist him as occasion required.

With the other part of his Army he marched into the Country of Helsing, which
on one side bordered upon the Sea, having the valley of the Dallca^les on the
other; and this he did, as well to gain a passage by Sea, if occasion should
require, as to secure his Army the more by such good neighborhood: But whilst
he thus advanced into Helsing, Letters were sent unto the Mountainers from the
Archbishop of Upsal, the old enemy of the Suedish Liberties, signed by himself,
his Father Ericus Trolli, and Bennet Canutus, who styled themselves the Council
of the Kingdom of Sueden; the purport whereof was, to beseech them to be
mindful of their duty to their Sovereign the King, and of the peace of the
Kingdom of Sueden, with large promises of the Kings grace and favor to them,
and of a safe conduct to Gustavus, if he would lay down Arms; adding that by so
doing, differences might be composed for their great advantage: But all the
entertainment these Letters met with was, Indignation, and Scorn.

The Helsingers gave Gustavus no harsh entertainment, He advances into Helsi^g
yet was his presence not very acceptable, they besought him that they might be
spared from present engagement in Arms, their Country being exhausted and much
impoverished by the late troubles: Gustavus hereby found that their temper was
not for his turn; he must have men of resolution, and therefore he accepted of
their submissive answer, and leaving them to second thoughts, he marched thence
into Gestrict, From thence into Gestrict.
where the people readily submitted to him, and so he returned to the Dales
again, having by this march increased his Army to the number of five thousand
good old Soldiers, who having formerly hidden themselves in several places,
now repaired to him.

The Archbishop of Upsal finding what little respect his Letters had with the
Mountainers, he resolved to do that by force, which his fair language could not
effect; and therefore he sent Henry de Milen, with a commanded party of
Soldiers into the Dales, to reduce them betimes, and to crush the Bird in the
Egg.

Gustavus being informed of his coming, advances to meet him, de Milen hearing
this, retires from him, professing to the Archbishop, that Gustavus was not to
be dealt with by parties: But the truth is, a spirit of trepidation had
possessed the Danes, The Danes are infatuated.
or else being in the Field, as they were, they would never have suffered an
enemy thus to gather under their noses, nor have dallied thus with Gustavus by
parties, when they had a just Army in readiness.

Gustavus was otherwise minded, he had begun, and now there was no retreating;
He will now let all men know that he was so far from fearing the Danes, that he
undertakes a long march to find them out, and fight them within their own
walls, and accordingly he advances to Westerass, He marches to Westerass.
a City having a Castle, and being rich by a continual Market of Copper and
Iron brought daily from the Mountains thither, and therefore there the Danes
had placed a Garrison.

Gustavus by this march also had much increased his Army by the confluence of
the Country to him, whereupon he divided his Army into three Battles, the Van
was commanded by Laurentius Olai, the middle by Laurentius Ericus, whom he
commanded to march through the valley of Balingsass, and to encamp near to St.
Olais Chapel, but not to attempt any thing without further order.

The Enemy not minding to stay their leisure; The Danes are bea^en.
and observing the manner of Laurentius his approach, gave him a full charge,
especially with their Horse, which was so bravely entertained by Laurentius,
that the Danes gave ground, and at last both Horse and Foot were driven to a
disorderly retreat, whom Laurentius pursued. Gustavus hearing hereof, and
fearing lest his men's forwardness might carry them beyond their Post, he hasted
into the Van, though with some danger to his person, and with the loss of some
that were nigh to him, and when he came, he found Laurentius engaged even unto
the streets of the City in pursuit of the flying Enemy, so that it was
dangerous to bring them to a stand, whereupon he gave them their liberty, and
with them he follows the enemy through the streets. But the Danes, when they
came into the Market place, ra^lied themselves, and made a stand behind their
Ordinance, which were ready planted to give the Suedes a salutation upon their
first approach: But Laurentius Fricus with the middle Battle, found out a
nearer way, and was already gotten into the City, Westerass taken.
and now charged the Danes in their Rear, making them quit their place, and
their Ordnance, and thereby saved much blood which might have been shed of the
Suedish side. The Soldiers in the Castle seeing their Friends thus beaten,
shot fiery bullets, whereby the City was fired in sundry places; but the
Suedish Soldiers quenched the fire, and saved the City. The Danes in the City
being sled to their intrenchments, defended themselves till they had
strengthened the Garrison in the Castle, and then by the help of their Boats,
gat them to Stockholme.

This Victory, as it discouraged the Enemy, so it much encouraged many secret
Friends to their Country to forsake the Danes, and to take part with Gustavus,
amongst whom was Arvidus, a West Goth, whom Gustavus knew so well, that he
presently sent him with part of the Army to besiege the Castle of Steckburrow,
and to watch the motion of the people in those parts. Other Castles also were
besieged; but Laurentius Ericus was sent with his Brigade to Upsal, and
Laurentius Olai, with the Country people that now flocked to him from all
parts, was appointed to second him. As they marched thitherward they
intercepted the Scouts of the Governor of Upsal; and the next day Letters were
sent from the Governor, and Magistrates of Upsal to the Suedish Commander in
chief, to desire liberty according to their wonted manner every year upon St.
Ericus day, to hold their Procession with the shrine of St. Ericus, to the
Church of old Upsal, being half a mile without their City; to which, answer was
returned, That it belonged to the Suedes, not to the Danes to hold that
solemnity. The Governor though he missed the Procession, yet would not lose
his Feast; he therefore would let the Suedes know, that he could keep his Feast
though the Suedish Army waited upon his Trenches; and accordingly held his
Feast in the Archbishops Garden. But the next morning before break of the day,
the Suedish Army came to the walls, seized upon the Guards, and entered the
City, Upsal taken.
whilst the Danes half asleep, and as yet scarce sober, being surprised with a
Pannick fear, fled out of the City, fiering of it as they went: But the Suedes
appointing a party to quench the fire, pursued the Danes till they had passed
the River, in which passage the Governor was shot with an arrow, whereof he
died at Stockholm.

About eight days after comes Gustavus from Westerass to Upsal, and calling
the Canons of the College together, he asked them whether they were Suedes or
Danes, charges them with the blood, spoil, and misery of Sueden, affirming that
they, and their Archbishop had nourished all the Rebellions in Sueden against
their lawful Governors, that they were betrayers of their Countries Liberties
into the hands of Foreigners; that ere long they must be responsible for those
actions, and in the mean time he required Fealty from them, and security that
in their stations they would maintain the peace and liberty of the Country.
They humbly answer by Petition, desiring that he would consider their
engagement to their Archbishop, now at Stockholme, and that they might have
leave to send to him to see if they could prevail to take him along with them
in this engagement, promising to write to him to invite, and persuade him
hereunto. This Gustavus was content to grant, and wrote himself by the same
messenger: But what other message the Canons sent privately, the event renders
somewhat doubtful. For the Letters were received with contempt, and the
messenger detained, the Archbishop saying, that he would carry an answer in his
own person; and accordingly he caused a Body of Horse and Foot immediately to
be drawn forth, with which he marched with that speed and secrecy, that they
were within two miles of Upsal, before Gustavus heard any thing of their coming.

Gustavus now too late, began to consider his own weakness, his Army being
divided in so many several employments, and the enemies (if he was not
misinformed) exceeding him in strength: whereupon he debated with himself what
were fittest for him to do: the City was unassured to him, if not assured
against him: If he retreat, it would be construed for a flight: If he stay, he
must put all to the hazard: He considered also that though he might suffer in
his Honor by a Retreat, yet that might be repaired again, but if he lost his
men, that loss would be irreparable both as to his own honor, the liberty of
Sueden, and the safety of his Party.

Hereupon he speedily withdrew out of the City into a Wood not far off:
Gustavus quits Vpsal.
and the Archbishop without opposition entering the City, is soon informed
thereof, and as eagerly pursues him to the Wood, where the Suedes had made a
stand, and gave not ground for all that the Danes could do against them.

As Gustavus was bestirring himself from place to place, His danger and
delivery.
his Horse fell into a Quagmire, where, being espied by the Danes, he was
knocked from his Horse, and had been at their mercy; but that a party of about
twenty of the Suedish Horse came seasonably to his rescue, and horsed him
again; after which, returning to charge the enemy afresh, they retired, but yet
in good order, which Gustavus observing, he was willing to make a golden Bridge
for a flying enemy, and so let them go quietly to Upsall.

Gustavus had now leisure to consider what to do: and found by experience a
double error in his proceedings: First that he had divided his Army into so
many parts, that none of them was of it self sufficient to oppose the enemy in
case they should gather to an head: the other, that in his March (contrary to
Caesar's Rule) he had not reduced the enemies Castles; but le^t them, as Birds
of prey, to fall upon any of his Parties, when they should be weak. He
considered also, that if now he should leave the wood, he was environed with
those Castles, and had the enemies Army entire, and near him. What shall he now
do? Men bring themselves into straits, Gods providence.
and plunges, but God brings them out. Gustavus had a party now besieging the
Castle of Westerass, who hearing of the fight between the Archbishop, and
Gustavus, rose, and hasted to him. Gustavus being thus recruited, turns to the
left hand, leaving Upsal on the right, and so bended his march toward
Stockholme, supposing that they might meet with the Archbishop, before he could
recover Stockholme; and herein his expectation was not frustrated: For if
Gustavus committed two errors, the Archbishop fell into one which was worse
than both of them, and that was, that being returned to Upsal, he considered
not that he had left Gustavus in a posture of defense, who also might possibly
recruit his Army, and so meet with him in his return to Stockholme if he made
not the better haste; and so indeed it fell out, Gustavus met him, fought him,
The Danes again are beaten.
and after an hours dispute, Gustavus his Arguments were of that force, that
the Archbishop hardly escaped into Stockholme with tenth part of his Army.

Gustavus follows him, and entrenches his Army near to the City, His Army much
increased
but considering that the City was full of Danes, and that most of the Suedes
after the late Massacre had forsaken their houses, and that it was like to hold
out long, he was casting with himself how to increase his Army; but he was soon
eased of that care: For the Helsingers, that hitherto had concealed themselves,
now come unanimously, and offer their service to him, and the like did many old
Soldiers of Germany, insomuch as he was less able to provide quarter for them
than men.

But what does the King of Denmark all this while? Is not he ready by this to
march with a complete Army to save a Kingdom that is ready to be lost? No
doubt but he had a good mind to it; The King of Denmark hated at home.
but his condition was such that he durst not stir from home. For as he went
out of Sueden without one God-speed, so he came into Denmark without one
Welcome-home. He was so dyed in blood that all were afraid of him: His Victory
was abominated, his person odious, and his Government grown intolerable;
wherefore finding that he could raise no Army at home, and that if he should go
out of Denmark he might lose all there, and get nothing but blows abroad; he
commands his Governor in the Isle of Gothland to relieve the Danes in Sueden
as occasion should require; in pursuance whereof, he repairs thither, and after
one repulse suffered, he relieved the Castle of Steckburg, besieged by Arvidus,
and then changing the Garrison, he committed the keeping of it to one Bernard
de Milen.

Gustavus considering that the siege of that place would prove dangerous to
Arvidus, A Convention of the Estates in Sueden.
if the Country, and neighborhood were not assured to him; he sent to the
Bishop of Hincopen, and having prevailed with him, by his advice, he summoned a
meeting of all the States of East and West Gothland, Smalland, Vermeland, and
of the Dales; and when they were assembled, he prayed them to take into
consideration the condition of their Country: that the misery thereof was
occasioned only through their divisions and variety of interests; and the
Government having been of late in the hands of Foreigners, the Public weal
has thereby been much endamaged. He said, he should not need to enlarge upon
the particular burdens which they felt and groaned under. The great business
which he desires them to take into consideration was, to advise, and conclude
upon the means of redress: As for himself he would deliver his opinion freely
and clearly, viz. That no means on earth could cure these evils, but a speedy
and effectual unanimity, and joint endeavor to restore the old principles of
Government, by one supreme Governor, and a free Parliament of the States, as
formerly had been used: But if they had any further advice therein, he
earnestly desired to be informed by them, assuring them that whatsoever they
should judge meet to be done in order to a settlement, he would endeavor the
accomplishment of the same, though to the sacrificing of his life, and all that
was dear to him.

This Speech being ended, there was a joint acclamation, and assurance given,
that they all fully, and freely assented to his opinion, and were ready to
assist him therein to the utmost, withal, giving him great thanks for his
undertaking their rescue out of the Tyrants hands, earnestly requesting him to
proceed till he had perfected the same, whereunto they would constantly
contribute their prayers to God for his gracious assistance, and for the
protection of his person; and for his further assurance, they do not only
acknowledge, They proffer him the Kingdom.
and promise submission to him as their lawful Governor; but they pray that it
may not seem grievous to him to take upon him the place, and title of their
lawful Lord and King.

To this Gustavus answered, That he took up Arms against the common enemy of
his Country, Which he refuses.
not aiming at Rule, but at the peoples liberty from the iron yoke of the
Danish Tyranny, under which themselves, their wives and children lay bound day,
and night; That he called not himself to the work, but only offered his
assistance therein; That he was invited to command by the Transilvanian Suedes
of the Dales; That his detestation of that abhorred Butchery at Stockholme
(wherein, not only many Personages fit to do their Country service, but many
of his own blood lost their lives and estates) did enrage his spirit to it, so
that he thought nothing dangerous for him to adventure, so that he might take
vengeance for it, which made him yield to the invitation of the men of the
Dales: and if you also (said he) will join your aid in this work, and can
conside in my command, I will not refuse to be your Captain and Governor
until the enemy be fully vanquished, and our Country cleared from them. But as
touching the making of a King, you may take that into consideration when the
War shall be fully finished; For then whomsoever the States of Sueden shall
elect to be King or Governor, his will I be to serve in any condition.

This Speech was received with joyful acclamations, and an unanimous vote that
Gustavus should be accepted for their Lord and Governor; and accordingly all
that were present swear Fealty to him, and faithful obedience next under God.

This was a little Parliament of part of the Nation, and chiefly intended to
assure those places where the War was, and to unite them in a more vigorous
prosecution thereof; and the success was answerable: For hereupon many Towns
and Castles of West-Gothland, Many join with him.
and Small and, readily surrendered, and submitted to Gustavus, whose Deputies
being sent to the Council, and convinced in their judgments of the justness of
the cause, the people had obliged themselves to stand to what their Deputies
should conclude. Hereupon Gustavus finding less need of employing so many
Soldiers in these neighboring parts, he sends a party into Finland, to which
many of the people joined: Amongst whom was one Grabb, a valiant man, and
skilful Sea-Captain, who having armed a few ships, with them assaulted such
places upon the Coast as held for the Dane, sometimes in one part, sometimes in
another; surprising Towns, slaying many, doing all by night, and before the
next morning he was gone, no body knew whither, nor which way. This caused the
Enemies to divide their Forces, to guard so many places at once; and in the
mean time the Suedes sat down before Abbo, Abbo besieged
though they were there hard matched, and sometimes overmatched by the Danes;
for as yet that part of the Country had not felt the Danish cruelty, though if
they had prospered, they should not long have escaped the same.

The Castle of Steckburg, Steckburgh surrendered.
after above half an years siege, was taken by Arvidus, the Governor whereof
being committed to Prison, after he had lain there two months, he submitted to
Gustavus, and swear Fealty to him. The Governor of the Isle of Gothland being
ignorant of these passages, came with a Fleet, well provided to relieve the
Castle; but when he came to the Promontory, he was suddenly assailed by the
Suedish ships which lay behind the same; and after the loss of six hundred of
his men, he was glad to betake him to his wings. Shortly after, Arvidus was
sent with part of his Army to block up Calmar, the rest being sent to the Camp
before Stockholme; For the Danish Admiral, Stockholme relieved by the
after the late defeat, having repaired his losses with a new supply of men and
ships, came to the relief of them in Stockholme, and the Danes being
strengthened by this recruit, sallied out of the City, and beat up one of the
Suedish Quarters, so that for a months space, the City remained disingaged.

Gustavus now finding by experience that Stockholme was a morsel too big for
him to swallow, without further strength, he bent his principal industry for
the recovery of other places Garrisoned by the Danes, and amongst other places
the City of Nicopen was at length yielded up to him by the Governor, Nicopen
yielded to the Suedes.
Henry Canzow, with whom Letters were found from the Danish Tyrant, which
required him to put to death all the Suedes that came into his power,
especially those of the Nobility: But as he had too much humanity in him to
execute so bloody a Decree, so he liked it not in others, and therefore he told
Gustavus, that Letters of the same purport were sent to other places, and he
believed they would be put in execution, which fell out accordingly in Finland;
for the Governor of Abbo, being blocked up (though not formally besieged) by
the Suedes, caused diverse of the chief men of Finland to be assassinated: But
Ericus Flemming being forewarned of the danger, and now in the Governors hand,
offered his service, with so many Suedes as adheared to the Danes, to adventure
their lives the night following to beat the Suedes before the City out of their
quarters, which being liked by the Governor, he asigned him such men as he
desired, who accordingly entered the Suedish quarters, but liked their
entertainment so well, that they returned no more into Abbo: and thus he
escaped that danger which many others shortly after smarted under.

Gustavus having gained Nicopen, the Castles of Tineslor, Tineslor and
Westerass surrendered.
and Westerass, presently after were delivered up to him, the latter having
endured a siege of nine months: But finding all his labor before Stockholme
lost, unless he could increase his strength at Sea, he sent to Lubeck for men
of War, and Ammunition, who readily assented being oppressed by the Danes in
their Trade. Nine ships were sent to Gustavus within a few months with
Ammunition, and Soldiers, who had a great mind to see Gustavus before they
would engage; The Lubeckers assist him.
but being satisfied when they had seen him, they all swear to be faithful to
him; part of these Gustavus sent to the siege of Calmar, the other part he
carried along with him to the siege of Stockholme (as it was the policy of War
amongst the Romans to divide their Auxiliaries) and then he sent the Countrymen
to their several habitations. Within a few weeks after, eight more ships of War
arrived from Lubeck at Stockholme, and being thus more secured at Sea, Gustavus
reinforced the siege in a more regular way than formerly.

The Suedes before Abbo finding the work too hard for them, withdrew their
Forces, and the Governor being now at liberty, by order from the Danish
Admiral, prepared a ship of War, with Ammunition, and Soldiers, for the relief
of Stockholme, which early in a morning coming to the Fore-land, sent out a
Skiffe for discovery, which was intercepted by Ericus Flemming, now Admiral of
the Suedes, who clearing the men out of the Skiffe, and manning it with Suedes
in the same fashion, he sent it back, into which, when the Governor of Abbo
was entered to enquire after news, they presently apprehended him, and carried
him away, and being hardly chased by the Danish ships, The Danes beaten at Sea.
they suddenly fell amongst the Suedes, and being charged by them, some were
taken, and others escaped. But the Governor of Abbo being brought to Gustavus,
he presently hanged him on a Tree, for his cruel assasinating the Nobility of
Finland.

Within a few weeks after the Danish Admiral came with five Ships for the
relief of Stockholme, but being within view, and not liking the Coast, he
returned without doing any thing, and Gustavus now finding the Sea safely
guarded, Stockholme straightly besieged.
he prosecuted his siege more vigoriously, making his approaches to the very
Suburbs, and by Bridges closing his Quarters. Hereupon the City began to be in
distress, and many escaping out, submitted to Gustavus: Amongst these, a Spy is
sent out, who under color of submission, was to make discovery, and as
occasion served, either to return into the City, or to haste into Denmark to
acquaint the King with the state of their affairs. This Spy was discovered, and
being searched, Letters were found sown up in his clothes, whereupon he was
convicted, and executed: And this being known in the City, and judged to be by
intelligence from some within, all the Suedes were ordered to depart, but such
as would take up Arms for the Danes. On the other side, Gustavus having
intelligence of preparations, intended for the relief of the Danes in Sueden,
he sent a party into Norway to begin a War there, who meeting with little
opposition, He begins a War in Norway.
soon made themselves Masters of the Province of Wicken, the Castle of
Carlsburg, the Danes being in no posture to oppose them, as the case stood.

For Christian the second, The King of Denmark flies into Germany.
then King of Denmark, by reason of his injustice and oppressions of his own
people, whilst he invaded the lives, liberties, and estates of all sorts, and
for his execrable murders, and perfidiousness in Sueden; his contumelious
outrages toward strangers, and his uncivil behavior toward his own Queen,
who was sister to the Emperor, Charles the fifth, having hereby provoked all
men against him, but more especially the Duke of Holst, he proclaimed War
against the King; and the Nobility of Denmark, perceiving that they were
distrusted by their King, who relying upon strangers, intended to bring them
into Government in Denmark, and so to rule his Kingdom by force and rigor,
they joined with the Duke, and invited him into Jutland, where all joined with
him. And Christian now too late, though too soon to him, concluding that the
Duke would be made King, leaves his Throne and Country, providing for his
safety elsewhere; and shipping himself, his Queen, Children, and all the
Treasure he could scrape together, he sailed into Germany; first going to the
Duke of Brandenburgh, and then to the Elector of Saxony: and after some time he
found means to raise an Army for the recovery of his Kingdom, but not keeping
touch with his Soldiers, he lost his Army and Kingdom a second time;
whereupon despairing of good success, Then into Flanders.
he fled into Flanders, where he lost his Queen, the greatest comfort he had
left him in the world; not only in regard of her relation to the Emperor, but
in regard of her excellent virtues, whereby she was so much beloved of the
Danes, that they offered to submit to her as to their lawful Queen if she would
stay in Denmark; but she, like her self, chose to live in exile with her
Husband, A good Wife.
rather than to reign without him.

The Danes in Sueden understood these things, and those of them that were
besieged in the Castle of Calmar were ordered to hold out as long as they
could, and then to fire the City, Calmar surrendered.
and ship themselves for the Isle of Gothland; but the Citizens being informed
hereof, in the night time opened their gates, and let in the Suedes, who soon
made themselves Masters of the Castle, and after that, of the Isle of Oland,
whereof when tidings came to Stockholme, they proffered to surrender, but upon
such conditions as Gustavus would not accept of.

Now did the Suedish affairs seem to promise a calm nigh at hand; A Parliament
called.
whereupon Gustavus thought it convenient to endeavor a settled form of
Government, for which end he summoned a general meeting of all the States at
Stregness, who being assembled, he told them, that now things were in a hopeful
way of peace; that it was necessary for the public peace, and justice of the
Nation, that the ancient form of Government should be revived: That for the
present they see the Nation without a supreme Magistrate, and without a Senate:
That the former has murdered the later, and the people ejected the former:
That he hoped in a short time to render an account of the Nation reunited, and
in a peaceable condition, which is the end of War; but some person must be
elected to govern them when in a peaceable condition, and a Senate must be
constituted according to the ancient custom of Sueden, who may elect the
supreme Governor: That they, the States of Sueden, are the only first movers
in this work, and have power to constitute this Senate anew, and therefore he
prays them to proceed according to their discretions for the settlement of the
Government, and such instruments as are necessary, and conducing thereto.

The States seeing their way clear before them, A Senate established.
without further demur proceed to the election of a Senate, consisting of some
of those of the former Senate who had escaped the enemies fury, and continued
faithful: to whom they added others of the great men: and having constituted
them, they granted to them the same power, and privileges which the ancient
Senate had, and in particular, to elect one such person as they should think
meet to be their lawful King or Governor.

The Senate being thus chosen, They choose Gustavus King
and empowered, they unanimously elect Gustavus for their King, and send a
Message thereof to him, humbly requesting that he will not refuse to take the
Kingdom upon him, and to perfect the work of restoring liberty to the Nation,
and vindicating the same from all Tyranny.

Gustavus having heard this Message, answered, That the burden of governing a
Kingdom was too heavy for his shoulders. which he refuses.
That it was one thing to govern in War, wherein he was trained, and another
thing to be a King, wherein he was not skilled. That he was well wearied
already with the dangers, cares, and labors of the War, and now having
brought the Nation into a posture of subsistence in peace, he has his ends,
and therefore desires them to rest contented therewith, and that they would
make choice of some other person of the Nobility of Sueden to be their King,
assuring them that himself would gladly serve under him whom they should
choose, and so thanking them for their good opinion of him, he dismissed the
Messengers.

The States, They press him again.
and Senate having heard this answer, were no wise satisfied with it, and
therefore renew their requests (the Popes Legate also joining with them) and
tell Gustavus plainly that they will not receive any negative, nor can he evade
the election if he regard the Senate, or convention of States, or the peoples
good.

Gustavus hereupon is at length overswayed, and yet abhorring all unworthy
self ends, He submits.
he professed his acceptance only upon the same grounds which moved them to
elect him: and that withal he was convinced that the work was of that nature
that he was unable to go through with it, His Piety.
and therefore he would rest upon the Lord of Sabbath for his assistance, and
protection, and next under him, upon the Lords of Sueden, whose wisdom, care,
and industry he much prized; especially desiring the earnest, and daily prayers
of all the people, upon which account only he would submit to their desires.
And so, according to the ancient custom, by mutual obligations of Oaths,
Gustavus is solemnly declared, and proclaimed King of Sueden: yet refused he to
be crowned till five years after.

The first thing that was done after this election was the requital of the
Lubeckers, The Lubeckers required.
for adventuring their men, Ships, and estates, with the Suedes, against the
Danes; in recompense whereof the Suedes granted, that they would never make
peace with the Danes without the consent of the Lubeckers. That upon the
surrender of Stockholme, such wares, goods, and debts therein, The Articles of
agreement.
as the Lubeckers, and Dantzickers should own upon Oath, should be secured, and
returned to them. That the Lubeckers shall be paid for their service. That the
Sea should be free for them, and that they shall have a free trade in Sueden.
That they only of all foreign Nations shall have a free Trade in the Ports of
Stockholme, Calmar, Sarcopen, and Abbo. That the King shall do them right. That
he shall never set prizes upon any of their Merchandise, nor compel them to
sell, or leave their goods against their wills. That their goods and estates
wracked, shall be restored to the owners, without loss. That their goods sold
in Sueden by their Mariners, or servants without order, shall be restored to
their owners, and the offenders punished. That the King of Sueden shall not
harbor any of the enemies of Lubeck. That if any difference shall arise
between the Suedes, and Lubeckers, the same shall be ordered by four Lords of
Sueden sent to Lubeck, and so many Citizens of Lubeck joining with them. These
were confirmed under the hands, and Seals of the King, and Lords of Sueden, and
Commissioners of Lubeck. This was more than a recompense to the City of Lubeck,
had they been as careful to keep touch with the Suedes as the Suedes were with
them.

Shortly after Stockholme was surrendered to the King, Stockholme surrendered.
who entered the same in the month of June, after welnigh three years siege,
wherein the Danes had time enough to have relieved it, if they had been
convinced of any right that they had to the Kingdom of Sueden. Upon his entry
he was proclaimed King of Sueden and Gothland, with great applause and joy of
all sorts. Hereupon diverse Towns and Castles were surrendered to him; and in the
rear, the Dukedom of Bleking, and the Town and Castle of Elsburgh, the only
commodious Port that the Suedes have into the Western Sea. But still the
Dukedom of Finland, and the adjacent Countries were out of the Kings
possession; and therefore beginning now to study good Husbandry for those
people whom he must own, he dismissed his Foreign forces, and the residue of
his Army he sent into Finland under the command of Ivar, and Ericus Fleming,
who within the space of one year reduced all that Country into obedience,
Finland reduced.
and the Northern people submitted upon the credit of their Neighbors, so that
the whole Kingdom was now united under the Kings command, and he had nothing
to do but to study peace and justice. Peace settled.
And accordingly he first made peace with the Muscovite, Peace with the
Muscovite.
having none other enemy whom he need to fear, nor indeed any that bordered
upon him, but the Muscovite on the East, and the Dane on the West; and as for
the Danes, their condition was this:

King Christian being fled, The Duke of Holst chosen King of Denmark.
Frederick, Duke of Holst, being sent for, came into Denmark, and by the
Nobility was elected and crowned King some years before Gustavus was crowned in
Sueden, though Gustavus was in Arms diverse years before him. ^oth these coming
to the Throne upon the same title of the peoples liberty; and knowing how
necessary peace with one another would be, a mutual Treaty is propounded by the
King of Denmark, and in order thereto, the King of Sueden propounded an
interview, wherein he stood not upon punctilio's, but proffered to come to the
King of Denmark in some convenient place upon security of a safe conduct, The
two new Kings meet.
which the King of Denmark granted as soon as it was demanded. The place of
meeting was Ancona, in the confines of Scania, where, in the presence of the
Lords of both Nations, an interview is had; and after mutual salutations and
complements, the King of Denmark spoke of the miseries, and calamities that had
befaln both the Nations for diverse years last past, declaring their present
dangers also by reason of the continual contrivances of Christian their late
King, which (says he) will be much heightened if our discords should continue:
For my own part therefore I am for peace with Sueden upon just and honorable
terms. Gustavus answered, that he held peace between the Nations convenient
and commendable, and was willing to hearken thereto upon equal conditions.

The King of Denmark began with proposing the continuance of the union of the
three Northern Kingdoms according to the Articles of Calmar; The King of
Denmarks speech.
which (said he) were confirmed by the Oaths of the Deputies of all the three
Nations; yet he desired not the change of the present Government of Sueden, but
only that Gustavus should acknowledge him Superior. Gustavus secretly
disliking this proposal, answered modestly, that for his part he was
unwillingly drawn to accept of the Suedish Crown. The King of Suedens answer
That he could wish that both Nations could flourish under one head. But (said
he) the agreement of Calmar is dissolved by the misgovernment of the late King;
and if the Danes could not all this while gain their expectations by force of
Arms, much less can they think it rational for the Suedes to yield up by Treaty
the Liberties of their Country, which are dearer to them than their lives, as
the late Wars have demonstrated. Neither can himself, who is sworn to maintain
the Liberties of his Country, allow of such terms, much less advise his people
to consent thereto. Yet for my own part, though I will not be a subject, yet I
desire to be a friend, true, and faithful to the King of Denmark, and am ready
to gratify him in all things agreeable to equity.

The King of Denmark perceiving hereby the unreasonableness of his former
demands, tells the King of Sueden in plain terms, that himself was desirous of
a firm peace, and league with him, if Sueden would be content with its ancient
limits, and would yield up what in these late Wars they had gained from
Denmark, especially the Dukedom of Bleking.

The King of Sueden answered, that himself valued the peace of both Nations
beyond that petty Duchy, and therefore he would consult with his Lords about
it, and accordingly it was assented to.

But the proposal about the Isle of Gothland, Peace concluded.
proved more difficult: It was in the possession of the Danes, but claimed as
belonging to the Crown of Sueden, yet at last they agreed to lay that debate
aside till a more convenient time: and thus peace was concluded between these
two Kings, as well for the Hans-Towns, as for themselves, against Christian the
deposed King; and all the Suedish Captives in Denmark were set at liberty, and
such of the Suedes as formerly had any particular interest in Denmark, were
restored to their right.

About this time a spiritual disease was newly breeding in Germany, Gospel
light in Germany.
which soon grew to be almost Epidemical in those Eastern parts. Gospel Light
was newly sprung out of Popish darkness, discovering the very bowels of the
Romish Religion, to be a mere garbage of pride and covetousness: To prevent
which, the Devil raises up another light, Envied by the Devil.
or a thing as like to light as himself is, when he is transformed into an
Angel of light. He found the people as desirous to gain their Civil as their
Religious Liberties. This he colourably helps on by a company of Professors,
Anabaptists trouble all.
pretending to a more pure light, and perfect way of holiness by a second
Baptism, suggesting that men of light must walk according to their light, and
that they were bound by no other Law, and so needed, neither Magistracy, nor
Ministry: Nay, those Ordinances savor of Antichristian Tyranny. Hereupon they
rose, and ran up and down Germany, and like the waves of the Sea, swallow up,
and bear down all before them, till dashing on a Rock, they break themselves in
pieces.

But before this storm, Two of them come into Sueden, and cause much trouble.
two drops fall upon Sueden by the coming over of two men with the Holland
Merchants, during the interview of these two Kings. These were Melchior Rincus,
and Knipper Dolling, who arriving at Stockholme, instill new principles into
the people, whence followed, that entering the Churches, down go Images, and
Organs, and all such things as they will call monuments of Idolatry. They made
also public invectives against public Worship, and the Clergy, as
Antichristian, suggesting that it were better to have none at all.

Gustavus the King returning to Stockholme finds much need of his presence,
Gustavus banisheth them.
and understanding of the tumultuous Reformation, and the sad principles taken
up, he commits the two Evangelists to prison, and afterward banished them; but
their poison was not so easily cured.

The news of this Reformation at Stockholme, Their infection spreads.
spreads far, and wide over the Kingdom, and liberty was so welcome to all,
being newly crept from under a Tyranny, that even good Government is brought
into question, and the King saw no way to pacify the storm, but by casting
overboard to the people somewhat to keep the Whale from overturning the Ship:
and finding that he must adventure a breach with the Pope, The Pope justifies
the massacre at Stockholme.
who had lately sent a special Legate, the Cardinal de Potentia, with Authority
to enquire of the bloody Massacre made by Christian at Stockholme, thereby to
vindicate himself of so horrible a crime, and that the Legate upon examination
had judicially pronounced sentence, that nothing was done therein by Christian
but what was just and right; The King visits the Kingdom.
he therefore told the people that he would visit all the Churches in his own
person, and make a reformation by the advice of learned men; and accordingly
the King in person visited all the Churches throughout the Nation, and informed
himself of the state of them; but coming to Upsal, he was opposed by the
Archbishop, and Canons; whereupon a Disputation was appointed, wherein the King
himself would be President: After which he summoned all the States of Sueden to
meet, to whom he related what he found in his Visitation, requesting their help
in directing some moderation in the work of Reformation, A Convention of the
Estates.
in Doctrine, and the worship of God, and in calming the violence of the
Catholic Clergy, which were such desperate enemies to it; as also in
regulating their abuse of the Church-maintenance, which they spent in pride and
luxury, which ought to be employed for the saving of peoples souls.

Their answer was, that if the matter be made to appear upon enquiry, they were
of opinon that the Temporalties belonging to the Clergy, may, and ought to be
seized, and the Church-maintenance also secured, for the right ends and uses to
which they were appointed.

The Ecclesiastics declaim against this, affirming, that the Churches
privileges and revenues were granted and confirmed to the Church by Kings and
Emperors; and therefore ought not to be invaded under pain of damnation. To
this it was replied, that the true Elders were worthy of double honor, both of
reverence and maintenance; but such as are slow bellies, neither serving God
nor man, ought not to have the Churches maintenance; and that if some Kings,
against all equity, permitted the same, other succeeding Kings may, and ought
to reform it; that there is not one sentence in all the Scriptures that
warranteth such power in Churchmen, or that countenanceth such manner of
living, especially in an unlawful way of opposing the Civil Magstrate, They
leave the Church-revenues to the disposal of the King.
as has been used in Sueden for these last two hundred years. In conclusion,
the States determined, that the Churches Revenues are in the power of the King,
according to the condition of times, to increase, maintain, or to diminish, as
may best conduce to the safety of true Religion in Doctrine, and to the
establishment of the pure worship of God, and holiness of life.

Hence followed a storm of Imputations, and Execrations, Popish lies, and
slanders.
Foreign Nations are made to believe that the King is an Atheist, and that the
common people in Sueden obey a Devil in the shape of a man; but the King
slighted these Scar-crows, as all Princes that fix their counsels upon good
foundations, ought to do; yet the common people in Sueden were enraged hereby,
and amongst these the Dallcarles, who were the first in vindicating the peoples
liberties, The Dallcarles rebel.
are now the first that appear to keep themselves and the people in bondage;
but they knew not who to pitch upon for their leader; yet at length one was
discovered called Nicholas Stur, reputed the son of Steno Stur late Governor
of Sueden, and he ascends the Stage in West Gothland to act for the old Church
Government; the people also allured by his great name, joined with him, and so
the War is now become Bellum Episcopale, the Bishops War.

The King hears, Religion reformed.
and sees all, yet the hatred and practices of these men move him not: He
showed magnanimity in the Field, but never more than in this case. He is but
newly a King, and contrary to all principles of policy, he is presently put
upon an hard task, even to change Ecclesiastical Government, and their formerly
received Religion, wherein he was to sail against wind and tide, and therefore
though he was very courageous; yet this daring adventure must rather be
attributed to his Faith, than to his Valor; and he met with success
accordingly, for the Dallcarles not finding that bravery of spirit in their new
Captain, And are quieted.
as might become a son of that famous Steno, began to suspect that they might
be in danger of a cheat, and therefore they secretly sent to the Widow of Steno
Stur to enquire the truth: She tells the Messengers plainly, that they were
deceived, for that her son Nicholas was long since dead. This message caused
the Dallcarles presently to withdraw their assistance, fearing that the cause
of Religion will not bear them out, unless patronized by one of the Royal blood
of Sueden. The Dallcarles now gone, the spirit presently disappears, and is no
where to be found, till he makes another apparition at Rostock, where at the
request of the King of Sueden, he was put to death; as also some others of his
party in Sueden were served in the like manner, Traitors executed.
and so the storm blew away.

Yet the common people are still like a Sea; A Famine causes new stirs.
a Famine comes upon the Land, and the Churchmen tell the people, that this is
the fruit of their Innovations in matters of Religion, whereupon they are again
angry, and refuse to pay the Kings Tribute; the King tells them that few of
them understood Gods words, and that fewer of them could make a right judgment
of his Works; that their stop of his Tributes should not stop his course: He
soon gathers an Army, and marches to Westerass, and from thence gives notice of
his coming to them of the Dales, requring them to meet him at Terna, ready
either to fight for their cause, or to beg pardon for their enterprise.

The Dalcarles like neither if they could help it; Feign they would hold their
old way of Religion, Which are soon quieted.
yet choose rather to submit, and to hazard their opinions rather than their
lives, and the issue was, some of them were corporally punished, others
reproved, and sent home, giving security for their good behavior; and in the
like manner, others in other places were so served; only the Archbishop of
Upsal, being one of the Popes sons, was admitted as a malcontent to banish
himself from his native Country.

The King being returned to Westerass, considered with himself the danger of
the Kingdom by reason of the bad lives of the Clergy, and their neglect of the
peoples souls, and their restless endeavor to bring his Government into
dislike with the people, and his person into contempt by imputations of Heresy
and Blasphemy, to which some stop must be put speedily, Convention of Estates
caled.
or all would come to confusion: Hereupon he called a Convention of all the
States of Sueden, to whom he propounded to take into consideration the State of
the Nation, The Kings Speech to them.
saying, that they all knew that he neither sought, nor willingly undertook the
Government of the same; that they all promised to assist him therein, without
whose help it was impossible for him to Govern; that he now, contrary to his
expectation, found the people much dissatisfied through the instigation of the
Clergy, whose Lordship, and power amongst them, you all (said he) know to be
such, as that now it is put into the balance with the Kings; and their luxury,
pride, and idleness all the world knows to be such, as is inconsistent with the
duty of their places, the good of the people, and righteous Government; that
their Castles and temporal Revenues are exempted from the service and safeguard
of the Kingdom, to maintain Dissentions, Mutenies, and Rebellions; that for
his part he must rather cease to be a King, than to see all things in confusion
under his Government: and therefore I require (says he) some order to be taken
by the Convention of the States for regulating hereof, or else I am resolved to
lay down my Government, and leave it to them that can manage it to better
purpose; and hereof I desire a speedy and positive answer from you the Bishops,
and other States of this Kingdom.

But the Bishops ears were deaf to these things: The Bishops refuse to submit.
their Authority, and Revenues were dearer to them, than to part with them for
words. They thought they had the King at an advantage, which they purposed to
make use of: and the major part of the other States, overswayed by the Bishops,
did not so readily, and resolutely appear for the King, as they ought to have
done, fearing the Popes Thunderbolt more than the Kings displeasure.

The King being offended hereat, said, He would never adventure one drop of
Suedish blood more, to maintain his Government by a Civil War, wherein the
conquered must be miserable, and the Conqueror unjust, and wherein friends must
destroy one another: and forthwith coming into the Convention of States, He
resigns his Kingdom to the States.
he resigned up his Kingdom, and Government, asking nothing but a recompense
for his service, and that they would take his Inheritance at a moderate value,
and so he departed into the Castle. This may seem a strange example. Octavius
only debated with the Senate about laying down his Government, Note.
but did it not: Gustavus did it, and debated it not. They that make Government
their work, will be glad of rest: but they that make it their sport, the people
will sooner be weary of them, than they of it. It seems Gustavus missed of
those encouragements which were promised from the Convention of States when he
undertook the Government; and for him to continue therein without them in order
to maintain the peoples liberty was vain: and therefore if he herein followed
the examples of some of his Ancestors, he may the rather be excused, though
hereby the Kingdom was left in a confused condition.

The next day the States met again, The Nobles oppose the Bishops.
and in cold blood, and upon second thoughts told the Bishops, that the
Kingdom must not be ruined to satisfy their lusts, and that if they would not
be equal judges between themselves, and the people, others must: yet (said
they) you shall be once more heard what you can say for your selves: And
hereupon a Conference was appointed, wherein Dr. Olaus appeared for the King,
and Dr. Gallen for the Bishops; and the point about Ecclesiastical power was
largely debated, which Conference the longer it lasted, the more it touched the
quick, so that many of the hearers saw cause to alter their opinions about
Prelacy, insomuch as upon the third day the Voters for the people urged the
Bishops positively to submit to the King: But if they meant otherwise to expose
the Nation to extremity, and mischief should come thereby, they vowed to be
revenged upon the Authors thereof; and to this, the greater part of the Nobles
agreed. At length the plurality of Votes prevailed, They request him to
reassume the Government.
and a message was sent into the Castle to Gustavus by a person of quality, to
beseech him to return into the Convention of States, but prevailed not, and a
second message prevailed as little, till a third message presented by persons
of near Relation to him prevailed to bring him to the Convention, where he was
received by all the States with the greatest observancy that could be, all
making it their humble request, that he would not reject the Government in such
a juncture of affairs, withal, promising their utmost, and faithful
assistance. The King considering with himself, that though it was an ill
condition with him to be always laboring, and yet never to do the work; yet
it was much worse to grow weary before he had attained to the shore, for that
was the next door to drowning; whereupon he took up a resolution to neglect
men's opinions and censures, and to see to what issue he could bring the
Counsels of the Conventions of Estates.

At last it was concluded that the Bishops should render up their Castles and
Temporalties to the Kings disposal, The Temporalties of the Bishops given to
the King.
and submit to live upon such Pensions as should be allowed them by the States,
saving evermore the titles, interests and right of the Nobility, and others, to
any part of the said Temporalities, which by the distemper of the times, had
been encroached upon: But the execution hereof proved more difficult; many
being unwilling to disrobe themselves before they went to bed.

Such as were worst affected were soonest at the issue, as desperate persons,
through conscience of their guilt, conclude that no mercy is to be had, and
therefore they had as good pass the Pikes at first as at last. Only the Bishop
of Hincopen was loath to part with his Castle of Monkbed, about which he held
some debate, but in conclusion was ordered to deliver possession at a day
prefixed, and in the mean time to put in security for the performance thereof,
and not to disturb the public peace. The King would not discharge his Army
till all was done, and at the time appointed he marched with it to the Castle
of Monkbed, where he was sumptuously feasted by the Bishop, who gave so great
content to the King, that he discharged the Bishops Sureties, and at his
request, allowed him to visit the Churches of Gothland, where, having gotten
much Treasure, without taking leave of the King, he took shipping, and sailed
to Dantzick, where, after some years, The Bishop of Hincope^ flies.
he dyed. And thus Sueden gave a leading example to the Eastern Nations of
regulating, and restoring the Church-revenues to the right ends for which they
were intended.

Gustavus having now reigned five years since his first election, The Clergies
pride abated.
and having thus far prevailed to pare the nails, and clip the wings of the
Lordly Clergy, he thought that now he might hearken to the advice of his
States, and give them satisfaction by being Crowned, and thereupon he appointed
a day to solemnize his Coronation at Upsal, Gustavus is crowned.
which accordingly was performed, after he had served at the helm of Government
seven years.

Gustavus his spirit, Reformatiou carried on.
which was always daring, grew yet more brave: His aims are yet higher, viz.
at a reformation in Doctrine, Worship, and holiness of life; for which end he
first placed in all the Cathedrals, men eminent for learning, holiness, and
eloquence, to preach the word of God, enjoining the Bishops out of the
Church-revenues, to provide them such Pensions as might encourage them in the
work. The King also kept set times every week to hear them in his own person
before he sent them forth, The Kings piety.
and this he did, as well to satisfy his own conscience, as to encourage
others to attend upon public Ordinances. But now comes the trial, the States
had agreed, and the Prelates had in show submitted as to their Temporalties;
but when the Reformation in Doctrine, Worship, and conversation was promoted,
Satan rages.
the Devil roars, and will not so easily be cast out of the whole Nation of
Suedon. So do the Bishops.
The Minister that was sent to preach at Scaren, was so entertained by the
Bishop, and his party, that he was forced to fly to Upland to save his life;
and the Rector of the College undertaking to expound St. Matthews Gospel, was
in danger of being stoned by the Scholars, who were encouraged thereto by the
Lords, and great men that joined with the Bishop, in this undertaking. Some
also both of the great men, and Commons of West-Gothland hearing hereof,
bestirred themselves, And others that affected Popery.
not for the Bishops sake (say they) but because our Religion is invaded by
this new German Doctrine of Luther; and upon this account they sent Letters
to Small and to stir them up to take Arms, who were easily persuaded thereto,
and seized upon such as would not join with them, and amongst others, upon the
Countess of Hoy, the Kings own sister. They wrote also to those in the Dales,
and other neighboring Provinces to send their Deputies to a meeting appointed
by them at Larva, so uncertain is the love of the people. Thus the Scene of War
is changed, and though Tyranny was in the Van, and Prelacy in the main Battle,
yet Popery brought up the Rear; and all tended to bring the Nation into its old
condition, rather than to suffer such a change. So unsensible are men of their
present happiness.

This storm the King might rationally foresee, by what he found in the case of
Prelacy; The Kings courage.
yet his courage leads him on even to astonishment, having nothing to back him
but a good cause and a good conscience; and truly, though Politicians might
condemn him, yet the issue justified him. For the Inhabitants of West-Gothland
considering that the generality of the people, The Mutineers disagree.
had sworn Allegiance to the King, thereupon demurred upon the business; as
also the Kings merits, their enjoyment of their Laws and Liberties, and that,
as to the point of Heresy objected against the King, they were no competent
Judges; and that, considering the Kings piety, they had no cause to believe it,
but rather to judge it a scandal raised by his enemies. Hereupon the
confederate Lords grew into differences amongst themselves, Some fly.
and the Bishop, and one other of them fled into Denmark, whither the Kings
Letter pursued them, alleging that it was contrary to their agreement, that
either King should harbor the others enemies, so that they were feign to fly
from thence into Mecklemburgh; and the other Lords (forgetting what they had
done) stood upon their justification, alleging that they were forced to it by
the heads that were absent in Foreign parts; Others put themselves upon trial.
and that they never promoted, or encouraged the Rebellion either by advice,
letters, or instructions, and therefore would stand to their trial at Law.

The King and his Council wondered at their confidence, advising them rather to
stand to the Kings mercy, and to crave his pardon: but they refused any mercy
but what the Law would allow. At last the King produced their own Letters
wherein they had written to the Provinces to take Arms, and so being
self-condemned, Are cast, and condemned.
two of them suffered death, one was ransomed, and the rest begging pardon,
were received to mercy: which excellent temperature in the execution of Justice
commended, and confirmed the King in his new-begun Kingdom, The Kings prudence.
making the people both to fear, and love him. And thus was this stir (for
War I cannot call it) about Popish Religion quieted, not with the Kings
sweat, and labor, but by God alone, whose cause it was.

The King taking into his consideration that the King of Denmarks carriage in
this matter, Another interview of the two Kings.
suited not with the former agreement made betwixt them, and being unwilling
that the same should be invalidated in the least point (wise men who will
preserve friendship, must stop the breach whilst it is small) he prevailed for
an other interview, that they might understand each others mind more fully,
and hereby the former agreement was explained, enlarged, and confirmed, and so
parting in love, they returned with joy.

The King of Sueden after so many storms; The Kings marriage.
now hoped for peace, and a settled Government, and having been three years a
Crowned King, he purposed to build up his Family by Marriage, which he
solemnized with the Lady Katherine, Daughter to the Duke of Saxony, at
Stockholme, and now he must abide the issues, and events of the affairs of the
Kingdom, to be theirs for better, and worse, and what he was formerly bound to
do, merely for the Nations-sake, he must now do for the sake of his own Family
and Relations. And thus having laid the foundation of his own house, His Piety.
he proceeds to the further building up of the house of God; for though he had
before seized upon the Temporalties of the Prelates, yet their places, so far
as they concerned Church Government, he took not away, nor that maintenance
which was appointed for the Ministry: The States also settled Pensions upon
such as should be Overseers, or Bishops, to have care of the Churches, and to
these places (as was said before) the King had sent choice men for gravity,
learning, and holiness of life, and now he advanced two brethren, He preferrs
godly Bishops.
Dr. Laurentius and Dr. Olaus, the one to be Archbishop of Upsal, the other to
be Bishop of Stockholme, through whose care and industry, together with other
reformed Bishops, the Reformation of Religion much prospered in the Kingdom
during their lives, Reformation carried on.
which was for the space of about thirty years; The Bible translated.
and through their study and diligence it was principally that the Bible was
translated into the Suedish Language; and being printed, was dispersed into
every Town through the Nation.

But the time of the Kings rest was not yet come: A strange apparition proceeds
from the Belgic shore unto the Coast of Norway, Christian the deposed King of
Denmark, now long since reputed, as buried in Brabant, had at last by the help
of the Empeperour, and some adventurers in Holland, and the adjacent Countries,
King Christian invades Norwey.
who hoped for large privileges in Denmark or Norwey (if they could be
regained to the King) gathered Soldiers and Ammunition, and with twenty five
Ships sailed from Enchusen to the Coast of Norwey; but by the way having lost
ten of them, they arrived only with the rest, and before they were aware they
were imprisoned by the Ice, all that Winter. Yet was Christian at liberty all
that while to work his designs upon that Country of Norwey, the Danes being at
that season wholly disinabled to oppose him. As many therefore of the great men
of Norwey as pleased, policy.
had free correspondence with Christian: Only the Governor of Agger-house
Castle dealt subtly with him, refusing to surrender it to Christian, but upon
such terms as might stand with his honor. For (said he) though I acknowledge
Christian to be King of these three Northern Kingdoms; yet for the honor of
my Family, I desire leave to write to Frederick the now King of Denmark, for
present relief (which in common reason he cannot send during Winter) otherwise
I will tell him that I must surrender the Castle to King Christian; and by this
means your Majesty will be no loser, and my honor shall be saved. Christian
was contented herewith, and the Governor dispatched his messenger into
Denmark, and notwithstanding the Frost, he had such supply sent him as enabled
him to stand upon his own defense. Upon this Christian prepared for a siege,
during the continuance whereof, as the besieged were relieved by the Danes,
Some Suedes revolt to him.
so were the besiegers not only by the Normans, but by many Runegadoes out of
Sueden: such was their old love to Christian, and their hatred to Gustavus; and
these flocking to Christian from all parts, soliciting the Dallcarles (who were
now disobliged from their King) to revolt with them to their former King, who
(as they said) was through afflictions become quite another man, changed into a
meek and compassionate nature, and a gracious deportment, and would doubtless
embrace them readily, and give them all the assurance they could desire; they
told them also that Forregn Princes would assist him, for that they liked not
such presidents of Subjects deposing their King. And above all, they might
hereby assure themselves that they should be received into the bosom of the
Church, and into the favor of the Pope. These, and such like motives were
suggested to the Dallcarles: Others were more wise.
But old Birds would not be catched with chafe; few of them gave any credit to
these things, and many derided them, knowing that nature is no changeling,
except it be overpowred by supernatural principles: that the manner of
Christians coming, showed little signs of repentance for any other thing, than
for that he had parted with the Crown upon such easy terms: that the
differences between Gustavus their King, and them, were but lately begun, and
might easily be composed; but those between Christian and them, were beyond a
cure. The revolted Suedes seeing this, soon disappear, and the Winter being now
almost ended, and Christian finding his party discouraged, and the stream still
after six years so strong against him, and being grown weary of living upon the
Germain courtesy, he chose rather to cast himself upon a Treaty with his Uncle
the King of Denmark, King Christians foolish credulity.
than to return into Brabant, and having conditions proffered him by the Danish
Admiral of safe conduct whilst he treated with his Uncle, and in case of
non-agreement, that he should have liberty to go whither he would, he sails
with the Admira into Denmark, never so much as enquiring whether the Admiral
had power to grant such conditions or not.

Coming into Denmark, He is made a prisoner.
before he was aware, he was made a Prisoner, gaining only this advantage,
that now he was maintained honorably upon the public charge of the Kingdom,
as one that formerly had been their King, whereas if he had been elsewhere, he
must have lived upon the courtesy of such as would have pitied him; and yet
this is observable, that the Danish Admiral had no thanks for this service, and
many thought that it would have been better for Denmark, if the Prisoner had
been in a Foreign Country: For though it be true, that deposing of Kings by
their subjects is sadly resented by other Princes; yet it is only whilst the
sore is green, and the flesh tender, which may occasion some anger from abroad
for the present; Note.
but if upon some trial, they get nothing, Foreign Princes so love their own
interest, and peaceable Government, that by continuance, the wound breeds
stupefaction, and they will engage no more.

Now as touching Sueden, who was not a little concerned in this business of
Norwey, its worthy our observation, how the breach between the King and the
Dallcarles was first made; for though the occasion was small, yet the mischief
might have been exceeding great. The matter was briefly thus:

The Kings debts to the Lubeckers for their service in the time of his Was, The
King of Sueden meets with new troubles.
were not yet fully satisfied, and now payment was required with some
eagerness, but how they should be paid, and how the money levied, admitted
great matter of debate; some were for a Tax, but that was thought would go
hardly down with the people, who were so exhausted by ten years Wars. Others
were of opinion that the profit of the Mines might be assigned to the Lubeckers
for certain years, but then they knew not how the Government should be
maintained without them? At last a project was propounded to give the King the
biggest Bell save one out of every steeple within his Dominions, which (as was
alleged) would do the work, and no particular man should have any loss, (...)
nor the public be prejudiced. But this was a great mistake as things then
stood: for the Merchants had engrossed much Copper, and if this proceeded, they
were undone, they could get no Market. It was said, this was no good reason,
being of too private a nature, to be balanced with the public good. Then the
quarrel was about the condition of these Bells: It was said, they were
anointed, and consecrated to an holy use, and ought not to be employed for
profane uses; but this also was judged invalid, the opinion being grounded
upon superstitious principles: But be it granted that the anointing, and
consecrating them was superstitious, yet if any property be at all in such
devoted things, that property remains till it be legally destroyed, and until
then, the seizing of such things, and converting them to other uses, will in
the vulgar opinion fall under the notion of Sacrilege, which has been always
abominable even amongst the Heathen, though ^t were done in the wild Wars: Or
if it comes not under that notion, then it must be in the nature of a gift to
the people of the Parish, either for their pleasure, or for the more convenient
assembling them to public duties; in both which cases the unlawful seizing
upon them is looked upon as a common plunder, and invasion of the goods of the
whole body of the people at once, which is a sad presage that no man's
particular estate is his own any longer under such a Government. And it seems
the people of Sueden had such an apprehension of this president; for after it
was resolved upon, and began to be put in execution, an insurrection was made,
and the people stood up in defense of their Bells, Tumults about Bells.
so that some could not be removed, others that were taken down, and carrying
away, were pursued and rescued, and the officers that were employed, were well
beaten for their pains.

This being reported to the King, he called a Convention of the States, which
would have been more seasonable before the business of the Bells had made such
a jangling. This Convention of States met at Upsall: But the Dallcarles, who
were most eager for their Bells, summon another Convention of the people at
Arbogg, so that here was one Parliament against another. The people (says the
Historian) are commonly of that temper, that they will either serve humbly, or
govern proudly. True liberty (which is the golden mean) they neither know how
to want, nor how to use, especially such as the Suedes now were, trained up in
War; who therefore chose rather to lose their peace than their Bells.

But the Parliament at Arbogg thrives not: few hearkened to their summons: yet
did they set a good face upon the matter, and sending Messengers to the King,
Subjects treat with their King.
they protest their fidelity, yet desired his answer to two requests: One, that
the King would not send more forces into the Country of the Dallcarles than
they should deem convenient for them to quarter: The other, not to set any
Governor over them, but such an one as was of their own Country, and
neighborhood. The Kings spirit was too great to like of conditions from his
Subjects, yet his wisdom prevailed to take into consideration the condition of
his affairs. He considered that Christian was now in Norwey: The Kings policy.
That Winter was newly begun: That the Norwegians were inclined to assist
Christian: And that if the Dallcarles should be further provoked, the issue,
might be doubtful. He therefore dissembled his displeasure, and sent them a
Governor according to their desire: But at the end of three years, he raised
an Army, He punishes the Rebels.
and seized upon the chief Authors of this rebellion, and put them to death:
and further, to bring down the pride of the Dallcarles, he seized upon their
liberties, and so levelled them with the rest of the people.

This was the first malignant design against the Government of Gustavus, in
favor of the cause of the deposed King, which, like a Granado firing in the
air, spent it self before it fell: but it proved not the last. For soon after
the King of Denmark died, leaving Christian a prisoner to the Lords of Denmark,
who differing in their opinions as to the election of a King, The King of
Denmark dies.
spent two years in an Interregnum: during which time, some sought to promote
the Son of the deceased King, which was but a child, and therefore more capable
of counsel, and herein the Bishops joined. Others acted for the Duke of Holst:
An Interregnum there.
and some were for restoring Christian, then a prisoner, to the Crown again.
This was one summons to the King of Sueden to look about him, and kept him off
from punishing the Dallcarles for the matter about the Bells. But there was
another thing that was no less dangerous, though the effect was not like to be
so sudden, and that was this

About this time there was a change of Government in Lubeck from the Popish to
the Lutheran way, Reformation of Religion in Lubeck.
which although in it self it suited well enough with the King of Suedens mind,
yet in such alterations there is commonly one man more active than the rest,
who in such alterations of Religion becomes an instrument of altering the
Government. And such an one the Lubeckers had fitted for the purpose: His name
was Woolweaver, Woolweaver, a turbulent person.
a man whose education was answerable to his name: Him they made Consul of the
City, and he being gotten up, was blown higher by affecting popularity, and
undertaking to be a Protector to the poor, who were now much increased in the
City, the principal cause whereof, he alleged to be the King of Suedens
abridging them in their privileges, contrary to his agreement made with them,
when they assisted him in his Wars; as also that he had countenanced trade
from, and with the Hollanders, and other Nations; for a remedy, whereof
Woolweaver counseled them to endeavor to draw the Danes to join with the
Lubeckers against all trading with Sueden from without the Baltic Sea.

But the Danes told them that they thought it not meet to conclude in things of
that nature till they were better settled in their Government, The Danes refuse
to join with Woolweaver.
and were ageeed about the party that should be their King: And finding it more
necessary to keep good correspondence with Sueden (because of the endeavors of
a party amongst themselves to advance Christian to the Throne again) they
acquainted the King of Sueden with the designs of the Lubeckers. Woolweaver
stormed at this, and without blushing, faces about, and propounds to the King
of Sueden to join with him against the Hollanders: But Gustavus his counsel was
rather to manage well the matter concerning Denmark, So does Gustavus.
than to enter into new engagements. For (says he) the Danish affairs are as a
Sea of many currents, wherein if you steer not an even course, and keep not
constant watch, you may be in danger of Shipwreck; and therefore as embarked in
one, and the same Ship with Denmark, let us bend our whole counsel in the
speedy settlement of the Government thereof, so as may best conduce to the
concurrent interest of both Nations.

Woolweaver finding himself thus disappointed in both these places, Woolweavers
pride.
grew angry, and like one lifted up from below, lifted up his thoughts higher
than his wits served him, and in his carere vaunteth, that as he had advanced
Gustavus to the Throne, so he would pull him down again, and thereupon
entertained correspondency with the Runnegadoes of Sueden: The King and
Woolweaver fall out.
which Gustavus being quickly sensible of, he seized upon the persons, goods,
and privileges of the Lubeckers in Sweden. The Lubeckers also dealt in the
like manner with the Suedes in Lubeck.

Wool-weaver in the mean time aiming at no less than the Crown of Sueden, held
private intelligence in Sueden, The Earl of Hoyes treachery.
and stirred them up to civil broils that might busy the King at home, and
first he prevailed with the Earl of Hoy, who had married the Kings sister, and
being a person of great interest, he prevailed with the people, especially with
those of Smalland, to disaffect them toward the King; which done, the Earl
withdraws himself, his wife, and children to Lubeck, under pret^nce for his
health sake: but being there arrived he was made Commander in chief of all the
disaffected Suedes who repaired unto him. Pride goes before a fall.
Its the usual fate of great men seldom to be contented with their present
state; they think that either their own merits are not rewarded enough, or
their inferiors too much, and so through discontent, striving to be higher,
they fall lower.

The Earl of Hoy thought it not enough to be the Kings brother by marriage,
and Lord Lieutenant under Gustavus in Sueden, but he must become General of a
party of discontents under Woolweaver against his King, his brother, his
kindred, and Country; and what he gained thereby, will afterward appear.

In the mean time many retire to him out of Sueden, principally by reason of
the disturbances in Smalland, which himself had kindled before his departure
thence, and which afterward were fomented by a company of lawless persons who
had combined themselves against the Kings Justices there, and carried
themselves with so high an hand, that it came to blood, even to the slaughter
of the Kings Lieutenant in that Country; and when the King had suppressed them
by force of Arms, yet they maintained a kind of theevish War till they could
retire themselves to the Earl of Hoy, whose party being thus increased, waited
all advantages, which occasioned the King of Sueden to stand rather upon his
watch, than upon his defense; for they did him no harm, God having provided
other means to clip their wings without the labor of the King of Sueden.
Divisions in Denmark.


For Woolweaver according to his design, being strengthened by these aides,
soon employed it about his principal work, which was to settle his Neighbors,
the Danes, in a fitting posture for his purpose. For the present condition of
Denmark was this: The Nobles were divided (as was said before) about the
election of a King, diverse were for John, the son of the former King, though a
child, and that principally upon the account of Religion, which his Father had
changed into the Lutheran way, and they hoped the son would the rather uphold
it. This the Bishops smelt out, and sought the advancement of the Popish
Religion, and therefore would have the Government managed by Administratorship;
and in their own names they published Injunctions, wherein they required all
the Lutheran Preachers to depart out of the Country by a day prefixed. This
being like to fall heavy upon the Cities of Hafnia, and Malmogia, who yet were
loath to make a breach, they prevailed to have the Government by
Administratorship advanced, and withal invited Christian Duke of Holst to be
Administrator for John, the former Kings son, but he disclaimed it. Then they
had recourse to, and prevailed with the Duke of Aldenburgh (who professed the
Doctrine of Luther) to accept thereof, who thereupon came to Hafnia with a
party; and when he was there, perceiving many whisperings about the restoring
of their deposed King, the Duke to gain the greater party, declared his
willingness for the resettlement of him, whereby he won much upon the common
people. For Christian drove on the same trade in Denmark as he had formerly
done in Sueden, flattering the people into a party against the Lords, which (as
an Historian says) is the ready way to Tyranny. Woolweaver, though he was more
passionate, than wise, takes this opportunity, and sides with the Duke of
Aldenburgh, and prevails with him to engage against the Duke of Holst, who had
diverse of the Lords of Denmark that joined with him to make him King; but in
this the Duke of Aldenburghs expectation was frustrated; for he lost the day,
and was beaten out of the Field by the Duke of Holst.

And now was the Duke of Holst brought upon the stage to act his part for the
Crown of Denmark, thereby to procure his own rest and safety; and observing
that the King of Sueden was left out of the play, he invites him to bear a part
in the Game for Woolweavers sake. The King of Sueden well knowing his own
interest, made little difficulty of the matter; and though Woolweaver
endeavored to stop that muse by a fair message, yet the King would not so be
persuaded, but told the messengers of their Masters entertainment of the
Suedish Runnegadoes, and so dismissed them; and being informed that the people
in Denmark sided with the Duke of Aldenburgh, for their deposed King, Gustavus
joins with the Lords of Denmark.
he thought it not fit to dally any longer, but forthwith falls with an Army
into the Danish Territories, and possessed himselves of diverse places for the
use of the Duke of Holst. The Danish Lords also seeing which way the current
ran, and themselves deserted by the people, joined with the Duke of Holst, and
engaged him for the Crown in good earnest.

In the mean time the Duke of Aldenburgh, The Duke of Aldenburgh beaten.
seeing what interest he had with the common people, thought all safe, and
therefore took his ease, and enjoyed his pleasure. But the Duke of Holst did
not so; he sent the Danish Lords into Jutland with an Army, who soon settled
that Country, and from thence marched into Fionia, where in one Battle all the
Duke of Aldenburghs hopes were dashed, and the Earl of Hoy was sacrificed to
the King of Suedens pleasure; the Archbishop of Upsal also, and diverse other
disaffected Suedes were slain in the Battle.

The news hereof coming to Lubeck, Woolweavers treachery against Gustavus.
made Woolweaver once more tack about, and hearing that Suanto, the son of
Steno Stur, sometimes Governor of Sueden, was in the Duke of Saxonies Court,
he suborned a messenger to him as from his Mother, to meet her at Malla, where
(it was said) she waited with convenience for him: Hereupon he repaired to
Malla, where instead of meeting with his Mother, he was met with by a Troop of
Horse from Lubeck, who offered him in the name of the City, great honors if he
will be advised by them, and so by surprisal, they conveyed him to Lubeck,
where he was saluted by Woolweaver the Consul, with great expressions of joy,
who minded him of the unsettled state of the Northern Kingdoms, and of the
private disaffection of the Suedes to their King. Adding that now there was a
fair opportunity offered to him to recover the Government of Sueden, which
place was so famously managed by his Ancestors. That Lubeck had an Army in
readiness, Suanto's fidelity.
wanting only his consent to be their Leader. That it was expected that he
should now show himself worthy of such Progenitors: But Suanto had sworn
Allegiance to Gustavus, and meant to observe it, and therefore refused the
proffers, and demanded liberty to depart, or else that Woolweaver would show
cause why he was detained Prisoner. Woolweaver seeing no good was to be done,
told him that he was no prisoner, and that it was free for him to go when, and
whither he pleased, only earnestly desiring that where ever he went, he would
retain a favorable opinion of the City.

The King of Sueden being informed of these passages, was thereby sharpened in
the pursuit of the Duke of Holsts interest upon the main land of Schonen, and
in a short time brought all the Country to submit to him, only the City of
Malmogia, and some other neighboring Castles held out for the Duke of
Aldenburgh, from whom they expected relief; and accordingly the Duke, with the
Duke of Oldenburgh, and the Duke of Mecklenburgh, joining all their strength
together, resolve to adventure all upon the issue of one Battle with the King
of Sueden, Aldenburgh beaten.
wherein their Army was utterly and irrecoverably overthrown; so that within a
few days all the Country was wholly for the Duke of Holst, which but a week
before was quite of another temper.

Haffnia had now been besieged above half a year by the Duke of Holst, which
City was only left as the gleaning of the War, and wherein the last strength of
the Dukes of Aldenburgh, Oldenburgh, Mecklenburgh, and of the City of Lub^ck
was now contracted. All this while Christian the deposed King had time enough
to try the courtesy of the house of Burgundy; but none of that house would stir
in his behalf, and which was more unhappy for the besieged, the affairs of
Lubeck were faced about to the Rear. For the Hans-Towns in their general
meeting, perceiving that the affairs of Lubeck had for these five years last
past been wholly swayed by Woolweaver, under a pretense of Religion, and that
the City by that means was brought into such difficulties that they knew not
how to come off, either with credit or safety; they thereupon concluded
(according to the counsel sent by the Emperor to the City) that the former
Government should be restored at Lubeck, not at all meddling with the matter of
Religion; and because they would salve the credit of Woolweaver, they commended
him to the Government of Bergeridoffe. Woolweaver was not therewith contented,
and therefore at his departure out of the City, vowed revenge; and the Senate
at Lubeck, being now changed, considering the restless spirit of Woolweaver,
were as little satisfied as he, and therefore sent messengers after him,
Woolweaver is hanged and quartered.
who finding him upon his journey, in the Territories of a Prince, who owed him
no good will, they procured him to be imprisoned, and afterward charging him
with Treason against the State of Lubeck, he was put to death, and quartered.
And now Lubeck was settled upon its old basis, and flourished again, leaving
this lesson to such as would be Statesmen, That miscarriages in Government,
are not reformed by altering, but by establishing the Government.

Haffnia now after a years siege, being tired out with the miseries of War,
Haffnia surrendered.
was surrendered upon terms, not altogether so honorable for the Duke of
Holst, as might have been expected: whereupon the King of Sueden told the Duke,
that being privy to his own engagements in the Dukes behalf, he little expected
that such an agreement should ever have been made by the Duke without his
knowledge, and in one thing, not without his consent. For (said he) why should
I be excluded out of this agreement, and you thereby to engage your self not to
aid me in case I should not agree with the Lubeckers upon just terms. The Duke
pleaded that he was necessitated to it to gain the present surrender of the
City; as also that the importunity of the Lords, and his neighbor Princes drew
him thereto: nevetheless he assured the King, that if he would send
Ambassadors, he should find that he should not receive any damage thereby.
And accordingly the King did send Ambassadors; but the Lubeckers could never
prevail to have a resettlement of their privileges in Sueden as they desired:
The King makes a truce with Lubeck.
so that in conclusion, there was only a bare truce concluded betwixt them,
and the King of Sueden for five years.

Thus are the three Northern Kingdoms brought once more into a settlement, and
turbulent Lubeck was calmed, and the Captive King in a manner twice captivated,
and now if not quite hopeless, yet less hopeful than ever formerly. England
indeed was allied, and had done what it thought meet, and possibly more than
was meet. For Ambassadors were sent from hence to draw the Lords to a Treaty;
but they liked not to adventure their necks upon purposes and promises. The
Emperor did less, either judging Christians person despicable by reason of his
unworthy carriage to his Queen, and Lords; or the Lords were more wise and wary
than to adventure upon a second trial of their late Kings courtesy, unless they
were compelled thereto by force: To do which, the Emperor had neither time,
nor money to spare, though the opportunity lay as fair to do his brother a good
turn as he could desire, if he had intended it. And lastly, though the common
people did what they could, yet they effected nothing. Note.
Its many times seen, that Providence does advance some particular persons of
the meanest rank to be instrumental in the public Government, but never puts
the Government into the power of such, which would be the speedy way to
confusion, as appeared in those very times by the Earthquakes in Government,
raised by the Anabaptists in Germany, wherein though the issue was abortive,
yet it came to that growth as made the greater Powers to tremble.

And now the time of Suedens rest was come, The King of Suedens Prudence.
where both King and people might have leisure to enjoy their several lots. The
King had hitherto acted the Soldiers part very well, and now he must try his
skill in a peaceable Government, wherein I shall only set down the brief
Contents of many Laws, and Acts of State, which show rather the disposition of
the Government, than the several actions thereof. The King now at leisure,
taking into consideration that the fuel which maintained the Civil War was now
spent, and that the people who had been trained up to the toil of War, were
fitter for labor than leisure; and considering also that a time must come when
a Commonwealth, reduced by War, must be governed and maintained by peace; he
now applied himself to acquaint his people with matters of profit, drawing them
to Mining, Husbandry, Fishing, and Merchandise, all which were much advanced by
the Kings own ingenuous contrivances; and by encouraging the laborious,
banishing idleness, punishing vagabonds, and wanderers, he found a way to make
the Sea to serve the Land, the Land to serve Men, Men to serve their Nation,
the Nation to observe their King, and both Nation and King to serve God; and
thereby he laid a far better building of Sueden than Augustus did of Rome, of
whom it was said, That he found it of earth, and left it of stone.

The people likewise soon found the sweetness of this Government, and were not
far behind in requital of the Kings favor to them. They had now lived twenty
years under his Government, and in a good measure found the benefit of peace,
though bought with their sweat and blood in a long War; but how sad would it
be, if the last breath of the King should put an end to their happiness? The
Crown of Sueden is made successive, and why.
The Council therefore at their meeting, taking this into consideration that
the Government of Sueden by Election was always uncertain, and seldom
effected without deceit, and discord, and oft-times at the price of the peoples
blood; that it is of short continuance, depending upon the life of one man, and
prejudicial to the public good. For that in such cases, Kings will deplume
their subjects to feather their own nests, to keep their young ones warm, when
themselves are gone; and that it were far better for the people to be sucked by
one Leech, which in time might be satisfied, than by the change of many, who
will but increase the pain, and suck without satiety. That the advancement of
one Family to the Throne would be a cure to all this, and a preparative to a
wining aspect from it upon the people, and of a due respect from them to it,
and so of a kind of conjugal affection between both against the Marriage day.
That it is a means to suppress the turbulent aims of ambitious men, who crowd
into the Throne, though of all others they be most unworthy. Besides, that it
secureth the present Government in the peaceable possession of him that enjoyes
it. And that upon these, and such like grounds, Augustus, and other Roman
Emperors, who wanting issue, used in their life times to adopt, and declare
their successors in the Government, and trained them up for that service; nor
did they find it dangerous either for themselves, or their successors so to
do. That the people at the siege of Stockholme offered to settle the Government
upon the King, and his children, when at that time he neither had any, nor was
married: But now that he is married, and has children, and has given such
large experience of his love, industry, and faithfulness in adventuring all
that he had, even to his own life to vindicate the honor of his Country: What
acknowledgement can be sufficient for so great a merit, less than the
settlement of the Crown of Sueden upon him, and his posterity for ever?

This was the result of their debates, and thus it was resolved unanimously at
the Council held at Orebrogia, that it should be propounded by them to the
Convention of States that it might be confirmed for future ages. All which by
an Instrument under their hands they professed to be done by them freely, and
of their own accord without any constraint. Indeed the Kings Enemies scoffed
hereat, as if he had suffered a Crown to be forced upon his Family against his
will. Others pretended Religion against it, as if God liked not that men should
contrive perpetuities; which is true, yet does he like that men should be
provident in establishing Justice, Truth, and Peace in a Nation; for which end
himself did settle the Crown upon the Family of David, and has blessed the
same Rule in the Government of most Kingdoms with prosperous success, though
not always precisely fixing upon the same person that men design thereto. But
whatsoever was said, its clear that the Kings desire was not very eager upon
it, for that he summoned not a Convention of States of four years after; and
then at Westerass the point was debated anew, the result whereof was this Act;
That after the death of Gustavus Ericson, The Crown is entailed upon Gustavus
his Family.
his Son shall succeed in the Government, and his eldest Son, and the Heirs
male of his body; and for want of such, his second Brother, and his Heirs male
of his body; and for want of such, John, the second Son of Gustavus, and his
Heirs male of his body shall succeed, and so the rest of the Sons of Gustavus,
and their Heirs male of their bodies: and in case of want of Heirs males of the
Sons of Gustavus, the eldest of the blood, and Family of Gustavus shall
succeed, and his issue male; and for want of such, then shall such person
succeed as the Council of the Kingdom of Sueden shall elect, provided he be no
Forreigner, and that he shall provide Portions for the issue female of
Gustavus. The Council of States did herein as wise men, that steer their course
by Rule, and yet still leave to God his supreme control, who also in this case
overruled their rule as to the succession of the posterity in Ericus his line,
which was afterward laid aside by the people (Ericus being found false to the
Principles of Government established by his Father, and the Convention of
States) and yet God owned Gustavus his Family so far as to build him a sure
house (who had built Gods house) by raising from thence many brave men both for
War and Peace, and made it the brightest Constellation of all the Northern
Hemisphere, Gods blessing upon his Family.
to have an influence, not only within the Kingdom of Sueden, but into the
general affairs of Europe.

But as Gustavus his House grows in their hopes, so Christian, the deposed King
loses in his. The Emperor being intent upon his Wars with France, found it
necessary to quiet his affairs in Germany, and therefore amongst other things
at the Convention at Spires, the difference between him, and Christian the
third, King of Denmark came under debate, and was settled; and Christian the
second, the Emperors brother in law, was after fourteen years of imprisonment,
left still to be a Prisoner, who seeing himself now quite neglected by his
chief friends, bethought himself how he might make his Captivity (seeing it
must be his condition) as easy as he could; Christian resigns his Crown.
and for that end he actually surrendered all his right, and the right of all
his posterity in the Crown of Denmark, and the Dukedomes of Holst, and
Sleswick, in as ample manner as could be devised, and thereby indeed he
obtained, though not a release from, yet more liberty in his prison.

The Title of Sueden was not at all mentioned, neither did the Suedes require
any resignation, nor would acknowledge any Title. Yet the Emperor was willing
enough to countenance any quarrel that was picked against the King of Sueden,
as appeared in the business of the Elector Palatine, and the Duke of Lorain
touching their Nieces Dowry (which, as they pretended, the Kingdom of Sueden
ought to take care of) but the matter went no further than words. The claim was
published in Print, and so was the King of Suedens answer also, who denied the
matter of fact, and alleged that if any thing had been formerly due, it was
made null by that inhumane Tyranny, whereby Christian forfeited all his rights
in Sueden, for himself and posterity: declaring also that now the public
Revenues of the Crown of Sueden, were otherwise settled, and could not be
altered.

A while after, Gustavus his Poste^ity.
the King of Suedens second wife dyed, leaving three sons, and four daughters.
Her eldest son [John] was afterward King of Sueden, when his eldest brother
Ericus was deposed by the people for his misgovernment. Her second son [Magnus]
was Duke of East-Gothland. Her third son [Charles] was Duke of Sudermania, who
afterward was King upon the deposing of his Nephew Sigismund, first King of
Poland, and after Crowned also King of Sueden, but after a while was ejected by
the people, because he would not maintan the Liberties of Sueden, but sought to
advance the Polish interest. After the death of this Charles, his son Gustavus
Adolphus succeeded in the Kingdom (whose Life I have also written) and after
him, his Daughter Christina, who resigning the Government, Charles Gustavus,
son of Katherine, daughter to Charles, and half sister to Gustavus Adolphus,
married to one of the house of Casimire, succeeded, who lately dying, left an
Infant in the Throne, since when, Christina would willingly have reassumed the
Government, but was rejected by the States, the rather because she was turned
Papist, who reserve the Kingdom for the son of Charles. A brave posterity
doubtless; yet the King, though now stricken in years, could not live
unmarried, but took a third wife, Katherine, daughter to Gustavus, Governor of
West-Gothland.

The Wisdom, Gustavus grows famous.
Courage, and prosperous success of Gustavus, being now famous amongst other
Nations, occasioned sundry applications to be made to him for assistance; but
he was ever wary of moving out of his own sphere.

Its an excellent point of skill in a Commander to know when his strength has
attained its just bounds of Conquest, Note.
and there, stopping his desires of gaining more, to fix upon the good
Government of what he has already gotten. It was one of the last counsels
given by Augustus to Tyberius, that he should not endeavor to enlarge the
bounds of the Empire, lest he should meet with more difficulty in keeping, and
less in losing what was gained. For the larger the borders are, the more
opportunity is given for invasion from abroad, and for rebellion at home. The
wisdom, and moderation therefore of Gustavus is to be commended; for though he
wanted not men of War, nor hope of success in further undertakings, yet having
adventured for the delivery of his Country from Tyranny, and accomplished it,
he desired no further happiness upon earth, than to maintain what he had
gotten, yet was he once overreached by the Livonians, who proffered to commit
themselves to his protection, which he refused; yet when they were much
endangered by the Muscovites, he sent aid unto them, who engaging too far, and
the Livonians hanging behind, the whole burden was left upon the Suedes, who
finding the Muscovite too heavy for them, and the Livonians heartless, or
faithless, withdrew their assistance betimes, and made their own peace.

Its a usual policy amongst Princes to be slow in advancing their eldest Sons
(who are to succeed them) into places of Government, Policy of Princes.
and not without cause; for in such cases, especially in times, and places of
darkness, their designed successors, if well gifted by nature, or education,
may prove heads of parties, and factions, and thereby put the present
Governors to much trouble; the one being looked upon as the rising, the other
but as the setting Sun. Yet it seems more prejudicial to the people to have a
raw, and unexperienced Governor set over them, who knows not how to govern
himself. And therefore if Ericus had been more experienced in Government, he
might have proved, either more advised by the overruling direction of his
Father, or else he would have discovered himself so far, as that he would never
have been trusted, and so many troubles might have been prevented, which ensued
afterward.

But it is vain to call back things which are already past, The King of Denmark
dies.
the time draws on a pace which must determine the work of this great King: He
had now governed the Kingdom of Sueden long, and had seen many changes in
other Nations as well as his own, and yet must outlive one more in Denmark
before he leaves the world. For about this time died Christian the third, King
of Denmark, by whose decease the Kingdom was put to the hazard of an other
Election, which concerned Sueden not a little; for Christian, the captive King
was yet alive, and had another fair opportunity to try the courtesy of the
Lords of Denmark: But they being unanimous for the choice of Frederick, Another
chosen.
the Son of the Duke of Holst, him they Crowned, and Christian was still set
aside. Unhappy man, that having lived a prisoner seven and twenty years in his
own Nation, could not in all that time, by his carriage gain a better opinion
amongst the Nobility of Denmark, but that still he remained under the note of
an impenitent, and obstinate Tyrant.

It is the opinion of wise men that the breach between a King, and his people,
is like the Divorce between a man, and his wife, never to be made up again; and
yet the difficulty lies not in any determinate judgment, or rule upon the
Case, as that of Divorce does (and therefore comes not within the compass of
impossibility) but in the distemper of the parties, by ambition on the one
side, and jealousy on the other, both hard to be cured: yet the first leading
the way to the second, if that be first allayed, the second may be cured. And
this Christian might have observed in the example of Carolus Canutus, his
corival in the Suedish Throne, who having been Crowned King, and fought
successfully against the Danes and Norwegians, ruled somewhat too imperiously,
for which he was ejected out of his Throne; and yet afterward, being
readmitted, he ruled in that manner, that he dyed satisfied with honor, and
the love of his people. But Christian was of another temper, he would fain come
again into the Government, but not under restraint, nor with submission, nor by
leave, nor with the love of his Nation; but still depending upon a foreign
interest, and the power of the Emperor, he was looked upon as an enemy, and
his return, as that of the unclean spirit, that would render the latter
condition of the Nation sevenfold worse than the former. For he that is a King
indeed, though wrongfully rejected, will still bear the mind of a King to
desire the peoples good, and will endeavor to deserve their love: But he that
depends upon the foreign interest of such as are professed enemies to a
peoples Religion and Liberties, disowneth interest in his people, and therefore
cannot rationally expect any re-acceptance (if that Nations Religion be right)
either by the leave of God, or liking of the people.

Now whether Christian took conceit at this Election, Christian the Tyrant dies.
seeing no hope of ever gaining a better condition than for the present he was
in, Writers mention not, but he dyed presently after, even within one month of
the death of Christian the third, and in the Seventy eight year of his age. And
Gustavus outlived him, and all these changes well-nigh two years, seeing his
people in a settled condition for Justice, Religion and Peace amongst
themselves, and with all their Neighbors, thriving in Trade, industrious in
Husbandry: Skillful in improving the benefit of their Mines: Potent both at
Sea, and Land: and himself blessed with repute, and honor, both from his own
people, and strangers: Successful in all his affairs; and leaving a numerous
posterity behind him. And having lived seventy years, and thereof reigned
thirty eight years, he gave in charge to his children to endeavor the peace,
and to maintain the liberties of their Country: but especially to preserve the
purity of Religion without the mixture of humane inventions; and to live as
brethren in unity among themselves. Gustavus dies
All which also he left as a memorial, ^ealed up in his last Will, and so he
resigned up his spirit to God, Anno Christi 1562.

So lived Gustavus, His Character
or Augustus, for the name is the same, which perhaps, minding him of
imitation, made him exceed his pattern. His aims out reached the Roman Empire,
and were higher than the world: His difficulties, and dangers greater: His
enemies more desperate by conjuncture of the Devils: His labor and industry
not unlike: His success beyond all, even to wonderment. If he came short of
Austustus in his time of Government (wherein the difference was not much) yet
he exceeded him in the manner: It being with such an excellent temper of
Monarchy with popularity: He preserved the peoples liberty, with the honor of
a King, and common security, without pride of Tyranny. The people living as
well under the King without servitude, as in a popular estate without sedition,
and yet he attempered all, with just liberty of conscience, and the true
worship and service of God, which he owned as the chief Diamond in his Crown,
and conveyed all to his successors by a better, and more enduring settlement
than Augustus did, or could attain unto: His worst enemies never publicly
taxed him with any crime but covetousness: And Thuanus (a Writer of credit in
those times) gives no countenance thereto: Nor did the Patrimony left by him to
his children, hold forth any such thing; and therefore if any such thing were,
it was for the service of the state of Sueden, wherein, if he spared not
others, its confessed by all, that he spared not his own estate. His
infirmities were common to other men, and must be acknowledged vitia naturae,
non animi, as infirmities of nature, not of purpose of mind. If his fame
rather mounted upwards, than spread abroad, we may thank the subtilty of those
times, who liked not that the splendour of his Religion should dazel their own,
and we may pity the distempers of those dawnings that knew not how to value
that Morning Star till it was set. It was Augustus his lot, after a long and
honorable Reign, to dye, and yet Tum quidem pauci luxerant, postea temporis
omnes: Few mourned at his death, but a while after, all. For Tyberius succeeded
him, who was as wicked, as Augustus was good: And whatever the people thought
of Gustavus whilst he lived, a while after when Ericus came to Reign, they knew
what it was to want their Gustavus: Of whom it may truly be said, that he dyed
a King, a a Patriot, a Knight, a Christian, true, and unconquered, and yet
lives a monument of the truth of that Golden Sentence, uttered by the God of
Truth, Him that honors me, will I honor.

Deo Tri-uni Gloria.
The Life, and Death of Mrs. Jane Ratcliffe, who dyed Anno Christi 1638.
Mrs. Jane Ratcliffe was born of good Parents, Her parentage
who were morally Civil, and moderately Religious, according to the temper of
the times wherein they lived: Her Uncle was Mr. Edward Brerewood, a learned
Professor in Gresham College London. In her younger years she was rather Civil
than Religious, and sometimes rather merry than Civil; yet lightsome without
lightness, or immodesty: Though too much delighted with dancing, Stageplayes,
and other public vanities, according to the fashion of young folks,
especially in those times when these things were so well thought of, that they
were admitted to be acted in the Churches. But it pleased God, Her conversion.
according to his election of Grace, in due time to call her by the Ministry of
Mr Nicholas Byfield, who was a powerful, and a profitable Preacher of Gods
Word at that time in the City of Chester; which also was seconded by the
afflicting hand of God, who took away her first Child (which she much took to
heart) but God made it an occasion to make her his own Child by Adoption, and
Grace. For from that time the means of Grace had a more kindly operation upon
her, which made her ever after more to mind her Father in Heaven, than any
Child she had upon earth.

Yet at first she rather feared God than loved him, whence were engendered many
perplexing scruples in her soul, The manner of it.
which for the present were very grievous unto her: For her Spirit was sore
wounded, and A wounded spirit, who can bear, Prove. 18. 14. The truth is, the
pangs of her New Birth were so painful, and bitter, and sometimes so terrible,
that it was a difficult thing to fasten any comfort upon her. But after the
Lord had chastened her soul with his severe Discipline, and thereby had
prepared her for a Cure, he showed himself her most favorable and effectual
Physician, according to that Job 5. 18. He make^h sore, and binds up, he
wound, and his hands make whole. For he quieted her troubled spirit, and settled
it in the assurance of his love.

Being thus, Her excellent parts.
through Gods goodness, converted, and comforted, it pleased him to bestow many
excellent endowments upon her, both Intellectual, and Moral. For by her
frequent, and attentive hearing of Sermons, and reading good Books, the Bible
especially (unto which she was addicted with an incredible desire, and delight)
and by moving Questions to such as she thought best able to answer them, she
became an excellent proficient in the most sound, and useful points of
Religion: yet took she not upon her to teach any but her own children, and
servants, though an Apollos might not have disdained to learn of such a
Priscilla, Act. 18. 22.

She meddled but little in worldly matters, Heavenliness.
and when she did, she little minded them: yet (shadowing her self from
acquaintance with the world) she shined gloriously in her knowledge of God, and
Heavenly matters.

As she had occasion to converse with others she showed her self a very prudent
Abigail: Her prudence.
The Word of God (as St Paul prescribes) dwelt richly in her in all wisdom,
which appeared in her speech, in her silence, in her carriage, and in her
actions.

In her speech: In her speech.
for (as the same Apostle requires) being enriched both in knowledge, and
utterance, 1 Cor. 1. 5. She opened her mouth with wisdom, as that rare woman,
Prove. 31. 26. having (as St Jerome dictated to Celantia) thought beforehand
what she should speak, and while she was yet silent, forecasting that she might
say nothing, which afterward she would wish to be unsaid again; and so she was
fitted, and well prepared either to counsel, or to comfort, to reprove, or to
plead for, as there was occasion.

Yet was she not (as some women would have been, with her abilities, and some
without them have been) obstreperously talkative, nor affected by her words to
make any oftentation of her wit, or other good parts: In her silence.
but very sparing of her speech, so that she was as much observed for her
silence, as for her discreet discourse when there was just occasion, and
opportunity. For she had learned, That In multitude of words there wants not
sin, Prove. 10. 19. That Whosoever keeps his mouth, and his tongue keeps his
soul, Prove. 22. 23. That Death and life are in the power of the tongue, Pov.
18. 21. That Tatling women are condemned by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 13. That Of
every idle word account must be given at the day of judgment, Mat. 12. 36. And
that they who profess Religion, and refrain not their tongues, their Religion
is vain, Jam. 1. 26. This moved her, with David, to resolve that her mouth
should not offend, Psalm 17. 3.

Certainly such silence as she used (in those that know how to speak) is an
argument of wisdom: For a wise man (says Solom^n) and it is as true of a
woman) holds his peace, Prove. 11. 12. And he that rfr^^ns his lips is wise,
Prove. 10. 19. And so far was she from speaking ill, especially of the absent,
or of her betters, that St Jeroms precept to Celantia, was set forth in her
practice, which was, rather to look to her own life, than to carp at another.
And she well knew that where corrupt communication is restrained, Her holy
communication.
there that which is good to the use of edifying is required: Yet was she so
wise, and wary, even in the use of good words, as to observe when, and where,
and before whom to use them, and the season when to give over as well as when
to begin her discourse.

She gave farther proof of her prudence in her carriage, Her wise demean^ur.
and behavior: And Bishop Hall in his Contemplations makes this a very good
proof of wisdom. There are some (says he) whose speeches are witty, while
their carriage is weak, whose deeds are incongruities, whilst their words are
Apothegmes. It is not worth the name of wisdom that may be heard only, and not
seen. Good discourse is but the froth of wisdom: the pure, and solid substance
of it is well-framed actions. And according to this we may commend her
conversation for prudence in practice, above that which, she showed either in
the use, or restraint of her tongue: For as St. Jerome says, She taught others
more by her example than by her speech, much more, then by her silence. She was
a woman of a well composed spirit, discreetly advised, framing her affairs by
good direction of grace, and reason, without any direction of humor or
passion, which bare no sway over her at all, and very seldom had any show, or
appearance in her, but when her discretion told her it was fit to make use of
them for due advertisement to others; and then she would order it with such
moderation, as that neither her words, nor her looks, nor her gestures, carried
any color of contradiction to her prudence, and piety: So that her wisdom was
a protection to the reputation of her piety against all scornful reproaches:
Yea it was a promotion of the Christian profession to more estimation in her
person, and for her sake.

And though she was singularly gifted, yet was she far from their disposition
who think they do nothing well unless they be singular: and though she had less
to do with worldly matters, than most would have had in her condition, yet
therein also she gave that proof of prudence which Solomon observes, Prove. 14.
1. A wise woman (says he) builds her house: For she was very provident in
managing her Family affairs both whilst she was married, and when she was a
widow also.

Now from her Intellectual parts, let us pass to her Moral, and we shall
find, that though she had a very good head, richly stored with ingenious, and
religious notions, yet she had a far better heart, more abundantly furnished
with excellent graces, whereof we will single out some.

1. For her faith, which is the hand that turns the key to unlock the
storehouse of divine beneficence: Her faith.
This appeared by a Paper written with her own hand, wherein she did set down
the Articles of her faith in full, plain, and perspicuous terms with pertinent
proofs of Scripture to every point, and then she makes particular application
thereof to her self, as thus:

I do believe the Scriptures to be the very Word of God, The confession of her
faith.
2 Timothy 3. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 21. and I have found them so to me by the witness of
Gods Spirit, which I have felt testifying of them, and by the unutterable
comfort which I have received by them, wonderfully refreshing my heart when it
was in the deepest distress, whereby God has made them so good unto me that I
account them better than thousands of gold, and silver, Psalm. 119. 72.

I do believe that God made man at first after his own Image, Genesis 1. 26. which
Image did chiefly consist in knowledge, and holiness, Eccles. 7. 29. Ephesians. 4.
24. and out of admiration of this Image, I do long for that time when I shall
be satisfied with it, Psalm. 17. 15.

I do believe that all mankind has sinned, 1 King. 8. 46. and that the nature
of man is stained with sin from the birth, Psalm. 51. 5. I know, and must
acknowlegde that the cause of all the afflictions which do befall me in this
life is in my self, and I know no cause to murmr at my crosses when I look
upon my sin.

I do believe that Jesus Christ is God, and my God, Psalm. 68. 20. and in that
he is a God, and my God, it does exceedingly comfort me: For he is full of
grace to supply my wants; a Counselor to direct me in my doubts; Almighty to
defend me; and an everlasting Father to love, pity, and bear with mine
infirmities, and to spare me; a Prince of peace to perform reconciliation with
his Father for me, and to fill me with the peace which passes all
understanding, and that he will establish, and order me henceforth, and for
ever.

I do believe that the Passion of Christ was by the eternal decree, and
appointment of God, Act. 2. 23. and that his sorrows were sustained for our
sins, and for our sakes, so as he bore all our iniquities, 1 Pet. 2. 24. and
that in his own person, he fullfilled, and finished all sufferings needful for
our salvation, 1 Pet. 3. 18 and that his Passion (so grievous as cannot be
imagined) is a sufficient price for the sins of the world, Joh 2. 29. therefore
why should not I be willing to suffer any thing for his sake, that has
suffered so great things for me: and say (with St. Paul) God forbid that I
should rejoice in any thing but in the Cross of Christ. I will for ever trust
in him; and rely upon him as the life of my life, and as to me both in life,
and death advantage: and having such a proof of the infinite love of God to me
in not sparing his own Son, but giving him up to death for me, shall I ever
doubt of my freedom from condemnation, such a price being paid for the
discharge of my debts by such a surety?

I do believe that Christ overcame sin, death, the grave, and Hell, and rose
again from the dead, ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God
in Majesty, Romans 1. 4. and that he has purchased his Church by his blood, and
that he is a Lawgiver to his Church, Jam. 4. 12. which is gathered by his
voice, Joh. 17. 9. separated from sinful society with the world: For she is an
holy Church, Ephesians. 5. 25. yet dispersed over the world; for she is Catholic,
Ephesians. 1. 10. and though Catholic, and dispersed, yet but one, Ephesians. 4. 4. knit
unto Christ by an indissolveable union, Col. 1. 18. And I am sure that I am a
member of this Church For I am called out of sinful communion with the: world
by the voice of the Ministers of Christ, who are in his stead, and separated
from it by the power of the Word, and I do rely upon Christ's merits for
righteousness, and salvation. I do not delight in the society of the wicked,
but in theirs who fear him, whom I love with sincere affections, as the most
worthy people of the world, and whatsoever I want of an holy life, yet I do not
live after my old evil conversation; but I constantly endeavor to be more, and
more holy. What thanks shall I give unto God, who has called me out of
darkness into his mavelous light, and saved me from the common condemnation
of the world? O the depth of the love of Christ unto me!

I do believe that there shall be a general Judgment, Psalm. 9. 8. that Christ
shall be the Judge, a visible Judge in his humane nature, Act. 17. 13. that it
shall be at the last day; but the precise day, and hour is not known to any
man, or Angel, Mat. 24. 36. that then every man shall be judged, Jude 15. and
every secret thing shall be brought to light, Romans 2. 16. and that the
judgment will be most just, and so confessed by all, Romans 2. 5, 6. why then
should I fear the last Judgment, seeing he shall be my Judge who is my
Brother, Advocate, and Redeemer? He that was willingly judged for me, will give
no hard sentence against me; yea he has already absolved me from my sins, and
given me the earnest of his Spirit, and the seal of the Sacraments, and I have
judged my self that I may not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32.

I do believe that the glory of Heaven is unspeakable, and incomprehensible by
us here on earth, 1 Cor. 2. 9. that is it eternal, Matthew. 25. 45. and that it
is the gift of God proceeding only from his free Grace, not our merit, Luke
12. 32. his free gift bestowed only upon the Elect, Rev. 21. 27. O that I
could by the effectualness of contemplation behold the greatness of this
felicity which is provided for me! yet as I can conceive it, I cannot choose
but long to be absent from hence, that I may be present with the Lord, 2 Cor.
5. 8. whose admirable beauty I shall clearly see, and know as I am known, and
that with a perfection both of holiness and happiness; such holiness as will
not only free me from all sin, but from all possibility of sinning; such
happiness as that, ceasing from all labor and sorrow, I shall enjoy an eternal
Sabbath, and shall be free to all the treasures of Heaven, and (with the
fruition of Gods glorious presence) shall enjoy the sweet society of all the
glorified Saints and Angels. And all this, as it is unuterable, so it is
unalterable: For as I cannot be disappointed of it because it is certain, so I
cannot be deprived of it because it is eternal. How then should the hope of the
future life, but swallow up the afflictions of the life present? and why should
I fear Death, when being dead I shall be so blessed?

Yet was not her Faith elevated so high, Her Faith.
but that she could readily apply it to promises of an inferior degree: For as
she trusted in God at all times, as David teaches, Psalm. 62. 8. so did she in
all things, whether temporal or eternal. In straits and difficulties for the
affairs of this life, she had that ready at hand: Commit thy way unto the Lord,
trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass, Psalm. 37. 5. If at any time
she was sinisterly censured by any one, her faith applied that promise to her
heart, He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment
as the noon day, Psalm. 35. 6. And whatsoever it were that came upon her as a
cross, her faith was either as a wreathe betwixt her shoulders and it, that it
did not pinch her, or a remover of it from her self to him, who was best able
to bear it, by virtue of that Warrant, Psalm. 55. 22. Cast thy burden upon the
Lord, and he shall sustain thee, and that done, her faith which teaches to
keep an eaven pace with the promises, not making haste, Isa. 28. 16. by
anticipating the time of accomplishment, taught her soul to wait upon God, as
David's did, Psalm. 62. 1. to effect his own work, at his own time, in his own
way and manner, wherein she would not prescribe any thing at all.

By this daily exercise of her Faith, Her Comfort.
she gained a great deal of freedom, and lightsomness of spirit, which
admirably appeared in her deportment upon great disappointments of that which
was her own due, and unexpected payments unto others: when she has seen no way
of supply for the present occasions, she has believed that Gods providence
would effect what her forecast could not, when she was not wanting in the use
of means, and that he could furnish her with that which should be sufficient,
albeit for the present she saw not how, nor by what means it would come to
pass; and therefore when she had done what belonged to her duty, in the
affiance of her Faith, she rested quiet, and remained cheerful, and slept
neither the less, nor the worse for it; and that which confirmed her confidence
the more was, that she still found by experience that God was most worthy to be
trusted.

That her Faith was as good as it was great, appeared by the effect of it in
her Devotion and Piety, which was suitable to her knowledge of God, and her
faith in him; by both which, as she had a clear apprehension of him, so none
had more dear, and devout affections to him, or more assured signs of such,
than she, as appeared in these particulars:

She was frequently, Her frequent Prayers.
and fervently conversant with God (besides the public) in her private
supplications, and therein was he most favorably familiar with her; for he
sent forth his Spirit into her heart, whereby she cried, Abba Father, Gal, 4.
6. The Spirit of Grace and Supplication, Zach. 12. 10. which enabled her in an
extraordinary manner and measure to pour out her soul into his bosom; and
though she duly esteemed of the solemn prayers of the sacred Assemblies
(whereof a learned and pious Divine said, that never any one prayed well
privately, who contemned, or neglected the public prayers of the Church) and
never slighted, or censured set forms of Prayer, yet could she, and that
excellently well, conceive Prayer, and vary her Petitions as the present
occasion did require.

Yea in this Devotion she was so abundant in apt and pertinent expressions, Her
fervent Prayers.
that indeed it was admirable, that one so silent in her common conversation
with the world, should be so fluent, and eloquent in her intercourse with God.
Nor was she more copious in speech, than fervent in spirit: For such was her
holy violence in Prayer, as that she seemed not to knock at Heaven Gate for
another to open it, but to make a battery upon it her self, and to break in by
the powerful importunity of her supplications.

Her service also of God in this kind, was no dry Devotion, Her prevalent
Prayers.
but steeped, and drenched in showers of tears; and though her prudence used as
much privacy as might be herein, yet such a singular gift could not be hid from
her servants, and some secret female friends, who sometimes, when they were
sick, or possessed with fears, or pains of childbirth, they would move her
with importunity to pray with them, and when she yielded to them, and God to
her, by answering her request, they were apt (as there was cause) to impute the
good effect to her fervent supplications. A female friend of hers (who was her
bedfellow in London for many weeks together) and thereby was a partaker of her
daily Devotions, professed that she was so plentifully furnished for utterance
of her requests to God, that she never wanted variety of meet words to be
presented unto him, but when a surcharge of sighs and tears put her Prayers to
a pause.

When the heart is full of love, the mouth is filled with praise of a person
most deservedly, Her holy Speech.
and most dearly beloved, whereof we have an example in this virtuous
Gentlewoman, who when time, company, and occasion did invite her to communicate
to others the good matter which her heart had indicted of God, she used her
Tongue as the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45. 1. And when she had that great
King for the subject of her speech, she spoke of him with such hearty and
savoury relishes of sacred delight and reverence, and with such an affectionate
force, as if her soul were ready to leap out at her lips into the ears of
others, to kindle the same holy fire in their hearts who heard her, which
burned in her own bosom, longing (as David did) that others might taste, and
see the goodn^ss of the Lord, Psalm. 34. 8. that they might be Rivals with her
in her Religious love; and glad she was when any sinner was converted, or any
already called, better enabled to promote the glory of God, and that was the
end which she principally aimed at in her godly discourse of him

In giving vent to her heart in this duty, Her Humility
she could spend her spirits with great delight, both to her self, and to those
choice friends who had opportunity to hear her, when just occasion was
ministered unto her; and yet when she had spoken best, she found matter of
complaint in her own expressions, as being too faint, and too flat, and so far
below that which was meet for the Majesty of the great God, insomuch as all the
acceptance which she desired of him, was but to pardon her presumption (as the
error of her love) for taking upon her to speak of his Excellency, and the
weakness of her spirit and speech, which made her fall infinitely short of
doing him right in the publication of his praise.

Another evidence of her dear affection unto God, Her love to Gods children
was the great love, which for his sake, she bore to whom, or whatsoever had
any near relation to him, according to that 1 John 4. 21. He that loves God
must love his brother also: and he must love him rather in a direct, than in a
collateral line, as Gods child, rather than as his brother, more for Gods sake
than for his own: The dearest degree of love belongs to those persons and
things which are nearest to him, and to such she bore a sincere, and singular
good will: As to his Saints with David, Psalm. 16. 3. and to his true Religion,
and worship, both at home, and abroad, the happy progress and prosperity
whereof was with her (as Jerusalem with David) preferred above her chiefest
joy, and to the Church of Christ.
Psalm. 137. 6. and it was a great affliction to her heart, to hear any ill
tidings of any good man, or any good cause.

She highly prized Gods word, and in the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
Her love to the Word and Sacrament,
she felt such a sweet refreshing as might make amends for the severity of her
frequent fasting, so that for her part, and portion of it, in respect of the
common sort of Communicants, she might say, I have meat that ye know not of,
Joh. 4. 32. Dainties, which infinitely exceed whatsoever delights, or
pleases a sensual palate: For the house of God, she showed her self just of
David's mind, when she said, I have loved the habitation of thy house, the
place where thine honor dwells, Psalm. 26. 8. and How amiable are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts, my soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts
of the Lord, Psalm. 84. 1, 2.

If by any imperious impediment she were kept from the Church (as by sickness
in her body, and House of God.
etc.) her soul was lovesick by her longings to be there; and whereas many
women take a little occasion to absent themselves from it, she would many times
force her feeble body to carry her soul to the Sanctuary, though the day before
she were confined not only to her chamber, but to her bed; whereby though she
hazarded her health, yet it pleased God so graciously to accept of her zeal to
his House, that she was never the worse for those pious adventures.

She kept a great distance from doting on the world, Her weanedness from the
world.
which St. James condemns as enmity to God, Jam. 4. 4. Though while she lived
she could not choose but be in the world, yet did she so love her dear Lord
Jesus Christ, that for his sake she was exceedingly estranged from the world;
which appeared,

1. By her estrangement from sensual delights, which she showed by her frequent
fasting from meats and drinks: By her abstinence from such sports and pastimes
as before her conversion she had been too immoderately addicted unto, and by
her fi^m resolution to forbear Marriage after her widowhood, and to rest in
that condition wherein she might best attend upon the service of God.

Indeed her love, and delight in communion with God, Her frequent Fasting.
made her mindeless of meat, and careless of provision for the flesh. Well she
knew, that though fasting makes the body weak (as David says, My knees are
weak through fasting, and my flesh fails of fatness, Psalm. 109. 20.) yet it
strengthens the spirit, and makes it vigorous in conflict, and victorious in
the event; yea fasting and prayer make a potent combination, which is able to
drive the strongest Devil out of his usurped possession, as Matthew. 17. 21.
These two she used, not only as weapons against the Devil, but as wings to
elevate her soul Godward and heavenward; yet herein was she observant of our
Saviors rule, Mat. 17. 18. that she fasted without an appearance of fasting,
only the next day it might be discerned by her faintness, she having spent her
spirits in spiritual exercises the day before.

For those sports and pastimes wherein formerly she had taken too much
contentment, Her abstinence from Sports,
she not only abstained from them, but much complained of her vanity in them:
Her eyes (which before were used to behold them with delight, now) shed tears
of shame and sorrow, that formerly she had set her mind so much upon them, and
now she employed them in the more frequent and affectionate reading of the holy
Scriptures, wherein she took more delight than she had done before in the most
pompous Spectacles, set out to take the eyes with gazing, and the mind with
wonder.

And as for Marriage, her heart was so devoted to her Lord Christ, and from
Marriage.
that though she had diverse fair invitations to it, by such as both for profit,
and credit, and other considerable respects, were worthy rather to be desired,
than denied, yet she resolved not to change her condition in that kind, and
that not only in love, and loyalty to her former Husband, but that she might
be more free to serve God according to that of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 34. The
unmarried woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in
body and spirit; but she that is married cares for the things of the world how
she may please her Husband.

2. She had so chosen God for her portion, Her weanedness from the world.
and set up her rest in the riches of his love, that she had but little mind
of the worlds riches. She knew, that riches may be had, and well used of the
Religious; and that poverty alone commends no man unto God, as St. Jerome
speaks, yet did she not dote upon them; but though she was competently careful
and frugal, as Christ prescribes, Joh. 6. 12. Gather up the broken meat that
nothing be lost; and though she was provident as the Apostle requires, 1 Timothy
5. 8. If any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own
hosue, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel; yet withal
believing that of the Prophet David, Psalm. 37. 16. A little that the righteous
has is better than the riches of many wicked; and as conforming her self to
that of St. John, Love not the world, nor the things of the world, 1 John 2.
15. She often besought of Almighty God rather to make, and keep her poor, than
to suffer her heart in any sort to sink down from her Maker, to dote upon
Mammon.

She was one that could very well find in her heart to honor God with her
substance, Her bounty to the Ministry.
as Prove. 3. 9. She was as cheerful in her layings out for him, as any Miser
could be in his layings up for himself; and when she heard of the irreligious
Parsimony of some toward the maintenanance of the public Ministry in that
City of Chester, she has professed that she had rather be at all the charge of
all the common contributions her self (if her estate would bear it) than that
God should be grumbled at, or his service poorly prized, or the wages of his
work unwillingly paid.

Another undoubted testimony of her true love to God, Her desire to dye.
was in that she so much desired to dye out of a fervent affection to him,
insomuch that she feared a long life would keep her too long from the enjoyment
of him; being therein like unto David in those ardent aspirations of his, As
the Heart pants after the water Brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God,
my soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come, and appear
before him, Psalm 42. 1, 2.

That which worldlings are most afraid of, that she so much wished for, that
her friends were fain to plead with her to be pleased with life, though she,
not being contented with their Arguments, contended against them by contrary
reason, showing first why she did desire to dye. Secondly, why she was not
afraid of Death, and hoping that it would not tarry long, she had in readiness
some special matters to be remembered at her Death, which she left in writing
under her own hand, and are as follows:

First, Why I desire to dye:

I desire to dye, because I want while I live here, the glorious presence of
God, Why she desired Death.
which I love and long for, and that sweet fellowship of the Angels, and Saints
who would be glad of me as I am of them, and would entertain me with unwearied
delight.

I desire to dye, because while I live, I shall want the perfection of my
nature, and be as an estranged, and banished person from my Fathers house.

I desire to dye, because I would not live to offend so good a God, nor to
grieve his holy Spirit: For his loving kindness is better than life it self:
And he is abundant in mercy to me, and it does lie as an heavy load upon my
heart many times, to think of dipleasing him.

I desire to dye, because this world is generally infected with the plague of
sin, and some have this Plague Sore running upon them, and I my self ^m tainted
with the same disease, so as whilst I live here, I can be in no place, nor in
any company, but I am still in danger of being infected, or to infect others,
and if this world does hate me because I endeavor to follow goodness, how will
it rejoice if my foot do but slip? Therefore how woeful would my life be unto
me, if I should give occasion to the world to triumph, or blaspheme in respect
of me? I cannot choose but desire to dye, when I consider that sin, like a
leprosy has so corrupted me, that there is no soundness in me, my mind, my
memory, my will, and affections, yea my very conscience is still impure; in
every faculty of my soul there is a miserable mixture of vile infection which
makes me aweary of my life; and all this is the worse, because it is incurable,
and inseparable companion of my life, so that I can go no whither to avoid it;
there is no business that I can dispatch that concerns my happiness without a
muteny in mine heart; though Gods works be all fair works, yet there are in my
nature many defects, insufficiencies, mistakings and transgressions; so that I
may say with David, Innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities
have taken hold on me, so that I am not able to look up, Psalm. 40. 12. I
therefore desire Heaven for holiness rather than for happiness, that I might
sin no more. I desire that condition wherein I may most glorify God.

I desire to dye, because of the Devils malignant, and uncessant assaults: I
can stand no where before the Lord on earth, but one Devil or other, is at my
right hand, and must of necessity enter into conflict with them, and their
temptations, and be buffeted, and gored by them, which is a thousand fold worse
than Death: More easy it is to wrestle with Flesh and Blood, than with those
Principalities and Powers, and spiritual wickednesses, and great Rulers of the
world: For they are subtle and cruel, and and like roaring Lions they go about
seeking whom they may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8.

I desire to dye, because by Death I shall rest from the hard labors of this
life.

I desire to dye, because nothing in this world can give me solid, and durable
contentment: I am less in liking of life, and have more desire of death when I
consider the misery that may come both on my body and estate, and fearful
alterations may come, and wars may come, and all the desolations, and terrors
which accompany them, and I may be left in the hands of the sons of violence:
Besides I daily suffer the loss of my friends who were the companions of my
life, and means of much contentment unto me; and those whom I lose by my life,
I shall find by my death, and enjoy in another world unto all eternity: And
for my children it does not trouble me, for that God which has given life and
breath, and all they have, while I am living, can, without me, provide for them
when I am dead; my God will be their God, if they be his, if they be not, what
comfort would it be for me to live? my life would be exceeding bitter unto me
if I should see them dishonor God, whom I so much love.

When she enjoyed the greatest portion of temporal or spiritual comfort, yet
would she never say, Master, it is good to be here, as Matthew. 17. 4. but making
that but a step for an higher ascent, she rather inferred, It is good going
hence: For if on earth there be so much good, how pleasant and desirable is
Heaven; the joys on earth to those that are there, are but as the earth is to
Heaven, little, and low, dark, and heavy.

Why I do not fear Death.

I fear not Death, Why she feared not death.
because it is but the separation of the body from th sold, and that it is but
a shadow of the body of death, Romans 7. 24. whereas the separation of the soul
from God by sin, Isa. 59. 2. and of soul and body for sin, is death indeed.

I fear not Death, because Death is such an enemy as has been often
vanquished, and because I am armed for it, and the weapons of my Warfare are
mighty through God, and I am assured of victory.

I do not fear Death for the pain of it; for I am persuaded I have endured as
great pains in life, as I shall find in Death, and Death will cure me of all
sorts of pains; and because Christ dyed a terrible and cursed Death, that any
kind of Death might be blessed to me; and that God, who has greatly loved me
in life, will not neglect me in death; but his Spirit will succor and
strengthen me all the time of the combat.

I do not fear Death for any loss: For I shall but lose my body by it, and that
is but a prison to my soul, an old rotten house, or ragged garment, nay I shall
not lose that neither, for I shall have it restored again at my Saviors second
coming made much better than now it is: For this vile body shall be like the
Body of Christ, and by death I shall obtain a far better life.

And as an incentive of Divine love, she prepared a breviate of Gods principal
benefits to her self for meditation on her Deathbed, and for thanksgiving to
God, which was this:

How shall I praise God, Her thankfulfulness.
1. For my Conversion. 2. For his Word, both in respect of my affections to it,
and the wonderful comforts I have had by it. 3. For hearing of my prayers. 4.
For godly sorrow. 5. For fellowship with the godly. 6. For joy in the Holy
Ghost. 7. For the desire of death. 8. For contempt of the world. 9. For private
helps and comforts. 10. For giving me some strength against my sin. 11. For
preserving me from gross evils both before, and after my calling, etc.

She showed her holy love to God, Her universal obedience.
by conforming her practice to his Precepts, according to that Joh. 14. 15. If
you love me, keep my Commandments. She thought nothing too much that she
should stick at (if God commanded, or forbad it) nothing so small, but his Word
was able to give it weight enough to bow down her neck to the obedience of it.
If it was a greater matter that he required of her, she considered, that he was
a God infinitely, both great and good, and that unto her, who had and would do
for her ten thousand times more and greater things than she could do for him:
If it were a little thing, she conceived that the contempt or neglect of it
would aggravate her guilt, as Naamans servants said to their Master, If the
Prophet had bidden thee do some great matter, would thou not have done it?
How much rather when he says unto thee, wash, and be clean? 2 King. 5. 18. the
less the duty is, the more is the disobedience if we do it not; for thereby we
extenuate the Authority of the Almighty, and such as slight it in a little
thing, will not regard it in a greater: She was therefore very precise in every
point which God required the per^formance of.

By this means she still increased in holiness and sanctification, and kept a
greater distance from great offenses; according to that of St. Jerome, Non cito
ad majora progreditur, qui parva formidet, who so is afraid of a small sin,
will not easily grow bold on those that are greater. Her love to God.
Her love to God was strong as death, Cant. 8. 4. yea, and much stronger, so
that Death could not affright her; for she desired da^ly to look death in the
face, nor could it hurt her more than she was content to endure: For though it
was not likely that she should go through the narrow wicket of Death, and not
be pinched in her passage, yet was she well contented with it, seeing it was
the ready way to come to God, whom she so much longed to behold.

Her Charity was very chary of the credit of the absent, Her Charity.
toward whom she would not suffer either her tongue, or her ears be guilty of
any wrong or robbery of their reputations. She never imposed false crimes, or
feigned faults upon others: She never discovered their secret sins, or
aggravated those that were known: She never denied, dissembled, nor diminished
the virtue or good parts of any. Though her hatred of sin was such as became a
sincere Christian, yet knew she how to distinguish betwixt sin, and the sinner,
and setting a severe dislike on the one, she reserved (as charity required)
love, or compassion for the other.

Her Charity was regular according to the Rules of Scripture, which she set
down in a paper* with quotations of Texts for her direction in four
particulars, 1. I must give readily, Job 31. 16. Prove. 3. 28. 1 Timothy 6. 18. 2.
I must give secretly, Matthew* 6. 3. 3. I must give liberally, 2 Cor. 8. 12. and
9. 6. 4. I must give cheerfully, 2 Cor. 8. 12. It was answerable also according
to her own ability, and others necessities: She had rather give a little to
many (since the number of the needy is very great) then a great deal to a few;
and she so ordered her charity, that she might still be able to exercise her
hand that way, and not as some, who give so much that after a while they can
give no more. And upon extraordinary occasions, if she were not magnificent,
the let was not in her mind, but in her means.

Her Charity was vigorus, and so cordial that what she gave was always without
grudging, knowing that God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7. yea she was so
cheerful herein, that she bestowed nothing upon her self with more readiness,
than she did upon others, whether it were toward the maintenance of the
Ministry, or in giving Alms to the poor; and yet herein did she follow the
rule of our Savior, Matthew. ^. 6. Let not thy left hand know what thy right
hand does; for she was many times as close in giving her own, as a Thief would
be in taking away from others; so that none did more good deeds with less show,
or sound of words than she.

For the object of her charity, she took her direction from the Apostles
precept, Gal. 6. 10. Do good unto all, but especially to the household of faith.
She indeed shut up her charity from none that had need of it, but she enlarged
it chiefly to such as were of the faithful.

Her love and charity was very entire, Her love to her neighbors
and great to her friends, yet not so confined to them, but that she reserved a
competent measure for them that dealt unfriendly with her, or that were enemies
to her. If there was any unkind difference between her, and any one, though
she enjoyed the freedom of her judgment to think as there was cause, yet
would she not suffer her affections to be estranged from them, but was ready to
do them good, if power, and opportunity did furnish her for it. She requited
love for hatred, pity for spite, ^riendly offices for offensive usages, She
bare ill will to none. She hated nothing, but that which is worse than nothing
[Sin] and that she hated in all, and most of all in her own soul.

As her Charity was evidenced by doing, Her Sympathy
so also by suffering: If any tribulation were upon others, or imminent over
them, she was like minded with her Lord and Master, according to that of the
Prophet, Isa. 63. 9. In all their afflictions he was afflisted. She did
passionately sympatize in the sufferings of her fellow members: If it was ill
with the Church, or any particular Saints; it was no better with her. Charity
made her suffer as much by inward affection, as they did of their enemies by
outward affliction.

Her Patience also was very remarkable: Her Patience.
For though her apprehensions were quick enough to conceive any thing tending
to the disturbance of peace and patience; yet she enjoyed such a calmness of
spirit as could hardly be turned to a storm. If any were injurious toward her,
her tongue could more readily pray, and her eyes weep for them, than with
looks, or words of indignation, or disdain set upon them. If she were angry at
others, which was very seldom, it was sin, their sin that was the cause of it.
If news came to her of any losses in her estate, as sometimes there did of
great ones, yet was she never put out of temper with those ill tidings, having
these considerations ready at hand to quiet her heart: It is that God that gave
all, that now takes away some, why should I take it ill? He would not have me
to be in love with, nor to rely upon uncertain riches, which were never true
to any that trusted them, but upon himself, and I willingly renounce them to
rest upon him. He can, if he see it good, recompense the loss, in the like, or
some better kind. If he take more, there will yet be many poorer than my self;
and if he take away all my goods, he can give me content without them, for he
is All-sufficient, and so though I have nothing, I may be as possessing all
things, 2 Cor. 6. 10. The world and I must part, and whether we be unstiched by
parcels, or torn asunder by taking all at once, all is one to me; that which he
chooses is best for us both, for his own glory, and my good, if I grudge not
against him, but willingly (as I pray) give way to his will.

By bodily sufferings her patience was exceedingly tried both for the truth and
strength of it: For of some of her children she had long, painful, and very
perilous labor; but that which exceeded all, was, a long, and sore sickness,
to which were applied very rough and irksome remedies, so that she suffered not
only the anguish of her disease, but many things also of the Physicians, as
that woman in the Gospel, Mark 5. 28. and had it only been pain and torment,
it had been more tolerable; but it was accompanied with a strange infirmity and
deformity. Her jaw being fallen, she could not bring it up toward her upper jaw:
Her mouth was drawn awry toward her ears, so that with much difficulty both to
her self and others, her food was conveyed through so crooked a passage to her
throat; which might have caused the greater discontent to her mind, because it
was the shipwreck of much beauty and comeliness, which until then was seated in
her countenance, and whereof she kept remarkable impressions to her dying day;
yet showed she admirable patience under this great affliction, to which her
heart was brought meekly to submit; and concerning which, she said, that if it
pleased the Lord still to continue her a spectacle of deformed misery, she
would not repine at his doing, or her own suffering, but would willingly, abide
it until he freed her body from the disease by health, or her soul from her
body by death.

Her Modesty also manifested it self by her shame-faced estrangement from sin
and vanity, Her Modesty.
concerning which virtue in her it may be said, that it was rather sometimes
too much, than any time too little, and it showed it self diverse ways.

1. In her look, which was habitually composed to a modest and gracious
gravity, so that against any thing that was unseemly to be said, or done, she
carried a severe rebuke in her very countenance; or if any were so immodest as
to speak, or do any thing before her, not becoming Christianity, her modesty
made some supply to their want of it, she would blush for them.

2. In her Speech, whereas some would have vaunted themselves, or made some
vainglorious show of such sufficiency as was in her, she rather shadowed her
own light with a dark Lanthorn, and therefore in that wherein she was a
teacher, she carried her self as in the person of a learner, rather asking
questions, than making resolutions, or giving rules, and directions unto others.

3. By her Silence: For as St. Ambrose says, Though^ silence be a rest to
other virtues, yet is it a chief act, an^ exercise of Modesty; yea her pace,
her habit, and he whole behavior was a lesson of modesty, which, together with
her other virtues, wrought a kind of awfulness in her person, so that those
that had not grace to do well in private, were more afraid and ashamed of an
appearance of evil in her presence, than in the sight of many a Magistrate.

As for Humility, Her Humility.
she made great account of it, she studied it seriously, and got it so by
heart, that there was no need of Art to make profession or ostentation of it.
Solomon makes contention the proper effect of pride, Prove. 13. 10. So
peaceableness is a sure sign of Humility; and this she showed in that she could
endure contradiction, reproaches, and other trials of Humility without a
quarrel, or breach of peace with any, being still ready to deny her self, and
to yield to others so far as with a safe conscience she could. Once a new Gown
being brought her to put on, and presented as a gift from he Husband, wherein
his kindness had put him to more cost than she wished, to make her more fine
than she desired to be, she humbly besought with tears that it might not come
upon her back; she said indeed little with her tongue, but her eyes spoke much,
because she was loath to conrradict him whom she was bound to obey; and at last
she submitted to his will, though against her own, not only because that habit
was no better than others of her rank did wear, but because it was a testimony
of her Husbands love, and of her own loyal subjection to his will; wherein she
followed the advice of Bishop Hall in his Contemplations. A good Wife.
It is not (says he) for a good wife to judge of her Husbands will but to
execute it; neither wit, nor stomach may carry her into a curious inquisition
into the reasons of an enjoined charge, much less to a resistance, but in an
hoodwinckt simplicity she must follow whithersoever she is led, as one that
holds her chief praise to consist in subjection, following her Husband, as the
Israelites did the cloudy Pillar, which when it stood, they stood, when it went
they followed. And indeed it was no marvel that she was so obsequious to her
Husband, for amongst her papers were found special directions which she had,
drawn out of the Scripture, for her conjugal affection, and behavior toward
her Husband, which were these which follow, under this Title;

Duties which concern me in particular.

I must submit my self to my Husband, as to the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 22.

I must account him my Head, Ephesians. 5. 23.

I must be in subjection to him in all things, as the Church unto Christ, Ephesians.
5. 24.

I must get his consent even for those times that I set apart for Religious
duties, 1 Cor. 7. ^, 10.

I must walk pleasingly toward him, 1 Cor. 7. 34.

When by his death she was loosed from the Law of her Husband, she would have
returned to a meaner habit, but because it was suitable to the place which she
held in the City (as having been wife to him who had been twice Mayor of
Chester, and diverse times a Burg^ss of Parliament) and for that God made such
good things neither only, nor principally for the use, and wearing of the
wicked, but for his children; and that it might not be imputed either to
singularity nor nigardize, she made no remarkable change in her attire; and
indeed, to keep down pride, she would not eat the bread of idleness, Prove. 31.
27. but willingly wrought with her hands, as that virtuous woman did, verse. 13.
and readily descended to such homely offices as were meet for the meanest of
her servants.

Notwithstanding such excellent gifts, Her preferring others before her self.
and graces wherewith God had enriched her soul, her mind was not lifted up to
vaunting or vanity, nor to the undervaluing or envying Gods gifts in others,
but in lowliness of mind, she esteemed others better than her self, Phil. 2.
3. disavowing her own praise, though those that gave it, thought it much less
than her due, and advancing others far before her self, though in gifts they
were far below her; and no marvel, for she was not as those who are far more
curious to know the faults of others than to correct their own, but an exact
enquirer into her own life, a severe censurer of her own imperfections and
failings; and as for others, she observed them most for that which was best in
them, to make her self more holy by imitating them therein, and more humble for
that wherein she fell short of them.

She often presented, and arraigned her self before Gods Tribunal to bring her
self down in submission as guilty before him, begging pardon on her knees at
his hands; and she came the lower by comparing her own faultiness, infirmity,
and misery with his infinite Purity, Power, and Majesty, in comparison of whom,
All Nations are but as the drop of the Bucket, or the small dust in the
Balance, Isa. 40. 15. which made her to think of him with admiration, and
love, and of her self with detestation and loathing; and when she took notice
of any good thing in her self, she boasted not of it, even because she had
received it, and that of Gods free gift, making it a Memento of thankfulness to
him that gave it her, knowing that he might have passed by her, and given it to
another, and that he might be provoked to take it away from her, if she should
take any of that glory to her self which was due unto him alone.

She always held this for a Maxim, Her Sincerity.
that if it be good to be esteemed virtuous (and most desire to be so esteemed)
than to be so indeed, is much better; for the substance of a good thing is
always better than the semblance of it; therefore she was so sincere in her
whole course, that she hated the least appearance of Hypocrisy: She was one of
those whom David blesses for their integrity, Bl^ssed are they who keep his
Testimonies, and seek him with their whole heart, Psalm. 119. 2. Her love was
without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. She loved not in word, or in tongue only,
but in deed, and in truth, 1 John 3. 18. and this appeared in that she made her
deeds of charity and good will always better than her words, whereof she was
so chary, that some blamed her for want of affability, which being objected to
her, she said, I like not the lavish language of some, who have their mouths
full of complemental courtesy to every one, though their hearts be shut and
contracted, when their mouths are so enlarged; and if they have love enough
within to maintain such liberality of words without, I like my own heart the
worse, that it is not so ready to attend upon my tongue, as on the sudden to
minister cordial affections meet for such frank and friendly expressions. She
used rather to let her friends see her love by her works, than to hear it by
her words.

Her Constancy also was very remarkable, by which her spirit was steadfast with
God, Her Constancy.
and her heart steadfast in his Covenant, as the Israelites should have been,
but were not, Psalm. 78. 8, 37. Her faith was grounded and settled, Col. 1. 23.
so that she was not carried away with diverse and strange Doctrines, Heb. 13. 9.
much less with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. But what she was for faith
and godliness from her first conversion, the same she was in all places, Her
growth in Grace.
at all times, and in all companies: But for the measure or degree of Grace,
she was not, as a stake in an hedge, which grows not, but as a plant in the
Garden that springs up, no dwarf in Gods house, but one that by spiritual
nourishment, and daily exercise of her graces, grew up apace toward the
stature of Christ, and as its said of the path of the just, Prove. 4. 18. She
shined more, and more unto the perfect day: So that she was best at last, and
most heavenly minded when she had the least time to tarry on the earth.

She was a loyal, and obedient Wife; a careful, and kind, though not a found
Mother; a gentle and beneficent Mistress; a good and a charitable neighbor,
and a true and constant friend.

Toward her latter end she fell into some bodily distempers, Her sickness.
wherein she had fits or trances, like the embrions of death, which (by a
gradual failing of her spirits) left her at last unable to speak or move, yet
without any great alteration in her countenance, which, by some, was conceived
to be a spice of the Mother, it was short, and not sharp, for she felt no pain;
yet when she returned to her self, she found that she was commonly more feeble
than before.

Upon the Munaay sevenight before she dyed, was the first assault given, which
set Deaths pale color upon her face and fingers from the middle joints toward
the ends; her nails turned to a bluish black, which being rubbed a while,
returned again to their former complexion, and she remained that night
indifferent well; the next day her disease appeared in the form and quality of
a kindly ague, and so continued mostly t^ll within three or four days before
her end, and then it turned from an intermitting Ague to a continual Fever,
that afflicted her with extreme burning, and other pains which commonly
accompany such a disease, especially when it rages most as it does toward the
latter end.

During her sickness, having the free use of all her faculties, her soul, no
doubt, was exercised in holy meditations; for wh^h she had kept in store many
particulars of importance to be remembered at her departure out of this world.
Her desires were strong for a speedy dissolution, so that she implored God with
the request of David, Psalm. 38. 22. Make haste to help me, O Lord my salvation:
and Psalm. 40. 13. Be pleased O Lord to deliver me, O Lord make haste to help
me: And this she desired that she might have a joyful meeting with him, and
fruition of him, after whom her soul longed, even then when her life was most
lightsome, and her condition most comfortable: And now the time drew near that
her desire was to be granted in that kind which she most desired, Her Death.
by the power of death, to pass to the Author of life, which she did in such a
calm manner that when she was thought to be but asleep, she was found to be
dead, on Friday, August the 17. Anno Christi 1638.

The Life, and Death of Mr. Ignatius Jurdaine, who dyed Anno Christi 1640.
Ignatius Jurdaine was born at Lime-Regis in the County of Dorset, His Birth
and Education.
Anno Christi 1561. And when he was yet young, he was sent by his Friends to
the City of Exeter, to be brought up in the profession of a Merchant, and from
thence, being about fifteen years old, His Conversion.
he was sent into the Isle of Garnsey; and God by his good providence having
brought him to that place, did also there effectually call, and convert him by
his Grace: So that from that time he resolved to be like that wise Merchant in
the Gospel, Mat. 13. 46. to part with all for that Pearl of great price,
whereas others did make it their great work, and highest design to get the pelf
of the world, and to load themselves with thick clay, Hab. 2. 6. And in
testimony of his thankfulness to God, he left by Will a considerable Legacy to
the poor of Lime where he was born, and to the poor of Garnsey, where he was
new born.

God seasoning his heart with Grace in his younger years, His holy life.
the general course of his life, did for the future relish of it, according to
that of Solomon, Prove. 22. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and
when he is old he will not depart from it. For as he was trained up in Religion
from his youth, so he continued not only in the form and profession, but in the
life and power of it, until his old age, and death.

In the whole tenor of his life, his piety was most eminent; His early rising
to converse with God.
and indeed, there have been few observed to hold such const^nt, and close
communion with God, as Mr. Jurdaine did. It was his constant practice for many
years together, even to his old age, to arise between two and three of the
clock in the morning, and that even in the coldest seasons of the year and to
spend the time in secret meditation, and prayer, until six a clock, which was
the appointed time for his Morning-sacrifice in the Family; at which time he
was called from his secret devotions to the exercise of Religious
Family Duties. And if at any time he had over-slept himself (as he accounted
it) and did not rise until four a clock, he would much bemoan himself, for the
loss of so much precious time, wherein he might have enjoyed sweet, and
comfortable communion with God: Surely, had he not experimentally found much
sweetness in this his spiritual converse with God, as David did, Psalm. 104. 34.
he could not have continued so constantly therein. And having thus awaked with
God in the morning, and renewed his acquaintance with him day by day, its no
marvel that he did walk with him all the day long after.

In all his affairs and dealings, He is slandered, and vindicated.
his care was to walk very exactly, and sincerely, according to St. Paul's
direction, Ephesians. 5. 16. But though in all things he studied to approve himself
to God, and to walk as in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 2. 17. yet could he not
escape the malicious censures of men, who charged him to do all in Hypocrisy.
He well knew that he had the imputations of dissembling, and hypocrisy cast
upon him, by men void of charity and sincerity; but the testimony of his own
conscience did more comfort him, than the uncharitable censures of men dejected
him; and he used upon that occasion to take up the words of Job, Till I dye I
will not remove mine integrity from me, Job. 27. 5. Many have often heard him to
profess, that he would not willingly commit a sin to get a world, though the
evil which he would not do that did he, as Romans 7. 25. (as it is incident to
the best of men) yet did he bewail it with grief of heart.

The sincerity indeed both of his intentions and actions has been questioned
by some, who were not ashamed to say, that under color of doing Justice (when
he was a public Magistrate) and providing for poor, he robbed the poor, and
helped to keep his own house* which was due to the poor: But for that falsehood
that was thus charged upon him, there were none that could ever better clear
him from it than himself, not only his conscience witnessing for him before
God, but his books (wherein he kept an exact Record of all the money which he
received by way of mulct from Swearers, Drunkards, etc. according to the Law)
and the Officers that distributed the money testifying his integrity before
men; so that might truly say with Jacob, Genesis 30. 33. My righteousness shall
answer for me, and so it did herein both before God and men.

Nay, he was so far from depriving the poor of their right, that he added much
of his own, distributing sixpences and shillings even when he had no money in
bank.

He had not only the testimony of his own conscience, and of good men, for his
upright and just dealing, but even of such who had little goodness in them. A
profane Gentleman jee^ing at his heavenly discourses; another of good quality,
though of little piety, replied, Well, Gentlemen, you may laugh at him, but on
my conscience, he means well, and whosoever of us goes to Heaven, shall meet
Mr. Jurdaine there.

He was a man that made conscience of all the duties and exercises of Religion
both in private, His heavenly Conversation.
and in public: His frequent discourses of Heaven, and the way thereunto, and
assurance of his interest therein, did declare that his heart and conversation
were much in Heaven. He used (...) take occasion to confer of spiritual, and
heavenly things with all sorts of men that he conversed with. One should
seldom hear him speak but of heaven and heavenly things. His heart was so full
of heaven that he could not but utter, and breath it forth in his discourses
with men, and especially with those whose hearts and faces were toward Heaven:
When he was at Table receiving his daily food, he did usually minister occasion
of holy discourses, and diverted vain, and unprofitable talk, to such edifying
speeches, as might minister grace to the hearers, according to that
exhortation, Ephesians. 4. 29. He took occasion from earthly things to speak of
heavenly; as from the sweetness of the creatures, to speak of the infinite
sweetness which is in God; from feasting on earth, to the sitting down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 8. 11. and feasting
with God and his blessed Saints there. And when the Table-cloath was taken
away, he would often say, In heaven there is no taking away, here we are soon
satisfied, and cloyed, but there will be such a feast, that we shall be
continually delighting our souls with it, without any cloying. And his manner
was to close his meals with singing some short Psalm.

He delighted much in reading good, His much reading.
and holy books, and especially that Book of books, the sacred Scriptures,
wherein he most delighted, and thereby showed that he had the property of a
godly man, set down, Psalm. 1. 2. and 119. 97. The word of God was his
meditation all the day long, yea both day and night. He did not only read the
Bible above twenty times over, but he read it with special observation (as
appears by the Asterisks, and marks in the Bible which he used) making
particular application to himself. The like course he took in reading over that
useful Book of Mr. Rogers his seven Treatises, and other practical books,
wherein he was very conversant, and his collections out of several Authors do
abundantly testify. And he took so much delight in reading that voluminous and
excellent Book of the Acts and Monuments of the Church, that upon occasion he
told a Friend that he had read it seven times over.

His zeal for God and his glory, His Zeal.
and against Idolatry, profaneness, and other evils, whereby God was highly
dishonored, was most eminent, and remarkable. He was a man of an
Anti-Laodician temper; he had well learned the Apostles direction, Romans 12. 11.
To be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, and not the time. He was far unlike
Ignatius Loiola, the Founder of the Order of Jesuits, who was a man of fire
that was set on fire by ^ell to promote the cause of the Prince of darkness;
but he had an holy fire kindled in his heart from heaven, whereby he did burn
with zeal for the advancement of Gods glory, and an holy indignation against
sin, and error. He would (if it had been possible) have burnt up all the
dross, and fi^th that corrupted the Truths of God, and that was contrary to the
ways of holiness; and therein he was very like to Ignatius the Martyr.

Neither did his zeal carry him beyond knowledge, His Prudence.
like that of the Jews, Romans 10. 2. when in his zeal he used often to cry out,
Fie upon discretion; For he condemned only that counterfeit pretense of
discretion, which was taken up, and pleaded against true and regular zeal: And
truly if carnal discretion be set up, and cried up, like the worldlings Idol,
it is the part of true Christian zeal to cry it down.

He was a very strict and conscientious observer and sanctifier of the
Christian Sabbath, His strict observation of the Sabbath.
or Lords Day. He did then rise very early as on other days (if not earlier)
and called upon those in his Family to rise early on that day, saying, This is
Gods day, and as we do expect that our servants should rise early to go about
our work on our days, so God expects our early rising on his Day, to go about
his work and service. And he used carefully to attend upon Gods holy
Ordinances. The feet of them that dispensed the Gospel, were beautiful in his
eyes, as Romans 10. 15. more beautiful than their faces to many others. He was
one of those Saints, that sat down at Gods feet to receive his word, Deuteronomy. 33.
3. as Disciples used at the feet of their Teacher, implied, Act. 22. 3. and he
was very desirous, and willing to learn of any that came with the Lords message
unto him. He was a M^ason, an old Disciples, Act. 21. 16. yea a Disciple when
he was old: It never came into his heart to cast off Ordinances, no not when he
had attained to an high measure toward perfection. He was a constant writer of
Sermons, even when he was old, and that, not for his own benefit alone, but for
the good of his Family, to whom he did constantly repeat the Sermons. And if he
found himself overtaken with drowsiness in hearing the word (an infirmity
incident to age) his manner was to stand up, and to rouse up himself that he
might hear the more attentively. He knew that Religion consisted not in
hearing, repetition, and profession, but in practice; and therefore his care
was to digest his hearing, and knowledge into an holy conversation.

His love was so great to the Ministry of the word, His love to Ministers.
and the Lords holy Ordinances, that he did entirely love, and affect all
faithful and painful Ministers, though their gifts were but mean; but he
could not away with a lazy Minist^r, though he was never so learned. Where
fidelity, and learning meet together in one Minister, Oh! how highly would he
reverence him.

And being desirous not to go to Heaven alone, His desire to have others saved.
but to draw others with him, his usual course was, when he went with his
Family to Gods house, to make an exhortation to his children and servants, that
they should consider into whose presence they were going, and whom they were to
hear, even that great God, to whom they were to give an account of every word,
which they should hear; and therefore he required them carefully to store it up
for their practice, and not to say, My Father, or my Master would not afford me
time; for if they did, he would protest against them in the day of Judgment.
And as he was going to the Congregation on the week-dayes, he would often find
some of the Country people that were come early to the Market, and then would
ask them where they did live, and when they answered five or six, or more miles
off, he would thence take occasion to show them how vain a thing it was to
pursue the world, and to neglect the care of their precious and immortal souls;
and would ask them, how they could rise so early to get the world, and not rise
as early to get interest in Jesus Christ, and to attain the favor of God, and
assurance of eternal happiness. And then looking back upon his Family, he would
say to them, You see here how these people can rise betimes to get a little
part of the world, and you will hardly rise early to get the assurance of the
favor of God, which is far better than the whole world.

As he returned from Sermons, he would be speaking to them that went with him
of what they had heard, exhorting them to be mindful of it, and to put it in
practice; and when one of the company was troubled, hearing him to press such
things upon them, told him, that he had heard many good Sermons at St. Peter's
[the Cathedral] but never heard one at the great Conduit before; he presently
replied, Sirs, are ye troubled to be put in mind of the word of God? I pray
God the time come not, when you are in hell, that you wish you had not only
practiced the Sermons which you heard at St. Peter's, but had received good
counsel from the Word, at the great Conduit also.

Thus by his diligent attending upon, and careful applying the means of Grace,
His Assurance
and Gods blessing upon them, he attained a very great measure of assurance,
even to a kind Plerophory, such as the Apostle speaks of, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Much
assurance, and Col. 2. 2. Full assurance of understanding, by which he was
carried as with full ^ails, to holy duties. And truly, if we connsider the
measure, continuance, and constancy of it, there are few Christians that have
attained the like. Assurance was much in his tongue, and in his heart; it was
that which he earnestly labored for, and obtained by fervent prayer, and
diligent use of the means. God gave him the Testimony and Seal of the Spirit,
and so assured him of his eternal love in Christ, as also of his Adoption, and
eternal happiness in Heaven. God gave it him as part of his reward for his
sincere, and faithful service.

At sometimes he had more than ordinary comforts, His joy unspeakable.
and incomes of the Spirit for the strengthening of his Assurance: As for
instance, At a time he being at a Sermon, and attending heedfully to those
discerning and differencing marks of uprightness, which were then laid down,
and one mark being more powerfully pressed, and coming fully home to his
condition, he being in a deep and serious meditation, and reflecting upon
himself, and finding, it to be truly in him, it seemed to him as if one struck
him upon the shoulder, encouraging, and saying, Be of good cheer, thou art the
man: upon which he had presently such inward joys, and ravishings of spirit as
were unexpressible.

And as by diligence he obtained, How he maintained his Assurance.
so he carefully kept his assurance by frequent trial of himself, and his
spiritual estate toward God, he used to try himself by all the marks of
sincerity which he found in the Scriptures, heard by the Ministry of the word,
or read in the books of godly Divines, and thereby he did clear up his
evidences for heaven; and he did not only try his estate by some marks, but he
kept a narrow watch over his heart and ways, and thereby his assurance was
preserved; and he kept it for a long time together, even for thirty years, and
more: and being asked whether he never met with any temptations of doubting of
his estate toward God, he gave this answer, That he had been, and often was
sorely assaulted by Satan's temptations, which were set against his Faith and
Assurance, and that he had been foiled in respect of the application of some
particular promises; but he was not thereby driven from his holdfast of Christ,
or from the assurance of his interest in the Covenant of Grace; yet still he
acknowledged that his assurance, and all his ability in spiritual things, was
through Christ that strengthened him, as Paul, Phil. 4. 13.

As he had this assurance himself, so he was always forward to stir up others
to labor for it; He stirred up others to labor for it.
there were scarce any that he met with, if he supposed that their faces were
heavenward, but he would be questioning with them about their assurance;
blaming them if they did not diligently seek after it, and encouraging them to
labor for it. And when some did ask him how they should get it, he gave them
this answer, that they should importunately seek it of God, and not give him
any rest till he granted it unto them; I would (said he) lock, or bolt my
Chamber door, and beg it of God, and never give him rest till I had obtained
it; and then he advised them that they should daily try themselves by some
marks, and he often mentioned three that he used to try himself by, 1. A
sincere desire to fear the name of God, as Nehem. 1. 11. 2. A sincere endeavor
to do the will of God in all things required, as Psalm. 119. 6. 3. A full
purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord, as Act. 11. 23. and these he did not
only speak of, but pressed them with much earnestness, as longing that others
should partake of that high privilege, and heavenly gift with himself.

If he met with any Scholar, and such an one especially as applied himself to
the study of Divinity, his usual question to such was, What evidence have you
for heaven? You Scholars have the best opportunities of all men for the
getting of assurance; you are still looking into Gods book, and into other good
books, and should acquaint your selves with your spiritual estate toward God,
and so have a greater measure of assurance than others.

The like course he took when he met with any others, as occasion was offered,
or if he found none, he would take it of himself: Once when he was a Parliament
man, being at London, and coming accidentally into the shop of an intimate
acquaintance, a man of great estate and employment, and an Alderman of the
City, he expressed his wondering at so great trading for the things of the
world, and thereupon demanded how he could in the midst of such wordly business
attend the weighty affairs of heaven? His Friend answered, that he hoped he
looked after the good of his soul. Mr. Jurdaine replied, How can you attend
upon the worship of God every morning? His Friend answered, that though he
could not attend upon it every morning, yet he failed not of it in the evening;
Well Sir, said Mr. Jurdaine, I will tell you in plain terms what I would have
you ^o do, I would take all these goods, and throw them out into the street,
and let them rather be cast away, and perish, than that they should be a means
to ruin my soul unto all eternity.

From this Assurance it was that he was so fearless of Death: His desire of
death.
He knew that Death was an enemy, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. 26. But that
through Christ, it was become a Friend to open the Gate of Heaven. Whereas
Death in it self is as Bildad says, Job 18. 14. the King of Terrors, or as
the Heathen said, Of all Terribles the most terrible; yet he, being assured of
his interest in Christ, found it not so to him; for he looked upon it as having
lost its sting through Christ. Indeed, he made it so familiar to him by his
continual meditation of it, that he was so far from fearing it, that he did
delight to speak of it, yea earnestly desired it, and with joy expected it,
whereby he discovered his great proficiency in the School of Christ. It was his
usual saying, that if Death were offered him on the one hand, and the Kings
Crown on the other, he would take the Crown, and throw it into the Kennel, and
choose Death far before it: He knew that he should be a great gainer by Death,
and thereby obtain the Crown of life and glory, Jam. 1. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 4. and
that he feared not, but rather hoped for Death. And this was further
manifested, in that when the Plague was very hot in the City of ^xeter, and he
being in the highest place of Authority there at that time, when the poor
flocked about his house for relief, though he would not causelessly expose
himself to danger, yet being in the discharge of his Duty, he feared not the
infection; but often professed, that if by Gods disposing, the Plague should
seize on him, he would kiss, and welcome it as the messenger of Death.

Nor was the meditation of Death then in his mind only in times of danger,
but at all times; there was not a day wherein he did not speak of it, and not
only when there was occasion offered to talk of it, but he would take occasion
to discourse of that subject: As when he was invited to a Feast, he would tell
the messenger that he would come if he did live so long: And when he went out
of his house upon public or private businesses, he would (as it were) take a
solemn leave of his wife, telling her, that he knew not whether he should
return to his house again.

Yet did he not so much desire Death as to undervalue the blessing of life, Yet
careful of life.
or to neglect the means for the preservation of it; for he acknowledged it to
be a great blessing, and he was willing to live as long as the longest lived
man, if it were Gods good pleasure, and if he might do him service. And when he
was sick, or in any danger, he would carefully make use of the means, that he
might thereby serve Gods good providence for his recovery or deliverance,
saying, that though he must trust in God, yet he must not tempt him by seeming
to trust in him.

His mind was not so much upon Earth, His heavenlimindedness.
and Death, as upon Heaven, to which he was assured Death would be a passage
for him: Sure his heart was much upon Heaven, or Heaven was much in his heart,
as appeared by his frequent discourse of it both day and night; and our Savior
Christ tells us, Mat. 12. 34. That out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. All that knew him, and looked upon him without a prejudiced eye, would
say, that he was a most heavenly minded man; a man that lived in Heaven as much
as most that lived upon earth. When in the night he looked upon those
glistering lights of Heaven, Ezekiel. 32. 8. the Firmament adorned with those
Stars of light, Psalm. 148. 3. he used to raise up his thoughts and speech much
higher, even to the glory of the highest Heaven, saying, If these visible
Heavens be so glorious, how does the Heaven above them exceed in glory, where
God alone shall be the light, and yet the Righteous shall shine forth as the
Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13. 43. There was scarce any occasion
administered, or any special act of Gods providence that did occur, but it would
draw out some speech of Heaven from him; as when any cross, or loss befell him
in his affairs, he would say no more, but, Heaven will pay for all. And when in
a journey he fell from his horse, and lay for a while in a swoon, as soon as he
recovered, his first words were, Well, I see that I am now deceived, I thought
that my horse would have cast me into Heaven.

These are some few heads of the breathings of his piety, to which much more
might be added; and truly they which knew him will marvel, not that so much is
said of him, but rather that there is so little.

He was as eminent for Justice as for Piety, when he was advanced to the
chiefest place of Government in that City, His Justice.
to be Mayor of that honorable Corporation: He was an eminent Magistrate, and
that not only in the year of his Majora^ty; but ever after as long as he lived.
He looked upon it, not as a place of honor only, but as an office of trust,
wherein he might honor God, and execute justice amongst men, and reform those
evils which abounded in those times in that place: He did not glory so much in
having the Sword carried before him (though it was a singular badge of honor
to that City, that the Kings swo^d should be taken from his side, and delivered
to the Mayor to be carried before him, as a signal testimony of his favor,
and their loyalty, and courage in the insurrection of Perkin Warbeck) as he was
desirous to draw forth the sword of Justice against evil doers, and not to
carry it in vain, Romans 13. 4.

He was observed to be an impartial Administrator of Justice, His Impartiality.
and one that without respect of persons did punish evil doers, of
whatquality, or condition soever they were that did transgress the Law, whether
they were Citizens or strangers that came thither, if complaint were made to
him, they should not escape condign punishment, as the Laws of the Land, or
custom of the place did award. As for instance.

There was a Gentleman of quality that was complained of to him for swearing
five Oaths, Examples of it.
and for some other misdemeanors: Mr. Jurdaine thereupon sent a Constable with
a Warrant to fetch him before him: but the Gentleman gave the Constable
threatening language, so that he durst not execute his Office: Whereupon Mr.
Jurdaine sent one Constable more for him, who brought the Gentleman before him:
And he being in his Court when he came, after diverse good admonitions given
him, he told him, that though he was never so great a Gentleman, he could no
more go to Heaven whilst he took such courses, than he could eat that stone
(pointing to a great stone in his Court) and then required him to pay five
shillings for his Oaths, which he did: Then he told him that he must put in
sureties for the good behavior: This the Gentleman refused to do, alleging
that he was a stranger: Whereupon Mr. Jurdain^ commanded the Constables to
carry him away to prison till he would find sureties, which accordingly they
did; and as he was going into the prison door, he desired that he might return
back again, and he would give Bail: When he came to Mr. Jurdain^ to do it, he
again gave him many good instructions, and the Gentleman (though he was a man
of a very high spirit) gave him many hearty thanks for his good counsel, and
promised amendment for the time to come.

The Master of Bridewell could witness how many disorderly persons were sent
thither by Mr. Jurdains Warrants, more than by any other Justices in his time.

The Stocks, and Whipping-post could testify what swearers, drunkards, unclean
persons, and such like notorious offenders were punished, principally by his
indifferent execution of justice. And if any of the offenders that were liable
to the censure, and penalty of the Law, desired to be spared, he would tell
them; Here be my children whom I dearly love, and yet if any of them should
commit such offenses, they should suffer as you must do: and therefore I cannot
remit of the penalty of the Law.

What excuses, or fair pretenses soever they made, he caused the Law to be
executed upon them; yea and that the more severely, because of the greatness of
the crime, and the greater dishonor that redounded to the Name of the most
high God thereby.

When some scandalous offenders, for the gross sin of uncleanness were accused,
and questioned before the Court, and some present (for by-respects) pleaded for
them, desiring to have them spared, he wished the Watchmen that were at the
Gates to keep out the Plague (it being a time wherein some Neighbor-towns were
infected) should be called home: For (says he) the Plague is in the Guild Hall
of the City: Adding further, that if they did not execute the Law upon them, he
would complain of them to the Council Table: And thereupon, after much contest,
there was Order taken for their severe, and just punishment.

He was ever very vigilant, especially in the year of his Mayoralty, when the
government of the City lay upon him, both to prevent, and remove disorders:
Insomuch as he would go himself with the Constables to search for idle, and
disorderly persons on Sabbath days at night, and at the end of the Assizes,
and Sessions, and in Fair weeks, etc.

Yea, A great reformation wrought by him.
he did not only execute justice, but he showed himself zealous therein,
manifesting the greatest indignation against those evils whereby God was most
highly dishonored, as swearing, and Sabbath-breaking. Indeed swearing was most
odious unto him, and had there been a greater penalty than was at that time
appointed by the Law of the Land, he would most readily have inflicted it. But
by his punishing as many as were brought before him, it struck such an awe into
the generality, as that some that lived at that time in the City, and near the
place of the greatest concourse of people, the Corn-market, observed that they
did not hear an Oath sworn for many years together.

He did not only maintain his zeal against swearing, and swearers of the
ordinary sort, and rank of men, but even of the highest that came within the
verge of his authority. As for example;

A Gentleman of great quality, and much favored at Court, His Courage.
was heard to swear five or six times in the City. Mr. Jurdaine having notice
of it, sent some Constables to demand the penalty for swearing. The Gentleman
was of an high spirit, and at this time accompanied with the chiefest of the
County of Devonshire, and there were diverse hot spirits about him. The
Constables pressed toward the room where he was, saying, that Mr. Jurdaine had
sent them to demand the aforementioned penalty: and it was like to have broken
forth into a great, and dangerous contest; but a prudent Gentleman, of a more
moderate temper, and one that feared an Oath, stepped forth to them, and told
the Constables that this Gentleman was of an high, and impatient spirit, and
had great company about him: I fear therefore (said he) that the event may be
of sad consequence if you pursue your intentions at this time; yet the
Constables seemed unwilling to depart till they had what they came for; the
Gentleman seeing this, said, I will now pay the six shillings to you for him,
and I promise you faithfully that I will take a convenient time to admonish the
Knight when it shall do him more good than the rigorous exaction of the penalty
of the Law can at this time, and so they departed.

It is credibly related that Mr. Jurdaine being summoned to appear in the
Star Chamber, for an act of Justice, wherein it was supposed that he went
somewhat beyond the strict letter of the Law, being there in the presence of
some of his Judges, who were Noble men, and hearing them to swear diverse Oaths,
he told them, that they must pay for every oath that they had sworn, or
otherwise he would make it farther known.

When he was Mayor of Exeter, He reforms the profanation of the Sabbath.
he did much reform the open profanation of the Sabbaths. For whereas the
Hullers had wont to set their Mills agoing on the Sabbaths, he put a stop upon
them for that whole day, knowing that that whole day was to be dedicated to
God, and his worship, and service; and whereas it was usual to sell fruit and
herbs, and other things on the Lords holy day; as also Bowling, Cudgel-playing,
and other profane pastimes were then much used, by his zeal and vigilance, and
by the care of other Officers under him, they were wholly left off, though not
without much reluctance, opposition, and some danger at the first; for there
were commotions and tumults, and great resistance made against him; but by his
constant zeal for God, and his day, and Gods blessing upon the same, they were
at last suppressed and quelled.

And not only when he was Mayor, but ever after, being a Justice of Peace, in
which Office he continued for twenty and four years, he was much taken up in
the execution of Justice, yea sometimes for the whole day from morning till
night: So that he did not only execute Judgment in the morning, as Jer. 21.
12. after he had been with God in the Mount of heavenly meditation, but all the
day long, as Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood before Moses
from the morning until the evening, Exodus 18. 13.

And when he was out of power as a Justice, His zeal, and courage.
he discovered his zeal as a Christian, against profane swearing, and for the
strict observation of the Sabhath, wherein there is a remarkable instance of
both at once; and it was this, Mr. Jurdaine returning from the Parliament in
the company of a person of Honor, he was invited by him to stay at his house
that night, being Saturday, and the Sabbath following, he (having observed that
Noble personage to swear, as they traveled together) told him, that he would
not go into his house, for that he was a Swearer, and he feared that the house
would fall upon his head: Answer was returned, that he need not fear that, for
the house was newly built, a fair, and strong house: To this he replied, yea
but the flying Roll of Curses shall enter into the house of Swearers, and shall
consume the timber, and stones of it. But to obtain his company, the Lord
pressed the inconveniences of his lodging in an Inn on the Sabbath day: Mr.
Jurdaine replied, But I will never go into your house, unless you will engage
your self, that no Oath shall be sworn, ^nor cursing uttered by your^, your
Lady, nor none of your servants or Family: This was faithfully promised; Yea
but then (said Mr. Jurdaine) how shall the Sabbath be kept? the answer was,
That he should have an honest Sermon in the forenoon. And what in the
afternoon, said he? Except we shall have a good Sermon in the afternoon also, I
will not go in. That likewise was granted, and (as it is said) all was
faithfully performed. His mercy to souls.


He was not for judgment only, but for mercy also: and he showed mercy to the
souls of them that were brought before him, as transgressors of the Law, and to
be punished according to their demerits: For he would labor to convince them
of the hainousness of their offenses, that so he might bring them to a sight of
their sins, and to repentance for the same.

He did much encourage the Officers under him to a diligent, and faithful
discharge of their duty: and indeed they stood in much need of it, meeting with
many discouragements from some others: and when he found them somewhat backward
through timerousness, or other by-respects, to execute his Warrants upon
persons of high place, he would exhort them to be active, and forward in doing
their duty, telling them, In good earnest (for that was his usual word) that
if he had as good a Warrant from God, as they had from him to apprehend
offenders, if he were required to apprehend the Devil himself, he would not be
backward to put it in execution.

His zeal was not only in distributive justice as a Magistrate: His justice.
but he was conscienciously careful as a Christian, in commutative justice, in
his commerce, and dealings with men, wherein he made the Word the rule of his
practice: and if he found at any time that he had swerved from that rule, he
would retract it, that so neither his own conscience, nor other men might
reproach him for walking disorderly, and besides the rule: and that appeared,
not only by his avoiding all usurious Contracts, but also in making restitution
of all that had been gotten thereby.

He had sometimes taken usury for Money lent to a person about Lime, which he
had received for diverse years: for at that time he held it lawful, by reason
of the practice which he had observed in some foreign States, and the
concurrent judgments of some Divines of note, who spoke in favor thereof: but
upon his perusal of the Writings of other godly Divines of our Nation, and by
conference with some worthy Ministers of his acquaintance, he was so convinced
of the unlawfullness of usury, that he did not only forbear the practice of it
for the future, He restores Use-money.
but restored the interest formerly taken: and took no more for the loan of
Money, than the party borrowing would voluntarily give him.

He did much bewail the common course of too many, who sin against God, both in
getting, and spending their worldly estates. For (said he) as they get it
unjustly, and by indirect means, so for the most part, they spend it leudly,
and lavishly in satisfying their sinful lusts.

Neither was he more famous for justice, than he was for charity, His Charity.
and that both in his life, and at his death: In his lifetime he was a
free-hearted man, and open-handed. He was a great patron of the poor: Another
Job in that respect: He could truly say with him, as Job 30. 25. Was not my
soul grieved for the poor? No doubt it was; and the bowels of his compassion
did yearn toward them: He was an Advocate, and did earnestly plead for them,
and especially for Gods poor, honest poor persons, whose hearts, and faces were
set Godward, and Heavenward, and his hands were very open to relieve them: He
did that for them, which many of far greater estates had not hearts to do.

He would often say, that he wondered what rich men meant, that they gave so
little to the poor, and raked so much together for their children. Do you not
see (quoth he) what becomes of it? and would reckon up diverse examples of such
as heaped up much for their children, and they, within a short time had
scattered, and consumed all: and on the other side, he often spoke of such as
had small beginnings, and afterward became rich, or of a competent estate:
giving a particular instance in himself: I came (said he) but with a groat, or
six pence in my purse to this City: had I had a shilling in my purse, I had
never been Mayor of Exeter. And therefore leave children but a little, and they
(by Gods blessing on their labor, and industry) may become rich: But leave
them a great deal, and they are in danger to be beggars.

His care for the poor was most remarkable in the time of the great Plague in
that City, which was anno Christi 1625. For in the Majors absence he was chosen
his Lieutenant, or Deputy, and he, seeing the deplorable condition of the City,
accepted of it, and then he wrote diverse Letters to many Towns in Devonshire,
and to some in Dorset, and Sommersetshire, by which means he procured several
sums of Moneys, for the suppliall of the wants of the many hundreds of poor,
that at that time were in a very distressed estate: One that was an eyewitness
related, that he had seen morning after morning coming to his door, sometimes
thirty, sometimes forty, yea fifty, or sixty, or more, wringing their hands;
some crying that their husbands were dead: Others that their wives were dead:
Others that their children were dead, and that they had not any thing
wherewithal to bury them. Some again cried that their Families were sick, and
they had not wherewithal to relieve them. Others that they had diverse
children, but they neither had bread, nor Money to buy it for them. Some cried
for bread: Some for Physic: Others for Shroudes for their dead: and he not
only heard them patiently; but his bowels yearned toward them, and his hands
were stretched out for their relief. For, standing within his own Shop, with
his own hands, he ministered supplies unto them all, and so dismissed them for
the present. And the next morning when there was a renewall of their sad
complaints, his charitable care of them was renewed also: and thus he continued
morning by morning, even for the space of near three months, till the return
of the Mayor into the City.

Besides his great care of supplying the wants of such poor as came unto him,
he had a special respect to poor Housekeepers, and Tradesmen, such as were
ashamed, and unwilling to make their sad, and necessitous condition known; and
a peculiar care of the godly poor, concerning whom he used to advise with the
Constables, and Churchwardens of every Parish, and according to their need,
would proportion some relief, and help unto them, and send it by the hands of
the said Constables, or Churchwardens.

And his care for the poor was not only in that extraordinary season (as their
exigents did require) but so long as he continued in the land of the living:
And he was so constantly exercised in this great work of charity, that he did
it, as it were, naturally: as the Apostle speaks of Timothy, Phil. 2. 20.

But though he did well, yet heard he ill even for this, and by some it was
cast in his teeth, that he made beggars: and when he was asked by a man of
place, and estate, what he would give to keep the poor from begging? (supposing
that he would not be so forward therein, as he was in relieving them) he freely
offered a great part of his estate, upon condition that the other would do the
like: But when he saw his forwardness, the other pulled back his shoulder, and
would not join with him therein.

He was given much to hospitality: His hospitality.
He would not eat his morsels alone by himself, as Job 31. 17. He well
remembered the Apostles direction, Heb. 13. 2. Be not forgetful to entertain
strangers. He was most loving, and friendly to them, and especially to such as
did suffer for conscience sake: As those godly Ministers who were silenced for
Nonconformity (although his own judgment was well satisfied in that point.)
To him they did continually resort, and by him they were kindly entertained:
Insomuch as by the profaner sort, he was cried out on as an Arch-Puritan: But
by those that took Religion to heart, he was honored with the title of Ga^us
mine Host, and of the whole Church, as Romans 16 23.

If we consider his last Will, and Testament, we shall find in it very great
and unparalleled acts of charity: As he gave one third part of his temporal
estate to his wife, and another third part to his children, according to the
custom of the City, so out of the other third part, he left very large
Legacies, especially to the poor.

We will here omit many Legacies given to Ministers, and others, and point only
at some that were more remarkable; and take them in his own words in his Will;
First I give to all the poor of this City, and County that receive pay of
Parishes, and also to those that dwell in Almes-houses, I give five shillings
to each, to be paid at my Burial. I give to one hundred more poor people ten
shillings to each, to be given to such as my Overseers shall think to have most
need, the honest poor to be chiefly looked unto. Also I give to the poor of
Lime, where I was born, and to the poor of Garnsey, where I was new born, five
pounds to each place. Also I forgive all the Moneys owing to me, if it be under
the value of twenty shillings to each. (These smaller sums which he had lent
to the poor were very many:) Also my Will is, and I give now more to fifty poor
people of this City, and County, twenty shillings to each, by my Overseers, or
the major part of them. Thus out of that estate which God had given him, he
gave again by way of gratitude to God, viz. to the poor, who are Gods
receivers. God gave him, and left him a competent estate (after his many, and
great losses) and which is more, he gave him an heart to honor him with his
substance, Prove. 3. 9. and to lay it forth as became a faithful Steward, in
the service, and for the honor of his Lord, who had entrusted him with it.

It Is true, some did wonder, and others did sharply censure him for his
extraordinary charity, and liberality, and especially for that he left no
greater a part of his estate to his wife: But this may be said in his defense:
That the strait, and close hearts of others, are no fit pattern to measure his
large heart by. And besides, God had opened his hand in giving very liberally
unto him blessings, both spiritual, and temporal, and especially spiritual,
even the graces, and comforts of his Spirit: and he enjoying such sweet
communion with God even above most other men, what marvel is it if he did more
for God than other men use to do? And as for his wife, as he left her the third
part of his estate, so likewise he made her Executrix of his Will, and thereby
much more had come to her than there did, had not some Debts (which he
accounted good) failed and come short both of his, and her expectation:
Besides, he did assure himself, that her Brother, who was then living, and a
man of great estate, would be ready to supply any of her wants.

Thus we have heard what Mr. Jurdaine did for God: How God honored him.
In the next place let us see also what God did for him. Besides all those
graces, which were eminently in him, and whereby he was enabled to act so
zealously, and vigorously for God, which all were Gods free gift: and that
comfortable assurance that he had, which was part of his reward: The Lord also
advanced him from a mean, and low estate, to the highest place of honor, and
dignity in that City. His beginnings were but small, as appears by his answer
to some that threatened to follow him with Suits, and not to give over till
they had not left him worth a groat: To whom he cheerfully replied: That he
should be then but two pence poorer than when he came first to Exeter: For
(said he) I brought but six pence with me hither; and yet, through Gods
blessing on his labors, he gat a competent, and comfortable estate, whereby he
maintained a large Family of children, and servants; kept hospitality: was
liberal to the poor, and open-handed to any pious use, even far beyond many
who yet had larger estates. But when he had the greatest temporal estate, he
set no great estimate upon these fading, perishing things: He set them not up
in his heart (as worldlings use to do) but trod them under his feet: And
usually also he set them very low in his ordinary discourse of them, and
especially when he was speaking of Heaven, and heavenly things. And yet he did
not forget to acknowledge Gods goodness in bestowing any of these outward
things upon him. He found by experience that they were but uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17. And that they had wings, and would fly away, Prove. 23. 5. But he
did not run crying after them, as they use to do who set their hearts upon
them: whereas he saw, and acknowledged Gods hand as well in taking away, as in
giving: as Job did, Job 1. 21. and therefore was quiet, and content, having
experimentally learned, in some good measure, that excellent lesson with St
Paul: I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content, Phil.
4. 11. By vicissitudes, and changes of estates, God did exercise his faith,
patience, and contentation.

Having passed through the several inferior Offices, he at last ascended to
the highest place of honor in the City, He is chosen Mayor, and Burgess of
Parliament.
to be Mayor there, wherein (as has been showed) he demeaned himself as became
a Christian Magistrate, and his ambition therein was highly to honor God, who
had thus honored him. And afterward he was twice chosen to be a Burgess of
Parliament, wherein his zeal for God, and against the corruptions of the times,
was abundantly manifested. He was a great stickler to have the Bill passed for
the punishment of Adultery with death: but those times would not bear it:
Surely some of the Lawmakers knew some special reason for it.

When he made a motion for the passing of that Bill; one, or more of the
Members in the House, cried out, Commit it Mr. Jurdain, commit it; upon which a
great laughter was occasioned; whereupon he presently said unto them (in a
zealous manner like himself) Do you laugh when a man speaks for Gods honor,
His courage.
and glory? Upon which there was a more than ordinary silence in the House. The
Bill was at that time laid aside, but in a following Parliament, it was called
upon by the name of Mr. Jurdains Bill. He was also (as it is said) the first man
that promoted the Bills for the more strict sanctification of the Sabbaths, and
against Swearing.

Yea, God did not only advance him to places of honor, and dignity in the eye
of the world: but gave him an high place also in the hearts of his people; and
therein God made good his promise, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Such as honor me, I will
honor. His name was very precious in the esteem of those that knew his worth,
both whilst he lived, and since his death.

Indeed it is confessed that he was a byword unto many, He is reproached by
the wicked.
and that his name was taken up by way of reproach, but it was by such as were
upbraided, and reproved by his holy, and gracious conversation: And he valued
not their reproaches, knowing that his Lord and Master did suffer much more in
this kind, and that this was but a Chip of that Cross, which, as he was
commanded, he was willing to bear: Yea he was well content to drink of this
bitter Cup after his Master, and with him, he despised the shame, Heb. 12. 2.
which the men of the world cast upon him: Nay, he accounted it his honor to
suffer shame for the Name of Christ, as the Apostles did, Act. 5. 4. But some
there were that brought shame upon themselves, whilst they thought to cast
contempt, and scorn upon him. Amongst other instances, this one was
remarkable: That being chosen Burgess for the Parliament, not without much
opposition, and going up to London to clear the Election, at which time there
was an accusation sent up against him by a man of no mean place, and power,
That he was the Host of the Schismatics: Whereupon some presumed that he would
have been sent back with disgrace: and accordingly there was a Sermon prepared
by one to jeer him at his return; this being his Text, Psalm. 114. 5. What ailed
thee -- thou Jordan that thou wast driven back? Thus men of profane spirits
will dare to make the sacred Word of God to serve their own base lusts and
ends. But Mr. Jurdaine, instead of being driven back, was confirmed in the
place to which he was chosen, and so shame was cast into the face of this
wicked scorner* and his Sermon, or Invective rather, proved abortive.

And as Mr. Jurdaine stood up boldly for God, so did God stand by, and for him,
and assisted him, and carried him through many troubles, and dangers that did
threaten, and even compass him about. One act of Gods providence, amongst many
others, was most notable, in delivering him out of trouble. He having done an
act of justice (as was hinted before) in punishing an unclean person, whose
offense was aggravated by some heinous circumstances, being moved with an holy
indignation against the offense, he went (as it seems) besides the letter of
the Law in some circumstance: Whereupon some friends of the person punished
(being stirred up with fury for the disgrace that reflected upon them, without
weighing the dishonor that was done to God, and the foul blot that was cast
upon Religion) resolved to prosecute him to the uttermost for it, wherein they
put him to great charge, and trouble, by prosecuting him in the Star Chamber:
and when the cause was to come to a final determination, it was much feared by
many of his friends, and through the boastings of his adversaries, that some
heavy censure would have passed upon him, to his crushing, if not to his utter
undoing. But when his friends on earth failed, he flees to Heaven for succor,
and defense, and cried unto God in David's words, The power o^ prayer.
Psalm. 22. 11, 19. Be not far from me, O Lord, for trouble is near: for there
is none to help: O my strength, have thou to help me. And he set apart the
evening, and a great part of the night, by fasting, and Prayer, to engage God
of his side, who has the hearts of all men, even of the greatest in his hands,
to turn them as he pleases, Prove. 21. 1. And behold, the next morning he
received a real, and gracious answer from Heaven, being not only acquitted,
but commended by the Lord Keeper, God stirring up the hearts of diverse in that
high, and arbitrary Court, to speak for him. Thus the Lord was a very present
help to him in the time of trouble, Psalm 46. 1.

After he was thus (through Gods mercy) freed, and returned to his house, he
piled up the Books, and Papers of all the proceedings in that troublesome, and
vexatious business, under his Cupboard in his Parlour, which was the place to
which he did often resort, and where he had that daily sweet, and heavenly
communion with God aforementioned; and being asked the reason why he left so
many Books, and Papers to lie in that manner? His answer was; These I keep in
my sight as memorials, His Prudence.
and monuments of Gods mercy in freeing me from my troubles.

Many other particulars might be instanced in: but by that little which has
been said, you may guess at the great worth of this holy man. Only give me
leave to add the observations, and testimony of Mr. Thomas Manton, who knew
him well, who speaks thus of him:

Mr. Ignatius Jurdaine may in some sense be styled the wonder, and Phoenix of
his age, and place of abode: concerning whose piety, and frequent communion
with God, his constant heavenliness, his charity in giving, lending, and
entertaining: his doing justice with impartiality, and diligence, we have
already heard: and therefore give me leave only to suggest a few other
passages, and observations.

1. That for his temper, he was a man of a raised zeal, and heroical spirit,
one of those rare examples which the Lord gives the world now and then, and
therefore his actions are not to be measured by an ordinary standard.

2. Seldom or never did any come into his company, but he would discourse with
them about holy things, asking the younger sort, how they did hope to be saved?
The more grown, if they professed Religion, whether they had any assurance?
which if they denied, he would tell them, that he was even ashamed of them. In
good earnest (would he say) I would study the Promises, and go into my Closet,
and lock the door, and there plead them to God, and say, that I would not go
forth till he gave me some sense of his love.

3. His entertainment at his Table was free, and sufficient, but frugall, and
sober: If his Wife at any time excused the slenderness of it, he would say,
Brown bread, and Kennel water is good fare with the Gospel. I have often heard
him say so: There is somewhat a like saying of Mr. Greenhams, and possibly Mr.
Jurdaine might borrow it thence, it suiting so well with the temper of his
spirit.

4. A formal man had once preached a Sermon at the Cathedral, about Heaven:
the discourse was for the most part frothy, and beneath the dignity, and worth
of such an Argument. Mr. Jurdaine was present as well as my self: After Sermon
I went to his house (being to receive a Letter from him to Oxford) and after
many good instructions, he asked me, if I had been at the Sermon that morning?
I told him, yea. And did you (said he) hear those wonderful things which God
has provided for them that love him? And so he readily picked out all those
passages which were any way subservient to use, and profit. It was wonderful
to me to see how an holy heart could draw comfort out of any thing. The Sermon
as Mr. Jurdaine repeated to me, was another kind of Sermon, and seemed to be
savoury, and spiritual. I remember with what warmth, and vigor he spoke of
it, even till this day, and hope that I shall never forget it.

5. This is not to be forgotten, his sending a Letter to the late King, and
expostulating with him about setting forth the Book concerning sports, and
recreations on the Lords days, which was enclosed in another to the Bishop of
Exeter, to desire him to convey it: and notice being given to the Bishop that
Copies of it were divulged (possibly by the Transcriber) he thought he could
not conceal it with safety, and therefore carried it to the King, who when he
had read it, in a great anger said, He would hang him. But the Bishop (a pious
man) fell upon his knees, and besought his Majesty's pardon, alleging, That
God had not a better servant, nor his Majesty a better Subject in the whole
Land. When the Bishop returned from his months attendance, Mr. Jurdaine went
to visit him, and after civilities past, the Bishop said, Ah, Mr. Jurdaine,
would you put me upon so hot a service? You know there are many eyes upon me
(meaning the Archbishops party, who suspected him as a favourer of Puritans)
Yea, my Lord (said Mr. Jurdaine) there are eyes upon you, the eyes of God, and
his holy Angels, to see how you discharge your duty, and office as the Kings
Chaplain, and Bishop of the Church.

6. Now and then, when he had leisure, he would usually go to his neighbors
shops, and admonish them to take heed that the cares of the world did not
deaden their spirits to heavenly things, telling them, if they had many
thousands it would not still the cry of conscience, purchase the least favor
from God, nor so much as ease the pain of the teeth, or keep off one fit of an
Ague; yea, if money were thrown to the Dogs, they would not so much as smell at
it.

7. He would often persuade his Fellow-Magistrates to a liberal provision for
the poor; and when they would ask him, where they should have money? He would
answer, God will provide, rather than the poor shall want, let us sell our
Gowns.

8. When he did distribute money to the poor with his own hands in a time of
great infection, and some asked him if he were not afraid of the Plague? What
(said he) afraid of Gods Visitation? Let us fear rather the Plague Sore of our
own hearts.

9. In his troubles in the Star Chamber, when one told him, he was sorry that
the Lord Keeper was against him: He answered, I have a greater Lord Keeper than
him: The Lord is my Keeper, I shall not be afraid.

10. It is not amiss to set down what others thought of him: I remember a godly
man observed him, that in every business (though he advenfar) the Lord carried
him through with reputation, and so compared him with another of great parts,
who, though godly, was always toiled in every undertaking. Drunkards, and
frequenters of Alehouses, were afraid of him: He was their usual Bugbear;
their memento in the middle of their excess was; Its time to be gone, Mr.
Jurdaine will come by and by.

The ordinary sort of men were convinced of his integrity, insomuch as carnal
and vicious men at a time of election of Burgesses for Parliament would say one
to another, If you choose any, choose Jurdaine, he will be right for the
Commenwealth, and will do the City service. He was twice chosen Burgess for the
Parliament, and once Mayor of the City, and once Deputy Mayor in a time of
great Infection by the Pestilence.

The Reverend Minister that preached his Funeral Sermon, amongst others, had
this expression: Look upon his Will, and you will think him the richest man in
the City. Though many exceeded him in estate, but few or none in making
provision for the poor. Delinquents seldom went from him without conviction. A
Noble man's servant that had scorned him, being brought before him, and
convicted for having sworn rashly three times, Mr. Jurdaine demanded his Fine,
and showed him the hainousness of the sin, with which the man was calmed, and
though he came from his companions braving, yet he returned with the
acknowledgement that he was a good Justicer; and when they asked him, what
Jurdaine did to him, he answered, He gave me good Law, and fair words.

I have heard above thirty years ago, that some godly persons in Exeter were
convented before the Bishops Court for keeping some private days of
Humiliation; whereupon Mr. Jurdaine went to the Bishop (who was a godly man) to
intercede for them. The Bishop told him that such Conventicles were forbidden
by the Law, the State being jealous lest the seeds of Sedition or Heresy might
be sown in them: To whom Mr. Jurdaine replied, My Lord, Do you think that the
Lord Jesus Christ, when he comes to Judgment, will say concerning these, and
such like poor Christians, Take them Devil, take them, because though they
sought me by fasting and prayer, yet they did not observe every circumstance
with so much prudence as they might have done. Whereupon the Bishop dismissed
them.

I am now come to the last act of his Life, His Sickness.
his sickness, and the period of that, his Death. In his sickness, which was
very painful, he being sorely afflicted with the Stone, and Cholick, yet did
he manifest more than ordinary patience, His Patience,
not opening his mouth in any word that might savor of repining, or discontent
at his present condition; but meekly and patiently submitting to Gods
afflicting hand, and waiting for his long-expected, and much desired
dissolution. He did then much act faith in Jesus Christ, and his gracious
Promises, and his assurance remained unshaken, though Satan was then busy with
him by his temptations: But being strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might, he did resist him. Some of his nearest Friends that observed his
confident Assurance in the course of his life, and of his happy estate in
heaven after death, did suppose that Satan would have set upon him with so much
violence, as to have shaken his Assurance, as no doubt he had will enough to
do; but God who had him in chains, would not permit him to do it: But he went
out of the world as a Conqueror out of the Field, being, through Christ,
victorious over all his spiritual enemies. One particular in his sickness may
not be omitted, which was, his taking all occasions of exhorting and
encouraging others to constancy in the faith, zeal for God, and making sure of
Heaven; and when his spirits began to fail him, he would say, I cannot speak
much more to you now; R^member what you have heard from me in my health. He was
willing also to incite others that were absent to the discharge of their
Duties. The Mayor of the City that then was, sending to see how he did, he
called the messenger unto him, and said, Remember me to Mr. Mayor, and tell him
from me, that he have a special care of these three things: To do Justice: To
provide carefully for the poor; and to make sure of Heaven. His gracious
speeches in the time of his sickness, were many, and more than can be here
expressed.

Having fought the good fight of Faith, His death.
and finished his course, he sweetly, and quietly resigned up his soul into the
hands of his blessed Savior and Redeemer. He departed this Life, July the 15.
Anno Christi 1640. being the Sabbath day.

The Sabbath was his delight on earth, and on that day God gave him to enjoy an
eternal Sabbath with him in Heaven. As he had sweet communion with God in the
use of Ordinances for many years on that day, so he went to enjoy an immediate
communion with God on that holy day; and after all his labors he entered into
rest, even that glorious Rest in Heaven, Heb. 4. 11. His departure hence was in
the Seventy ninth year of his age, and, according to his account for the
New Birth, His Funeral.
in the Sixty fifth year. For so long he reckoned since the time of his
effectual Calling. At the celebration of his Funerals, there has not been
known any man to be more lamented than was he, the loss being so great, not to
the City alone, but to all those Western parts, the influence of his example,
as a zealous Magistrate and Christian, reaching far and near.

After he had served his own Generation by the will of God, he fell on sleep,
Act. 13. 36.

The Life, and Death of Mrs. Margaret Ducke, who dyed Anno Christi 1646.
THe Father of Mrs. Margaret Ducke was Mr. Henry Southworth, Her Parentage
a Gentleman of a good Family: Her Mother was a virtuous and Religious Matron.
He was a Merchant and Customer of London, by which means having acquired a
plentiful estate, he contented himself with it, and withdrew from thence to a
more quiet, and retired (that is a more happy) life at Wells, where he lived
plentifully, and having only two Daughters, his Coheirs, he gave them
liberal, and pious education in all those ways which commend, and accomplish
well-bred Gentlewomen.

This Gentlewoman, who was the younger of his Daughters, was deservedly dear to
both her Parents, and lived with them till their deaths, which fell out to be
shortly one after another: For as they were lovely and pleasant in their lives
(if I may so use the words of David's lamentation over Saul and Jonathan, 2 Samuel
1.) so in their Deaths they were not divided. She was then about the one and
twentieth year of her age, at which time she was desired in marriage by many
younger in years, and higher in means and lands than the Gentleman was, Her
Marriage.
unto whom (with her great contentment even to her dying day) she yielded her
self, and her affections, resolving (as the virtuous Marcella in St. Jerome
answered her young Woer, Cerealis, who was of a Noble, and Consular race; Si
nubere vellem, utique maritum quaererem, non haereditatem) that when she
married, she would marry an Husband, not an estate, though yet God had blessed
her Husband with a competency of these outward things.

Their Marriage was celebrated by that incomparable, and (even in this age)
famous Prelate, Bishop Lake, in the City of Wells (who never married any
persons besides themselves) where, for some years they lived together, and the
Town to this day gives an ample testimony to their piety and charity. For her
part, they say, as Gregory Nyssen said of Placilla, that if she prevented him
not in any work of charity, yet she was sure to concur with him therein; and
when she departed from thence, they soon complained, and lamented the want of
her charity. The blind complained that they wanted an eye, the lame a staff,
the mourners one to comfort them, the languishing one to visit them, as St.
Jerome said of Nepotian. For indeed, she was eyes to the blind, feet to the
lame; she was a mother to the poor and distressed, and to those who had nothing
to help them; The blessing of those (as Job says of himself) that were ready
to perish came upon her, and she caused the widows heart to sing for joy.

From Wells they removed to Blackfriers in London, Her removed to Blackfriers.
where she lived long under the powerful Ministry of the thrice worthy and
learned Dr. Gouge, a man, famous for his pains in the Church of Christ. What
her Life, Faith, Charity, Patience was, during her abode there, was well known
to all in general, and particularly observed by that Reverend Doctor, and
abundantly testified at her Funerals by him, so that nothing needs to be added
to his full, and faithful testimony. One thing was well observed by him, and is
very remarkable, that notwithstanding the many opportunities she had to see
Plays, to which the neighborhood, and vicinity of the Playhouse there, and
the frequent throngs of Gentlewomen which pressed thither, might have been
forcible and prevailing invitations, yet she could never whilst she lived
there, nor indeed all the time of her being in London, be induced to see any of
them; and being sometimes advised by her dearest Friend, to go thither, as
other Gentlewomen did, to avoid too much retiredness, she answered, it is hard
to say whether with more discretion, or Religion, that she liked it not, and
that, next to Gods house, she could best spend her time in her own. In Gods
House (if I may with reverence use Tertullians expression) she saw enough of
the Scene, Scenicae Doctrinae delectant? Her love to Gods House.
Sat nobis sententiarum, sat versuum, sat etiam Canticorum, etc. Sentences,
Verses, and Songs enough to delight her soul. Would she see a Tragedy? There
she could see before her eyes Jesus Christ, evidently set forth, crucified
amongst them, Gal. 3. 1. What a sight is Christ's coming to Judgment? Kings
throwing down their Crowns and Scepters, and themselves before him? In her own
house she could (as Solomon describes the excellent Huswife, Prove. 31. 27, 28.)
employ her self in looking well to the ways of her Household, and not eating
the bread of idleness, that so her children might rise up, and call her
blessed; her Husband also, and he might praise her.

She was so far from the gadding disposition of other talking, Her retiredness.
walking women, that she was for the most part as a Snail, Domi porta, within
her own shell and family. And as St. Jerome pourtaits his never enough admired,
and applauded Marcella, Raro procedebat in publicum, and maxim Nobilium
Matronarum domos vitabat, ne cogeretur videre quod contempserat: She went
seldom abroad, and especially chose to decline the houses of Noble and
Honorable Ladies, lest she should be tempted to see those vanities which she
resolved to contemn, and so be unwillingly wrought and brought to desire what
she so willingly despised.

This retiredness (as usually it does) drew on her a decrease of health, Her
weakness.
which occasioned, for the enjoyment of a better air, and recovery of health,
her removal to Cheswick, where she lived to her dying day, exceedingly beloved,
and dyed extremely lamented, and desired of all.

While she enjoyed her health, Her holy life.
which yet was much interrupted, her constant, and unfailing practice was,
besides daily prayers in the Family, to betake her self in the morning, and at
other convenient times to her constant private devotions in her Closet, and
then allotting some time (for being a wise and prudent woman, she made a little
time reach far) in the education, and oversight of her children, and disposing
and dispensing the affairs of the Family, the residue of the day she spent in
reading books of Piety and Devotion, and most willingly those of Dr. Gouge, by
which means she made her heart, Bibliothecam Christi, a Library of Christ, and
furnished her self with such a stock of Christian knowledge, and devotion, as
carried her on with much comfort and cheerfulness through all her afflictions,
till she arrived at her long, and much longed for home.

Both in her health, Her Meekness.
and sickness, she was of so meek and mild a comportment, and behavior
toward all, that she conquered by it, as Ignatius advised Polycarp to do,
those that had (if at least any had) any venomous sting, or spleen against her.
For her meekness she seemed indeed like that Dove in the Prophet Hosea, chap.
7. 11. that had no heart, none certainly to do any harm or injury to any. And
as Solomon says, Prove. 15. 1. A loft answer turns away wrath; so without doubt
her soft and mild disposition in these rough and blustering times, kept off
many an impetuous storm and shower from her. This mildness was eminently
conspicuous in her sickness. One night her Husband persuaded her to use an
Electuary that was sent her, she refused it twice, but in mild terms; yet the
next morning she told him, that she had been too blame (it might be) in her
words the night before. Often she desired all the world to forgive her if she
had offended any, as she heartily forgave them all that had offended her. Her
Husband told her, that he thought she had no enemies; Yea (said she) some have
wronged me, but I forgive them from my heart, and desire God to forgive them.

In all the time of her sickness she was never heard to use any impatient word
to any, Her Sickness.
or of any Quis unquam ab hac muliere quod displiceret audivit? That I may use
St. Jeroms Question concerning another on her behalf, Who ever heard any thing
from this good woman that might displease him? or believed any thing against
her, and condemned not himself of too much credulity or malignity in believing
it? Cheerful she was, yet she tempered it with such a becoming severity; severe
she was, yet she allayed it with such a decent cheerfulness, that it may be
truly said of her, what was said by St. Jerome of a virtuous woman, Nothing was
more severe than her cheerfulness, nor cheerful than her severity. Such a
concurrence and constellation of virtues and sweetness, such a Mirror of
Charity, such a Treasury and Magazine of Chastity and Sobriety was in her. In
short, she had such an eminency in single virtues, as if she had had no more,
and yet such a worthiness in all, as if she had been singular in none.

Since the troubles of these bleeding times she suffered many afflictions with
a Masculine patience, Her patience.
though much imbittered to her by a long, and tedious sickness, and the
necessary, and indispensable absence of her dearest Consort, which yet she
professed, that it never bred in her the least ill thought of him, saying
often, that she did but desire to see him again, and to speak with him, and
then she was ready, if God so pleased, the next day to sing old Simeons, Nunc
dimittis, Luke 2. 29. Lord now let thy servant depart in peace. And God
heard her prayer, and his also (for in this they were joint and mutual Orators)
and to her great comfort, she saw him, and spoke with, and for three weeks
space they mutually enjoyed each other abroad in the house. But then the
firstborn of Death began to devour her strength (as Bildad speaks, Job. 1. 13,
14.) and threatened to bring her to the King of Terrors; for so indeed Death is
to them that have not made their peace with God: But to her, however in regard
of the dissolution, and parting of those dear friends, body and soul (which had
been now for two and forty years sweet, and loving inmates) a valley of Achor,
Hos. 2. 15. (that is, bitterness, as the word imports) yet was it to her a door
of hope to open her a passage into that better world, which she so much longed
after, often professing, that there was nothing that could tempt her to wish
for life, but the breeding up of her little ones; which yet now she was the
less solicitous about, because she could leave them in the hands of their
tender, and careful Father, not doubting (as old dying Jacob said when he was
blessing the two Sons of Joseph, Genesis 48. 15. 16.) That that God which had fed
her all her life long until that day, and the Angel which had redeemed her
from all evil, would bless them. And now finding her self arrested by the
messenger of Death, and her body (like the house of Saul) growing weaker, and
weaker, but her soul (like the house of David) waxed stronger and stronger,
took higher flights, and made nearer approaches to God that gave it.

When her Husband came to her (as he did frequently) he continually admonished,
and minded her of the gracious Promises of mercy in Christ, and of faith in
him, and desired her to be strengthened, and comforted in them: Her answer was,
she was comforted in them, Her Comforts.
she found the comfort of Gods Spirit in her, and verily believed she should
see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living, Psalm. 45. 13. Ever and
anon saying, I am comforted: Gods Spirit is in me which makes me endure my
sickness, and more pains than you can think of, so comfortably as I do.

When she knew of none by, her usual prayer was, Lord look down upon me in thy
mercy, Lord forgive me my sins, Lord assist me with thy holy Spirit; Lord thou
have assured me of the forgiveness of my sins; Lord assist me still with thy
holy Spirit. And many times passing the whole night without sleep, she spent
that time in these, and the like heavenly prayers, and ejaculations, in which
her Husband, and those which attend her continually, still found her when they
came to her.

Never man had a more faithful, A loving Wife.
dear, and loving Wife, or more careful of what concerned him, than himself,
and more tender of any thing said, or done against him, than if it had been
said, or done against her self. And when he seemed to lament the loss he should
have if God took her from him: She meekly answered, We came not into the world
together, and therefore may not look to go out together. When he replied, that
it would be much better for their children if he went first, as by the course
of nature was most likely, she said, that he could do much better for the
children than she could, and thanked God for that she could now leave them with
him.

For the space of three weeks she kept her bed, and about a fortnight before
her death, being surprised with a fainting fit in which she was like to depart,
and thereby perceiving that earth would suddenly return to the earth whence it
came, that her soul might be the better winged, and prepared for a return to
God that gave it, she de^ired that all the Family might be called up, and join
in prayers with, and for her. At which time, observing the grief and passion of
her Husband, and those that were present, expressed plentifully by tears from
their eyes, she besought him, and them not to grieve, and lament for her
happiness.

About that time a Reverend person coming to visit her Husband, he solicited
him to enlarge that great act of favor unto him, by a greater act of charity
to his wife, by visiting her also whom God now visited with sickness, as also
to pray with, and administer some comfort unto her, which he most willingly
condescended unto; and having taken a strict account of her faith in Christ,
and hopes of a better life, he left her with his Fatherly benediction, top full
of comfort; and when she was afterward told that he came out of respect and
kindness to visit her Husband, she said, No, but God had sent him for her
comfort, often acknowledging the consolations which she had found by him.

When any came to visit her in the time of her sickness, at the parting, she
desired them to pray for her, and often sent Messengers, and caused Letters to
be directed to her friends in London to pray for her, for that she was now
preparing for another world.

When she was sometimes desired for her childrens sake to cheer up her self,
Her Faith.
her answer was, that to leave them did not trouble her, because she was
assured that God would provide for them, adding that she would willingly leave
Husband, Children, and all, to go to Christ, which was just the mind of that
blessed Martyr Ignatius, Befall me (said he) what will, or can, so I may enjoy
Jesus Christ, my Love, my Life that was crucified for me; or rather St. Paul's
case, expressed in that most elegant Barbarism, Phil. 1. 23. Desiring to be
with Christ, which is multo magis melius, much more better.

And now finding the day of her life wasted to the evening, She begs Prayers.
and ready to dye into night, on the Lords day before her death, she desired
the prayers of the Congregation in the Parish where she lived, being well
assured (as she said) that many good people would pray heartily for her. After
which, some coming to visit her, and exhorting her to patience, and to remember
the afflictions of Job, she answered, that she had had her part in his
afflictions, God having given her Luctuosam foecunditatem, Her Afflictions.
as St. Jerome said of Laeta, a sad, and sorrowful fruitfulness, taking away
seven of her children in their minority, so that she (as Hanna spoke in her
song, 1 Samuel 2. 5.) that had born seven, waxed feeble, yet she comforted her
self with this hope, that they were in Heaven before her, and hoped that they
would be Lamps to lead her to heaven; for she assured her self, that they
followed the Lamb whithersoever he goes; and for those two which were yet
alive, she thanked God, for that she saw no ill qualities in them. Besides (she
said) that God had taken away her goods from her, but had given her patience,
which to her was of more value; and she esteemed it above them all, knowing
that God was able to restore all when he pleased.

She often acknowledged Gods goodness to her in sending her a mild sickness,
and not taking her away with some sudden stroke (as he did the wife of Ezekiel,
Chap. 24. 16.) or by some tormenting disease, as he is pleased to visit some of
his dear ones, acknowledging the wonderful mercy of God to her therein.

A week before her death, She blesses her Children.
she called her eldest Daughter to her, being to go from her to School at
Putney, and putting her hand on her shoulder, she said to her, I give you that
blessing which my Mother gave me at her death, The God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob bless you (and then added the blessing which Aaron
by Gods own appointment was to give the children of Israel) The Lord bless
thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious
unto thee; the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And
bid her serve God, and pray duly to him both morning and evening, and fear his
Name, and then (said she) I doubt not but God will bless you, as he has
blessed me. In the evening of the same day, she commanded her younger Daughter
to be brought her, and to be put upon the bed in a kneeling posture, and then
putting her hand on her shoulder, she gave her also the same blessing as she
had given to her sister.

Four days before her death she grew a little better, which put her Friends in
some hope of her recovery; but the day following her sickness seized on her
again, and so continued upon her that she slept no more till she slept the
sleep of death, and together with her sickness, her Piety, Devotions, and
comforts increased in her.

In the last night of her life, presently after midnight, feeling death now
approaching, she sent for her Husband, Her Devotion
and Family out of their beds, and told him when he came to her, that she was
now leaving the world and him, and expressed in many words her great devotion,
faith and assurance of that everlasting life which she now was shortly to
enjoy, and desired that they might now all pray together, which they did, she
still expressing much devotion and comfort; and after an hour spent in those
passages, she desired that the Bell might be tolled for her, and some
Gentlewomen of her neighbors, coming to her, before them she expressed her
comforts, and assurances of everlasting life as before, and with increase, and
therein, and in prayers they continued till near the rising of the Sun.

After this she seemed for a wh'le willing to slumber, and closed her eyes, and
so lay for a little while, but then turned her head to the other side of the
Pillow, and after a few restless turnings, she said (what the Prophet Micha had
said before her, Mich. 2. 10.) There is no rest in this world, and then opening
her eyes, after some expressions of the comfort which she felt, distinctly
knowing all that were present, and speaking to them all, she seemed to slumber
again, and after a little time, spoke these words, Come, let us go, let us go;
repeating those words several times, which she spoke not in a slumber, but
being awake, and as perfect in her understanding, and memory, as at any time in
her life. And it is a comforttable opinion that Divines teach from Luke 16. 22.
that the Angels do attend on Gods children, especially at the time of their
dissolution, to conduct their souls from earth, to heaven; which opinion she
sometimes in her sickness related to her Husband, and added, that she had heard
it from the Pulpit, and had read it in some Books, and she believed it to be
true, and comforted her self with it.

After a little time she called for some drink, and having taken it, it began
to alter her, as it seems she felt in her self, for she presently laid her self
back on her Pillow, and lifting up her eyes toward Heaven, she said, Lord have
mercy upon me; Lord Jesus receive my soul; and so continued moving her lips,
and her tongue, but her words were not heard, and then held up one hand, and
then joined both her hands together, holding them up with her eyes still
heavenward, till her strength failing her, she laid down her hands by her, and
stretched her self in the bed without any help, and sweetly fell asleep about
seven a clock in the morning, Her Death.
August the 15. Anno Christi 1646.

And August the 24. she was decently, and solemnly laid in her bed of rest; the
house (as Job says) appointed for all the living, Job 30. 23. where the weary
are at rest; where the wicked cease from troubling, and hear not the voice of
the oppressor, Job 3. 17, 18.

The Life, and Death of Mrs. Margaret Corbet, who dyed Anno Christi 1656.
IF we enquire into the Relations of this Gentlewoman, Her Parentage
either by Affinity or Consanguinity, or both sides, the Families are ancient,
of renown, and good reputation. Concerning the Family from whence she was
descended, her Father was Sir Nathaniel Brent, late Warden of Merton College, a
learned Knight, whose great pains, and dangerous adventures to procure the
History of the Council of Trent (which he translated into English) are to be
remembered with an honorable mention, and for his faithful discovery of
Jesuitical juglings, his name will be had in honor, when the names of the
Popish party will rot.

Her Mother, the Lady Martha Brent, was a Lady of a Gracious spirit, abounding
in love, meekness, humility, love to Gods Ordinances, and Gods Children. Her
delight (with David) was in the society of Saints. She imitated her worthy
Father in the sweetness of disposition, who was Dr. Robert Abbot, that learned
and godly Bishop of Sarum, who was Malleus Baptismi, and Armianismi, the Hammer
of Popery and Arminianisme: His excellent Works or Monuments of his Honorable
memory.

To be born of a godly Family, and to be well descended, is a mercy not to be
neglected. Mr. Philpot, a zealous Martyr, being a Kings Son, and an Archdeacon,
told his adversaries that he was a Gentleman. Anabap^istical parity, and
Levelling designs are worthily to be abhorred, and looked upon as a ready way
to confusion, rapine, and violence. So then we see that she was a Gentlewoman
every way well descended. Her Ancestors were persons of Honor, and from them
she had the benefit of an ingenuous and liberal Education. This is much, but
its more, when I say that she came of a godly stock, and of praying Relations;
and indeed, this is that which ennobles Nobility it self.

God in mercy began with this Gentlewoman betimes, Her timely Conversion.
even about the fourteenth year of her age. Then God gave her a willing mind,
and purpose of heart to serve him in the days of her youth: Insomuch as she
was swift to hear the word of God, she waited diligently at the posts of
Wisdoms Gate. She wrote the Sermons which she heard (a practice used by King
Edward the sixth, that rare English Josiah) and she left many volumes of
Sermons of her own handwriting, taken with great dexterity, and these are as so
many choice Monuments of her Industry. She was much conversant in reading of
the holy Scriptures (which can make us wise unto salvation) and she joined with
her reading, prayer, Her Piety.
and meditation. Her delight was in the word of God: It was (as with Jeremy)
the joy and rejoicing of her soul; and with the reading of Scriptures she
searched Expositors, and Practical Divines, and attained thereby to such a
measure of Divine knowledge, as enabled her to state some Questions of
controversy for her better use, and help of her memory, and to discourse very
soundly upon the most material points of Religion, and even above her age and
sex, to maintain the truth, as occasion was offered, with strength of Argument
against gainsayers.

She was eminent for the grace of Humility; Her Humility.
and when I have said that she was of an humble spirit, what can be said more?
This the Apostle would have us to be clothed withal, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Humility is
the ornament of all Graces: Its that Salt that seasons the best parts and
graces. So humble was the spirit of this excellent Gentlewoman, that the
poorest might have free access unto her, and receive courteous language from her
mouth, and liberal alms from her heart and hand, both being opened wide for
their relief. The observation of this humble deportment from her childhood,
gained the heart of her dear Husband unto her, long before she was ripe for her
Marriage: Her humble spirit evidently appeared by her condescending to them of
low estate: the servants in her Family, the poorest, and meanest in the Parish
where she lived, will bear witness to the truth of this particular.

She was of a meek and quiet spirit, Her Meekness.
which (as the Apostle says, 1. Pet. 3. 3.) is in the sight of God of great
price. All her Relations will attest her meek deportment, and how much she
hated brawls and contentions: Her very enemies (if they would speak their
consicences) can testify her readiness to pass by injuries. So far she was
from rendering reviling for revilings, that she endeavored to rec^mpence ^vil
with good, and prayed for such as despitefully used her, professing that it was
the desire of her ^^ul to do her very enemies all the Christian offices of love
which lay in her power.

Special notice ought also to be taken of her Wisdom and Gravity in the
ordering of her conversation Her discourses were savoury, Her P^udence and
Gravity.
administering Grace to the hearers, and tending to edification. Her behavior
was modest, and grave; though she was of a cheerful spirit, yet it was without
levity: She was no tatler, busie-body, no medler in the affairs of others: She
was no gadder up and down from house to house, hearing, and telling of news (as
too many do to the wounding of the reputations of others.) The vain and
frivolous discourse of some who came to visit her, was an heavy burden, and
affliction to her spirit. The dicourses of such as tended to the defaming and
blasting others reputation, were a great grief and trouble unto her; and when
she heard such discourses, she would endeavor to turn the stream another way,
and move such discourse as might be profitable for the sou^s good.

Her Love was very eminent toward all those that feared God: Her love to the
Saints.
she was with David, a Companion to such, a lover of their acquaintance, who
were the Saints, the excellent ones, Psalm. 16. 3. Insomuch as when she
apprehended any thing of God, though in persons inclining to separation, and of
a contrary judgment from her, she was so compassionate, as to labor with much
sweetness and candor, to convince them of their errors, and to w^n them to
the truth; imitating herein the holy practice of learned Musculus, who gained
some Anabaptists, and Sectaries by kindness, and benefits, and (...) them as
much by love as by arguments.

Her holy Courage deserves special notice; Her Courage.
for though she was humble, meek, and loving, yet she was stout and courageous
in declaring her judgment upon just occasions, before those whom she knew to
be contrary minded, hating compliance against conscience, and doubting always
the soundness and sincerity of those who du^st not own their opinions. She was
much of her worthy Fathers temper in that particular, who has been often heard
to say, that a Coward can hardly be an honest man; and much of Esters
resolution, desiring rather to suffer her self than sluggishly, and silently to
see the truths of God to suffer.

She was a praying Christian: Her frequent prayers.
She was much in prayers and tears; much in a sacred acquaintance, and holy
communion with God: Her gift in prayer was very great: She was much in her
Closet alone, and there much upon her knees: An excellent pattern for women's
imitation, which by no means should suffer that great duty to be omitted. It
was a Character of Paul, when converted, Act. 9. 11. Behold he prays. Praying
Christians are the best Christians, they are prevailing Christians; and as
Reverend and holy Mr. Dod was used to say, Never d^spair of that person who can
but pray.

She was ^ixed and (...) in Religion, having frequently read the Scriptures,
(...)
(...) many ^ound, orthodox, and practical Divines, she became settled, rooted
and grounded in the truth. She was one that held fast her profession without
wav^ing. She was not (...) about with every wind of Doctrine Ephesians. 4. 14.
neither was she of their humors, who for politic ends comply with all
companies in their opinions. She kept close to the public Ministry where she
lived, there she heard the word faithfully dispensed. She neither was of their
opinion, nor practice, who out of I know not what kind of singularity,
separate from the Ministry of a godly Pastor and Husband. Her delight was very
great in Gods Ordinances, and she was glad when they said, Let us go to the
house of the Lord in company. She had such an high esteem of, and longing
desire unto the house of God, that when her strength failed her, she would be
carried thither; by reason of lameness, the feet of her body were weak, but the
feet of her soul, her affections, were strong, nimble, and vigorous.

Look upon her in her Relations, Her Family government.
as a Wife, a Mother, and Mistress, and you shall see she was mindful of her
duty to God in them all: Her great care and endeavor was to set up God in her
Family; in order whereunto she bestowed great pains in Catechizing of her
children, and other near Relations committed unto her charge. Her great design
was to bring them all up in the fear and admonition of the Lord, and to
inculcate again and again, that main and needful lesson of Remembering their
Creator in the days of their youth. Much pains she took in Catechizing, and
instructing her servants, especially before they were to receive the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper. She used to examine them of the Sermons they heard, and
she customarily read over those Sermon Notes to them which she had taken ^t
Church, that so they might be the better prepared to give an account thereof to
her Husband. God was pleased to give her several Olive branches round about her
Table, well bred, well Catechized, and well governed, and of very great hopes.
As Eunice and Lois instructed young Timothy, so she instructed those hopeful
little ones in the holy Scriptures, and acquainted them with the knowledge of
God in their tender years. Thus according to Solomon's counsel, they were
trained up in the way wherein they should walk, Prove. 21. 6. and that even from
their childhood; insomuch as one of them (though very young) hearing a
neighbor using the name of the Lord upon a slight occasion, reproved him for
it, alleging the Commandment of God against it, Thou shall not take the Name
of God in vain. And another of them reasoning with his fellows about God and
the Devil, professed that he had rather be in hell with God, than in heaven
with the Devil. And a third, who by reason of her age could not speak
distinctly, said in some discourse with her Father, that God Almighty would not
bless them who tell Fibbs (meaning Lies) and that she had rather dye than tell
a Fibb; so far had their Mothers instructions prevailed with them.

She was eminent for a charitable and bountiful spirit; Her Charity.
she was another Dorcas, full of good works, and Alms-d^eds. That high Elogium
that Solomon gives a virtuous woman, may properly be applied unto her, Many
Daughters have done virtuously, but she excelled them all, Prove. 31. 29. Many
there are that come far short of her, but very few that went beyond her in the
acts of Charity. God gave her a liberal and plentiful estate, and that was a
great mercy; but it was a far greater mercy that he gave her a liberal heart to
do good, and to distribute: To cast her bread on the waters, and to honor God
with her substance. That protestation which Job makes for his own vindication,
may fitly be applied unto her, Job 31. 16, 19. He would not withold the poor
from their desire, nor cause the eyes of the widow to fail. He would not see
any to perish for want of clothing, nor any poor without covering. The whole
Country round about where she dwelt, will bear her witness, that she visited
and relieved the sick, and clothed the naked, fed the hungry, and healed the
wounded. Her purse, her hand, her heart, were all open for their relief. She
bought many precious Drugs, and cordial waters: She made several precious
salves, and gave them all away to such as were in need of them. She spared not
her best pains, being never aweary of well doing; insomuch that in the
extremity of her greatest sickness (such bowels of compassion yearned in her)
she compounded several Medicines with her own hands, and applied them. Thus
will her works praise her in the Gate, and being dead, she yet speaks, Prove.
31. 31. Heb. 11. 4. For her precious name lives. The Lord will have the name
of the Righteous to be in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112. 6. and the memory
of the just is blessed, Prove. 10. 7. And precious in the sight of the Lord is
the death of his Saints, Psalm. 116. 15. Now this rare Gentlewoman reaps the
fruit of her serving of God, and the whole harvest, whereof she received only
the first fruits in this present world.

The usual saying is, Her Sickness.
All is well that ends well: Come we therefore to speak of her end. Her life
was holy, and therefore her death must needs be happy. It pleased the Lord to
exercise her with a long and lingering sickness; and amidst the weakness of the
outward man, God gave her great strength in her inward man; though her limbs
and outward strength failed her, yet God was her strength and portion, and he
never failed her. A few days before her distemper waxed high (her Husband
being from home) she sent for all her Family both young and old, to come in
unto her chamber, with whom she prayed near two hours, with such pathetical,
heavenly, Scripture Language, as drew admiration and tears from those that were
present. She blessed her children, counseled her servants, heartily and
affectionately commended her Husband unto God; she wept and prayed, and prayed
and wept, and could not easily part with the company, nor yet leave off
praying, and weeping.

Upon the increase of her distemper, Her holy speeches.
her spirit was much disturbed, and some impertinent speeches did fall from
her, yet in the midst of all her impertinences, Grace, and the Spirit of God,
did eminently declare their Power and Sovereignty in her, by many savoury and
choice speeches, and sweet breathings of her soul; some of which are these that
follow, I was in the Devils claws, but Jesus Christ, the sweet Bridegroom of my
soul, the sweet Bridegroom of my soul (these words she often reiterated) the
sweet Bridegroom of my soul has delivered me. At another time, I am safe, for
Jesus Christ is at my heart, and I would not part with him for ten thousand
worlds. Again, Come Lord Jesus the Captain of my salvation, ride on gloriously
conquering, and to conquer for me Satan, Sin, Hell, Death, and all mine
enemies. Afterward again, I was in Hell, but now I am in Heaven; I am in
Heaven indeed, indeed I am in Heaven; I am in Heaven eternally; I am in Heaven
the habitation of Gods glory unto all eternity. Much of this nature she did
speak, even when her understanding was so disturbed, that she scarce did know
her near Relations, and those who did attend upon her in her Chamber.

And now all these things are worthy to be transmitted unto posterity, and to
be had in perpetual remembrance. She was an eminently godly Gentlewoman, Her
Character
being but little above Eight and twenty years of age when she dyed, which was
in the beginning of March, Anno Christi 1656. But though she was young in
years, yet was she old in Grace: She had lived long in a little time: Her Death.
She was a mirror of her age, and a renown of her sex, a pattern worthy of
imitation. She was the beloved faithful wife of as an entirely loving and
faithful Husband. She was a tender affectionate Mother to her own, and no less
careful of those pledges committed to his charge. She was a most dear Sister,
an affectionate Mistress, careful both of the bodies and souls of her
servants, that they should neither want corporal, nor spiritual food. Her
profession was with Joshua, Chap. 24. 15. Choose you this day whom you will
serve; But as for me, I and my house, we will serve the Lord. She was not only
a friend to her friends, but a friend to her enemies, even unto such as
despitefully used her All the Country round about could not but look upon her,
whilst living as a public gain, and when dead* as a public loss: She was very
useful whilst she lived, and will be much missed now she is dead. Two things
were very eminent in her: Setledness in Religion, and holiness of conversation.
By her death the poor have lost a liberal Almoner; the sick (...) a good
Physician; the wounded have lost a (...) Surgeon; the Husband has lost a
faithful Wife; the children a tender Mother, the servants a gracious Mistress:
and not any that knew her of all her neighbors and friends, but they will
find a great loss, and miss of her. All that knew her loved her, but only
such whose love is not worth the having. She lived much desired, and dyed much
lamented: For her to live was Christ, and to die was gain, Phil. 1. 21. She was
honored in her life, and she was honored at her death, by a confluence of
many persons of quality, of the Gentry, Ministry, and Neighborhood round
about, who by their concourse at her Funeral, showed plainly in what an high
estimation she was amongst them, and that her good Name was like a precious
Ointment powered forth. The hope of Glory was that sovereign Cordial which
abundantly revived, and satisfied her spirits whilst she lived, and now her
hope is turned into fruition, and her faith into vision. All her sorrows and
sighings are turned away, and her employment is without the least tediousness,
without interruption, and intermission to sing Hosannahs, and Allelujahs to him
that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever more.

This Life was drawn up by my Reverend and worthy Friend Dr. Henry Wilkinson,
principal of Magdalen Hall, Oxon.

The Life, and Death of Mrs. Elizabeth Wilkinson, who dyed Anno Christi 1654.
Mrs. Elizabeth Wilkinson was born of godly Parents, Her parentage, and
education.
of an ancient, and well reputed Family of the Gentry in Devonshire. Her Father
was Mr. Anthony Gifford, her Mother, Mrs. Elizabeth Cottle, and by them she was
religiously educated during her minority: After which she lived with an Aunt
(an old Disciple) above twenty years together, where she had many prizes put
into her hands to get wisdom, even many spiritual advantages for her eternal
good. But considering that no helps of education, nor any means could prove
effectual without divine influences; it pleased the Lord out of the riches of
his mercy, in a signal manner to vouchsafe a blessing to all those helps, for
the good of her soul, and to crown all endeavors in order thereunto with good
success.

She was observed from her childhood to be very docile, very willing to learn,
industrious in reading of, Her timely conversion.
and swift to hear the Word of God preached. She was very careful to remember
what she heard, and took much pains in writing Sermons, and collecting special
Notes out of practical Divines. She had the ornament of a meek, and quiet
spirit; with that she was eminently adorned: She looked not (as too many do)
upon gaudy, and vain dresses as any ornament: She neither liked them, nor
conformed to them, but went in a grave, decent, and sober attire: She was
humble, gentle, tenderhearted, and full of bowels of compassion, remembering
such as were in bonds, as if she had been bound with them, Heb. 13. 3. She was
of so affable, sweet, and courteous a disposition, that she gained abundance of
love, and respect from all those that conversed with her: and by this means she
was the greater gainer by all good conferences. It was her usual custom to
move good discourse, and ofttimes she turned the stream of other impertinent
talk into something which was solid, and tended unto edification, and that
ministered grace to the hearers.

She kept a Diary of Gods dealings with her soul, Her piety.
and of other various dispensations that she met withal. She was much busied
in prayer, meditation, and self-examination. She would often desire her
Husband, and others of her acquaintance to deal plainly, and impartially with
her. For (said she) I would not be deceived with a formal profession, nor with
a temporary faith. Perhaps through affection you may judge far better of me
than I deserve; wherefore I desire you to sift, and search me thoroughly: for I
like such plain dealing best of all, and those are my best friends which deal
most plainly with me.

In process of time after a careful watching over her heart, Her growth in
grace.
and frequent addresses made unto the Throne of grace, she found returns
answerable to her prayers, and desires: God gave her a large measure both of
parts, and graces: She was able not only to assert the truths of God, but to
convince gainsayers. She abounded in love, faith meekness, humility, and the
rest of the graces of the Spirit, insomuch as she became a Christian of the
higher Form, a tall Cedar of Libanus, a grown, solid, and excellent Christian.

It pleased God for the trial of her graces, Her afflictions sanctified.
to exercise her very much in the School of affliction. Insomuch as ten years
before her death, she was (one time reckoned with another) at least half the
time sick. But God ordered this sickness of her body to be a medicine for her
soul. For the spirit of prayer was much set on work hereby; and her faith,
love, and patience did appear, and shine the more eminently. Out of the Furnace
she came forth as gold purified seven times: so that the rod, and staff,
correction, and instruction went together, and by these fatherly chastisements
her soul did thrive more abundantly. When she was able, she neglected not the
frequenting of the public Assemblies: they were her delight: and she was a
professed adversary to the withdrawing from the public Congregations of the
Saints. Both them, and the godly, and Reverend Ministers of the Gospel she had
in high esteem, and reverenced them all her days. And when she was not able to
go to the public Congregations, she used to spend her time in reading, prayer,
and meditating at home, and employed her friends to read to her, and pray with
her. Such as were stable, and sincere Christians were her delight: Those she
accounted more excellent than their neighbors. She would often say, that She
valued no friends like to those who were friends to her soul.

Concerning her deportment, Her Relative duties.
and carriage to her Relations (for such as are real Saints show it in their
several capacities) never was a Wife more full of sincere love, and respect to
an Husband, whom she loved entirely, and was as entirely beloved by him. Her
affection to her children was very tender: She was careful to Catechize,
instruct, and to train them up in the fear of God; and upon her Deathbed,
amongst many other excellent counsels, and instructions, she added this charge
as from a dying Mother, that they should remember that they had a Mother, who
would not allow them in any sin. She was careful also to instruct her
servants, and to teach them the fear of the Lord. Indeed she was ready, and
willing (as opportunity was offered) to do good unto all: and as need required,
gave unto them, both corporal, and spiritual food. She had a large heart, and
improved it to do a great deal of good in a little time: Insomuch as the poor,
the sick, the afflicted, and the unexperienced to whom she was very merciful,
and useful whilst she lived, had a very great miss of her when she was dead.
In brief, she was one of those Worthies of whom the world was not worthy: And
yet to give a further Character of her, I will here set down a Narrative,
copied exactly out of her own handwriting, of Gods gracious dealing with her
soul, as it follows word for word.

It pleased the Lord out of the riches of his grace, The time, a^ manner of
(...) conversion.
to remove me from an ignorant place where I was born, and to bring me very
young, into a Religious Family: And when I was about twelve years of age, upon
the reading in the Practice of Piety, concerning the happy estate of the godly,
and the miserable condition of the wicked in their death, and so for ever unto
all eternity; it pleased the Lord so much to affect my heart with it, as from
that time my heart was wrought over to a desire to walk in the ways of God.
But at that time, I fear, I did not go upon a right principle; for I then did
not eye the glory of God in it, but only my own safety, that it might be well
with me for ever. But quickly after that I had but begun to set my face toward
Sion, Satan's malice.
I was set upon with many temptations, and perplexities in my thoughts, which
were very troublesome to me at all times, but especially when I was alone: the
consideration whereof brought such an horror upon my conscience, insomuch as I
did not know what to do. That little I had, whether from education, or from the
light of Nature, caused a striving in me continually against those thoughts of
Atheism, which were most terrible unto me. I was sensible that it was a
fearful sin to have any such thoughts to lodge within my breast: but I desired
from my soul to be freed from them, and had continual reasonings within me
against them, and yet still for a long time I was troubled, but could not
acquaint any with my condition. I did not think that it was so with any other
as it was with me.

In this strait, Gods mercy.
when I knew not which way to turn me, even there did the Lord extend his
compassion toward me in my greatest extremity, in directing me to read Calvin's
Institutions, and especially that part that treats of the Creation. Whereupon
the Lord was pleased to give in such satisfaction to my soul, concerning those
things about which I was troubled, as that from that time forwards I was not
violently assaulted in that kind.

But no sooner was I freed from that trouble, but new ones sprang up: For the
very remembrance of that horrid sin of Atheism, Satan's subtilty.
left such a terror upon my spirit, as made me fear that I had committed that
sin against the Holy Ghost: and so my condition seemed to be, not only for the
present, but, in my apprehension, then for ever most miserable. All other sins,
though never so great, I knew upon true repentance were pardonable: but this
sin, that I lay under the fear of, I knew out of the Word of God should never
be pardoned: which caused many sad fears upon my spirit known to God alone.

For the removal of these fears, Gods mercy.
the Lord in mercy directed me to the reading of Mr. Scudders Works; where are
laid down the marks of that sin. Upon perusal whereof the Lord was pleased to
satisfy my misgiving heart, by a clear manifestation to my soul, that I had
not committed that sin; and so assured me that though my sins were great, yet
were they pardonable, which put me more cheerfully upon the use of such means
as the Lord had directed me unto. And having satisfaction given in concerning
this particular, there was a great burden taken off from my spirit. Although I
found no grace in my heart, nor discovery of the love of God unto my soul, yet,
in that there was but a possibility, there was a ground of comfort administered
to my heart; which I formerly feared that I should be shut out from. But still
my fears remained, that I was not one of those in particular for whom Christ
died: The more I looked into mine own heart, the more I saw, of sin, and Satan,
discouraging me from having any hope, that the Lord should accept of such a
vile sinful wretch as I was, who had entertained such sinful thoughts.

I likewise thought how small the number was of those that should be saved, in
comparison of others, and my repentance, I feared, came short of that which was
required in the Gospel. As for faith, I could not find the least measure of it
in my soul; with many other sad discouraging thoughts. But when I was most
perplexed with fears, and doubts, even then did the Lord graciously dart in
some beams of his reconciled countenance, as I was reading something in Mr.
Scudders Christian daily Walk, etc. which the Lord set home upon my soul, Her
comfort, and joy.
and brought into my soul so much joy, and comfort at the present, as neither
my tongue, nor Pen can express: But this joy remained not long, for I quickly
lost the sense of it: yet the remembrance of it was sweet unto me at all times.

But after this, all my former fears returned afresh again upon my heart, only
I had a door of hope opened, that when God saw it best for me, he would return,
and renew his reconciled countenance unto my soul in the clear light, and
apprehension thereof: and this was when I was about sixteen years of age. After
which time the Lord did exercise me with various dispensations: For, for two
years space, I was by providence cast upon a place, where I heard very little
powerful preaching, small helps for the good of my soul, but what the Lord was
pleased to give in by the use of private means. But his power, and abundant
mercy was much seen in that time, that, though I had not much comfort, Gods
mercy in want of mean^.
yet the Lord was pleased to keep up my spirit in a way of depending upon him,
and my fears were less at that time, than formerly when I had more helps: So
gracious was t^^ Lord unto me, in keeping me alive in a time of famine.

After this, through Gods goodness, I was sometimes under the preaching of a
powerful Minister, [Mr. Bateman of Ockingam] who was Crowned with the
conversion, Gods providence.
strengthening, and building up of many souls: unto whose preaching the Lord
gave me such a blessing, as I seldom, if ever, went away from hearing him
without comfort. Though I came to hear him with many doubts upon my spirit, yet
the Lord so ruled, and directed him, as if his Sermons had been only concerning
my particular, and he fully acquainted with the whole condition of my soul.
Sometimes the Lord directed me to some supporting Promises, upon which I
relied: But those Promises which were made to Believers, though I highly prized
them, yet I durst not apply them to my self, fearing that I had no interest in
them. But that Promise Prove. 28. 13. He that confesses, Her faith in Promises.
and forsakes his sins, shall find mercy. And that 1 John 1. 9. If we confess
our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness. And the Promise is 1 John 2. 1, 2. If any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but for the sins of the
whole world; and the Invitation, Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts come
ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy, and eat, yea come,
buy wine and milk without money, and without price, together with the rest of
the Chapter; all those places the Lord often made a stay unto my soul: And
afterward the Lord so blessed one means or other unto me, insomuch as I was
kept from sinking, and falling into such horror as many of the people of God
sometimes fell into.

But yet my fears and doubts were so many, as that my comfort never lasted
long: Her fears and doubts.
If the Lord did but hide his face, I was troubled. No longer could I believe
(then I found new strength given in) that the Lord would ever have mercy upon
my soul. The sense of Original sin, and Actual transgressions in their
filthiness, and guiltiness, caused my fears yet to remain upon my spirit, my
faith then seemed very small, if I had any, which I much questioned: I durst
not then say, Lord increase my faith, but I could cry earnestly, Lord work
faith in me. I found much dullness and deadness, manifold distractions in
duties, so that God might justly have withdrawn himself from me for ever; yet
notwithstanding all my uneven walking with God, he was graciously pleased to
manifest his mercy unto my soul.

When I was stricken with such weaknesses, as I apprehended might quickly have
ended my life, I fell into a great fear: At the first finding my heart to sink,
the Lord was pleased to g^ive me so much respite, as to pour out my soul before
him, desiring strength and support from him to keep up my spirit, and to make
me willing to submit to his dispensations, and the Lord graciously answered my
prayers, in that he removed all my former doubtings, Her prayers answered.
and fears all the time of that sickness, which was long, and so dangerous,
that neither I, nor others expected my life. The Lord then cleared up my
evidences for Heaven, and gave me in so much comfort against the apprehension
of death, as I never had in all my life before.

Other like trials of the Lords love I found still, when I was in the greatest
extremity, and stood most in need of help from him, insomuch as at such times,
I have hoped that I should never again have questioned the love of God to my
soul: But I have found it otherwise by sad experience: For when these
impressions were worn of, I have been ready to call all in question again
concerning my poor soul. It made me often to think of that which was laid to
Solomon's charge, that he forgot the Lord that had appeared to him twice. A hard
thiug to believe.
I found it the hardest thing to believe, that ever I went about. But this
wavering condition could not satisfy my soul; for the Lord giving me sometimes
a glimpse of his love, made me long after fuller enjoyments of it, so that I
was carried out with a restless impatience, to beg that the Lord would take
away the heart of unbelief from me, which did both dishonor him, and hinder me
from that peace which the Lord was willing that his people should enjoy.

My heart then being brought unto that frame, I was more willing than ever I
was before, to impart my condition unto some spiritual Friends, She imparts her
condition to Christian friends,
whom I desired to deal impartially with me, acquainting them with the whole
condition of my soul, how far the Lord had carried me on, and at what I stuck,
and still as new objections did arise, I labored to get satisfaction: Being
convinced that I had too much prejudiced my self in that I had not sooner made
my condition known to some who were able to give me advice.

This way of communicating my condition, And finds comfort.
I found the Lord blessed unto my soul, insomuch that my hopes were more
confirmed, my fears more removed, my faith more strengthened, and by the hearing
of such Sermons and reading such Books as came closest unto the conscience, and
were most for trial of ones spiritual condition, I found the greatest benefit
by, and received the most comfort from them. Formerly I had many fears that I
was not one of them who had an interest in the Election of Grace: But the Lord
afterward put into my heart to enquire whether I had those Graces of his
Spirit wrought in me which none but his own elect people could have.

Upon the strictest searching into mine own heart, the Lord was pleased after
many years of fear, at last to evidence unto my soul that there was a change
wrought in my heart, Her self-examination.
will, and affections, notwithstanding the remainders of sin and corruption,
which still encompassed me about; being confident that he that had begun this
good work, would not leave it unfinished unto the day of Jesus Christ; and the
Lord was pleased to set home diverse Promises for the strengthening of my faith;
Her faith.
to wit, those which set down the Everlasting Covenant, 2 Samuel 23. 5. The
Everlasting love of God, Jer. 31. 3. Joh. 11. 13. The certainty of the
Foundation, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The certainty of the Promises, 2 Cor. 1. 20. They are
all in Christ Yea and Amen; and that the children of God have eternal life
promised unto them, and that none shall be ever able to pluck them out of
Christ's hands, Joh. 10. 28. Then for diverse years the Lord was pleased to stay
me, to lead, and guide me till he had set my feet upon that Rock which is
higher than I, from whence I trust, that I shall never be removed. And now my
hearts desire is, to ascribe that measure of hope and comfort which the Lord
has given me at any time, only unto the praise of the glory of his Grace, who
has made me accepted in his Beloved, Her thankfulness.
which is so great a mercy as I can never be thankful enough for, nor walk
answerable thereunto. I know, when I look into my heart, there is matter of
fear that the Lord will withdraw the influences of his comforts from me: But
that which I rest upon is, the free mercy of God in Christ, expecting
performance of his Promises made, Romans 6. 16. Sin shall not have dominion over
you, because you are not under the Law, but under Grace: And Ezekiel. 36. 25. that
he will sprinkle clean water upon me, and that he will give me a new heart, and
put a new spirit within me, that he will take away my stony heart, and give me
an heart of flesh; being persuaded that the Lord will keep me by his own Power
through faith unto salvation. And now that I may have all the Graces of the
Spirit strengthened, and increased in me, which I find that I stand in
continual need of: It is the desire of my soul to be a partaker of the Lords
Supper, which, through the blood of Christ only, I have right unto.

This is the particular account of Gods gracious dealing with this godly
Gentlewoman: considering there was no administration of the Sacrament in that
Parochial Congregation where she lived, and used formerly to receive it, nor
any Pastor at all to officiate there, she being desirous to enjoy that great
Ordinance, and that after a pure way of administration, sent this
aforementioned Narrative to the Reverend Dr. Harris, living then in the
University, who admitted her to the participation of the Lords Supper in that
public Assembly where he administered it.

Now let us see also a Letter written by Dr. Harris concerning this godly
Gentlewoman, whom he highly honored, upon the occasion of his communicating
the aforesaid Letter of hers to a friend: Do not (says he) think it lost time
to read over this Narrative: It was penned by this gracious woman upon a
serious occasion, what time she was to give an account of her self at her
admission to the Lords Supper. The discourse is plain, but pregnant of
instruction. I alter nothing in the thing, I only take notice of the persons
therein mentioned: As 1. God, 2. Satan, 3. The parties self: All which offer
matter worthy thy thoughts.

First in Satan, thou see his most ordinary way and method in tempting. His
first attempt is to blow out all light left in the soul, Satan's method, and
subtilty.
and to quell all thoughts of a Deity if possibly he can, that so no room at
all may be left for God: If that cannot be, but the conscience will be
sometimes talking; then his next work is to question and argue the case,
whether indeed there be such a person as God, such a thing as the soul, such a
book as the Bible, such a place as an Heaven or Hell; and if he cannot gain
such a conclusion from the soul, then in the third place the Question is, What
manner a one this supposed God is? And first, whilst thou art in thy natural
state he represents God made all of mercy, and when thou art under mercy, all
of vengeance and fury; there was no place for fear, and here none for hope:
There sin was an inconsiderable thing, and beneath Gods cognizance; here sin is
unpardonable, and beyond Gods mercy: In both estates he labors the destruction
of Faith; now in the threats, then in the Promises. In the first estate you
must never yield to self-despair; no, spit in his face that shall once question
thy belief in God, without the least doubting. What? not believe my Maker with
all my soul? What? once doubt or suspect him? I defy him, and the foul fiend
that shall say so. On the other side, when once converted, what have thou to do
with the Covenant of Grace and Peace? That is bread for Children, not for Dogs,
Hypocrites, for such as have sinned against the Holy Ghost, as thou have done;
and at this bay he holds the soul for some space; and eftsoon recruits his
forces, and renews his Interrogatories, thus, Thou within the Promise? Thou a
believer? Can thou say, dare thou say that thou have faith? It may be thou
dare not deny it, but what is that to the point? Thou dare not affirm it,
though partial enough to thy self: Be advised by me, who loves plain dealing,
and let not thy false heart, and these fawning Preachers befool thee unto
destruction.

Thus the Devil up, and down, first and last, thus he proceeded with man at the
first, and though sometimes he shifts hands, and finds out new ways, yet here
lies his road for the most part, and this is the first party here named.

Now in the second place, Gods mercy to his own.
what does God? It must be granted that he permits these Hellish Scullions
to scour his Plate, and to fit the vessels of honor for their Masters use, and
they (as glad of the office) bestir themselves, they dawb their vessels, and
render them as foul and ugly as they can; but when they have done their work,
God takes his Plate out of their hand to their no small grief; and in the mean
while God goes along with the temptations, and in them all supports his poor
servants now more immediately by his own hand, prompting their Petitions,
darting into their souls some glimpses of comfort, minding them of some
Promise, to be sure, yielding them some secret hope, something or other which
draws them along still more or less. 2. Now more immediately by men, and other
means; sometimes he directs them to some special Book or Treatise which fits
their case, and holds soul and life together at present; sometimes he sends an
Interpreter one of a thousand, that shall rip up their misery, and show them
their misery, and show them their remedy, and at last fetches off his Captives,
even then when Satan began to crow, and cry victory, that extremity being Gods
opportunity, and this is usually, though not ever, Gods way.

Now look upon the third concerned, the party tempted, what does he? He sticks
(often) in the birth, fool as he is, his first work is to keep the Devils
counsel, confess and be shamed for ever; Man's folly.
the Devil is true to him, and he will be as true, and never peach: he travels
with a woeful burden of sin, guilt, horror; but if thou love thy self (says
the Devil) keep thy own counsel, trust not God, nor man. But if the Preacher
does force him to a confession, and he can hold no longer, then he makes forth
but fair and softly. First, he makes many offers, goes, and comes, and
something he would say, but is loath, he begins afar off, and then stops,
begins again, and then stops again, takes another day, and then comes again
with a purpose of uttering all; and when he comes to his friend, either all is
quiet for the present, and the pang over, or else if he hangs still on the
rack, then he drops out somewhat, but reserves the worst, and so is little the
better, because he comes not to the bottom quickly; or if he speaks out all,
yet there is another rub in the way; how can I tell whether this parties
testimony be true or no, his judgment and affection being right? He shows me
promises, but knows he or I whether those promises do belong to me? He speaks
of a Christ, but what is that to me, if he be none of mine? He talks of
believing, seeing is believing: It is a senseless thing to trust to another
goodness when I have nothing of mine own; to believe mercy when I feel wrath,
shall I not believe mine own eyes? And thus after a world of Sermons,
Sacraments, Conferences, the poor soul hovers, and finds no rest or
satisfaction till God be pleased to work him to these things,

1. To a resolution of imparting himself to some godly friend, and of speaking
his whole heart to some one or other.

2. Of resting in Gods bare word, without the assurance of sense.

3. Of accepting of Jesus Christ without any Ifs, and Ands, notwithstanding his
own unworthiness.

4. Of waiting upon God, and harkening when he will speak peace; and when he is
brought thus far that he will be beholden to a Commuinon of Saints, and will
take Gods word without any farther surety, and owe all to Christ, though he can
contribute nothing, and in despite of all suggestions and discouragements will
stick to the peace of Christ, and look for all his peace in that way, saying,
Though he kill me yet will I trust in him, I will wait, and hearken to him;
when (I say) he is thus far proceeded, Satan may now go shake his ears, and
receive his answer, Its God that justifies, who shall condemn? Oh! Hell, where
is thy power? Oh! Death, Oh! Devil, what is thy Commission? Its not my meaning
to prescribe to God any one way of working; but this is the way he often takes
with his children, and this we may find exemplified in this foregoing
Narrative touching the conversion and procedure of this Saint, so far as she
has commented upon her own life. Now for her death, I will tell thee wh^t my
observations were thereabout.

1. I find that God began with her quickly, and called her hence before she
was aged, and that is mostly his method where an early harvest is intended, a
timely seeds-time is promised; they live quickly, and live apace who ripen
betimes; so was it with her who was seldom out of action after her entrance,
but gained as much time in so little a time as any I knew.

2. I observe that death came not all at once upon her, She dyed daily.
she was yearly dying some years before she dyed her last, and thus death was
made familiar to her: I have seldom known any of her age that was less amazed
at the speech and thoughts of death; so good a thing it is to know
experimentally what it is to dye beforehand.

3. Observe how Gods power triumphs in weakest vessels: It is a thing I have
often thought on, that godly women for the most part dye more confidently and
comfortably than do good men, the Lord trampling upon Satan in them, and in her
very eminently.

4. Her patience was remarkable in the midst of sore pains which frequented her
in the beeding and bearing of children, He Patience
yet then her speech was, I fear not pains, I fear my self, lest through
impatiency I should let fall any unfitting word: It is a blessed frame when
pain seems light, and sin heavy.

5. I plainly saw in her the power of Grace beyond nature; 1. When life and
death were both laid before her, her speech was this, I am at my Fathers
disposal, howbeit of my self I rather incline to death, than life. 2. Whereas
her affections were very strong both to her loving Husband and children,
insomuch as it was conceived, that the last farewell would go very near her
when she should part with so precious and dear Friends, she was so much taken
up with the thoughts of Christ, that she seemed not to stick at any such
relations. Nay thirdly, she seemed wholly to forget her natural self, for being
entreated to favor her body and speech in regard of the lowness of her
spirits, after some pause she brake forth into these words: Shall I for this
poor carcass be wanting to my souls comfo^t, and my Saviors praises? Let me
have your prayers still, and God his praises; yea, pray not only for, but with
me. Which being done, she overflowed with comfort, and in that condition I left
her, and that stream of comfort led her, not long after, to the Fountain where
are Rivers of joy for evermore.

Thus lived she a most profitable life: Thus dyed she a most fruitful death.
God so turned this his servant, that living, dying, and after death she should
be fruitful. Thus will God honor those that honor him. To him be all honor
to Eternity. Amen.

Now it may be useful to make mention of her last sickness, especially eight
weeks before her death.

All her discourses were savoury, Her holy speeches.
tending to edification. Many good Christians came to visit her, who all (if it
were not their own fault) might reap some spiritual benefit from those many
excellent speeches which proceeded out of her mouth. And the counsels she gave
to her Relations, and other friends, were tempered with gravity, and affection.
She accustomed not her self to affectation of high-flown phrases, but held fast
the form of sound words. She was an old Disciple, and her grave and sober
language accordingly discovered her so to be.

From the very first of her last sickness, her apprehension was that she should
dye shortly, Her sickness.
and her longing desire was to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. She often
repeated those words of Job, There the weary go to rest; and those words in the
close of the Revelations, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; upon the approach of
her death (whereof she was very sensible) she asked her Husband, what Promises
of assurance were a firm ground for her to bottom upon? He named Joh. 10. 28.
And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand. Likewise he added Romans 8. 33. 34. Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, who is he
that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather, that is risen again, who
is ever at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. He added
verse. 38, 39. For I am persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor ^^ings to come; nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. These (said she) are sweet promises.

That morning she dyed, Her joy unspeakable.
she desired her Husband to read the 17 Chapter of John (which Chapter that
eminent holy Scotchman, Mr. Rollock, caused to be read to him when he was
dying) after that was read, she was ravished with great joy, and expressed her
self accordingly. Her Husband, and two other Friends prayed with her. After the
last Prayer was ended, she said, My flesh, and my heart fails: Her Husband
answered her, That God was the strength of her heart, and her portion for ever:
He would never fail her. She returned an answer (which were the last words
which ever she spoke to him) He will never fail me. About an hour after she
resigned up her spirit unto God who gave it; Her Death.
and her last words were, I have finished my course. She slept in Jesus
December the 8, Anno Christi 1654. To her to live was Christ, and to dye was
gain. She lived much desired, and dyed much lamented. Her name is like precious
Ointment powered forth. She lived holily, and dyed comfortably, and now partakes
of those joys which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither can enter into
the heart of man to conceive, even those things which God has prepared for
them that love him.

Diverse Epitaphs were made at the Death of this rare Gentlewoman: I shall only
insert two which were made by two Reverend and Learned Doctors.

On the Death of that worthy Gentlewoman, Mrs. ELIZABETH WILKINSON.
E-re while (Dear Consort) I was leas'd to thee,
Wise now to Christ for perpetuity:
L-iving with thee was sweet, with him far best,
I-n earth joy's mixed with pain, in him all rest.
I-wrought, I suffered much in a few years,
L-ife now rewards my work, wipes off my tears;
S-ighs are all turned to songs, all tears to wine,
K-ings favor crowns my heart, what should grieve thine?
A-re we not both of the same household still?
I-at the Banquet, and thou at the Mill,
B-oth fellow servants: I my Pension now:
N-ext thine, work on, the Feast succeeds the Plow.
E-ach of us yet in hopes, my Dust to win
S-alvation from the Grave, thy soul from sin.
T-hings worth the waiting for; Christ comes to save,
O-mourn no more, but write this on my Grave.
H-ere lies Mother, and Babe, both without sins,
N-ext birth will make her, and her Infant twins.
Her Child was buried with her.
Thus interwoven were our Names, till death
Left Wilkinson without Elizabeth.
We Will join again. 'Twas Man and Wi^e before,
'Twill then be fellow-Saints for evermore.
ED. REYNOLDS.

On the truly Virtuous and Religious Mrs. Elizabeth Wilkinson. To her Husband.
Say, shall I speak or hold my peace?
That seems more due; but this more ease,
Where, what to speak, is hard to say;
For should I utter all I may,
'Twere endless: And to praise a Friend
By halves, is but to discommend.
And would I speak, To whom? and what?
To those that knew? or knew her not?
Who knew her need it not: for they
Know more than I am like to say:
Who knew her not, may think that she
Deserved but what they hear from me:
And so instead of setting forth
Her praise, I should but wrong her worth.
He that adores with silent view,
Does not detract from what is due:
But all that while his silence says,
He knows not how enough to praise.
So, might I choose, I would adore
Her speaking worth, and say no more.
But since I must (for so you say)
Not hold my peace, I must obey:
Yet it is, I say, too hard a task,
To answer fully what you ask:
To know, what first I should commend,
And harder, where to make an end.
Should I begin, where first appear
Her worths, I must begin with Her.
(Higher than so, I need not go,
Tho, whence she came, be worthy too.)
From first, her own deserving merit
Claims more than others do inherit:
Nor is it easy to express,
What age of hers was spent amiss.
Her temper meek; Her carriage such:
Her language good, and not too much:
Her habit comely, more than brave,
Her conversation humbly grave.
What virtues decked a single life,
Were doubled, when she was a wife.
How good a wife, I need not tell
To him who knew her worth so well;
Nor, what was her Maternal care,
To whom her children were so dear.
Nor was her good confined to home,
But challenged a larger room;
To heal the sick, the hungry feed,
And succor those that stood in need;
Good both to soul and body too,
Of those with whom she had to do;
To rich, to poor, to great, and small,
But in her Closet best of all
(Which was her Christian daily walk)
In doing that which others talk:
Forward to good without constraint,
And as she lived, she died a Saint.
But this to speak at large would crave
A Volume, not an Epitaph.
And were it done, I might offend
By shaming many left behind,
(Tho more there may be found, I fear,
That will commend, than follow her.)
Some mind good words, more than good lives,
Some are good women, not good wives;
Some, neither this, nor that; and some
Abroad are better than at home;
Some hope to dye like Saints, although,
It Is too too plain, they live not so.
It Is rare in all respects to see
A Wife, a Woman like to thee;
At home, abroad, in life, in death,
Like unto our ELIZABETH.
I. WALLIS D. D.

A Table of the chief things contained in the first Part.
A
ADvice to children page 323, etc. Affability 118 Afflictions of Gods Ministers
45. 62, 65, 80, 280, 290
B
Books which are best 314
C
Candor 77 Charity 1, 4. 41, 93, 116, 149, 174, 239, 303 Comforting afflicted
consciences 10, 41, 114 Communion with God 7 Conjugal love 14, 40, 139
Constancy 258 Contentment 30 Conversation in Heaven 9 Conversion 57 Courage
287, 302
D
Diligence 99, 132, 202 Divisions lamented 227
E
Envy 107, 211
F
Faith 120, 150, 172, 281 Family duties 7, 28, 101, 145, 162 Family government
307 Fasting and p^ayer* 15, 63, 70, 119, 162 Fruitfulness in conversation 13,
264
G
Gratitude 28
H
Heart t^nder 169 Hospitality 8, 34, 42, 78 Humility 8, 20, 37, 42, 68, 118,
148, 172, 216 240, 269, 297, 304 Hypocrisy complained of 261
I
Ignorance 276 Independency (...) approved 319 Industry 2, 30, 34, 56, 62, 63,
86, 88, 105, 109, 129, 137, 165, 195, 219 Justice 14, 150
L
Life holy, and heavenly 9, 30, 40, 107, 148, 268 Love to the Saints 174
M
Meekness 74, 114, 169 Memory good Ministry highly esteemed 101, 160, 163, 167
Ministry successful 67, 105, 212, 228, 234 Moderation 73, 271 Modesty 75, 251
P
Painfulness in the Work of the Ministry 4, 32, 91, 106, 132, 162, 204, 212,
223, 262, 263, 284. Patience 121, 150, 169, 272, 306 Peacemakers 78, 115, 239
Persecutors plagued by God, 22, 65 Piety 68, 96, 147, 160, 194 Popery not to be
tolerated 220 Prayer frequent and servent 9, 15, 38, 69, 103, 171, 219, 254,
310 Prayer succesfull 11, 192, 204, 230 Set forms of Prayer lawful 255
Preaching plain, best 252 Predictions 10, 201, 225, 226 Providence remarkable
2, 6, 4^, 56, 64, 66, 79, 129, 191, 207, 215, 234, 235, 27^ Prudence 30, 36,
57, 74 229
S
Sabbath sanctified 69, 102, 298 Satan's malice, and subtilty 191, 192
Self-denial 35, 105, 135, 142, 205, 268 Sermons which are best 313
Single-heartedness 261 Slanders 290 Speeches gracious 11, 122, 178, 299, 304,
317, etc. 320 Studiousness 40, 67, 97, 116 Sympathy 45, 120, 174
T
Temperance 117, 305 Temptations 61, 249, 294 Temptations resisted 199
Thansgiving page 119 Tithes asserted 266
W
Wives virtuous 14, 32 Word meditated on 98 World contemned 196, 269
Z
Zeal 5, 113, 148, 163, 166, 201, 226, 239
A Table of the principal things contained in the second Part.
A
Afflictions of Gods children p. 497, 514 Anabaptists raise troubles 374
Assurance 457
B
Bible translated into Suedish 387 Bishops temporalties given to the King 382
Bounty 431
C
Charity 438, 470, 507 Comforts of Gods children 424, 494, 518, 522 Constancy
446, 505 Conversation heavenly 452 Conversion 415, 502, 512, 515 Covetousness
342 Courage of Gods children 384, 466, 468, 477, 505 Cruelty 341, 342
D
Death desired; and why 432, 460 Death not feared, and why 435 Devotion 499
E
Enemies loved 439
F
Faith of Gods children 420, 424, 496, 519, 523 Family government 506 Fasting
and prayer 429 Fidelity 400
G
Gods mercy to his children 516, 517, 519, 526 Growth in Grace 447, 513
H
Heavenly-mindedness 416, 461 Hospitality 473 Humility 425, 444, 503 Hypocrisy
342
I
Joy unspeakable 457, 518 Justice 462, 463, 465
L
Life holy 449, 491 Love to Gods children 428, 437, 50^ Love to Gods house 490
M
Meekness 492, 503 Mercy to souls 465 Ministes loved 45^ Modesty 44^
P
Patience 440, 485, 49^ Piety 369, 384, 387, 502, 51^ Policy 338, 393, 41^
Popish lies, and slanders 37^ Prayer frequent, and fervent 425, 426, 50^ Prayer
prevalent 479, 52^ Pride 39^ Providence remarkable 344, 357, 51^ Prudence 386,
403, 417, 418, 454, 480, 50^
R
Religion reformed in Sueden 377, 383 387, 39^ Restitution 47^
S
Sabbath sanctified 454, 46^ Satan's subtilty and methods 516, 517, 52^ Self
examination 52^ Slanders against Gods children 450, 47^ Speeches holy 427, 50^
Sympathy 43^
T
Thankfulness to God 436, 52^ Treachery 344, 39^
W
Wives good 367, 443, 49^
Z
Zeal 453, 46
FINIS.
Courteous Reader, be pleased to take notice that thief Books following are
Printed for, and sold by William Miller, at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, near the Little North-door.
MR. Anthony Burgess of Original Sin, Folio. Rouses Works, Folio. Gadbury's
Doctrine of Nativities, Folio. Hickes Revelation Revealed, Folio. Wilson on the
Romans, Folio. Tailor of Temptations, etc. in Folio. Boltons Discourse of true
Happiness, Quarto. Clarks Lives of Ten Eminent Divines, and other famous
Christians, Quarto. Clarks Ministers Dues, Quarto. Obstinate Lady, Quarto.
Record Urinal of Physic, Octavo. Langleyes Death of Charles the first
Lamented, and Restoration of Charles the second Congratulated, Octavo. Ravius
Oriental Grammar, Twelves. Latin Bibles, Twelves. Latin Testaments, Twelves.
Boltons Helps to Humiliations, Twelves. Mr. Peacocks Meditations, Twelves.
Country-mans Catechism, Twelves. Clamor Sanguinis, Twelves. Lord Capels
Meditations, Twelves. Quarles Barnabas, Twelves. King Charles's Work, Twenty
fours.

