CANTERBVRIES AMAZEMENT: OR The Ghost of the young fellow Thomas Bensted, who
was Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered by the means of the Bishop of CANTERBURY;
who appeared to him in the Tower, since the Jesuits Execution.

With a Discourse between the two Heads on London Bridge, the one being Thomas
Bensteeds, the other the late Jesuits.

woodcut scene depicting Thomas Bensted's dismembered corpse, with his ghost
appearing to a sleeping man who are thou I am thom^^ Bensteed

Printed for F. Coules, in the Year 1641.

Canterburies amazement: OR The Ghost of the young fellow Thomas Bensteed, who
was drawn, hanged, and quartered, by the cruelty of the Bishop of
CANTERBURY; who lately appeared to him in the Tower, since the Jesuits
Execution.
Canterbury. THIS is the time that every Creature has his dull sence^ wrapped
in silent sleep: the hardy labourer that toils all day, and wearies his
irksome members with incessant labors this hour has a free dispensation from
his pains, and eases his wearied body with soundest sleep. The covetous and
priping Usurer that is not capable of the least intermission, but esteems each
minute an age, wherein he does not employ his working brain, labors with
subtle inventions to augment the massy stock of his ill-got and unnecessarie
treasure, at this minute enioyes his natural rest. The crafty Politician,
whose restless perecranion is continually full of diverse imperfect and
indigested crockets, quaint devices, and State proiects, this midnight hour
Morpheus has dandled his over wearied senses into sound and senseless sleep,
all creatures are hushed into quiet rest: There is no noise at all stirring in
City or Country, not so much as the barking of dogs, or howling of wolves,
yet I am so haunted with idle fancies and imaginary conceits, that sleep these
eight days has been to me a mere stranger. One night I see many religious
Ministers (whom for too much sedulitie and diligence in the execution of their
ministerial functions, and for their obstinacy to innovations, and their
industrious care of the souls committed to their charge, I have not only
deprived them of their Benefices, sequestered their estates, and thereby utterly
undone them, their poor wives and children, but made them incapable of any
Priestly function here in their Native Country; and they were thereby enforced
to seek their livelybood in remote and foreign places, though they were
ancient, or by any other way unable to undergo Travail, offering the incense
of their prayers against me: another night me thinks I see my dire oppressions,
presented in a hellish Mask, each act that I have done is laid before me in my
sleep; among which I find few good ones; yet why should I be transported with
fear, for shadows they have no substance and are caused by dull and
melanchely fancies: a faint-hearted soldier that can slay, and then be touched
with remorse of conscience for what he has done: Why should I be afraid to
behold the apparitions of those things which I before delighted to enact? Avaunt
then idle fear, seek thy abode in others breasts, I will not harbor thee in
mine, and yet I must: Bless me my better Genius! what do I see! the
formidable figure of a quartered man: my Resolution now plays the unconstant
woman; my whole body is a perpetual palsy, my senses never were benumbed till
now, my rational part of man begin to forsake my drooping soul; Courage, I
never found defect of thee till now. Let me have strength enough to speak unto
this ayrie substance. What art thou that at this dead hour of the night,
assailst my quiet chamber? speak what is thy business.


Bensteed. Why my Lord, is your grace senseless? know you not me? I am
Drum-Maior Bensteed, that with my gallant Myrmidons come thus in Arms the
second time. Why do you stand so like a Statue? Do you trust to the justice
of your cause? Why do not you take your Barge and waft your Grace to
White Hall; there is the Sanctuary you once fled to for aid.


Canter. It Is needless, I am safer here, and in a stronger house: and for that
Bensteed thou namest, he is secure enough; I fixed his head on London bridge,
there he keeps watch; the Scots cannot come in, but he must descrie them.


Bensteed. O my Lord, but Bensteed has a fellow watchman that does now supply
my place, one of your Graces friends now bears me company: this is his first
night: he is a very learned grave man: your Grace I am confident knows him.


Canter. What was his name, and for what offense does he bear thee company?


Bensteed. A Jesuit, my Lord, his name is Ward, Walker, Waller, Slater, or any
of them.


Canter. A Jesuit? and so many names? I wonder that I never heard of him. O
how negligent were my High Commission Officers, that could not hunt out that
piece of Superstition?


Benst. I protest my Lord, your Grace dissembles admirably: as if a Jesuit
could not live in peace for your Officers: alas, my Lord, they were better
employed, in seeking out men that repeated Sermons together, and could have
better Compositions of them than of Jesuits, they were rather privileged than
punished.


Canter. But speak if thou be that Bensteed, what is thy business here?
wherefore do thou thus haunt me in this fearful shape?


Benst. My Lord, I come to know wherefore I was made such an example, and to
dispute the cause, I was so uniustly put to death?


Canter. Because thou wast found guilty of Treason, and therefore according to
the Laws of England, ought to be hanged, drawn, and quartered.


Benst. Oh my Lord; the Laws of England never made Riots Treason: and I had no
hand my Lord in breaking open the White Lion prison: the greatest matter I did
my Lord was, I attempted to break open your fortified Gates with a Broom stick,
which was a thing altogether impossible; which had I done my Lord, it had been
at the worst but Fellonie or Burglarie, and not Treason, but I was poor, and
one fit to suffer; I had no gratuities to bestow on your Grace, I had no Buts
of Sack for your Cellar, nor Beaver hat, perfumed Gloves, or plush Cloak for
your Gentlemen: If I had as good store of Pieces my Lord, to have presented
Petitions to your Grace withal, I might then perchance have had them
subscribed with a We refer this Petition, with a private note in the Margent;
but wanting these, I ought to dye, though for no other crime.


Canter. Why simple fellow, do thou know what belongs to the English Laws
better than those grave Judges who sat on the Bench at thy trial, that thou
make these bold distinctions? and do thou challenge them of injustice? they
had a hand in the business as well as myself.


Benst. I dare not tax the Judges, let those that have sued in forma pauper is
do that; sor it may be your politic Lordship informed them more than what was
truth, or it may be they took your Grace rather for a Pope than a subject, and
so it became Treason; but if otherwise, let them be assured my cause will have
a revenge: And for your self, who all the Kingdom knows is guilty of this,
and many more greater Offenses, rest confident that my recompense will not be
very easy.


Cant. But good Mr. Bensteeds Ghost, let me know the cause, why you accompanied
with your fellow Rebels, sought my life more than any man's else? I am utterly
ignorant of any crime whereof I was guilty to incense any man against me.


Benst. So you are ignorant of sowing discord between the Scots and us: How
many truly affected subjects lost their lives, more precious than your own in
that skirmish? and how many should have lost their lives, had your proiects
taken their full effect? Moreover I believe you are ignorant, that when a
Parliament was begun, and every poor man that had been uniustly wronged,
might without the giving of gratuities have had his injuries righted, who was
the chief cause of its dissolution? all this you are pleased to forget, but
assure your self it will be remembered. You have forgot too I believe
bestowing Benefices on non Residents, that would preach once a month, and keep
Curats who would read long service, tickle them up with Homilies, and always
conclude within the time, and never preach in the afternoon, but spend that
time in mirth and good fellowship amongst their neighbors, in the Alehouse,
or at Bowls, according to your book which tolerated Sundays Pastimes. Nor
you do not remember, that you would have had the Kingdom governed by the
Civil Law only: then your High Commission would have been high enough
indeed, so high as it is low now. You have forgot also the threatenings you
bestowed upon the Judges that opposed the Ship Money. You have forgot too the
sounding of the new Canons, and the ex Officio Oath etc. You have forgot that
you endeavored to pull down the French Church, which was erected for the
French Protestants that fled hither for succor: had they been Papists, their
Church might have stood long enough without your contradiction.


Cant. O gentle soul, I believe thou know all my faults, which are far
more than those thou have put me in mind of: Let me entreat thee therefore, to
leave me, that I may repair to my devotion, and crave pardon from heaven for
these and all the rest of my misdoings, and study to give the wronged world
what satisfaction possible I may: wrack not my wounded conscience with the
remembrance of my horrid acts; if any pity harbor within thee (wronged
Spirit) let me be its object: I crave for pity that before had none.


Benst. O my little good Lord, had you been composed of mercy and justice, you
would have mingled one with the other, and not let justice take place,
becoming so severe and cruel to prosecute the Law against me, as to send for
the Judges, and to compel them by menacing words at your house, to make it
treason, when neither Act nor President could be found for the like; you might
have censured me to have lost my ears, or have branded me in the forehead and
cheeks, and so have banished me: but to take my life, and thus to mangle me,
and let my blood be spilt upon the thirsty ground, which was as thirsty as your
obdurate heart: but look which way you please, go which way you can, I am
still in your sight, hers an arm and a leg Westward, there an arm and a leg
Eastward; this is inhumanity, and especially from you, and one of your Coat and
function: the Law it self has provided mercy for some relinquents; and you to
have no compassion, which should plead for mercy! But it is noted, you never
spared any, but prosecuted them to the height of your malice as you have done
me poor man.


Cant. I confess, it was my only act, and by my instigation; but I would thou
had been executed in any other place, than at that which is my way to my
Country Palace at Croydon.


Benst. But why was I quartered, and thus in peece-meale set up at each gate,
for birds and other ravenous souls to be made a prey unto, and to endure now a
pluck, and th^^ a tug from the hunglie Crows as they fly woodcut scene of a
man cutting open a woman and removing her heart with a dismembered body hanging
on the city walls surrounding him over me, to make me still cry out, O cruel
Canterbury, remember I was a Christian, and so dyed a penitent Christian. Was
my fact so heinous that nothing could pacify your rage, that when my life was
expired, my torn and slaughtered carcass must be hung between heaven and
earth, as not worthy of either: I spilt no blood in the mutiny, (as I have
said) but I have read that Churchmen, and women, are still most bloody minded,
as the Martyrs are monuments of the cruelty of bloody Bonner, and malicious
Gardner; and now you cruel Laud and spightfull Wren, to each of you, and those
Judges of the Law which judged me, I have given my quarters for a memorial.


Cant. Enough, all is true thou have said concerning them; but for thy
particular, I was informed that thou were a Prentise of London, and sent with
diverse others by your Masters to pull down my Palace, because I confess, I
was ever an enemy to the Citizens and City for diverse reasons, and therefore
did command this justice to be done, for others to take example by.


Benst. Alas, I was a young man, and but nineteen years of age, and not of
ripe years, but as full of sorrow for your cruelty; for had you suffered my
body to have been buried, I might have been forgotten in a short space, but to
set my dismembered joints upon the gates of this stately City for every one to
gaze on, savourd not of that Christianity which you seemed to profess,
unless it were of that superstitious Religion, that practices only blood, and
builds them Altars with the bones of Martyrs.


Cant. O speak no more, thou have penetrated my proud heart, and mollified my
seared conscience: what would I not give to redeem thy life, if it were
possible?


Benst. Your wishes come to late; but let me thus advise you, procure by some
means, that my parched limbs may be taken down, that those friends, kindred,
and country men, nay my poor father, and mother, may not forsake their
concourse to London about their livelihood, and trade; for sometimes I am
forgotten by them, when other matters of greater consequence is in their heads:
but when they come near London bridge, then is their grief renewed with
anxietie of mind, ready to strike them dead when they see my head, as if I were
set up on purpose to cross and perplexe them, or to examine their private
businesses, or wherefore they come, this is a double suffering; nay my Lord, be
not much affrighted, nor do not shake and shiver too much: let not your
Gentlemen which lie here at your beds feet in a Trundle bed be disturbed by
your passion: but let me now admonish and tell you, that you must labor and
study with all your might, as ever you did to raise yourselfe to be a Bishop,
to repent for your sins, and not only so, but labor to give satisfaction for
the wrong you have done to several men: I could give you a catalogue of those
men's names which you have highly injured: but I will forbear, because I know you
cannot forget them, especially having so good a memory, and now no State
affairs to trouble your Grace withal: and so farewell, referring you not to
an High Commissioner, but to your own self, which if you do really perform,
you shall upon your submission be silent as a dead Duck, or an innocent Lamb.


Cant. Prithee leave me.


Benst. Well, I Will leave thee, and yet still be with thee; for assure thy self,
that when thou do appear before the Parliament, I will be also there, and be
a torment, not a comfort, to thy afflicted conscience: with the eyes of thy
imagination thou shall behold my severed limbs, and then Conceive what
trembling in thy joints shall dwell,
Blood is the reward of blood: Farewell.



A Discourse between the two Heads on London Bridge; the one being Bensteeds,
the other the late Jesuits.
Bensteed. WHO art thou, that dares come up without my consent, and stand thus
cheek by iole with me?


Jesuit. my name is Slater, Ward, Waller, and Walker, a Jesuit I was by my
profession, and have taken Orders in that Society these 35. years and
upwards, for which I was condemned, and am now come to be thy fellow watchman,
to overlook all.


Benst. And why so many names did thou bear?


Jesuit. The better to conceal my self, and all my plots and intentions.


Benst. Thou have now as many quarters as before thou had names: but what
plots had thou in thy head, when it was on thy shoulders?


Ies. I may now reveal them which are past, because I can invent no more: and
the rather because I had a pardon from the Pope before I was executed: we had
many agents about the late plot which was intended against the City of London,
and the Tower, and those no mean ones: for had our plots tooks effect, I had
been advanced to a more eminent place with my head on my shoulders, than now I
am without it, had I been wife, and not too confident of my self and my
disguise, I might have fled, and bin as safe as the rest of the Conspirators.


Benst. I perceive your fact was more heinous than mine, and therefore may
justly claim place here better than I.


Jesuit. Not better Mr. Bensteed, for you are the ancientest stander of the
two, and therefore may claim pre-eminence.


Benst. Your conspiracy was against the state of our whole Kingdom, to ruin
that: mine was only against a particular man, the Bishop of Canterbury, a
Subject; yours of a higher consequence, and for which you suffer justly.


Jesuit. That Is true; but had he that power still as he had when thou were
condemned, I should not have thus suffered. But I am weary with my late
journey, and have got a scu^fing in my head, so that I am now ill at ease to
relate the rest of my plots at this time; which I will forbear till our next
nights conference.


FINIS.

