THE CASE OF PROTESTANTS IN ENGLAND UNDER A Popish Prince, If any shall happen
to Wear the IMPERIAL CROWN.

LONDON:Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Alleyin Paternoster Row,
1681.

The CASE of PROTESTANTS in England, etc.
A PRINCE putting Himself and his Dominions under the Popes Authority, and
admitting (as he must unavoidably) the Laws and Decrees of the Romish Church;
all his Protestant Subjects, being by the Judgment and sentence of that Church
Heretics, do forthwith lie under the penalties which those Laws and
Constitutions will have inflicted upon Heretics. And these are the severest
penalties, being proportioned to the crime which that Church judges most
heinous; for Heresy is Treason with them, and the highest degree of High
Treason, for it is (say they) Crimen laesae Majestatis divinae, Treason against
the Divine Majesty, and so, much worse than Treason against any Prince on
earth; and upon this ground they commonly justify all severities decreed
against Heretics. Not to mention particular Doctors, Innocent Caput,
Vergentis, de Hareticu.
the Third thus argues in a special instance, This punishment is justly
inflicted upon Heretics, because it is so in case of civil Treason, which is a
smaller fault than Treason against the Divine Majesty. And By the Law of their
Church, Sic omnes Apostolicae sedis sanctiones accipiendae sunt tanquam ipsius
divini Petri voce sirmatae sint, Distinct. 19. Cap. 2. All the Constitutions of
the Roman See must be received, as if they were made firm by St. Peter's own
mouth. And it is enacted by a general Doeree (Generali Decreto constitutmus),
That whatsoever King, Bishop, or Nobleman, shall believe that the Decrees of
the Roman Bishops may be, or shall suffer them to be violated in any thing, be
accursed, (execrandum Anathema fit) and shall for ever remain guilty before
God, as a betrayer of the Catholic Faith. Gans, 25. q. 1. cap. 11.
there is an Edict of 7 Decretal. Lib. 5. Tit. 3. de Hareticis.
Frederick confirmed and made a Church-Constitution by several Popes,
particularly by Innocent 4th, wherein what is enacted against Traitors, is
declared to fall upon Heretics multo fortius justinsque, with much more force
and justice. So that the Papal authority being introduced among Protestants,
they are forthwith Traitors by law, and stand in no better terms, than the
worst of Traitors, and are exposed to the penalties which the highest Treason
is judged worthy of. Let me instance in two or three particulars briefly; for I
must but point at the miseries of Protestants in such a state, not give a full
prospect of them.

Infamy is one of them (that I may begin with the least). Heretics are
infamous by Law Caput Infames 6. q. 1. cap. alieni. 2. q. 7. Cap.
Excommunicamus 1. Sect. credentes. de Haereticis. Cap. Statum de baret. in 6.
It is certain (says De Fide. Disp. 21. Sect. 5. N. 3.
Suarez) that Heretics both by common and civil Law are infamous, for which he
alleged several Texts of the Popes Law, and extends it to the favorers of
Heretics, if they repent not within a year; and to their Children for some
generations, if their Parents dyed pertinacious.

It is many penalties in one, including several things grievous and intolerable
to all sorts Suarez ibid. Diana. Sum. v. baeret. n. 9. Pet. St. Joseph in 1.
Deca^^ p. 39. Tho. Sanchez. op. Moral. Lib. 2. n. 12.
; for upon this account, those whom they count Heretics, are deprived of all
Nobility, Jurisdiction, and Dignity; and debarred from all Offices, Benefices,
and public Councils; they are incapable of choosing, or of being chosen to
them, (so that it reaches all sorts), Clergy, Laity, Noble and Ignoble, (as
the same Author tells us). And they fall under all this immediately, ipso
facto, as soon as they are Heretics, before any sentence Declaratory of their
crime; so in a manner all the Suarez. ibid. Number. (...)
Doctors conclude, In quo Authors fere convenient, proving it from the very
words of the Law aforementioned.

Let me mention some of the particulars comprised in this Legal Insamy:
Protestants are hereby excluded from all public Councils, and so from
Parliaments; being incapable of either choosing, or being chosen thereto. This
is the Decree of a General Con. Lateran. sub Innocent. 3. in crab. Tom. 2.
Council. p. 948.
Council, besides several Constitutions for it in the Canon Law. So that all
the Lords and Commons in England would be by Law (while they are Protestants)
debarred from having any place in Parliament; and all the Freeholders from
choosing any; and that by a Law paramount to any Civil Law, or National
Constitution: and this alone would be enough to ruin and enslave this, or any
people whose Liberty depends upon Parliaments. They are excluded from all
Dignities, this is Essential to the penalty; for it is a Regul. Juris 87. in 6.
Rule in their Law, Infamibus Portae non pateant dignitati; particularly
Noblemen are degraded from their Nobility, and deprived of all Honors De
haereticis cap. ut Commiss. in 6.
, this by the same Law: and it is extended to their Children by many of their
Faber Teraquillus, Cantera, Otalora in Sanchez. ibid. l. 2. c. 29. n. 1.
Authors, who say expressly, that the Issue of Traitors, Civil or Spiritual,
lose their Nobility, both that which they had by Privilege, and that which
comes by descent from their Ancestors.

They are deprived not only of all Ecclesiastical Benefices, but of all Secular
Offices, which is expressed in the Law forequoted; Particularly it is decreed
Cap. 2. Sect. Haeretic. de baereticis in 6.
that Heretics be not admitted into any public Office, or Benefice; but if
they be, it is null and void. Nor can they exercise any Jurisdiction, either
Spiritual or Civil, as their Aquinas, Soto, Castor, Azor, Simanca, and Suarez,
ibid. Disp 21. sect. 5. number. 12. By the Constitution of Gregory 9, an Heretic
is deprived of all Jurisdiction, whether Natural, Civil, or Politic. Simanca
Instit. tit. 46. sect. 74. Juxta Constitutiones Gregorii 9, etc.
Authors commonly determine: and upon this account they conclude all our
Judges, Justices and Magistrates, that are Protestants, to be incompetent, such
as have no more Jurisdiction than the Bench they sit on, and think not
themselves at all obliged to answer them; or if they condescend to give them an
answer, yet not to speak the truth before them, although they be sworn to it.

In short, all that owe any duty to Heretics are discharged from the
obligation, and exempted from paying any. In their Canon Law it is decreed Cap.
Final. de Haretecis.
that all who are bound to Heretics by any obligation, whether of Oath, or
Fealty, or Service, or any other Agreement, or promise, are freed there from.
Subjects owe no Allegiance to their Prince, nay they may lawfully kill them, as
their Authors commonly conclude. Servants owe Masters no Faithfulness, no
service; though they be slaves, and purchased with their money, yet they are
discharged; and if they discover their Master's Heresy, and so seek to take
away his life, though they be not Christians, it is reason (they hold) that they
have absolute freedom when none but Christian slaves may have it, save upon
such a treacherous Azon. Instit. Moral. Tom. 1. l. 8. c. 12. q 7. Penna, Molina
and Sanchez. Ibid c 24. m, 10. 11.
account. Parents lose authority over their Children, so their Law Cap. 2. sed.
final. de Haereticis in 6.
will have it: and Children owe no duty to such Parents, only they are bound
under mortal sin to denounce them, that is, to discover their Heresy; which is
the way to deprive their Parents of their lives. And they give this reason for
it, because it is lawful for a Child to kill his Father, if he be an enemy to
the Commonwealth; and therefore he may much more lawfully in this case deal
thus with his Father, that is, betray him to death. This is an act worthy of
honor and praise, as is proved by the Constitutions of several Popes, and so
many other Bonacina de obligatione denunciandi, Disp, 4. p. 2. n. 3. It a
Farinacius, Azorius and alii fere communiter. Idex aliis Sum. Pontisicum
Constitutionibus probat Penna. Ibid.
Writers, that it may pass for their common Doctrine; nor can they be secured
from suffering for their Parents Heresy, without detecting them, as 7 Decret.
de heretic. c. 3.
Innocent 4th decrees.

We see a little to what condition the admission of the Papal authority would
reduce us; it would expel nature and humanity, and make the dearest Relatives
unnatural and barbarous to one another; it would leave no Protestant either
Dignity or Authority, either Safety or Liberty; by these Law (which must then
be ours) our Nobles are sentenced to be Peasants, and Peasants must be no
better than slaves.

Secondly, Another penalty to which Heretics are condemned by their Laws, is
Confiscation of all their Estates or Goods. And this they incur, Ipso jure, and
ipso facto, that is immediately, as soon as they show themselves Heretics,
before the sentence of any Judge. There is an express Decree Cap. Cum secundum
leges, de har^ticis in 6.
for this in the Canon Law, Bona Haereticorum ipso jure decernimus confiscata,
We decree that the Goods of Heretics are confiscated by sentence of Law. In
this the Gloss, and all the Doctors who write of Suarez. Ibid. Disp. 22. Sed.
1. N. 2.
Heretics do agree; and upon this reason among others, because Humane Laws
punish Treason against men, and sometimes lesser crimes, with confiscation of
Goods; therefore much more must Treason against the Divine Majesty, which is
committed by Heresy, be thus punished. And this reason is assigned not only in
the Text of the Canon Law now mentioned, but also in other Texts, particularly
Innocent Cap. Vergentes, verse. cum enim. de Haercticis. Cum long sit gravius,
aeternum quam temporalem laedere Majestatem.
the Third thereby proves, that Heretics Goods are confiscated, because this
is decreed against Civil Treason, which is much less than that against the
Divine Majesty.

By virtue of this Confiscation, Heretics, as soon as ever they discover it,
are deprived of all Propriety and Title to their Estates, before any sentence
passed against them. Suarez Ibid. sect. 3. n. 1.
says, This is the Common Doctrine. Sanchez Ibid. cap. 22. n. 2.
musters up multitudes of Doctors for it: and Quast. Theol. lib. 1. q. 36. p.
290.
Corduba tells us, that all their Doctors in a manner, both Canonists and
Divines maintain it.

But though they generally agree that Protestants by Law have lost all
propriety, and have no title at all to any estate; yet there is some difference
among them about the possession of what is thus confiscated. For many of them
hold, that Heretics before any Sentence, are bound in Conscience to quit the
possession of all they have, and sin damnably if they do not; especially if
their heresy be public and notorious, as it is in all professed Protestants:
and their reasons are good enough, if the principles upon which they proceed
were so. For the Sentence which some count pre-requisite, is not pretended to
be damnatory, to condemn to the punishment, for that is already done by Law;
but only (as all agree) declarative of the crime, that the crime may be
evident, and who are guilty of it; which is needless when it is evident and
notorious before.

Others of them teach that Heretics may keep possession, and are ^ot to be
deprived of it, before the sentence declarative of the crime. But though this
latter seem more favorable, yet it is of little or no advantage to
Protestants, since those that have a mind to their forfeited estates, may soon
procure such a Sentence; for an ordinary Bishop, or other Ecclesiastical person
may pass it, as the Law it De Haereticis. Cap. cum secundum Legis. in 6.
self declares. For example: Corker the Benedictine, lately arraigned, was
ordered by the Pope to be Bishop of London; if their Plot had so far succeeded,
that the Popes Orders had taken place, he might in his Spiritual Court have
declared all the known Protestants in London, and his whole Diocese to be
Heretics; which done, all the Nobles, Citizens and others in his Diocese,
might have been turned immediately out of possession, and stripped of all they
had; and this by Law. The effects of this Confiscation, wherein they all agree,
make the severity of the Law apparent; and the forbearance of seizure before
sentence of little consideration, if they thought themselves obliged not to
seize such Estates before.

First, All the profits made of the Estate from the first day of their guilt
are to be refunded, if they be extant and found among their Suarez, De Fide.
Disp. 22. sect. 4 n. 11. Sanchez ubi supra, c. 21. n. ult.
Goods, Formally, or but so much as equivalently; nay, some Simancha, Vasquez
in Suarez, Ibid. n 11, 12.
will have them responsible for the mean profits, though they be consumed or
spent, if so be they knew themselves to be obnoxious, when they spent them: or
being spent, if the Estate be any thing better on that account, they are still
looked on as being extant, and the estate still liable: and it is counted
better, if the party be Idem ibid. sect. 4. n. 9.
Richer, If he therewith bought any thing else, or made use thereof to pay his
Debts, or bought but necessaries to live on, and thereby spared his other
Revenues.

Secondly, All Alienations by Gift, Sale, or otherwise, before Sentence, are
null and void; and all Contracts for that purpose rescinded; in this, Suarez
says, all their Writers agree Ibid. sect. 1. number. 5. In hoc offectu concors
est sententia omnium scribentium.
unanimously; and the Exchequer of the Pope or Popish Prince will recover all
that has been so disposed of by the Heretics to others where ever they be, or
in whole possession soever they be found, or through how many hands soever they
have passed; this is the Doctrine Universally embraced by all their Doctors of
Law, and all their Divines, so understanding the Text of their Law, as Ibid.
Lib. 22. Number. 33.
Sanchez tells us. Nay it is a sin Idem. ibid. n. 61.
for him to fell any part of his Goods or Estate, without discovering to the
Purchaser his hazard, in buying what is by Law confiscated. And in this case
the Purchase will be forced from him without restoring the price he paid for
it, unless it be found among the Heretics Goods, for which the same Jesuit
alleges above Thirty Ibid. n. 68.
Doctors. Nor are those to whom the Estate is Escheated any way obliged, to pay
any of the Heretics Debts Ibid. n. 76.
, which were contracted since his Heresy, and so his Creditors (not excepting
Roman Catholics) may be lawfully ruined, as well as himself.

Thirdly, The Children and Heirs of Heretics are deprived of their Portions.
And though this seem hard in their own apprehensions, that they should be
ruined and reduced to poverty for their Parents fault; yet what they suffer is
not to be considered, because the Child is not here punished by or in himself,
but by accident, and in another. And this is all the satisfaction the best of
them give in this pitiful case, Suarez ibid. Nor will their Law admit that any
Commiseration of the Innocent should be any impediment to the severity of the
Execution; but provides against it in these words, Neither shall this severe
Censure, for the disinheriting of Orthodox Children be any way hindered, by the
pretense of compassion; since in many cases by Divine Judgment, the Children
are temporally punished for their Fathers; and according to Canonical
Sanctions, vengeance may be sometimes taken, not only upon the Authors of
wickedness, but their posterity, Cap. vergentis, Tit. de Haereticis.

But what if the Children to whom the Estate is left, be Roman Catholics, are
they to be thrust from an Estate left them by their Heretical Parents? This
seems impolitick, since hereby no hopes are left to any for securing their
Estates by turning Papists; and not only so, but they confess it seems to be
against Piety, and in the 4 th Synod of Toledo there is a limitation for the
security of such Innocents; but by the Canon Law in aftertimes that Limitation
was exploded, and the Catholic Descendents of Heretics excluded from having
any advantage Cap. Vergentis. de Haereticis.
by their confiscated Estates. This is expressed in the Text of their Law, and
more fully in an Original Epistle of Pope Innocent the Third. Suarez. ibid.
page 775.

But suppose the Posterity of a Protestant or his Children, being still
Papists, have continued in the possession of the Estates so left them for many
years together (Forty or an hundred years), will not this create them a title?
since Prescription may do it where there is no other right, and is allowed so
to do both by Civil and Canon Law; and an hundred years is confessed to be
sufficient for Prescription Menochius and alii in Diana. Sum. V. Praescrip. N.
2.
against the Roman Church in other cases?

No, an hundred years will not suffice in this case, if the Possessors, or
their Fathers knew that he who left them the Estate was an Heretic, and if he
was at any time suspected to be so while he lived; or if he was reputed a
Catholic all his days; yet if any time within 40 years after his decease, it
appears he was an Heretic, there is no place left for Prescription: but then
they will have the Estate seized, in whose hands soever it be sound, and the
Sanchez. l. 2. c. 22. n. 41.
Possessors thrust out, though they be Roman Catholics.

Hereby it appears, that as soon as the Papacy is admitted, all Title and
Property is lost and extinct among us by the Law which will then be in force,
unless in those few Families who never had a Protestant Proprietor; nor are
they secure as to any part of their estate, which ever belonged to Heretics:
And therefore we must not think his Holiness acted extravagantly, when he
declared all his Majesty's Territories to be his own as forfeited to the Holy
See for the Heresy of Prince and People: for herein he proceeded regularly,
and according to that which they esteem the best Law in the World. Not only
Abbey Lands are in danger, who ever possess them, but all Estates are forfeited
to his Exchequer, and legally confiscated: All is his own which Protestants in
these Three Nations have, or ever had, if he can but meet with a Prince so
wise, as to help him to catch it.

Thus we see the process of their Law against Protestants must not end with
their Lives, but follow them many years beyond Death and the Grave; and ruin
their Children, and Childrens Children, when they are gone: And when they have
left a Heretic nothing of his own to subsist on, it is provided also that he
shall have no Relief from others: for this is part of his Penalty Zanardus,
Director. pars 2. p. page 126.
that none shall receive him into their houses, nor afford him any help, nor
show him any favor, nor give him any counsel.

We in England are zealous for Property, and all the reason in the world we
should be; but we must bid adieu to this when we once come under the Popes
Authority; for as soon as this is admitted, all the Protestants in these
Nations are Beggars by Law, by the Laws of that Church (which will then be
ours), divesting us of all Propriety and Title to what ever we count our own.

Thirdly, The last Penalty I shall insist on, which their Law will have
inflicted on Heretics, is Death.

This is the Sentence of the Canon Law. Heretics Cap. ad abolendum. de
Haereticis. Vide Suarez ubi supra. Disp. 23. sect. 2. n. 1. and 3.
are to be delivered to the Secular Power to undergo due punishment, and that
is Death, as appear by many Papal Bulls approving and receiving the Civil Laws,
which have adjudged Heretics to death: For though those Laws were Originally
intended, against such only which were Heretics indeed: yet since the Roman
Church will have all Protestants to be Heretics, they must suffer Death by
virtue thereof, how far soever they be from Heresy.

And the Canon Law further determines, that Secular Judges cannot remit the
Penalty, as appears by the Text, Cap. ut Officium, and is more fully explained
in the Bull of Urban the 4th, and in another of Innocent 4th. Hereupon Direct.
pars 2da. page 754.
Zanardus takes it for granted, that all Laws will have every Heretic put to
Death; and their Angelical Doctor 2. 2dae. Q. 10. Art. 8 Corp.
is positive, that Heretics, though they do not pervert others, may be justly
killed by Secular Judges, and bereaved of all they have, rather than such as
are guilty of High Treason.

If there were need to cite particular Doctors, Suarez assures us, that it is
the judgment of all their Doctors, Ita docent omnes Doctores. But there is a
Constitution of Paul 7 Decretal. l. 5. tit. 3. cap. 9.
4th, which may serve instead of all; where to show how impartial their Decrees
are in this case, Having declared that with the unanimous consent of the
Cardinals, all Poenal Acts, Canons, Constitutions against Heretics, made by
any Popes, Councils, or others, are by Apostolical Authority renewed and
enforced; he specifies persons of greatest Eminency in Church and State, viz.
Earls, Barons, Marquesses, Dukes, Kings, Emperors, etc. and will have all these
punishment inflicted on them, if they are, or shall hereafter be Heretics.
Particularly it is decreed, that they are therefore deprived wholly and
perpetually of their Baronies, Marquesats, Dukedoms, Kingdoms, Empires, and
rendered incapable hereof, so as they shall never be restored. And to make sure
work, all of them, Kings and Emperors among the rest, shall be put to death
Saecularis relinquantur arbitrio potesatis, animadversione debita Puniendi.
Which expression they thus explain, Debita nimirum secundum jura Civilia quae
est paena mortis. So Suarez ibid. Disp. 23. Sect. 2. N. 3.
Only if they recant, the Holy See may show them this Clemency, as to thrust
them into some Monastery, there to do penance all their days with Bread and
Water.

This punishment they extend very far Idem ibid. Sect. 2. N. 5. 6.
for Death is to be insticted, not only on the Teachers of what they call
Heresy; but on all who belive any Doctrines opposite to what the Romanists
receive as matters of Faith, though they draw none else thereto; yea on all
that believe any one point of such Doctrine, though they reuounce all the rest;
For they agree, that one Error makes a Heretic, though all besides that one
be abjured. And on those also who abjure them all, if they do not likewise
discover their Accomplices; and so betray all the Protestants they know, to
Death. For such, though they do profess themselves to be Papists, and conform
to them in all things; yet if they discover not others, and expose them to
death, they are judged to be but Quia est occulator hareticorum -- and ideo
merito judicatur fiste co^^ersus. Ibid. Sect, 6.
counterfeit Catholics, and not worthy to live.

The Death they will have us suffer, is burning alive; no Death more tolerable,
or of less exquisite torture will satisfy the Mercy of that Church. For though
they find no Rule for this in the body of the Civil Law, yet they allege some
latter Constitutions for it, and particularly that of Frederick (which the
Popes have made their own Law) in these words De Hereticis. 7 Decretal. Sect.
inconsutilem.
Decernimus ut vivi in conspectu hominum comburantur, We Decree that they shall
be burned alive in the sight of the World. The Holy Canons it is presumed are
for it: The first Statute of Henry 4th in England, for the buring of Heretics,
was Enacted according to the Holy Canons. And if they had no other Law for it,
yet the Use and Custom of their Church has the sorce of a Law; and makes it as
lawful and necessary for them to burn I rotestants, as it is to burn Faggots
when they are cold; and that it is the custom of the Church, they have the
testimony of all Nations round about us. We need go no further than our Native
Country, where in the days of the last Popish Successor it is proved by near
300 Witnesses, that their Laws will have all sorts of us burnt alive, without
regard of Age, Sex, or Quality. And if we will not be satisfied that they may
lawfully burn us, Man, Woman and Child, unless we have Scripture for it, they
have it ready, John 15. 6. If any one abide not in me, men gather them, and
cast them into the Fire, and they are burned. Alleged by diverse of their prime
Jac. de Grass. decis. l. 2. cap. 9. n. 2. Suarez ubi supra. n. 4.
Authors for this purpose; which proves as plainly and infallibly that
Protestants must be burned, as -- Feed my sheep proves that the Pope has power
to kill both King and People. The Process against Heretics in the Inquisition
is remarkably merciful, for there a Protestant shall not have the favor to be
burnt at first Zanardus, Director. 2 da pars. page 755.
, and dye once; but must suffer many Deaths before, by enduring diverse tortures
more grievous than Death, before he be brought to the Fire. One that has the
spirit of a Christian, and reads the account of the Tortures there in use,
would scarce think that any but the Devils could be either the Inventors or
Executioners of them. But Pope Paul the 4th would better inform him, who
ascribes the settling of the Inquisition in Spain, to the inspiration of the
Holy Ghost; and there is no doubt but his Successors would attribute it to the
same inspiration, if they could get it settled in England. And they are highly
concerned to endeavor it, If they believe the Words of a dying Pope. For
Onufrius, Vita Pauli 4.
Paul the 4th in a Speech before his Death (and so before his Infallibility
expired) declared to the Cardinals, that the Authority of the Roman Church
depends only upon the Office of the Inquisition. And indeed it is very fit,
that such an Authority should have such a foundation. Nor can any question that
it is necessary and pious to exercise all the cruelties of the Inquisition upon
us, without shaking the whole foundation of the Roman Church, and all the
Authority of it.

Hereupon how are we concerned to look about us? We ought to remember (for they
are not like to forget it), that as soon as ever the Papal Authority is
admitted among us, all the Protestants in these Nations are dead men in Law;
being under a Law that has sentenced us already to be burned alive, and under
a power that has declared it necessary that no one of us escape with Life.

But they are not yet quite ready for burning us, though they are impatient
till they be so; and show what design they have upon our persons, by turning
our houses and Goods into flames. For this course they think not fit to take,
how just and pious soever they est^em it, merely because they cannot, or dare
not till they have the Law in their hands, and Power to Murder us by a judicial
Process. Where Protestants are numerous and potent, the way they then take for
discharging the obligation that is upon them to destroy us, is by treacherous
Massacres, or open Wars or Assassinations. They hold it lawful to make War upon
Heretics for their Heresy. So De restitut. Disp. 2. q. ult. sect. 2. n. 7.
Sum. V. Bellum. n. 5. Theol. Pract. Tr. 2. c. 13. n. 3.
Bonacina, Diana, Castro, Molanus, and others: but Cardinal Allen Admonition to
Nobility and People, p. 41.
our Countreyman may suffice, who asserts it to be not only lawful, but
necessary to take Arms against his Prince and People, being Heretics. It is
clear (says he) that what people and persons soever, be declared to be
opposite to Gods Church, with what obligation soever, either of Kindred,
Friendship, Loyalty, or Subjection, I be bound unto them; I may or rather must
take Arms against them. And then must we take them for far Heretics, when our
lawful Popes adjudge them so to be.

Not only Sovereign Princes and the Pope, but a Bishop may raise War for the
Faith, against those that are Excommunicate, if they submit not: So Hostiensis,
and others Vid. Silvest. V. Bellum.
after him. They count it a more necessary and holy War which is levied for the
destroying of Heretics, than the War against the Turks. Hence Cardinal Lib. de
unione Ecclesiastica ad sinem. And this was he who made it his business in so
many Courts to form a League against England (having renounced the Popes
Supremacy); persuading the Popish Princes, that it was more necessary and
meritorious than a War against the Turks.
Pool in his Address to Charles the Fifth, importunes him to turn his Arms
against the Protestants, being more concerned to ruin them than the Turks.

They think the destroying of Protestants by Massacres, sometimes more
advisable, for avoiding the hazards of a War; and these how bloody and
treacherous soever, will be both lawful and meritorious, being for the rooting
out of a pestilent Heresy, and the promoting of the Roman Interest. The
barbarous Irish never thought their hands and weapons better employed than in
butchering the Protestants: And this not more from the savageness of their
nature, than from the Laws and Doctrine wherein they have so much encouragement
for such bloodiness. The least they could expect for it, was full pardon of all
sin, such as is promised to those who make War against the Turks, and for the
recovery of the Holy Land. For several Popes had thus rewarded the Irish, for
less bloody Feats than these; and thereby testified how meritorious it is, to
shed the blood of English Protestants See the Brieves of Greg. 13. Anno 1580.
and Clement 8. 1600,
. Charles the Ninth, with the French Papists, never acted any thing with more
satisfaction to his Holiness, than that Tragedy in Paris, and other Cities,
where so many Thousand Hugonots were most treacherously and inhumanely
slaughtered. The Pope would not have so great delight as he took therein to be
transient, but that it might afford him a continued entertainment, would have
it Painted in his Palace. And for this, Triumphs were made by the Papists
almost every where, as a most glorious Action. And that there might be a
concurrence of the greatest impiety, with the greatest inhumanity, public
thanks must be returned to God, in France and Italy, for the Stabbing Drowning,
Pistolling, and Cutting the Throats of so many Thousands; enticed thither by
the Solemnity of a Marriage, with all the Security that the Promise and Oath of
a King could give them: But nothing is unlawful that will ruin the Protestant
Religion.

Only in one thing these fell short; for though near Three hundred thousand
were thus Murdered in both Nations, yet they killed not all; whereas if they
had not suffered one Protestant in France or Ireland to escape with life, the
Catholic design had been there perfectly accomplished, and the bloody Actors
had more highly merited; for that merits most, which most promotes the
Catholic Interest, which is most promoted when Heresy and Heretics are quite
extirpated; and so to kill all Heretics, is most meritorious.

This was it that our Conspirators aimed at, they intended to leave no
Protestants alive; those that escaped the Massacre, should have been cut off by
their Army Dugdales Deposition at the Trial of the Five Jesuits, p. 25.
And Coleman says, Their design prospered so well, that he doubted not but in
a little time, their business would be managed to the utter ruin of the
Protestant party, in his Letter In Colemans Trial, p. 78.
to the Internuncio. The effecting of this, with the consequence of it, was a
thing so desirable, so meritorious, That if he had a Sea Ibid. page 43 77.
of Blood, and a hundred Lives, he would lose them all to carry on the design;
and if to effect this, it were necessary to destroy an Hunderd Heretical Kings,
he would do it. We must not imagine that it was a sin, with this man, to
destroy an Hundred Kings, and an Hundred Kingdoms too, in such a Cause; a
Cause, no doubt, most glorious, and of transcendent Merit in their account;
when one man might without profuseness, be at the expense of an hundred lives,
and a Sea of blood, to promone it. It is true by his expressions, he seems to
be in some transport, and no wonder when he had so fair a Prospect of the utter
ruin of Protestants by their present bloody design; and speaks of their ruin
as a thing certain, and not to be doubted of. Sure this was a sight so fair, so
transporting, as must needs ravish a good Roman Catholic out of his Senses.
But then how senseless must they be, who will not believe our utter ruin was
designed, when such as best knew it, make no doubt, but it would in a little
time, be certainly effected? However we cannot think that they who make so
little of killing an Hundred Kings, when they stand in the way of their
Catholic design, will stick at Assassinating any particular Subjects.

When we hear Papists say (as diverse such sayings have been of late observed)
that they would make no more to kill a Protestant Man, or Child, than to kill a
Dog Bradshaw in Prances Narrative, page 23. Giffard in Hist. Plot. page 213.
We look upon them as wild expressions, which proceed rather from the
wickedness of the persons than of their Principles; whereas indeed they have
ground enough from the Writings of their chief Authors. One of their greatest
Divines proving that they may justly kill us, being Heretics, makes use of
this Argument among others, Christ calls Heretics Thieves and Robbers; but
sure Thieves and Robbers are worthy of Death; also he calls them Ravenous
Wolves, Matthew. 7. Luke. 20 But Wolves are not only to be driven from the Flock,
but also to be killed, if it be possible. So Suarez De Fide. Disp. 23. se^l. 1.
n. 3. Zanard. Ibid. cap. 7. page 119.
argues, and his Argument seems less toletarable, than the other Villainous
expression, for it seems more meritorious to kill a Wolf than a Dog. Cardinal
Epil. contra Venetas.
Baronius tells the Pope (though his Holiness might know so evident a truth
before) that Peter had a double Ministry, to feed, and to kill; according to
that Text, Feed my sheep: and according to that too, Kill and eat: For, says
he, when the Pope has to do with refractory opposers, then Peter is commanded
to kill, and slay, and devour. Much according to this Cardinals Doctrine is the
saying of Singlcton Prances Narrative, page 4.
the Priest, That he would make no more to Stah Forty Parliament men, than to
eat his Dinner. And who can discern b^t the Priest; expression is as agreeable
to the Cardinals Comment, as that is to his Text? Girald and Kelly, the two
Priest; that were chief in the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, that they
might draw Mr. Prance into that barbarous action, told him, Ibid page 10.
That it was no Murder, no Sin (and Girald said, Nothing was to be made of
killing Twenty Heretics in such a case,) that it was an act of Charity, and a
meritorious work. We may easily conceive, how they will have it to be an Act of
Justice; for they are taught, that the Killing of Heretics Justa est quia
Vindicativa; and so withal, how it may be meritorious; every act of virtue
being so, by their Doctrine: but how it can be an act of Charity, is not so
easy to discern. We shall hardly be persuaded, that to kill us, is an act of
Charity; but if they will have it so, so it must be. And then who can deny but
that Papists are the most Charitable Persons under the Cope of Heaven, since
they will not stick to murder Millions of Protestants (all in these Nations)
out of mere Catholic Charity? What need they more to stop the mouths of any,
that will dare hereafter to accuse their Church as uncharitable? They may have
Two Hundred Thousand Arguments from one Topic, the Massacre in Ireland, to
prove that none ever out of Hell, were more emiuent for this virtue, no not the
Assassins themselves.

The Gunpowder-Traytors were as much for the meritoriousness of Murdering
Heretics. John Grant one of the Principal Conspirators, the day he was
executed, being advised by a Grave and Learned Person, to repent of that wicked
enterprise; He answered, That he was so far from counting it a sin; that on the
contrary he was confident, that Noble design had so much of Merit in it, as
would be abundantly enough to make satisfaction for all the Sins of his whole
life, as Epist. Fron. duc. page 189.
Casaubon assures from good evidence.

O the dreadful power of the Spirit of Delusion, which can persuade a man even
when he is dying, that the most horrid and barbarous design that ever the
Devils helped any of their Instrumants to contrive, is so transcendently both
meritorious and satisfactory! yet this is not a private spirit, but that by
which the Roman Church seems generally inspired. This was but a more
compendious way, of executing the Laws of their Church against Protestants. And
Roman Catholics are left to devise what expedient they can, for the execution
of them; when they are not in a capacity of proceeding the ordinary way, by
burning us. And that Invention will have most of Merit, which is most quick and
extensive, and makes an end of most at once. The Society is particularly under
the Conduct of that Spirit; for the Provincial Garnet, Tesmond, Gerard, and
other Jesuits did teach the Conspirators this Catholic Doctrine Gunpowder.
Treason. page 74.
That the King, Nobility, Clergy and whole Commonalty of the Realm of England
(Papists excepted) were Heretics, and that all Heretics were accursed and
excommunicate, and that no Heretic could be a King; but that it was lawful and
meritorious to kill the King, and all other Heretics within this Realm of
England; for the Advancing and enlargement of the Authority and Jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Rome, and for the restoring of the Romish Religion. What? Is it
meritorious to kill all in the Realm? Yes, the more the better, the greater the
sacrifice, the greater will the value and merit of it be: They will prove it
unanswerably by an Argument from the less to the greater. If it be meritorious
to kill one Heretic, it will be as much more meritorious to kill all in a
Kingdom; as all in a whole Kingdom are more than one single person.

Thus the greater any wickedness is, the more powerful Motive their Church has
for its encouragement; The more prodigiously bloody and inhumane it is, the
more will the Catholic Merit of it advance. And the Ground of this is
observable, they will have it meritorious to Murder this whole Nation, King and
People, because they were Heretics, and all Heretics are accursed and
excommunicated. Now King James and the People of these Kingdoms were not at
this time excommunicate expressly, nor so denounced, nor any such sentence
against them published, as the Jesuits acknowledged; only they were included in
the general Excommunication, which is denounced by the Pope against all
Heretics every year the week before Easter. So that all who are in their
account Heretics, but one year, or but one day before M^undy Thursday, are
sufficiently accursed and excommunicated, to make them liable to be justly
killed; and to render any Papist capable of meriting, by doing execution upon
them. All the Protestants in these Nations may be meritoriously slaughtered, as
soon as ever the Papists have opportunity to do it, without expecting a warrant
from any other sentence, or Excommunication, than what we are continually
under. This was the Doctrine of our English Jesuits, of Garnet their Superior
particularly, whom the Papists here honored as a Pope, and paid him the
veneration due to his Holiness, by kissing his feet, and reverenced his
Judgment as an Oracle; and since his Death he has the Honors of a Martyr. And
if he and his Associates be counted Martyrs, for but designing to destroy the
Protestants of these Realms, though they miscarried; what would their
Successors be thought worthy of, if they could attempt it successfully, and do
effectual Execution? Garnet further declared it to be his Judgment, that it was
so necessary to have Protestants destroyed; that it would be meritorious to
attempt it, even in such a way, as would ruin many Catholics with them.
Catesby (with respect to the Powder Plot, whereby many Roman Catholics, and
some of considerable quality, were like to be blown up together with the
Protestants) inquires of their Oracle, ^^^^^bon Ibid. p. 184.
Whether it was lawful to ruin the guilty and the innocent together? Garnet
first Answers in a private House, that it is lawful, if so much advantage can
be gained by it, as will countervail the destruction of the Innocent.
Afterward he tells them in the Fields, That they may lawfully extinguish the
good and bad together, and that it would be an act of great Merit, if it would
much promote the Catholic Interest. Upon this account we see how it might be
meritorious to burn London, though the Houses and Goods of many Papists were
consumed in the Flames; yea, and how the most desperate Villains amongst them
might merit Heaven, and expiate all the Crimes of a most flagitious life, if he
could but fire the whole Kingdom: provided so many Protestants were thereby
ruined, as would countervail the loss of such Catholics, who could not escape
the common Flames.

Whereby we see their Principles and Actings, both of them are grounded upon
their Church-Laws, Sentencing Heretics to death and ruin. The executing of
these Laws is the exercise of a principal virtue, an Act of Justice, and is
upon this and other accounts esteemed meritorious. Execution must be done one
way or other in order to it; they must and will do, what our present
Circumstances leave feasible. They cannot now in a Bishops Court try and
condemn us, and then deliver us to the Secular Power to be burnt at a Stake;
but they can Stab, or Pistol, or Poison us, or Blow us up; and these are Acts
of Justice upon Malefactors, which their Laws condemn to Death, no less
virtuous and meritorious than the other; perhaps Heroical in their account, as
being of more then an ordinary strain. It is true, they want some formalities
of Law, yet are never the worse for the want of that, which they cannot
possibly have. But men once they have secured the Throne, we may expect they
will proceed against us with more observance of a Judicial Process, and burn us
and our Children with all Punctilio's of Law, as they did under the last Popish
Successor.

But it is not probable that under such a Successor these Laws may not be
executed.

If there were any probability, that for a while they might not be thoroughly
executed, yet our condition in the interim would scarce be tolerable to an
Englishman; to be divested of all security by Law, for Liberty, Estate and
Life; and to hold these without, nay against Law, only at the will and known
mercy of Papists; even when they must count it a cruelty to themselves to spare
us, seeing both their Salvation and (which seems generally more minded) their
Interest is concerned in the Execution of these Laws. It seems highly probable
to me that all endeavors will be used to have them fully executed; for the
design of these Laws is to destroy Protestants. And those Romanists that
understand their concerns, do make account, that their main interest lies in
this; For neither can they recover their former flourish and greatness, nor can
they indeed think themselves safe, till this be done,

Accordingly we may observe, that in all Countries round about us, who have
been under Popish Princes, all attempts have been made, and their utmost
endeavors used utterly to root out Protestants. And it is mere folly to expect
that we should fare better in like circumstances. Even in France the only
instance alleged, to give any hopes that Protestants may subsist under such a
Power, The design of these Laws was vigorously pursued, in all methods of
pretended Justice, and plain Violence, in the Reigns of Five Kings
successively; by Confiscations and Plunderings, by Fire and Sword, by
Assassinations, Treacherous Massacres, and open War. So that some Hundred
Thousands of them were destroyed, and in all reason none of them had escaped,
nor any more Hugonots had been left in France, than there are in Spain and
Italy; if they had not stood upon their Defense, which yet proved a lamentable
expedient; for if we will believe Father Parsons Mitigati^^, page 130.
two Millions on both sides were slain within the compass of Ten years in the
Reign of one of those Five Kings.

Those who would have us reduced to such a condition, wherein we cannot
otherwise be secured than the French Protestants were, would either have us
prostitute our Religion, and all that is dear to us to the will of the Papists,
or else expose the Nation to desolation and ruin.

Our Conspirators have declared that they had the very same design which those
Gracious Laws engage them in, viz. the utter extirpation of Protestants and
their Religion, and were resolved and prepared to pursue it with Fire and
Sword. Of the former they have given us a real Demonstration by the Flames we
have already seen; and of the latter by their Army to be Commanded by Officers
of the Popes appointment. They were to begin with Assassinations, and our
Sovereign was to fall with the first. In this all that have given any Evidence,
exactly agree, and all see, but those that will be blind, and would have His
Majesty for company perish with his eyes shut. When they had dispatched the
King, a Massacre was to follow, as is positively Sworn again and again by
unexceptionable (...) of the Five Jesuits, page 25.
Witness, and this signified to be the method advised, by the Conspirators both
in France, Flanders, and England; then to make clear work, those Protestants
that escaped the Massacre, were to be destroyed by their Army. Coleman at his
Trial would have us believe, that nothing was intended but the advance of
Popery, by the Innocent way of Toleration; that is no wonder, for he was then
concerned, if ever, to disguise their Design. But when he has to do with those
who were conscious to the Plot, and with pleasure could see the bottom of it;
then the Mask is off, then it is in plain terms the subduing of a Pestilent
Heresy (for so is the true Christian Religion in the Roman Style nowadays)
and the utter ruin of the Protestant party. To accomplish such a glorious
design, there must be no sticking (as was observed before) to kill an Hundred
Heretical Kings, (Alas! one single King was nothing to the Dagger of such a
Hero) or to shed a Sea of Blood (their own he means.) How many Seas of
Protestant Blood do we think might have satisfied such harmless Catholics? not
an hundred we may be sure, if all the Protestants in the World could have bled
more. But this they were bound in Conscience to execute the Popes Laws, they
were at all points ready to do it, they wanted nothing but only a Catholic
Prince in the Throne.

O but the Temper, or at least the Interest of such a Prince would oblige him
to forbid or restrain such violent executions in England.

I, but what if his tempter be such as to comply with such violent proceedings;
or his temper being better, what if it be overruled? What if he be persuaded as
other Catholics are, that he must in Conscience proceed thus? What if he
cannot do otherwise, without apparent hazard of his Crown or Life?

The Contrivement is such, that Execution shall be done before he has got the
Reins of Government into his hand; and when he has them, he is not to hold
them alone, he will not be allowed to be much more than the Popes Postillion,
and must look to be dismounted if he drive not according to order.

Let these things be weighed, that we may see before it be too late into what
circumstances we are running. If the Prince be Zealous and Resolute, a Bigot in
their way; If his heat in embracing Religion at first, or promoting it
afterward, transport him beyond the sense of his Interest; If it make him
contemn such reason, or decline that consideration that should have withheld
him from it, or might moderate him in it; If he make it his design, and count
it his Glory, to subdue this Religion as a Pestilent Heresy; If he give up
himself to the Counsels and Conduct of such, whose words and practices make it
evident, that they intend extremities; then there is a violent presumption,
that he will not study any abatement of the rigor of these ruining Laws, after
once he thinks himself firmly settled.

But if (as I had rather suppose) his inclination should lead him to some
Indulgence and forbearance, yet that must be controuled by Conscience, and
Conscience must dictate what they suggest, who have the conduct of it; and it
will be readily suggested, that it is a deadly crime to favor Heretics to the
prejudice of the Catholic Interest, which can never be more effectually
advanced than by their ruin. Besides, the Law Cap. ut officium.
it self assures us, that it is not in the power of any Civil Magistrate to
remit the penalty, or abate the rigor thereof; and this also is declared by
the Bulls (...)
of several Popes. Nay if the Prince should solemnly engage his Faith, and give
as much security as Papists can give by Oath, that he would not suffer
Sanguinary Laws to be executed upon his Dissenting Subjects, this would signify
nothing: For they would soon let him understand, that Contracts made against
the Canon I aware invalid, though confirmed by Oath, as P. a St. De primo
praecepto. p. 94.
Joseph. And that he is not bound to stand to his promise, for the Liberty of
Religion, though he has sworn to it, as Bonacina; (...) praecept. Di^. 3. q.
2. pu^^l 8. prop. 3. n. 159.
and that Faith is no more to be kept with Heretics, than the General Council
of Constance would have it. So that Protestants are to be burnt, as John Hus
and Jerome of Prague were by that Council; though a Prince has given his Faith
and Oath for their safety. The best that is pleaded in defense of that General
Council so openly Canonizing perfidiousness, leaves Protestants as much
exposed, after all the security the Prince can give, as if none at all were
given them The Emperors engagement, say they, secured them against Secular
Process, but not against the Process of the Church. So that the Church may burn
us, when the Prince has engaged all his faith for our safety. And to this
purpose it is observable what Becanus Manual. l. cap. 15. n. 15, 16.
an eminent Jesuit delivers when he is endeavoring to vindicate their Council.
The Council of Constance, says he, Decreed these two things: First, That the
Secular Power can no way hinder the Ecclesiastical Power from its Legal
exercise, and therefore if any Secular Prince do give safe conduct to any
Heretic, this ought not to hinder the Ecclesiastical Judge from exercising his
Office, that is from trying an Heretic, and proceeding against him according
to evidence. The reason is, because when there are two Princes who have
distinct Judicatures and Tribunals, one of which is greater and superior to
the other; the Inferior may not hinder the Superior, from executing his
Jurisdictions. And therefore the security which he promises to any, extends
not to the Tribunal of the Superior Prince, because the Superior is not bound
by the Laws and agreement of the Inferior, (Caput, cum Inferior extra.) But
now the Secular and Ecclesiastical Prince have distinct Tribunals (as is well
known,) and the Ecclesiastical is Superior (Cap. Solita:) Therefore the
Secular, when he gives safe Conduct to any, he cannot extend it to the
Ecclesiastical Tribunal; nor by the security given, can hinder the
Jurisidiction of the Ecclesiastical Judge, etc. Molgnus De fide. l. 3. c. 27.
also, who undertakes to excuse this Council, says, It is a General Rule with
the Romanists, That Faith is either never to be given, or never to be kept with
Heretics, for the exercise of their Religion. Simanca Cathol. Instit. Tit. 46.
N. 52.
by the Authority of the Council, maintains this worthy principle, That Faith
engaged to Heretics, though confirmed by Oath, is in no wise to be performed.
He would prove it by reason: For (says he) if Faith be not to be kept with
Tyrants, and Pirates and other Robbers, who kill the body; much less is it to
be kept with Heretics, who kill Souls; He confirms it with the Testimonies of
Salomonius, and Menochius, Placa, etc. and of their Sum. 2 da 2 dae, Q. 70.
Art. 1.
Angelical Doctor, the Oracle of their Schools, who says, an unteachable
Heretic is to be betrayed to Justice, notwithstanding Faith and Oath. Becanus
Manual. l. 5. c. 15. n. 25.
to vindicate the Doctrine of Simanca, tells us, that they all say as much as
he has said. Simanca teaches the same that we teach, viz. That Faith is to be
kept with Heretics in what is lawful and honest: but in no case otherwise, and
so never in case of Heresy. So that the Faith of any Prince however engaged,
is so far from giving an Heretic any security; as Heresy is far from being a
thing lawful and honest. Upon these principles (by which it appears that Rome
has changed Faith with Carthage, that being now worse than Fides Punica; and
is when she would be counted Christian, far more Faithless than when Pagan)
their Doctors, Jesuits, and others, have instigated Kings to endeavor
seriously the rooting out of Heretics; Asserting, that an Oath in favor of
Heretics, is but Vinculum iniquitatis. In Fine, This is the sense of their
best Authors, and we must believe it to be so, unless we will be deluded. By
their Laws and Principles they are always under an Obligation utterly to
exterminate Protestants; yet sometimes they are concerned in point of Interest,
to forbear and dissemble; Pretending to engage their Faith when they do it not
in the sense of those who rely on it, as the Council of Constance deluded
Jerome of Prague, that they might (as they did) burn him: or engaging their
Faith when they intend not to keep it, as our Queen Mary, Charles the 9th of
France, and other Popish Princes, abused the Protestants to make them secure,
that they might have the better advantage to ruin them; and then that they may
seem real, they may promise or swear that they will not proceed against us; yet
notwithstanding when they have an opportunity to destroy us, though they were
bound by Ten thousand Oaths not to attempt it; yet they Sin damnably if they
endeavor it not to the utmost.

But if there were neither Law nor Conscience to hinder, yet in point of
Interest, he must not show favor to Heretics, nor grant any Indulgence for
their Religion, he cannot do it without apparent hazard both of Crown and Life.
For by showing such favor, he in their account deposes himself, and
immediately loses title to his Kingdoms.

An Emperor or a King, says Parsons Philopat. p. 109.
, if he show favor to an Heretic, for that he loses his Kingdom. The Jesuits
have sufficient grounds for this Doctrine, how extravagant soever it seems. For
the Council of Lateran, which Bellarmine calls their greatest and most Famous
Council, decrees Cap. Excommunicamus, de Haereticis Sect. moneantur.
, that if a Prince upon a years warning, does not exterminate Heretics; his
Subjects are discharged from Allegiance, and his Dominions are to be seized on
by other Catholics: He thereby draws upon himself the Curse and
Excommunication of the Church, he is excommunicate by Law, that Council has
passed Sentence already, and he is de facto Anathematized yearly by the Bull of
the Supper; the former is Excommunicatio Juris, by the Law: and this is
Excommunicatio Hominis, by the Judge, as several of their Graff. decis. l. 4. c.
11. n. 6. Becanus de Fide. c. 15. q. 8. n. 6. Soto 4. Distinct. 25. Q. 1. Art.
1. Citing two Texts of their Law for it. Cap. Sicut de Haereticis, and Cap.
siquis forte. 24. Q. 1.
Doctors will have it. So that it takes effect presently, Ipso Facto, and is of
no less force than if the person concerned were Excommunicated particularly,
and by name, though the terms be general.

The Pope every year does solemnly Excommunicate and Curse, not only all
Heretics, but every Favourer and Defender of them, and from this Sentence,
none can Absolve any but the Pope himself, for it is a reserved case; and they
generally declare him to be a Favourer of Heretics, who hinders the execution
of the Laws made against them. Conformably hereto their Doctors teach, that
Kings and Princes when they are negligent, in rooting out Heretics; they are
to be Excommunicated, and deposed by the Pope. So Becamus Controvers. Anglican.
p. 131, 132.
. Another as I find him In Foulis. page 60.
cited, sets it out more elegantly in a Metaphor, making Princes to be the
Popes, their Shepherds Dogs (as they are wont to do out of great reverence) and
expresses himself significantly to this purpose. If a Prince be a dull Cur,
and fly not upon Heretics, he is to be beaten out, and a Keener Dog must be
got in his stead. Others Zanard. Direct. Pars. 2. page 61.
tell us, he incurrs more grievous penalties than Excommunication, as appears
by the Breves of several Popes; though to be deprived of Kingdom and Life, to
which this Sentence makes a Prince liable, one would think sufficiently
grievous. But there is no need to cite particular Doctors, seeing by the
Decrees Cap. Excommunicamus, de Haereticis.
of that Church the Fautors of Heretics, are liable to the penalties which are
to be inflicted on Heretics themselves: and their Church-Law Cap. Error 83.
Distinct. and. cap. Qui alius, de Haereticis.
determines again and again, that they are to be taken for Fautors of
Heretics, wh^ omit what they ought to do, for the punishing of Heretics, that
they may cease from their error: And in this they all agree, Ita docent omnes,
says Suarez De Fide. Disp, 24. Sect. 1. N. 6.
. Sure he must have more Love for Protestants, than any true Papist can have,
who will run such hazards, to show them Favor.

He must expect also to be burdened with the Hatred of Zealous Chatholicks, and
the effects thereof. They detest such a Prince, and damn that Political
Prudence, which forbears the severe execution of the Laws against Heretics; as
being the way not only to ruin the Church, but subvert a Kingdom Ribadeneira
de Principe, l. 1. cap 15.
They count none worthy the Crown, who will not go through stitch with their
design, for extirpating Heretics, and promoting the Roman Interest with Fire
and sword. Nay they count such, though they be Papists, as bad as Heretics,
worse than Turks, and unworthy to live; they will have a price set on their
Heads, and Assassinates hired to rid the World of them. So Doctor Stapleton,
Orat. contra Politicos, p. 15. and 24. in Hospin. Histor. Jesuit. l. 4. c. 11
sect. 2.
counted one of their greatest and most sober Divines. And these are not only
Points for Speculation, they have been reduced to practice among those who have
the repute of the most moderate Papists in Europe. Henry 3d. and 4th two Kings
of France were Assassinated on this account. A suspicion that they favored
Protestants, was the great inducement to Zealous Catholics to get them stabbed.
The two Kings since indeed have escaped better; no wonder, for they never
provoked the Catholic Assassinating Spirit: They have given sufficient
demonstration that they hate the Protestants; for though they kill them not
outright, yet have they reduced them to such Circumstances, that their Mortal
Enemies may to their satisfaction, see them dye a Lingering Death.

And which more concernsus, the Conspirators in all places having declared
expressly, that if TO. H. do not answer their expectation, for rooting out of
the Protestant Religion, and Extirpating those that profess it: Their design
Dr. Oats Narrative, page 4. n. 5. p. 3. n. 4. p. 8. n. 13 p. 10. n. 16. p. 15.
n. 13. p. 10. n. 29. p. 39. p. 64. n. 6.
is to destroy him after they have killed his Brother. So that whatsoever
respect they have for him on the account of his Religion, yet after they have
served their turn on him a while; he must expect nothing but Death, unless he
will give assurance that he will ruin the Protestants of these Nations.

Hereby we may judge, what favor we may in reason promise our selves, from the
Temper or Interest of a Popish Successor.

But may not Parliaments secure us by Laws and Provisions restraining the
Powers which endanger us?

There is nothing of this tendency can in reason be expected from Parliaments,
without securing the Throne. For if the Conspirators once gain that, it may be
they will have no Parliaments; A Government more Arbitrary and Violent is more
agreeable to their Principles and Designs. It is apparent that Popery, as it
has been by many occasions sublimated since the Reformation, has in a manner
quite stifled the English Spirit in English Papists. They are for another
Government, in which the Pope must be Supreme, and to which our Kings must be
subjected or killed. And in Civils, they are for an Universal Monarchy, by
which this and others must be swallowed up; and so they are still ready to
devote themselves to that Prince who bids fairest for it. So they did to the
Spaniard in Queen Elizabeth's time, and now upon that account are wheeled off to
the French: They have been forward upon all occasions, to Sacrifice the Honor
of the King, and the Liberty of the Subject to the Roman Moloch; they are much
more his Subjects than the Kings; and they are no more to be trusted as to the
true English Interest, than the Italians or Spaniards. They pass for Natives
indeed, being born among us; but are plainly Foreigners as to Government,
Principle, Interest, Affection and Design. We may well believe on these
accounts they are no Friends to Parliaments, if they did not otherwise openly
declare it.

But if the necessity of their affairs should require a Parliament, there is no
great question but they may get such a one as will serve their turn: For so
has every of our former Princes in all the changes of Religion that have been
amongst us. So did Henry the 8th, both when he was for Popery; and when he was
against it, and when he was partly both for it, and against it. So did Edward
the 6th. when he was wholly Protestant. So did Queen Mary, when she was for
burning them alive. So did Queen Elizabeth, when she run Counter to her Sister.
There are English-Papists enough already to furnish both Houses; and there will
be more, if Popery were once enthroned. The strongest Arguments which diverse
have for their Religion, are drawn from the Throne. The indifferency which is
visible in too many, signifies that they will be determined by their interest,
and their Estates are like to outweigh their Religion.

The warping of diverse upon advancement, and acting Counter to themselves when
lower; shows, there is something higher in their hearts, then that which should
be Supreme. The little concern they show for Religion, who in regard of their
Station in the Church, should have the greatest Zeal for it, disappointing and
astonishing those who esteemed them Protestants, and great supports of that
Profession.

The little sense of any danger (when our Religion was never in such extreme
hazard, since we and our Fathers were born,) the obstructing in one or both
Houses, of all that is offered to secure us, or has the most probable tendency
to it, by those from whom it was least expected. Those greater heats against
true Protestants (differing from us in some small things,) than against
Papists; when represented by this horrid Plot in their own Colors; shows, that
Popery is no such formidable thing to many, now under another profession; as it
is, and will be to Hearty protestants, and such as have effectually received
the Love of the Truth. However by the Laws which will be in force, when the
Throne is Papal; All Protestants must be excluded from both Houses. For all
these must then pass under the notion of Heretics, and as such, not only by
the Constitutions of several Popes, but by the Decree Cap. Excommunicamus Sect.
credentes. Tit. de haereti^i^.
of a General Council, received as obliging in Popish Countries; they are made
incapable of being admitted to any public Counsels, or of choosing any to sit
there. This is but a branch, of one of the last Penalties we must then lie
under; and thus all hopes of any Relief by Parliaments, under such a Successor,
are quite blasted.

As for Laws such as are, or may be made beforehand for restraining Popery,
and securing our Religion under a Popish Sovereignty; they will then be judged
Nullities, for they are no Laws which are against the common good; but these
will be counted mischievous Acts, of a pernicious nature and tendency; being
for the support of Heresy, against their Catholic Interest. They will be null
and void also, without any formal repeal, upon another account, viz. because
Enacted by an incompetent Authority: For our Parliaments are now, and have been
long Constituted of such as they count Heretics; and these by the Decrees and
Principles of their Church have no Jurta constitutiones Greg. 9. Haereticus
privatur omni Dominio naturali, civili, politico. Simanca Instit. Cathol. Tit.
46. N. 74.
Jurisdiction at all, much less that which is Sovereign and Legislative. They
have no right to proceed in Judgment upon Laws duly made, so far are they from
all just Power to make any. And whereas no Laws can be made in these Realms
without the concurrence of every of the Three States in Parliaments, they will
not own any of them to be in a capacity to concur therein.

The King being an Heretic, is with them no King, he is divested of all
Prerogatives and Royalties; has no power to call Parliaments, or pass any
Bills there tendered; He is no better with them then a private person, nay in a
worse capacity than a good Subject; for by their Principles he may lawfully be
killed by a private hand.

The Nobles being Heretics, their Blood is tainted by the highest Treason, the
Attainder good in Law, (that Law which will then be of most Sovereign
Obligation;) they have lost all Privilege of Peers, they have no Titles to
Baronies, no rights to be Summoned by Writ, if there were any that had right to
Summon them. They have forfeited what they had by Descent, though from Popish
Ancestors; and what they had by Patent, is null and void. Since our Princes
were Protestants, they are no more Lords, in the sense of the Romish Laws, nor
have more Right to sit as Peers in making Laws, than Laws of Jack Straws
creating.

This is manifest by the first Penalty forementioned, and awarded against
Heretics by the Laws of the Roman Church; which takes effect from the first
day of their supposed Heresy, before Sentence of any Judge.

The Commons being Heretics are no Proprietors, and so have no Power, no
Privilege do to the Commons of England, they are born to no Estates, if they
be the Issue of Protestants; The Estates of their Fathers being confiscated
before they were born, and so is all they have acquired since by Purchase, or
otherwise. So that they have no Right to be chosen, nor have Protestants any
Right to choose them, being no Freeholders, nor having title to any Goods or
Lands, by any Tenure whatsoever. In short, By the Judgment and Sentence of
their Church, all Ranks among us are in a State of Usurpation, we have no right
to Estate or Life (as we are like to find when they have power;) much less any
Authority to make Laws: What our Parliaments have enacted, or may do, for the
securing of our Religion, or Restraint of Catholics; is no more valid, no more
obliging with them, than the Acts or Ordinances of mere Usurpers, nor do they
owe, nor will they pay them more observance (when time serves) than to the
Constitutions of so many Thieves and Robbers.

But suppose our Laws were valid, and Enacted by a competent Authority, yet
being against the Laws of the Church, the Sovereign Authority of these will
supersede the other: For so they determine, that when the Canon and the Civil
Laws clash, one requiring what the other allows not; the Church-Law must have
observance, and that of the State be neglected. Their Law (...)
provides for its preeminence, in these words, Constitutions against the Canons
and Decree of the Roman Bishops are of no moment. Their best Authors Victoria
relect. page Navar. Manual. c. 7. n. 1. Fumus v. lex. n. 7. B^nacina. Tom. 2.
Disp. 1. Q. 1. punet. 4. n. 17. Diana. Sum. v. in puisitor. n. 10. after
Barbosa and others.
are positive in it, and our own Country affords us Instances of it. The
Statutes of Provisoes, and others of like nature, made in the Reigns of Edward
the First, Edward the Third, Richard the Second, and Henry the Fourth, for the
relief of the Nation against Papal Encroachments: They were defeated by the
Popes Authority, and in effect repealed, there being no effectual Execution of
them till Henry the Eighth's time. And if the Pope (the Throne being once at
his Devotion) should appear against any Statutes or Provisions made for our
security, as Pope Martin Barnet Hist. Reformation, page 110.
the Fifth did against the Statutes of Edward the Third, and Edward the Second,
that would be enough to null them as to the Consciences of Roman Catholics; or
to lay them asleep, and render them ineffectual to the purposes they are
designed for.

We may see hereby what Laws made now, for our Security will signify, when
such a Successor is in possession.

Upon the whole, our danger as to all our concerns, Civil and Religious, is
very apparent, and looks upon us with such a terrible Aspect, as scarce any
true Protestant can fully view it without Horror and Trembling. Our Estates,
Lives, and Souls are in extreme hazard, and what have we more? That which will
not secure us is discernable by the Premises; what expedient may be effectual
to rescue us and our Postery, who with us and all that is dear to both, are now
in the very Jaws of Destruction, is humbly lest to the Wisdom of the Nation in
Parliament.

FINIS.

