THE LIFE and DEATH OF Nebuchadnezzar THE GREAT, The first founder of the
Babylonian Empire; Represented by the Golden Head of that Image; Dan. 2. 32.
and by the Lion with Eagles Wings; Dan. 7. 4. As also of CYRUS the GREAT, The
first founder of the Empire of the Medes, and Persians; Represented by the
Breast, and Arms of Silver in that Image; Dan. 2. 32. And by a Bear; Dan. 7. 5.
And by a Ram with two Horns; Dan. 8. 3, 20. He was the deliverer of Gods Israel
out of Babylon, the seventy years of their Captivity being Expired.

By both of these, much light is given to many of the Prophesies of Isay,
Jeremy, Esekiel, and Daniel.

By Sa. Clarke, sometime Minister in St Bennet Fink, London.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door. 1664.

Licensed to be Printed,

Roger L'Estrange.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF Nebuchadnezzar THE GREAT, The first Emperor of the
CHALDEANS, Who was represented by the Golden Head of that Image, Dan. 2. 32.
and by the Lion with Eagles Wings, Dan. 7. 4. Whereby much light is given to
many of the Prophesies of Isay, Jeremy, Esekiel, and Daniel.

By Sa. Clarke, sometime Minister in St Bennet Fink, London.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door, 1664.

THE LIFE, and DEATH OF NEBUCHADNEZZAR THE GREAT, First Emperor of the
CHALDEANS.
NEbuchadonazar, His Parentage.
or Nebuchadnezzar, was the Son of Nebuchadonazar, or Nabopolaser of Babylon,
who was made General of the Army by Saraco, King of Assyria, and Chaldea, after
whose death Nabopolaser took into his hands the Kingdom of Chaldaea, which he
held by the space of one and twenty years; At the same time Astyages was made
Governor of Media by Cyaxares his Father; and the better to strengthen
themselves, they entered into Affinity, by Astyages his giving his Daughter
Amytis to Nebuchadnezzar, the Son of Nabopolaser, and thereupon joining their
Forces together, Ninive taken.
they took Ninive, together with Saraco, the King thereof, placing a Viceroy
in his stead.

Shortly after, the Governor of Coelosyria, and Poenicia, revolting from
Nabopolaser, he sent against him his Son Nebuchadnezzar (having first
associated him with himself in the Kingdom of Babylon) with a great Army,
Nebuchadnezzar made King.
which was in the latter end of the third, and the beginning of the fourth year
of Jehoiakim, King of Juda; as appears Dan. 1. 1. compared with Jer. 25. 1.

Nebuchadnezzar was no sooner thus associated with his Father in the Kingdom,
but the things which he was to act, Prophesies of him.
were presently revealed to the Prophet Jeremy; the first whereof was the
overthrow of the Egyptians; First at the River Euphrates; then in their own
Country, Jer. 46. The first of these came to pass presently, Pharao Neco's
Forces, which he left at Carchemish, being cut off by Nebuchadnezzar in the
fourth year of Jehoiakim, Jer. 46. 2. The second was not till after the taking
of Tire, in the seventeenth year of the Captivity of Jechonia. Ezekiel. 29. 17,
18, 19.

In the third year of Jehoiakim, His first Action. He Conquers Jehoiakim.
Nebuchadnezzar the second, his Father being yet alive, entered Judaea with a
great Army, who, besieging, and forcing Jerusalem, made Jehoiakim his Vassal,
in despite of Pharaoh Necho, who had made him King, and took with him to
Babylon, for Pledges, Daniel, who was yet a child, with Ananias, Misael, and
Azarias. He took also part of the Treasures belonging to the Temple; but stayed
not to search thoroughly for all. For Necho hasted with his Army to the relief of
Jehoiakim, hoping to find Nebuchadnezzar in Judaea. But this great Babylonian
had no mind to hazard himself and his Army against the Egyptian, Judaea being
so ill affected toward him, and himself far from all succor; or sure place of
retreat. If he had (as may be supposed) any great strength of Scythian
Horsemen, it was wisely done of him to fall back out of that rough Mountanous,
and hot Country, into places that were more even and temperate. And besides
these reasons, His Fathers death.
the Death of his Father happening at the same time, gave him just occasion to
return home, and take possession of his own Kingdom, before he proceeded in the
second care, of adding more unto it.

And this he did at reasonable good leisure. For the Egyptian was not provided
to follow him so far, and to bid him Battle, until the new year came in, which
was the fourth of Jehoiakim, the first of Nebuchadnezzar and the last of Necho.
In this year the Babylonian, lying upon the Banks of Euphrates (his own
Territories bounding it on the North-side) attended the coming of Necho: He
Conquers Pharaoh Necho.
there, after a cruel Battle fought betwixt them, Necho was slain, and his Army
forced to save it self by a violent retreat, wherein it suffered great loss.

This Victory was so well pursued by Nebuchadnezzar that he recovered all
Syria, He Conquers Syria.
and whatsoever the Egyptians held out of their proper Territories toward the
North. The Egyptians being thus beaten, and altogether for the present
discouraged, Jehoiakim held himself quiet, as being in heart a Friend to the
Egyptians, yet having made his peace with the Chaldeans the year before, and
Nebuchadnezzar was contented with such profit as he could there readily make:
he had forborne to lay any Tribute upon the Jews.

But this cool reservedness of Jehoiakim, was, on both sides, taken in ill
part. Whereupon the Egyptian King Psamnis, who succeeded Necho, began to think
of restoring Jehoahaz (who had been taken prisoner by his Father, and carried
into Egypt) and of setting him up, as a Domestical enemy against his ungrateful
Brother. But to anticipate all such accidents, the Judean had put in practice
the usual remedy, which his Forefathers used: For he had made his own Son
Jechonia, 2 Chronicles. 36. 9.
King with him long before; in the second year of his own Reign, when the Boy
was but eight years old. As for this rumor of Jehoahaz his return, the Prophet
Jeremy foretold, that it should prove a vain attempt, saying, He shall not
return thither, But he shall die in the place whither they have led him
Captive, and shall see this Land no more. Jer. 12. 11, 12.

The Egyptians, The weak estate of the Egyptians.
having lost all their Mercenary Forces, and received that heavy blow at
Carchemish, had more Gold than sharp Steel remaining, which is of small force
without the others help. Besides, the Valor of Necho was not in Psamnis
Apries, who, reigning after Psamnis, did indeed once adventure to show his face
in Syria; but after a big look, he was glad to retire, without adventuring the
hazard of a Battle. Wherefore this declining Nation, fought only with brave
words, telling such frivolous tales, as men that mean to do nothing, use,
boasting of their former glorious acts against Josias, and Jehoahaz. And truly
in such a time and case, it was easy for Jehoiakim to give them satisfaction,
by letting them understand the sincerity of his affections toward them, which
appeared in time following.

But Nebuchadnezzar went more roundly to work: Nebuchadnezzar lays a Tribute
upon Jehoiakim.
For he sent a peremptory message to Jehoiakim, requiring him not to stand upon
any nice points, but presently to acknowledge himself his Subject, and to pay
him Tribute; Adding thereunto such terrible threatenings, as made the poor
Judaean lay aside all thoughts of adhearing unto Pharaoh; and to yield to do,
as the more powerful would have him.

Thus he continued in Obedience to Nebuchadnezzar three years; During which
time the Prophet Jeremia, cried out against the impiety of the Jews, putting
them in mind that he had now for three and twenty years exhorted them to
repentance; But because they had stopped their ears against him, The Captivity
foretold.
and the rest of the Prophets, he now foretold that their Captivity was at
hand, and that they should bear the yoke of Bondage for seventy years. Jer. 25.
15, etc.
The same calamity he threatened to all the Neighboring Nations, Jer. 27.
to the Egyptians, Moabites, Ammonites, Idumaeans, and the rest; foretelling
that they should all drink out of the Babylonian Cup the Wine of his fury, whom
they had forsaken; and that after the seventy years should be expired, the
Babylonians themselves should taste of the same Cup, and be utterly subverted by
the Medes and Persians, by which means the Jews should be permitted to return
into their own Country, Jer. 25. 12, etc. And their return. Jeremy imprisoned.
and Cities. The first imprisonment of the Prophet Jeremy seems to have been in
the fourth year of this Jehoiakim, at which time, Baruch the Scribe, wrote all
his Prophesies from his mouth, whom he sent to read them unto the People, and
afterward to the Princes, who presented them to the King: But fearing the
Kings fury, they had first set Jeremy at liberty, and advised him, and Baruch,
to hide themselves, Jeremiah 36. ^9, etc.

Jehoiakim having heard part of it read to him, Jeheiakim burns the Roll.
and perceiving the ill news contained therein, he made no more ado, but cut
the Book in pieces, and cast it into the fire. All which, Jeremy caused to be
new written, with this addition, that the dead Body of Jehoiakim, should be
cast out, being exposed in the Day to the heat, and in the night to the frost,
and that there should be none of his seed to sit upon the Throne of David.

Times thus running on, Tire rebelleth against Nebuchadnezzar.
Jehoiakim thought himself secure from all danger, as being Tributary to the
Babylonian, and yet withal, well thought on by the Egyptian: About which time
the mighty City of Tire, opposed it self against Nebuchadnezzar: and upon just
confidence of her own strength, despised all preparations that could be made
against her. Now for as much as the term of seventy years was prescribed for
the desolation, as well of Tire, as of Jerusalem, and other places, and
Countries, its apparent that they that refer the winning of this City to the
ninteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, have good ground and warrant for it. For the
Siege thereof began in the seventh year of his Reign, and lasted thirteen years.

Here it will not be amiss to insert a brief note concerning the beginning of
this great Princes Rule; The third year of Jehoiakim, was the last of
Nabul^sser, who being freed from other cares, and businesses, took notice of
such as had revolted from him to Pharaoh Necho, and sent this Noble Prince* his
Son, with an Army into Syria to reclaim them. In this expedition was Daniel
carried to Babylon, who therefore makes mention of it, Dan. 1. 1. The year next
following, being the fourth of Jehoiakim, was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar,
which Jeremy affirms in express words, Jer. 25. 1. And from this we must
reckon all his time, and actions which follow to be spoken of. In his three and
twentieth year he conquered Egypt, and then began his great Empire, there being
none lest that durst offend, or oppose him. The second from this year it was
wherein Daniel saw that vision of the Image consisting of sundry metals, which
prefigured the succession of great Kingdoms, that should Rule the World before
the coming of Christ. But to return to the Siege of Tire, which began in the
seventh year of his Reign.

The Stately City of Tire covered all the ground of an Island, Tire besieged.
that was divided from the Continent, by a deep, and broad Channel of the Sea.
The Chaldaeans had no Fleet of Ships, neither were they Seamen: the Tyrians
excelled all other Nations in multitude of goodly Ships, and skill to use them:
and every Wind, from one part or other, brought in all needful provisions to
the City: Wherefore neither force, nor Famine could greatly hurt the place;
whereof nevertheless, the Judgments of God (denounced against it by Isay, Isay
23.
Jeremy, and Esekiel) had threatened the destruction; Jer. 25.
and the obstinate resolution of Nebuchadnezzar had fully determined to
accomplish it. Esek. 26.


This haughty King, impatient of resistance, undertook a vast piece of Work,
The difficulty of the work.
which was, to fill up that part of the Sea which divided the Island from the
continent. The City of old Tire, that stood opposite to the New, upon the firm
Land, and the Mountain of Libanus near adjoining, that was laden with stately
Cedars, and abundance of other Trees, furnished him with materials to effect
it. Thirteen years were spent in this difficult, and hopeless undertaking,
which need not seem strange, if we consider, that Alexander, working upon that
foundation which was remaining of Nebuchadnezzars Peer, and being withal,
assisted with a strong Fleet, was yet seven months ere he could make way into
the City. Wherefore, if the raging of the Sea was able to carry away that
wherewith Alexander labored to cover a Shelve, with much more violence could
it overturn, and as it were, consume the work of Nebuchadnezzar: who laid his
foundation in the bottom of the deep; Striving, as it were, to fill the empty
Belly of this greedy Cormorant, whereas the Macedonian did only stop the throat
of it. All may know that God could easily have accomplished his own threatenings
against this place (though it had not pleased him to use, either a Miracle, or
such of his more immediate Engines, as are Earthquakes, etc.) by making at
least, the Seas calm, and adding the favorable concurrence of all second
helps. But so it pleases him often times, in chastising the Pride of man, to use
the hand of man, even the hand of man, striving, as it may seem, against all
resistance of nature, and providence. So that by this excessive labor of the
Chaldeans, that Scripture was fulfilled, that every Head should be made bald,
and every Shoulder should be made bare, Esek. 29. 18. Yet would not
Nebuchadnezzar give over till he was master of the Town.

When he was entered upon this desperate undertaking, whether it were by some
losses received, or some Mutany in his Army, or some glorious rumor of the
Egyptians strength, his evil willers took courage to rebel against him; and
amongst them, Jehoiakim, renounced his subjection, and began to hope for the
contrary which soon after fell out. For Nebuchadnezzar gave him no leisure to
do much hurt: But with part of his Army, he marched strait into Judea;
Jehoiakim rebels, and is taken, and slain.
where the amazed King made so little resistance (the Egyptians having left
him, as it were in a dream) that Nebuchadnezzar entered Jerusalem, laid hands on
Jehoiakim, Jer. 22. 18, 19. and 36. 30.
whom at first he bound, intending to send him to Babylon, but his mind
changing, he caused him to be slain in that place, and gave him the Burial of
an Ass, to be devoured by Beasts, and ravinous Birds, according to the former
Prophecy; Leaving in his place his Son, Jehoiakim, or Jeconia; Jeconias made
King: and imprisoned.
whom yet after three months, and ten days, he deposed, and sent him Pisoner
to Babylon, together with Esekiel, Mordecay, and Josedech, the High Priest.

The Mother of Jeconias, Jer. 29. 2.
together with his Servants, Eunuchs, 2 Kin. 28. 8, 16.
and all the ablest men, and best Artificers in the Land, were also then
carried away Captives. This Jechonias, 2 Chronicles. 36. 10.
following the Counsel of the Prophet Jeremy, made no resistance, Jer. 24. 1.
and 29. 1, 2.
but submitted himself to the Kings will, wherein he both pleased God, and did
that which was most profitable for himself, Esek. 17. 12.
though at the present it might seem otherwise, to such as considered the evil
that befell him, rather than the greater evil that he thereby avoided. This
only particular act of his is recorded in Scriture which was good: But it seems
that he was at least a partaker in his Fathers sins, if not a provoker, which
was ye cause, that though he submitted himself to Gods will, yet did he not
preserve his estate: For so it is said, That he did evil in the sight of the
Lord, according to all that his Father had done. In his stead, Nebuchadnezzar
set up Mattania, his Uncle, Zedekiah is made King.
making him King of Judea, and called him Zedechias. For like as Necho, King of
Egypt, had formerly displaced Jehoahaz, after he had slain his Father Josias,
and set up Jehoiachim, Jer. 37. 1.
the Son by another Mother: So Nebuchadnezzar slew Jehoiakim, 2 King. 24. 17.
who depended on the Egyptians, and, carrying his Son Jeconias Prisoner to
Babylon, he gave the Kingdom to this Zedechias, who was whole Brother to that
Jehoahaz, whom Necho took with him into Egypt, and from Zedechias he required
an Oath for his loyalty, and faithful subjection, which Zedechias gave him,
and called the living God to witness in the same, that he would remain assured
to the Kings of Chaldea, 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Esek. 17. 13, 14, 18.

In the first year of Zedechias, Jer. 24. 2.
Jeremy saw, and expounded the vision of the ripe, and rotten Figs, the one
signifying those that were already carried away Captives, the other signifying
those Jews that yet remained, and were afterward destroyed, Jer. 29. 17.

In the fourth year of Zedechias, Babylons destruction foretold.
Jeremy wrote in a Book all the evil which should fall upon Babylon, which
Book, or Roll he gave to Seriah, when he went with King Zedechias to Babylon,
to visit Nebuchadnezzar, willing him first to read it to the Captive Jews, and
then to bind a stone to it, and cast it into Euphrates, pronouncing these
words; Sundry Prophesies of Jeremy.
Thus shall Babel be drowned, and shall not rise from the evil which I will
bring upon her. This journey of Zedechias to Babylon is probably thought to be
in way of a visit, Jer. 51. 59.
and to carry some presents to Nebuchadnezzar; But yet its likely he had some
suit to make, which his Lordly Master refused to grant, and sent him away
discontented. For at his return, all the bordering Princes sent Messengers to
him, inciting him (as it seems) to those unquiet courses from which the Prophet
Jeremy dehorted both him, Jer. 27. 8.
and them. About which time the Prophet, by Gods appointment, made bonds, and
yokes, one of which he wore about his own neck, others he sent unto the five
Kings, of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tire, and Zidon, by those Messengers which came to
visit Zedechias, making them know, that if they, and the King of Juda continued
in subjection, to Babylon, they should then possess, and enjoy their own
Countries; If not, they should assuredly perish by the Sword, by Famine and by
Pestilence.

He also foretold them that those Vessels which yet remained in Jerusalem,
should be carried after the other to Babylon, yet at length should be restored
again.

The same year Ananias, Ananias a false Prophet.
the false Prophet, took off the Wooden yoke which Jeremy did wear, as a sign
of the Captivity of the Jews, and brake it: Vaunting, that in like manner after
two years, Jer. 28.
God would break the strength of Babel, and the yoke which he laid on all
Nations: and that he would restore Jeconias and all the Jews, with the Vessels,
and Riches of the Temple, and put an end to all these troubles. But Jeremy
instead of his Wooden Yoke, wore a Collar of Iron; and in sign that Ananias
had given a false, and deceitful hope to the People, he foretold the Death of
this false Prophet, Jer. 28. 15.
which accordingly came to pass in the seventh Month.

After this, Zedechias rebels.
when Zedechias had wavered long between Faith, and Passion, in the eight year
of his Reign, he practiced more seriously against Nebuchadnezzar with his
Neighbors, Esek. 17. 15, 17.
the Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites, Tyrians, and others who were promised great
aides by the Egyptians, in confidence of whose assistance he resolved to shake
off the Babylonian Yoke; whereof when Nebuchadnezzar was informed, he marched
with his Army in the dead of Winter, Jerusalem besieged.
toward Jerusalem, and besieged it. Jeremy persuaded Zedekias to render the
City, and himself to him: But Zedechias, being confident of help from Egypt,
and being persuaded by his Princes, and false Prophets, that it was impossible
that the Kingdom of Judah should be extirpated until the coming of Shilo,
according to Jacobs Prophecy, Genesis 49. 10. he despised the counsel of Jeremy,
Jer. 32. and 34.
and imprisoned him. For Jeremy had told the King that the City should be taken
and burnt; that the King should not escape, but be taken Prisoner, and brought
to the presence of Nebuchadnezzar: That he should not perish by the Sword, but
being carried to Babel, should there die a natural Death.

The following year, Jer. 44.
Jerusalem was surrounded, and more strictly besieged by Nebuchadnezzars Army;
Egypt a broken staff.
whereupon the King of Egypt, Pharaoh Hophra, entered into Judea with his Army,
to succor Zedekias, of whose revolt he had been the principal Author. Jer.
37. 3, 10.
But Jeremy gave the Jews faithful counsel, willing them not to have any trust
in the succors of Egypt: for he assured them that they should return back
again, and in no sort relieve them. And it fell out accordingly. For when the
Chaldeans removed from Jerusalem to encounter the Egyptians, these bragging
Patrones abandoned their enterprise, and taking Gaza, in their way homewards,
returned into Egypt as if they had already done enough, leaving the poor People
in Jerusalem to their destinied miseries, Jer. 34. 11, 22.

In the mean while the Jews, who in the time of their extremity, Lev. 25. 39,
40, etc.
had released their Hebrew Bondmen, and Bondwomen, according to the Law, in the
year of Jubilee, and made them free, thereby to encourage them to fight, did now
upon the breaking up of the Chaldean Army, repent of what they had done, and
thinking that all danger had been past, they held them by force to their former
slavery. But the Caldeans being returned to the Siege, the Prophet Jeremy, Jer.
34.
when the State of Jerusalem began now to grow to extremity, counseled
Zedekias, to render himself to the Babylonians, Jer. 39.
assuring him of his own Life, and of the safety of the City if he would do so.
But his obstinate heart led him on to that wretched end, which, his neglect of
God, and his Infidelity, and Perjury had provided for him.

Three and twenty Months the Chaldean Army lay before Jerusalem, Jer. 39.
and held it exceeding straightly besieged; For they built Forts against it round
about, 2 King. 25. 1. or, they surrounded the City with Wooden Towers, so as
the Besieged could neither Sally out, nor receive into the City any supplies of
men or Victuals. Jer. 39. 1. and 52. 4.
Josephus says, that they overtopped the Walls with their high Towers which
they erected upon Mounts, from which, with their Engines they did so beat upon
the Walls, that the desendants were forced to forsake their stations. And
though the Besieged also raised Counter-Buildings, like unto these, yet the
Great Nebuchadnezzar, who Commanded all the Regions thereabouts, and had the
Woods, and Rivers at his command, found out means to disappoint and overthrow
all the Citizens endeavors, and to beat down their Towers as fast as they
raised them. For his own works were guarded by the Walls of Jerusalem, whereas
theirs within lay open to his Batteries. Besides, both Famine, and Pestilence
(which commonly accompany men straightly besieged) grew fast upon them, whereby,
when the number, strength and courage of the Jews failed, Jerusalem taken.
the Caldeans made a breach, and forcing an entry, their Princes did seat
themselves as Lords of the Town, in the middle Gate, 2 King. 26. 2, 3, 4. Jer.
39. 2, 3. and 52. 5, etc.

Zedechias, Zedechias flies and is taken.
beholding this uncomfortable sight, and finding no other means to escape the
present danger, lost both his Courage, and his Hope at once, and shifted
himself, together with his Wives, Children, Princes, and principal Servants,
out of the City, by a way underground, leaving his amazed, and now headless
Subjects to the merciless Swords of their enraged enemies. Thus he, who when
the Prophet Jeremy persuaded him to render himself, despised both the Counsel
of God, and the Army and force of Nebuchadnezzar, used now the remedy which one
calls, A woeful, shameful, and unfortunate shift.

By this secret subterranean Vault, Zedechias stole away, and by the help of
the dark night, recovered the plains, or deserts of Jericho. But by reason of
the train that followed him and his (every one leading with him those whom he
loved best) he was easily traced and pursued. How great soever the company was
that attended him, yet certain it is, that they, on whose fidelity he most
relied, no sooner beheld the Caldeans to draw near, but they all abandoned his
defense, and shifted for themselves in the Deserts, as they could. For whom God
had forsaken, no man regarded. And thus Zedechias was taken by the Ministers of
Gods vengeance, and being made a Prisoner, together with his Children, and
Princes, he was carried to Riblah, in the Tribe of Nephthalim, where
Nebuchadnezzar then lay, as a place indifferent between Jerusalem and Tire,
with both which places he had at one time to do.

Now when Nebuchadnezzar had laid before Zedechias the many Graces and Favors
which he had conferred upon him, And carried to Babylon.
together with the notable falsehood and perjury wherewith he had requited him,
Jer. 34. 3, etc.
he commanded his Children, 2 King. 25* 4, 7.
Princes, and Friends to be slain before his face. This being done, to ye and
yt so lamentable a spectacle should be the last, Jer. 39. 4, 7 and 52. 7, 11.
that ever he should behold in this world, he caused his eyes to be put out,
and so carried him like a Slave to Babylon, where he consumed the rest of his
life in perpetual imprisonment. Herein was that mavelous Prophecy of Esekiel
fulfilled: I will bring him to Babylon, and he shall not see it, Esek. 12. 13.

Thus in the eleventh, and last year of Zedechias, which was the eighteenth of
Nebuchadnezzar, the Chaldeans entered Jerusalem by force, where sparing neither
Sex nor Age, they put all to the Sword that they found therein.

In the year next following, 2 King. 25. 8.
Nebuzaradan, the General of the Babylonish Army, burnt the Kings Palace, and
the whole City of Jerusalem, Jer. 52. 13. with 39. 8.
and after the fire had lasted from the seventh to the tenth Day, The Temple,
and City burnt
he also burnt the Temple of God to the ground, the richest and most
Magnificent place that ever the Sun saw, when it had stood four hundred thirty,
and one years.

After this upon a second search, 2 King. 25. 18.
Nebuzaradan (not yet satiated with blood) commanded seventy and two others to
be slain, Jer. 39. 8, 9. and 52. 14, 23.
which had hidden themselves from the first sury, to wit, the chief, and the
second Priest, two Commanders of Zedechias his men of war, 2 Chronicles. 36. 18, etc.
five of his household Servants, Poor People left under Gedaliah.
and some others, carrying away to Babylon the ablest of the People through all
Judea, and leaving the poorest laboring people, with some that followed the
party of Nebuchadnezzar, to till the Ground, over whom he placed Gedaliah, Jer.
39. 10.
the Nephew of that Saphan, whom Josias had formerly employed in the
Reformation of Religion. Jer. 40. 16
This Gedaliah, a Jew by Nation, left Zedechias, as it seems, in the
beginning of the War, and by Jeremies desire to live with him, its probable
that had embraced the same advice, which the Prophet gave to Zedechias, which
was, to submit himself to the Babylonian King, who being ordained of God for
them, as an instrument of his Justice, was, therefore irresistible.

The Prophet Jeremy being left to his own choice to live where he pleaced,
Jeremy goes to them.
made choice to go to Gedaliah, to whom he was commended by Nebuzaradan, and
he, not only entertained him kindly, Jer. 40. 6.
but comforted him, and all the other Jews that were left under his charge,
promising them favor, and liberty, so long as they remained obedient Subjects
to Nebuchadnezzar by whom he was established Provincial Governor over his own
Nation.

But ere the year was exspired, a Prince of the late Kings Family (who during
the Siege of Jerusalem had sheltered himself from the storm, with Baalis, King
of the Ammonites) being attended by ten other chosen men, whilst Gedaliah
feasted them in Mitspah, Gedaliah slain.
the City of his residence, they traitorously slew him, together with diverse
Chaldeans and Jews that accompanied him. Jer. 41. 2.
This done, they escaped, 2 King. 25. 25.
and in their way, encountering with eighty persons, repairing toward Gedaliah
with persents, they slew most of them, and only spared some, who promised to
discover to them some Treasures that were hidden in the Fields during the War.
They took with them also a Daughter of Zedechias committed to the care of
Gedaliah by Nebuchadnezzar: This treachery of Ismael had been formerly
discovered to Gedaliah by Johanan, one of the Captains of the few remaining
Jews, but he would not believe it.

Judea being now without a Governor (for Ismael durst not take it upon him,
but fled as fast as he could to the Ammonites) the residue of the Jews, fearing
the revenge of the Chaldeans, resolved to fly into Egypt, and besought Jeremy
to ask counsel of God for them, Jeremy's counsel rejected.
who returned answer, that if they remained in Judea, God would provide for
them, and show them mercy; but if they sought to save themselves in Egypt, Jer.
43.
they should then undoubtedly perish. Notwithstanding which advice, the Jews
held their determination, and despised the Oracle of God; and constraining
Jeremy, and Baruch to accompany them, they went into Egypt, He is carried into
Egypt, and stoned.
and by the permission of Pharao, they dwelt in Taphnes; where, when Jeremy
often reproved them for their Idolatry, foretelling the destruction of
themselves, and the Egyptians, he was, by these his own hard-hearted and
ungrateful Countrymen, stoned to Death, and by the Egyptians, who greatly
reverenced him, buried near the Sepulcher of their Kings, Jer. 42. and 43.

The nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzars Reign it was, when destroying utterly
the great and mighty City of Jerusalem, he exceedingly enriched himself with
the spoils of it, and the Temple, and by that dreadful Example terrified all
those that should dare to resist him. From that time forward, he, to his three
and twentieth year, labored in the Conquest of those adjoining Countries,
Nebuchadnezzar Conquers diverse Nations.
which God had exposed unto his Sword, and commanded to wear his Yoke, namely,
the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, Tyrians, Sidonians, and Egyptians, though
some of these were already become his followers, and served under him when
Jerusalem was taken, and burnt. But the Tyrians, whose City was built upon an
Island, and therefore secure from the invasion of any Land-Army, and whose
Fleet was so strong, that they needed not to fear any enemy at Sea, were
neither daunred with the fall of their neighbor City, nor with the obstinate
resolution of this mighty King employing all his wit, and power to work their
subversion.

That the City of Tire was rather well pleased then any way discouraged with
the destruction of Jerusalem, it appears by the Words which Esekiel
condemns, as the common voice of Tyrus, Esek. 26. 2. Aha! the Gate of the
People is broken, it is turned unto me; For seeing she is desolate, I shall be
replenished. Yet at length, that great work before mentioned, began to appear
above Water, and so to threaten them with inevitable mischief.

Nebuchadnezzar still follows his work hard, notwithstanding all
discouragments, and in the thirteenth year of the Siege, and the nineteenth of
his Reign, he had brought it to such perfection, that now the Citizens
despaired of holding out against him; whereupon all the chiefest of them
embarked themselves, their Families, and Treasures in their Fleet, Tire is
taken.
and escaped to the Isle of Cyprus, but the poorer sort were left to the fury
of the enemy; who being enraged for being put to so much pains, slew with the
Sword, not only such people of Tire as dwelt on the Continent (who are called
her Daughters in the Field) but the like execution was done in the streets,
into which with excessive labor, the Chaldeans made way for his Horses, and
Chariots. Thus Nebuchadnezzar made his Army serve a great service, against
Tyrus, wherein every head was made bald, and every shoulder was made bare, yet
had he no wages, nor his Army, Esek. 29. 18. but was fain to rest contented
with the Honor of having destroyed that City, which in all men's Judgments had
been held invincible.

The destruction of these two Great, and powerful Cities, having made the name
of the Chaldeans dreadful in the ears of all the Nations round about,
Nebuchadnezzar used this advantage of that reputation which he had obtained by
his victories already gotten, to the getting of more, and more profitable, with
less pains. The Kingdom of Egypt was the mark which he chiefly aimed at. A
Country so abounding in Riches and pleasures, that it might well have tempted
any Prince, finding himself strong enough, to pick occasion of quarrel against
it. Besides, it was so far an enemy to the Crown of Babylon, that, had it been
far poorer, yet it must have been subdued, or the Conquest of Syria could not
have been secured.

Yet was it needful, that before he entered upon this business, the Countries
adjacent should be reduced into such terms, that either they should wholly
stand at his devotion, or at least, be able not to work him any displeasure.
And herein the Decree of God concurred (as in all prosperous enterprises) with
reason of State. For the people of Moab, Ammon, Edom, Damascus, Kedar, Hazor,
and other adjoining Regions, whom God for their sins had condemned to fall
under the Babylonian Yoke, were such, as regarding only their own gain, had,
some of them, like Ravens, followed the Chaldean Army, to feed upon the
carcasses that fell by the cruelty thereof. Others taking advantage of their
neighbors miseries, occupied the Countries, which, by his Victories, belonged
to Nebuchadnezzar, all of them thinking, that when the Babylonian had satisfied
his fury, he would be forced to forsake those desolated Countries, and leave
the possession of them to those who could first seize upon them. Particularly,
the Edomites, The Jews enemies threatened.
and Philistines, had showed much malice against the Jews when their City was
taken, Esek. 25. 12, 15. Whether they had done any good service to the
Chaldeans, it appears not; if they did any, its like to have been in reference
to their own advantage, wherein yet they were deceived. The Ammonites were not
contented to rejoice only at the fall of Jerusalem, but presently they entered
upon the Country of God, and took possession of it, as if, not the Chaldeans,
but they had subdued Israel, Esek. 25. 3. Jer. 49. 1. Neither can it be
imagined what other design Baalis, King of the Ammonites had, when he sent
Ismael, a Prince of the Blood of Judah, to murder Gedalia, whom the King of
Babel had made Governor over those that remained in Israel, and to carry
Captive into the Ammonites Country, the People that abode in Mizpah, than a
desire of entanglng Nebuchadnezzar with so many labors at once, as should
force him to retire into his own Country, and abandon those wasted Lands, to
himself, and others, for whom they lay conveniently. Such, or the like Policy,
the Moabjtes also did exercise, whose Pride, and Wrath were made frustrate by
God, and their dissimulation condemned, as not doing aright, Jer. 40. 14. and
41. 2. and 10. and 28, 27, etc.

All these Nations had the Art of ravening, They are destroyed by
Nebuchadnezzar.
which is familiar to such as either live in, or that border upon Deserts; and
now the time ministered occasion to them to show the uttermost cunning of their
Thievish wits. But Nebuchadnezzar made void all their devices by sharp, and
sudden War upon them, overwhelming them with unexpected ruin, as it were in
one night, according to the Prophesies of Isay, Isa. 16. 14.
Jeremy, and Esekiel, who all foretold, with little difference of Words, the
greatness, and swiftness of the misery that should come upon them. It appears
not with which of them he first began; but it seems that Moab was the last that
felt his heavy hand: For so, many interpret that Prophecy of Isay, threatening
Moab with destruction after three years, as having reference to the third year
following the destruction of Jerusalem: the next year after it, being spent in
the Egyptian expedition. This is evident that all the principal Towns in these
Countries were burnt, and the people either slain, or made captives, few
excepted, who saved themselves by flight, and had not the courage to return to
their habitations too hastily, much less to attempt any thing against
Nebuchadnezzar: but lived as miserable out laws, until the end of the seventy
years which God had appointed for the desolation of their Countries, as well as
of the Land of Judaea.

When by a long course of Victory Nebuchadnezzar had brought into Subjection
all the Nations of Syria, Egypt attempted by Nebuchadnezzar.
and the bordering Arabians in such wise, as that no enemy to himself, or
Friend to the Egyptian, was left at his back, that might either impede his
proceedings, or take advantage of any misfortune that might befall him; then
did he forthwith apply himself to the Conquest of Egypt, upon which those other
Nations had formerly been dependants. Of this expedition, and the Victorious
issue thereof, the three great Prophets, Isay, Jeremy, and Esekiel have written
so plainly, that its altogether needless to seek after any other authority to
confirm the same. Long before it was prophesied by Isay, that the King of
Assyria, or Babylon, should lead away the Egyptians Prisoners, and the
Ethiopians Captives, young, and old, naked and barefoot, even with their
buttocks uncovered to the shame of Egypt, Isa. 20. 4.

But Esekiel, and Jeremy, as their prophesies were nearer to the time of
execution, so they handled this Argument more plainly, and precisely. For
Esekiel tells us clearly, that Egypt should be given to Nebuchadnezzar as wages
for his great service which he had done against Tire, Esek. 29. 18, 19, 20. He
recounteth also in particular all the chief Citys in Egypt, saying, that these
by name should be destroyed, and go into Captivity: yea, and that Pharaoh, and
all his Army should be slain by the Sword, Esek. 30. 4, 10, etc. Chap. 32, 2,
etc. And the Prophet Jeremy, says thus, Behold I will visit the common people
of Noe, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their Gods and their Kings, even Pharaoh
and all that trust in him; and I will deliver them into the hands of those that
seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadnezar King of Babel, and into
the hands of his Servants, Jer. 46. 25, 26. Josephus accordingly says, that
Nebuchadnezzar in the three and twentieth year of his Reign, and in the
fifteenth year after the destruction of Jerusalem, Egypt conquered.
did Conquer Egypt, and kill the King thereof, appointing a Viceroy to Govern
it. And it is evident that his Victories which followed his Conquest of Syria,
were such as did more enlarge his Dominions, than all his former Wars had done.
For Esekiel in his 30th Chapter reckons up (besides the whole Country of
Egypt) Phut, and Lud, with other Nations that may seem to have reached as far
as into Mauritania, which were conquered by him, and added to his Empire. And
truly it is worth observation how Pharaoh, King of Egypt was infatuated by God,
who thought himself most safe in his own Country by reason of the well-defenced
situation thereof, and therefore very unwisely suffered his enemies to make a
clear way to his own doors by the Conquest of all his Friends, and Allies in
Syria. For as the labor of this business did more harden then weary the
Chaldean Army, Carnal confidences.
so the confidence, and vain security of the Egyptians, relying upon the
difficulty of the passages which the enemy was to make through the Arabian
Deserts, and the great advantage which the River Nilus afforded, did little
avail them, when the War came on; Yea, it did much astonish them (as may justly
be thought) in the time of execution. It being usually seen, that the hearts of
men fail, when those helps deceive them, in which they bad reposed more
confidence than in their own Virtue, and Valor.

Until this time the Kingdom of Egypt had flourished under the Rule and
Government of the Pharaohs for above the space of one thousand, four hundred,
and eighty years. But from this time forward, it remained forty years without a
King under the subjection of the Babylonians; and then at length it began to
recover by little and little the former greatness: Yet so, that it was never
dreadful unto others as it had been, God having said of that people; At the
end of forty years I will gather the Egyptians from the People whither they
were scattered; Egypt never recovered its strength again.
and I will bring again the Captivity of Egypt, and will cause them to return
into the land of Pathros, into the land of their habitation, and they shall be
yet a base* Kingdom* It shall be the basest of the Kingdoms, neither shall it
exalt it self any more above the Nations; F^^ I will diminish them that they
shall no more rule over the Nations, and it shall be no more the confidence of
the House of Israel, Esek. 29* 13, 14, 15, 16. For whereas it had been said of
Pharaoh, I am the Son of the wise, the Son of ancient Kings, Isa. 19. 11. and
whereas they had Vaunted, the River is mine, and I have made it, Esek. 29. 9.
The Princes of Egypt, now became fools, the River failed them, the King himself
was now taken and slain, and that ancient Lineage was quite extinguished.

Of any Wars made by Nebuchadnezzar after such time as he returned from the
Conquest of Egypt, Ninive destroyed. See before
we read not, except that against Ninive, the destruction whereof was forefold
by the Prophet. Ninive indeed had been taken long before by Merodoch, and
together with the rest of Assyria, made subject to Babylon. Yet was it left
under a peculiar King, who rebelling against Nebuchadnezzar, as Jehoiachim, and
Zedechias, Tributary Kings of Judah, had done, was made partaker also of the
same ruin. That the destruction of Ninive followed the Conquest of Egypt, is
clear by the comparison which Nahum the Prophet made between this City that was
to fall, and the City of Noe in Egypt which was fallen already; Nahum 3. 8,
etc. Art thou better than populous Noe, that was situate amongst the Rivers,
that had the waters round about it; whose Rampire was the Sea, and her wall was
from the Sea. Ethiopia, and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite: Put,
and Lubin were her helpers. Yet was she carried away, she went into Captivity;
Her young children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets,
and they cast lots for her honorable men, and all her great men were bound in
chains. Thou also shall be drunken; thou shall be hid; thou also shall seek
strength because of the enemy, etc.

This Great Monarch, having thus spent his younger days in enlarging his
Dominions, he betook himself to rest, that he might reap the fruit of his
former labors; and the first thing that he applied himself to, was to
beautify his Imperial City of Babylon, Babylon beautified
adding a new City to the Old, which he compassed about with three Walls, and
made in them stately Gates. And near the former Palace he built a New one,
more stately than it, wherein he raised stone-works, like unto Mountains, which
he planted with all manner of Trees. He made also Pensile Gardens (one of the
Worlds wonders) born upon Arches, Pensile Gardens.
foursquare, each square being four hundred Foot long, filled above with Earth,
whereon grew all sorts of Trees, and Plants. The Arches were built one above
another in a convenient* height, still increasing as they ascended. The
highest, which did bear the Walls on the top, were fifty Cubits high, so that
they equalized the highest Mountains. He made also Aquaeducts for the watering
of this Garden, which seemed to hang in the air. This most sumptuous frame,
which outlasted all the remainder of the Assyrian, and all the Persian Empire,
is said to have been reared and finished in fifteen Days. Nebuchadnezzars
Golden Image.
He erected also an Image of Gold in the Plain of Dura, sixty Cubits high, and
six broad, commanding all his Servants, and Subjects to fall down and Worship
it, Dan. 3. 1, etc.

But of all this, and other his Magnficence, we find little else recorded, save
that which indeed is most profitable for us to consider, to wit, his
overvalewing of his own greatness, which abased him to a condition inferior to
the poorest of men. For whereas God had honored him, not only with many great,
and glorious Victories, and much happiness in his own life; but with a rare
discovery of things that were to come after him; yea, and had manifested the
certainty of his Dreams, by the miraculous reducing of it into his Memory, and
given him the interpretation thereof by the Prophet Daniel: D^n. 2. 31, etc.
He notwithstanding, became so forgetful of God whose wonderful power he had
seen, His Pride.
and acknowledged, that he caused that Golden Image to be set u^, and
Worshipped, appointing a cruel Death for them that should dare to disobey him,
which was utterly unlawful, and repugnant to the Law of him that is King of
Kings; And thus he who so lately had Worshipped Daniel, the servant of God, as
if he had been God himself: now commanded a Statue to be erected unto himself,
wherein himself might be worshipped as God: From this impiety it pleased God to
recall, and reclaim him, by the wonderful and miraculous delivery of those
three blessed Saints, A Miracle.
out of the fiery Furnace, Dan. 3. 26, etc.
who being thrown bound into the midst of it, for refusing to commit that
abominable Idolatry, were preserved from all hurt of the fire, loosned from
their Bonds, accompanied by an Angel, and at last called out by the King, and
restored to their former honor.

Nebuchadnezzar being amazed at the Miracle, Dan. 3. 29.
mad a Decre tending to the honor of God, He makes a Decree to Gods Honor.
whom by the erection of his Image, he had dishonored. Yet was not this
devotion so rooted in him, that it could bring forth fruit answerable to his
hasty zeal: Therefore was he forewarned of God in a Dream, His dream
interpreted.
of a terrible Judgment which hung over his Head, which Daniel expounding,
withal counseled him to break off his sin by righteousness, and his
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, that there might be a lengthening of
his tranquillity, Dan. 4. 27. whence it seems, that injustice, and cruelty were
his faults, for which he was thus threatened: But neither did the Dream, nor
advice of Daniel so prevail. For probably he believed it not, but looked upon
it as an idle Dream; for that it seemed altogether unlikely that so great a
Monarch should be driven from amongst men, He dwells with the Beasts.
yea, compelled to dwell with the Beasts of ye Field, and made to eat Grass as
ye Oxen, this was altogether incredible in man's Judgment, and therefore giving
so little heed to it, its no marvel that he had forgotten it by the years end.

One whole year was given to this haughty Prince wherein to repent, which
respiting of the execution may seem to have bred in him forgetfulness of Gods
sentence. For at the end of twelve Months as he was walking in his Royal
Palace in Babel, he was so overjoyed, and transported with a vain
contemplation of his own seeming happiness, that without all fear of Gods heavy
Judgment pronounced against him, he uttered these proud words: Is not this
great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of
my power, and for the Honor of my Majesty?

But his proud speeches were not fully ended, when a voice from Heaven told
him, that his Kingdom was departed from him, etc. And the same hour the thing
was fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar, and he was driven from men, and did eat
grass as Oxen, and his Body was wet with the dew of Heaven, till his hair was
grown like Eagles Feathers, and his hails like Birds Claws, Dan. 4. 33, etc.

This his punishment was singular, His Bodily shape not changed.
and unexpected. For he ran amongst beasts in the fields, and woods, where for
seven years he lived, not only as a salvage man, but as a salvage Beast: for a
Beast he thought himself to be, and therefore fed himself in the same manner,
and with the same food that Beasts do. Not that he was changed in his external
shape from a man to a Beast. For as St Jerome well expounds it, when he says,
verse. 34. that his understanding was restored unto him, he showed that he had
not lost his Humane shape, but his understanding, being stricken with a Frenzy,
or deep Melancholy, which made him think himself a Beast.

Seven years being expired, He is restored to his Kingdom.
Nebuchadnezzar was restored both to his understanding, and to his Kingdom: and
(says he) I blessed the most High, and I praised, and honored him that lives
for ever, whose Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom is from
Generation to Generation; And gives Glory to God.
And all the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as nothing, and he does
according to his Will in the Army of Heaven, and amongst the Inhabitants of the
Earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What do thou? At the same
time my reason returned unto me; and for the Glory of my Kingdom, mine honor,
and brightness returned unto me, and my Counselors, and my Lords sought unto
me, and I was established in my Kingdom, and excellent Majesty was added unto
me. Now therefore I Nebuchadnezzar praise, and extol, and honor the King of
Heaven, all whose works are truth, and his way is Judgment, and those that
walk in Pride he is able to abase, Dan. 4. 34, 35, 36, 37.

How long helived after this is uncertain, but all agree that he reigned about
twenty months copartner with his Father in the Kingdom, and about three and
forty years by himself alone.

Whilst Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon raged in Judea, Gods Justice
God prepared a worm, which in due time, should eat out this spreading Tree; by
reason of the cry of his poor People which entered into his ears: According to
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 137. 8, 9. O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be
destroyed: Happy shall he be that rewards thee, as thou have served us. Happy
shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones. For in
this very year was Cyrus, the Perso-Median born; whose Father was a Persian,
and his Mother a Mede; of whom this very Nebuchadnezzar at the hour of his
Death, A Prophecy.
uttered this Prophecy. There shall come a Persian Mule, who shall make use of
your Devils, as his Fellow Soldiers, to bring you into Bondage. He calls Cyrus
a Mule, because he was to be born of a Father and Mother of two diverse Nations.

FINIS.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF CYRUS the Great, THE FIRST FOUNDER of the EMPIRE OF THE
MEDES, and PERSIANS; Represented by the Breast, and Arms of Silver, in that
Image, Dan. 2. 32. and by a Bear, Dan. 7. 5. and by a Ram with two Horns, Dan.
8. 3, 20. And the deliverer of the Israelites out of Babylon, the seventy years
of their Captivity being Expired.

Whereby much light is given to many of the Prophesies of Isay, Jeremy,
Esekiel, and Daniel.

By Sa. Clarke, sometime Minister in St Bennet Fink, London.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door* 1664.

THE LIFE, and DEATH OF CYRUS the Great, The first Founder of the PERSIAN
EMPIRE.
CYRUS was the Son of Cambyses, His Parentage.
King of Persia, by Mandanes the daughter of Astyages, King of Media; He was so
named by the Prophet Isay almost two hundred years before he was born, Isay 45.
1, 4. Thus says the Lord unto Cyrus his anointed, etc.

Cyrus his first Education was under his Father Cambyses, His Education.
with whom he lived till he was twelve years old, and somewhat more; at which
time, he was sent for, together with his Mother Mandanes, by his Gandfather
Astyages, into Media.

In Media he served Astyages, first as one of his Halberdiers, and then as one
of his Armour-bearers till he was called home into Persia by his Father
Cambyses, when as yet he had one year to spend at School; and when he had spent
seventeen years at School amongst Boys, he spent ten years more amongst youths.

When Cyrus was now almost sixteen years old, Evilmerodach the King of Assyria,
being about to marry a wife called Nicotris, His first Action in War.
made an in-rode, with a great Army of Horse and Foot, into the borders of
Media, there to take his pleasure in hunting, and harrassing of the Country:
against whom, Astyages, and Cyaxares his Son, and Cyrus his Grand child, who
then first began to bear Arms, being but about fifteen or sixteen years old,
marched out, met with him, and in a great Battle, overthrew him, and drove him
out his borders. Indeed the Death of Nebuchadnezzar, the Father of
Evilmerodach, gave courage to those that had found him a troublesome neighbor,
to stand upon prouder terms with the Babylonians, than in his flourishing
estate, they durst have used.

But Evilmerodach, being too proud to digest this loss which he had received by
the Medes, and their Allies, the Persians under Cyrus, he drew unto his party
the Lydians, and all the People of the lesser Asia, with great gifts and strong
persuasions, hoping by their assistance to overwhelm his enemies with a strong
invasion, whom in vain he had sought to weary out by a lingering War.

The issue of these great preparations made by Evilm^r^^ach against the Medes,
was such as opened the way to the fulfilling diverse Prophesics which were many
years before uttered against Babel, by Isay, and Jeremy. For the Babylonians
and their Confederates, who, trusting in their numbers, thought to have buried
the Medes and Persians under their thick showers of Arrow, and Darts, were
encountered with an Army of stout and well trained men, weightily Armed for
close fight, by whom they were beaten in a great Battle, Evilmerodach is slain.
wherein Evilmerodach was slain. After which that great Empire that was raised
and upheld by Nebuchadnezzar, was grievously shaken and enfeibled under his
unprosperous Son, and left to be sustained by his Grandchild Belshazzar: a man
more like to have overthrown it when it was greatest and strongest, than to
repair it when it was in a way of falling.

Xenophon relates the matter thus, When the Babylonian had enlarged his Empire
with many Victories, and was become Lord of all Syria, and many other
Countries, he began to hope that if the Medes could be brought under his
Subjection, The strength of Media.
there would not then be left any Nation adjoining, able to make head against
him. For the King of the Medes was able to bring into the Field sixty thousand
Foot, and ten thousand Horse, to which the Forces of Persia being joined, made
an exceeding great Army.

Considering therefore the strength of such a neighbor, he invited Craesus,
King of Lydia, a Prince very mighty both in men and Treasure, and with him
other Lords of Asia the less to his assistance, alleging that those Eastern
Nations, were very powerful, and so firmly conjoined by League, and many
Alliances, that it would not be easy, no nor possible for any one Nation to
resist them.

With these suggestions, backed with rich Presents, he drew to himself so many
adherents, as he compounded an Army of two hundred Thousand Foot, and sixty
thousand Horse: Of which ten thousand Horse, and forty thousand Foot were
brought by Craesus, who had great cause of enmity against the Medes, for that
they had made great Wars against his Father Allyattes. Cyrus made General of
the Army.
Whereupon Cyrus was by his Father Cambyses, and the Council of the Kingdom,
made General of the Persian Army, and sent away into Media with thirty
Thousand Soldiers, and one Thousand Commanders, all of equal Authority under
him; and when he came thither, he was also made by his Uncle Cyaxares, who had
sent for him, General of the Median Forces, and the management of the War
against the Babylonian was wholly committed to him; With this Army he marched
against Evilmerodach, He overthrows the Babylonians.
and his associates, and in a very bloody Bartell, overthrew them. In which
defeat, Evilmerodach, King of Babylon, being slain, so many of his Subjects
revolted, that Babylon it self could no longer be secured but by the help of
Mercenaties, waged with great sums of money out of Asia the less, Egypt, and
other Countries, which new leavied Forces, were also defeated, and scattered by
Cyrus, Cyrus his great victories.
who following his advantage, possessed himself of a great part of the lesser
Asia. Those Persians which followed Cyrus, and were by him levied, are reckoned
to be thirty thousand Foot, of which one thousand were Armed Gentlemen; the
rest of the common sort were Archers, and such as used the Dart, or Sling.

Craesus, notwithstanding the men lost, and the Treasure spent in the quarrel
of the Babylonians, Craesus his Victories.
yet did he Conquer Aeolis, Doris, and Jonia, Provinces possessed by the Greeks
in Asia the less, adjoining to his Kingdom of Lydia. He gave Laws also to the
Phrygians, Bithynians, Carians, Mysians, Paephlagonians, and other Nations. He
also enforced the Ephesians to acknowledge him for their Lord; He also obtained
a signal Victory against the Sacaeans, a Nation of the Scythians; All which he
performed in fourteen years.

And being now confident by reason of his good successes, and withal, envious
at Cyrus his Fame, and prosperity; doubting also that his great Victories might
in the end grow perilous to himself, he consulted with the Oracle of Apollo,
whom he presented with mavelous rich Gifts, what success he might hope for in
his undertakings against Cyrus; from whom he received this ambiguous answer,
Craesus Halym penetrans, The Devils subtilty.
magnam pervertes opum vim: Craesus passing over the River Halys, shall
dissolve a great Dominion: For the Devil being doubtful of his success, gave
him this Riddle, which might be construed either way, to the ruin of Persia,
or of his own Lydia.

Hereupon Craesus (interpreting it as he most desired) resolved to stop the
course of Cyrus his progress, and therefore despised all the Arguments used by
Sandanes to the contrary, Good Counsel neglected.
who desired him to consider aforehand, that he provoked a Nation inhabiting a
barren, and Mountanous Region; a People not covered with the soft silk of
Worms, but with the hard skins of Beasts; not fed with meat to their Fancies,
but content with what they found; Drinkers of Water, and not of Wine; and in a
word, a Nation Warlike, Patient, Valiant, and Porsperous, over whom if he
became Victorious, he could thereby enrich himself in nothing but Fame, in
which he already excelled: and if by them he should be beaten, and subdued, so
great would his loss appear of all things, which the world makes account of,
that the same could neither be hastily recounted, nor easily conceived.

Notwithstanding this solid, Craesus marches against Cyrus.
and seasonable Counsel, Craesus having prepared a powerful Army, advanced
with the same toward Media: but in his passage he was retarded at Pterium, a
City in Cappadocia of great strength; which whilst he attempted both by power
and policy to take, and Conquer, Cyrus came on, and found the Lydians encamped
before it. Neither of these Champions were inferior to other, either in
strength, or opinion. For out of doubt, Craesus, as he excelled any Prince of
that age in Riches, and ability, so was he not inferior unto any in Territories
and Fame, that then lived. But Kingdoms and Commonwealths have their increase,
and Periods from Divine Ordinance. This time was the Winter of Craesus his
prosperity, the leaves of his flourishing estate being ready to fall; and that
of Cyrus but in the first Spring and Flower; the God of all Power, had given a
date to the one, and a beginning of Glory to the other.

When these two Armies were in view each of other, after diverse skirmishes had
passed between them, the Persians, A great Battle.
and Lydians began to join together, and to encounter each other in gross
Bodies; and as either of them began to retreat, fresh supplies were sent in
from both their Kings. And as the Persians had somewhat the better of the Day,
so when the dark vail of night had hidden each Army from the others view,
Craesus doubting what success the rising Sun might bring with it, quitted the
Field to Cyrus, Craesus retreats.
and withal speed possible, retreated toward his own Country, and taking the
next way thither, he recovered Sardis, the first City of Lydia, and his Regal
Seat, without any pursuit made by Cyrus to retard him; where, being arrived,
and nothing suspecting Cyrus his approach, or any other War for that Winter, he
dismised his Army, and sent the Troops of his sundry Nations to their own
Provinces, appointing them to re-assemble at the end of five Months,
acquainting his Commanders with his intent of renewing the War at the time
appointed.

The morning being come, Cyrus finding that the Lydians were departed, put his
Army in order to pursue after them, Cyrus pursues him.
yet not so hastily, and at their heels, as to be discovered. But getting good
intelligence of Craesus his proceedings, he so ordered the matter, that he
presented not himself before Sardis, till such time as Craesus had disposed of
his Army, and sent them to their Winter Quarters. His coming being altogether
unlooked for, and unfeared, And beseiges him in Sardis.
he had opportunity enough to surround Sardis with his Army, wherein Craesus
had no other Companies than the Citizens, and his ordinary Guards, insomuch as
after fourteen days Seige, Sardis taken.
Cyrus took the City by Storm, and put all to the Sword that made resistance.

Craesus now having neither Arms to Fight, nor Wings to fly, in this common
calamity, he throst himself into the heap, and multitude of his miserable
Subjects, and had undergone the same lot with the rest of the vanquished
persons, had not a Son of his, who had been dumb all his Life before (by the
extremity of Passion and Fear) cried out to a common Soldier, Craesus preserved
who was with a drawn Sword pursuing his Father, that he should not kill
Craesus. Hereupon he was taken and imprisoned, and despoiled of all things, but
only the expectation of Death.

Shortly after he was bound with Fetters, and Placed upon a large and high pile
of Wood, to be burnt to ashes thereon. He should have been Burnt, but is saved.
To which, when Fire was set, and kindled, Craesus remembering the discourse
which long before he had with Solon, the Athenian Lawgiver, he thrice cried
out, O Solon, Solon, Solon, and being demanded what he meant by the invocation
of Solon, he at first used silence: But being urged again, he told them that
now he found that true, which wise Solon had long since told him; That many men
in the race and course of their lives might well be accounted Fortunate, but no
man could discern himself to be happy indeed till his end.

Of this his answer, Cyrus being speedily informed, and thereby being put in
mind of the mutability of Fortune, and of his own mortality, he commanded his
Ministers of Justice, speedily to withdraw the Fire, and to save Craesus, and
bring him to his presence; which being done, Cyrus demanded of him, who it was
that had persuaded him? or what reason had instigated him to invade his
Territories, and to make him, of a Friend, an Enemy. To which Craesus thus
answered: It was thy prosperous, and my unprosperous destiny (the Grecian Gods
with all, flattering my Ambition) that were the inventers, and conducters of
Craesus War against Cyrus.

Cyrus being much affected with this answer of Craesus, Cyrus makes him his
friend.
and bewailing his estate, though he was victorious over him, did not only
spare his life, but entertained him ever after as a King, and his companion;
Thus Heroditus relates it. But Xenophon says, that Cyrus did entertain Craesus
friendly at the first sight, and makes no mention of any such cruel intent of
burning him alive; and this may seem the more probable, because Craesus was his
Grandmothers Brother, and its very likely that neerness of Alliance might
withhold Cyrus (if he had been vicious, which he was not) from so cruel a
purpose as to have burnt him alive.

When Cyrus afterward passed with his Army over Araves into Seythia, Cyrus
invades Scythia.
he left Craesus to be a companion, and counselor to his Son Cambyses, whom he
made Governor over his Empire in his absence, with whom he lived all-the Reign
of Cyrus, and did afterward accompany Cambyses in his Expedition into Egypt,
where he hardly escaped his Tyrannous hands. At this time the Races of three of
the greatest Kings in that part of the World came to an end; to wit, of the
Babylonians, Medians, and Lydians, in Balthazar, Xiaxares, or Darius Medus, and
Craesus.

After this Lydian War ensued the great Conquest of Babylon, which gave unto
Cyrus an Empire so large, and mighty, that he was justly reputed the greatest
Monarch then living upon the Earth. How long time the preparations for this
great action took up, is uncertain, only it seems that ten whole years did
pass between his taking of those two Cities of Sardis and Babylon; which time
was not wholly spent in providing for the Assyrian War, but much of it in
settling the Estates which he had already purchased; Ctesias also tells us, that
during this time Cyrus invaded Scythia, and being victorious over that Nation,
he took Amorges their King Prisoner; But being in a second Battle overthrown by
Sparetha, the Wife of Amorges, himself was taken Prisoner, and so one King was
released for the other. His danger.
Gobrias about this time (a Nobleman, whose only Son, the King of Babylon, in
his Fathers life time, had in a hunting match, villainously slain) together
with his Friends, revolted to Cyrus.

Its very probable also, that no small part of those troubles which sprang up
in the lower Asia, grew soon after Cyrus his departure with his Victorious
Army, before the Conquest was fully established. For after Cyrus was returned
out of Asia the less, many Nations which were formerly Conquered by Craesus,
and now by Cyrus, revolted from him; Against whom he employed Pactias, and then
Harpagus, who first reduced the Phocians under their former Obedience; and then
the rest of the Greeks that inhabited Asia the less, as the Jonians, Carians,
Aeolians, and Lycians, who, very resolutely (according to the strength they
had) defended themselyes; But in the attempt upon Babylon it self, its not to
be questioned but Cyrus employed all his Forces, having taken order beforehand,
that nothing should be able to divert him, or to raise that Seige, or to
frustrate that work upon which he did set all his rest.

And great reason there was, The strength of Babylon.
that he should improve all his Policy and strength unto the taking of that
City, which, besides the Fame and reputation that it held, as being the Head of
an Empire, which depended thereupon, was so strongly fortified with a trebble
Wall of great height, and surrounded with the waters of Euphrates, that were
unfordable, and so plentifully Victualled for many years, that the Inhabitants
were not only free from fear, and doubt of their estate, but through their
Confidence, they derided, and despised all the Projects and power of their
Besiegers.

For not long before, Babylon fortified by Nicotris.
Nicotris, the Mother of Belshazzar, a witty, and active Woman, foreseeing the
storm that was ready to fall upon Babylon from the Medes, to hinder their
passing the River by Boats into Babylon, She turned the River Euphrates, which
before ran with a strait, and swift course, drawing it through many winding
Channels, which she had cut for that purpose, whereby she made it to run more
slowly than formerly it did: and then she raised a huge Dam upon each side of
the River; and up the River from the City-ward, she dug a vast Pond, which
was every way three or four hundred Furlongs wide, into which she turned the
River, thereby leaving the old Channel of the River dry; which done, she fell
to work, and fenced the Banks within the City with Brick-walls, and raised the
Water-Gates, answerable in every point to the rest of the Walls, which were
made on the farther side of the Channel, round about the City. She built also a
stately, and Magnificent Bridge of Stone in the midst of the City, which joined
to the Kings Houses, that stood on each side the River: and having finished all
her Works, and Fortifications, she turned the River out of the Pond into its
right Channel again.

And now came Cyrus to invade the Country of Babylon, Cyrus invades Babylon.
and appeared before the Walls of the City, and there challenged the King to a
Duel, or single Combat, but he refused it. At this time Gadatas, a Noble man
of Babylon, whom Belshazzar had gelt, upon a jealousy that he had of him with
his Wife, fell over to Cyrus, in revenge whereof the Babylonians sallied out,
and fell upon his Lands; but Cyrus set upon them, and routed them; At which
time the Cadusii whom Cyrus had appointed to bring up the rear of his Army,
unknown to Cyrus, set upon a Country lying near to the City; but the King of
Babylon falling out upon them, cut them all off. Yet Cyrus, quickly revenged
the Death of his men; and then came to an agreement with Belshazzar, to hold
truce with the Ploughmen on both sides, and the War to go on between the
Soldiers only. After which, passing beyond the City, he took in three of
their Forts, and so returned into the confines of Assyria, and Media; and
thither, upon his invitation, came his uncle Cyaxares, and was by him
honorably received; and entertained in a Pavilion, that had been the King of
Assyrias: and Winter now approaching, they entered into consulatation to provide
things necessary to maintain the Siege.

The only hope of Cyrus with his Medes, Cyrus besieges it.
and Persians (who despaired of carrying by assault a City so well, and
strongly fortified, and manned) was in cuting off all supplies of victuals, and
others necessaries; Whereof, though the Town was said to be stored sufficiently
for more than twenty years, yet might it well be imagined, that amongst such a
World of People as dwelt within those Walls, one great want or other would soon
appear amongst them, and vanquish the resolution of that unwarlike multitude.
Yet in expecting that success of this course, the Besiegers were likely to
endure much hardship, and travel, and that all in vain, if they did not keep
strict watch, and sure guards upon all the Avenues, and Quarters of it.

Which that he might the better do, he caused presently a vast trench, both for
breadth and depth to be cast round about the Walls of the City, casting the
earth ever toward his own Army, and made store of Bulworks all along upon it,
for his Guards to be upon: and then, dividing his whole Army into twelve parts,
he ordered that each of them should Watch his Month, by turn.

And yet this was a very hard work, The Babylonlans vain Hopes.
considering the vast circuit of those Walls which they were to gird in, having
neither men enough, nor yet sufficiently assured to their Commander; the
consideration whereof Ministered unto the Babylonians matter of good Pastime,
when they saw the Lydians, Phrygians, Cappadocians, and others, quartered about
their City to keep them in, who, having been their Ancient Friends, and Allies,
were more like to join with them, if occasion were offered, than to use much
diligence on the behalf of Cyrus, who had, as it were but yesterday, laid upon
their necks the galling Yoke of servitude.

Whilst the Besieged were thus pleasing themselves with this foolish fancy,
and vain mirth (the ordinary forerunners of sudden calamity) Cyrus, who by God
that set him on work, Cyrus's stratagem.
was made strong, valiant, constant, and inventive, devised, and by the labor
of his men, dug so many Channels as were capable of receiving the Waters of
Euphrates, and so to draw the same from the Walls of Babylon, that thereby he
might make his approaches the more facile, and assured, which, when by the
labor of many hands he had performed, he waited for a fi^ time wherein to put
in execution, what he had designed. For he had left in each of the Trenches
toward the River, certain Banks, or Heads uncut till he saw his opportunity.

Now Belshazzar finding neither any want or weakness within the City,
Belshazzars Feast.
nor any possibility for his enemies without, to approach the Walls by reason
of the great River that surrounded them, he prepared an exceeding sumptuous
Feast, Public Plays, and other Pastimes, and thereto invited a Thousand of his
Princes, or Nobles, besides his Wives, Courtezans, and others of that Trade.
This he did, either to let the Besiegers know that his Provisions were
sufficient, not only for all needful uses, but even for superfluity, and
excess; Or because he hoped that his enemies by this time were discouraged, and
even broken under their manifold disasters: Or else he made this Feast in
Honor of Bell, his most adored Idol: or lastly, because it was his Birth, or
Coronation Day: Or for many, or most of these respects.

Yea, he was not contented to use, and show such Magnificence as no Prince else
could Equal, but he listed up himself against the God of Heaven, Dan. 5. 23.
For he, his Princes, his Wives, and his Concubines, made Carousing Cups of the
Golden, and Silver Vessels which his Grandfather Nebuchadnezzar had taken out
of the Temple which was at Jerusalem; His Blasphemy.
and in contempt of the Lord of Heaven, he praised his own Puppets made of
Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Iron, and Wood, and Stone; Whilst Belshazzar
was thus tryumphing, and had his brains well filled with vapors, he beheld a
hand, which by Divine power wrote upon the Wall that was opposite to him, The
Writing on the Wall.
certain Words which he understood not, wherewith, so great a fear, and
amazement seized upon him, that the joints of his loins were loosed, The Kings
distraction
and his knees smote one against another; Which Passion when he had in some
measure recovered, he cried aloud to bring in the Astrologers, the Chaldeans,
and the Southsayers, promising them great rewards, and the third place of
Honor in his Kingdom, to him that could read, and expound the writing: But it
exceeded their Art, and Skill.

In this disturbance, The Queen comforts him.
and astonishment, the Queen, hearing what had passed, came in, and observing
what distraction the King was in, after Reverence done, She used this Speech; O
King live for ever; Let not thy thoughts trouble thee, non let thy countenance
be changed; there is a man in thy Kingdom in whom is the Spirit of the holy
Gods, and in the Days of thy Father light, and understanding, and Wisdom like
the Wisdom of the Gods was found in him, whom the King Nobuchadnezzar thy
Father, the King I say, thy Father made Master of the Magicians, the
Astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the Southsayers; For as much as an Excellent
Spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, in interpreting Dreams, and showing
of hard Sentences, and dissolving of doubts were found in the same Daniel, whom
the King named Belteshazzar. Now let Daniel be called, and he will show the
Interpretation.

This Queen was either the Grandmother, or the Mother of Belshazzar; For it
appears that She was not any of the Kings Wives, because She was absent from
the Feast, and in regard of her age, past-banquetting, and dancing; Yet upon
the report of the Miracle, She came in to comfort, and cheer up the King; and
whereas Daniel was forgotten, and neglected by others, of younger years, and
latter times, this old Queen remembered well, what Daniel had done in the days
of Nebuchadnezzar; Grandfather to this Belshazzar, and kept in mind, both his
Religion, and Divine gifts.

When Daniel was brought into the Kings presence, Daniel brought in.
he said unto him: Art thou that Daniel, which art of the Children of the
Captivity of Judah; whom the King my Father brought out of Jewry? The Kings
Speech to him.
I have heard of thee that the Spirit of the Gods is in thee, and that light,
and understanding, and excellent Wisdom is found in thee; and now the Wise men
and the Astrologers have been brought in before me, that they should read, this
writing, and make known to me the Interpretation thereof, but they could not do
it: And I have heard of thee that thou can make Interpretations, and dissolve
doubts: Now if thou can read the Writing, and make known to me the
Interpretation thereof, thou shall be clothed with Scarlet, and have a chain of
Godl above thy neck, and shall be the third Ruler in the Kingdom.

But Daniel made answer in a far differing style from that which he had used to
his Grandfather; Daniels answer.
For the evil which he had foretold to Nebuchadnezzar he wished that it might
befall his enemies: But to this King (whose contempt of God and vicious life he
hated, he answered in these Words; Let thy gifts be to thy self, and give thy
rewards to another: Yet I will read the writing to the King, and make known to
him the Interpretation: which yet before he did, he showed him the cause of
Gods judgments against him, and the reason of this terrible sentence, whereof
the King and all his Wise men were utterly Ignorant, the substance whereof is
this, That Belshazzar forgetting Gods goodness to his Father, whom all Nations
feared, and obeyed, and yet for his Pride, and neglect of those benefits, as he
had deprived him of his Estate, and understanding; so upon the acknowledgement
of Gods infinite power, he restored him to both again; And thou his Son (said
he) O Belshazzar, have not humbled thy heart, though thou knew all this, But
have lifted up thy self against the Lord of Heaven, and they have brought the
Vessels of his House before thee, and thou and thy Lords, thy Wives and thy
Concubines have drunk Wine in them, and thou have praised the gods of Silver,
and Gold, etc. and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy
ways, have thou not Glorified: Then was the part of the hand sent from him, and
this writing was written, He reads, and Interprets the writing.
Mean, Mean, Tekel, Upharsin, Whereof this is the Interpretation: Mean, God
has numbered thy Kingdom, and finished it: Tekel, Thou art weighted in the
ballanees, and art found wanting: Peers, Thy Kingdom is divided, and given to
the Medes, and Persians.

The very evening or Night of this Day, wherein Belshazzar thus Feasted, and
wherein these things were done, Cyrus, either by his Espeials, or being
inspired by God himself, whose Ensign he followed in these Wars, finding the
time, and opportunity fit for him, even whilst the Kings Head, Cyrus drains
Euphrates.
and the Heads of his Nobility, were no less distempered with the vapors of
Wine, than their hearts were with the fear of Gods Judgments, he caused all
the Banks, and Heads of his Trenches, to be opened, and cut down with all
speed, and diligence, whereby that great River Euphrates was quickly drawn dry,
and himself with his Army passing through the Channel which was now dry,
without any opposition, they easily made their entrance into the City, finding
none to disturb them; Invadunt urbem somno, Vinoque sepultam: All the Town lay
buried in Wine and Sleep; Babylon taken.
and such as came in the Persians way, were put to the Sword unless they saved
themselves by flight, as some did, who ran away crying, and filled the Streets
with an uncertain tumult.

Such of the Assyrian Lords as had formerly revolted from Belshazzar to Cyrus,
did now conduct a Selected company to the Kings Palace, which being easily
forced by them, they rushed strait into the Chamber where the King and his
Princes were Banqueting, Belshazzar slain.
and there slew both him and them without mercy, who strove in vain to keep
those lives, which God had newly threatened to take away. Now was that
prophecy fulfilled, Jer. 51. 30, 31, 32. The mighty men of Babylon have
forborne to fight; Prophesies fulfilled.
they have remained in their Holds; their might has failed; they became as
women; they have burnt their dwelling places; Her bars are broken. One Post
shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet another, to show the King
of Babylon that his City is taken at one end. And that the passages are stopped
(viz. of the River Euphrates) and the Reeds they have burnt with fire, and the
men of War are affrighted; The Prophet Isay also, two hundred years before this
subversion of Babylon, in his forty seventh Chapter, and elsewhere, describes
this destruction so feelingly, and lively, as if he had been present, both at
the terrible slaughter there committed, and had seen the great and unseared
change, and calamity of this great Empire; Yea, and had also heard the sorrows
and bewallings of every surviving Soul, thereunto subject; which Prophecy he
begins with these words; Come down and sit in the dust, O Virgin daughter of
Babylon, sit on the Ground; there is no Throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans:
For thou shall no more be called tender, and delicate, etc. And though it
cannot be doubted that God used Nebuchadnezzar, and the Chaldeans as his
Instruments to punish the Idolatry, and wickedness of the Jews, yet did he not
forget that in the Execution of Gods Judgments, they had used much rigor, and
extremity; as we see Isay 47. 6. I was wroth with my People; I have polluted
mine Inheritance, and given them into thine hand; Thou did show them no
mercy; Upon the Ancient have thou very heavily laid the Yoke; and again, I will
rise up against them, says the Lord of Hosts, and will cut off from Babel the
Name, and the remnant, and the Son, and the Nephew: Meaning Evilmerodach, and
Belshazzar. And again, Isay 13. 15, etc. Every one that is found shall be
thrust through; and every one that is joined to them shall be slain with the
Sword; their Children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes, their
Houses shall be spoiled, and their Wives ravished. Behold, I will stir up the
Medes against them, which shall not regard Silver, and as for Gold, they shall
not delight in it; their Bows also shall d^sh the young men to pieces, and
they shall have no pity on the fruit of the Womb; their eye shall not spare
children. And Babylon, the Glory of Kingdoms, and beauty of the Chaldees
excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom, and Gomorrah, etc. Read also
Chapter fourteenth. No Historian that was either present at this Victory of
Cyrus, or that received the report from others truly as it was, could better
describe, and leave the same to posterity after it was acted, than Isay has
done in many parts of his Prophecy, which were written two hundred years
before any of these things were attempted.

The Greatness, The greatness of Babylon.
and Magnificence of Babylon, were it not by diverse grave Authors recorded,
might seem altogether Fabulous; For it is reported for truth, that one part of
the City knew not that the other was taken three days after; which is not
impossible if we consider the vast Circumference of it. Diodorus Siculus says,
that it was in compass three hundred, and sixty Furlongs, which make forty five
Miles. The Walls were so thick that six Chariots might pass in front thereon,
and they were three hundred sixty and five Foot high, and were adorned, and
beautified with one hundred and fifty Towers. Strabo gives a greater circuit,
adding twenty five Forlongs more to the former compass, reckoning it at three
hundred eighty five Furlongs, which makes forty eight Miles and one Furlong.
Herodotus finds the compass yet to be greater, namely four hundred and eightty
Furlongs in circuit; the thickness of the Wall he measures at fifty Cubits, and
the height at two hundred of the same Regal Cubits. For entrance, it had a
hundred Gates of Brass, with Posts, and Hooks to hang them on of the same
Metal; and therefore did the Prophet Isay rightly entitle Babylon, The
Princess, and Glory of Kingdoms, Isay 47. 5. and 13. 19.

But when Cyrus had won her, he stripped her out of her Princely Robes, Babylons
miserable Captivity.
and made her a slave, dividing, not only her goodly Houses, and her whole
Territory, with all the Riches therein contained, amongst his Soldiers; but
also bestowed the Inhabitants themselves as Bondslaves, upon those that had
taken possession of their goods.

Cyrus having obtained this great, and Signal Victory, the glory of which was
a reward for his service done for him who was the Author of it, and of all
goodness, and thereby translated the Empire of the Chaldeans to himself, Cyrus
releases the Jews.
according to the Prophesies which went before of him; in this first year of his
Empire, he made a Decree that the Captive Jews should return again into their
own Country of Judea, and that they should build again the House of God in
Jerusalem, having now endured, and finished the seventy years Captivity
foretold by the Prophet Jeremy. The tenor of which Decree was thus,

Thus says Cyrus King of Persin; His Decree for it.
The Lord God of Heaven has given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and has
charged me to build him an House at Jerusalem which is in Judah, Who is there
among you of all his People? Let his God be with him, and let him go up to
Jerusalem which is in Judah, and build the House of the Lord God of Israel (He
is God) which is at Jerusalem: And whosoever remains in any place where he
sojourneth, let the men of his place help him with Silver, and with Gold, and
with goods, and with Beasts, besides the free will Offering for the House of
God that is in Jerusalem, Ezra 1, 2, 3, 4. He also brought forth and restored
the Vessels of the House of the Lord which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out
of the Temple at Jerusalem, and had put them into the House of his gods; These
were brought forth and numbered unto Sheshbazzar the Prince of Judah; Or
Zorobabel.
and this is the number of them; Thirty Charges of Gold, a thousand Chargers of
Silver, He restores the vessels of the Temple.
nine and twenty Knives, thirty Basins of Gold, Silver Basins of a second sort
four hundred and ten, and of other vessels a thousand; All the vessels of Gold
and Silver were five thousand and four hundred.

The number of Jews that then returned out of Chaldea, The Jews come to
Jerusalem.
under their Leader Zorobabel, the Son of Salathiel, and Nephew to King
Jeconias, and Joshua the Son of Josedech, the High Priest, were about fifty
thousand: And as soon as they arrived at Jerusalem, they built an Altar to the
living God, and sacrificed thereon according to their Law, and afterward
bethought themselves how to prepare materials for the building of the Temple.

Cyrus having set all things in order at Babylon, returned, through Media, into
Persia, to his Father Cambyses, and his Mother Mandanes, who were yet living;
and from thence returning again into Media, His Marriage.
he married the only Daughter and Heir of Cyaxares, and for Dowry, had the
whole Kingdom of Media given him with her; And when the Marriage was finished,
he presently went his way, and took her with him; and coming to Babylon, from
thence he sent Governors into all his Dominions; His Governors.
Into Arabia he sent Megabyzus; into Phrygia the greater, Artacaman; into
Lydia, and Jonia, Chrysantas; into Caria, Adusius; into Phrygia Hell
spontiaca, or the less, Pharmichas; But into Cilicia, and Cyprus, and
Paphlagonia, he sent no Persians to Govern them, because they voluntarily, and
of their own accord took his part against the King of Babylon; yet he caused,
even them also to pay him Tribute.

Cyrus having spent one whole year with his Wife in Babylon, His great Army,
and Victories.
gathered thither his whole Army, consisting of one hundred and twenty Thousand
Horse, and two Thousand Iron Chariots, and six hundred Thousand Footmen, and
having furnished himself with all necessary provisions, he undertook that
journey wherein he subdued all the Nations inhabiting from Syria to the Red Sea.

The time that Cyrus enjoyed in rest and pleasure after these great Victories,
Cyrus his Civil Government.
and the attainment of his Empire, is generally agreed upon by all Chronologers
to have lasted only seven years; In which time he made such Laws and
Constitutions as differ little from the Ordinances of all wife Kings that are
desirous to establish a Royal power to themselves and their Posterity, which
are recorded by Xenophon.

The last War, His last Wars.
and the end of this Great King Cyrus is diversely written by Historians:
Herodotus, and Justine say: That after these Conquests, Cyrus invaded the
Massagets, a very Warlike Nation of the Scythians, Governed by Tomyris, their
Queen: and that in an encounter between the Persians, and these Northern
Nomades, Tomyris lost her Army, together with her Son Spa^gapises that was the
General of it. In revenge whereof this Queen making new levies of men of War,
and prosecuting the War against Cyrus, in a second sore Battle, the Persians
were beaten, and Cyrus was taken Prisoner, and that Tomyris cut off his Head
from his Body, and threw it into a Bowl of blood, using these words, Thou that
have all thy time thirsted for blood, now drink thy fill, and satiate thy self
with it. This War which Metasthenes calls Tomyrique, lasted about six years.

But more probably this Scythian War was that which is mentioned before, which
Cyrus made against the Scythians after the Conquest of Lydia, according to
Ctesias, who calls Tomyris, Sparetha, and makes the end of it otherwise, as
you may see before.

The same Ctesias also records, that the last War which Cyrus made was
against Amarhaus, King of the Derbitians, another Nation of the Scythians,
whom, though he overcame in Battle, yet there he received a wound whereof he
died three days after. His Death.


Strabo also affirms, that he was buried in his own City of Pasagardes, which
himself had built, and where his Epitaph was to be read in Strabo's time; which
he says was this,

O, His Epitaph.
vir, quicunque es, and undecunque advenis, neque enim te adventurum ignoravi:
Ego sum Cyrus, qui Persis Imperium constitui; pusillum hoc Terrae, quo meum
tegitur Corpus, mihi ne invideas. O thou man, whosoever thou art, and
whenever thou come, for I was not ignorant that thou should come: I am
Cyrus that founded the Persian Empire: Do not envy unto me this little Earth
with which my Body is covered.

When Alexander the Great returned from his Indian Conquests, he visited
Pasagardes, and caused this Tomb of Cyrus to be opened, Alexander opens his
Sepulcher And honors his Tomb.
either upon hope of great Treasure, supposed to have been buried with him, or
upon a desire to honor his dead Body with certain Ceremonies; when the
Sepulcher was opened, there was found nothing in it, save an old rotten Target,
two Scythian Bows, and a Sword. The Coffin wherein his Body lay, Alexander
caused to be covered with his own Garment, and a Crown of Gold to be set upon
it.

Cyrus finding in himself that he could not long enjoy the World, he called
unto him his Nobility, with his two Sons, Cyrus his last words.
Cambyses, and Smerdis, and after a long Oration, wherein he assured himself,
and taught others, about the immortality of the Soul, and of the punishments
and rewards following the ill, and good deservings of every man in this life;
He exhorted his Sons, by the strongest Arguments he had, to a perpetual
Concord and agreement. Many other things he uttered, which makes it probable,
that he received the knowledge of the true God from Daniel, whilst he Governed
Susa in Persia; and that Cyrus himself had read the Prophecy of Isay, wherein
he was expressly named, and by God preordained for the delivery of his People
out of Captivity; which act of delivering the Jews, and of restoring of the
holy Temple, and the City of Jerusalem, was in true consideration the
Noblest-work that ever Cyrus performed. For in other actions he was an
Instrument of Gods Power, used for the chastising of many Nations, and the
establishing of a Government in those parts of the world, which yet was not to
continue long: But herein he had the favor to be an Instrument of Gods
goodness, and a willing advancer of his Kingdom upon earth, which must last for
ever.

Cyrus had Issue two Sons, His Issue.
Cambyses, and Smerdis, and three Daughters, Atossa, Meroe, and Artistoua. At
his Death he bequeathed his Empire to his Eldest Son Cambyses, appointing
Smerdis, his younger Son, to be Satrapa, or Leiutenant of Media, Armenia, and
Cadusia. He reigned about one and thirty years, and died aged.

The Greek Historians wholly ascribe the Conquest of Babylon to Cyrus, because
that he commanded the Army in Chief; yet the Scriptures attribute it to Darius,
King of the Medes, whose General Cyrus was: For when Babylon was taken, and
Belshazzar slain; Its said, Dan. 5. 31. that Darius the Median took the
Kingdom, being about sixty two years old. It was Darius also that placed
Officers over the several Provinces thereof, as we read, Dan. 6. 1, 2. It
pleased Darius to set over the Kingdom a hundred and twenty Princes, which
should be over the whole Kingdom, and over these, three Presidents, of whom
Daniel was the first, etc. And thus was it Prophesied by Isay long before;
Behold! I will stir up the Medes against them, etc. and by the Prophet Jeremy;
The Lord has raised up the Spirit of the King of the Medes: for his device is
against Babylon, etc. Jer. 55. 11. And again, verse 28. Prepare against her the
Nations, with the Kings of the Medes, the Captains thereof, and all the Rulers
thereof, and all the Land of his Dominion.

But certain it is that the Honor of that great Victory over Babylon was
wholly given to Cyrus, who was the Instrument preordained, and forenamed by God
himself: not only for this Action; but also for the delivery of his Church:
Yet Daniel makes it plain, that himself: not only lived a great Officer under
King Darius, but that he continued in that estate to the first year of Cyrus,
which was not long after, which also was the year of Daniels Death.

As for the age of Cyrus we are beholding to Tully for it; who in his first
Book de Divinatione, Cites it out of one Dionysius, a Persian Writer, in this
manner. The Sun (says Dionysius) appeared unto Cyrus in his sleep, standing at
his feet, which, when Cyrus thrice endeavored to take in his hands, the Sun
still turned aside, and went away: and the Magi, who were the most learned men
amongst the Persians, said that by his thrice offering to take hold of the Sun,
was portended to him that he should reign thirty years; His Age.
which came to pass accordingly: For he lived to the Age of seventy years, and
began not to reign till he was forty.

In the first year of Belshazzar, Some useful Observations.
Daniel had the Vision showed him of the four Beasts, signifying the four
Monarchies; and of God delivering over all power, and Sovereignty to the Son of
man, Dan. 7.

In the third year of Belshazzar, the Vision of the Ram, and Goat, foreshewing
the destruction of the Persian Monarchy by Alexander the Great, and the great
misery which Antiochus should bring upon the People of God was showed to
Daniel, living then at Susa, in the Province of Elam, upon the bank of the
River Vlai, which environed the Castle of Susa, and parted the Provinces of
Susa, and Elemais, Dan. 8. whence we may collect, that at that time the
Province of Susa was not in the hands of the Medes and Persians, but of the
Babylonians, under whom Daniel then lived.

Darius the Mede, son of Cyaxares, or Ahasuerus the Son of Adyages, took upon
him the Kingdom, which was delivered over to him by Cyrus, the Conqueror, Dan.
5. 31. and 9. 1. The Angel, in this first year of his Reign, is said to have
confirmed, and strengthened him in his Kingdom, Dan. 11. 1. After which he
reigned two years.

Toward the end of the first year of Darius the Mede, the seventy years of the
Babylonish Captivity expired, which began under Jehoiakim, in the first year of
Nebuchadnezzar, at which time God promised that they should return into their
own Country, Jer. 29. 10. Thus says the Lord, that after seventy years be
accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good Word toward
you, in causing you to return to this place. Upon consideration of which very
time, now so near approaching, it was, that Daniel powered out that most fervent
Prayer for the Remission of his own sins, and of his Peoples; and for that
promised deliverance out of their Captivity: Whereupon the Angel Gabriel
brought him an answer, not only concerning this, but also for the spiritual
deliverance of the Church to be wrought at last by the Death of the Messiah,
uttering that most famous, and memorable Prophecy of the seventy Weeks, Dan.
9. 12, etc.

The Samaritans, by the means of some Courtiers about Cyrus, whom they had
bribed for that purpose, distributed the Jews in their building of the Temple,
Ezra 4. 5. Whence proceeded that three weeks mourning of the Prophet Daniel,
which Fast he begun about the third Day of the first Month, in the third year
of Cyrus, Dan. 10. 1. 4. After which, upon the four and twentieth Day of the
first Month, that vision of the Kings of Persia; of Alexander the Great, and
his Successors, and their Kingdoms, was showed and revealed unto Daniel, as he
stood upon the bank of Hiddikel, or Tygris; All which is contained in the three
last Chapters of Daniel; which (as may be collected out of the close thereof)
was the last Vision that ever he had, and that but a little before his Death.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, be pleased to take notice that these Books following, are
Printed for, and sold by William Miller, at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door.

Hick^s Revelation, Revealed, Folio

Clares Martyrology Complete, with the Persecutions of England to the end of
Queen Mary's Reign, Folio.

-- Lives of ten Eminent Divines, some being as follow; Bishop Usher, Dr Gouge,
Dr Harris, Mr Gataker, Mr Whittaker, etc. and some other famous Christians.

-- Life of Christ, 4o

-- Life of Herod the Great, 4o

A Prospect of Hungary, and Transylvania, together with an account of the
qualities of the Inhabitants, the Commodities of the Countries, the Chiefest
Cities, Towns, and Strongholds, Rivers, and Mountains, with an Historycal
Narration of the Wars amongst themselves, and with the Turks, continued to this
year 1664. As also a Brief Description of Bohemia, Austria, Bavaria,
Steirirark, Croatia, Dalmatia, Moravia, and other Adjacent Countries, contained
in a Map joined therewith; by which Map you may know which Places are in the
Power of the Turk, and which Christians have 4o

Ctadocks KNOWLEDGE and PRACTICE; Or, a Plain Discourse of the Chief Things
necessary to be KNOWN, BELIEVED, and PRACTICED in Order to SALVATION; 4o

Ford, of Baptism, 8o

Cott^n, on the Covenant of Grace, 8o

Culverwell, of Assurance, 8o

Records Urinal of Physic, 8o

Ravius Oriental Grammar, 12o

Peacocks Visitation, 12o

Dr Tuckney's Good Day well Improved, 12o

-- Death Disarmed, 12o

-- Balm of Gilead, 12o

Clamor Sanguinis, 12o

King Charles's Works, 24o


