CANTERBVRY'S WILL. WITH A serious Conference between His Scrivener and Him.
ALSO A loving Admonition to his Brethren the Bishops.



Printed in the Year 1641.

CANTERBVRY'S WILL. With a serious Conference between his Scrivener and Him.
Scrivener. MY Lord did you send for me?


Laud. Scrivener, I did. Yesterday in the morning finding my body not at ease,
I sent my water to the Doctor, whose opinion concerning it was this, that he
could perceive nothing in it, but grim Death with his unpartiall Dart.


Scriv. My Lord, the Fates me thinks are too blame as yet to conspire your
Graces Death.


Laud. Friend, do not flatter me, it is not the Fates but Justice which
requires my Death: do thou not hear as thou walk along the streets, how
each School boys mouth is filled, with a Give little Laud to the Devil.


Scriv. I must confess, my Lord, that I have often heard the repetition of
those words, but never until now knew they did concern your Grace.


Laud. Nulla dies sine linea, there is no day passes without some scandalous
Libell or other concerning me; that Poet is accounted of no estimation, whose
fa^sie cannot elevate it self so high as to break my (once stony) heart.


Scriv. Why star^s your Grace?


Laud. Because living so long, I have had so little Grace.


Scriv. My Lord, be not angry with me, if I make use of an old saying and apply
it to your self.


Laud. Speak your pleasure, Friend.


Scriv. Once being in company, each man was vaunting of his honesty; one
amongst the rest starts up, and speaks thus:

I am a man which was borne with as much honesty as the best man here, and have
made as little use of it: wherefore they all concluded, that he had the more to
come: so, although your Grace hitherto have made but little use of grace, be
comforted with this, that the more grace is to come.


Laud. So truly I hope. But prithee friend, tell me seriously, what is the
common report abroad concerning me? do not flatter, but speak the truth.


Scriv. I hope your Grace does not take me to be any of the Devils son in
Laws, for he is father of all lies, as for my part I could never endure him, he
has such a damnable hot breath, nay, and he stinks as bad; some say he had the
Patent for Brimstone, which was the reason that not long since Tiffenies were
out of fashion.


Laud. Thou art disposed to be merry: but prithee come to the purpose.


Scriv. As the Priest said, when he did you wot what: but to answer your
demand; and if it please your Grace, there are so many things reported abroad
concerning you, that I had need to have as many tongues as Argus had eyes, to
report them to your Grace: but hoping you will take my will for the deed, I
thus begin. Some say you are a Papist, for setting up Altars; others a
murderer for the death of Thomas Bensteed; others a foe to young Gregory the
hangman.


Laud. Why to him a foe?


Scriv. Because your Grace has sneakt your head out of the collar so long.


Laud. I can have patience to hear no further.


Scriv. My Lord, two years since, what was he which durst so to have reviled
you, I am sure you had two or three by the ears for a less matter.


Laud. Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamurin illis.
Oh vain it is, to say what I have been,
The times are changed, and I am changed therein.
But what Death do they say I must die?


Scriv. Some say, you shall be hanged, others burnt, not one will endure to
hear you shall have the Honor to be beheaded.


Laud. It Is wonder some do not say, I will poison my self.


Scriv. So they do, I went the other day to the Apothecaries for a little
Ratsbane to kill the Ratts about my house, and he would not let me have it,
because he knew I was one of your Graces favorites, least I should bring it
unto you, and you should poison your self with it, and so save the hangman a
labor. Does your Grace think now that I flatter you.


Laud. I think thou do not: but now come and prepare thy self to write my
Will.


Scriv. Most willingly my Lord.


Laud. First, I bestow my Miter, with the appurtenances, which have been
upholders of my pride, and causers of my downfall, to some learned and pious
Prelate, which may make better use of it, than ever I did. Secondly, my
Crosses, Beads, Tapers, Holy water, and the like, I bestow upon the Pope, and
all his cursed crew.


Scriv. My Lord, I pray hold a little: I have heard much talk of the Pope, I
pray tell me what manner of fellow is he?


Laud. I will truly define him unto thee; He is one which goes about in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly is a ravening wolf; his sole intention is to
rob God of glory, and man of felicity: he is the Antichrist, the whore of
Babylon, the chief embracer of all ambitious thoughts; wherefore let all men
as they tender their own salvation, beware of him, and his cursed deeds; his
thoughts are bloody, and his paths lead unto destruction.


Scriv. Say you so? for that trick I will never go to Rome, least like a
roaring Lion he should devour me: Now if it please your Grace to go forward,
I am ready.


Laud. Thirdly, my Manuscripts I bequeath to the fire, because they savor
rather of Popery than sound Religion: my Books to poor Scholars, and best of
my Chaplains, which are most free from the sect of the Arminians.

Fourthly, the wealth which I have besides, I bestow it freely (with the leave
of the Parliament) upon all those which I ever wronged, which my conscience
tells me are too many, that to think of it my heart is ready to break. A few
more Legacies I have yet to bestow, which are these; My prayers for the whole
Realm; my admonition to future Judges, that they forsake and contemn bribery,
and love and cherish equity. My counsel to the Hierarchy; that they be humble
minded, tender hearted, piously affected, industriously to their studies
bended, preaching painfully and purely, that it may prove to the edification
and salvation of the people: let my falling by sin, be a cause of their
rising by grace: but let those of the Episcopacy beware especially of pride,
which is a vice so horrid in the sight of God, that for it he made Lucifer
which was a shining Angel in heaven, to be a damned fiend in hell.


Scriv. Has your Grace finished now?


Laud. I have.


Scriv. I wonder you should send for me to write your Will, no sign of Death
being in your face.


Laud. Thy Argument is of no consequence; it is sufficient that I have deserved
Death, and how soon I may have according to my desert, it is unknown to me,
wherefore it is good to take Time whilst Time is.


Scriv. My Lord, I can only be sorry for your misfortune, and that's as much as
I can do.


Laud. For thy sorrow I thank thee, but alas, it can do me no good; it must
be prayer of others, and penitency of my own, must lead me unto true beatitude
and comfort.


Scriv. When Cedars fall, what will become of us poor shrubs?


Laud. Do thou not daily see, the lusty and tall Oak hewed down, and yet
the Bramble still does keep its residence.


Scriv. If all our Oaks should be hewed down, the Bramble sure would much
lament their fall.


Laud. If that they old and hollow were, they would not.


Scriv. All this Time you plead against your self.


Laud. In so doing I act the part of a wise Lawyer, whose cause being good, it
is ten to one if he have not the better of the suit. If I should have taken an
advantage of thy proposition, and have pleaded for my self, no man of what
capacity soever, but that with great facility might have convinced me.


Scriv. O my Lord, had your Grace been in this mind you now are in six years
since, you never had exchanged Lambeth Palace for a Tower Lodging.


Laud. Thou say too true: my watery casement no longer will stand shut,
wherefore farewell.


Scriv. Farewell.


Ye Bishops which in Honors Poole do swim,
Aim not too high, least that you sink with him.
FINIS.

