The grand Trial: OR, Poetical Exercitations UPON THE BOOK of JOB. WHEREIN,
Suitable to each Text of that sacred Book, a modest Explanation, and
Continuation of the several Discourses contained in it, is attempted BY WILLIAM
CLARK.

Nam momentanea est ira ejus, vita vero in beneplacito ejus, ad vesperam
accedat fletus licet, sub auroram tamen redit laetitia, Psalm. 30. ver. 5.
EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. M. DC. LXXXV.

TO JAMES EARL OF PERTH, Lord Drummond, and Stobhall, LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR Of
the KINGDOM of SCOTLAND.
My Lord,
BEing now to expose this Poetical Essay to the mercy of the censuring World,
and considering, under whose Patronage I might adventure the Publication: I
humbly presumed your Lordship, both as a person eminent in Piety, Virtue, and
Learning; and by the high Character you bear in the Government as supreme Judge
of that Illustrious Court, upon which my Profession as a Lawyer has afforded me
a dependence now these many years, to be the only Person, to whom I could with
honor dedicate this Proiece; especially being encouraged to it by your
Lordships generous perusal, and approbation of some of the Sheets in private.

I do therefore, my Lord, address this Poetical Composure to your Lordship, as
to a Person, whose sublime Soul I know entertains the true Sentiments of
Mortality, and the transient vanity of this World, of which this admirable Book
of JOB affords so large, and spacious a Field for Contemplation, as a Mind but
even a little elevate above the Dust of the World, and furnished but with
ordinary Parts, may in private Meditations on the several Texts, far exceed my
most polished Reflections on the Subject: the exercise of Contemplation being
so pleasing to an ingenuous Spirit, as what in other Sciences reiteration
renders nauseous, in this it adds fresh Desires, and makes the Soul so
enamou^'d with but even a random Prospect of its true, and permanent Felicity,
which it discovers through the Telescope of Conten plation, as it undervalues
all the Afflictions of this Life, in the satisfaction of what nothing can
parallel on this side Separation.

The ground of my Address to your Lordship proceeding then from that esteem,
which all this Nation has for you, as a Person, who, in the Affairs of greatest
Importance, affords daily Proofs of your eminent Abilities, I do not so much,
as approach the borders of Flattery, if I name your Lordship one of the prime
Ornaments of the Age, in which you live.

For seriously, my Lord, when I compare the Figure you make in the State, with
that of your years, (contrary to the Vulgar opinion, That Wisdom only dwells in
aged Breasts;) I must acknowledge with the learned young man, who bears no
small part in the ensuing Discourses, that -- There is a spirit in man, and the
instigation of the Almighty gives understanding.

But as your Promotion, my Lord, in so small advance of years to the high
Dignity, in which you now move, makes me admire the vivacity, and felicity of
your wit, so (to augment the wonder) when I consider your Lordships younger
Brother at this same time, shining in that eminent station of Secretary of
State, making thus betwixt you the most ^^^ly conspicuous pair of one Family,
that has flourished, since the days of the two Illustrious Brothers Dukes of
Hamilton; I find my self again obliged with that same Elihu to acknowledge,
that the Spirit of God has made you both, and the breathing of the Almighty has
given you life.

May this bright Constellation long shine in the Orb of our Government, and as
you increase in Years, so may you both increase in Piety, and Virtue, advance
in His Majesty's Royal esteem, and the love of your Country, until such time,
as two such refined Souls being translated to eternal Felicity, may make a
fairer appearance in the Court of the King of kings, then mortal Men can make
in that of a King upon Earth, to which the good Wishes shall never be deficient
of him, whose Ambition is to be esteemed,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, most obliged, and most sincerely devoted
W. C.

Preface.
SInce men do no less differ in their Judgments, and apprehensions of what they
read, in this then in former Ages, and that some out of envy, others out of
malice, or ignorance do either abstain from perusing of Compositions of the
nature of the ensuing Treatise; or having perused such (though never so well
accommodate with all the embellishments of W^t, and Art) in the same humor
decry them, it is usual for Authors to make Apologies for publishing of what
many of them pretend were never designed for the Light but importunity of
Friends, or Copies surreputiously creeping abroad, obliged them to a
Publication, though in reality their only design was an itch of Applause, only
to be attained by the brokery of the Press, as if a few polished expressions in
the entry of their Writings were able to divert the torrent of the censuring
Readers.

Hence tedious Prefaces, and joined with these a deal of Encomiums are posted
in the Avenues of all our modern Writings, only to put the Readers in an humor
before perusal, and invite them to an appetite for their Crudities. But what is
here published I acknowledge was originally designed for the Press, and so
stands in need of no such inviting Complement, the Publication being as
necessary, by the rules of my Circumstances, as the Composition was, which was
so far from being calculate to the Meridian of Applause, as I never projected a
favorable reception of it, but made my account, (as I yet do) for censure, and
the worst of usage, with all which I am resolved to dispense, in confidence
that all ingenuous and impartial Readers will find my design in it has been
only to alleviate the severity of my own sad Circumstances.

It is true indeed, the publishing my private Reflections upon a Subject of
such sacred Importance, as is that admirable Book of JOB, may be esteemed a
presumption in one of my Profession, whose business is generally to mind
secular Affairs, and not to make such in-roads into Divinity; but with the good
favor of the learned, and worthy Clergy (for whom no man has greater esteem
then I have) I hope it will be acknowledged, that the Scripture being a Theme
in which we are all equally concerned as to perusal, and instruction; if I,
following the opinions of the best of Commentators on the Subject, have, at my
solitary opportunities expressed my thoughts in Poesy upon the several Texts,
as I found those of their own Profession have learnedly instructed me in Prose,
my greatest Crime in this Publication, is only that I am not of their Order.

Neither will it be found, upon perusal by the most severe Inquisitors, that I
have deviate from the receive^ ^pinions of the Divines upon the place, unless
possibly in cap. 24. v. 18. where the words are, He is swift as the Waters,
etc. I apply the Text to the Crime of Piracy, being induced thereto by the
words of the preceding Texts, wherein Job enumerates several special Crimes at
Land, and probably might thence take a rise to discourse of that notorious
Crime of Piracy, of which in all appearance he had frequently heard, living so
nigh the Red Sea, which was then and is yet much infested with Pirates: and
authorized besides by the concurse of the learned Grotius, Vatablus, and our
Countryman Mr. Hutchison in the same opinion.

I would request then those of that venerable Order to have that charity for
me, as to think I did not attempt a work of this importance, hand over head,
(as the Proverb is,) but to peruse, and examine the whole, and I hope they will
find I have proceeded in it with that deference, as is due to the Subject.

To the Vulgar Objection against this Piece, that it has been frequently
performed in Verse already by others, I make no further answer then that all I
have ever seen, Sylvester, Herbert, and Quarrels, do perform it in a simple
transposition of the words of Prose into Rythme, whereas I have not followed
that method, but according as the several Texts afforded Subject, I have
presumed to expatiate, by way of Poetical Lectures, and (which was the greatest
difficulty in all the Composure) have endeavored to connect the several Texts
in continued Discourses, notwithstanding of the abrupt transitions from one
Subject to another, and frequent Hebraisms all along, which hardly admit of a
genuine exposition in Prose, and by consequence, are more difficult to be
coupled in Verse. Nor if I had followed the methods of these Gentlemen exactly,
do I commit any novelty in this Essay, if men will consider how many
Translations have been published of Virgil, Horace, etc. yet do not these
hinder some of the most refined Wits of the Age to publish their Translations
of the same Authors to this very day, for were it no more but the new dress of
the present and current Language, it makes a great difference from a
Translation Fifty Years ago.

This Book of JOB I know is by some repute no real History, but a Parable, and
to have been writ Originally in Poesy, but I am concluded by the positive words
of the Text, There was a man, etc. or if it was, as these suppose, certainly
the Mythology is of great use and instruction for all Christians, for, by the
whole Contexture I look upon Jobs Troubles to have much consisted in Oppression
and Calumny, which are the two hardest species of Affliction for an ingenuous
Spirit to bear, as he appears to have been, especially when his Friends, stead
of comforting him, seem all along to second those clamourous reports of him,
that had been spread through the whole Country on that occasion; so that all
his doleful Circumstances considered, his loss of Children, Estate, Reputation,
and aggravation of his Afflictions by his too zealous Friends, who maintained
his Punishments were nothing but the return of his Sins, he appears to quadrate
with that excellent expression of Boethius, in his second Book, de Con^ol. Phil.
Hoc tantum dixerim, ultimam esse adversae fortunae sarcinam cum miseri, quae
perferunt, meruisse creduntur. Yet how God Almighty in the end does vindi^ate
him from all those lewd aspertions, and restores him to double what he formerly
possessed, is a great ground of comfort for all suffering Christian, wholly
under such heavy Pressures, as I my self have done aad yet do by the malice of
some virulent, vindictive Fellows, who so endeavor to destroy my Reputation,
as they have no regard to their own.

Upon this consideration I have attempted* and finished this Essay, and in a
Poetical Strain humoured the several Discourses from the beginning to the end:
and if I have been somewhat free in my Characters and Descriptions of the Vices
of this present Age, as I found the Texts afforded me Subject, let the Persons
concerned, (if any such be) ^onsider, the Spirit of God, in all Ages, as
appears by the whole Tract of Sacred Writ, has inveighed against such
Villainies; and I following the Text, could do no less in Poesy, then what the
Prose in few words seemed to poin out. And for my description of the Adulterer
(which some Critics may possibly judge a little too particular,) let them
consider Solomon's description of his whorish Woman, which is a sufficient
authority for me.

Further I have not to say, introductory to the perusal, but if I be judged in
this Composition a most presumptuous Interloper in the Trade of Wit, my answer
is, I never did, nor do yet pretend to that Character: let the florid Wits of
our Age enjoy their Trade entire, for me, a great part of my design in this
Composure being only to make atonement for my former wanton excursions in this
Art; and if I meet with censure, or applause, I am indifferent: for when I
consider how many polished Wits of our Age have employed their Parts of late in
Projections destructive to themselves, and their Families; I think the small
Parts God has allowed me have been better employed in this unprofitable
Composition, which I hope upon perusal will be found to savor neither of a bad
Christian, nor a bad Subject; for before I would do any thing contrare to the
Character of either, to obtain the reputation of a contriving Wit -- Ridenda
Poemata malo.

Errata.
PAge 7. Line 9. read since for sure: ibid. l. 15. add still. p. 13. l. 29. add
me. p. 29. l. 11. for putting, r. pulin^. ibid. l. 42. for nor, r. none. p. 35.
l. 41. add are. ibid. l. 46. for express, r. oppress. p. 60. l. 49. r. I am. p.
84. l. 30. r. specious lie. p. 85. 4, and 5. l. of 12. verse, r. on it. p. 110.
l. 1. r. be. p. 127. l. 12. of verse 9. for to, r. so. p. 140. l. 1. of verse
2. for shall, r. still. p. 144. l. 26. for ob, r. of. p. 184. l. 15. for
should, r. would. p. 191. l. 1. of verse 8. add thou. p. 213. l. 14. of verse
13. for flowers, r. floors. p. 223. l. 23. of verse 17. for properly, r.
property. p. 261. l. 1. for my, r. by. p. 262. l. 3. for all, r. at. p. 264. l.
34. for through, r. though. p. 274. l. 9. verse 27. for power, r. hour. p. 287.
Text, verse 12. for just, r. unjust. ibid. l. 3. r. untamed. ibid. l. 13. for
the, r. thy. p. 301. verse 19. l. 24. for riches, r. virtues. p. 304. verse 13.
l. 1. for such, r. since. p. 311. l. 4. for chines, r. chimes. p. 354. verse
21. l. 5. for small, r. tall.

If any other Errors appear to the Reader, which may be occasioned by mistake
of the Printer, (of which the best corrected Pieces are hardly free,) he is
courteously desired to amend them with his Pen.

Poetical Exercitations UPON THE BOOK of JOB.
CAP. I.
IN former times, before Heavens mighty King 1. There was a man in the land of
vz, whose name was Job, and that man was perfect and upright, and one that
feared God, and eschewed evil.

From Egypt did his captive People bring:
Where the Heirs of promise, in a sad estate,
As Criminals, by Sentence relegate,
For many years, did, with much sweat and toil,
Earn a poor Living in a foreign soil.
Before the Law of God was published,
Before his Standard was on Earth displayed;
Before his Church did visible appear,
And he had only Chapels here and there,
In that vast Canton of Arabia, known
By the name of Desert, where with Sands o'reflow'n
Whole Regions in a constant deluge ly,
Unfit for (...) (...), where Husbandry*
Planting, Enclosing, and such Policy
Is hardly known; only amongst the Rocks
The Inhabitants do ramble with their Flocks
For pasturage, and like their Beasts, with ease,
And simple food themselves entirely please.
Or else through sandy Valleys, where the Sun
Is almost by his own reflex outdone,
They travel with their Camels, as they are
Employed by Merchants, to transport their Ware
From Mart, to Mart, in all the Countries round,
Where Industry, and Trading does abound.
Unless perhaps on some small Rivers side,
(Which in that Country too is rarely 'spy'd)
Some fertile Acres fit for Husbandry,
Mixed with a slender marle a squandring ly;
And there some Castles, Houses, Cottages,
Poor Mercat-towns, and Country-villages
Make a small Landscape, and perhaps afford
A Dwelling for some great Arabian Lord.
But generally the Country is so bare
Of Policy, as a Geographer
For a large hire, would hardly undertake*
A traveling survey of that Land to make.
Hence are those Idle, Vagrant, Sun-burnt-creatures,
Of cunning, fiery, and malicious Natures:
Hot as their Soil; and by their looks confess
Within their breasts a no less barrenness
Of Piety, and Virtue, then their grounds
To the eye express: besides they know no bounds
In villainy, but live most barbarously
By rapine more, then lawful industry.
In this same High-land-country amongst those men,
Who all things good, and sacred did profane,
Whom length of time, and commerce to this day
Have not yet civilized.
In this so barren Land a man did dwell,
Whose name was Joh, a man, who did excel
Most of that Age in Piety, a man,
Upon whose heart in lively colors drawn
The picture of true Virtue did appear,
A man, who did his God devoutly fear;
A just, and upright man, who fully knew
The Art of moderation (known to few)
A man, whom all the Vices of his Age
Could not from true Religion disengage,
A man obedient to his Makers Will,
Practicing good things, and eviting ill.
The Land in which he lived is called here
The Land of Uz, though, as it does appear
From Sacred Writ, one of the Race of Sem,
Who, (as it stands Recorded) bore that name
Of old did with a colony repair
To the lesser Syria, where now the fair
Damasco stands* whence all that T^^^^ of Ground
Was called the Land of Uz. It Is also found
That one of that same Name of Esaus Race
So called his Dwelling in another place:
From hence a part, at least, of Idumaea
Situate in Arabia Petraea
Is called the Land of Uz. But that, which here
Is named, by observation does appear
To Have been that Land, which one of Nahors Race
Bearing the same Name, for his Dwelling place
Of old did choose; and is a part of that
Arabia called Deserta, situate,
As by our modern Maps, we daily see,
Betwixt the twice, and the thrice tenth degree
Of Northern Latitude: Bord'ring on the West
With the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf on the East,
Arabia Faelix on the South, Judaea
Upon the North, with part of Idumaea;
Hence our Geographers do plainly tell
This is the Country, where once Job did dwell.
As for his Family it is thought he was
Descended of a branch of Abrams race,
By one of his three Sons with Ketura,
Who, some think, planted in Arabia:
Others affirm, with more authority,
He was a branch of Nahors Family:
How e're it was, his Actions do express
He was a man of honorable Race.
This man was with a goodly Issue bless't 2. And there was born to him seven
sons, and three daughters.

(Which of all Earthly blessings, is the best)
Seven Sons, three Daughters, all of comely Features,
Complaisant Humors, and obedient Natures
Did call him Father, nor was all around
The Neighborhood, a fairer Issue found,
Then that of Jobs: for as they did increase
In Years, so in true Piety, and Grace
They made a large advance; and prudently
Studied true Virtue, and Frugality.
But lest this fair, and hopeful Progeny, 3. His substance also was 7000 Sheep,
and 3000 Camels, and 500 Yoke of Oxen, and 500 Sheeasses, and a very great
Household, so that this man was the greatest man of all the East.

This numerous, and growing Family
Might have proved chargeable, as now a days
We see it frequent: GOD did also raise
This man in Wealth; his Labors he so bless't
That every Year his Revenue encreas't:
For his projections he so surely laid,
As of their Success he was not afraid;
But made his Grounds afford by Pains, and Art
What Nature had denied: nay every part
Of his Possessions clearly did express
Their Masters virtue, care, and painfulness.
His Revenue consisted, as appears,
In what was only used in former Years,
Corn, Sheep, and Cattle, for the Hills did keep
To him a Stock of some seven thousand Sheep,
From which each Year to him (...) did a^^^ew
No small proportion of his Revenue.
He had a Stock too of three thousand Camels,
That fed upon his Grounds, both Males, and Females*
Most of which useful Beasts he did let out
For hire to all the Merchants without doubt,
Who traded through that Country, and did bear
From place to place the rich and costly Ware
Of Persia, Egypt, and Arabia
The Happy, Palestine, and Syria:
Because those Beasts can only tolerate
The Sand, the Drought, the Hunger, and the Heat
Which traveling in that Country does require
And thence for such, a good, and constant hire
Is still afforded.
He had five hundred Yokes of Oxen too,
Which (if we reckon four Yoke to a Plow;
The most we in those Northern Countries use)
Does make a laboring of a hundred Plowes,
And five and twenty, so we make account
His Laboring did his Pasturage surmount.
For thirty Acres being the laboring
Of every Plow, we make a reckoning
More then three thousand Acres he possessed
Of fruitful grounds, and may be also guessed
To have been one of the few Valleys there,
Watered with Rivers, and Manured with care.
He had five hundred Shee-asses to boot,
Which he for lesser burdens did let out
To Laborers, and Merchants all about,
Who had occasion for them.
Now, as he was a man of fair Estate;
(For by our modern reckoning, we may rate
This man, by what is in short related here
To Have had of Rent ten thousand pounds a Year)
So to his Birth, and outward Quality
Was added Power, and Authority:
A man he was, no doubt, of Reputation,
In great esteem amongst those of his own Nation,
Chief President, at least, as we may guess
Of th'Courts of Justice in those Provinces,
Which lay contiguous with his dwelling place.
But all this Wealth, this Power, and Quality 4. And his sons went and feasted
in their houses, every one his day, and sent, and called for their three
sisters, to eat, and drink with them,

Had served for nothing, had his Family
Been dis-unite: nor had he cared for these,
Unless he had enjoyed Domestic Peace.
This he had too, and that in so great measure,
As far exceeded all his Wealth and Treasure.
For his seven Sons (who, we suppose had now
Attained man's age, and that he did allow
T'each of them distinct Farms off his Estate)
Did mutually each others kindly treat
In Peace, and Plenty they their hours did waste,
And called their Sisters, when they meant to Feast.
But Job considering, in such (...), 5. And when the days of their banqueting
were gone about, Job sent, and sancti fied them, and rose up early in the
morning, and offered burnt-offering according to the number of them all. For
Job thought it may be, my sons have sinned, and blasphemed God in their hearts,
thus Job did every day.

How many strong temptations do ly,
For sinful lewdness, scarce to be evited,
By such, whose Blood, and Brains by Wine are heated;
He would next morning early stir, and pray
That GOD would pardon sins o'th'by-past day
Committed by his Children. For, says he,
I do suspect (how ere the matter be)
There Is something sinful in the case, since Feasting
Is still at least accompanied with Jesting.
Thus, with himself in private reasoning,
He Would for each Child make a Burnt-offering;
And, whilst their Feasting lasted, every day,
Job for his Childrens sins would Fast and Pray.
In short, if Jobs Felicity we rate
By Birth, and Knowledge, Honor, and Estate,
A goodly Issue bless't with unity
Amongst themselves, unspotted Piety,
Sincerity in all his Dealings, Grace,
Frugality, and Virtue, we may trace
All Histories, with which the World does swell,
And amongst them all not find his parallel.
For sure this worthy Gentleman appears
To Have been a Pattern, for some hundred years,
To all about him: and we here may see
How God thinks fit his Memory should be
To this same day preserved; that we may thence
Precisely understand, at what expense
Of true Devotion we should live, and know
When with Afflictions God does bring us low,
As this same Good man was, how to endure
With Patience the hottest Calenture
Of Sorrows fever: and may likewise see
What silly Expectations those be
On which we feed in our Prosperity,
As if we fancied Perpetuity
Of our Enjoyments here * and that our God
Loved us so well, he would never use his Rod;
But with soft Hand would clap our Heads, and lay
Our Pillows every Night, and every Day
Afford us every thing we can project
For our poor Fastings, and our Prayers sake.
No, no that Man, who ere he be, that thus
With fond Delusions does his Soul abuse,
Does shreudly err: for in this Precedent
We may perceive how clear, and evident
The contrair does appear, and calculate
From thence the folly of a great Estate.
For now, as longest Day must have its Night, 6. Now, on a day when the
Children of God came, and stood before the Lord, Satan came also among them.

And Darkness must at length succeed to Light:
As greatest Calms do Storms prognosticate,
So greatest Joys do Sorrows antidate:
And this Good Man, whom in Serenity,
Under the Zenith of Prosperity,
Wee've lately seen, must now (...) prepare
To show his Virtue in another Sphere.
For at a General Sessions of Heaven,
Held at that time, when Liberty was given
To all, that in that Court do make abode
To see the Face of the Almighty God.
When Heavens Great Monarch in Majestic State,
Environed with his Troops of Angels Sat:
He too, who once was of that Corporation,
As Eminent, as any of that Station;
Until, with foolish Pride he did so swell,
Because he thought he was not used so well
As his great Services required, and so
He with some others would a Plotting go
Against his Prince, and think to model too
(As all our discontented Statesmen do)
The Government of Heavens: but instantly
His Plot was opened, and he, by and by
With all his Friends about him poorly fell
From thence, by Deportation, to Hell.
This wretched Head of Rebels too appeared
Amongst the Just; demanding to be heard
In some shrewd Accusation patly laid
Against some Champions of the praying Trade.
At least that he might shortly understand
Upon what Service God would him command
He there as Sergeant of the Court did wait
To receive Orders at the Utter-Gate.
But, as when Damnster does in Court appear, 7. Then the Lord said unto Satan,
whence come thou, and Satan answered the Lord, from compassing the earth to,
and fro, and from walking in it.

The Condemnation of some Man we fear:
So this Old Rebel did prognosticate
The Alteration of some Persons State,
By his officious presence.
This thing appearing then well known by name
Of Satan, God did ask him, whence he came?
(Not but that all his Wanderings he did know,
With all his Plots, and Projects here below:
But that from his own Mouth he might express
His villainous Toilling, and Unwearyedness
In doing evil, and that since he fell
From Heaven, he every hour does merit Hell.)
Satan makes answer, I have been abroad
Compassing all this Earth of thine, Great God.
There I have walked at random, to and fro,
And viewed the State of all things here below.
I Have seen how thou do constantly suppress
Me, and my Subjects, by thy watchfulness,
On all our Motions; as if all to thee
Belonged by Right, and nothing else to me,
But thy displeasure; yet I Will not resign
My claim for all that; nay I still design,
Where ever thou a Colony shall plant
I and my Friends shall all their Meetings haunt,
And make that Church at best but Militant.
For, since I Am not allowed (...) Privilege
Of my Creation, but with bitter rage,
Am to this day secluded from my Right,
Why should not I with all the Force and Might;
That I, and my poor banished Friends can raise,
By constant In-roads still disturb the Peace,
Of those, whose constant Prayers do combine
To ruin further yet both me, and mine.
As if already I were not undone,
By thy Displeasure, these for sooth must run
A sharper Scent, and by their Prayers baull,
For my Destruction yet for good, and all.
Nay know, Heavens King (for so I must confess
Thou art indeed) that I am not the less
A Prince on Earth, and will endeavor still
To keep that Right, do with me what you will.
Yes, I Will mentain now what I do possess,
And still will make it my great business
T'enlarge the Limits of my Empire here:
Since in thy Heavens I date no more appear
As formerly: allow me then Great God
To wander sometimes here, and there abroad
To view my Interest: though yet after all,
I am thy Servant, and obey thy call.
Then says the Lord, since thou go every where 8. And the Lord said unto
Satan, have thou not considered my servant Job, how none is like him in the
earth, an upright, and just man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil.

A-wandring, since thou could not choose, but hear
Of my great Servant Job: sure thou do know
How of all Mortals that live there below,
He Is the most just; scarce to be equalled
On Earth: him sure thou have considered
As one of thy chief Enemies, for he
Is a most Loyal Subject to me.
A Man most Honest, Pious and Upright,
Just, shunning Evil, doing, at my sight,
What I Judge candid good, and equitable,
And for his Heavenly Interest profitable,
One, who by Standart of true Piety
Does measure all his Actions constantly.
What say of him? Is he not such, now say
For all thy Art, can fall upon a way,
To make that Man break his Allegiance
To me? can thou thy Interest advance
With him, or tempt him to do any thing
That may i'th'least displease his God and King?
Yes, says the Devil, thy Servant Job I know 9. Then Satan answered the Lord,
and said, does Job serve God for naught.

And have considered too: why be it so
That he is such: as truth I cannot deny
He is; I Have viewed his constant Piety.
And great Devotion, and I thank him too
That does, what he is so well hyr'd to do.
Can any man do less, to whom thou have given
Possession of all Blessings under Heaven:
So well mentain'd he does but what he ought
To do, then pray does Job serve thee for naught?
Pray now, (...) L^^d, who would not at this rate 10. Have thou not made an^
hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he has, on every
side, thou have blessed the works of his hands, and his substance is increased
in the land.

Become thy Servant? yea, who would not state
Himself thy faithful Slave, thus to be used
Thus kindly, to have nothing thus refused
May contribute for his Convenience here,
As in the case of this Man does appear.
Why would such Favor but to me allow,
As this too happy Man enjoveth now,
I would become thy Faithful Servant too.
But I, and my poor Friends for ever barred,
From thy Celestial Favor, and declared
Incapable of ever being restored
To former Favor, cannot, Mighty Lord,
Expect, upon these terms, to become such,
As those, whose Predecessors erred as much,
As ever we did: for I know thou have
A kindness for the Race of Man shall last.
To th'worlds end: and yet those Creatures shall
But prove ungrate to thee, Lord, after all.
For this same Race of Man, this Progeny
Of my old Fellow-Sinner, certainly,
After thou have them with all Kindness blessed,
Will be but Shrubs of the old Root at best.
And as their Fathers did, not long ago,
Provoke thee to a drowning of 'em; so
The Children still their Fathers Steps will trace,
And be to thee the same still, in the case.
Now then this Job, on whom thou have bestowed,
What to few Men on Earth thou have allowed:
Whom, as with hedge, thou have environed,
And guarded all he has on every side;
Whom thou have raised in Wealth and Dignity,
And made him Head of a Great Family:
Pray what can he do less, than Fast, and Pray,
Kneel down, and make an Offering every day
To thee his Patron: and endeavor too
To shun all evil, as a many do.
For fear of me, and not for love of thee,
Because before their Eyes they daily see
How inexorable I am to all
Those Men of Earth, whom thou do Sinners call;
If in my hands thou once deliver them,
Whereas, if they but call upon thy Name,
With a few Sighs, and Tears, thou instantly
Remit'st them all their Sins, and by and by
The Effect of all thy Heavenly Clemency,
Upon the matter, proves indeed no more,
Then crossing the old, upon another score,
To sin afresh. for all those breathing things
Abuse thy Mercy.
Nay they will make a fashion too, when ble'st
As this Man is, and that their Souls have rest
From dunning Pinches, Miseries, and Pains,
(Which are some other Men's Quotidians,)
To use Devotion* and perhaps express,
In a set Prayer, some small Thankfulness,
For these thy Favors, but they always run
Upon that Strain, that, as thou have begun,
So thou would continue always to extend
That Peace, and Plenty to them to the end.
For if once interrupted, then we see
What Frettings, and bold Abjurations be
Amongst those formerly fine Supplicants
Now crying out of Miseries, and Wants.
Stretch therefore out thine Hand, and seize upon 11. But stretch now out thine
hand, and touch all that he has, and see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy
face,

All that Job has, and thou shall see anon
This unkind dealing will reverse the case,
And heel Plaspheme thee, to thy very Face.
Yes, heel Blaspheme thee, and forget that thou
Did good things to him, formerly allow:
He Will tell thee plainly thou have disordered
All his concerns, and fully ruined
His expectations: so that after this
He Will tell thee boldly thus, and thus it is
To serve a God, who takes no care at all
For such as on his Name do daily call.
Then said the Lord, well, Satan, thou shall find 12. Then said the Lord unto
Satan, lo all that he has is in thine hand, only upon himself shall thou not
stretch out thy hand; so Satan departed from the presence of the Lord.

My Servant Job is of another kind,
Then falling Adams ordinary Race,
As thou shall't soon perceive upon the Case.
And to demonstrate this thou may go try him,
Seize upon all his Substance then, do by him,
As thou thinks't fit: only I do Command
Upon his Person stretch not out thy Hand,
But all hls Goods are thine. No sooner sai'd
Then the false Slave of this Commission glad,
Runs out on Execution, and Commands
His Men to Mischief soon, and cries all hands.
Now here Jobs Woes, and Miseries Commence, 13. And on a day, when his sons,
and daughters were eating, and drinking wine in their eldest brothers house.

His future Troubles take their Rise from hence:
For soon the Devil had drawn his Troops together,
And they all ready to march quickly whether
He should command them: he did only now
Wait for an opportunity to do
What he intended.
So when the Children were a Banqueting
In The Eldests House, suspecting no such thing,
The Devil perceiving their security,
Resolves to catch this opportunity
Of plundering all: with his wild Arabs hastes,
And in the first place drives off all his Beasts.
Job on a sudden has the dismal News, 14. Then came a messenger unto Job, and
said the oxen were plowing, and the asses feeding in their places.

How whilst his Oxen Labored in the Plowes,
The Cattle calmly footing in the Traces,
And all the Asses feeding in their places.
The Theeving Rogues did violently fall 15. And the Sabeans came violently, and
took them, yea they have slain the servants with the edge of the sword, but I
only am escaped alone to tell thee.

Upon the Beasts in Ploughs, and plundered all,
In all his Servants Bowels sheathed the Sword,
Burned all the Barns, and Houses, in a word,
Says Currior, who these fatal News did bring,
I Have only 'scapt, thus to relate the thing.
Scarce had he told the Tale, when comes another 16. And whilst he was yet
speaking, another came, and said, the fire of God is fallen from heaven, and
has burned up the sheep and the servants, and devoured them and I only am
escaped to tell thee.

To give account of News as bad as 'tother:
The Fire of God, says he, from Heaven did fall,
And in an instant quite consumed all
thy numerous Flocks of fine Wool-bearing Sheep,
With all the Servants, who these Flocks did keep,
Thus are thy Store-rooms fully desolate,
Only I 'scap'd the Tidings to relate.
Whilst he yet spoke another comes to tell 17. And whilst he was yet speaking
another came, and said, the Chaldeans set out three bands, and fell upon the
camels, and have taken them, and have slain the servants with the edge of the
sword, but I only am escaped to tell thee.

How the Chaldeans in three parties fell
Upon the Camels, made them all their prey,
Killed all the Herdsmen, carried all away,
Of whom, says he, I only did escape
To be the Relator of so great Mis-hap.
IN th'neck of this another comes, who shows, 18. And whilst he was yet
speaking, came another and said, thy sons, and thy daughters were eating and
drinking wine in their eldest brothers house.

(In one great Blow, to sum up all his Woes)
How, whilst his Children freely did carrouse,
And drunk Wine in their eldest Brothers House,
Eat merrily, conversed, and made good cheer,
Enjoying one another without fear.
There came, says he, so far as I could guess, 19. Behold there came a great
whirlewind from beyond the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house
which fell upon the children, and they are dead, and I only am escaped to tell
thee.

Out from the fields beyond the Wilderness,
A violent, and sudden Hurrycane,
The like of which I think yet never Man
Has seen, and with such fury patly fell
On the house, where, Sir, your eldest Son did dwell,
And where at that time all your others were,
With your three Daughters met, to make good cheer,
That in an instant one might see the walls
Clap closs together, down the Roof-tree falls,
Stones, Rafters, Boards, Dust, in a trice fall down,
And with the ground the House was levelled soon.
Where all your Children smothered in a heap,
I left, and by great mercy did escape,
To tell thee what I with my eyes did see,
And what, with Tears, I now relate to thee.
Plunged in deep grief, with sorrows overcome, 20. Then Job arose, and rent his
garment, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped.

Job hearing these sad news did sit as dumb,
With Eyes dejected low, and Arms a Cross,
As if he meant not to survive his Loss;
But sudden Dissolution did desire,
Hoping he might in some kind sigh expire.
Speechless he sat, and seemed not to complain,
But having paused a while, at length, with pain
He rose, and to his grief was forced t'allow
The same Compliance other Mortals do,
For though he knew his miseries alone
Did come from God, yet being more than Stone,
Hearing these sad News, he could not forbear,
At least upon the last to drop a Tear,
And write in mournful ink from grief swollen Eyes,
Upon his Face his Childrens Elegies.
The unexpected loss of his Estate
He does not value (though indeed 'twas great)
But O his loving Issue! O the loss
Of his dear Children does him sadly cross:
This in some passion makes him tear his hair,
Unrip his breast, and to the open air,
In some disorder lay his bosom bare.
At length over come with this sad Exigent,
He formally all his apparel Rent,
With careless Razor shaved his Head around,
Fell down, and grovelling prostrate on the ground.
Lord, says he, naked from the Womb I came, 21. And said naked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither, the Lord has given and the
Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord.

And to Earths Womb I must return the same.
What I acquired, was but thy pure Donation,
And all the Right that I had was Possession:
Then why should I Complaint of Losses make,
Since God, who freely gives may freely take.
This Morning I was rich in Wealth, and Fame,
Now in the Evening I a Beggar am:
Plundered of all; -- Estate, and issue too,
Why sure I shall be no more envied now.
Now I Am undone, now absolutely poor,
As those, who beg their Bread from Door to Door.
Then what do Wealth and Honors signify
When, as it were by turning of a dye,
All I possessed is now entirely lost:
Then what is he, who does of Riches boast!
Riches! -- the very Dregs of the Creation,
A naughty thing, that never came in fashion,
Until true Virtue become Poor and Old,
What She before did give, was basely sold,
As yet it is, for Money: -- Riches! -- O
The Bane of Mankind; from whose Spring do flow
Torrents of Falsehoods, Jealousies, and Fears!
Riches a lean, dry Nurse of Anxious Cares!
A Food, on which we feed with great delight,
Yet never allays our ravenous appetite.
Man's Life-race running in a crooked Line,
A dash, which spoiled the' original design
Of his Integrity; a thing, which all,
Who hugg it here, themselves do even call
Th'abstract of Madness, when Eternity
Appears at hand, and they begin to dye.
For O what help can Riches then afford
To their deluded Owners? in a word
No Man of Judgment should of Riches boast,
For, when (as mine) they are entirely lost,
Then they appear to have been very Dreams,
Which none but he, who softly sleeps, esteems.
And then, there is Honor too. that taudry thing,
Of which poor Mortals make such reckoning:
Why I had that, as much as I desired
And to no higher Honors I aspired:
But now -- all is lost -- Riches, and Honors too
Have all abandoned their old Master now.
Then what is this same Idol, of which most
Of its proud Owners insolently boast?
What is it pray! -- a mere Device of Men
To Abuse the World, and shiftingly maintain
The Reputation of a Bankrupt Race,
Which long ago was forfeit in the Case
Of the first cadet; when Fraternal Ties
Could not obstruct Friends being Enemies
For a small triffle: though the World was then
But Tripartite, and those unhappy Men
Had Elbow-room enough; yet was it State
First troubled under that Triumvirate.
And then our Native Honor, Truth, and Faith
Expired with the first expiring Breath.
Since then true Honors lost, why should we cheat
Our Reason with its silly counterfeit!
And fancy Titles, Names, and Dignities
Can make the fallen Race of Mankind rise
In Virtues Orb? Why should we proudly boast
We have a thing our Predecessors lost!
For to this day (let us say what we can)
There Is neither Honor, Faith, nor Truth in Man.
Why since the substance then is gone, alace
Why should vain man its empty shadow chase!
Its empty shadow, -- yes -- its mere reflex,
Which only, when it shines, a figure makes.
Though, as an Evening shadow to the Eye
Extends it self beyond the Symmetry
Of what it follows; so this flattering thing
By poor deluded Mortals Reckoning
Appears t'exceed the true Original,
Whilst really it is nothing at all,
And disappears with that same swiftness too,
As when the Sun sets, all your shadows do.
Or if it something be, at best I take it,
To be but what each Fools conceit does make it,
For, as we see how Hobby-horses please
Some Children, rattles others; even so these,
Who court this honor, are some pleased with that
Which only is acquired by toil, and sweat;
And venture boldly, without fear, or shame,
Only t'attain a military fame,
On Fire, and Sword, others themselves do please
With what they can attain to with more ease,
And less expense, so cunningly practice
Mean snaking shifts, and horrid villainies,
By which, at length, they climb to Dignities.
But as we see how those same very Boys,
When come to years, call those things childish toys,
Which then they hugged; so, when a man attains
To Grace, and Knowledge; Lord how he disdains
Those painted Baubles, which he formerly
Esteemed, and thinks them now all vanity.
And yet both Riches, and great Honors too
To some, as blessings God does still allow,
When seasoned with Grace.
But nor my Honors, nor my Riches pleased
My mind so much, nor was I so much eased
In any thing, as that my Family
Seemed to perpetuat my poor Memory
And that I lost, in the twinkling of an Eye.
Lord what a folly then it is for men
To Trust in things so perishing, and vain
As Children are: a piece of Sophistry,
By which we'd fain out-wit Mortality,
But to no purpose, for do what we will,
Death is before hand, with our projects still.
Things, which to wish we pronely are inclined
Though in them we but seldom comfort find.
Nay, but that God after the first Creation,
Enjoined the useful toil of Generation,
No wise man would such methods prosecute,
To bring himself in trouble, and dispute,
With those of his own Loins, and be in fears
Of his, own Children, as they come to years.
Issue! an Art, by which we would create
Our selves anew, and so perpetuat
Our Names on Earth: nay at a huge expense
We purchase too this inconvenience.
Whilst truth our Names and Memories are known
Better by Characters, in Brass, or Stone,
When both our Race, and our Estates are gone.
Riches and Honors then I did possess
As Blessings, and enjoyed domestic peace:
But above all my God was pleased t'allow
Something of true Grace to my Spirit too,
That I might use them right, so that of late,
In Birth, in Parts, in Honor, and Estate,
If breathing man can have Felicity,
On this side Time; why such a man was I.
-- But now, that thou art pleased, Lord, to divest
Me of what but this morning I possessed,
Assist me now, now let that Grace appear
Which thou allow'd'st me, give me strength to bear
My Losses so, as all men may confess
Who see me in this miserable case
That thou have not deprived yet of Grace.
Lord the^ what shall I say; thou giv'st, thou take,
Thou raises, thou throws down again, thou make,
And thou unmak'st* -- O let thy glorious Name
Sound in the Trumpet of eternal Fame.
For all thy Actings are both just and fair,
And well thou know what Criminals men are,
And what they do deserve; O make me then,
Highest of late, but lowest now of men,
O make (...) wi^^ a (...) patience,
Endure what thou art pleased to dispense.
Thus though we see Jobs Grief was answerable ^2. In all this did not Job sin,
nor charge God feolishly.

To his Condition, which was lamentable,
Yet in his greatest paroxism of woe
He did not sin, nor treat his Maker so,
As if he would accuse him foolishly
For the only author of his Misery.
Then happy he, who can his loss sustain
With patience, and not of God complain:
For when Afflictions Storms from Heavens do fall
We ought to suffer, and not cry at all:
Because we know that God affliction sends,
Upon a many, whom he least intends
^ extirpate in his anger; for we shall
See this good man's afflictions after all,
Converted to a fair, and pleasant Scaene,
Of Wealth and Honors, and a most serene
Aspect of Favor, when our God does show
To Job his Face ex Postliminio.
Cap. II.
Here Is a Grand-Tryal then, awake all you 1. And on a day the children of God
came and stood before the Lord, and Satan came also among them, and stood
before the Lord.

Who ever in your lives Affliction knew;
Sum up your Sorrows, reckon all your Woes
And all your wreaking Miseries unclose,
Your Crosses, and your Losses all declare,
See who with Jobs afflictions can compare;
Or with his Patience.
For now his Issue, Wealth* and Honors gone,
His Body must be sadly racked anon,
And put to horrid torture, as if what
He yet had lost were not proportionate
To the merits of so great a Criminal,
He must endure the question after all.
See here then God again in Judgment set,
Environed with Majesty, and State,
Before whom numerous Angels do appear,
As if for jury they impannelled were:
He, who by Virtue of his late permission,
Had to a most deplorable condition
Reduced this pious man, appears there too,
To see if there was more mischief to do.
Satan, from whence, says God, from compassing 2. Then saidthe Lord unto Satan,
whence come thou, and Satan answered from compassing the earth to and fro,
and from walking in it.

The Earth, and there securely traveling
In every corner, doing all I can,
Says he, to dissappoint the Hopes of Man.
I Have done what thou allowd, says he, and ^ow
I ask if thou have any more to do
For me on earth? is there another there,
Whom thou think just, and upright, let me hear,
Is there a man for whom thou have esteem
Under the Heavens? pray let me know his name:
And, by thy good permission, I shall try
The utmost Force of his Integrity:
I Will soon reduce him to the same estate,
As I have done thy other man of late,
And then thou wilt see that all those upright men
Are but thy Servants for their private gain,
Not so, says Heavens King,, for yet I see 3. And the Lord said unto Satan,
have not considered my servant Job, how none is like him in the earth, an
upright and just man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil, for he yet
continues in his uprightness, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy
him without cause.

My faithful Servant Job does honor me.
The Man, whom thou so falsely did accuse,
As though he, like a Hireling would refuse
To serve me, were his wages taken from him,
See now thy malice cannot overcome him.
Thou Have cut off all his Family, and taken
His means from him, yet he does not complain.
He, thou did move me, without cause t'oppress,
See he continues firm in uprightness.
True, says the Enemy of Man, it is true, 4. And Satan answered the Lord, and
said, skin for skin, and all that a man has, he will give for his life.

(To give thy faithful Servant Job his due)
He bears his Losses yet, with that Submission,
As I expected none in his condition
Could well have done; for by this time I thought
The Bitter Potion would a shreudly wrought.
But yet when I consider these mean Creatures,
Whom thou call'st men, I do observe their Natures
To be above all things most prone to live,
For Skin for Skin, all they possess they will give
For one hours breath: so yet thy Servant Job,
Because, as of his goods, I cannot robb
Him of his life, truly he does dispense
With loss of these, since the convenience
Of breathing is allowed him still; I know
The man is in great misery, and woe.
His Losses do oppress his Spirits sore,
Yet as a Ship-wrack'd-man, when got ashore,
Glad to have 'scap'd with life, does soon forget
His losses, and though wearyed, faint, and wet
To the next Village he will a begging go.
(For men will rather beg than dye we know)
So Job, though stripped of all, yet still in health,
Already has forgot his former wealth:
So glad he is yet alive, he has forgot
The loss of Children, Honors, Fame, what not!
He with Contentment begs and eats his bread,
And only sighs for those are lately dead:
Nay now he with some ease does spend his years,
Because he is free of all his former cares.
But p^^^^^^ now, great God, stretch out thy Hand, 5. But stretch now out thine
hand, and touch his bones, and his flesh to see if he will not blaspheme thee
to thy face.

And touch his Body, let me but demand
This favor of the once for all, and then
I Will make this Job of all the Race of Men
The most impatient, then thou'st quickly see
What is his true Opinion of thee:
For with his pains I Will alter soon the case,
And make him curse thee to thy very face.
Then says the Lord his Person's in thy hand, 6. Then the Lord said unto Satan,
he is in thy hand, but save his life.

But save his Life I strictly do command:
And thou shall surely see all thy designs
Soon disappointed by his countermines
Of Piety, and Patience.
Out flies the Devil, and instantly does fall 7. So Satan departed from the
presence of the Lord, and smote Job with fore boyls, from the crown of his
head, to the sole of his foot.

On Job by Execution Personal:
He baits his Body with a thousand sores,
And makes an humor issue from its pores
So pestilentious, hot, and purulent,
So foul, so loathsome, and so virulent,
As soon his Body does appear all over
To be but one continued scabby sore.
Merciful Heavens! What a sad sight is here! 8. And Job took a potsherd to
scrape him, and he sat down among the ashes.

Pouldred with Ulcers Job does now appear,
All Comforts, and Subsistence from him taken,
His Body with a scorching* Fever shaken
Of loathsome sores: -- what shall this poor* man do,
Thus cruciat in Mind. and Body too!
Why patiently he sits on Dung, and As^^s,
Not bursting out in angry fits, and flashes
As in like case a many sure would do,
But, with a piece of broken pitcher now
He scrapes the putrid matter from his sores,
And silently his sad Estate deplores.
But all the efforts of cruel Poverty 9. Then said his wise unto him, do thou
continue yet in thy uprightness, blaspheme God, and die.

With Heavenly thoughts, and smiles of Piety,
One of undaunted spirit will make sweet,
Though he can neither have to drink, nor eat.
Diseases of the Body often too
Afford such thoughts, as Health will scarce allow
Our Entertainment: for when free of pains,
And in the ouzy channels of our Veins
Our Blood flows smoothly, then we think on pleasures,
On Honors, and in hoording foolish Treasures;
And on these things we rest, like silly ^ops,
Feeding our Minds with vain fantastic hopes.
But when Diseases on our Bodies seize,
And in our Veins our Blood begins to freeze:
When the motion of our Pulse seems at a stand,
Scarce to be felt ^y the Physicians hand:
When with excessive pains our Bones do ache,
And all the Pillars of our Bodies shake:
With pious thoughts then we our selves soulage,
And by such lenitives abate the rage
Of our Distemper: whilst we ^eem to be
In love with sickness: and would not be free
From pa^n, that we may still have fair occasions
To raise the value of our meditations.
Yes sore Diseases, loss of all that's dear,
An upright man will patiently bear,
No outward sorrow can his Mind depress,
Providing he enjoy domestic peace.
But O when one with sore Afflictions vex't
In Mind, and Body grievously perplex't,
Endures debates at home, additional
To all these Plagues, sure this is worst of all.
(For O how wretched must be that Man's Life,
That Is poor, and sick, and has a scolding Wife)
This was the posture, this the present state
Of this good Man, who did enjoy of late
All happiness on Earth: and here alace
To consummat the strangeness of his case
He losses, after all, domestic peace.
For now his Wife, who should in that sad state,
With all the suggred words appropriate
To that kind Sex, have mitigate his grief,
And from her very Eyes have smiled relief
To her afflicted Husband, in this case,
(The true design of Wedlock) she alace,
Enraged with grief, extravagantly sad,
And for her losses furiously mad,
Stead of allaying of her Husbands woe,
Seems to augment it.
Her loss she so impatiently bears,
So like a Woman, such a flood of Tears
Falls from the well-stor'd Sources of her Eyes,
Which, with her passion constantly do rise:
Her Breasts she so does beat, so tears her Hair,
And by her gestures now does so declare
Her discontent, whilst all this while she sits
By him on Dunghill: That at length her Wits
Appear to be disordred: for she now
Upbraids her Husband, and demands him how
He so could bear his losses. -- Well, she says,
And must we now in our declining days,
We, who have lived in plenty formerly,
Become content with want and penury?
Must we yet live? O must we thus survive
The loss of all, that is dear to those alive --
Yet live -- live -- only that we may endure,
Such miseries as never Mortals sure
Before this time did feell! -- yet live to see
The Vulgar gazing both on thee, and me
As horrid spectacles of Heavenly wrath!
-- Yet live -- that we may only wish for Death!
Yet live! -- to swim in oceans of Tears!
And whine away a few unhappy years!
Why this is madness! -- madness! -- yes -- to me
It appears madness in the extreme degree,
Why Husband then, she says, since all is now lost,
How mean (...) look* in th^^* dear friend, to boast
Of a fantastic, sullen patience,
A Virtue, which no man of common sense
Of Wit, or Honor ever yet esteemed,
A passive dullness, hardly to be named
But with some indignation! -- patience!
Why here is a thing indeed -- must thou dispense
With loss of all, only to obtain the name
Of patient, in the Records of future Fame!
And this forsooth thou must call uprightness,
Why here is a stubborn humor I confess:
A thing unworthy of a man of Wit
A poor contented humor, only fit
For luteous Spirits! -- still to bear respect
To Heavens great Prince, who does thy cries neglect,
Who laughs at all thy pitiful addresses,
In these sad times, and openly professes
Himself thy enemy; nor will he hear
Thy most refined, importuning Prayer.
Yet still thou wilt trouble Heavens, and spend thy time
In this unpleasant, and ill-sounding Chyme
In The ears of our great God, from such as thee,
Whom he, who is not blind may plainly see,
He does abhor: yet thou will still proceed,
And call to Heaven still, as if indeed
Thy bare Devotion could afford us Bread.
Then, to conclude, says she, let me advise
Him, whom I dearly love, to be more wise,
Then thus persisting in his uprightness,
To loss himself by his own wilfulness.
Dye rather then, she says, if thou would be free,
From the sad pressures which now torture thee;
Do, yes, do something that deserves death,
By Law, and unto Justice yield thy Breath.
For rather than thou should on Dunghill ly,
A Spectacle to every one goes by,
I Would have thee fairly curse thy God, and dye.
O the sad pangs of an afflicted life! 10. But he said unto her thou speak
like a foolish woman, what shall we receive good at the hands of God, and not
receive evil, in all this Job did not sin with his lips.

That one should hear such language from his wife.
Such language, as would make this man despair,
But that he has a better Comforter,
Who bids him hope: to this shreud Harangue then,
He thus makes answer.
Thou talkst like foolish Girl, says he, why Woman,
God in his mercy is obliged to no Man:
For all the kindness he did ere extend
To man, or will do to the worlds end
Is not the effect of merits, but indeed
From his own goodness solely does proceed.
It Is true, dear Wife, he favored us of late
With a fair Issue, and a great Estate;
But pray' do think, because he did allow
Such Favors to us then, that he should now
Indulge us with his former bounty too.
Shall we our selves no better understand
Than to be taking good things from his hand,
Like Children, with a canine Appetite,
And hang upon his table with delight,
And Complaisance, while he affords us food,
As if he were obliged to do us good
Perpetually, and not also take
Ill from him kindly for his Justice sake*
Then, trust me, Woman, what our God has done
In our concerns is very just, and none
But fools will of his Actions complain,
Since he who gives may freely take again.
For shame let us then, who Prosperity
Have seen, now God has sent Adversity,
Bear all our Griefs* and Losses patiently.
By this officious Fame had published 11 Now when Jobs three friends heard of
all this evil that was come upon him, they came every one from his own place,
Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, for they
had made an appointment together to come to mourn with him.

The news of Jobs Afflictions and spread,
Strange stories of his losses every where,
Which when three worthy Gentlemen did hear,
His Blood-relations, ( but what yet was more
His Friends) they did most heartily deplore
His sad condition from their very soul,
And so would make a Journey to condole
With him in his affliction: for this end,
They Messengers did to each others send,
Appointed where their meeting place should be,
From whence they in a body might go see
Their now distressed Friend, whom formerly
They had beheld in great Prosperity.
Their Names were Eliphaz the Temanite,
Bildad the Shuhite, Zophar the Naamathite;
Men of great wit and parts, and certainly
In their own Countries of great quality.
Now we must think that Job was all alone, 12 And when they lift up their eyes
afar off, and knew him not, they lift up their voice, and wept, and they rent
every one his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.

For by this time his Wife was surely gone,
To shift in the Country for convenience,
Not able to subsist on patience,
But had (good Lady) now determined
Not to return to what she once did wed*
For good and evil, for her Jointure now
Was gone, and all the Expectation too
Of her afflicted Husbands Restoration,
Which made her soon abandon him in passion.
When then his friends did to the place draw nigh,
Where the afflicted man did pensive ly;
When first they see his face they were afraid,
And thought their guide had possibly betrayed
Them by some trick, and stead of their old friend,
Had brought them there to see some Ghost, or Fiend.
But when anon they did perceive 'twas he,
'T was he indeed, whom they did mean to see,
How sadly then they mourned! how sore they weep't,
Rent all their Clothes, and on their heads they heap't
Great quantity of dust, as is the fashion
In those parts to express their Lamentation.
Then down beside him on the ground they sat, 13 So they sat down with him on
the ground seven days, and seven nights, and none spoke a word to him, for
they saw that his grief was very great.

Where seeing how his grief was dumbly great,
In Complaisance they also silence keep't.
Seven Days, and Nights, and only sighed, and weep't.
But when they spoke, the comfort they did bring
Was little better, than his female thing
Afforded lately: for we soon shall see
Those wise men with their Patient disagree;
And fly in passion, whilst they constantly
Maintain a point, which Job does still deny.
That man lives not on earth, who never errs,
Good men may sometimes be bad Comforters.
Cap. III.
BUt when much time they had in silence spent, 1. After this Job opened his
mouth, and cursed his day.

At length Jobs Tunn'd up Sorrow must have vent
Else he will burst --
His Heart with strong fermenting Grief oppressed,
Can now maintain its Post within his Breast
No longer, overpowered with numerous woes,
Who now began it is passages to close,
With the Rubbish of his Body, which was now
Prop't up, and kep't in joints with much ado.
For all the assistance Sighs and Groans could make,
In pumping up his Sorrows seemed to weak,
Against such swelling Griefs; though he appears
To Have voyded much in cataracts of Tears,
Which all this while had issued from his Eyes;
Yet if not rescued quickly by supplies
Of cleansing words* and passionate expressions,
(Which most alleviate Grief at such occasions)
He Is gone. --
When then he saw that he was forced to speak,
Before his Heart should all in pieces break,
He thus began. -- Cursed be the day, says he, 2. And Job spoke, and said,

That to the World brought such a Wretch as me,
O thrice accursed be that unlucky day,
On which the Sun in complementing Ray,
Made its first visit, and with smile did see,
In Infant posture such a thing as me.
Pregnant with grief then he begun to cry 3. Let the day perish wherein I was
born, and the night in which it was said there is a man child conceived.

I'th'extream labor of his Agony, --
Let the day perish wherein I was born,
And never be named hereafter but with scorn.
Let the night, says he, in which it was said
A Man child is Conceived by overspread
With a perpetual Cloud of darkness, spite
Of Fire and Tapers, Lamps and Candlelight.
In darkness let my Birthday have its shrine, 4. Let that day be darkness, let
not God regard it from above* neither let the light shine upon it.

Let Heavens great Light no more upon it shine,
Let Providence of that day take no care,
Let it be dashed out of the Calendar.
Let it be wrapped up in a horrid Wreath, 5. Let darkness and the shadow of
death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon it, let the blackness of the day terrify
it.

Of its own colors, let the shade of Death
Mantle that fatal day, let sable cloud,
I^s Noontide glory in sad darkness shroud.
Let Astrologues, when they the Year survey,
Mark that with Rubric, as a dismal day, 6. As for that night, let darkness
seize upon it, let it not be joined to the days of the year, let it not ^^me
into the num^^^ of the months.

Let everlasting darkness damn that night,
Which was by too officious Candle light
Assisted, when any Mother did cry out,
And for my sake did in great labor shout.
O that same dismal night! that night! that night!
O that unhappy night! which with despite
I Will ever name.
O that accursed night, let it be known,
To prying Devils, and wandering Ghosts alone.
Nay let it never so much honor bear,
As t'usher in the meanest day of the year.
Let other nights with it no Commerce keep:
In it let never mortal Creature sleep:
Let all the other months of the year abhor
This cursed night, and never allow it more
The former freedom of their Corporations,
Nor ever name i^ in their Computations.
O that abominable night! that dire, 7. Let that night be solitary, let no
joyful noise be heard therein.

And cruel point of time! let never Fire
Shine in that night! O let it never be
From falling Stars, and stinking Vapors free.
Let such as do intend in Jollity
To spend some hours in cheerful Company
Abhor that fatal Season, and delay
Their merry meetings to the break of day.
Let all, who in extreme necessity, 8. Let them curse it that curse their day,
being ready to renew their mourning.

Abhor the hour of their Nativity
Here bring their Curses, and with great despite,
Throw thousand Maledictions on that night. --
-- O that thrice damned night! -- let all conclude
That night, -- that only must be understood
TO have truly been the night in all the year,
In which their dreadful woes did first appear.
That fatal night, -- that night, -- that woeful night, 9. Let the stars of the
twilight thereof be dark, let it look for light, but have none, neither let it
see the dawning of the day.

O let it never be adorned with Light.
The Stars, which in its twilight do appear
Let them a sullen Russet Livery wear,
Whilst thoseof all the other nights shine clear.
O let the hopes of that unpitied night
Be disappointed, whilst Heavens Glorious Light
Disdains its fulsome Vapors to dispel,
But leaves it, as he found it, black as He^^.
Because it Sealed ^ot up my Mothers Womb, 10. Because it shut no^ ^p the doors
of m^ mothers womb, (...) hid sorrow from n^^e eyes.

That in that Cell I might have found my Tomb,
That so I never a living Soul had been,
And those poor Eyes had never such sorrow seen.
Ah why was I not stiffled in the Birth! 11. Why did I not dye from the womb?
why did I not give up the ghost, when I came from the belly.

Why did my unkind Mother bring me Forth!
Why was I not in Gobbets cut for shame,
That such a Monster from the Belly came!
But O, since my poor Mother was constrained 12. Why did the knees prevent me,
or why the breasts that I should suck.

To cast me out, what further then remained,
But that those Women, who were present there,
Had laid my Body in the open Air.
Would, when she was of me Delivered,
The Midwife then had knocked me in the Head.
Would she had on the Pavement let me fall*
Or, with main force, had dash't me' against the wall.
O would she -- would she had done any thing,
Might have preveen'd my present suffering.
Nay, since we think that some of those can guess,
From the Infants forehead of its future case,
Could she not have discovered in my face
My present state! -- could she not plainly see
What a sad creature I in time should be!
Yes -- sure she did: -- O then why did she not
In kindness to me cut my tender Throat!
Alas how the good woman was to blame,,
That did not kill me, to prevent my shame!
O why did women on their unkind knees
Lay me, as soon as born! -- O why did these
Linnens, and Swaddling clothes for me provide,
Whilst had they left me naked, I had died.
Why did the Breasts in feeding Liquor flow,
And offer suck to such an Embryo!
For, but for these unhappy Courtesies, 13. For now I should have layn still,
and been quiet, and should have slept, then had I been at rest.

Those most unseasonable Civilities,
Now in earths bosom I had lay'n at rest
And not been with those, akeing woes oppressed.
I might ha'sleep't with Kings and Counselors, 14. With Kings and Counselors
of the earth, who built desolate places for themselves.

Who, in their lives erected costly Towers,
And Pyramids, in Deserts, to proclaim
By such wild Trophies, how they courted fame.
With Princes that had Silver heaped in store, 15. Or with Princes that had
gold, who filled their houses with silver.

And keep'd their Chests brimful with precious Ore,
The grand Horse-leeches of the Universe,
The earths high, and most Illustrious Scavengers.
Who, with what Nature gave them, not content,
Do rack her Bowels for her Excrement.
Why as untimely Birth was I not hid, 16. Or as an hidden untimely birth, I had
not been, as infants, who never see the light.

And with some kindly toillet covered!
Or as a still born Child, who sees no light,
Wrapped in the dusky Blankets of the night!
But O that all things should have contribute 17. There the wicked cease from
troubling* there the weary be at rest.

Thus to destroy me! since, without dispute,
Had I then died, my happiness had been
As great this very day as is my pain.
For I had now secure from trouble sleep't,
And in the silent grave my quarter keep't.
I -- in the grave -- the grave to be envied,
And wished beyond all Palaces beside.
It Is there, it is there, it is there where only all
The groaning world themselves can happy call.
There both those who oppressed, and were oppressed
On earth, enjoy uninterrupted rest.
There all are Friends: there all our Picques and Jarrs,
Our Plots, our Foreign, and our Civil Wars
Ly buried with us; I, we all appear
To be so many dormant Brethren there.
The boistrous Tyrant, who in life did rage,
To whom no sleep could give an hours Soulage;
Who betwixt King, and Prisoner spent his years,
Amidst a thousand jealousies and fears:
In deaths cold arms when he encircled lies,
He Is free from all his Royal Miseries.
The val^ant Warrior, who, in life, enjoyed
But little rest, and was most part employed
In action, ready still to march, or fight,
And knew no difference betwixt day, and night:
Free from Allarm of Trumpets, under ground
He sweetly sleeps, until last Trumpet sound.
Poor Prisoners, who were in life distressed, 18, There the Prisoners rest
together, they hear not the voice of the oppressor.

And by their cruel Creditors oppressed,
In grave together comfortably rest.
No Usurer against them does declare
In Court, no Action lies against them there.
Free from the gingling noise of Chains, and Keys,
And weekly threatenings, for their weekly Fees,
In Deaths low Rooms the Wretches sleep with ease.
There, there both poor, and rich, both low and high 19. The small and great
are there, and the servant is free from his master.

Princes, and Peasants undistinguished lie.
Those, who in life imagined, they excelled
All others, and with vain Opinion swelled
Of their own parts, do in the grave appear
But even as those, whom they call Dunces here.
The Servant there is from his Master free,
No former quarrels make them disagree.
The slave, who all his lifetime made no gain,
But what he earned betwixt the whip and chain,
Who often his freedom would, with tears, demand,
And longed to be turned by his Masters hand,
But still denied, in grave that blessing has,
And only owes his liberty to death.
O Death! -- who can thy Excellence declare!
What state of life can we with thine compare!
In life we waste a few unhappy years,
In a continued Labarinth of tears,
'Twixt envy, and compassion here we breath,
Preferring worst estate of life to death.
For O this notion of life, this bare,
And mean conception of a breathing here,
Does in our wanton ears so sweetly sound,
That we abhor the thoughts of underground.
Fools* who'd be rather tossed 'twixt wind and wave,
Than sleep on Bed of Roses in the grave!
Whilst all bedaub'd with sweat in noon-tide-light,
Does not the wearied Labourer long for night?
That free from toil, he may enjoy, at best,
But the poor Favor of a few hours rest.
Though quickly roused, before the Sun appear,
With morning-blush upon our Hemisphere.
He Is forced again to toil. --
Then O how much, then o how much should those,
Who in this sleep of life find no repose,
Wish sor the sleep of death, in which they may,
Beyond the fear of interrupting day,
Though thunder round this lower world should roar,
Sleep undisturbed, while Heavens shall be no more.
Then why should one be thus compelled to live, 20. Wherefore is light given to
him that is in misery, and life to the bitter in soul?

That fain would dye? Why should the Almighty give
A Lease of Life to one, who seriously
Hates it so much that he does long to die!
For what is life to one, that is destitute
Of all the favors it can contribute?
What man is he on earth that can be able,
When of what even does make it tolerable
This life is spoiled, ah who is he, who then
For love of life would suffer so much pain
As I endure. --
Then why should one desire to live, who lies
Environed with a thousand miseries?
A wretched man, -- a man, who hardly knows
What life is now* -- only he does suppose,
By the figure of his present suffering,
This life must be some very naughty thing.
Some naughty thing! -- yes sure it must be such, 21. Who long for death, but
it comes not, and dig for it more than for hid treasures.

As wise men never can despise too much:
A thing it is esteemed by none, but Fools
A thing, which Boys are even taught at Schools
To undervalue: nay each man does boast
Himself the bravest, who contemns it most.
The Cob*web-product of a toiling breath
Never complete, while finished by Death.
A silly toy, which, as we come to years,
Still to us more ridiculous appears.
It Is true this lise bestows all empty pleasures
On men on earth, it gives them Honors, Treasures,
Revenge, and Success, yes these Life does give,
For which these Aerie Fools desire to live.
As those who dream to sleep; but after all;
When they on serious Contemplation fall:
When their own minds do tell them all is vain,
Which they thought here was Permanent, -- O then
O then how they abhor this Life, and fain
Would be out of its Intrigue: yes at length,
When they perceive how all their wit, and strength
Is baffled by some pitiful disease,
Which on their bodies then begins to seize:
Lord how they 're vexed, and penitently think
Of Life, as men next morning after drink;
When the sad pleasures of their Cups now make
Their Stomachs sick, their Heads with horror ache:
I then, as these their Cups, so these abhor
Their Lives, and swear they will never love them more.
But wearied of the Inconvenience
Which Life affords, with great Impatience,
O how they long to be a trudging hence,
With groans they have the Journey of their breath,
And never rest till they arrive at Death.
Should any then extravagantly sad, 22. Who rejoyee exceedingly, and are glad
when they find the grave.

As I am now, be yet alace so mad,
As wish to live! -- no sure, or if he do,
That man deserves no pity --
For a poor living man, with grief oppress^t,
I -- horrid grief, -- should have in mind no rest,
Whilst clogged with Fetters of a lingering Breath,
But, in his Torments, force resisting Death;
Yes, and in Joys mad excess, fondly rave,
When he is so happy, as to find his Grave.
Then why is Life upon a man bestowed, 23. Why is light given to a man who is
hid, and whom God has hedged in?

That would of Death be insolently proud!
Of Death -- I and esteem that favor more,
Then all the Blessings he enjoyed before.
-- O then, kind Death, now let me see thy Face:
O will thou me in thy cold Arms embrace:
Make haste -- make haste, for I Am with Life oppressed,
If thou have any love for me, make haste,
Haste, -- haste, -- for Heaven sake -- haste --
For why is Life upon a man bestowed,
To whom his God no Comfort has allowed!
Why should I be condemned to Live, when all
What in this World I could Pleasure call
Is gone: -- when Felons are allowed to Dye,
After the Fisque has stripp't them, -- why should I
Not yet, -- not yet convict of any Crime,
Bear the sad threatenings of insulting Time!
-- Insulting Time! that does my Case proclaim,
Whilst gentle Death would cover all my shame.
Then let me dye, -- yes dye -- and never more 24. For my sighing comes before
I eat, and my roarings are poured out like the waters.

The benefit of a poor Life implore:
-- Of a poor Life, a Life so poor and mean,
A Life so larded with sad grief, and pain,
As if his mortal foe a man would curse,
All his invention could not wish him worse,
Then I am now, -- then I am -- I -- sad I
Who, that I may be sadder, must not dye.
-- Lord how my Sighs -- with force ingeminate
Pump up whole floods of Tears, which, when I eat,
Are now the only Sawces to my Meat.
For, from my Eyes, these, as from Water-spout
Like Rain: swollen Torrents, issue always out.
Then let me dye, -- O let me quickly dye 25. For the thing which I greatly
feared, is come upon me, and that which I was afraid of is come unto me.

As others do, and not so cruelly
Be forced thus to survive my Loss, and see
Under the Heavens no sinful man, like me.
No sinful man, -- no none of all that Race
So much oppressed as I am -- none alace
Of Heavens foes suffering so much as I,
Who lived by the Laws, and Rules of Piety:
As I, who always studied to shun
Those Courses, which a many Mortals run:
As I, who always shunned to give occasion
To my (indeed kind God) of provocation:
But now I plainly see my former Zeal
And Piety could not with him prevail
TO avert this blow -- no -- no -- my clouds of Prayers
Are now dissolved in deluges of Tears*
And I must suffer now what never man
Endured before me, since the world began.
Indeed in the affluence of my former bless,
I still would fear this sad Catastasis:
And these same thoughts did so my Spirit seize,
As, in the night time my over wearied eyes
Had little sleep: for I could never endure
In all my prosperous time, to live secure,
As some, who on their earthly Blessings rest,
Which makes me so uneasily d^gest
My present troubles. -- O then let me dye
For since alace my ^eal and Piety,
My Prayers, my Tears, my daily Offerings
Could not prevent my present Sufferings:
How should I think they can me extricate
Out of this sad, and miscrable state.
Then let me dye -- O let me dye again --
I beg it, Lord -- let me be out of pain
At any rate -- let not thy dreadful wrath
Deprive me of the benefit of death;
As it has done of all things here below,
N^ -- my good God -- permit it not, for so
I shall in horror live, and possibly,
After long sufferings, in despair shall dye.
O let me dye then -- for thy mercies sake,
Lord let me dye -- and force me not to take
Those resolutions, which some other men
Would take, if in such misery, and pain.
-- Burst then, poor heart -- O split -- burst speedily,
That I may have the happiness to dye.
-- To dye, and then I know my Makers wrath
For all this, will be by my single death
Quickly appeased, and in the grave I shall
Rest sweetly free of troubles, after all.
O death, what mortal can thy worth esteem!
Who Is he can thy intrinsic value name!
All states of life are daily to be sold,
But thou death art not, to be had for gold*
Though the world of life but one great market be,
Yet all is bought up, and there is none left for me,
But that, which even mad men would abhor:
Then why should I this life keep any more.
-- This life -- this hellish life -- O now, kind death
Ease me of this, and take my parting Breath.
Then burst, sad heart -- what cannot all my Art
Be able yet to burst one broken heart!
-- Yes sure -- burst quickly -- let me quickly dye,
And in this ugly ^^unghill, where I lie
Let me be buried -- but, my Friends, take heed
My Body with much earth be covered.
Under a heap of stones, lest Laboring Men
Digging this Dung hill in the Season, when
They dung their grounds, should find my Carcass here,
For if uncovered* will infect the Air.
PART II.
Cap. IV.
JOB having thus attempted to express 1. Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and
said,

That inward grief, which did his Soul oppress,
One of his three Friends, Eliphaz, by name,
Did him thus tartly for his passion blame.
Should we, says he, with thee expostulate, 2. If we essay to commune with
thee, will thou be grieved? but who can withhold himself from speaking.

And, on the matter, enter in debate;
We see the heat of thy impatience
Is such, as our discourse may give off^nce.
Yet though thou should*st be vexed, and curse us all,
As thou have done thy birthday, nothing shall
Make us forget our duty (for reprove
The errors of a man we so much love;
We must indeed) then pray who can forbear
To answer thee, when such discourse we hear
Of thy great zeal, and piety of late,
Thy grace thy virtue, and I know not what,
By which thou would make us think forsooth, that he
Who cannot act unjus^ly, punished thee
Without a fault preceding -- very fair,
Pray, who with patience can such language hear?
Should in our hearing one of God complain
Unjustly and from answer^ng we abstain?
No, no, my friend, we came not here indeed, 3. Behold thou have taught many*
and have strengthen^d the wearied hands

To hear thee in thy Passions exceed
The rage of madmen* or allow thee so
To cry, and overact a man of woe.
For shame -- how mean a thing it is to see
Thy mind thus discomposed, that such as thee
Whose eminent prudence* virtue, piety
And long experience of the worlds vanity,
We thought had taught thee to know better things,
That such as thee, in foolish murmurings
Should bluster thus. -- --
Thou who did others in affliction teach 4. Thy words have confirmed him who
was falling, and thou have strengthened the we^k knees.

How to behave, would to them patience preach,
And how with crosses they should be content,
Thy self to become thus impatient!
Thou, who in troubles others have restored
Can thou no comfort to thy self afford?
Others thou would check, when in Adversity, 5. But now it is come upon thee, and
thou art grieved, it touches thee, and thou art troubled.

As thou do now, they would passionately cry,
And curse their Birthday, as thou now have done;
Afflictions at length are come upon
Thy self, and thou art grieved, it touches thee
In The quick, and thou art all in flames, we see.
Where Is now thy fear of God? thy confidence 6. Is not this thy fear, thy
confidence, thy patience, and the uprightness of thy ways?

In him? thy Uprightness? thy Patience?
Where are those Virtues now? -- what -- are they fled,
At such time, as thou most of them have need?
Why should, my friend, like madman then cry out, 7. Remember I pray thee,
whoever perished being innocent, or where were the upright destroyed.

In view of all thy Neighbors round about?
And set out thy condition, with such Art,
As if, without cause, thou afflicted were?
Have not thy sins called for thy punishment?
Prithee forbear then this thy vain Complaint,
Who ever perished being Innocent?
Pray, call to mind how thou have lived before,
As other sinners, and complain no more.
Revise the Annals of thy former time,
And thou will surely find the hidden Crime,
For which we all of us perceive indeed
Thou now art most severely punished.
Consider this pray, and without debate, 8. As I have seen those that plow
iniquity, and sow wickedness, reapthe same.

Thou Wilt not so with thy God expostulate.
He acts according to most upright Laws,
And punishes no man, without a Cause.
But I Have observed that Antecedent sin,
(How slow soever) still does usher in
Punishment to it self proportionate,
Which still attends the sinner, soon, or late.
So, in his Judgment on his sins may read,
And see the Cause, from whence his woes proceed.
For I have often seen that such as Plow
Your heathy Ground, and corrupt Seed do Sow,
For all their Labors, when their Harvest came,
They Would Reap no other, but the very same.
Vain men! who, cause not punished instantly, 9. With the blast of God they
perish, and with the breath of his nostrils they are consumed.

Mistake forbearance for indemnity:
At least they think, when Judgments God designs,
He Will be so kind, as by some outward Signs,
To give them Warning, and proclaim the War,
By the Herauldry of some Portentuous Star*
In praevious threatenings he will the work begin,
And not surprise them napping in their sin:
So, ere the arryval of their punishment,
They may have some small leisure to repent,
By which perhaps they may these ills prevent.
Poor fools, who grossly do themselves abuse
With such wild notions, as if God should use
What methods they prescribed, and give them time
First to Commit, then mourn for every Crime.
But let us suppose that God Almighty now
To Sinning men such warnings should allow
In that case, pray what would these wretches do?
Would they repent? I doubt they would not: -- nay
I think they would rather crave a longer day;
That they might mourn, with more convenience,
And so perhaps some hours, ere they go hence,
They Would drop a Tear, or two, and openly
Confess, what they no longer dare deny,
So fraught with hopes, and sins, they would shrewdly die.
Thus then we see to warn, and to surprise
Is all one thing, for no man, while he dies
Thinks on Repentance, and it may be then
With a few putting words, oppressed with pain,
He Will say he is truly grieved to think upon
His former Actings, and begin annon
To settle his affairs; and possibly
Emit some pious groans before he dye.
Vain, hoping sinner! on what grounds should he
Thus make account? when we may daily see
How when a many swell with boystrous Pride,
And undervalue all Mankind beside*
Death, or Destruction suddenly appears,
And pulls them out of the world by the Ears.
For instance see some proud imperious thing, 10. The roaring of the lion, and
the voice of the lyonness, and the teeth of the lions whelps are broken.

Amongst its Neighbors keep such Revelling,
As Lions, and their Broods in Forests do
Amongst their Fellow bruits: for mark but how,
By the same Law, as those do bear away
What e're they find, proclaiming it their prey,
So the oppressing wretch, under pretense
Of Law, and Justice, by plain violence,
Seizes on all his Neighbors Lands around,
And then with Lawsuits does them so confound,
They Are glad at length for Aikers to compound,
And be his Tennents. Yet for all his Pride,
When in Oppressions triumph he does Ride,
God strikes this lofty Tyrant on the Face,
And lays him in the Dust, with all his cursed Race.
As dead he lies, and no man does bemoan him, 11. The lion petisheth for lack
of prey, and the lions whelps are scattered abroad.

From every corner Pleas break out upon him:
All those, whose means by force he did retain,
Are soon restored to their own again.
Then this poor Lion starves, for lack of food,
Nor pity him, although he roar aloud,
And all his Whelps are scattered here, and there
To ^ake the Dunghill, for their daily fare.
But now, my friend, that thou may not suppose 12. But a thing was brought
to me secretly, and mine ear received a little thereof.

Those words to be my own, I must unclose
The Secrets of my Heart, and plainly tell
What God, of late, did to my Soul reveal.
About the time, when Mortals wearied, 13. In the thoughts of the vision of the
night, when sleep falls on man.

With anxious Thoughts, do tumble in their Bed,
And one small nap after another catch,
As if they did not mean to sleep, but watch.
Fear came upon me, terrors did assemble, 14. Fear came upon me, and dread*
which made all my bones to tremble.

Before me, which made all my joints to tremble;
My nerves grew stiff, my heart did shrewdly beat,
And I all over lay daubling in cold sweat.
The winds did rage and bluster in my sight, 15. And the wind passed before me,
and made the hairs of my flesh to stand up.

Which made my hairs for fear, to stand upright,
And all my flesh to quiver, nay my bones
Keep'd such a rattling, as a bag of stones
Beat by an Artists hand, do what I please,
I could not shun the grinding of my knees.
Then see I one, whose face I did not know 16. Then stood one, and I knew not
his face, an Image was before mine eyes, and in silence I heard a voice saying.

Before my eyes appeared a glorious show,
Which goodly sight did soon my fear allay,
And horrid night to me became as day.
So, when these thundering fears composed were,
In serene silence I a voice did hear
Which thus expressed it self. --
Upon the earth, what mortal man is he, 17. Shall man be more just, than God,
or shall a man be more pure then his maker?

Can be more just then God; who e're he be
That in his own eyes thinks himself more pure
Then is his maker, he mistakes it sure.
For, when his very Angels he did check 18. Behold he found no sted fastness in
his servants, and said folly upon his Angels.

And them for folly soundly did correct:
When for his pride, one mighty Angel fell
From highest Heavens to the lowest pit of Hell,
When in those heavenly creatures he did find
No constancy according to his mind:
Can sinful man, that mean, and silly tool, 19. How much more in them, that
dwell in houses of clay, who^ foundation is in the dust, which shall be
destroyed before the moth.

Who lives in Huts of clay be such a fool,
As think he can perfection attain,
To which, who ere Aspyres does toil in vain.
He, who from dust derives his Pedigree,
Composed of dust, who dwells in dust, shall he
Pretend to that perfection in his pride,
Which to his Angels God has even denied.
Poor dying wretch! shall he, with those compare,
Who dwell in heavens, and immortal are.
Ah don't we see how vain man perishes, 20. They be destroyed from the morning
to the evening, they perish for ever without regard.

And every day augments the rolls of death:
He Is always on his march, his Passing Bell
From morn, to night does, every minute, knell.
Yet no man does consider seriously
The importance of this mortality.
Do not their honors, with them, fly away? 21. Does not their dignity go away
with them? do they not dye, and that without wisdom?

And stoop to wasting time, as well, as they,
Who did enjoy them? I their dignity
Crumbles to dust, and when the wretches dye,
They drown in the Ocean of Eternity.
Yet no man does regard this, none so wise,
As, after all this, once to cast his eyes
Upon this subject, which so much concerns
All men to know; yet never mortal learns
The art of dying, though each hour we hear
Sad lectures of it sounded in our ear;
And every moment does such means afford,
As may instruct us, while deaths raging sword
To none gi^es quarter, but does every day,
Sweep us, and all our hopeful things away.
For, as they live, alace how many dye,
Pregnant examples of the worlds vanity.
Cap. V.
COnsider then, and ponder well, I pray 1. Call now; if any will answer thee,
and to which of the Saints will thou turn?

These my discourses, mark me what I say:
Thy plagues I see, indeed, are very great
Yet is thy grief no less intemperate.
Others have been and as thou art, now are,
For thy condition is not singular.
Many beloved of God, whilst here below,
Have suffered more, then thou did ere yet know,
In mind, and body have endured much pain,
Yet none of them, as thou did, did complain.
And where are all the Saints, who now enjoy
Eternal rest? how did they here employ
Their time, when plagues so thick upon them fell,
Their lives became the Portraiture of Hell;
Why none of them did rail, as thou do now,
But calmely would before their maker bow,
And gently all their blows receive* none ere
Of those did in their humors thus appear,
As thou do now.
For, when a man does in affliction lie, 2. Doubtless anger kills the foolish,
and envy slays the Idiot.

What boot'st him, like a child, to weep, and cry?
Such houlings, and repinings sure are vain,
And ^^ead of casing, do increase the pain.
But I Have observed when any man of wealth
Is once depri^^d of riches, or of health:
Although before he^'d seem to represent
In all his actings something of a Saint.
Yet then he cries, then he repines a main,
Then he complains of poverty, and pain:
O then he railes upon that providence,
Which was, in former times* his sole defense.
For now -- all sorrow, wrath, and desperation
He thinks on nothing less then restoration,
Whereas before he thought he was so sure,
His wealth to generations would endure.
Well I have seen some Gallant in his pride 3. I have seen the foolish well
rooted, and suddenly I euiled his habitation, saying.

In^ulsly laugh at all the world beside*
Fixed, and firme-rooted, as he did suppose,
And proof against the battery of his foes,
When, on a sudden providence would frown,
And this same fool would tumble headlong down,
With all his sins about him, in a tryce,
Killed by the fall from glories precipice.
Then would I say this man deservedly 6. His children shall be far from
salvation, they shall perish in the gate, and there shall be none to deliver
them

Does fall, and with him all his family,
Is levelled with dust, because he did
In such vain, transitory things conside.
For by fair justice he shall be destroyed,
And all his unjust purchases made void,
Then, after he has justly forfeit all,
He, without pity shall most justly fall.
Those, who are hungry shall eat up his grain, 5. The hungry shall eat up his
harvest, yea they shall take it from among the thorns, and the thirsty shall
drink up their substance.

And reap the profit of his nine Months pain:
Nay they shall sweep his grounds, and fields so clean
As his poor children shall find naught to glean.
The thirsty travelers, who for rain does gape,
Shall drink up all the substance of his grape.
For thou must know afflictions do not come 6. For misery comes not forth of
the dust, neither does affliction spring out of the earth.

By accident, as is supposed by some,
On any man, nor do Heavens noble laws
Allow that any one without a cause
Should suffer punishment, -- no not at all,
There Is no such thing, as that you fortune call:
It Is a mere notion, a device of men
To palliate their sins, and entertain,
A proud opinion of their innocence,
And lay the blame of all on Providence,
Which they call fortune, and conclude from thence
When any are afflicted at the rate,
As thou art now, that they are unfortunate,
Unlucky, and I know not what -- alace
Why should we with such sopperies, as these,
Abuse our selves, when certainly we know,
Who know there is a God, things are not so:
But that our God does formally arraigne
For every sin convict, and punish men.
Then know --
That no affliction comes by accident, 7. But man is born to travel, as sparks
fly upward.

But that all Judgments to our doors are sent
By rule of Heavens Court where information,
Is made, and proved, preceding condemnation.
Besides as sparks, by nature upwards fly,
So man to sorrows born does live and dye;
In a continued sweat of toil, and care,
With dregs of anger, for his daily fare.
Tortures of mind, and body all at once
Do suck the marrow from his very bones:
Nor can he pleasure to himself project,
Or joy, and comfort, in this earth expect.
Were I then in thy lamentable case, 8. But I would enquire of God, and turn my
talk unto God.

I Would not repine, but humbly make address,
To my good God, from him I would demand
A patient mind, and learn to understand
From whence such floods of evils do proceed,
And in my sorrows I my sins would read.
To him alone my self I would apply, 9. Which does great things, and
unsearchable things without number.

To whom the world belongs, who sits on High,
To whom all Creatures in subjection are,
Whose Jurisdiction does exceed by far
All Powers on Earth; who things unsearchable
Performs, of which we are not capable
To give a Judgment, things beyond our reach,
Things, which to act no humane Art can Teach.
It Is he, who makes the Rain from Clouds to fall, 10. He gives rain upon the
earth, and pours rain upon the streets*

By which the Earth made pregnant, yields us all
Our Hearts can wish, affords us daily Bread,
Drink, Clothes, and Medicine, and what else we need
For Maintnance of that Fabric, which he framed,
To Lodge the Soul, and it the Body named.
-- The Body, -- O a thing most excellent!
For whose Subsistence, we should even torment
Our Souls: a very precious thing indeed,
That on the Labors of the Soul should feed!
The Body! a mere piece of useful Dust
Demis'd, for some time, to the Soul, in Trust.
Though for its use, the too kind Soul, at best,
Pays a severe, and dreadful Interest:
Whilst to afford it pleasure, legally
It forfaults its own true Felicity.
What is it we hugg then? what do we esteem?
A dying thing, which scarce deserves a name!
A thing, so long as Soul does it inspire,
Moves for a time, like Puppet on a Wyre;
That gone, it moves, it prats, it squeeks no more,
But a dull piece of Clay, as't was before,
Breathless, and Sapless on the Ground it lies,
Yet, in its Fall, its Maker glorifies,
As well, as in its Frame; because from thence,
We learn what Honor, and Obedience
We owe to him, who this fair Fabric raises,
And by a Breath destroys it when he pleases.
Besides, who'd not in Duty be exact,
When still before his Eyes he sees the Rack,
The Axe, the Gibbet, and in Mind does feel
Sad apprehensions of the dreadful Wheel?
Is not our case the same? do we not see
How many thousand, Shapes of Death there be
Daily presented to our view to show.
That after all, all to the Grave must go.
From this fair Topic, let us argue then*
He is our God, and we poor sinful men,
Therefore since to him we owe Life, and Breath,
We should live well, that, when invading Death
Approaches, he may find us on our Guard,
Not by his ghastly looks to be out-dar'd.
For though he seize the Body, yet on high
The Soul shall live to perpetuity.
It Is he, the mighty God, it is he alone, 11. And sets up on high them that
are low, that the sorrowful may be exalted to salvation.

Who in the Heavens has set up his Throne,
From whence he orders all things, and does raise
This man to honors, and that man debase;
That to the afflicted he may comfort give,
And make those, whom the world abhors live.
The subtle plottings of our knowing men 12. He seattereth the devices of the
crafty, so that their hands cannot accomplish that, which they do enterprise.

He disappoints, and makes their projects vain:
He laughs at all their consults, and despises --
Both them, and all their silly state devises.
So that what e're those Crocodiles project,
Their Machinations never take effect.
He spoils their counsels, and makes all their wit 13. He takes the wise in
their craftiness, and the counsels of the wicked are made foolish.

Like salt, whose savour's lost, downright unfit
For any thing, save at a round of Ale,
To be the subject of some Country tale.
For the Worlds wisdom in Gods eyes is folly
Their Art but the product of dull Melancholy.
Their reasoning is notional, and vain 14. They meet with darkness in the day
time, and grope at noontide, as in the night.

Erring in things even evident, and plain:
Things manifest, things clear, as noon-tide-light,
To them are dark, as to one in the night
Who nothing sees, gropes, but no rode can find,
And stands confounded betwixt rain, and wind,
Whilst at each justling shrub his joints do tremble.
Thinking the Night-thieves, round him do assemble.
Lord what is all we brag of then for what
Keep we such toil on earth? -- is it only that
We may be thought more wise, than others are
And be esteemed wits, it is very fair:
A rare design indeed, well worth our pain,
When after all we learn, or can retain
All our fine wisdom in Gods eyes is vain.
For when our Politicians counsel take 15. But he saves the poor from the
sword, from their mouth, and from the hand of the violen* man.

How they the just, and pious man may break,
Partly by law, partly by violence,
The Almighty soon appears in his defense:
He rescues him from all their calumnies
Their false Inditements, and the Batteries
Of their foul mouths, and powerfully withstands
The rude attaques of their all-seizing-hands,
That grasp at person, chattels, fame, and lands.
Thus from the snare the just man does escape 16. So that the poor has his
hope, but iniquities shall stop his mouth.

And saves his means, for which those fools did gape,
As all had been even ready now to fall
Into their hands: whilst the unjust Cabal
Now disappointed of their former hope,
Are forced at length, their ravenous mouth to stop,
And all with shame confounded, to confess
Gods justice, and their own vile foolishness.
Our God alone the just man's cause maintains,
And with strong Bitt, and seasonable Reins,
He curbs the fury of the oppressing beast,
Who, to enrich himself, would lay all waste.
Who formally denies that Laws were made
For such as him, to check his roving trade:
But boldly claims all that his arms can take
And, in his Wars does no distinction make
Betwixt his Allies, and his open foes,
But treates them all at the same rate, God knows,
Our God shall sure attaque this foolish thing,
Whilst all his friends do yet his triumphs sing,
And 'midst his pleasures, make unwelcome death
Rob him of both his Laurels, and his breath.
Then since the case is thus, let us be content 17. Behold blessed is the man
whom God corrects, wherefore refuse not thou the chastiting of the Almighty.

With whatsoever plague* or punishment
Our God inflicts upon us, for, be sure,
To such as us his kindness does endure.
O happy is that man, whom God corrects,
And for his lewd, and sinful courses checks!
Thrice happy he, whom, when his sin abounds,
And makes him proud, God in his mercy wounds,
And brings him low, that on his former state,
In bed of sorrow he may meditate
Counting what time he has in folly spent,
And, in return, how his sad punishment
Makes all his balance. Let Us then understand
Our selves* and patiently the Almighties hand
Endure, and in our minds rest satisfied,
That for our good, we are with afflictions tried.
For as he gives the wound, with the same hand 18. For he makes the wound and
he bind eth it up, he smites and his hands make whole.

He binds it up: he never wants a band,
A Slave, a Plaster ready, in such cases,
Which he applies to all the affected places.
He wounds, he cures, makes sick, and does restore
Men to their health; what can we ask for more?
Though troubles upon troubles, woes, on woes 19. He shall deliver thee in six
troubles, and in the seventh the evil shall not touch thee.

Should tumble on us, as the Ocean flows:
And the rude tempests of adversity
Should drive us on the rocks of poverty;
Where sure to suffer Shipwreck, we despair
Of all relief, then will our God take care
To rescue us, that so we may perceive
It Is he alone, who does his people save,
Let Us praise him then, pray to him, and obey
His word, and we shall no more salvage pay,
When by oppression all our means seized 20. In famine he shall deliver thee
from death, and in battle from the power of the sword.

And we, and all our family es are sqees'd
Within the Compass of a hazle nut,
For our Provisions, and our bread is cut,
Like Sugar-tablets, in small lozanges,
T'allay the hunger, which does sore express
Our little ones, and makes them often cry,
With tears, for crumbs of bread, or else they dye:
Of which when each so hunger-starved, and pained
In grains, and scruples has its dividend,
These scrambling morsels rather do incite
Then quash the fury of their appetite.
Whilst thus, I say, we hunger-sick shall lie
Under Deaths Talons, and upbraidingly
Our Enemies shall laugh out all around,
Whilst we, and ours do tear the very Ground,
For ^oots, and Vermin, or what ever may
Detain the poor life but one single day;
Then shall our God appear, and furnish store
Of Bread for us, and all our Infants, more
Then we could even have wished, and let us see
The unjust for want of Food may dye, but he
Who trusts in God shall never want sustenance,
For I Have been Young, in Age I now advance,
Yet all my time I never could observe
One man that feared our God for hunger starve.
Nor could I ever see the just man's Seed
Like those o'th wickeds offspring, begging Bread.
Nay when the men of War shall roar around us,
And with their threatening Oaths shall so confound us,
As we shall not know whether we should fly
To save our Lives, and Goods --
When the enraged Sword shall hew down all,
And Old, and Young do by its fury fall;
Then shall the Lord make Angels us Environ
To Guard us from the blows of the dreadful Iron
So, whilst behind, on both sides, and before
The hungry steal, our Neighbors shall devour
To us, and ours, God shall be Tutelar,
And save us from all miseries of War.
Nay further, when another Sword does rage 21. Thou shall be hid from the
scourge of the tongue, and thou shall not be afraid of destruction when it
comes.

And with us does more cunningly engage;
The Sword of the Tongue, then that of Steel, more feirce,
(For this the Body, that the Soul does pierce)
A killing Sword, and yet invisible;
A Sword, whose wound is inperceptible,
By outward Signs: like Thunder, wounds the Heart,
The Body still untouched in any part.
A Sword that kills us always unprepared
For fight, whose blows the bravest cannot ward.
A Sword, that whet with Malice, day, and night
Is still in Edge, yet never within the sight
Of him it wounds, the subtlest of all ills,
Like Ba^ili^k, unseen, it sees, and kills.
An useless Sword in open fields, and tame,
But in dark Rooms makes havoc of our Fame.
The Champions, who this famous Sword do use
A^e the mere Dross of Nature, the Refuse
Of Mankind, who by secret Calumnies,
Foul Characters, false Oaths, and serious lies,
Vain Apprehensions, Jealousies, and Fears,
Endeavor to set all the World by the Ears.
Whilst the false decoyes hugg themselves to see
The wished effects of their vile Treachery.
Poor Caterpillars! -- who 'cause no man can
Find out their Wakes, escape the revenge of man,
Yet God has Spies on those malicious fools,
Ferrets them out of all their lurking Holes,
Though here they scorn the Ear, the Sight, the Scent,
Yet God will bring such out to Punishment,
Those ugly crawling Toads, with malice swelled
Shall be at length destroyed in open field;
To show how God abhors the very Race
Of Back-biters, as they still shun the Face
Of those they injure, and will vindicate
The just from their aspersions soon, or late.
From this same Sword, which others does devour,
Thou shall be free, and fear its Edge no more,
Than those, who in Proof-armour do not feel
The furious Gashes of the Murdring Steel.
But when both War, and Famine do appear, 22. But thou shall laugh at
destruction, and death, and shall not be afraid of the beast of the earth.

And Food shall be intolerably dear:
When wicked men shall howl, and make a noise,
For lack of Bread, thou freely shall rejoice,
And be of want of Meat no more afraid
Than those, who have their Stores in Garners laid.
The very stones of the field shall seem to be 23. For the stones of the field
shall be in league with thee, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace
with thee.

At such time, in firm alliance with thee,
And in their several stations shall produce
Something, that to thy welfare may conduce:
Each Beast its throat shall offer to the Knife,
With emulation; to support thy Life.
In fine shall be so happy, thou shall know 24. And thou shall know that peace
shall be in thy tabernacle, and thou shall visit thine habitation, and shall not
si^.

No want of any Blessing here below,
Firm peace within thy walls, thy family
Shall live with thee in perfect amity:
All thy Relations shall thee kindly own,
And to undo thy Fame shall join with none.
As some, who on small Piques, and petty Jars
Do lay foundations of fierce, lasting Wars;
Against their nighest Friends, and Blood-Relations
And will not hearken to accommodations:
Whose wretched malice does admit no change,
But with a most implacable revenge,
Pursue their foolish quarrels, never cease
From Railing, and have in their Minds no Peace.
No Wars like those amongst Friends, no Piques so hot,
As those in the same Family begot:
When Blood it self in several streams divides,
And checks its common Course, by Counter-tides,
Of Envy, Malice, Pride, Revenge, and Hate,
O how much to be pitied is the State
Of that accursed unhappy Family,
Where such sad Piques have broke its Unity.
Thou shall be ignorant of all such, and scarce
Think there are such things as domestic Jars,
Thy Blood shall in a peaceful Channel flow,
And all its Course no other Banks shall know,
Than those of Love, and Friendship, all thy Life
Shall have no Quarrels, and perceive no Strife.
Shall see thy loving issue multiply 25 Thou shall perceive also that thy seed
shall be great, and thy posterity as the grass of the earth.

Into a fair, and numerous Family;
Whose large extent should one intend to trace,
Might as well reckon every pile of Grass
That grows in the field, or calculate the motion
Of waves, and billows in the foaming Ocean.
Full fraught with years, at length thou shall descend
Into the pleasant grave, and put an end 26 Thou shall go to thy grave in a
fulage, as a rick of corn comes in due season to the barns.

To those enjoyments of thy mortal state,
As those, who with their Feasting satiate
Lie down to sleep, or as the Corn is brought
Into the Barn, when it by time is wrought
To full perfection: or as Fruits do fall
From Trees when over-ripe: so truly shall
Thy exit with felicity be crowned,
And thou shall sleep most sweetly under ground.
Thus, friend, we have inquired, and thus have found, 27 Lo thus have we
enquired of it, and so it is, hear this, and know it forthy self.

Nor is our Doctrine without solid ground.
Thus then it is, if we be understood,
For what we speak is only for thy good.
Cap. VI.
AS prisoner at bar for crimes arraigned, ^ 1 But Job answered, and said,

Hears his Indictment read, and is constrained
To hold his peace, in such an exigent,
Although he knows he is truly innocent,
Of what he is accused, but after all
He pleads not guilty, and begins to fall
To his defense: so with attentive ear,
Job all this while this reasoning did hear,
Not interrupting, till at length his friend
Of his so learned discourse had made an end:
Then, as his sorrows would permit, he speaks,
And argues thus.
O, says he, that my ponderous griefs were weighed 2 O that my grief were well
weighed, and my miseries were laid together in the balance.

And all my miseries were in balance laid.
Poys'd by a steady, and impartial hand,
Then, my good friend, you soon would understand
What is my case, what my disease, and pain,
And how much reason I have to complain.
It would be found most unsupportable, 3 For it would be now heavier than the
sands of the seas, therefore my words are swallowed up.

The sands with it were not comparable.
No pain so great, no grief so heavy sure,
As this, which I poor mortal do endure.
I cannot express it, I want eloquence,
And cannot with that grace make my defense,
As you accuse me, grief will not allow
Me the same liberty of speech, as you
Do use in your discourse: your figured words,
And pretty Tropes, which like so many Swords,
Cut out a passage for your arguments,
And make a Lane for your unjust Complaints,
TO oppress my Spirit, do your wit express,
But what do all such Flowers of Art as these
To one, in my condition signify,
Who am already dead with misery?
Why do you then accuse so dull a thing,
That does not understand your Reasoning?
A silly Creature, that makes no defense,
But only strives to express its innocence,
By pious Sighs; you had as good forbear
Your Rhetoric, and with me drop a Tear,
In kind compliance with my killing grief,
To which your pointed words bring no relief,
You see my case, beyond expression, sad
Then why do you affliction to affliction add?
See how the Almighties Arrows in my Heart 4. For the arrows of the Almighty
are in me, the venom whereof drinks up my spirit, and the terrors of God
fight against me.

Are fixed, beyond all remedy of Art.
The envenomed Shafts have sucked my Moisture dry,
And caused the Wounds they made, to putrify,
Spreading a foul contagion every where,
Yea even my very Soul they do not spare.
Besides I feed a flame within my Breast,
By which my pain is every hour encreas't,
A flame that burns with heat, and violence,
Beyond belief: -- a flame of Conscience,
A flame that makes us waste our days in fear,
For who a wounded Conscience can bear?
A wounded Conscience! -- ah a dreadful thing!
What Art can this express: whence shall I bring
Similitudes to point it out! O whence
Shall I bring homeward so much Eloquence,
As to express a wounded Conscience!
A Sting of Conscience! -- O a horrid thing!
Not the most virulent and sharpest Sting
Does hurt the Body, as this does the Mind,
No, no this Sting is of another kind,
Then all your S^ings on Earth, no poisoned Dart,
Composed by the subtilest Rules of Art,
Makes such a wound, as does a Conscience
When God allows it once a perfect Sense
Of its own Strength: then, then it wounds indeed,
And makes the Heart of hardest Metal bleed.
What tempered Steel can make a wound so deep,
As does a Conscience roused out of its sleep,
By Divine Power, it Rages, Stares, and Foames,
Like one out of his Wits, that haunts the Tombs,
It Stings, it Bites, it Pierces, Cuts, and Stricks
Practicing all the Feats of Lunaticks:
For when of sin we have a lively sense,
No Torment with a frighted Conscience
Can be compared.
Yet this, this Torment I endure, alace,
There Is none can pity one in such a case,
But, he that has the like affliction known,
And so can guess my Torment by his own.
Why do you then condemn my just Complaint 5. Does the wild ass bray, when he
has grass? or loweth the ox when he has fodder?

As if it did exceed my Punishment?
Why so severe, to vex a poor forlorn
Unhappy wretch, as ever yet was born?
A thing, Of which my Country is ashamd,
And thinks not fit that I should ere be named,
Hereafter, but as Malefactors are,
Who suffer for their Crimes, with shame, and fear.
Indeed you try me by too Bloody Laws,
When you affirm I cry without a cause.
Pray does the wild Ass bray, and make a noise,
When it has Grass for Pasture, at its choice?
Does the Ox Low, when Fodder lies before it,
Or cease from Lowing, whilst it does implore it.
D' ye think I Am proud of suffering? God knows 6. That which is unsavory,
shall it be eaten without salt? or is there any taste in the white of an egg?

I take no pleasure to express my woes.
I had as ^^^ve be silent, but that you
Force me to speak, because you will not allow
Me to sigh out my Breath, and hid my Face
Amongst those ashes, whilst I hold my peace.
Can any man take pleasure in his pain?
Or by stupendous Poverty make gain?
No sure, no more then you will with pleasure eat,
White of an Egg, or such unsavory Meat,
Without some Salt; such my affliction is,
And needs no help of this periphrasis,
TO express its nature: such my Sorrows are,
With which no Earthly Torments can compare
For what my Soul did formerly abhor, 7. Such things as my soul refused to
touch, as were ^^rrows, are my me^^.

Is now my Meat, what I disdained before
To touch is now to me familiar,
And (O sad change!) my only daily Fare.
O then that God would grant me my request, 8. O that I might have my desire,
and that God would grant me the thing I long for.

And what I long for would vouchafe at least:
O that with my strong wishes he would comply,
And kindly suffer me at length to dye!
To dye! -- O that is the thing, which I desire. 9. That is that God would
destroy me, that he would let his hand go, and cut me off.

Yea, in this very moment to expire,
Would God but stretch his arm of Providence,
And cut me off, that so I might go hence,
And be no more: would he but condescend
To what I ask, and there should be an end
Of all my earthly pain, and misery,
O then that God would suffer me to dye.
Then should I yet have comfort, then some rest 10. Then should I yet have
comfort though I burn with sorrow, let him not spare, because I have not denied
the words of the holy One.

My Soul might find, and I be free at least
From these huge pains: -- O that he would allow me
The favor, without sparing, to undo me.
Though I Am in sorrow, yet let him not spare
To give the blow, lest I perhaps despare:
For hitherto I never have denied
Gods Holy Word, or in the least signified,
In all my Torments any diffidence
Of his just, kind, o're-ruling Providence.
Alace what strength have I thus to endure, 11. What power have I that I should
endure, or what is my end, if I should prolong my life?

The force of Heaven, which never Mortal sure
Was able to support. --
Ah then, why should I live, or to what end
Should I prolong my Life, thus to attend
A lingering Death, which I might have at hand,
But that my Conscience does me countermand.
Alace what strength have I, -- what strength have I 12. Is my strength the
strength of stones or is my flesh of brass?

TO endure these Torments, -- what congruity
Is now betwixt my Person, and my Pain.
Of which I must be suffered to complain:
Am I composed of Stone, or Brass, that I
Should suffer all these Tortures, and not dye?
Have not I called for help, but could find none 13. Is it not so that there is
in me no help, and that strength is taken from me.

And now my Substance, and my Strength is gone;
My Nerves are stiff, my Blood to Phlegm is shrunk,
My Eyes in Wells of brinish Tears are sunk;
My tottering Body Wyre-strung, Bone by Bone
Makes but the figure of a Skeleton.
Ah is there no man that will pity have 14. He that is in misery ought to be
comforted of his neighbors, but men have forsaken the fear of Almighty.

Upon a Carrion dropping in its Grave;
He that is in sorrow still is understood,
To find some Comfort from his Neighborhood,
But I find none, --
But it is no wonder men their friends for sake,
When now a days, their Faith to God they break.
Take it from me, who by experience know 15. My brethren have deceived me, as a
brook, and as the ruing of the rivers, they pass away.

False friends too well, to whose base tricks I owe
No small proportion of my present grief,
From such, in time of want, there is no relief --
To be expected, more than from a Brook,
Where if for Waters you in Summer look,
It Is dry, in Winter frozen, but when Rain
Falls in abundance, and we are in no pain
For Water, then it overflows its Banks,
Offering its Service, without Hire, or Thanks.
So when we are Rich, such friends will flock about us,
They cannot Live, Eat, Drink, or Sleep without us,
They cringe, they bow, they ^aun, and us present
With foolish smiles, and aerie complement:
Protesting friendship at so high a rate,
As none would think they did equivocat.
But draw the Courtain, and let Poverty
Appear, with its Companion Misery,
Within our Walls, then all those Wasps are gone,
And as their friends they will us no more own.
Than who'd not rather sleep in faithful Dust,
Than Live, and in such friends of the fashion trust?
Friends did I call them, -- no I do mistake, 16. Which are blackish with ice,
and wherein the snow is hid.

Such are not friends, who do their friend forsake
In Misery, for at such time alone,
As by a Test, true friendship should be known.
But such have Hearts as hard, and black, as Ice,
They Are of no value, no esteem, no price.
Rugged, unpolished, cold, as is the snow,
Instinct of Nature sure they do not know.
Friends for a Sunshine of Prosperity, 17. But in time, they are dried up with
heat, and are consumed, and when it is hot they fail out of their places.

O worthy friends! but when the troubled Sky,
Portends a Storm, and Clouds begin to reel,
Then those Fair-weather-friends bid us farewell.
Friends for well furnished Tables, Friends for Food, 18. Or they depart from
their ways and their course, yea they vanish, and perish.

Friends of the Pantry, Friends for nothing good,
Save that such Friends as these might serve for foyles,
To set true frindship off: like Scabs, and Boyls,
They drop away, when the humor is run dry
Which fed them, and until Prosperity
Return, like Crans, they to warm Countries fly.
For as a Traveller in the Arabian Sands, 19. They that go to Tema considered
them, and they that go to Sheba, waited for them.

Thinks to find Water, where a thousand hands
At constant work will find their Labor vain
In digging for it, where the Sun does drain,
The innate Moisture, and by scorching Beams,
Choaks up the Veins of Rivers, Springs, and Streams.
But can find nothing save sterility, 20. But they were confounded, when they
hoped, they came hither, and were ashamed.

So those, who on such barren Friends rely,
When they stand most in need of them shall find
Like those dry Sands, they fly before the Wind,
And make no help to such in their distress,
But rather by their Malice do increase*
Their friends affliction.
Why, my good friends, such friends I think you are, 21. Surely now you are
like unto it, you have seen my fearful plagues, and are afraid

And I may safely you with such compare,
My case you see, my miseries you know,
And none of you are strangers to my woe:
You see my dreadful Plagues, and are afraid,
Such Judgments may upon your selves be laid,
Yet, stead of Comfort, which I justly might
From you expected, in this doleful plight,
Your bitter words my Torments do augment.
Your tart Reproofs increase my punishment.
Ah what is your quarrel against a dying wretch?
Why do you thus insult? I do beseech 22. Was it because I said, bring untome,
or give me a reward of your substance.

The favor of you, that you will let me know
If I have injured any of you, or no?
Have I been grievous to any of you, my Friends?
Have I demanded any of your Means?
Or have I proudly claimed of your Supply?
Or vexed you with my Bill of Charity?
Why then should I be so severely used
By any of you? have I e're refused
To serve your interest, and your reputation?
Before my late, and total Desolation?
Did ever I of you, my friends, demand 23. And deliver me from the enemies
hand, or ransomme out of the hands of yrants.

That you would free me from my Enemies hand?
Did, I when Captive, any of you pray,
That of your Bounty you would my Ransom pay?
Pray teach me then, my friends, and let me know 24. Teach me, and I will hold
my tongue, and cause me to understand wherein I have erred.

Where lies my Error in the case, and so
Being convinced, I shall from answering cease,
And, as a Mute, hereafter hold my peace.
But whilst you thus accuse me, I must still 25. How steadfast are the words of
righteousness, and what can any of you reprove?

Assert my Innocence, say what you will
To the contrair: for my upright Conscience
Does plead my Cause, and prompt me with Defense,
Against all the Pleas you do against me move,
Then, wherein justly can you me reprove?
Will Not you permit a man in misery, 26. Do you imagine to reprove words, that
the talk of the afflicted should be as wind?

His troubled Mind so much to lenify,
As by some sad expressions to declare,
What the vexations of his Spirit are?
D' ye think but men, in my condemned estate,
May have at least some liberty to prate?
See you not how my pain my speech does force,
And none should stop a dying man's Discourse.
But you on those in sorrow vent your wrath, 27. You make your wrath ^o fall
upon the fatherless, and dig a pit for your friend.

And to your half-dead Friend you threaten Death,
Your unkind words, like Grins, and Snares you lay,
By which your Friend you shrewdly may betray.
Now therefore pray at length, impartially 28. Now therefore be content to look
upon me, for I will lie before your face.

Look on me, and consider whether I
Have reason thus to express my grief, or no,
When I endure what none of you can know:
Assure your selves then I take no delight.
Thus to complain, I am no Hypocrite,
As you pretend, my sorrows are no less
Then I esteem them, nay could I express
My inward griefs, they are more in number sure,
Then mortal man did ever yet endure.
Forbear then, pray, -- at my desire, forbear, 29. Return I pray you, let there
be no iniquity* return I say, and you shall yet see my righteousness in that
behalf: is there iniquity in my tongue? does not my mouth feel sorrows.

From such Discourse, so rigid, so severe,
As wound my Heart more than my Sorrows do,
With all my Plagues, and Torments, pray allow
My grief some vent, or (as my present case is)
Should I be silent, I should burst to pieces.
Have patience but a while, and you shall see,
There Is no so great iniquity in me,
As you allege: when my survey is made,
And with my woes, my words in Scales are laid.
Cap. VII.
THen what am I? -- a man -- and what is he? 1. Is there not an appointed time
for man upon earth? and are not his days, as the days of an hireling?

A breathing Bauble -- now pray let us see
What is this man, -- of what should he be proud?
What more than to other Creatures is allowed
To this same taudry piece of Flesh, and Bone,
This painted Glowworm, this Cameleon,
That casts it self in every Form, and Shape,
And fain would something of its Maker Ape*
Is there not to this glorious Creature set
A certain time? his days are limitate,
As are those of a Hireling, his abode
Upon this Earth has its own period;
Beyond which no man of the greatest strength,
Can pass -- vain man must dye -- vain man at length
Must drop into his Grave, and there become
The very Dross, the Caput mort^um
Of Life's projection, fitted for no use,
Yet is this all his labor does produce.
Although he fancies to himself he may,
Exceed the reputation of Clay
In high conceits, and even seems to hold
Within his Clutch whole Magazines of Gold,
Like one, who in a Dream great Booties takes,
But finds himself deceived, when he awakes.
On what alace then should this silly Tool
Value it self! -- this Hypocondriackfooll,
For what should he himself so much esteem,
When all his Life is but a very Dream.
Have you not seen a Labourer all the day, 2. As a servant longs for the
shadow, and as a hireling looks for the end of his work.

Long for the happy night, wherein he may
Refresh his wearied Bones, and think the Sun
Spite of him, with too slow a pace does run.
And with impatience does his Task attend,
Longing to have his Labors at an end.
This is my very case, for so have I 3. So have I had as an inheritance the
months of vanity, and painful nights have been appointed to me.

Toiled all the day long of my vanity,
And longed extreemly for the approach of night,
In which I pleased my self to think I might
Enjoy some Rest; but here the difference lay
'Twixt the Labourer, and me, the night, and day
To me were both alike; no rest I found
In either, at no rate I could compound
With sleep for one hour of its company,
But on my Bed, I Would sick, and tossing lie,
With Eyes unclos'd, and Spirit much perplex't,
Fainting with grief, in Mind, and Body vex't.
So runs my Time, so do my Years advance,
I'have indeed had for Inheritance,
Long days of pain, and months of vanity*
Which makes my Life a Scene of misery.
So soon as I my self compose to Rest, 4. If I laid me down, I said when shall
I arise, and measuring the evening, I am even full with tossing too, and fro,
unto the dawning of the day.

Thinking to cach some slender Nap at least,
Before I shut up my o'rewearied Eyes,
Now I lie down, but when shall I arise
I say, how shall I pass the tedious night?
When shall I see again the morning light?
The night I do by Moments Calculate,
And with impatience for the Morning wait?
With tossing too, and fro upon my Bed,
My Body is sore pained, and wearied.
My Body tortured with a strange Disease, 5. My flesh is clothed with worms
and filthiness of the dust, my skin is rent, and become horrible.

W^ose fury no soft Ointments can appease:
What art to such as I am can bring ease?
My Flesh with Vermin is all overspread,
See how with Dust, and Mud I Am covered.
My Skin to pieces is all rent, and torn,
Was ever man to such sad Judgments born?
My Pains, and Torments are all visible,
With Ulcers I am become horrible.
My days do pass with more celerity, 6: My days are swifter then a weavers
shuttle, and they are spent without hope.

Than Weavers Shuttle through the Web does fly.
Amidst a thousand Sorrows, Cares, and Fears,
I spend some inconsiderable Years.
They fly, they fly, nothing in Earth, or Air,
In swiftness, can with humane years compare,
Out all sight they fly, they fly amain,
Never intending to return again.
Time turns its Hourglass, and ore'turns us all,
No Mortal Creature can its Time recall.
Consider then, good Lord, what thing I am, 7. Remember that my life is but a
wind, and that mine eye shall not return to see pleasure.

And how I must return from whence I came,
In a few days: my Life is but a blast,
And like a puff of Wind, is quickly past.
Then shall my Eyes, with darkness black, as night,
Be sealed up, and to my earthly sight,
Nothing that is pleasant shall again appear,
For what to me most precious was. and dear,
I have already lost, and now remains,
What to preserve, is hardly worth my pains.
For why, alace, should such a one as I
Desire to live in pain, and misery,
Of which I cannot be free, unless I dye.
In a short time (for which I do implore) 8* The eye that has seen me, shall
see me no more, thine eyes are upon me, and I shall be no longer.

The Eye that has seen me, shall see me no more.
Thy Eyes, O Lord, are on me, and annon
Shal't strike me dead, and so I shall be gone.
I shall no longer in this state remain,
For Death shall put an end to all my pain.
As Clouds do quickly vanish into Air, 9. As the cloud vanishes, and goes
away, so he that goes down to the grave shall come up no more.

And in full Bodies do no more appear,
So he that once goes down to silent Grave,
To Life again shall no more access have.
Shall not return unto his dwelling place, 10. He shall return no more to his
house, neither shall his place know him any more.

For even his Servants, who adored his Face,
To whom, on Life, his presence was most dear,
If after Death, to them he shall appear;
His gastlie looks will make them quickly run,
Nor can these very underlings be won,
With their old Friend, and Master to converse,
By all the Rhetoric of the Universe.
Though all such apparitions as these,
Are but mere phantasms, and delude our Eyes.
With empty Shadows of composed Air,
But the True Body never does appear:
That rests in Grave, and shall not rise before,
The Fabric of this Earth shall be no more.
Then since no other lenitive can be found, 11: Therefore will I not spare my
mouth, but I will speak in the trouble of my spirit, and muse in the bitterness
of my mind.

T'allay my grief, ere I go under ground,
But only words, by which I may express,
Those inward ills, that do my Soul oppress,
I will not spare my mouth, but openly
Unto my ever-living God I Will cry.
I Will speak, as one in Spirit sore perplex't,
As one with Plagues, and Torments shrewdly vex't.
I Will speak, I Will speak,, I will not hold my Tongue,
But roar out my oppressions all day long.
Lord, I Will say, what am I! an Ocean! 1^. Am I a sea, or ^whale-fish, that thou
keep'st me in ward*

A Whale. or any thing that is more than man!
That to destroy me thou should take such pains,
Whilst to undo all that of me remains,
Were but a small Task for a Gnat, a Flee,
A Wasp, a Hornet, or a humble Be:
Why should then be at so much pains, good Lord,
To kill a thing, which of its own accord,
Will quickly dye, a thing, that by thy Wrath,
As yet denied the liberty of Death,
Does only some small sparks of Life retain,
And like a Dying Creature, breaths with pain.
One entire Ulcer, a mere lump of Boyls,
A heap of Sores, one laden with the Spoils,
Of all Diseases; one so fully spent
In Body, and in Mind so discontent,
No pleasure, which the World affords, can hire
My Soul to Live: pray let me now expire;
Or else I fear, that through impatience
Of my afflictions, I may give offense.
For when I say my Couch shall me relieve, 12. When I say my couch shall
relieve me and my bed shall give me comfort in my meditation.

And in my Bed I shall some comfort have,
When I imagine I may find some ease,
In-sleep to cull the edge of my Disease.
When I suppose I may find Consolation,
In The pleasure of a few hours Meditation:
And whilst on Pillow I my Head do lay,
To sleep away the sorrows of the day,
Then do thou put my Soul all in a fright, 14. Then fear thou me with
dreams and astonishest me with visions.

With fearful Dreams, and Visions of the night.
In a cold sweat I lie, my Flesh, and Bones,
My Joints, and Sinews tremble all at once.
Struggling with pain, upon my Bed I roll,
Whilst horrid Objects do nightmare my Soul,
And to my troubled fancy represent,
What neither Tongue can speak, or hard can paint.
Hells Terrors plainly are to me revealed,
Whilst with amusing sleep my Eyes are seal^d;
On which reflecting when I do awake;
Fear damps my Soul, and makes my Body shake.
Hence Drowning, Smothering, Strangling of the Breath, 15. Therefore my soul
chooses rather to be strangled, and to dy^ then to be in my bones.

Or any of the numerous kinds of Death
My Soul to Life prefers; my generous Soul
Abhorrs to live in such a lurking hole,
As is this body; such a vile Hog-sty,
A Brutish Soul would even disdain to ly
Within its Walls: a Cottage so unclean,
So Cob web-furnish'd, so obscure, and mean,
As none but one of Life that is wearyed
In such a villainous Cave would lay his bed.
What Soul so poor and mean exceeding but
The small Dimensions of a Hazel nut
Would stoop so low, as condescend to dwell
In such an ugly, smelling nasty Cell,
As is this body, which I do call mine,
So thin, the Sun does clearly through it shine,
Is this a Lodging for a Thing Divine?
A tottering Fabric, which the rotten Bones
Not able to support, down all at once
Will quickly fall: is this a dwelling place
For any thing come of a Heavenly Race?
No, no, fly hence my Soul, fly hence, make haste
Why do not fly? for such a Noble Guest
There Is here no room, no fit Accommodation,
This body can afford no Habitation,
For such as thee, Dear Soul. -- --
O let me die then, let me die, good Lord,
O let me die, Death surely will afford
Such comfort, as I here expect in vain.
Why should I live then in such grievous pain?
And as a mark to all sad torments stand
When pitying Death does offer help at hand.
In this condition, I do do life abhor, 16. I abhore it, I shall not live
always, spare methen, for my days are but vanity.

I ba^e it, and shall never love it more.
What should I for a few hours breathing give?
For it is impossible I can longer live.
O spare me then for some small time at least
That these o*re wearyed bones may have some rest,
And in this life I may find ease, before
I take my Journey hence, and be no more:
E're I be wrapped up in Eternity,
For all my days are but mere vanity.
Then what is Man that thou should look upon him? 17. What is man, that thou
should magnify him, or that thou ^ettest thy heart on him?

This wretched thing, that thou should so much own him.
Thou do thy heart too much upon him set,
Which makes the silly Toad it self forget,
Valuing it self so much on thy esteem
As it has purchased to its self a name,
Beyond the other Creatures of thy hand:
Whereas if it, it self did understand,
It Is but as dust, that before the Wind does fly,
A passing thought, the abstract of vanity.
Since thou can then, Lord, by one word destroy
This Creature, why should so much time employ
In Torturing of it thus, once, and again,
And not by one blow put me out of pain.
One blow of favor, Lord, I do implore,
Kill me, and then I shall complain no more.
But still I cannot fancy, why should thou, 18. And do visit him every
moment, and tryest him every morning.

Before whom all in Heavens, and Earth do bow,
Have this same Creature Man in such esteem
This flying Shade, this passage of a Dream,
A thing so mean, not worth thy Observation,
Why should allow it so much Reputation?
That thou the great Creator every day
Should of this pismire make so strict survey.
How long, Lord, shall I in these Torments lie ^ 19. How long will it be, ere
^^ou depart from, thou will not let me alone whilst I may swallow down
m^spittle.

Ah is there no end of my Misery!
Some respite, Lord, I beg, I do request,
Some breathing time, even so long time at least,
Free from these pains, as I may swallow down
My Spittle: Oh, good God, let me alone*
But for a Moment, that I may but try
Thy goodness once, again, before I Dye.
Lord I have sinned, it is true, I do confess 20. I have sinned, what shall I do
unto thee, O thou preserver of men, why have thou set me, as a mark against
thee, so that I am a burden to my self.

My Error, and my black unrighteousness.
What shall I do! how shall I answer find
To thee, the great preserver of Mankind!
As worst of sinners, Lord, thou do me treat,
For as my Sins, so are my Judgments great.
The have set me against thee, as a Mark, or Butt,
At which thy pointed Arrows thou do shoot,
With Torments have me so o'reloadened,
That long ago of Life I Am wearied.
Why should thy wrath continually burn, 21. And why do thou not pardon my
trespass? and take away mine iniquity, for now shall I sleep in the dust, and
if thou seek me in the morning, I shall not be found.

Against a poor sinner! O let Grace return,
Pardon my sins: wash from iniquity
The Soul thou gavst me, Lord, before I dye.
Let me of Mercy hear the joyful sound,
For in an instant I shall not be found.
I dye, I dye, my Passing Bell does Toul,
Have Mercy, Lord, have Mercy on my Soul.
Cap. VIII.
THus have we seen how Job with grief oppressed, 1. Then answered Bildad the
Shuhite, and said.

By night and day, has in his Mind no rest.
In this sad case, with great impatience,
Appears to quarrel even Providence.
For those his Friends, of whom he did expect
Some Comfort, rather sharply did him check,
For the Errors of his Life, and openly
Reproved him for his gross Hypocrisy:
We Have seen with how much Art and Eloquence,
One of his friends has given evidence
Against him, now another undertakes,
The argument, and thus he answer makes.
How long, says he, friend, will thou thus exclaim* 2. How long will thou talk
of these things? and how long shall the words of thy mouth be as a mighty wind?

Against that justice, which the Heavens did frame,
To what do all thy imprecations tend?
What means this clamor? shall there be no end
Of this thy idle talking? shall we be
Obliged to hear, what none, but such as thee
Would stammer out? what one in sober case
Would be ashamed to speak: such words as these,
Which thou in foolish passion have used
Against our God: would hardly be excused,
Out of a mad-mans mouth: but when they flow
From such as thee, friend, whom we all do know
To be of more than ordinary Sense,
We must condemn, thy gross impatience.
Dost' think that God, whose great and mighty Name, 3. Does God pervert
judgment, or does the Almighty subvert justice.

All things Created, daily do proclaim,
Can in his judgments err, can any thing
Invert the firm Decrees of Heavens King?
He who himself is Justice, can he do
What is unjust? dost' think that he will allow
Vain man to imagine that he can dispense
With what injustice is, in any Sense?
Do think he can be Bribed, as daily here
Our Judges are, either by Hope, or Fear,
With all the efforts of humane Art, and Skill
TO alter the Eternal Purpose of his Will.
Why if thy Children did their God offend, 4. If thy sons have sinned against
him, and he has sent them to the place of their iniquity.

And for their sins, were brought to untimely end:
Why dost' regrate the loss so bitterly,
Of those who for their Crimes deserved to dye?
No sure thou should not such thy Children call,
But rather take example by their Fall;
TO abstain from sin, and not provoke the Wrath
Of him, who in his Hand has Life, and Death.
Yet if thou wilt call on God, and earnestly 5. Yet if thou will early seek unto
God, and pray to the Almighty.

Implore assistance from his Majesty,
If with a heart, and hands uplifted thou,
Humbly before thy great Creator bow.
If with a cordial true sincerity, 6. If thou be pure and upright, then surely
he will awake up unto thee, and he will make the habitation of thy
righteousness prosperous.

Thou to thy Maker do thy self apply;
Then will he hear thy Prayer and after all,
What now thou do most grievous Torments call,
He Will re-establish thee, and make thee see,
How much, for all thy Plagues, he valueth thee.
He Will bless thy dwelling House with Righteousness,
And' crown thy Life with Honor, Wealth, and Peace.
Nay tho thou now do in affliction lie, 7. And though thy beginning be small,
yet thy latter end shall greatly increase.

Complaining of thy Pains, and Agony.
Although thy present Case seems to declare,
No Remedy is left thee, but despare.
Yet shall thy latter end with joys be bless't
And thou of great abundance be possessed.
Now if thou will not credit what we say, 8. Enquire therefore I pray thee of
the former age, and prepare thy self to search of thy fathers.

Go too, enquire, search all Records I pray,
Dig in the bowels of Antiquity,
Where Times immense spare-treasury does ly.
Where our Creators Glorious Works of old,
Are to be read in Characters of Gold.
There shall thou see, what mercies God has shown
To those he loves: how much he for his own
At all times has appeared: enquire now pray,
For, truth is, we are but of Yesterday.
Just dropped into the World, mere Novices, 9. For we are but of yesterday, and
know nothing, and our days upon earth are but as a shadow.

Have no deep thoughts, and can at best but guess,
Men of no reach, nor is there time allowed,
For us to learn on earth, although we would.
For, as a shadow, so our years do pass,
Our Days by time are eaten up like Grass.
But O let Venerable Antiquity 10. Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee,
and utter the words of their heart?

Inform thee plainly how the case does ly,
Ask Council of dead Wise Men, in a word
Let what those Fathers left upon Record
Teach thee, let their Authority prevail,
For what we speak, perhaps thou think a Tale.
Inform thy self then, and thou wilt surely find. 11. Can a rush grow without
mire, or can grass grow without water?

We are thy real Friends, and are more kind
Than thou imagin'st, for we do not mean
To flatter thee: but hearing thee complain
Of thy sad usage, as if thou were one
Void of all sin, and it could not be known
What moved our God so sore to punish thee,
We tell thee, we the reason plainly see.
Sins usher Judgments, as the Flames do heat,
And as when Serpents Mouth, and Tail does meet,
It makes a Circle, so the sin goes round,
Then meeting with the Judgment does confound
It self with the substance of that poisonous thing,
And so the Sin, and Plague make up one Ring:
In which Engraven we may plainly read
The cause, from whence the judgment does proceed.
For Sin and Judgment are so linked together
As he who sees the one may see the other.
Let Us argue then, my Friend, I do desire,
Can a Rush grow up, where there is no Mire?
Can Grass, unless by water moistened
Grow up, and with fair Coverlet over spread
Both Hills, and Valleys: as is daily seen,
The Grass which withers, whilst is yet green: 12. Whilst it is yet in its
greenness, and not cut down, it withers before any other herb.

It does require no toil to cut it down,
For it does fade, before it can be mown.
Before all other Herbs it withers,
For all its Beauty quickly perishes.
Such is the case of those, who do forget 13. ^o are the paths of all that
forget God, and the hypocrites hopes shall perish.

Their God, and on vain things their minds do set*
Of whom, I look upon the Hypocrite
A creature, who it self a Saint does write,
Pretending to a singular Purity,
And gulls the World, with show of Piety;
To be the chief: this wretch I do esteem
The worst of men, not meriting the Name,
Even of a Moral Man, so base a Creature,
So supercilious, of so false a Nature,
As no man can his word, or promise trust,
An ^bject sinner, nothing framed of Dust
God hates so much: and therefore let him Treat
His Conscience, as he will; and basely cheat
The credulous World, with a Formality,
God will not suffer such Hypocrisy
To flourish long: but in a moments space
This painted Flower shall wither, like the Grass;
For God shall soon, for all his lofty top,
Dash him to thousand pieces with his hope.
He Will disappoint his hateful confidence, 14. His confidence also shall be cut
off, and his trust shall be as the house of a spider.

And cut him off for all his formal sense,
Those earthly things, in which he put his trust,
Shall in an instant be transformed to dust:
Of no more value, than a Spiders house,
To every besome so obnoxious,
As what appears most neatly wrought to day,
To morrow is most neatly sweep't away.
Shall soon perceive the flattering vanity, 15. He shall ^ean upon his house,
but it shall not stand, he shall hold him fast by it, yet it shall not endure.

Of such as think to erect a family
On villainy. and fraud (for desolation,
Is only built on such a weak foundation)
His outside piety shall no more prevail,
For all those cunning Tricks, and Arts shall fail
By which he did the World abuse; his name
Shall not be mentioned, but with scorn, and shame.
Let him do what he can to magnify
The reputation of his Family.
Let him hoord up his Means in Chests of Iron,
And round the same with Grats of Brass environ:
Let him grasp close the things he loves so well,
And amongst his quickly purchased Treasures dwell:
Watching them, with great trouble night, and day,
Yet shall those darling Riches fly away.
But, as in view of the Sun a tender Tree 16: But the tree is green before the
sun, and the branches spread over the garden thereof.

Still verdant flourishes, although it be
Transplanted from one place to another, yet
It grows apace, and nothing does abate
Of its most pleasant shape, and former strength,
Till it become a lofty pine at length.
Although its Roots in Earth do scattered lie, 17. The roots thereof are
wrapped about the fountain, and are folden about the house of stones.

Like Metals in the Veins, so as no eye
Can trace them, some about the Fountain wrapped,
Some close to the Arbours, and the stone-house clap't:
Yet pluck it up, and to another Ground 18. If any pluck it from his place, and
it deny, saying I have not seen the.

Transplant it, as no vestige can be found
Of its first seat, so that no eye can know
Whether a Tree did e're grow there, or no.
TO will soon shoot up amain, and flourish more, 19. Behold it will rejoice by
this means, that it may grow in another mould.

In that new soil, than ere it did before.
Even so the Godly, though it be their case,
To be transplanted here from place to place:
Tossed with afflictions, and with sorrows vex't,
With grief overwhelmed, with poverty perplex't,
Yet shall they laugh at length, whilst others mourn,
And all their woes shall to their profit turn.
For God an upright man will not neglect, 20. Behold God will not cast away an
upright man neither will he take the wicked by the hand.

Nor will he the injust in his ways protect;
He will not thee, friend, in this state desert,
But after all will truly take thy part;
Nor will he leave thee, till he has restored, 21. Till he have filled thy
mouth with laughter, and thy lips with joy.

All he has taken from thee, in a word,
He Will fill thy Lips with joy, and make thee glad
At length, indeed, more than thou now art sad.
Then such as thee contemned in poverty, 22. They that hate thee shall be
clothed with shame, and the dwelling of the wicked shall not remain.

When they perceive thee in prosperity,
Shall be ashamed of what they did before,
And shall thy friendship by all means implore.
But if thou in thy stubborn ways persist,
And think it lawful to do what thou list;
Then shall thy sorrows, ^stead of growing less,
Be more, and thy afflictions shall increase.
Cap. IX.
DUring these learned digressions of Wit; 1. Then Job answered, and said.

Job all the while most pensively did sit.
For as to one condemned, before he dye
The Judge from Bench does use himself t'apply
In exhortations, laying out his Crime.
Resumes his Case, and whilst it is yet time,
Conjures him to Repentance, so, while these
Did open thus Jobs Case, he held his peace;
At length perceiving he had no defense,
Against their Insults, but his own Innocence.
Thus mildly answers.
Why, my dear friends, you tell me God is just, 21 I know that it is so: for
how should man compared unto God be justified?

And in him only I should put my Trust.
To me this is no new thing, for I know,
And always was convinced that it was so.
Gods justice, I confess, is admirable,
Impartial, Pure, beyond what I am able,
By all the parts allowed me, to express;
Gods Justice is most powerful, I confess.
Compared with which, all that we can acclaim
Of Righteousness, does not deserve the name
Of moral virtue; for should we be tried,
By Law of God, who can be justified?
In Courts of Men, we use to lay Defense,
Against the Bill, the Jury, the Evidence,
Refuse the Words of the Law, and plead the Sense:
But in Gods Court no such Procedure is,
His Laws are clear, need no Paraphrasis,
The Bill is so well founded, it is found
Without Removal from the Court: it is owned
By all as true: it needs must be confess't,
Who can deny't? when from our very Breast;
Both Evidence are brought, and Jury too,
What Court such fair Procedure can allow?
When God Arraigns us Mortals, who is the man 3. If he would dispute with him,
he could not answer him one thing of a thousand.

Dare, plead not guilty? who is he, that can
Make answer to his Charge? hold up his Face,
And with his Maker dares dispute the Case?
TO one of a thousand Questions he will demand,
When at the Bar of our Great Judge we stand,
Who Is he can frame an answer? or deny
His Errors, or himself can justify,
IN the smallest point? who can his Charge refuse
His Vices palliat, or his sins excuse?
Who can express the glorious qualities 4. He is wise in heart, and mighty in
strength, who has been fierce against him, and has prospered?

Of our Great God? he is admirably wise:
In boundless force, and power most formidable,
And in all things, that is good, incomparable.
Who ever yet did with his God contend,
And boasted of his success in the end?
The highest Mountains, which to humane eyes 5. He removes the mountains and
they feel not when he overthrows them in his wrath.

Appear to be contiguous with the Skies,
Whose proud Imperial tops themselves do shroud
IN the tiara of a continual Cloud:
He pulls up by the roots with little care,
And like so many Peebles, here, and there,
He throws them from his hand, with wondrousease,
Some in the Pools, and Lakes, some in the Seas:
Some in the Isles, the Main-land, and the Shore,
And Hills are now, where Valleys were before:
Nor do those stubborn Mountains feel his Blows,
When in his anger, he them overthrows.
This Center of the Universe, which all 6. He removes the earth out of her
place, that the pillars thereof do shake.

Admire so much, and with good reason call
Earths glorious Fabric, which for certain Term,
Our God to Mankind has Let out in Farm.
This Earth adorned with so much bravery,
And with such fair, and rich variety
Enammeled: as no Art can imitate;
For atoms whereof we so much debate:
Buzzing about this Globe, like Bees in Hive*
Where who each other shall out-toile, we strive,
Whilst mean time one poor lease for life is all
We here on Earth our Property can call.
Nay happy, could it so long time endure,
That each man could his Turff for Life ensure:
But ah where on those precious Clods retains,
To death, and leaves the fruit of all his pains
To those he loves, ten thousand, ere they die,
Are stripped of all, and in sad Poverty,
Consume their hopeless years, and so do I.
This Glob of Earth he tosses too and fro,
As one does Ball with Racket, high, or low,
As he thinks good, he makes its surface quake,
Its body twirle, and all its Pillars shake.
The Sun, who, like a Conqueror every day 7. He commands the sun, and it
rises not; he closes up the stars, as under a signet.

His Glory does triumphantly display:
Whose splendid Beams afford such radiant light
As scatters all the vapors of the night.
With such bright Luster does this Glob surround,
As its fair influence every where is found.
Who in his Motion does observe such Grace,
No force, or Art will make him change his pace;
But 'round the Horizon makes such pretty tours,
In his Diurnal, and his Annual Course,
Checked by no snare, obstructed by no fear,
With great exactness measuring out the year;
As one would soon conclude, without dispute
This Creature were a Monarch absolute.
Our God prohibits this same Sun to rise,
And couching like a Spanniel, closs ^e lies
Below the foot of our Almighty God,
Nor for the World, dares he peep abroad,
Until licensed, by the same Divine Power,
Which him confined, and which from hour to hour
He does expect: whilst we poor Mortals ly
Plunged in a horrid, deep Obscurity:
Where in our nasty holes, like Toads we craul,
And grope, like Blind-men 'bout this earthen Ball,
Until by warrant in our Hemisphere
This most Illustrious Prince does re-appear.
Poor toiling Spiders, inconsiderat things,
Who call themselves here Emperors and Kings!
Whose great ambition is to imitate
This Splendid Creature in his Pomp and State:
Dreaming themselves in a most happy case,
When by the World esteemed of his race:
Who cause themselves be pictured, with their heads
Environed with his Rays* that he who reads
Their aerie Motto's, may perceive how much,
These Fools affect to be imagined such,
As is that Creature in his Noon*tide glory;
And in that pride transmit themselves to story.
Ah how I pity those poor crowned toys,
Who fool themselves, to pleasure Girls, and Boys:
The Springtide of whose Souls no higher rises,
Than to abuse us with such State Devices.
When this same glorious, bright Original,
The mean Apprentice-copies whereof all
Those Buzzards do at most aspire to be
Esteemed, who is not blind, may plainly see
Is but a Vassal to the Almighty Lord,
Answers his call, and watches by his Word.
Those lights, which in their Rows so eminent
Make such a Figure in the Firmament:
And with such beauty in their Orbs appear,
As one would think the Heavens pellucid were:
Those pleasant Stars, who with their sparkling light
Allay the Horror of a Winters Night.
Who teach the almost despairing Mariner,
In blustering Storms, how he his Course may steer:
And when his Sea-card, and his Compass fails,
Instructs him how to tack and ply his Sails.
These troops of pointed Lights, Heavens numerous Eyes
In Packs, and Bundles the Almighty ties:
Then with his Signet does those Bundles seal,
As one does Wares, and merchandise for sale:
So that their twinkling light appears no more,
And darkness reigns, where Lamps did shine before.
The Canopy of Heavens he stretches out, 8. He himself alone spreads out the
heavens, and walks upon the hieght of the sea.

And makes those Orbs, like Whirle-winds, roll about
This fixed Mass of Earth: it is he alone
Directs their Motions, and makes every one
Of those great Engines in their circles move,
Some quick, some in a course more slow, above
What human* art can imitate, it is he,
Who walks on the surface of the Sea:
Where stoutest Ships like drunken men do reel,
And forced by strength of waves, turn up their Keel.
On those proud billows does our Mighty God
Walk unconcerned, as on a beaten road.
The Stars in several bodies he does frame, 9. He makes the stars, Arcturus,
Orion, Pleiades, and the climats of the south.

To each of which he gives a proper name:
Such as Arcturus, Orion, Pleiades,
And quarters them through all the Provinces
Of his vast Empire; where those bodies ly,
Each settled in its own Locality,
The standing Forces of Heavens Monarchy.
Great things he acts; O things most admirable! 10. He does great things and
unsearchable, yea mavelous things without number.

Beyond our reach, things most innumerable!
Things, which no human Language can express,
Though every Language does the same confess.
Why even those works, which daily to our eyes 11. Lo when he goes by me, I
see him not, and when he passes by, I perceive him not.

In course are obvious, our Capacities
By many thousand Stages do transcend,
Nor can our groping reason comprehend
The meanest of his actings, or espy
This Mighty Monarch. when he passes by,
And makes his splendid Progress through the Sky.
Nor can our eyes perceive his Royal Seat,
Though, every day he shows himself in State.
When this great King would Justice execute, 12. Behold when he takes a prey,
who can make him to restore it, who shall say unto him, what do thou?

What man dares his Authority dispute?
Who Is he that dares Declinator allege,
Against his Court, or offer to repledge
The highest Prince, whom he intends to try?
Or save his Life, whom he commands to dye?
When he our Goods, and Substance does distrain,
Who can compel him to restore again
What he has taken? who is that Mortal, pray,
Dares offer to resist his Power? or say
He does unjustly? or in Court dares bring
A quo warranto, against this mighty King!
No, all is in vain, no force of Eloquence, 13. God will not withdraw his anger,
and the most mighty helps do stoop under him.

No Laws, no proofs, can clear the Innocence
Of him, whom God condemns; no surely he,
Unhappy Creature, (who so e're he be)
After his reasoning, praying, after all,
A victim to the Divine wrath must fall.
Nay, you, my friends, for all your wit and parts,
Which does afford you talk, though in your hearts,
You think not what you speak, even you must dye,
When God pronounces Sentence, from on high,
Against you, nor will all your Art can say
In Rhet' ricks sweetest flowers procure delay
For one small moment: no, his Sentence must
Be execute, and you return to Dust.
Since you then even with all your Eloquence, 14. How much less shall I answer
him, or how shall I find out my words with him?

Against his Procedure can make no defense:
Ah how can I a wretch so despicable,
Void of all Reason, Wit, and Parts, be able
To make him answer? where shall such as I
Find sugared words t'obtain indemnity?
Nay though persuaded of my innocence, 15. For though I were juli, yet I could
not answer, but I would make supplication to my judge.

Yet against his Justice I Would make no defense.
All he lays to my Charge, I would confess,
And then to his sole Mercy make address.
I would not plead, but say I firmly knew,
All my Indictment to be simply true:
And then exibit, with great veneration,
Before my Judge my humble supplication,
Wherein I Would ask, that he by me would do,
As he thought fit; but if he pleased t'allow
Some breathing time, that I might yet implore,
(Before I trindle hence, and be no more)
His pardon for my sins, I Would only say,
This favor would oblige me still to pray.
For should I in this manner supplicat,
I Would hope that God would me commiserat.
It Is but what he can grant me out of hand,
Though more than I deserve, or dare demand.
Fools, with their Maker, do expostulat,
And think by words themselves to liberat,
But pious men, who better things do know,
Upon Gods Mercy still themselves do throw.
For when The Almighty does in Judgment sit,
All that are knowing will to him submit.
He, who to search the Records is inclined,
Of that high Court of Justice, soon will find
No formal pleadings there, no exculpations,
But only prayers, and humble supplications.
These are the most prevailing arguments
With the great Judge o'th'World, the glorious Saints,
When them for Crimes The Almighty would accuse,
In all their trials, never did other use.
Now, though I know that God does hear the cry 16. If I cry, and he answer me,
yet would I not believe that he heard my voice.

Of those, who from the pit of misery
Do make address to him, and that our Lord
In his good time to such will help afford:
Yet in my present pain, and agony
I do believe, with some difficulty,
That God will hear my prayer, or if he do,
That he to me such favor will allow
As he to others grants: since only I
Condemned to perpetual misery,
Can hope for no relief, then pray excuse
These hot expressions, which you hear me use;
For I Am undone with grief: my case is sad,
And still oppression makes a wise man mad.
Like a strong tempest, God his wrath lets out, 17. For he destroys me with a
tempest, and wounds me without a cause.

Which will at length destroy me, without doubt
The torrent of his anger swells so high,
And rushes on my Soul so furiously,
As all the art of humane patience
Cannot resist its force, and violence.
I Am wounded by the order of his Laws,
Most justly, though as yet I know no cause.
My plagues, and torments sensibly I feel,
And know the measure of my woes full well,
But such my dullness is, I cannot yet
Perceive those ugly sins, which did beget
Those monstrous Evils; of which I complain,
And call for reparation, but in vain.
For I Am so (...) by that Heavenly wrath, 18: He will not suffer me to take my
breath, but fills me with bitterness.

As I can find no time to take my breath.
Continued sorrows do my Soul oppress,
My Heart is brim-full of sad bitterness.
But what does yet encreass my misery, 19. If we speak of strength, behold he
is strong if we speak of judgment, who shall bring me into plead?

To the utmost, is the vast disparity,
'Twixt him, who does these ills inflict, and me,
He Is great, and I as mean, as mean can be.
And, if we speak of strength, why the Lord of Hosts,
Is strength it self in abstract, he who boasts,
Of any strength, valor, or gallantry.
Compared with God is but a butter-fly
Compared with Eagle, or a silly Ant,
In scales with a huge, big-bon'd Elephant.
Talk we of Judgment: who shall make address
For me? and bring me in to plead my case?
When I appear before his Majesty,
What shall I say? how shall I justify?
My actings in this Earth? how shall I frame
Excuse for what to mention is my shame?
For if with God I Would enter in debate, 20. If I would justify my self, mine own
mouth willcondemn me, if I would be perfect, he shall judge me wicked.

And justify my self at any rate:
If I desert, or innocence would plead,
Then words which from my own mouth do proceed,
would prove me guilty: and if I but name
My uprightness: his Justice will proclaim
My misdemeanors, and make evident,
How I in courting sin my time have spent.
Nay though I were upright, yet would I not 21. Though I were perfect, yet I
know not my soul, therefore I abhor my life.

Desire to live: my Soul has quite forgot
Its former kindness to that piece of clay
It loved so much before, and every day
Longs to be from its consort separate;
Whom it does now with so much reason hate.
Yet here is my comfort, that I understand, 22. This is one point, therefore I
said, he destroys the perfect, and the wicked.

My God will punish, with impartial hand,
Both just, and unjust, and will evidence,
That 'twixt them both he makes no difference:
Has no respect for persons, no regard
For one, or other; but gives out award
In every point, as he finds just and lays
Every man's Cause in equal balances.
In unjust Causes he will none maintain,
So of Gods Justice no man should complain.
If in his wrath God should the wicked slay, 23. If the scourge should
suddenly slay, should God laugh at the punishment of the innocent.

And root them out, what could those wretches say,
Against Gods Justice, when their Conscience,
Assures them he has done them no offense.
Because Gods Judgments do their sins pursue,
And punishment to offenders is as due,
As Wages to the Labourer: for each sin
First acts its part, then Judgment does begin,
Where it leaves of: and so pursues the Chase,
Until the breathless sinner end his Race.
This is his Justice, but his Mercy sure,
Eternal, to all ages does endure.
Must not our God be full of Clemency,
When on the wicked even unwillingly
He executes his Justice: punishment
Is long delayed, and vengeance seldom sent
Against any but the stiff impenitent.
Who at his Judgment, does repine, and cry,
Out upon Gods too great severity;
Sure that unhappy Creature does mistake
Gods Bounty, and his own Condition make
Worse than it was intended: for we know
In Mercy God is quick, in anger slow:
A God of Mercy he himself does write,
And so in sinners death takes no delight:
Far less than should the just, and innocent
Think God takes pleasure in their punishment.
Nor ought we to repine, when we reflect 24. The earth is given into the hand
of the wicked he covers the faces of the judges thereof, if not, where is he,
or who is he?

How God the wicked Lords of the earth does make:
How he puts Pastures, Vineyards, Houses, Lands,
Power Jurisdiction, Honors in their hands;
By which puffed up a wanton life they lead,
Whilst godly men do toil for daily bread.
Nor how the Judges of the earth abuse
Their Sacred Function, and their Power do use,
TO oppress the Just: whose eyes with avarice
Are sealed up: who boldly set a price
On Justice: and employ their utmost Art
To sell the same, as in a public Mart.
Who by their Friends use to negotiat
For Quotes of Pleas: and closely stipulat
For so much at the Issue of the cause:
TO attain which point, they cruciat the Laws;
And make them serve their ends so forcibly,
As all the world may see their Bribery.
If we consider how God does permit
Those men to live on earth, as they think fit,
Because they are none of his, and have no share
IN th'land of Promise: whilst the upright are
In sad afflictions tossed, and seem to be
Over whelmed by a most impetuous Sea
Of miseries: we will find these walk in th'Road
Of black Damnation; of such Creatures God
Does take no care: but lets them all run wild,
Like Herds of Asses, in the open field.
But his own Children he does exercise
In a continual tract of miseries.
That being keep'd in such strict Discipline,
In a full body they may mount the Line,
IN the daily Seige of Heaven, and in the end
Possess the same; only to be attained
By Sighs and Tears: whilst wicked men do run,
Without all order, and so are undone,
Amidst their pleasures, for they do compel
Their Souls instead of Heaven to march to Hell.
Now were it lawful to repine, did God 25. My days have been more swift than a
post, they have fled, and have seen no good thing.

Allow to any that do feel the Rod,
To say that his condition were sad
Sure never any Mortal Creature had
More cause than I poor wretch have to complain,
Who Have lost my years, and spent my days in vain.
Swifter than Post my days their course have run,
That I might be more speedily undone.
My days are gone, my time is vanished,
My hours are fled, my life is finished.
My wretched life, a Scene of woes has been,
Under the Sun I have small pleasure seen.
Whilst others of obscure, and mean estate,
To Wealth, and Honors have been elevate:
Their modest parts, buoyd up by Friends and Fame,
Purchassing quickly to those Fools a Name:
Which impudently they would attribute
To their abilities, I destitute
Of every thing that is good, do silently
Spin out my days in grief, and penury.
And as the south wind, with a gentle breese,
Breaths on the verdant Plain, and skims the Seas;
With little noise, so I my days have spent,
My view of the world was merely transient.
Have you not seen a Vessel under sail, 26. They are passed as the most swift
ships, and as the eagle that flies to the prey.

Swollen with a stiff, but favorable gale,
Post through the stubborn Seas, and make a Line,
Upon its surface, in a foaming brine?
Or with what wonderful celerity,
The ravenous Eagle to her prey does fly?
So have my days run out, so have my years
Plough'd through a sea of foaming brinish tears.
Now should I say I will complain no more, 27. If I say I will forget my
complaint I will cease from my wrath, and comfort me.

But here my exclamations give over.
Here to my querullous Notes I Will put a stop,
And from this minute I Will begin to hope.
Then all my sorrows, all my woes, and fears, 28. Then I am afraid of all my
sorrows, knowing that God will not judge me innocent.

Would suddenly appear about my ears,
With ghastly looks they would stare me in the face,
And in their silence publish my disgrace.
Because (however I my self do vent)
I know God will not hold me innocent.
If horrid sins then do my Soul distain, 29. If I be wicked, why labor I thus
in vain?

Why do I thus excuse my self in vain?
If to my Maker I have given offense,
Why should I all this while plead Innocence?
No sure, if things be so, all I can say 30. If I wash my self with snow water,
and purge my hands most clean.

Is to no purpose: only I betray
My weakness in endeavoring to maintain
My just demeanor, where my guilt is plain.
For certainly, however I pretend 31. Yet shall thou plunge me in the pit, and
mine own clothes shall make me filthy.

To Piety, and Grace, yet in the end,
The great Heart-searcher will make evident,
That to this minute I my days have spent
In wickedness, and sin, in villainy
Not to be named, in stead of purity.
And thou, O Lord, in just conceived rage,
will Sentence such a Scandal of his age
To utmost torment, that the world may see,
How much thou hate such a one as me,
Whilst all the Fig-leav'd arguments I use
To palliate my sins, and make excuse
For my false dealings, and unrighteousness,
'Stead of concealing, shall my guilt express.
For God Almighty's not a man as I Am, 32. For he is not a man as I am that I
should answer him, If we come to judgment.

That I should set my face to it, and defye him.
When he to Justice does himself betake,
That I before my God should answer make.
An what am I a molded piece of Dust,
Consigned to a few years breath in trust?
Awalking ghost! a mere night wanderer,
Like the empty figment of some Conjurer.
That such as I forsooth, should undertake
Harangues before the King of Heavens to make,
And argue for my self, whilst tacitly
My Conscience tells me I deserve to dye.
Nor, should I offer to expostulate', 33. Neither is there any umpire, that
might lay his hand upon us both.

And with my Maker enter in debate,
Is there an Umpire, to oblige us both,
And tie us by Subscription, and Oath,
To stand to his award: for who is he
Dares arbitrate betwixt my God, and me.
But let him hold a little, and at least 34. Let him take away his rod from me,
and let not his fear astonish me.

For some small time, forbear, at my request,
To torture me: let him withdraw his Rod,
And let the hot Pincers of an angry God
Piecemeal my Soul no more: O let his wrath
Be satisfied with a single death.
Then would I boldly speak, and without fear, 35. Then would I speak, and fear
him not, but because I am not so, I hold me still.

Before him in my own defense appear:
Then would I argue with such Eloquence,
As in short time would clear my Innocence,
But 'cause at present, I am not in case
For speaking, I think fit to hold my peace.
Cap. X.
MY Soul's cut off, and though I seem to breath, 1. My soul is cut off, though
I live I will leave my complaint on my self, and I will speak in the bitterness
of my soul.

Yet am I cooped up in the jaws of death.
My Soul is fled, my days of life are gone,
And this poor widowed Body left alone,
To be the subject of some country fable,
As in its ruins only memorable.
This fashioned piece of Earth, which formerly
One would ha'thought, would shift Mortality,
For many years: a Body which of late,
In health, and vigor, fully animate
With a most cheerful Soul, seemed to imply,
As if at least some small felicity
Were to be found below the Heavens: this point
Of the Creation framed joint, by joint,
Into a reasonable shape, at last
By griefs consuming fury quite defaced,
Has now no figure, but does every day
Like Wax before the Candle, melt away.
For, as a stranded Vessel, by no hands,
To be got off, and sticking on the Sands,
Obnoxious to the rage of every Tide,
Whilst each rude Wave beats ribs out of its side:
In its dimensions every day decreases,
Until at length it is shattered all to pieces,
And then what was a stately Ship before,
In Planks and Boards is cast upon the Shore.
So this frail Body, which in health, and strength,
Looked like a tall Ship, in its Course, at length,
Stranding upon the Shelves of foul diseases,
In its proportion every hour decreases.
And that it may be ruined with dispatch,
Each ulcerous Billow does large Gobbets snatch
Out of that vigorous Body, which alace,
Is now in a most despicable case.
Hence what remains is that this shattered frame,
Void of all honor, beauty, shape, and name.
Should, like infected Goods by no man owned,
In Skin and Bones be hurried under ground.
Then what is Life! -- O let me but admire,
What idle expectation can hire
Insipid man upon this Earth to dwell,
And love that thing, which we call Life, so well!
Life -- like the Mornings-dew upon the Grass,
Exhaled e're Noontide* Life a simple lease,
At will, and pleasure of a homely Farm
For us to toil in, where we are hardly warm,
In the possession of it, when anon,
Our Lease runs out, and we must all be gone.
Life but the parcels of a few years breath,
Summed up at last in the capital of death,
Times wast-book: health. and strengths extinguisher
Heavens great derider: Hells remembrancer.
The old man's profit, and the young man's loss,
The rich man's Idol, and the poor man's cross:
Sins active Pander for some little space,
Then to Repentancea sad looking glass.
Pleasures mean vassal, times obedient ^alve,
And a most faithful servant to the Grave.
Death charges Time, Time charges Life, by Roll,
To make account of every living Soul:
The grand Collector, by just calculation,
Himself discharges of each Generation*
In deaths exchequer, then begins afresh,
T'exact the impost of all living flesh.
This is that we call Life, this is the thing,
Of which poor Mortals make such reckoning,
As if the sum of all their happiness,
Lay in their breathing for some little space.
Alace that men of reason thus should lie
Sick of an universal phrenesie:
And not roused up at length perceive, for shame,
What is this Life, which they so much esteem.
This Life, -- a thing so burdensome to me,
As how I hate it you do clearly see.
May I not then oppress't with Life repine,
Since there is no Life comparable to mine?
The dregs of Life, that do with me remain,
Are but the mere fomenters of my pain:
For who extended night and day, on rack
Would not, with all his heart Death welcome make?
O let me then to God make my address;
O let me to himself my woes express:
He is a God of mercy, and will hear
Th'oppress't, and have regard to every tear
That drops from pious eyes. --
A sore complaint then on my self I Will make,
And in the anguish of my Soul I Will speak.
I Will say to God, condemn me not; and why 2. I will say unto God condemn me not
and why do thou contend with me?

Will thou contend with such a thing as I,
An Eagle take the pains to kill a flee!
Contend with me,! -- a thing not to be named,
A thing, of which even Nature is ashamed,
A piece of Earth, that serving for no use,
Is thrown out on the Dunghill as refuse,
The dross of human frail^^y, the abstract
Of all, that is moldy, low, decayed, and cracked.
A thing now grating at the gates of death,
Retarded only by a gasping breath;
A thing so mean as is not worth thy wrath.
Then why, good Lord, do thou take so much pleasure, 3. Think thou it good
to oppress me, and to cast of the labors of thy hands, and favor the wicked?

T'oppress so mean a thing, beyond all measure?
What does this to thy Glory contribute?
How does such usage with thy Justice suit?
Alace I know not how the matter stands,
But thus t'undo the labor of thy hands,
Thus to destroy a Creaure thou did frame,
And once did think it worthy of a name:
Nay, as thy Creature, thou was it pleased to own,
Thus to reject it, with a sullen frown,
Me thinks is strange. -- What may the Atheists say,
When thy own servants are oppress't this way?
Why they will surely, in their scoffing mode,
Blaspheme the ever glorious Name of God.
See here, they will say, a man, who seriously
Applied his mind to thou art of piety,
Who his great God, above all things adored;
A most devoted Servant to his Lord.
One, who not pleased with what his neighbors used,
Despised their Religion, and refused
T'acknowledge any of their Deities,
But, in a zealous phrensy, did devise,
A Deity to himself peculiar,
Out of an humor to be singular.
See now, they will say, see how his God does treat him,
See how his Lord, he so much loved, does hate him.
How he does whip him: -- how he takes delight
To vex a man, who used himself to write
A most obedient Servant to his God,
See how he beats him with a heavy Rod.
Let him complain, weep* pray, do what he can,
Let him cry out, yet still this pious man
Finds none to comfort, pity, or deplore him,
And for his God, 'has no compassion for him,
But, on the contrair, does appear t'abhor him.
Sure this will be their language; thus alace,
Those impious wretches will themselves express.
Yes this will be their Table-talk, I fear,,
O then forbear, for thy own sake, forbear
Thus to torment me, lest in plaguing me,
These men conclude that all who honor thee
Will be thus used -- O do not gratify
Those bold professors of impiety,
In my so sad, and grievous punishment,
But please, good Lord, to let thy wrath relent,
And from those cruel torments, set me free,
That such, as do contemn thy Laws, may see
How merciful a God thou art, how just,
How kind to such, as in thee place their trust.
But why should I presume thus to express, 4. Have thou carnal eyes, or do
thou see, as man sees.

What thou well know*st, and I at best but guess.
Thou, who did all things frame, do all things know
Those hateful sinners will blaspheme thee so,
If thou continue thus to torture me,
Thus I suspect, but thou do plainly see
Thy eyes, O Lord, are not of humane fashion.
Obnoxious in the least, to fascination:
No, no, my God, I know thy piercing eye
Does, at one glance, the whole Creation spy,
Its Horizon being sole ubiquity,
Nor are thy days, O Lord, like those of man, 5. Are thy days as man's days, or
thy years as the time of man.

So that we might thy time by numbers scane,
No, Lord, thy days surpass our admiration,
And scorn the endeavors of our Computation,
For who will undertake to calculat
That time, which by no time is limitat?
That immense time, whose vast extent does lie
Twixt the two Tropicks of Eternity,
Whose hours, and minutes are innumerable,
As is its durance unimaginable;
I know, good Lord, no time can comprehend
What no Beginning had, and had no End.
Now, since it is so, then let me understand, 6. That thou inquire of mine
iniquity, and searchest out my sin.

What is the reason (if I dare demand)
Why thou a God so high, and excellent,
Do take such pleasure in my punishment?
Why thou should give such out let to thy wrath,
As to pursue thy servant to the death?
Why thou should make such formal inquisition
After my sins, and call for exhibition
Of all my hidden thoughts: as if thou meant,
By such harsh dealing, to make evident
Thy hatred to thy Creature, and proclaim
To all the World, what I conceal, for shame:
Thy torturing me thus does plainly speak,
The language of a hot, inveterat picque.
From thee such usage is not ordinar,
For you are not subject as we poor Mortals are,
To passion, and revenge: then let me know
what have I done, that thou should bait me so,
What have I to thy anger contribute,
That, with such hatred, thou should prosecute
The relics of a man, the vanity
Of Life, the ruins of Mortality?
Ah Lord, however I have sinned before, 7. Thou know that I cannot do
wickedly, for none can deliver me out of thy hand.

Yet now thou see I can do so no more:
For thou do keep me in an Iron Cage,
In which I wast the gleanings of my age.
In sad reflections on my by past times,
Calling to mind a thousand horrid Crimes
I have committed, for which constantly
I beg for mercy from thy Majesty.
But now, although I would, I cannot do ill,
My Soul thou so with bitterness do fill;
No power of sinning does with me remain,
Unless thou judge it sinful to complain:
And, if complaints be sinful, then alace,
No humane language can my sins express.
I am indeed most guilty of that sin,
For, in this moment, I do but begin
My sore complaint. Nay though I cry in vain,
And though I to no purpose do complain,
Yet can I not forbear to give some vent
To that huge grief, which does my Soul torment.
Ah, Lord, did thou not frame me? did not thou 8. Thine hands have made me,
and fashioned me round about, and will thou destroy me?

To me, at Birth, a humane shape allow?
Did thou not mould, and fashion me around?
Of many simples did not me compound?
And will thou now this goodly frame destroy.
In whose Composing thou did Art employ?
Will thou this thing, by second operation,
Reduce to th'state of primitive Creation.
And end thy Labors, in annihilation?
Remember, Lord, how thou of clay did frame 9. Remember I pray thee that thou
have made me, as the clay and ^il^ thou bring me into dust again?

This Figure, to which thou did give the Name
Of Body -- breathed upon it, and made it live,
Then to it a certain lease of Life did give:
Thou taught it how to think, to speak, and act,
And entered with this Creature in Contract,
By which thou did engage it to maintain,
And will thou now unravel all again?
Did thou not pour me out, like Milk, and lay 10. Have thou not poured (...),
like milk, and turned me to curds, like cheese?

My first foundation in a drop of Whay?
Which in warm Vessels kindly entertained,
For some small time, a liquid thing remained,
Then from the serous matter separate,
In a most ball it did coagulate,
of such a form, as on the Cruds would squeeze,
Into the globous figure of a Cheese.
Then did thou, by an Art inimitable. 11. Thou clothed me with skin, and
flesh, and jo^^ed me together, with bones and sinews.

Translate me from a simple vegetable,
Into a well compacted sensitive,
And, from that hour, appointedst me to live.
With Bones, and Sinews then thou did me knit,
And wrapped me in a Damask Coverlet.
Of Nerves, and Muscles; and (though yet a Brute)
Thou cloathedst me in a most goodly Suit
Of Ivory Skin: a Suite accommodate
For every Season, every Rank, and State:
When thou had thus apparelled me, and I 12. Thou have given me life, and grace
and thy visitation has preserved my spirit.

Now entered junior of Mortality;
Then I begun to rouse, and stir apace,
And with my Sense my Hunger did increase,
I called for Food, which thou did soon prepare,
And furnished me, (though a close prisoner
In the dark Womb) yet did thou every day,
By secret Canals, to my mouth convey
Fresh Vict^als, in good case: then after all,
Was It please t'infuse the spirits animal,
And I became a creature rational.
Thus having past my course of Generation,
Each hour, I waited for a fair occasion,
To launch out in the Worlds great Ocean,
And enter my Apprentisage to Man.
After nine Months imprisonment, at length
Having obtained some tolerable strength,
At a Springtide of humors, I set out
Of the Harbor of the Womb, with such a shout,
With such a dreadful Peal of Groans, with such
Hard tugging, sweating, wrestling, and so much
Sad labor, toil, and crying out (for all,
Who see me launching still more hands did call)
As I begun of passage to despair,
And had not thou, my God, of me taken care,
For all my strength, I never had passed the Bar.
But after all this labor, toil, and sweat,
By which I was almost exanimate,
After, with main force, I had wrestled out,
And now amazed, begun to stare about,
And view this New found-world. which to that hour
I never had heard of, nor e're seen before:
Then thou, by instinct, made me weep amain,
('Cause all I viewed, was transient, and vain,)
And wish that I were in the Womb again.
Yet, since thou had ordained that I should live,
Thou* in thy wisdom, did think fit to give,
Reason and Knowledge to me, whereby I
Might learn to live, by learning first to dye.
Thou did preserve me by thy Providence,
Thy Grace was to my Soul a strong defense,
Against all temptations: thy Paternal care
Did for my Body daily Food prepare.
To thee alone, Lord, (the have obliged me so)
My Birth, my Being, all that is good I owe
But what needs further, Lord, I do confess 13. Though thou have hid these
things in thine heart, yet I know that is so with thee.

I owe more to thee, then I can express:
For reckoning all my Lifetime over, and over,
I find I Am in thy debt still more, and more,
So that at length I Am broke upon the score.
For who so guilty of ingratitude,
What man so void of reason, who so rude,
Whosoever unthinking, as when he begins
To reckon up thy mercies, and his sins,
But will acknowledge he is obliged to thee,
(Though punished, tortured, and oppressed like me)
When he considers how thou formerly
Have guarded him, since his Nativity.
From what had else besaln him, had not thou,
Both owned him kindly, and supplied him too,
With all things for his life convenient,
Since the first hour he to the world was sent.
And then, if any man perhaps intend,
Some small proportion of his time to spend;
^th' serious and useful contemplation
Of the so much to be admired Creation:
And view the order of thy Providence,
How to each living Soul thou do dispense
Thy Justice, and thy mercy, instantly
He Would find his Reason in an exta^^e;
Whilst linking second causes, in a* chain,
By thumbing of 'em, he would attempt, in vain
To fathom, what no Art can comprehend.
And then at length he would find there is no end
In searching of such things, and so give over
His inquisition, and will dive no more*
In that abyss, but end his contemplation
In a profound, and humble admiration:
Acknowledging that, save to thee alone,
Those Mysteries can not at all be known.
Thou, Lord, have all things made, do all things spy* 14. If I have sinned
then thou will strictly look unto me and wilt not hold me guiltless of mine
iniquity.

Nothing can be concealed from thy Eye:
For what man labors, by his foolish art,
To lock up in the Cabin of his Heart,
And thinks a secret, to thee, Lord, is known,
As well, as what to publicque view is shown.
If I have sinned then, thou will instantly
Look, with a most sever, enquiring Eye
Upon my Errors, and wilt not acquit
Me from the Censure that is just, and fit,
To be on man inflicted, in such cases,
But wilt, most justly, as my sin increases,
Add to my punishment, and possibly
Entail wy woes on my Posterity.
Why then, if I have sinned, I am undone, 15. If I have done wickedly, ^o unto
me, if I have done righteously I will not lift up my head, being full of
confusion, because I see my affliction,

And merit to be pitied by none,
Because I knew thy Justice would not spare
For all excuses, such as guilty are:
Hence if I Have sinned; my Doom I plainly read:
If not, I will not yet lift up my head,
Or say^' the least that I am innocent,
Because I fear a further punishment:
But still imagine that I guilty am,
And, in thy presence, hide my face, for shame,
I Will live in great humility, and fear,
For no man in thy fight, can just appear.
But how soever the matter be, good Lord, 16. But let it increase, hunt thou me
as a lion, return, and show thy self marvellousupon me.

Proceed thou to destroy me, in a word,
Let loose the Reins of thy consuming Wrath,
And never leave me, whilst the Gates of Death
^ly open to receive me: Let thy Rage,
By close pursuit, abridge my lingering age.
Never give over, but rouse me every day,
With the same view* as Lions hunt their Prey:
Break me to pieces, do, and so express,
Thy self admired in my unworthiness.
For, rather than in such sad torments lie, 17. Thou renewest thy plagues
against me, and thou encreasest thy wrath against me, changes and armies of
sorrows are against me.

'Twere better far I instantly should dye.
Let me then quickly be undone, let all
Thy heavy plagues at once upon me fall;
And not by Piecemeal, every day augment
The several species of my punishment,
And thus each hour thy dreadful Chase renew,
As if thou did take pleasure to pursue
My wearied Soul. -- --
Armies of sorrows up against me draw,
With all the numerous rude Militia
Of foul diseases, which my Body seize,
Whilst I am to such Cannibals, as these
A daily prey, my sores do still increase,
And in my Spirit I can have no peace.
Then O why did thou bring me from the Womb? 18. Wherefore then* have thou
brought me out of the (...)* O that I had perished, and that no eye had seen me.

Why did I from my Native Cottage come?
Where I no sorrow knew, no trouble felt,
But most secure in peace, and plenty dwelt*
Was it for this that to the World I came!
For this -- that ever I was born -- for shame!
For this -- that e're my Mother should ha* known
The pangs of Childbirth, nay one single groan,
In bringing forh a Creature destinate,
For grief, and sorrow; one, whom God does hate;
Against whom he does his angry Sword unsheath,
And every day does wound him in his Wrath.
But never will bless him with the blow of Death.
Would I had perished in the Womb, at least
Would ^ a still-born Embryo, at best
Had dropped into the World, and instantly
Had been Box'd up, and Buried, so no eye
Had seen me this side of Mortality.
Would I had been, as though I never had been, 19. And that I were as I had not
been, but brought from the wo^b to the grave.

Without existence, never heard, or seen:
Would Providence for me had never cared,
Would my fond Parents had their labor spared,
And I a thing without all form, and shape,
Had been concealed in Natures modest Lap:
When from the Womb soft hands did me receive,
Would I had fairly slipped into the Grave.
But since I am condemned, -- O since I must, 20. Are not my days few, let him
cease, and leave off from me, that I may take a little comfort.

In a few days, incorporat with Dust:
Since thou, O Lord, wilt call for what is thine;
And I to Worms this Body must resign:
Some little respite, for thy Mercy sake
Allow me, that I may some comfort take.
Before I to the Land of darkness go, 21. Before I go, and shall not return,
even to the land of darkness, and shadow of death*

A dismal Land, which never Light did know,
Whence I shall not return, a dreadful Land,
Where pale-faced horror does in chief command:
Where Worms with Death in council sit, and call
For an account of every Funeral:
Where empty Sculls in heaps are gathered,
And with dry Bones the Land is overspread.
A Land so very dark, no art can trace, 22. Into a land I say, dark as darkness
it self, and into the shadow of death where* is no order, and the light* is
there as darkness.

Its true dimensions, or by Map express
Its Situation, a most barbarous Land,
Whose Laws, and Language none can understand:
A Land of mourning, where no joy is known,
But Mirth, and Sorrow there are both as one.
Cap. XI.
THus Job had spoke, thus had himself expressed, 1. Then answered Zophar the
Naamathite, and said,

Whilst his poor troubled Soul could find no rest:
For 'stead of sleeping, he did still complain,
Keep't waking by the torture of his pain:
But (which is worse) when he had made an end
Of speaking, and, it may be, did intend
To take a Nap; then some of those, who keep't
Him company, and (as we fancy) sleep't
By turns, would fall a speaking, and with heat,
Engage him in a most unkind debate.
Thus when* he now had spoke, thus instantly,
Zophar his friend made him this tart reply.
Who can with patience, thy vain humor bear? 2. should not the multitude of
words be answered, or should a great talker be justified.

Or, says he, so much idle talking hear?
From whence this torrent of discourse? from whence
This foolish bragging of thy innocence?
From whence this clamor? whence this sad complaining,
Whence all this crying out? what is the meaning
Of all these blustering words? whence all this noise?
Dos't think, my friend, thou have to do with Boy's?
Dos't think us fools? do think us Novices?
Dos't think we do not understand thy case?
Pray'to what purpose should complain so sore?
Dos't think we never see such things before?
Then what do mean by such a multitude
Of puling words? do think we will conclude,
From all these fine expressions thou art just,
And so believe you are innocent, on trust.
Should men, with silence, hear thy precious lies? 3. Should men hold their
peace at thy lies? and when thou mockest others, should none make thee ashamed?

Or when thou do make faces, shut their eyes?
As if, forsooth, 'twere finful to behold
Such a sad Object. -- --
Do think but we all, with compassion see
Thy case, although we cannot comply with thee,
In all thy doleful, foolish exclamations*
Nor second thee, in thy expostulations,
Thou, who so often have thy Neighbors blamed
For such vain talk, should thou not be ashamed
To prate so idly? -- --
Should thou not be ashamed thus to assert 4. For thou have said, my doctrine
is pure, and I am clean in thy eyes.

Thy uprightness, when he who knows the heart,
Does laugh at thee, pray' with what impudence
Do thou upbraid us, with thy innocence?
Think thou that we believe that all is true
Which now thou speaks't? -- no, if thou had thy due,
And all thy words, were well considered,
'Stead of being pitied, shoulds't be punished.
Thou blameless in thy Life! thou innocent!
Thou one, of whom no man can make complaint!
Thou in the sight of God, upright, and clear!
Bless us! -- what foolish arrogance is here!
Was ever wise man in discourse so weak!
Did ever man, so like a mad man speak!
Was e're such talking heard? would thou lay claim
To what no Mortal can attain? -- for shame,
Forbear such words, forbear this canting strain,
And of thy Maker do no more complain,
For all thy exclamations are in vain.
But since we cannot prevail with thee, and since 5. But O that God would speak
and open his lips against thee.

I see we are not able to convince
The of thy Errors: O that he would speak,
Who framed the Tongue, that for his Justice sake,
(Since what we argue, is but lame, and faint)
Himself would please to take up th* argument:
And lay thy sins before thee all a row,
That so we might, by demonstration, show
How much you are in the wrong, and let thee see
In short, how like, for all the world, to thee
The fool does prate, who when in humor cross't,
And overpowered with judgments, thinks all is lost.
O that our God himself would take in hand 6* That he might show thee the
secrets of wisdom, how thou have deserved double according to right, know
therefore that God has forgot thee for thy iniquity.

To answer thee, and make thee understand
Wisdom's true value, which if thou did know,
Thou would not through impatience bluster so,
As now thou do, nor clamor at this rate,
For were thy punishment proportionat
With thy foul sins, as thou have merited,
Thou should indeed be doubly punished;
Know therefore that because of thy offense
God has forgot thee, and will not from hence
Acknowledge thee, as he has done before,
And, in his presence shall't appear no more.
But say now thou, who do to Wit lay claim, 7. Can thou by searching, find
out God? can thou find out the Almighty to his perfection?

And thy own Knowledge do so much esteem:
Thou, who thy friends, and neighbors fools do call,
And think thou know much more than we do all,
Vexing us with a pitiful relation,
Of all thy former Life, and Conversation:
With Tales of thy pretended patience,
And formal Stories of thy Innocence.
Cans't thou, my friend, conclude, with all thy art,
What truly God is? cans't thou, for thy heart,
Reduce thy Maker to his proper kind?
Or thy Creator in perfection find?
Say, can thou do this? will thou take in hand,
To answer me the question I Will demand?
In the first place then, I desire to know 8. The heavens are high, what can
thou do? deeper than hell, how can thou know it?

How high the Heavens are? say now can thou show
What bounds that spacious Vault does comprehend?
How far it does from East to West extend?
On what foundations the proud Pillars stand,
Which that vast arch support? what mighty hand
Did found them? in each of them how much space
Does lie betwixt the Chapter, and the Base?
No it is in vain, thou may thy labor spare,
Such things beyond thy scantling knowledge are.
For, as Heavens are immeasurably high,
So the Foundations of those Pillars lie
Deeper then Hell it self: thou can not reach
Their true dimensions, which no art can teach,
Nor can the same by Theorems express,
For all your Artists do but faintly guess
What really and truly these things are.
For O how mean, and low they do appear
Demonstrat in a Map, a Globe, or Sphere,
By our vain plodding Charlatans of Art,
Who cannot comprehend the smallest part
Of the Creation, and yet soar so high,
As naught below the Empyrean Canopy,
Can satisfy their curiosity.
Nay even those, who pretend by art to know 9. The measure thereof is longer
then the earth, and it is broader then the sea.

The measure of the Heavens, and boldly show
Their Longitude by Lines imaginary,
Even those same fools in their opinions vary,
And cannot agree what bounds they should allow
For that capacious Fabric: far less thou,
Void of all art, can make us understand
How far that Powerful, All-creating Hand,
The wings of Heaven beyond the Earth has spread,
How much, in breadth they do the Seas exceed.
Yet, if our God at any time intend 10. If he cut off, and shut up, or gather
together, who can turn him back?

To pull down all this Pile, and make an end
Of what, with admiration, we behold,
And so esteem, its worth cannot be told*
If God intend to cut the Heavens assunder,
And blast the universal Globe with Thunder,
Pray who can stop him? who can turn him back?
Or to desist from his intentions make?
If once he thus intend, he will surely do it, 11. For he knows vain man, and
sees iniquity, and him that understands nothing.

And see what any Mortal dares say to it.
For O he knows vain men, he knows us all
Full well, and what we Wit, and Parts do call,
He names mere folly, and can clearly show
The wisest man on Earth does nothing know.
He knows our private Cabin-thoughts full well,
In vain from him our sins we do conceal,
He knows them all: no winged thought can fly
From Pole to Pole so soon, but instantly
Our God discovers from whose Breast it came,
And, in that instant, can its owner name.
He sits in all the Councils of the Heart,
And, undiscovered, laughs at all our Art,
By which we manage every close design,
So covertly, as those, who dig a Mine,
Unseen by any, yet he plainly sees
What we intend by all such thoughts as these.
Yet would vain man fain be esteemed wise, 12. Yet vain man would be wise,
though man new born is like a wild asles colt.

And think each one injures him, who denis
To him, that goodly Epithet, although
This self conceited fool does nothing know:
Stupid, insipid, ignorant, and dull,
Rude, as a Boobie, of a thick, hard scull
Is this same man at best, a very brute,
And, while refined by art, without dispute,
Like a wild Asses Colt; so dull a Creature
As he appears no more obliged to Nature,
Then rugged Flints, until by Artists hand
Polished, and cut. --
But after all, though mankind in hIs eyes 13. If thou prepare thine heart, and
stretch out thine hands toward him,

Be of no value, yet he still will prize
Religious thoughts, and quickly understand
True sighs, and pious motions of the hand.
If evil from thy heart thou wilt banish far, 14. If iniquity be in thine hand,
put it far away, and let no wickedness dwell in thy tabernacie.

And against fin declare a formal War;
If thou, in thy own house, as Judge wilt sit,
Acting, in all things what is just, and fit,
Suffering no Crime within thy walls to sleep,
But, in a most assiduous method, keep
Strict watch upon thy actions, and practice
Good things, and use Religious exercise.
When thou art private with thy Family,
As an instructor in true Piety.
Then shall thou glory in thy Innocence. 15. Then shall thou truly lift up thy
face, without spot, and shall be stable, and shall not fear.

And, in thy well Reformed Conscience,
Enjoy a sweet, serene tranquillity,
Beyond the reach of Malice, and envy.
Then, without stain thou shall hold up thy face,
In brisque defyance of the Worlds disgrace,
In resolutions fixed thou shall appear,
Above all the impressions of fear.
Shall end thy days in calm prosperity, 16. But thou shall forget thy misery,
and remember it as waters that are past.

Forgetting all thy former misery:
And shall remember on thy woes, at last,
As men remember dreams when they are past.
Or, as when water streams pass quickly by,
They Are no more notic'd by the Travelers eye:
So shall thy troubles be at length, forgot,
Obliterat, extinguished, dashed, what not?
Then shal't the appear more flourishing, and gay, 17. Thine age shall also
appear more clear, then the noonday, thou shall shine, and be as the morning.

Than does the Sun at Noontide of the day:
Or, as he from his Morning Couch does rise,
And with his sweet Carnation-blushes, dies
The Mountain-tops, so then thou shall appear,
And, like him, shine most beautiful, and clear.
Founded in hope, thou shall, with confidence, 18. And thou shall be bold,
because there is hope, and thou shall dig pits, and shall ly down safely.

Boldly rely upon thy Innocence:
Enjoy the good things of'the Earth, in store,
And shall know want, and penury no more.
Thou shall, with safety, Furrow up the Ground,
And, where Earths hidden Treasures can be found,
Securely dig, and reap those goodly things,
Which here beget us Emperors, and Kings,
Nay thou shall with thy Riches have more peace,
And sleep more soundly, than the best of these.
For in profound tranquillity of mind, 19. For when thou take thy rest, none
shall make thee afraid, yea many shall make suit unto thee.

Thou shall great ease, and satisfaction find:
With soft, domestict peace thou shall be bles't,
No rude allarum shall disturb thy rest.
Thy proud Relations shall not thee despise,
But, maugre all their envy, thou stalt rise
In wealth, and reputation, and increase
In all the goodly perquisits of peace.
For, stead of cursing, with uplifted hands,
They shall present thee with their mean demands,
And, with sad groanings, and submission plead
The favor of some petty Loaves of bread,
TO allay the Famine, and compesce the cries
Of their decaying, half-starv'd Families.
But such as in their ^ins do persevere, 20. But the eyes of the wicked shall
fail, and their refuge shall perish, and their hope shall be sorrow of mind.

And with high lifted hands do boldly Err:
Such, as on wrath, and malice are intent,
And have no Inclination to repent
God shall destroy: all their fair hopes shall fail,
Nor shall their Death-bed-tears with him prevail.
He with great justice, shall reject their Suit,
And, when they are accused, they shall be mute.
Sorrow of mind, anxiety, and care,
Black Horror, sad Remembrance, and Despair,
Shall be with those poor men familiar.
Cap. XII.
WIth pious silence Job had all this time 1. Then Job answered and said.

Heard Zophar shreudly aggravat his crime:
Made to his talk no interruption,
As many, in his case, would sure have done,
But, so soon as his friend an end had made,
To his discourse he only answered.
Indeed, my friends, I see you are so wise 2. Indeed because you are the people
only wisdom must die with you.

It Is to be feared, with you all Wisdom dies.
You feel no pains, and torments, as I do,
And therefore think all my Expressions now
Are but like School-boyes whinings, when chastis'd
For their own good: for such indeed you're pleased
T'esteem my carriage.
You who have never yet affliction known,
On whose foft faces no rude wind has blown:
Have never known sorrow, or the use of tears,
But smilingly enjoyed your peaceful years;
It Is easy for you, in such words as these
T'accuse the afflicted of what crimes you please.
Then after all this Torrent of Discourse, 3. But I have understanding as well
as you, and am not inferior to you, yea who knows not such things?

Sure you imagine that by very force
Of reason, you have obliged me to confess
That I Am now punished for my wickedness.
You think you have my case so opened,
In arguments not to be answered,
And so ensnared me by your Art, and Skill,
As I a Fool, a Madman, what you will,
Must as a man found guilty hold my peace,
And hear my Sentence read upon my knees.
But seriously, my friends, I Would have you know
You're much deceived, if you imagine so:
I know no difference betwixt you, and me
In any thing, but what you all do see,
My sad affliction.
I Am scandalously poor, I must confess,
But I was never taxed with foolishness:
For follow your discourse, and you shall find,
Although I cannot so express my mind,
As you do in your Flowers of Eloquence,
Yet truly I lack neither Wit, nor Sense,
Memory, Judgment, or what Parts you call,
And understand as much, as you do all.
Whence this insulting then? pray to what end 4. I am as one mocked of his
neighbors, who calls upon God, and he hears, him, the just, and the
upright is laughed to scorn.

Do all your vain Expostulations tend?
Whence all these Accusations? alace
Do You mean to mock me in my very face?
Because God, in his mercy, grants you all,
Your hearts desire, and hears you, when you call,
Therefore a man afflicted, and oppressed
Must be the subject of your unkind jest.
You think perhaps that God does favor none,
Or has respect, but for your selves alone;
Because you're rich, because you never yet
Have known the pangs of a distressed Estate.
Hence, (though upright, and just) the poor with you
Have no esteem; to such you don't allow
The Character of simple Innocence,
But laugh at all such, with great Insolence.
For O how meanly you Rich Men do prize 5. He that is ready to fall is as a
lamp despised in the opinion of the rich.

The Poor, though Pious, Virteous, Learned, and Wi.
Yes you on Riches only set your hearts,
And weigh men by their Money, not their Parts.
Hence I Have observed, my friends, that such as you
Do undervalue. and (I know not how)
As on a Lamp, or Link extinguished,
On all, that are not rich, you proudly tread.
But what needs more: -- it is so, and still will be, 6. The tabernatles of
robbers do prosper, and they are in safety that provoke God, whom God has
enriched with his hand.

For wicked persons do increase we see,
And men of unjust Principles do rise
In Wealth, and Power, erecting Families
Upon the Ruins of the Just, and those
Who understand no Piety (God knows)
Do live in safety: with his bounteous hand,
God does enrich them, and they fill the land.
Why this to me is no strange thing, I knew
How God did rule the World as well as you.
Nay who is so stupid, who so void of sense 7. Ask now the beasts and they shall
teach thee, and the fouls of the heaven, and they shall tell thee.

As does not understand how Providence
Earths Governor, chief Minister of state
To our Great God, does all things regulate
Below the Sun, allowing to every Creature
Its Shape, its Substance, Virtue, Food, and Nature.
For ask the Beasts that toil for daily fare,
On Earth, and those, who in the open Air
Keep constant Commerce, and they 'll plainly tell
What you have lately preached to me, as well
As any of you all; they 'll fully show
How much all Creatures to their Maker owe.
Or speak to The Earth, and it will soon proclaim 8. Or speak to the earth, and
it shall show thee, or the fishes of the sea, and they shall declare unto thee.

The Power of God, and his most Glorious Name,
Nay very insects, things so despicable
As some o'th'learned hold it questionable
Whether they be of primitive Creation,
Or merely by equivocque Generation,
Begot on putrid matter by the Sun,
When through the hot Signs he his course does run.
Or speak to the Fishes, who do every day,
Amidst the rude waves, unconcern'dly play,
All these will clearly speak how deep a sense,
They have o'th'gracious power of Providence.
Then to what purpose all your talk? pray why 9. Who is ignorant of all these,
but that the hand of the Lord has made these?

Should you obtrude your mean Philosophy
Upon your friend? alace I Would have you know
Your wisdom's common to all here below.
Why so dogmatick, when you only preach,
What the Creation every hour does teach?
Must we esteem you wise, because that you
Know as much as the Brutal Creatures do?
Or shall we think that you deserve esteem,
Because you can descantupon a Theme,
Well known to all men? for who is ignorant
Of what you speak? though you do proudly vaunt,
You are the only knowing men, alace,
How much do I commiserate your case.
For ah, who knows not how Gods mighty hand
Has all things framed in Heavens, Air, Sea, and Land.
That mighty hand, that hand, which does contain 10. In whose hand is the soul
of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind.

The precious Soul of every living man:
That hand, which grasps at once both Life, and Death,
That hand, which stops, and lets out every Breath:
That mighty hand we know has formed all,
Without the help of what you wisdom call.
That powerful hand, that right hand, which alone
Acts by true wisdom, is most surely known,
Beyond what all your wisdom can rehearse,
To be the Author of the Universe.
For lets observe but, who did frame the Ear, 11. Does not the ear discern the
words, and the mouth taste meat for itself.

And for what use: why it will soon appear,
If once we speak: for then articulate,
And distinct words entering that narrow Gate;
Through the Ears winding Turnpikes progress make,
And are conducted to the Intellect,
In decent order, have quick audience,
And from the council of the common Sense,
As quick returns: for words are instantly
Dispatched in answer: twinkling of an eye,
The earsof both speakers do these words convey,
TO each others judgments i'th'same form, and way.
Let us observe then, how this useful sense,
By special license from high providence,
Enjoys its place, and faculty, nor are
Those many towrs, and windings in the ear,
There to no purpose, since experience
Demonstrats every day their excellence.
For, as we see in Princes Palaces,
How all the avenues, and passages
Are strictly guarded, to oppose the rude
Tumultuous entries of the Multitude:
Whilst civil persons, who have business,
Pass through the Guards, and daily make address
To the Princes ear: so all the Guarde of the brain
To civil courteous words do make a Lane,
Which passing forward to the Intellect,
Are there received with kindness, and respect.
But, if in throngs, and with a hideous shout,
They chance to make approach, to keep such out,
The Drum of the Ear does quickly beat to Arms,
Yet by the frequent use of such allarms,
Those Guards are oft-times overcome, and thence
Men lose the use of that most useful sense.
That useful sense, to which indeed we owe,
The greatest part of what we learn, or know,
So that were it even but in that curious sense,
We may admire the work of Providence.
Observe the Mouth too, how it tastes the Meat,
To try if it be wholesome, sour, or sweet,
Ere to the Stomach, whether it does tend,
It can have access, that it may defend,
The Body from all Food, that is destructive,
To health, and make its charge securely live.
Now from such topics, though there were no more,
Who may not soon, the Almighties Glory know?
Forbear then all your arguing, pray forbear
And let us no more of your vain Lectures hear
Upon this subject, since no art can show
The full extent of what we only know,
From such external signs, for what indeed
The Power of God is, whence all things proceed,
Which here we see: how things are regulate
In Heavens, and Earth: how he did Fabricate
This vast stupendous Globe, which still the more
We view, the more the Framer we adore
Is what exceeds our reach.
It Is true indeed, (and I do not deny) 12. Amongst the ancient is wisdom, and
in the length of days is understanding.

But even on this side of Mortality,
There is a wisdom, which one may attain
By serious thoughts, and labor of the Brain,
There is a thing I know, which in some sense
May be thought wisdom, called experience,
Which among aged persons keeps its Residence.
Seldom in other company we see
This grave Instructor, whom I take to be
A thing made up of many passages
Of foolish Life, by which it seems to guess
At future Events, and would wisely cast
By th'vanity of things already past,
The issues of new Counsels, but alace,
When we perceive how still new passages
Occur, which we have never known before,
Then we admire, and can presage no more.
And then, when we reflect what vast Expense
Acquaintance with this same Experience
Does cost' us daily, and how, ere we can
Improve to its full height the wit of man,
The life of man runs out: who'd not assert
That all the knowledge, all the wit, the art,
And all the cunning, which we can attain
Below the Heavens is absolutely vain.
Vain, and inconstant, frail, and perishing
A very inconsiderable thing,
Not worth our pains to know: for don't we see
Among all alive on earth how few there be
Can teach us, which obliges us to crave
Instructions from the Records of the Grave,
Their sayings we esteem, their Works we read,
And borrow all our Knowledge from the Dead.
But O how mean, how poor, and despicable 13. With him is wisdom, and strength,
he has counsel, and understanding.

This Wisdom looks! how like a very babble!
A thing of no esteem, compared with that,
Which did this Glorious Universe creat!
That, -- that is true Wisdom! that -- O that indeed
Does all your Human Wisdom far exceed.
For with our God, Wisdom, and Strength does dwell,
In understanding he does ail excel.
No more than of that thing you Wisdom call,
Here Is Wisdom that gives silence to you all.
A Divine Wisdom, which no art can teach!
A perfect Wisdom, far above our reach!
A Wisdom infinite! incomparable!
Vastly profound! simply inimitable,
By us poor Mortals! O the Excellence
Of this eternal pure intelligence!
This uncreated Wisdom! this so fair,
Unspotted Knowledge! this so singular
And precious Wisdom! this so eminent
And glorious Prescience, which did all invent
This solid Understanding! this so clear,
And pointed Wisdom, which should only bear
The name of Wisdom! this does plainly show
We have no Wisdom, we do nothing know:
But all the Wisdom we can here attain,
Is (without question) evident, and plain
(Though on it we bestow a goodly name)
But like the sparks, that issue from the flame.
Or as we see in a contracted Ray
O'th'Sun how Atoms wantonly do play,
Which were but ^ust, while by that glorious Beam
Raised from the Dunghill: then to men they seem
To be some things of moment, and become
The subject of grave arguing to some
More curious Brains; as they are of admiration
To duller judgments; and of meditation
To pious Breasts: yet let the Sun recall
His Animating Ray, and after all
Those things appear but transient, and vain,
And soon incorporat with the dust again.
Just so all Humane Knowledge animat
By wisdom from above we estimat
For some small time, so long as so inspired,
But when the Divine Rays are once retired,
Then we perceive what we did late esteem
Was but a Shadow, or an empty Dream.
O the great Power of God! who can express 14. Behold he will break down, and
it cannot be built, he shuts a man up, and he cannot' be loosed.

His admirable Strength! we must confess
It Is he alone that rules, it is he alone
That orders all, accountable to none.
It Is he that builds, it is only he erects
Kingdoms and States; it is he alone protects
These in their being; he alone beats down
Those powerful Corporations, as soon
As he thinks fit: he overturns them all;
At his command to Anarchy they fall.
Those glistering things, which we adore by names
Of Scepters, Robes, Swords, Balls, and Diadems,
He breaks to pieces with his mighty hand,
To let the' admiring world understand
It Is he alone, by whom all Princes reign;
And fall; and whom he once beats down, in vain
Mortals endeavor to restore again.
Or if they do, he renders their designs
Unsuccessful, and quickly countermines
Their secret Pl^ts: but when they have done all
That men can do, if on his Name they call,
Then he will hear, and by his Power alone
Restore Exiled Princes to the Throne.
When he imprisons men, (who e're they be)
No Friendship, Force, or Law can set them free.
When he seals up the Clouds, then by, and by 15. Behold he withholdeth the
waters and they dry up, but when he sends them out they destroy the earth.

The Floods and Rivers of the Earth run dry.
The parched Ground no moisture does retain,
But every thirsty Clod does gape for Rain.
And all the beasts o'th'field with drowth oppressed,
Hang out their tongues, and can enjoy no rest.
But when he sends them out, they furnish all
Men, Beasts, Birds, Insects, Creatures great and small
With Liquor in abundance: and o'rflow
Earths surface quite if he will have it so.
With him is Strength, and Wisdom, no thing can, 16. With him is strength and
wisdom. he that is deceived; and he that deceives are his.

Without his license, be performed by man.
Nay Sin it self, tho man to it make suit,
Without permission, dares not contribute
To its own being: he who means to make
Unlawful gain, dares not yet undertake
Without Gods special tolerance to do it,
Who will permit it, though he don't allow it.
It Is he, who turns the Counsels of the Wise 17. He causes the Counselors to
go as spoiled, and makes the judges fools.

To down right folly: he who vilifies
Their closs Projectings, and does laugh at all
What these Intrigues, and Cabin councils call.
It Is ne makes Dotards on the Benches sit,
And Beardless fools, when ever he thinks fit,
To plague a sinful Nation: it is he
That raises men of base, and low degree
To be our Rulers: he takes Princes down,
And brings th'unweildie Distaff to the Crown:
That he a sinning Nation may vex,
With all the passions of that humorous Sex.
He cuts of aged Princes; he alone
Sets Fools, and sucking Infants on the Throne:
And for the faults of an ^nrulie Land,
Makes many Princes stead of one, command.
He snatches Scepters from the greatest Kings, 18. He loses the collar of
kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle.

Pulls off their Robes, and makes those crowned things
Fettered, and pinioned, beg their daily Meat,
With fear, and trembling at the Conquerours feet.
Whole Nations in a berd he drives away, 19. He leads away the princes as a
prey, and overthrows the mighry.

And of their Princes makes a lawful Prey.
The high and mighty he does overthrow
Annuls their Powers, and makes the proudest low.
He makes the faithful Counselors speech to fail, 20. He takes away the
speech from the faithful counselors, and takes away the judgment of the
ancient.

And what they talk, sound, like an idle tale.
He makes their mouths to furnish Evidence,
Sufficient to condemn their Eloquence.
He makes the aged, and prudent stammer out
Their minds like fools; and make the audience doubt;
Although they see their Senators in the face,
If these be they, or mad men in their place.
Your Sovereign Princes, who to day appear 21. He pours contempt on princes
and makes the strength of the mighty weak-

In wealth and honor, void of any fear
Of being overturned, and daily fleece
Their poor over toiling Subjects as they please,
To morrow he contemptible does make'em,
And makes all these they thought their friends, forsake 'em.
Deep subterraneous Caverns, where the Beams 22. He discovers the deep places
from their darkness, and brings forth the shadow of death to light.

O*th'Sun never pierced; dark places, void of names;
Unseen, unheard of, never known before,
Replete with noisome vapors to that hour,
And killing Damps, foul Kennels, black as Hell;
He clears, their darkness he does soon dispel.
At his command those Fogs do fly away,
And these dark holes, like Noontide of the day
Appears, so clear, and so transparent bright*
As if they always had been full of Light.
That Nation which our God intends to bless, 23. He increases the people, and
destroys them, he enlarges the nations, and brings them in again.

He makes to flourish in all happiness.
He makes the people in prosperity
And wealth to live, and daily multiply.
Under his own vine, ignorant of fear,
Makes each man with his Neighbor keep good cheer,
Furnishes to 'em all the best of Meat,
Which under their own Fig Tree they do Eat.
Proof of all Writs, these people do not care
For th'heavy clutch of the pinching Usurer.
The dismal News of an approaching term,
Which frights the most of men does not allarm
That happy Nation, who in plenty live,
And spend as freely, as their God does give-
They know no Contributions, Raps, or Force,
Quart'rings, or transient March of Foot, and Horse,
No they are free of all these Curses, far
From all the sad calamities of War.
Whilst other Nations howl, they live at ease,
Enjoying all the Benefits of Peace.
But when a long continued peace has bred
Foul luxury; and all the Land's o'respread
With unclean Acts, and scenick wantonness,
Then farewell all their former joys, and peace.
Their loud-tongu'd sins no sooner make a noise
In Gods Ears, but he instantly destroys
That foolish people, whom he so much bless't*
And throws them out, like Chaff, he does detest
Their very memory; makes them soon a prey
To Barbarous Nations, who drive all away
They find within that peoples Land, before'em;
Nor will afford them food, though they implore'em,
With cries, and tears, would burst the very stones,
Yet these unmoved with all their sighs, and groans,
'Stead of all answer to these sad demands,
Shall poinard those poor wretches, wash their hands
In their hearts-blood; cut off their heads, and show
Them on their spear points, not consented so
Ravish their Virgins, and unrip their Wives,
Brain all their Children, and with bloody Knives,
On their dead Corpse their cruelty repeat,
And throw large Collops to their Dogs to eat.
Without regard to either sex, or age,
These men shall glut their Military rage-
Burn all their Houses, Towns, and Villages,
Waste all, and leave no memory of peace.
But after all, he will his ear afford
To some small remnant, who have escaped the Sword:
When in their Chains, and fetters they do cry
To Heavens for mercy, then he instantly
Will hear their prayers, release them from their pain,
And soon restore them to their own again-
When he intends a final desolation, 24. He takes away the hearts of them,
that are the chief over the people of the earth, and makes them to wander in
the wilderness out of the way.

And means, in anger, to destroy a Nation;
Let them give out Commissions of array,
And raise well modeled Armies under Pay:
With great allowance, and large hire engage
The most accomplished Captains of their age
To be their Generals: give them full Command,
Put all their Force, and Treasure In their hand.
Who may Encamp these Troops in every part,
By all the Rules of Military Art:
Decamp, March, Countermarch, and make a halt,
Lay ambushes, besiege, and make assault;
Do all that brave, and skilful Chistans dare,
By the exactest Discipline of War.
Assured of Victory, yet after all,
A Pannick Fear shall on these Captains fall:
Their Blood shall cool, their Courage shall decay,
And they shall be the first shall run away,
When action comes: their Troops shall be defeat,
And stand in fear of every one they meet.
Their broken Squadrons squandring in their way,
Through all the Country shall become a prey
To Boys and Peasants: Hills, and Dales to boot
Shall not secure them from the hot pursuit.
Three of'm in a body shall not remain
Most of'm being captivat, or slain
Without all hopes of Rallying again.
But as men in the dark do feel, and grope, 25. They grope in the dark without
light, and he makes them to stagger like a drunken man.

So shall those scattered Forces without hope,
Benumbed with fear, in lamentable case,
Whilst the feirce Conquerors closs pursue the Chase,
Through Ditches, Pools, and Quag-mires, here and there
Woods, Mountains, Cornfieldsd, Pastures, every where,
Run to preserve their Life's, but all in vain,
Staggering, like so many Drunken Men.
Cap. XIII.
ALL this mine ears have heard, mine eyes have seen, 1. Lo mine eye has seen
all this, mine ear has heard, and understood it.

And to my knowledge, some such things have been
In my own time: I have observed with care,
What Changes, Turns, and Revolutions are
In all Conditions of this Life, I know
There Is nothing fixed and solid here below.
All this I know, my friends, to show you how 2. I know as much as you know, I
am not inferior to you.

I Am not inferior to the best of you.
And were it not for the present woe, and pain
I do endure, I think I could explain
My self, in manner as methodical,
And as good Words, as any of you all.
But I intend my Language to direct 3. But I will speak to the Almighty, and I
desire to dispute with God.

Only to God; only to God I Will speak.
With the Almighty I Will expostulate,
I do desire to enter in debate
With him alone: for though I understand
What has befallen me is by Gods command;
And his pure Justice, because while such time,
As God has found, and tried, and proved the crime,
Of him he means to punish: he will never
Send out his Vengeance, for what suit soever
Our Enemies make to him; in a word,
In Justice only he does draw the Sword,
Against poor sinners, yet I fain would know
For what black crimes I am tormented so.
I know from God I may such answer have, 4. For indeed you forge lies, you are
Physicians of no value.

As may hereafter all your labor save.
I know he will me fully satisfy,
And tell me plainly where the cause does lie,
Of my disease: and so proceed to cure,
By Principles, and Medicines more sure,
Then what you can afford: I may expect
From him true comfort, but what you direct
Is but like Oil poured on the Flames: alace,
You talk, but do not understand my case.
Only you boldly vent some foolish lies,
Which to condemn your friend, you do devise,
But you're Physicians of no worth, or price.
Indeed, my friends, I am ashamed to hear 5. O that you would hold your tongue,
that it might be imputed to you for wisdom.

Such idle talking: and I cannot forbear
At length to tell you in plain terms, that you
Might truly to your selves great kindness do;
If you would hold your peace, and speak no more,
Of my concerns, and what you have spoke before
I shall excuse: then once, my friends, again,
I must beseech you free me of the pain
Of your discourse, and to your selves allow,
By holding of your peace some favor too:
For foolish talkers all men do despise,
But such, when silent, are esteemed wise.
This granted, I desire the liberty 6. Now hear my disputation, and give ear to
the arguments of my lips.

To argue with you for some time, that I
May show you in your reasoning, where you err,
And so convince you that what you aver
Is not agreeable with Piety,
And tell you where the fallacy does ly.
For here is your error now, upon pretense,
That you forsooth appear in Gods defense,
You talk at random, your disord'red zeal
Over your wit, and reason does prevail.
I thought in you some comfort to have found,
But 'stead of that, your bitter speeches wound
My poor afflicted Soul, for you still beat
Upon one string, and frequently repeat,
That God does send afflictions on none,
But those, whose sins do merit them alone,
From whence subsuming I have merited,
You do conclude I Am justly punished.
This is your constant doctrine, this is all
The argument, on which, by turns you fall,
Though truth it is but what Logicians call
A begging of the question: for I
Your major proposition still deny:
And for your minor that I Am such a man,
As you assert, endeavor what you can
To make it out, I still deny that too,
So that I only make this answer now,
Of what you charge me I am innocent,
And therefore merit no such punishment,
As I endure. --
Whence all this noise, my friends, then? to what end 7. Will you accept his
person? or will you contend for God?

This tumult of Discourse? if you intend
Still to oppose, why I must still Defend.
Or if you do intend to personate
Your glorious Maker, and for him debate,
Then will I make no answer; I Will not speak,
Nor Harangues in Gods vindication make,
As you have done: for why, my friends, would you
Have me to bluster out my folly too,
And treat the Almighty with such liberty,
Only forsooth to bear you company? 8. It is well that he should seek of you?
will you make a lie for him, as one lies for a man?

Indeed your carriage is unwarrantable,
Your proud demeanor is intolerable.
I know my God will no such thing allow,
That such presumptous Orators, as you
Should undertake his Interest to plead,
Against any here on Earth, he has no need
Of your assistance: nor will he demand
Advice of you: pray' therefore understand
Your pregnant folly, and, in common sense,
Reflect upon your impious insolence.
You undertake to plead for God? will you,
(As for their Clients some cracked Lawyers do)
Give to your passions foolish liberty,
And, with great art, set out a speciously,
To gain your point. This method some indeed
Do use for men, but if for God you plead,
You must be solid, sure, and circumspect,
In everything you counsel, act, or speak.
Observe then pray; our God will not permit 9. He will surely reprove you if
you accept any person secretly.

Such pleadings for him, for when he thinks fit
To show the Justice of his actings, when
He would convince the stolid race of men
Of their gross sins, and openly detect
Their hidden faults, then he himself will speak.
Yes he will speak, and strongly plead his cause 10. Shall not his excellency
make you afraid, and his fear fall upon you.

By quoting his own equitable Laws.
He Will speak, he will speak, and show what difference
Is betwixt his, and humane Eloquence.
The King of Heavens will speak, and show you how
His cause is mangled by such things, as you.
Our God himself will make it evident
You cannot manage such an argument.
And when he speaks, why at his very Breath,
His Orators will look as pale, as Death:
In great disorder, betwixt shame, and fear,
When they see God in his own cause appear:
That mighty God, for whom, in pur-blind Zeal,
They thought they had both plead, and preached well,
Whilst mean time, all their Eloquence, at best
Did only serve some Paltry interest,
Which they would glaze over with the Name of God,
As if his Glory were their period.
Though in their hearts, those men, who preach too much
Upon that Subject, are not always such
As they pretend: however they would deceive
The credulous vulgar, and make all believe,
That what they spoke were upright, and sincere,
Whilst really, their Eloquence, I fear,
Is but like that at Bar, even so infused,
As by their Clients they are kindly as'd:
But when God speaks, a sudden fear shall fall
Upon those Preachers, and confound them all.
For when he speaks, he will tell you in your face, 11. Your memory may be
compared to ashes, and your bodies to bodies of clay.

You have provock'd him, and abused his Grace.
He gave you Parts, it is true, and Eloquence,
But never meant that you, in his defense,
Should use those Gifts, or offer to debate.
For him, unless you were commissionat
By special warrant from himself, for those
Who, in Enthusiastic fits, suppose
Men of all stations, and degrees may preach,
And silly women, if they please, may teach;
Those, who, like you, all others do despise,
And thinks there is no man holy in their eyes,
But such, as are of their opinion, say
They Are only perfect, walk in Gods own way;
Sure these men grossly err, for God does own,
No such presumption, and it is well known,
God in all ages does such men select,
As he thinks fit should by commission speak,
For him to the people: and will sure destroy
Those preaching fools, whom he does not employ.
Then you, my friends, must know, that having spoke
For him, without commission, you have broke
His divine Statutes, and, in Heavens Court
Incurred a praemunire: to be short,
For this your great presumption, your name
Shall be extinguished, and your race, for shame,
Shall shun men's converse: this at length, shall be
The profit of such actings, this the fee
Of those officiously who undertake,
Without commission, for their God to speak.
Then pray now from your foolish arguing cease, 12. Hold your tongues in my
presence then, and let me speak, let come upon it What will.

And, while I speak, be pleased to hold your peace,
Forbear your talk for some time, and be still,
For I intend to speak, (come out what will.)
Come out what will, I Will speak, I Will boldly speak,
And to my Maker my discourse direct.
I Will say, Lord, why am I thus punished? 13. Wherefore do I take my flesh in my
teeth, and put my soul in my hand;

Thus cudgelled, stead of being comforted?
Thus sharply taxed by three comforting men,
As if, without a cause, I did complain.
Good Lord, that I should be reproved by those,
Who, if they felt the tenth part of my woes,
Would instantly cry out, and make a noise,
Using such faint expressions, as Boys,
When whipped at Schools: such, as if they did feel
What I endure, would stagger, foam, and reel,
Like mad men, such, as if they knew the care^
And grief I know, would instantly despair.
Yet such, forsooth must censure me, good Lord,
That those my friends, who comfort should afford
To me in this condition, when they see
What are my plagues, and what my torments be,
By signs so manifest, so plain, and clear,
As when, for pain, my very flesh I tear,
When all o'r grown with Ulcers, all o'r run
With putria sores, contemptible, undone,
I here on Danghill sit, and fain would cry
To thee, my God, if I had liberty,
And were not interrupted by those men,
Who by me sit: thou know, O Lord, how fain
In private, I Would pour out my very Soul,
If those men, who have come hither to condole
My sad condition, as they do pretend,
Did not obstruct me: how I fain would spend
The small remainder of my troubled days
In pious sighs, and setting out thy praise,
By what I have observed, and heard, by fame,
From others, since first to this world I came:
How fain I Would pray, how fain my sins bemoan,
If those tormenters would let me alone.
It seems indeed, Lord, thou design'st to make
My case extremely sad; for this I take
As not the least part of my punishment,
That thou to me such comforters has sent.
Yet, Lord, I Will still apply to thee, I know 14. Lo though he slay me, yet will
I trust in him, and I will reprove my ways in his sight.

There is no other comfort here below:
Compassion, pity, mercy there is none,
But what proceeds from thee good God, alone.
I Will therefore trust in thee, -- in thee, good Lord,
I Will only trust, -- I Will hope, and -- in a word,
Do with me what thou will, let even thy wrath
Be satisfied with no less than my death:
Yes, kill me, Lord, cut me to pieces, do
As thou thinks't fit, yet here I firmlie vow,
This heart, this poor oppressed heart shall never
Deviat from it is love to thee, what ever
Come of my person: -- nay even when I die,
In my last gasping breath, I Will formallie
Express my love to thee: in thee I Will trust
My gracious Maker; for, as thou art just,
So thou art merciful: besides, good Lord,
I know thou only comfort can afford
To men afflicted: let me then be freed
Of my officious friends, who boldly plead
Against me, 'stead of comforting, for I
Esteem my greatest woe their company:
I do indeed, for I had rather choose
Be plagued by thee, then comforted by those.
Now, Lord, to them though I will not confess
My sinful errors, yet my wickedness,
Before thee, I acknowledge, as the cause
Of all my woes: Lord, I have broke thy Laws,
And merit no less censure in thy sight,
Than instantly to be destroyed downright.
But after all, I know, O Lord, that thou 15. He shall be my salvation also,
for the hypocrite shall not come -before him.

Wilt use me better than these talkers do.
Thou Wilt be more kind, and whilst I am in pain,
For some small time, allow me to complain,
And then restore me to my strength again.
For after all this trial, thou shall clear
My innocence, and make, at length, appear
That I in sin have taken no delight,
And show these men -- I am no hypocrite.
Now then, my friends, observe, be pleased to hear 16. Hear diligently my
words, and mark my talk.

What I discourse, For seriously I fear,
In all your talk of late, you have abused,
Your selves more than the man you have accused.
For you have said, because of my offense, 17. Behold now, if I prepare me to
judgment, I know I shall be justified.

That I Am by* God rejected, and from thence,
You did affirm I might expect no more
To see his face, as I had done before.
Ay me! -- a sentence cruel, and severe!
A doom, in which great malice does appear!
Now pray, my friends, by what authority
Act you these things? who gave you liberty
To give out Judgment thus? for to this hour
I never heard that any of you had power
From our Great God to excommunicat
The poorest Wretch on Earth. --
I therefore hope I quickly shall be able
To make appear how most unwarrantable
Your sentence is, for this I surely know;
As God excels in acts of justice, so
In acts of mercy he does so abound
As no man needs despair: he is always found
Of such as seek him, and I know he will be
As merciful, as formerlie to me.
But were it so, my friends, as you have said,
That I Am of God rejected, then indeed,
Indeed, in that case, I should soon despair,
And be of the same opinion as you are
Nor should you from my mouth hereafter hear
Words of assurance, words of confidence
By which I do alleviat my sense
Of present sufferings: for I firmly know
I know my God has not determined so,
As you allege: I know he is more just
Than to reject a man, that puts his trust
In him alone, a man, who never yet,
In all his sad, and suffering estate,
From his first Principles has deviat.
For I do still believe that God has sent,
Upon me now this heavy punishment,
Only to try my faith, that men might know,
Whether I be a hypocrite, or no:
For were I such, in this my horrid case,
I Would be so far from trusting in his Grace,
As I Would abjure him to his very face,
But O I know, I know my God will never
Exclude me from his mercies act, however
He Is pleased to vex me now: I know indeed
He will not to an outlawry proceed,
Against a man, who is willing to appear,
And answer all: -- no, no I do not fear,
I fear not that he has rejected me,
As you pretend, for, by what I can see,
Should I just now before my God be tried,
I doubt not but I would be justified.
Then who is the man, pray, that with me will plead, 18. Who is he that will
plead with me now? for if I hold my tongue, I dye.

And prove that for my sins I Am punished?
Pray' let me know the man, that so I may
Debate the case a little with him, pray
Let him appear; this favor, friends, allow,
That I may know with whom I have to do.
Pray let me know, and I will instantly
Argue my case, with all sobriety,
For, if I once should hold my peace, I dye
Will no man plead? will no man undertake 19. But do those two things to me,
then will I not hide my self from thee.

The argument? then my address I Will make
To God alone: two things I will implore
Of his large bounty, and demand no more.
Two things preliminary, Lord I must
Request of thee, which as you are good, and just
I know thou will allow, that so I may
With freedom speak all that I have to say
In my defense.
First then, some small time, Lord, forbear thy wrath, 28. withdraw thy hand
from me, and let not thy fear make me afraid.

That I may have some leisure, but to breath:
That I may have but a few hours soulage,
And not be quite consumed in thy rage.
Next, O my gracious God, let not thy hot
And wasting anger fright my soul, let not
Thy lifted hand so terrible appear,
Nor damp my Spirit, with a killing fear.
Then what thou please of me to demand, 21. then call thou, and I will answer
thee, or let me speak, and answer thou me.

I Will answer, so far as I understand,
Or, if thou think it fit, that I should speak
I shall, Lord, and in favor, I Will expect
Thou Wilt answer me. -- --
For, if I be allowed this liberty,
With boldness, then, good Lord, I will reply,
To all the questions thou to me shall state,
And with my God take pleasure to debate.
If I must speak then, -- I demand, good Lord, 22. How many are mine
iniquities, and my sins, show me my rebellion, and my sin.

How many are my sins! -- pray in a word,
How many are they! -- tell me -- am I able
To calculat them! -- are they numberable!
What are my sins, Lord, of what quality?
How black, how uglie, of how deep a dye.
Why, Lord, it seems, that since the world began,
Of all the sins practiced by mortal man,
Sure mine must be the foulest, mine must be
Most venomous sins of the first degree,
For -- -- -- -- --
Whilst others sins, with modesty have called
For Judgments, it appears that mine have baul'd,
And, with great clamor, furious zeal, and heat,
Have asked as due, rather than supplicat,
For Divine vengeance, and with open voice,
At Heavens Gates made a tumultuous noise,
As idle Beggars for their Alms do cry,
And so, by clamorous importunity,
Extorted from a mild, and gentle God,
The unwilling usage of an angry Rod.
My sins have, in a Cluster, cried aloud
For punishment, no mercy has withstood,
The rude attaques of their impetuous suit,
But suffered them to gain, without dispute,
The Almighties Ear: who has accordingly
Sent Judgments out, in such variety,
And has me so severelie punished,
As all my Neighbors never suffered
So many ills at once, as I do now,
Besides what I may lay account for too,
Ere all be done, for I perceive the wrath
Of God increases every hour, Whilst death
Keeps at a distance, and appears to smile
Unkindly at my torments all this while.
Nay (which is worst of all) men, on pretense
Of comforting me, with great violence,
Oppress my little spirits that remain,
And, with their bitter words augment my pain.
What are my sins then, Lord, ah let me know, 23. Wherefore hidest thou thy
face, and take me for thine ^remy?

What have I done, Lord, to be punished so!
What have I done! what sins have I practiced,
What horrid Treason have I e're devised
Against Heavens King? what are my faults, good Lord,
Again I beg thee, tell me in a word,
That so I may perceive the reason why
I Am punished with so much severity.
Now pardon, Lord, my great presumption,
In those demands, let my condition
Plead some excuse: let me some pity find:
Some pity, Lord, to ease my troubled mind.
Have pity then, have pity on my case,
And for thy Names sake, do not hide thy face,
Because in that I all my comfort place.
Why then, good Lord, do thou to me deny
Thy countenance? I am no enemy
To thee, my God, but one, I dare avow,
(As far as humane frailty will allow)
Loves thee with all his Soul, and still shall do.
Why then am I thus punished? why oppress't 25 Will thou break a leaf driven to
and fro? and will thou pursue the dry stuble?

With grief? Why does my Soul enjoy no rest?
Why is a Creature, -- a poor dying Creature,
Debarred from dying by the course of Nature?
Why to suck in again a parting Breath
Is it compelled, only to endure thy Wrath?
To break a Leaf, that is driven to and fro,
I humbly think it is a thing below
The Majesty of God! -- why such am I?
Or like the Stuble, withered, and dry,
When lightly it before the Wind does fly.
Then why in such sad torment? Why so vex't 26 For thou writest bitter things
against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth.

In Soul, and Body? Why so sore perplex't
In Spirit? Why so bitter Judgments sent
Each moment, to recruit my punishment?
Such Judgments make me now, Lord, call to mind
Those sins, which wasting time had cast behind
Its Shoulder; -- sins, which I thought thou had not
Recorded: -- sins, which I had quite forgot.
But now the Errors of my wanton years
Appear afresh: -- hence all these sighs, and tears:
Hence these sad words, which issue from my mouth,
Since for the sins of my disorderd youth,
I Am punished thus: -- why, Lord, I must confess,
Those whiffling errors do deserve no less
Than I now suffer: yet I still must cry
For mercy from my God, or clse I dye.
For mercy, Lord, I must thee still implore, 26. Thou put my feet also in
the stocks, and look narrowly into all my paths and make the print thereof
in the heels of my feet.

I Will call to Heavens (for I can do no more)
For mercy still: -- this liberty, at least,
I hope thou wilt not deny: -- this small request
To a poor dying man: -- allow me pray,
Allow me, Lord, that what I have to say
In a few dying words, I may express,
And then do what thy Majesty shall please,
With me thy prisoner, thy wretched slave,
One ( save to be the stopple of a Grave)
That serves for nothing: -- do then what thou will,
Dispatch me, Lord, or if my horrid guilt,
Require that I should live some longer time,
Why let it be so, let my horrid Crime.
(If possible, it e're can be content)
Be glutted with my horrid punishment.
For I am thy close prisoner, good Lord,
No power on Earth can me relief afford:
Escape I cannot -- no -- my feet are bound,
My hands tied up, all naked on the ground,
More than half-dead, o'r grown with sores I lie,
Am I not punished yet sufficiently!
Not yet! -- not yet! -- O may it not suffice
That I am wrapped in such calamities,
As hardly any one has suffered,
But I must yet be further punished?
Shall there be no end of my Misery!
May not I now have liberty to die?
For thou have filled my body with such pain, 27 Such an one consumes like a
rotten thing, and as a garment that is moth-eaten.

As in me there does no more life remain,
Than what does serve to make me sensible
Of what I fuffer: -- O most terrible
Consuming Wrath! -- now let me die good Lord,
-- I can endure no more: -- pray now afford
This favor to a man in dying case,
That, like Moth-eaten Garment, rots apace.
Then since I cannot live, O let me die,
Since Life it self is but Mortality,
For mortal man, at best, I do conceive
To be a thing, that, like a Floating-wave,
Swells in the Cradle, breaks upon the Grave.
Cap. XIV.
MAN of a Woman born in cares, and tears, 1 Man that is born of a woman, is of
few days, and full of trouble.

Enjoyes a few, but miserable Years.
He sucks in sorrow, with his infant Breath,
And. in his husk, he bears the seeds of death,
In his short life he nothing does perceive,
But Seas of troubls, Wave succeeding Wave.
He knows no pleasure, nor contentment he,
Nor is he ever from some passion free.
Yet must this wretch be born. -- --
Though it were better for him certainly
He were not born,) than thus be born to dye.
'Twere better for him he lay buried,
With all his hopes about him, covered
With the thin notion of an entity,
Under the arch of possibility,
Then that he should exist. -- --
But O he must be born, he must appear
On Earths wide, and capacious Theater,
To act, with mighty pomp, and vanity,
His part of the fable of mortality,
Though 'twere but fool of the play. -- --
For whilst in the womb he safely lies immured
Free of all woe, of aliment secured
By others labor, yet he thinks he is there,
At best, but a well treated prisoner.
Hence in the belly languishing he lies,
And fain would make escape, to feed his eyes,
On things abroad, and fully satiate
His Virgin-longing, with -- he knows not what. --
At length impatient of this kind restraint,
He Will be no longer in this Cloister pent,
But with his fellow-mortals he will b'acquaint,
At any rate, what e're the event be,
And in this humor, justles out to see
This foolish world. -- -- --
This world, of which he fancies some such things,
As Beggars, when they dream they are mighty kings:
And yet no sooner into it he peeps,
Then instantly the changeling cries, and weeps;
Appearing in some inward perturbation,
As disappointed of his expectation:
In it he wastes his time in fear, and pain,,
And often of being born he does complain,
Yet when he goes out of it, weeps again.
As if unwilling, after all, to part,
(Sad as it is) from what his soul, and heart
Does truly love, which that he might possess,
He could dispense with all its painfulness.
Inconstant Creature! -- whom no state can please,
To whom nor life, nor death can purchase ease;
Whose humorous fancy naught can satisfy:
Who knows not whether he should live, or dye!
Yet is this man, of so much worth, and fame,
Whom all the Creatures have in great esteem.
This, this is he, who is so vainly proud
Of the three souls, which God has him allowed,
Whilst those, who do his actions strictly view,
Hardly believe that he has more than two:
For of the third he takes so little care,
As one would say his reason lay not there:
So that of all endu'd with growth, and sense,
He least deserves that heavenly influence.
This, this is man, who does no sooner come
A native, naked Beggar, from the womb,
Then as soon Food, and Raiment God provides
For him, with every other thing besides,
Of which he stands in need: -- ordering all
The other Creatures to attend his call.
Yet, after all, when he is accommodat
By Providence, at such a princely rate,
The wretch becomes to him the most ungrate
Of any thing, that lives. -- --
For, as we know Beggars can bear no wealth,
So, now endu'd with riches, health, and strength,
In these external things he puts his trust,
And quite forgets, who raised him from the dust.
This is that formal piece of d^llest clay,
That molded, and unmoulded every day.
A thing from Heavens only with breath inspired,
That he, who gave this breath might be admired,
And not the thing, that breaths: yet on this breath
The Grashoper himself ^o valueth;
As he, with lofty pride, and arrogance,
Above his fellow creatures does advance,
And thinks the world his sole inheritance.
Whilst many Brutes (as we may daily see)
Both longer time, and with more peace, than he,
Possess the same: for he poor soul -- alace,
Can scarce enjoy, but for one half hours space,
The full possession of what Life, and breath
Affords him, when an enemy called Death,
Does turn him out of all, and then annon,
Ere he can view it well, he must be gone.
This is the Source, from which, by progress springs,
The Stream of all our Emperors, and Kings,
Those men, who with an armed foppery,
Blow up the pipes of vain Chronology:
Those men, who, when in their carreer withstood,
Will make the world swim around in blood,
Only to purchase to themselves a name,
And never think to have their fill of fame,
Whilst mean time, (ah poor souls! how Iregrate
There as ridiculous, as illustrious state!)
With all their glorious power they but appear
To us like squibs, that squandring here and there,
Put the admiring rabble in a fear,
Who know not what they are, but men of sense
Are not afraid of of their imper^nence;
For in an instant, as with crackling noise,
Affording only sport to wanton Boys,
These fly in smoke, so these men in a tryce,
After they have damped us with their cruelties,
Afford us sport in their own Tragedies.
This then is Man who rambles every where,
To catch a name who does no labor spare
T'attain his point: running, he cares not whether,
Killing, and spoiling, mixing all together,
In his hot fury: sparing no expense,
To show the world his great magnificence:
Whilst really, he is but like one of those,
Who, at our Fairs, do set up public Shows;
And with his Drums, and Trumpets makes a noise,
In Streets, and Lanes, assembling all the Boys,
And Girls about the Town but by and by,
His License now run out, he silently
Packs up his Trinkets, and by break of day,
Out of the Town he meanly sneaks away.
So man, on Earth, for a small term of years,
Makes no small noise, and then he disappears.
Have you not seen a silly Butter-flee
Attacque the flaming light, and wantonly
Hover about it, for some little space,
Until its wings begin to burn apace;
And then the helpless Creature, in a tryce,
Sticks to the Candle, spurns a while, and dies.
So on this dangerous Earth -- --
Stuck full of all the species of death
The adventuring mortal armed with single breath,
Boldly appears. -- what next? -- why in he flies,
Buzzes a while about the world, and dies.
Is this the thing then we call Man! alace
This the Heir Male of the first mortals race!
This Man of Woman born, whose foolish years
Are wasted in a tract of cares, and tears!
If this be he, that proud and, lofty creature,
Who calls himself the Masterpiece of Nature,
Why sure he seems to me so mean a thing,
As he is hardly worth our mentioning.
Strange then kind Females should be at such pain*
In bringing to the world a thing so mean!
A thing, which valued by just Estimation,
Is scarcely worth the pains of Procreation.
Yet, after all, (say of him, what we can,)
This empty thing is all we have for Man.
Yes in this very piece of miniature,
So long indeed, as Heavens, and Earth endure,
We see the Image, Glory, Wit, and Power,
Of him, who framed him; so that, to this hour,
In this same Man, with no small admiration,
We read the Abridgment of the whole creation.
This is the Lord of Earth: -- yes this is he,
Who holds of the King of Heaven, in capite,
This goodly Manor, and that as appears,
In Mort main too, to him, and all his Heirs,
For payment only of some Tears and Prayers.
I this same fair and fruitful Seigniory
Was once indeed his settled Property,
For ever in his Person to endure,
Full, and in peace, before the forfeiture.
But, O thou man, to whom in Paradise,
This fair Appanage God did first demise,
Man not of Woman ^orn, thou poorly sold,
(What was not to be purchassed for Gold)
Both thine, alace, and our felicity,
For a mean toy; and for thy fault, we dye.
Ah! had not thou, with dull indifference,
Exchanged thy opulent state of Innocence,
For this poor mortal state, which we possess,
What Art could have expressed man's happiness?
He could for ever have retained his breath,
And bid defyance to the force of death;
He had, with great convenience, eat his Bread,
And called himself the Lord of Earth indeed.
But now, that in continued miseries,
He lives a while, then miserably dies,
He owes to thee: and for thy curious Crime,
He and his Race are eaten up by time,
As Oxen eat up Grass. --
Then what are all these things we pleasures call,
Wealth, Honors, Issue, Fame! -- What are they all?
When man must dye! -- when he must formally
Abandon all these pleasant things, and dye!
Yes die, e and as into the world he came,
Naked, and poor, go out of it the same.
For, as a flower its beauty does display, 2. Hr shoots forth as a flewer,
and s^cut down, he flies ^^o as a shadow, and continues not.

And suddenly does moulder, and decay:
So man in g^y, and verdant youth appears,
Most glorious in the Summer of his years;
Void of all sorrow, and anxiety,
Spread like a Garden-flower: but by, and by,
When he is crossed with thoughts, and business,
His Tulip-colours disappear apace.
And, as a shadow, when the Sun is gone,
Appears no more, but vanishes annon,
So all his beauty vanishes, and now
Wrinkles succeed it, and, with much ado,
His face is known to those, who formerly
Knew him in the days of adolescency.
At length Time fairly turns his Glass; and now
The Fable's done, and there is no more to do
But that -- --
Wrapped up in Homespun Winding Sheet (O brave!
The Lord of Earth be thrown into his Grave.
Almighty God! what fluctuating thing 3. Yet do thou open thine eyes on suen
a one, and bringst me into judgment with thee.

Is this same Man! how frail, and perishing!
How subject to himself! how much a slave
To passion, from the Belly to the Grave!
Nay such a piece of mere formality,
(Though Mantled with a glorious vanity
Of Wit, Birth, Riches, Learning, Honors, all,
Which he does his appurtenances call)
That even himself, when, with impartial eye*
In Reasons Looking glass, he does survey
His worldly state, perceives that all he can
Pretend, at most to, is -- to be a Man.
A man of woes, and sorrows, cares and fears,
A poor retainer to some painful years.
A short-li^d man, who rarely does attain
To the age of sixty, and does still complain
Either of pains of Body, or of Mind,
So long as within bounds of Life confined.
So that, if the had not let him understand,
He Is chief of all the Labors of thy Hand;
He Would think himself, in this same contemplation,
The very meanest part of the Creation.
Yet do thou, Lord, thou high, and Heavenly King,
Take special notice of this foolish thing:
Thou look upon him, with a careful eye,
And take the pains, for his security,
TO enclose him, with a wall of Providence,
And keeps't a constant Watch, for his Defense,
Both day, and night: so that the power of Hell
Cannot against him with their Plots, prevail,
Whilst guarded thus, and so well for tifi'd
By his Creators Art on every side*
Yes, and of late too, I was one of those,
Whom thou, with a strong Rampart did enclose:
But now thou'hast deserted me, and I
Unfenc'd lie open to the Enemy.
Now my accusers, in great throngs, do bring
Their several Charges before thee, my King:
Before thee I as Criminal appear
At Bar, and am environed with fear:
Now thou do try me: now thou do intend
To bring me quickly to a shameful end.
Lord, what am I! -- a wretched dying thing, 4. Who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean! no not one.

Not worth thy wrath, not worth thy noticing:
Why try'st' me then, with such severity,
And of my actings maks't such scrutiny,
As if, of all men, I had most transgressed
Thy Divine Laws: thou hear'st I have confessed
I am a sinner: -- do thou Lord, expect
That mortal man can other answer make,
When thou do charge him with impiety,
Then I do now: -- I do not, Lord, deny
That all the Judgments I do now endure
Were merit long ago: for I am sure
That man was never born, since Adams Fall,
That can affirm he never sinned at all.
What then wouldst' have me say? -- I do confess
I am all sin, I am all guiltiness:
Can any thing that is good from me proceed?
No sure, then judge me, for I cannot plead
Not guilty: I Am unclean, and who can bring
That which is clean, out of an unclean thing?
Then, since it is so, since I cannot deny 5. Are not his days determined? the
number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed his bounds, which he
cannot pass.

I have abounded in iniquity:
Since I Am found guilty, and condemned, why then,
I ask but what is granted amongst men,
On such occasions, to a Criminal,
Who freely at the Bar confesses all
Of what he hears himself accused, and so
Himself on mercy of the Court does throw.
Then what I beg, great Judge, what I demand
Is not to live (because I understand,
As I, am sadly circumstantiat now,
Death will oblige me more, than Life can do.)
But only, since I have confessed my Crime,
I may be but reprived for some time:
That I may have some leisure to repent,
And not, at least, out of the World be sent,
With all my sins about me. --
Remember, Lord, how man is in his prime,
But a poor Gleaner of a scattered time:
A calculator of some triffling years:
An Almanac of sorrows, woes, and tears*
Are not his days, and months determined?
His bounds designed, which he cannot exceed?
Let then his bitter persecution cease, 6. Turn from him then that he may
cease, until his desired day, as an hireling.

That, for some time this Creature may have peace:
That he, at least, may be allowed to live,
Until the time appointed shall arrive
When he must die: -- the day, wherein he must
Quite this vain world, and return to Dust.
For, as a Hireling. labourer does attend
The hour, which to his Work may put an end,
That he may have his Wages, and some rest
From his hard labor: so, with cares oppress't,
Poor Man for his appointed time does wait
Wherein his foolish labors soon, or late
May have an end; that so the wearied slave
May quietly lyedown, and sleep in Grave.
That he may sleep in Grave, and be no more 7. For there is hope of a tree, if
it be ^ut down, that it will yet sprout, and the branches thereof will not
cease.

A slave to sorrow, as he was before
Though he should there, without all hopes remain,
Of ever seeing his dear World again,
His darling World, which he so much esteemed;
Of which scarce more than Embryo, he dreamed:
But, when in Grave, he thinks no more upon
His World, for all these notions then are gone.
Those thoughts do with the Carrion buried lie,
And for his Soul, ' it is all Eternity.
Thus then, alace! -- ah thus we plainly see
Man's in a worse condition than a Tree:
For of a Tree cut down there is still some hope
It yet may sprout, and spread its lofty top;
Although its scattered roots now old, and dry, 8. Though the root thereof wax
old in the earth, and the stock thereof be dead in the ground.

Sapless, and barren, under Ground may dye:
And what of Trunk remains may every day,
In Dust, and Powder moulder and decay.
Yet sucking moisture from some Rivolet, 9. Yet by the scent of water it will
bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant.

Whose frugal Streams does scarce its Channel wet,
It quickly will revive, and bud again,
And, in short time, spread out its Boughs amain,
As formerly, and so arrive, at length
Unto its wonted comeliness, and strength,
But ah poor man upon his Sickbed lies, 10. But man is sick, and dies, man
perishes, and where is he?

Sighs out his Breath, and like a Candle dies
Drowned in its Socket, without hopes, alace!
Of ever living in his former case,
Without all hopes, not sprouting like a Tree,
Only falls sick, and dies -- and where is he?
Ah where is he! -- he who did once appear; 11. As the waters pass from the sea
and the flood decays and dries up.

And thought of nothing less than death, while here:
Where is he now? -- where is this rambler gone?
What Is become of him? -- pray' what has he done?
What has Earths darling done, that he should dye,
And slip out of the World so shamefully?
Why Man is gone: he is now no more: -- he is dead,
He Is now in deep oblivion burried:
There Is no more of him. -- For as Floods, and Seas
Are dried up, when Waters from them pass
To other Channels: so man vanishes,
And is an empty nothing after death.
A nothing! -- nay -- hold here, I must correct 12. So man sleeps, and rises
not, for he shall not awake again, nor be raised from his sleep while the
heavens be no more.

My error, and in this my passion check.
For, though to outward view, and reasoning,
Man in his Grave appears to be a thing
Useless, trod under foot, esteemed by none
But hurryed in supine oblivion:
Yet this same Trunk, which under ground does lie
Wants not its hope of Immortality,
For, after many years it may revive,
Shake off its Circumambient Dust, and live
More firm, and solid than it did before,
In a continued peace, and die no more.
Yes, as the waters from the Ocean flow*
Through Subterraneous Passages, that so
They in Earths Bowels may be purified,
And free 'of former saltness, gently slide
Through clifts of rocks, and unknown passages
Into some thirsty Channel, and increase
Its dwindling Streams, then by degrees amain
Return to their own Oce^n again.
So from the Sea of Life man sof^lie flows
Into the Grave, where he does only loss
His former saltness, and aciditie,
And there in closs Repositure does lie,
While he be fitted for Eternity.
It Is true he sleeps, and shall not rise before
The appointed time that Heavens shall be no more:
But when that time shall come, that blessed time,
No new-blowen Rose, no Lilly in its prime
Shall smell so fragrant, and appear so fair,
So livelie, so in beauty singular,
So fresh, so gay, so bright, so purified,
As this same man, who we supposed had die'd,
Shrunk into dust, and in cold earth engross't,
This man, whom we had given over for lost;
When that blessed time arrives, shall re-appear
More pure, and act in a most glorious Sphere,
Than ere the Scenick Creature could do here.
Thrice happy those then, who in grave do rest, 13. O that thou would hide me
in the grave, and keep me secret until thy wrath were past, and would give
me a term, and remember me.

Whom no sad crosses of this life infest!
How much I envy their Felicity!
How fain would I enjoy their company.
Lord, then that thou would hide me in this grave!
Good Lord, that such a wretch as I might have
The benefit of that closs Sanctuary,
In which I might, but for a season, tarry,
Until thy wrath were past, thy anger gone,
And those had storms of Judgments overblown:
Then, of thy goodness, please to let me know
How long I must those Torments undergo:
How long my sufferings must endure, and then*
Remember me, in mercy, once again.
O let me find thy kindness, once before
I drop out of this World, and be no more.
But O I see my torments do encreasse, 14. If a man dye, shall he live again?
all the days of my appointed time will I wait till, while my change come.

And, whilst I live, shall enjoy no peace.
I therefore wish to dye, as th^se oppress't
With toil, and labor, wish to be at rest.
Now, if a man once in this Gulf of Death
Be drowned, pray shall he reassume his Breath?
Shall he revive? -- yes, -- yes -- he shall indeed,
And never more again be buried.
I Will therefore wait, I Will therefore patiently
Attend the arrival of Eternity.
At least I Will wait, until the hour shall come
That must restore me; which although to some
It be a question, it to me is none,
For, with assurance, I rely upon
My Makers goodness, and believe that God
Will to my sufferings set a period.
Then shall my God me once again embrace, 15. Thou shall call me, and I shall
answer thee, thou love the work of thine own hands?

And to me every hour extend his Grace.
Then shall I Make address to him, in prayer,
And shall no sooner speak, then he shall hear,
'Shall answer every thing I can demand,
And make me, with great pleasure* understand
The language of the Saints. --
But now, alace, Lord, thou do calculat. 16. But now thou numbrest my steps,
and do not delay my sins.

My very thoughts: thou do enumerat
My errors, one by one; and by, and by,
In order they appear before thy eye.
There Is no concealing of the smallest sin,
(Though in the breast yet) when thou do begin
To reckon with us; neither hope, nor fear,
Can shelter them from eyes so sharp, and clear,
But streightways all above board must appear
When thou do call. Then all must be revealed, 17. Mine iniquity is sealed
up, as in a bag, and thou addest to my wickedness.

And, on the square be summed, tied up, and sealed,
Like Money in a Bag, that thou may know,
What each man's judgements' to his sins do owe.
Nay, with so strict a survey not content,
Thy anger does my wickedness augment.
For even my moral sins are mustered
Before thee, strictly viewed, and numbered,
And I alace, am shrewdly punished
For sins, which in some others virtues are,
And, in the Worlds eyes, lawful do appear.
Then must I thus be punished, good Lord? 18. And surely as the mountain comes
to naught, and the rock that is removed from his place.

Thus -- without pity? -- will thou not afford
But some small respite to my wearied Soul,
That I may have some leisure to condole
My sad disasters: -- Lord have pity then
On me the most disconsolat of men.
Some respite I beseech, some interval,
Some breathing time, though it were never so small!
So many judgments, for one poor man's share!
Sure, Lord, such dealing is not ordinar.
Who can endure thy anger? at this rate,
'Twould tear the very Rocks out of their Seat,
'Twould make the proudest Mountains tumble down,
And crumble into thousand pieces soon.
Such wrath would make the wounded Ocean roar, 19. As the waters break the
stones. when thou overs^^^ est the the things ^^^ion grow in the dast of the
earth, (...) thou destroyest the hope of man.

And spread its Billows far beyond its Shore.
'Twould cause a Deluge in the Earth: -- such wrath
Would kill all Cratures, that on it do breath.
For, as the Waters hardest stones do break,
When through the grounds a rapid course they take,
So, by thy anger Man is broke to pieces,
Pounded to dust: and as thy wrath increases,
So all his hopes decay, and in a tryce.
Poor pensive Man whines out his life, and dies.
Unhappy Man! -- alace his hopes still fail, 20. Thou prev^^l^st against him,
so that he passes away, he changes his face, when thou castest him away.

And against him, Lord, thou always do prevail.
Thy hand does reach him, when he least does dream,
Of danger, then, with infamy, and shame,
He steals out of the World, he slips away,
Like the Night-vapours, at approach of day.
And, as a Thief, whom huy, and cry does chase,
Lest he be caught, disfigures all his face,
So, with sad grinnings, Man to Grave does pass,
He dies, -- he dies, -- he is buried annon, 21. And he knows not if his sons
shall be honorable, neither shall he understand concerning them, if they be of
low degree.

And with him all his Troops of hopes are gone.
His Sons survive him, but he knows not how
Those men demean themselves, nor what they do:
To what profession they they themselves betake,
What Figure in this Life those Fools do make:
What part they act: what state they represent,
IN the Theater of the World: whether content
With the sweet Blessings of a private Life,
Or, if involved in a continual strife,
In tedious Pleas, in Fraud, and Perjury,
To raise a thing men call a Family.
No, -- he knows not what men his Sons shall be,
Preferred to honors, or of low degree.
Though here, with great anxiety, and care, 22. But while his filesh is upon
him, he shall be sorrowful, and while his soul is in him, it shall mourn.

He eats his own Flesh, for his daily Fare.
In flames of grief his very Heart does burn,
And. whilst his Soul is in him, it does mourn,
When he but thinks, in what condition
His Family shall be, when he is gone.
Whilst, with a Femal curiosity,
He endeavors to learn, before he dye,
What shall be the state of his Posterity.
He Would fain ascertain his ill- purchased wealth
Upon his brats, what he has got, by Stealth,
By Fraud, by Rapine, Lying, and Debate,
Upon his Race he would fain perpetuat.
Entails, in strictest form he causes draw,
As if he would to Providence give Law:
As if he would regulat the Winds, and show
Out of what Point they constantly should blow:
Or fetter up the raging Ocean,
And make it always calm: -- so foolish man,
By strong Entails, in form of Covenant,
Stuffed up with threatening cl^^ses irritant,
With substitutions, and -- I know not what --
(All legal fetters,) fain would captivat
Some little spot of Earth, and there enstate
His Family, with that perfection,
That Providence on Earth allows to none.
Thus vainly toyls this Mole, but after all,
When Death for him does peremptorly call,
He leaves these thoughts, and so he leaves his Race,
To save, or spend, and live, even as they please.
Cap. XV.
HOw delicat! how admirably good! 1. Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and
said.

How learned! how pious! (if well understood,)
How grave! how solid! how elaborat
Was Jobs discourse! -- what Mortal in his state,
Oppressed with sorrow could himself express,
So firmly, and with so much steadiness,
Of Mind, as this afflicted man has done,
Yet after all. --
His friend, as formerly, must him reprove,
(Whether from envy this proceeds, or love,
May be a question) and accordingly
Eliphaz all this while who patiently
Had heard him speak, at length resolves once more,
To argue with him, as he did before.
And thus, in terms severe, and violent,
Takes up his Brother Zophars argument.
And should a wise man thus express his mind, 2. Shall a wise man speak words
of the wind? and fill his belly with the eastwind?

In words, says he, inconstant, as the wind?
Words of no value, foolish idle words,
Such, as a discomposed mind affords.
Words so extrinsick to the case in hand,
As, truth, I think thou do not understand
What thou do speak: words so extravagant,
So course, so dull, so insignificant,
Such whining words. so childish, and so mean,
So far below a man, so poor, and lean,
As one, that were not in his judgment weak,
I Am confident would be ashamed to speak.
Unequal words: words scarce articulat;
Words, Like a Turtles chattering, at this rate
Parrots, and Mag^yes might be taught to prat.
Then should a wise man use such words, as these? 3. Shall he dispute with
words, that are no: comely? or with talk, that is not profitable?

Or, with such Language, his sick fancy please?
Language, by which thou do thy cause abuse.
Language, which none, but Lunaticks would use:
Provoking words, discourse not tolerable,
And as thy case is, quite unprofitable:
Yet, in such gibbrish, thou must vent thy mind,
But, from my heart, I Would wish thou would be more kind
To thy poor self, and not excruciate,
With sad complaints, and cryings, at this rate,
Thy troubled Soul. I's't not enough that thou
Should chide thy Friends? -- but thus thy Maker too
T'upbraid forsooth, and that so bitterly,
As if our God could do an injury
To thee, my friend, or any of us all:
Then why should thou exclaim? why should thou baul?
When God in justice does inflict what he
Judges has ever been deserved by thee.
Indeed, my friend, I Am sorry to perceive 4. Sure thou have casten off fear,
and restrains prayer before God.

Thy sad condition, and I truly grieve,
To hear thee cry, and rave incessantly
In this thy fever of impiety.
Why now, alace, my friend, thou do appear
Designedlie to have shaken off all fear
Of God Almighty: thou who used to pray,
And pour thy Soul out, both by night, and day,
Before thy Maker: now, alace I fear
The have totally fogot the use of prayer:
And seem to be, by thy unruly passions,
In desuetude of pious meditations.
Else how should such Expressions, as these 5. For thy mouth declares thy
iniquity, seeing thou have chosen the tongue of the crafty.

Proceed out of thy mouth? such passages
Of simple folly, as no wise man's ear
Can so much idle talk with patience hear.
For truth' thou talkst, like one, who wantonly
Makes Table*jests of Grace, and Piety*
Who laughs at God, and all that he has made,
Blasphems his holy name, and makes a trade
To treat en ridicule, all Providence.
Arguing boldly all things come by chance.
Sure thou deserve extremely to be blamed, 6. Thine own mouth condemns
thee. and not I, and thy lips testify against thee.

That, in the eyes of God art not ashamed
To talk, like one of those, whose hearts are sealed,
To whom our God at no time has revealed
His Divine Grace: but lets them foolishly
Run out the Course of their Impiety.
And never stop, till some Disease do quell
Their hot Carrier, and then the thoughts of Hell
The apprehensions of tormenting Devils
With the sad prospect of all kind of Evils
May some Remorse from those poor Souls procure,
But these good thoughts no longer do endure,
Than their Disease. for, let its force abate,
And then return they to their former state.
Like one of those, thou talkst, alace, my friend,
When wilt' to those expressions put an end?
For thus thy mouth condemns thee, and not I,
Thy conscious lips against the testify.
Thou talks't, thou talks't, and like a foolish wretch,
Would fain discourse of things above thy reach,
And seem to question, in thy frantic sense,
The sovereign power of Divine Providence.
Thou talkst with God, as would with one of us,
-- Why thus oppressed? why am I punished thus*
Say thou, why are my steps thus calculat?
And all my errors so enumerat?
As if forsooth, he who commands on high,
Should find himself obliged to satisfy
Thy rude demands: as if forsooth that he
Should stoop so low, as answer such as thee,
In all thy School-boyes questions, and assign
A reason for his actings.
Do think that he, who did us all Create,
And with his own Breath did us animate,
From whence this reason ( of which were so proud)
Flows in a channel, can be understood
To act by other rules, than only those
Of undisturbed reason? do suppose
That he, who governs all by upright Laws,
Would punish such as the, without a cause?
Prithee, my friend, then let me understand
Why so presumptuous as to demand
A reason, why thou art thus punished?
Do think such language can be suffered?
A reason from the God of reason! sure
No pious ears such pratting can endure:
Dost' think he will give account to every fool,
On whom he uses justice, by what rule
He does proceed: no sure, he will not do it,
The Majesty of his Laws will not allow it.
But if thou will from men a reason know*
It Is only this, our God will have it so,
That he may keep aspiring spirits low.
This is the reason, prithee rest content 7. Art thou the first man that was
born, and wast thou made before the hills?

With this then, and no more thy self torment
With asking questions, why thus punished?
Why thus afflicted? why thus buffetted?
We Have heard too much of such unwarrantable,
And shrewd discourse, discourse unsufferable:
Forbear then pray, for all those sad complaints
Are to no purpose, but weak arguments
Of innocence, and rather do imply
A heart replenished with impiety,
Which now thou labour'st to conceal, in vain,
And so bewrayst thy Conscience by thy pain.
Whence all this arguing then? this violence
On reason, to maintain thy innocence!
What need of all this reasoning, what need
Of words, if thou be innocent indeed!
For innocence still for it self will plead.
Then, by thy favor, friend, I must demand
What, in a word would have us understand
By all those brisque expressions? do conceive,
Thy hollow talking will make us believe
That what thou, in thy passion do express
Must be received as learned sentences,
And so admired, in future ages look,
Like the dark Riddles in some ancient Book?
Art thou of men most aged, grave, and wise?
Had thou a Being, ere the Hills did rise?
Art thou of Council to the Almighty Lord, 8. have thou heard the secret
council of God? and do thou restrain wisdom to thee?

Who framed* and ordered all things by his word?
Do thou advise him? do thou influence
His Spirit in his Works of Providence?
Art thou the only wise man now alive?
Have thou attained what all in vain do strive
To purchase, -- wisdom in perfection? can
Thy Parts advance thee 'bove the reach of man?
Prithee, lets hear now what thou further know 9. What know thou, that we
know not? and understandest that is not in us?

Than we do? of what learning can thou boast,
Unknown to us? what Arts, or Sciences,
For all thy blustering words, do thou profess
To understand, of which we are ignorant?
Then what is this knowledge, of which thou do vaunt?
This extraordinar wisdom? prithee show
What are the things thou know, we do not know.
With us are men both ancient, and sage, 10. With us are both ancient, and very
aged men, far older then thy father.

Men, that do far exceed thy Fathers age.
Men learned, and knowing, men of lives upright,
Men truly sober, men, whose piercing sight
None can escape; men, who distinctly know
The causes, whence all things in course do flow,
For every triffle can assign a reason,
And show that all things have their proper season,
In which they shut up, flourish, and decay,
And, with submissive reverence, obey
The orders of the first, and mighty Cause,
To whose perpetual Edicts, Rules, and Laws,
All other causes do subjection own,
And can do nothing by themselves alone,
In short, there is nothing to those men unknown
Yet thou, forsooth, do undervalue such, 11. Seem the consolation of God small
unto thee? is this thing strange unto thee?

As all men do, who think they know too much.
Thy self-conceited pride will not permit
Thee to believe that any has more wit
Then thou have; hence thou do all men despise,
And we are but very dunces in thy eyes.
But be assured it is no small thing, my friend,
That God to thee should consolation send
By such as us, men, who exactly know
Thy weakness, and most readily can show
The cause of thy disease, and plainly tell
The proper remedy: men, who wish thee well,
Who pity thee, but on no terms will ly,
Who know all Arts but that of flattery:
And therefore what we speak, thou may believe
Is for thy good: for, though we truly grieve,
To see thee in such sad calamity,
Yet, of a truth, we cannot justify
Those rash expressions, which we hear thee use,
But as thy friends, we fain would dis-abuse
Thy wavering mind; and make thee fully know
What, in affliction Man to God does owe.
It Is not that one should thus complain, or that 12. Why' does thine heart take
thee away? and what do thine eyes mean?

He with his Maker should expostulat,
As thou have done, or by his looks express,
What inward sorrow does his mind oppress,
Or, with such self-conceited impudence,
Upbraid the Almighty with his innocence.
Or, in his language thus prevaricat, 13. That thou answerest thy God at thy
pleasure, and bring such words out of thy mouth.

And with the All-knowing-God at random prat,
As if with his familiars he did speak,
And* in his passion, show himself so weak,
As to repine* and bitterly exclaim
Against Gods Justice, and so rashly blame,
That ne*re too much to be admired God,
Who, though in anger he does use the Rod;
Yet, in that anger, mercy does abound,
As in afflictions it is always found
By those, to whom our God allows the grace
Of its right use, for still in such a case,
As from most bitter Herbs, and acid Plants,
Menuse t'extract wholesome Medicaments;
So from afflictions Limbeck gently flows
True Piety. -- --
O then, my friend, for thy own sake forbear
Those rankling words: pray let me no more hear
Such dangerous Thunderclaps of fiery passion,
By which thou tempst thy Maker, in that fashion,
As it is a wonder he has all this time
Heard thee with patience: for a smaller Crime,
Many have by his justice been destroyed,
But thou, my friend, have all this while enjoyed
Thy Breath, at least: and if thou understood,
How much our converse serves to do thee good:
Thou art so far from those extremities
Of misery, which from afflictions rise,
That I should rather think, in sober sense,
Thou might with all those triffling ills dispense,
Assisted by such comforters; -- indeed
Thou merits't further to be punished,
If in these mad expressions thou proceed.
Thou just! thou clean from sin! thou innocent* 14. What is man that he should
be clean, and he that is born of woman, that he should be just?

What sober person thus himself would vent?
Can any man be clean? can man be just?
Can any thing, that has its rise from dust,
Be without blemish? can a silly creature,
That sucks Corruption from the Mothers Nature,
A creature black, with sin Original,
Before it well its self a man can call:
One, whose defect does with its life begin,
And in the Womb becomes acquaint with sin;
Can he be clean? can such a one, as he,
For all the World be esteemed free
From all, that is evil?
Man of a Woman born, can he be clean?
Pray what by such expressions do thou mean?
Can any thing, that is good from one proceed,
Who so much mischief to the World does breed?
Who plagues us all with sin; that cursed root,
Which, in its season, yields no other fruit,
But sin alone, which we do soon disperss
Through all the corners of the Universe
A fruit, in which men drive a constant trade,
And toil as much, as for their daily bread,
To purchase this dear fruit; at any rate,
In this all mortals do negotiate.
But, after all this Traffic, when at last
Man, on his Deathbed does begin to cast
Th'accounts of this same dismal trade, alace
How does he look! when all the passages
Of his past life before him does appear,
And he, poor soul, already dead with fear,
Sees, by account what profit he has made
Through all the course of this unlucky trade:
-- Sin upon Sin, Loss upon Loss! he cries
Shuts up his Books, curses this trade, and dies.
Yet is this all, that Woman does produce,
Beseech thee, then, my friend, do not abuse
Thy self with fancies, as if any thing
That Is good, from such a tainted root, can spring.
No, no -- wee're all unclean: wee're sinful all, 25. Behold he found no sted
fastness in his saints, yea the heavens are not clean in his sight.

No man on earth himself can upright call.
What! -- while the very Saints, while traveling here,
Bedaub'd with sin did in his sight appear,
Nay even the Heavens themselves are in his eye
Grossly unclean, full of Deformity.
Will man pretend that he is clean? will he, 16. How much more (...) man
abominable, and filthy who drinks iniquity, like water?

Who Is sin, in the superlative degree:
Who in provocking God takes such delight,
As in his food, and sins, with appetite:
Who greedily sucks in iniquity,
Shall he pretend in the least to purity?
No sure: -- thou err'st, my friend, but, if thou wilt hear 17. I will tell thee,
hear me, and I will declare what I have seen.

What Is for thy good. I freely will declare
What I have seen, and in my time have learned,
What with great pains, and labor I have earned.
I Will tell thee things, which prudent men of old 18. Which wise men have told*
as they heard of their fathers, and have not kept secret.

Have by their Reverend Ancestors been told*
What these did not think fit to be concealed,
But for their childrens benefit revealed,
Who by learned Sayings, and wise Apothegms
In History have Eternized their Names.
Who by their Prudence did so moderate 19. To whom alone the land was given,
and no stranger passed through them.

And manage that, which God had allocate
To them for their inheritance so well,
With such Discretion, and did so excel
In The art of Government, mentaining peace
With all their Neighbors, living in such case
Amongst themselves, as none durst undertake
T* invade them, or atempt in the least to break
Their firm confederacy, which of old
They had so founded, as nor Steel* nor Gold
Could cut that Knot: nor could the smiling tricks
Of Statesmen countermine their Politics.
In short they did possess, and govern all,
As if their Land had been Allodial,
As if it had belonged to them alone,
And, (save of the King of Heavens,) they held of none.
Those men have told us that the wicked are 20. The wicked man is as one that
traveleth continually with child, and the number of years is hid from the
tyrant.

Most miserable, in continual fear.
In pains, like those of Childbirth, still they lie
Exclaiming, in the extreme agony
Of a sad troubled conscience, which alace
Allows them ease, scarce a small moments space*
The cruel man is never void of fear,
But fancies Death attends him every where.
For, when he calls to mind by what Oppressions
He has enlarged his Titles, and Posessions:
How many he has ruined, and undone,
And eat up all their means, since he begun
To set up for himself; how cunningly
'Has turned out many a goodly family,
And sent them all a begging: he from thence
Infallibly concludes. --
All hate him, curse him, do his name abhor,
And, as they ask their alms from door to door
They tell by whose oppression they are poor.
Then when he thus reflects, and calls to mind
How hateful he*s become to all mankind:
The unjust Tyrant does not think it strange
That all the world should meditate revenge
Against their common Enemy: a man
Proscribed, and out-lawed by the public Ban
Of all just pious men, who in their prayers,
With fervent zeal, and floods of bitter tears,
Accuse them to their God, and constantly
For Justice, -- Justice -- in Heavens Court do cry,
Against him, -- then he stares, and looks about,
And even his own Domestics he does doubt
Upon his life have some design, and those
Who break his bread, are now become his foes.
With horror thunderstruck, with care oppress't 21. A found of fear is in his
ears, and in his prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him.

This miserable soul can have no rest.
Before his eyes strange visions appear,
His mind is sore belabored, his ear
Is still infested with a noise of fear.
A dreadful noise, like that of Passing Bell,
Which does his nigh-approaching death foretell;
In which he is not deceived, for by, and by,
(Even in the solstice of prosperity)
Down from the Mountains falls some injured Lord,
Who, and his hungry crew, with fire and sword,
This mighty man's Dominions invade,
And wasting all before them make a Trade
Of pillaging, appearing every where,
Like lightning, sometimes here, and sometimes there,
So through his territories nimbly fly,
Seizing his Towns, and Castles speedily:
Advancing still, in a vindictive rage,
Until in Battle with him they engage,
Defeat his Forces, put them all to flight,
Then to his glory he bids long-good-night.
Thus ends the whip, and terror of his age, 22. He believes not to return out
of darkness, for he sees the sword before him.

For to him so his mind did still presage,
In The noontide of his bless: he durst not hope,
Or fancy any other horoscope
Then a most wretch'd and miserable end,
Which makes him in perpetual horror spend
The best of all his time, enjoyes no ease,
But is disturbed in mind, for still he sees
The raging Sword before him, and he fears
His Enemies are still about his ears.
At length, when misery does come indeed, 23. He wandreth to, and fro for
bread, where he may, he knows that the day of darkness is prepared at hand.

Like one, that wanders to, and fro for bread,
So does this great man ramble every where,
And makes what shifts he can for daily fare.
Careless of Honor, outward Pomp, and State,
And costly Diet, now content of what
Nature affords: a simple Peasants Food
To him is pleasant, and he finds it good.
He eats, he sleeps, no more he does demand,
Because he knows his death is nigh at hand.
Anxiety, affliction, grief, and care, 24. Affliction, and anguish shall make
him afraid, they shall prevail against him, as a king ready to the battle.

Which stir up good men's hopes* make them despair,
Despair downright, in fiery rage exclaim
'Gainst-what the precious fool does Fortune name,
And, in his humors, openly blaspheme.
Transported, drunk with fury, he cries out,
In fits, and like a mad man runs about
The Towns, and Countrey-fields, vents all his passions
In angry wrath, and horrid execrations.
Against him at length despair does so prevail,
He becomes faint, and all his spirits fail:
Cursed be the Stars, that ruled my Birth, he cries,
With a strong sigh, thrusts out his Soul, and dies.
O thus let all Oppressors end! thus all 25. For he has stretched out his hand
against God, and made himself strong against the Almighty.

The enemies of God Almighty fall!
Let thus such men, who in prosperity
Lift up their faces, and their God defy:
Who laugh, with pleasure. at Omnipotence,
And make a formal jest of Providence:
Who, in their actings, do their God deride,
And spit against the Heavens in their pride:
Let them all perish thus; O let them dye,
Without compassion, in great misery.
For* though vain man may to the World pretend, 26. Therefore God shall run
upon him, even upon his neck, against the most thick part of his shield.

He Is proof of judgments, can himself defend
Against the assaults of Heaven, and proudly boasts,
In Power he is equal with the Lord of Hosts,
Our God does smile, and for some time permits
This fool to Revel in his frantic Fits:
But, when he is blown up to the hight of pride.
And undervalues all the World beside,
Then will he fall upon him, overthrow
All his defenses, bring this Champion* low,
And make the insulting Rebel understand
The difference 'twixt an Almighty-hand,
And that of Flesh: his choicest Coat of Mail
Shall not resist his thrusts, God shall prevail
Against all his strength, that men may learn to know,
What great submission to their God they owe.
And not imagine, in prosperity, 27. Because he has covered his face with his
fatness, and has collops in his flank.

Because in wealth, and honor they are high,
They can the strength of our great God defy.
For, whilst in plenty we our years do waste,
Void of all sorrow, with no care oppress't,
But in our Myrtle Groves deliciously
We feed, and sleep in deep security*
Whilst hopeful Children do about us stand,
Like Guards of the Body, and on every hand
Our Friends, Dependants Servants, in a row,
By their attendance do their kindness show,
As well as their submission, and we fear
No enemy, but all things do appear,
As tributary to our happiness,
And we all Earthly blessings do possess,
Then, then alace, we do become such fools,
As to forget that God Almighty rules
This lower World, and think our selves so sure
In our Possessions; as we can endure
Heavens wrath, and not be moved. -- --
But let us once but tumble in distress, 28. Though he dwell in desolate
cities, and in houses which no man inhabit, but are become heaps.

Then we are at length obliged to confess
That God is all in all, that he alone,
Rules all from Spade, and Shovel to the Throne.
And though those impious fools, who here despise
The Power of God, and think themselves so wise,
As they can purchase Lands in soveraignity,
And independent of Gods Majesty,
The Princes here on Earth: may vainly dream
They Are fully blessed, yet in his esteem
They are accursed; condemned, and destinate
For Wrath, and Torment, dire Revenge, and Hate.
Let them, to purchase to themselves a name
Erect stupendous Monuments of fame.
Repair wast houses, Cities desolate
Rebuild, and their design to found a seat
For them, and there accursed Posterity
'Spite of that Mighty God, that lives on high:
Nay let them languish in the Golden-itch, 29. He shall not be rich, neither
shall his substance continue, neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof
in the earth.

And by all means endeavor to be rich;
Yet shall their toil, and labor be in vain
Nor shall they have more profit for their pain
Than daily bread: nay that ere all be done
Shall be deficient too, and they anon
As in a Glass their folly shall behold,
And see on what they have bestowed their Gold.
Those high fllow'n Projects, which their aerie minds
Did entertain; those fancies of all kinds
Which did their heads possess shall now be broke,
And all their notions vanish into smoke.
Their buildings none shall ever see complete,
For all their substance shall evaporat
Before the Roofs ar set on; and these fair
And sumptuous Fabric, to the open air
Shall be exposed; they never shall grow old
For their Materials shall be bought and sold
To pay the Workmens Wages: and if ought
(The naked walls perhaps) remain unbought,
Why these shall be a simple Volary
Where ill-presaging Owls by nights do cry
Rooks, and Jack-dawes by day do make a noise,
And he who raised the Building, scarce enjoys
A covered corner in that spacious Nest,
Where he with his poor Family may rest.
Where he with his poor Family may dwell, 30. He shall never depart out of
darkness, the flames shall dry up his branches, and he shall go away with the
breath of his mouth.

And with sad groans, and numerous sighings tell
The story of his former life, and show
The vanity of all things here below.
Where he may teach his Children to take care,
By his example never to out-dare
The Almighty God: or think that any thing
Can here be blessed to us when Heavens King
Has vowed the contrair: or imagine that
We can be happy here at any rate,
Unless God favor us: then, with a groan,
Shut up his story, and retire alone
To some dark hole, where he intends to lie,
And pass his days in sad obscurity,
Until the time arrive that he should die.
But ere he die, he shall spread flowers, and leaves,
Tempered with tears on all his childrens graves.
His branches thus lop't off, the Saples Trunk
Withered, and dry, in grief, and sorrow sunk,
At length shall burst, and in a flood of Tears
Over wheml'd, shall end the Legend of his years.
Thus shall he die, whom, while his sun did shine, 31. He believes not that he
erreth in vanity, therefore vanity shall be his change.

And every thing appeared to combine
To raise his happiness, and make him glad,
No power of Eloquence could ere persuade
That all his glory, all his gallantry
Was but mere air, and glittering vanity.
Therefore, since he such speeches would not hear,
Nor to grave admonitions give ear
By which good men endeavored to teach
What thoughts were proper for him, and did preach
Faith, and Repentance to him every day,
But not reguarding what they all did say,
Would still continue in his high conceit,
Laugh at those serious Counselors, and treat
Their grave advices, as ridiculous,
And mere cunn'd Lessons, serving for no use,
But to keep fools and children, every where,
By such Predictions, in continual fear.
Therefore his end shall be all Vanity;
And he the example of inconstancy
In Human Glory, laughed to scorn by all,
Poor, wretched, and unpitied shall fall.
Poor, and bereaved of issue he shall die, 32 His branch shall not be green,
but shall be cut off before his day.

And of him there shall be no Memory,
Only his name like Beacon shall appear
In History, to warn all men to stear
Another course than he, who wilfully
Did Shipwreck on this Rock of Vanity.
For as sower Grapes unpleasant to the taste, 33 God shall destroy him, as the
vine her sauce-grape, and shall cast him off, as the olive does her flower.

Not worth the eating, but Hogs-food, at best,
Men use to spitt out: as the Olive tree
Does cast her Flower; so he, who ere he be,
Who thus does live, who thus consumes his time
Shall by our God be cast off in his Prime.
For all the Race of those poor Souls, who hate 34 For the congregation of the
hypocrite shall be desolate, and fire shall devour the houses of bribes.

Their Great Creator shall be desolate.
Such as by Poling, Cheats, and Bribery
Have from the Dunghill raised a family,
And become Men of Substance, by oppressions
Shall all at length from their unjust Possessions
Be by the God of justice totally
Ejected, and their masqued Villainy
Shall to the World be published that from thence
All men may learn to place their confidence
In God alone; and not believe that all
The Wit of Mankind can prevent their Fall
When God intends it, who did all creat
Of nothing, and can all annihilat.
For such men pregnant with all kind of ill, 35 For they conceive mischief, and
bring forth vanity, and their belly has prepared deceit.

Let them Hood-wink their conscience, as they will,
After great labor and perplexity,
Are all delivered of mere vanity.
Of all their stale devices here is the end,
what ere they plot does to their ruin tend.
PART. III.
Cap. XVI.
THE afflicted man, whom all this while we must 1. And Job answered, and said.

Suppose on Dunghill, parched with blowing dust,
His Body all with grievous sores over spread,
With Blood, and Ulcerous runnings pargetted.
(Such as would make a man in health forbear
To sit by such a Carrion, through fear
He might b'infected) putrified, unclean,
Shrunk into bones, all withered, and lean.
with Boiles, and Scabs, so loathsome, and so foul,
So noisesome to inhabit, as his soul
Can scarce have Lodging, yet the loving thing,
For all his Sores, for all his suffering,
Will not forsake him, and for all that is past,
Resolves by shifts to hold it out to th'last.
For as when Floods in Winter suddenly,
Break into lower Rooms, men use to fly
Up to their Garrets, to preserve their Lives:
So to his head his soul does fly, and strives,
Whilst all below with sores are overflown,
And there is no room undrown'd, but that alone,
There to reside, though in a doubtful case,
Until the Waters violence decrease.
Amidst these storms there it resolves to dwell,
And fortify that goodly Citadel,
Which if by strength of Art it can hold out,
Against those numerous foes, it does not doubt,
But though it gives the Body now as lost,
As but a breathing Skeleton at most;
Yet after all these woes, by art and pain,
It may be soon recovered again.
Job then, all soul, with reason yet supplied,
Does think himself still so well fortified;
As he will not yield: such courage this affords,
As all these furious batteries of words,
Used by his friends against his innocence,
Cannot prevail, but still to his defense
He means to stand: and though he is now so weak,
So fully spent, as he can hardly speak,
Yet answers, though he rather seems to squeak.
Job then I say, we must imagine now,
To this so learned discourse has much ado
To make an answer: for we must suppose
This Eliphaz to be as one of those,
Who to a Castle by long Siege become
At length esteemed untenable by some;
With Forts on every side environed,
And to mere rubbish almost battered;
Is peremptorly with last summons sent,
And Job, as speaking from the battlement.
Alace, my friends, said he, what comfort brings, 2. I have often times heard
such things miserable comforters are you all.

This long discourse, I Have often heard such things
As you have spoke: and I perceive you trace
All the same steps, and from one common place
Draw all your arguments: and still repeat,
(As if in speech you were confederat)
Each one another words, so palpably,
As though almost here without sense Ilye;
Yet seriously I am ashamed to hear
Men of your parts: men who to all appear
Of a deep reach, with so much toil and pain
Speak the same lesson over, and over again.
If this be that, which comforting you call,
Most miserable comforters you're all.
Still to repeat this harangue over and over, 3. Shall there be no end of words
of wind, or what makes thee bold so to answer?

And tell me naught, but what I knew before,
Is very hard, pray what do you take me for?
Do You think for all the torments, sores, and pains
Which I endure, but that there still remains,
Some small reserve of reason not yet spent,
By which I may withstand your argument.
Yet for some time, I am not yet overcome
So much with sorrow, as I should be dumb,
Hearing of such discourse: my conscience
Does still assure me of my innocence;
And therefore I must let you know that I
Do still all your insulting words defy.
My God, in whose Name, you so much accuse
Your miserable friend, knows you abuse
His Majesty, whilst you would seem to be
Of council to him, as if all you three
Were blameless, without sin, beyond the reach
Of Laws, and only I a sinful wretch.
Shall there be no end of such aerie prating?
And what makes thee, friend, in expostulating
So violent, so bitter, so severe,
In words so piquant, as you would hardly bear
From one another, yet must I sustain
All these reproachful words, and not complain.
This it is to be aflicted: this to lie
Under the mercy of sad penury.
This to be poor, this to be miserable,
When words by me before intolerable,
Words, which incensing Choler in my breast,
In the same heat I had returned at least,
I Am now compelled with patience to digest.
Do You think but I could speak as well as you, 4. I could also speak as you do,
but would God your soul were in my souls stead, I could keep you company in
speaking, and could shake my head at you.

And use the same unkind expressions too,
Nay more severe, and pique you to the bones,
Were we in equal terms, but for the nonce,
All you can say with patience I must bear,
For now it seems I am condemned to hear
All you can speak. But would that any of you
Felt but the twentieth part of what I do,
Would that but for a week, a day, an hour,
You had some feeling of what I endure,
That for my satisfaction I might see
In such a case what might your carriage be,
Should I but rate you thus as you do me.
In such a case I would indeed assert,
Though you set up for Saints, yet in your heart
You were all sinners, men who take delight
To counterfeit the puling hypocrite.
Men, who deserved what ever you endured,
And therefore plead that you might be assured
God had rejected you: as all of you
Affirm he has done me; and argue too
Against your impatience in your agony,
And by harsh words augment your misery.
I could insult, I could your woes deride;
And jestingly pass by, and shake my head
When I might see you thus on Dunghill sit,
As I do now, and puzle all your wit,
(Though in the eyes of the world pretended saints)
To make an answer to my arguments.
All this I could perform, were I inclined 5. But I would strengthen you with
my mouth, and the comfort of my lips should assuage your sorrow.

On such occasions to be so unkind
To you, as you are all of you to me,
And try your patience to that same degree
As you do mine; I could indeed express
My thoughts of, you with as much bitterness
As you do now of me.
But God forbid, were your estate so sad,
I should affliction to affliction add.
Or convocat my wits, and rack my brain,
For shrewd inventions, to augment your pain,
And smartly tax you when you did complain.
No, no, but on the contrair, from my soul,
I would your sad affliction condole.
I Would cherish you with soft, and cordial words,
Such as true friendship, at such times, affords:
I Would tell you that afflictions are sent
From Heaven upon us with no ill intent;
But all our woes, if rightly understood,
Do rain upon us only for our good.
I Would tell you too, that Wheat the best of Grain,
Does in Earths surface almost dead remain,
All the long Winter buried in Snow,
Yet maugre all those Storms it still does grow.
And in the Summer, when the Sun draws nigh,
Makes an appearance with more bravery,
More Weight, and Substance than all other Grains,
Which in Green Liveries do adorn the Plains;
Though none of those in shivering cold were sown,
As was the Wheat; or had such pinching known,
As this same precious feeding Grain had done.
I Would tell you how the finest Gold is found,
Not in the Valleys, and the fruitful Ground,
But amongst barren Rock, and Desert places,
Where nothing fit for Humane Food increases.
I Would tell you also where the Coral grows,
Which every Mortal does esteem, who knows
Its use and value: not in open Plains
Amongst the pleasant Shrubs, and useful Grains,
Not in enclosed Grounds, on every side
With Palisades of Quickset fortified;
Not in fair Gardens, closly Walled a-round,
Parks, Orchards, Forests, Woods, or some such ground,
Where other Plants do flourish and increase,
No this does grow in the bottom of the Seas.
This fair ingrain'd Vermilion Plant does grow,
Where huge Sea Monsters ramble to and fro,
Devouring every thing which they can eat:
And were this Corral for these fishes meat,
Man never would possess it. There it grows
Where horrid darkness all things overflowes.
In a most barren ground, an useless land,
Made up of pickled rocks, and furrowed sand.
Yet there it grows, and there its virtue saves,
Amidst the boistrous seas, and sullen waves.
And though indeed, whilst in that dismal place,
Its form, and beauty are in no good case,
Buried in Sea-weeds, tender, pale, and soft,
Yet when by diverse art it is brought aloft,
Anon it becomes hard, of Scarlet-hue
Both profitable, and pleasant to the view.
So in affliction virtue does increase
Though buried in the bottom of the Seas
Of Woes, and Sorrows: for it still retains
Its true intrinsic value, and remains
Amidst these rude insulting Waves entire,
As a true Diamond does amidst the Fire.
Thus, thus, my friends, were you as I am now,
With such smooth Language I would comfort you,
And with such sug'red words, and pleasant trops,
Allay your sorrows, and refresh your hopes.
With healing words I would compesce the rage
Of your afflictions, and your grief assuage.
But O you will say, since I can thus express 6 But though I speak, my sorrow
cannot be assuaged; though I cease, what release have I?

My self, so smoothly in another case,
Since I to others can such comfort speak,
Why to my self do I not comfort take?
Why here it is now, thus it is to be vex't
With sore affliction, thus to be perplex't
In mind, and body: here is the difference
Betwixt a bare Opinion, and Sense.
These are your thoughts now, and you do suppose
Your wretched Friend to be as one of those
Who can give others good advice, and show
Where they may find true comfort in their woe.
Can others teach, when with sad losses crossed
And amongst the billows of affliction tossed:
How they should inconvenience avoid,
And not be with their miseries annoyed:
What Sail they should in such a Tempest bear
Whot solid Course, in prudence, they should steer
To save their lives, and souls: but change the case,
And let such men themselves be in distress.
Let but afflictions waves upon them break,
And to themselves they can no council take,
But tie up the helm, and let all go to wrack*
This you imagine, 'cause you have no sense
Of those sad pains, which I do feel, and thence
Conclude that when you hear me thus complain
I am the most unduiiful of men,
Who knowing better things do wilfully
Against my knowledge sin, and foolishly
Behave my self in misery like those
Who nothing understand. Thus you suppose
Thus you conclude, and so by consequence
Return me guilty of impatience.
But pray, my friends, observe, I said indeed,
Thus I could do, thus, were you in my stead,
And I, as ye are, from afflictions freed.
But, O there is great, and vast disparity
Betwixt the thought, and sense of misery!
As much as is betwixt a real thing,
And that in fancy, or a suffering
True blows of Death, and those upon a Stage:
Or twixt a real tempest, where the rage
Of cruel waves some hundreds does devour,
Where dying men with hideous cries out-roar
The boistrous noise, which wind, and seas afford,
And such a thing in Picture: in a word
Unless you felt those sorrows reallie
Which I do feel, and your prosperity
Were to affliction turned: unless your sense
Were with such things acquaint, no inference
From suppositions; no Imagination
Of what they are, by Picture, or Relation,
No Map of such, though never so plain, and fair
Can make you understand, what sorrows are.
All those Ideas, wichh your brain does frame,
When you with pleasure of affliction dream:
Are but weak notions, mean conceptions,
And best of them but faint Comparisons,
By which you cannot know what I endure,
Or learn what true affliction is, no sure,
Unless, as you see mine, your case be this,
You cannot fancy what affliction is.
But I do know, alace I know too well
What only you conceive, but I do feel.
I am the man have seen, and can declare
By sad experience what afflictons are.
I am the man that have affliction seen
In its true colors, and have sadly been
Oppressed with grief* I am the man that knows
Beyond all others, true, and real woes.
Those wasting sighs, in which insensibly,
The Soul out of its Earthly Cage does fly:
Those heavy groans, which Life can hardly bear,
To me, are become so familiar,
As when a few another man would kill,
I can emit a thousand, when I will,
And yet not dye. Those hateful passages
Of humane Life, which make our woes encreasse,
Fraud, and oppression, hard for any man
To Endure, are become my quotidian.
Tears from my eyes incessantly do flow,
As when in Summer heaps of melted Snow
Falls from the Mountains, with such violence,
As I have almost lost my optic sense,
Yet still I live: my Body is over grown,
With putred sores, my Spirit overflown,
With seas of grief, yet am I not undone.
What shall I do then, shall I live, or dye,
Sleep, or awake, on this, or that side lie?
Even what I will, it is all one in the case,
For no invention can procure me ease.
Speaking, and silence is to me one thing,
For neither of them can me comfort bring.
Comfort, alace, a thing so strange to me, 7. For now he makes me weary, O God
thou have made all my congregation desolate.

I cannot fancy what it is; nor see
From whence it should proceed: I scarce can dream
Of such a thing, I hardly know its name.
Now pray where is this comfort to be had?
Is it in commerce? do men make a trade
In venting of it? is it to be sold?
Can it be had for Money, or for Gold?
If so, then you, my friends, may comfort buy,
You may acquire it by your Means, not I,
Who stripped of all, here a poor Beggar ly.
Poor, and diseased, over burdened with wrath,
Depressed with sorrow, wearied to the death,
With heavy loads of grief. -- I faint, -- I faint;
My spirits now I hope are fully spent.
O let me die, since God has dissipat
The hopes of both my Family, and Estate.
Since thou have scattered both my Means, and Race,
And brought me in contempt, and sad disgrace,
With all my friends; who will not own me more,
Nor converse with me as they did before,
Because the hand of God has made me poor.
Since thou have made me odious to all,
And none do pity, or lament my fall:
But even, my friends, men, who I thought had known
My temper, and at such time would have shown
Their kindness to me in my sad distress,
By their proud words afford me nothing less.
Nay those whom blood to me had rendered dear,
Insult upon my woes, and now appear
More fierce, more cruel, more in Rancour di'd,
Than all my prating Enemies beside.
Then let me die! at length, Lord, let me die,
That I may here shut up the History,
Of a most miserable Life, and close
In my last Groan, the Fable of my woes.
For why, Lord, should I any longer see 6. And have made me full of wrinkles,
which is a witness theirof, and my leanness rises up in me, testifying the
same in my face.

The light of Heaven, who am condemned by thee!
No, with my Mantle wrapped about my head,
Let me be to the place of dying led;
Where I may quickly find what I desire,
And in the twinkling of an eye expire.
Expire? O happy word! to ease my pain,
Let me but once repeat that word again:
Expire! -- alace I fear that favor yet
Will not be granted. I must longer wait
For that last blow: and in this panting breath
Still live, yet feel the horrid pains of Death.
A thing that should not live, yet cannot die;
Lord what a goodly spectacle am I!
Poor, Lean, Diseased, Sun-dry'd, and Withered,
My Face with Wrinkles deeply furrowed,
All these do show it is not fit that I
Should live, and yet I Am not allowed to die.
Was ever man in such a dismal case? 7. His wrath has torn me, and he hates
me, and gnasheth upon me with his teeth, mine enemy has sharpened his eyes
against me.

Was ever mortal tortured thus? alace
I Am torn to pieces, by the Divine Wrath,
And yet denied the Liberty of Death.
I Am become odious in Gods sight, he hates
The very thoughts of me, he meanly rates
All my Pretensions: nay he frowns upon me,
Denies his presence, will hear no more on me.
As a notorious Traitor I am used,
The privilege of council is refused,
To me, and which is worse, obliged down right*
To answer my Indictment, without sight.
And 'cause the Almighty does me thus despise,
My Enemies in wrath against me rise,
They rise against me with great Violence,
And with sharp words assault my innocence.
With grinding teeth, and eyes all in a flame,
They stare about them, when they hear my name,
With such disdain they do upon me smile,
As if forsooth it were not worth their while
To notice such as I appear to be,
Or eye such a poor wretched soul as me.
With mouths wide open they upon me gape 10. They have gaped upon me with their
mouth, they have smirten me upon the cheek, reproachfully they have gathered
themselves together against me.

As if they would me devour, and seem to ape
The Hectors of the Ocean, when they chase
With open mouths before them through the seas
Shoals of small Fishes; and most bitterly
With Tongues, like Scorpions, they continually
Do whip my Soul: they whisper to each other
They go aside, and there consult together
How they may vex me further: they devise
With all their force, and art that in them lies
How to undo me, and bring evidence,
TO invalidat my Plea of Innocence.
Now it appears alace that God indeed 11. God has delivered me to the ungodly,
and turned me over into the hands of the wicked.

Has me rejected, and delivered
Me as a slave into the hands of those
Who are both his, and my declared foes.
I was in Wealth, and Honor, and Esteem, 12. I was at ease, but he has broken
me asunder, he has also taken me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set
me up for his mark.

In great respect, of all who heard my name:
I knew what plenty was, I lived at ease;
And no cross-dealings did disturb my peace,
Now I am poor, now I am desolate,
And forfeit both of Honor, and Estate.
Now I am pinched, and in great Penury,
Now I am poor, and on the Dunghill lie,
Like an old useless Jade exposed to die.
The Wrath of God has shattered me to pieces,
And yet that wrath against me still encreaies.
As Grim-fac'd Archers, Executioners 13. His archers compass me round about, he
cleaves my reir asunder, and does no spare, he pours my gall upon the ground

Of earthly justice do themselves disperse
In quest of Malefactors; beat the Woods,
Willowes, and Reeds, that grow among the Floods,
Survey the Mountains, and the Champaign Ground,
And give not over, while their prey be found,
So have Gods Archers compassed me around.
I Am now their Captive, by those I am led
Whether they list, pinioned, and fettered.
They spare me not, their fury knows no bounds,
They Have made me all a Mass of Blood, and Wounds.
With heavy strokes, and blows ingeminat, 14. He has broken me with one
breaking upon another, and runs upon me, like a giant.

I Am broke to pieces: I Am excoriat,
By Furrowing Stripes: such cruel usage sure
Never yet breathing Mortal did endure.
As a fierce Giant, with his monstrous Spear,
Banded, and pointed, beyond ordinar,
With violence, upon his foe does run,
So by the strength of God I am undone.
For this cause I upon my Skin have sowed 15. I have sowed a sackeloath upon my
skin, and have abased my horn to the dust.

A doleful Sackcloth, and my head have bowed
Low to the ground; for this cause I lament,
For this cause I my clothes have torn, and rent,
My head have shaved, and in this sad Estate,
Each minut I my Threnody repeat.
My face with weeping is all withered, 16. My face is withered with weeping,
and the shadow of death is upon my eyes.

Death over my eyes its coverlet has spread.
The pretty guardians, which did formerly
Protect my wearied eyes from injury,
Now weak, and sore, with watching overspent.
And by uninterrupted weeping faint,
Have quite their stations, and take no more care
Of their poor charge, but now quite useless are.
O let me once again then but demand 17. Though there be no wickedness in my
hands and my prayer be pure.

Of my great God, that I may understand
From him what is the cause of all my woe;
Just King of Heavens! -- why am I punished so.
I am not conscious of such horrid guilt,
As may deserve this: do then, what thou will;
Cut me to pieces, let my flesh be thrown
To Dogs for food; my bones dispersed, and sow'n
Upon the highwayes, that each Passenger,
Who travels on the Road, may, without care*
Trample upon them; yet I still must cry
O my good God, with thy good liberty,
I bear a heart, that does entirely love
Its great Creator: and each hour does prove
By fervent prayer, with what alacrity
It does perform all works of piety;
And is not guilty of hypocrisy.
O Earth! to Mortals common Source, and Grave!
Who kindly do all breathless dust receive, 18. O earth cover not thou my
blood, and let my crying find no place.

If I be such, as men would have me be,
Let my foul blood no shelter find from thee,
But let my Corpse exposed upon the place,
Be to Spectators shown with open face,
That, if I die fo great a Criminal,
As men would have me, I may by all
Voted unworthy of a burial.
Why be it so then, let me be condemned 19. For lo now my witness is in heaven,
and my record is on high.

By man on Earth, let me be thus esteemed
A lying Rogue, a Hypocrite, a Cheat,
Of Principles false, and adulterat;
Yet the great Judge of the World does know my cause,
And well I hope by trial of his Laws,
To be acquit, my witness is on high,
My Records in the Heavens securely ly:
By those, one day, I hope to make appear,
How from those Crimes I Am innocent, and clear.
Then to my unkind friends, who on pretense 20. My friends speak eloquently
against me, but mine eye pours out tears to God.

Of consolation, vent their eloquence,
Against the most unpitied of men,
Accusing me (poor wretch) once, and again,
Present I shall no other answer make,
Then that my God I hope at length will speak,
And from his mouth resolve undoubtedly,
Which of us have most errea, they, or I:
Whilst I my self no other way defend,
But by those tears, which from my eyes descend,
By which to God my cause I recommend.
Yet, would to God that one in my estate, 21. O that a man might plead with
God, as he does with his neighbor.

As with his Neighbor, freely might debate
With his Creator: then would I demand
For what sad misdemeanors does the hand
Of God thus ly upon me? why alace
Am I in such a lamentable case?
Is it because the season of my years, 2a. For the years accounted come, and I
shall go the way, whence I shall not return.

Proper for such afflictions appears:
And that the strength, and vigor of my age,
Seems able with such tortures to engage.
Why be it so: -- yet after all -- alace,
Me thinks my God should now extend some grace,
And not for ever show an angry face.
Yea sure, me thinks he should some pity have,
Now when I am even stepping to my Grave.
For oh! --
My time appointed quickly shall run out,
My years shall vanish soon, and then I doubt,
Some friend will kindly drop a tear, and mourn
For one, who goes, whence he shall not return.
Cap. XVII.
MY Lungs are wasted, and I find my breath 1. My breath is corrupt, my days are
cut off, the grave is ready for me.

Is corrupt, and has now the scent of Death.
The current of my Life is now run out,
And, when on all hands I do look about,
I find there is no way how I can escape
The Grave, for every spot of Earth does gape
For this poor Carrion; and I wish it were
Fairly interred, and not in the open air
Exposed, to be the Food, and daily Fare,
Of Beasts, and Birds of prey. --
I drop into the Grave, -- I breath with pain, 2. There are none but mockers
with me, and mine eyes continues in their bitterness.

And nothing of a man does now remain.
But some small reason, and a voice, that is shrunk
Into the accent of a hollow Trunk.
Yet in this sad condition fain would I
Expect the good hour, wherein I must dye.
I Would fain resign my breath, and trindle hence,
With satisfaction, that my innocence,
Though questioned here, is to my Maker known,
And I must make account to him alone.
Fain would I in the Grave ly down, and rest
My wearied Bones: where I might find at least
After so many pains, and sorrows, ease,
But these men will not let me die in peace.
For, stead of comfort, in this exigent,
With bitter words, they do my Soul torment.
Were any of those men now in my case,
How would they take it pray? if in their face,
While they were dying, one should them upbraid,
And call them Hypocrites? -- I am afraid
For all their fair pretended patience,
Were they but conscious of their innocence,
And in such sad distress, as I am now,
Their warm Religion, and their Morals too,
In such a case, would have enough ado.
To curb just Indignation, which, no doubt,
As well, as mine, would suddenly burst out.
Sure they would complain, and tax the Upbraiders too
O^ Barbarous, unkind Usage, as I now
Do them for their harsh dealing thus with one,
Whose Innocence even to themselves is known.
For no so Sauvage Nation ever yet
Allowed that dying men at such a rate
Should be insulted, but most courteously
Have still indulged to such the Liberty
To use their own Devotions, and die,
Yet this to me my unkind Friends deny.
Since things are so, with these I Will no more speak, 3. Lay down now, and put
in surety for thee, who is he, that will touch my hand?

But to the Almighty I Will my speech direct*
I must a little with my God debate,
With my Good God I must the question state:
For I perceive, (let me say what I can)
My case cannot be understood by man:
I will debate with God then. Say, Good Lord,
Will thou to me this liberty afford?
Will thou with me join issue in the case?
And let us argue frreely, face to face,
As one does with another here below,
And plead the affair in open Court, if so,
Be pleased to put in surety for that end:
Now who will ba^l God, as one would do his Friend?
Go to then, -- since I must debate my case 4. For thou have hid their heart
from understanding, therefore shall thou not set them up on high.

With God, who understands it, not with these,
Who neither understands it, nor will be,
(By all that I can speak) informed by me.
First then, my God (let these say what they will)
I lay it as a solid Principle,
That, though when sins of wicked men do cry
To Heavens for justice, on whom by, and by
Thou send'st thy numerous Plagues in troops abroad,
And put'st those wretches under thy blackrod:
Yet those are not the only men, whom thou
Appoin't'st for sorrow, but to just men too
Sad tokens are of thy displeasure sent,
By way of Trial not of Punishment.
For I deny ^o^ but Afflictions are
The just rewards of sin nor will I dare
TO aver the contr^^: Yet O Lord, I know
Often times thou do afflict thy own, that so
Thou may by humbling of them, let them see
How much all Mankind should depend on thee,
Who all things have created, and can send
Judgments, or Mercies, where thou do intend.
And yet, when thou do Good Men persecute,
Thou do not mark them, as (without dispute)
Men who deserved such usage at thy hand;
No certainly, for none who understand
The method, which thy Divine Providence
Does use with men, and what is the difference
Betwixt a Trial, and a Punishment,
Will make up such an unkind Argument,
As these out of my sad afflictions do;
But notwithstanding all my plagues, allow
I am not yet so guilty, as those men
By very Strength of Rhetoric, would fain
Persuade me to believe: whilst they assert
As a firm Axiom, and by rules of art
Argue it boldly, -- that no man can be
Afflicted by the hand of God, but he
Whose sins are horrid, and abominable:
A strange opinion! an intolerable,
And impudent assertion, such as none,
Who have regard to their own Souls would own.
What! -- thus to circumscribe the Almighty God!
As if he should not use his angry rod
On any but his open enemies,
In m^er revenge, and not his own chastise,
To keep them in their duty: -- this indeed
Is Doctrine no way to be suffered.
Poor inconsiderat Fools! they will not allow
That privilege to God, which Mortals do
Freely enjoy, without impediment,
For, should one now retort their argument
Upon themselves, and seriously check
Those knowing persons, when they do correct,
With loving stripes, those of their Family,
Whom they do most esteem: then by, and by
They Would tell us what they do is not revenge,
Hatred, or Wrath, but Love: and yet it is strange
They should assert that God afflicts none
But those he hates -- --
Thus I perceive then, Lord, the have hid from these
The true, and genuine meaning of my case.
But, Lord: I know all comes alike to all,
And thou, in Wisdom, lets thy Judgments fall
On just, and sinful men promis^uously,
And wilt not show the world a reason why
Thou thus do act: that so both good, and bad
May know thy Mighty Hand, and be afraid
TO incur the hazard of thy hot displeasure,
When thou demonst^ates to 'em, with what measure,
Thou fadom'st all men's actions: for, as thou,
Where wrath is merited, wilt not allow
The party punished should plead innocent,
And say you are cruel in his punishment,
So, when thou sendst afflictons on the just,
And godly men, who in thy mercy trust,
Thou Wilt not permit that any should conclude,
From thence, that such men must be understood
Guilty of all, that is evil: for, if so
The blessed Saints in Heaven might undergo
The censure of the most ungodly men
That ever lived on Earth; since it is plain,
None ever such afflictions endured,
As those, and yet to say their sins procured
All that they suffered, and that all they felt,
Whilst in the land of misery they dwelt.
Was but the product of their faults: and that
Their judgments hardly were proportionat
To their foul Crimes, were inallowable,
Since thou, O Lord, have made them capable
Of thy eternal favor. Nay this were
To prove Religion were no more but Air,
That none were pious, that no man did call
Upon Gods Name aright, no -- none at all:
But that all those goodly Inhabitants
Of Heaven known to us by the name of Saints
Were the mere dregs of the World. --
Since in this Earth, they knew no other state
Of life, then what we do commiserat,
Even though deserved in any, whom we see
In sad affliction, ( though none pity me.)
I do concclude then, 'twere a consequence
Of dangerous import, if we should from thence
Infer that because that good men do endure
Afflictions in this life, that therefore sure
Such men are impious, vile, and execrable,
For shame, let none be so uncharitable,
As to maintain this error. --
For I Am persuaded, Lord, that one may be
Under griat troubles, and yet loved by thee.
Next, Lord, I hold it as a rule, that all,
By thy just Statutes are not Criminal,
Who black with sorrow, and over come with pain,
Of their afflictions modestly complain:
If, joint with such complaints they prayers send
To Heavens, and from their hearts do recommend
To thy kind mercy the consideration
Of their estate, and mildly plead compassion.
Lastly I am persuaded, after all,
That though sad woes, like sheets of Snow should fall
From Heavens upon a man, who puts his trust
In his Creator; yet, like blowing dust,
These clouds of woes shall vanish into air,
And their succeeding life shall look more fair,
Then that in sorrow gloomy did appear.
These are my principles, good Lord, from whence,
(With thy good leave) I would by consequence
Infer that I Am unjustly tax't by these,
Who call themselves my friends: who proudly raise
Themselves against me* and do argue still,
My numerous sins alone (say what I will)
Have brought upon me all that I endure,
And therefore hold me guilty. and impure.
Thou see then, Lord, how these my case mistake, 5. For the eyes of his
children shall fail* that speaks flattery to his neighbor.

Then why should they themselves my Judges make?
Who in their Censures are so partial,
And to their own opinions wedded all,
Me thinks themselves they rather should decline,
Then, by joint council, cunningly combine,
Under pretense of friendship to increase
My troubles, by such arguments, as these.
Should they be Judges? they who openly
Do value men by their prosperity:
And look on those, who in afflictions waves
Do swim with pain, as men do look on slaves
Coupled in chains. -- --
Such flattery our God will not permit
To go unpunished, but when he thinks fit,
Upon those flatterers he will such judgments send,
As in a few day^s space may make an end,
Not only of their persons, but of all,
What these proud fools a memory do call.
Shall all their worldly pageantry deface,
And, in his anger, root out all their Race.
Now I remember, whilst my sun did shine 6. He has also made me a byword of
the people, and I am a tabret before them.

In its full O^b, and all things did combine
To make me happy, as a man might be
In this vain world* then would I daily see
My friends, in crowds, within my walls appear
Protesting nothing to them was so dear,
As was my interest, and with cast-up-eyes,
Persuading me that they would sacrifice
Their Means, their Lives, and should occasion call,
To do me service, they would venture all
That men call dear: -- I Am become poor of late,
By the hand of God, I Am become desolat,
With sorrows, on all hands, environed,
And all my noontide friends are vanished.
My life is changed, and all my friends are gone*
And, in distress I Am visited by none,
But three, whose visits, I may say have been
The worst affliction I have ever seen.
(For truly I esteem those Visitants
No Comforters, but subtle Disputants)
Men, who retain no pity in their hearts,
But would on this occasion, show their parts
On me, in this deplorable estate,
Not meaning to condole, but to debate.
Would they had spared their unkind kindness too
And left me here as well as others do,
Then had I been more easy, than I Am now.
For all my other friends, those Parasites,
Those Cuckows of my life, those Hypocrites,
That gull the World with a fair pretense
Of Love, and Friendship are all marched hence.
Nay would their venomous malice rested there,
And, as they have quit me, so they would forbear
The mention of my name; and when they meet
At their Festivals, would they would forget
That ever such a thing was born, as I am,
Would that some other Subject might supply'm
With new Discourse, and I had Liberty
At least, in dark oblivion here to die.
But O I Am now become the Table-talk
Of all my friends, nay all men, when they walk
In Streets, or Fields, of my afflictions prate,
And speak, with pleasure, of my sad estate.
I Am now the rabbles talk at Wakes and Faires,
My present sorrows sounding in their Ears,
Like a melodious Consort, and (God knows)
Hearing of my calamities, and Woes*
Those Clowns are no less pleased, than when they hear
The noise of Tabret, Fife, or Dulcimer.
Nay so my foes have now their malice spread,
As those, who never knew me, never had
Acquaintance of me, when they hear my name
So much bespattered by a foul-mouthed fame,
Admire what cursed, and wicked thing I am.
My eyes with weeping for this cause, are dim, 7. Mine eye therefore is dim
with grief, and all my strength is like a shadow.

(My heart, with springs of grief swollen to the brim
Both Day, and Night affording new supplies
Of brinish liquors) for, as water rise,
By force of Pump: so from my bursting heart
By force of Sighs, without all help of art
Fresh Streams are sucked up hourlie, issuing out
Through either eye, as through a Water-spout.
By this uninterrupting Flux, at length
With sorrows I perceive my former Strength
Is quite exhausted, and I now appear
Like a mere shadow, or a Damp of air.
This, at first view, may all good men surprise, 8. The righteous shall be
astonished at this, and the innocent shall be moved against the hypocrite

To see a man plunged in such miseries,
A man, who thinks at least God does not hate
His Person, nor does so excruciat
Him, as a Malefactor, though*he knows
That all his sorrows, all his pains, and woes
Are but his Merits: these my sufferings
May possibly occasion murmurings
Amongst the best of men, when they perceive
My sad condition (which though some believe
To be the product of my sins, yet these
Know better things) and viewing of my case,
Upon their own Deportment, do reflect,
And, with themselves think what they may expect,
When such as I, who hopes all don't maintain,
That in Gods sight I am the worst of men,
Am so unkindly used, but when they check
Their errors, and begin to recollect
Their minds, and fall to solid Contemplations,
Of the true Order of Gods Dispensations,
Then do they understand that God does try
His own by so exact a scrutiny,
And, with such Judgments does their lives infest,
As puts their patience to the utmost test:
Yet still he loves them* and will not permit
The Floods to rise higher than he thinks fit,
Because good men, men just and innocent
Do at his hands deserve no punishment.
But for the couz^ning Hypocrite, sad wrath
Shall rain upon him; he shall wish for Death,
But shall not find it, and his miseries
Shall be augmented by his unheard cries.
Because God knows those men the World do cheat
With a fair show of zeal, and shreudly treat
The just, and upright, whilst they would maintain
They were themselves the only pious men.
Then good men their afflictions shall forget,
When they see men, whom God does truly hate,
So justly punished, men, who have provoked
By Villainy, Fraud, and Oppression cloak't
With piety, one, that will not be mocked.
Then shall the righteous men new Spirits take 9. But the righteous will hold
his way* and he, whose hands are pure, shall increase his strength.

When they consider how God does correct
The good, but utterly destroys the bad,
And makes their case irreparably sad.
Then though in dreadful misery, and pain,
Yet shall they no more of their God complain,
Then will a Patient, who does understand
His good Phisician will not set his hand
To any Order, or, for any bribe,
Be hired by his Enemies to prescribe
Such Medicines to him, but what he knows,
(At least he does, by rules of art, suppose)
Are for his Health: to those Religious Men
In the most boiling Calenture of pain,
Shall not repine, but, with great constancy
Endure all the assaults of misery,
And still hold bravely out, until at length,
God shall relieve them, and renew their strength.
And now, my friends, though I designed no more 10. All you therefore turn you,
and come no^ and I shall not fi^^ one ^ise man among you.

To argue with you, as I did before.
Yet on this subject I cannot forbear
But once again must in all calmness here
Complain of you, who so mistake my case,
And, 'cause afflicted, tell me in my face,
I Am a cursed Person, a vile Reprobat,
One, whom his Maker does abhor, and hate:
When you your selves, for shame will not deny,
But that the Almighty, when he means to try
The faith of those he loves, will exercise
Such with unheard of woes, and miseries;
That when such fiery trial they endure
With patience, they may become more pure
Then formerly, and (as your selves aver)
After such sufferings, in Gods sight appear
More just, and righteous, then they were before,
Like Gold refined in Furnace over, and over.
But, since you have taken up an argument,
To prove that no man can be innocent.
Who is afflicted, but that only those,
Whose sins do cry for judgments suffer woes:
You do resolve, although your reasons were
Ill founded, and of no more weight then air,
Yet still your reputation to maintain,
By a continued reasoning, and vain
Expressing of your Parts, albeit you know
You are i'th'wrong, yet you will have it so;
Because you are wisemen, and cannot err,
Whereas, my friends, by what does yet appear,
(I know not what you wit, and prudence call)
But, truth, I find none wise amongst you all.
But O I will no more expostulat 11. My days are past, mine interprises are
broken, and the thoughts of my heart.

With men, who love to entertain debate,
On every triffle, and in foolish pride,
Think they know more, than all mankind beside.
No -- such men are too wise for me, and I
Now am not for debates: -- I die, -- I die,
My days are spent, all my designs are quashed,
My poor endeavors are to pieces dashed.
My thoughts are now so with afflictions clouded, 12. They have changed the
night for the day, and the light that approaches for the darkness.

My judgment with the vail of woes so shrouded,
As now my sad confusion I see,
When things most clear are dubious to me.
Then why should I my time in arguing wast?
My small time, that remains? my days are past,
Then why should I desire to live, when those,
From whom, in this sad state, I did suppose
I might find comfort, by their tart discourse,
Have rendered my condition ten times worse,
Then when they found me: -- O had not these men
Come hither, sure I had been out of pain,
Before this time, for, in my solitude,
I had been stiffled by the multitude
Of wasting sighs, and groans: -- sure I had died,
And been so happy too, as none had spied
My face, when dying, none had interposed
Themselves 'twixt me, and death, no hand had closed
My glaring eyes: none had officiousl*
Impeded me, when I designed to die.
But in some silent hour, unseen, unknown,
Unheard, uninterrupted, all alone,
As one, that falls asleep I had expired,
And gently from the Worlds view retired.
-- How sweetly had I died, how quietly
Had I been shiffled in eternity,
Betwixt the utmost gasp of parting breath,
And the chill blowing of approaching death.
My wearied soul, ere now, from whence it came,
In the vehicle of a pleasant dream,
Had been transported: and my Body laid
In the cold Ground had its last tribute paid.
For, though I with some reason hope, that I 13. Though I hope yet the grave
shall be my house, and I shall make my bed in the darkness.

May see my sun return before I die.
And though I fancy to my self that yet,
The time may come, in which I may forget
All these afflictions, which I now sustain,
And no more of consuming want complain.
The time may come, in which my Body may
In its own sphere its former strength display;
And this poor soul, which now with heavy groans,
And floods of tears, its miseries bemoans,
May from the Dunghill yet be elevate,
And so restored to its former state.
Yet to what purpose all these hopes! alace
To what end serve those fa^ir appearances!
Those aerie expectations, which uphold
The drooping spirits, of both young, and old.
Those pleasing notions, by which we deceive
Our lingering hours, and make our selves believe
We may, when vapors of the night are gone,
Yet view our sun in its full horizon.
That smiling prospect of our future bliss,
Which for some time, allays our grievances.
That painted idol, in whose downy lap,
Our wearied sorrows sometime take a nap:
For what do all those serve, when after all,
Death at our doors does peremptorly call,
-- To Grave, -- to Grave -- make haste. -- my hour draws on,
Dispatch -- dispatch -- up -- I most wait on none,
Bestir your selves, -- it is high time to be gone.
Then where are all our hopes! where all our joys,
And pleasures which did here make so much noise!
When that sad Summons in our ears does sound,
Ah where is then our Lifeguard to be found?
Those Champions of the World! I doubt they are,
By that time bravely vanished into Air.
Away all foolish hopes, then, for I know,
I know this Body to the Grave must go,
And after all those mournful passages,
I know the Grave must be my dwelling place.
Where in close darkness, and long night I must
Attend, until my Soul return in Dust.
And when I there have fixed my habitation, 14. I shall say to corruption thou
art my father, and to the worms, you are my mother, and my sisters.

I shall take pleasure in the contemplation
Of that dark subterraneous Soil, and strive
To learn more there, than when I was alive
On earth: there I shall quickly know what all
Which here we honor, Riches, Beauty call,
Strength, Learning, Judgment, Worldly Policy,
With all the Product of Mortality,
Do in those dismal Regions signify.
There, there I fear I soon shall learn to know
There is no difference betwixt High, and Low:
Betwixt the Rich, and Poor, the Strong, and Weak,
But there all of 'em the same figure make.
I shall perceive that all those qualities,
Which we esteem in life, afford no price
Amongst the inhabitants of these Provinces,
Who barter nothing, but for Species
Of simple bodies void of cost, or art
Do only trade, and, in return, impart
Dire Putrefaction, pestilentious Vapors,
Thick, rotten air, that would extinguish Tapers,
Black Sculls, dry Bones, with Matter purulent,
O goodly Trade! -- O Wares most excellent!
Yet these are the only Product of the Grave,
These, these are all, which, in return we have
For bodies of the goodliest Form, and Shape,
For stately Bodies, which no art can ape.
How many healthful bodies, in their prime,
Are hurried hourly hence, by pruning time,
To Deaths Plantations: where that of a King,
And that of a poor Clown is all one thing.
That in its youth, and that with age consumed,
That wrapped up in its rags, and that perfumed
With Aromatic Odours. Nay, although
To coasts of grave those latter will not go,
But elsewhere trade, and brag much of their gain,
How free from Putrefaction they remain
By trading to deep Caverns, under ground,
Where putrefying moisture is not found:
Where by the help of Powders, Spices, Oils,
With other rich Ingredients (the Spoils
Of some fair Provinces) they do endeavor,
To keep their figure under ground, for ever,
Yet at long run, their trading does amount
To the same Profit, to the same account,
As do all others: for, in sober sense,
I can indeed perceive no difference,
Betwixt a Body, that enbalm'd does ly,
In a Lead Coffin, wrapped up decently,
In costly Wax-cloathes, Bowell'd, and perfumed,
And that, which with a tabid ill consumed,
Putrid, and withered under ground does rest
In a poor Wooden Coffin: for, at best,
Both are but food for Vermin: only this,
(As those, who live in open Villages,
Are by the Invaders sooner overrun,
Brought in Subjection, plundered, and undone
Than those in Garrisons) does sooner feed
Those hungry insects, than that wrapped in Lead.
But even that too to wasting time, at length
Is forced to yield, for all its formal Strength,
And the poor Carrion which it self did trust
To those firm Walls becomes at length all Dust.
As well as that, which in the open Grave
Was sooner eat up: seeing all things have
Their own duration, and their period
Set by the appointment of the Almighty God.
Now even those under ground, preserved, and dried
Do become black, and almost petrifi'd,
As we may daily see, without all shapes,
Flat, and deformed, not so like Men, as Apes,
Nay, in a short time, even to powder too
Their flesh does crumble.
Whilst their rich Coffines studded every where
With Characters of Gold, do still appear
Sound, and untouched, which we should not admire,
If we consider that in Shell entire
A rotten Kirnel oftentimes is found,
So these, by long retention under ground,
Not with such dwellings in their lifetimes us*d,
Though well prepared, yet are at length reduced
By a contagious, subterraneous air,
To that Condition, in which they appear.
Then O for all this wit, for all this art
How do those bodies to the world impart
As perfect Emblems of life's vanity,
As any records of Mortality
Afford. -- For don't see these withered things,
Those musty relics of our glorious Kings,
Who, in their lives, with art, and vast expense,
TO express their Grandeur, and magnificence,
Caused dig deep Caverns out of solid Rocks,
In which their bodies, as in Marble box,
Might from the rage of insects sleep secure,
And firm to all Eternity endure.
Pray don't we see how those same Corpse are made
Through much of the world the subject of a trade?
O this vain World! how ridiculous
To see a Princes Body serve the use
Of each Plebeian! -- --
To see those things, for all their foolish hopes,
Exposed in Apothecaries Shops,
As well as other Drugs, to public Sale,
And, in small parcels vented by retail!
Alace how mean, and how much differing
From the first project of a Mighty King!
But the great King of Heavens will have it so,
That to proud Mankind he their pride may show,
For as from dust they sprung, again they must
By course of nature, all return to dust.
It Is Dust alone, for which those Countries deal,
The only traffic of that Common-weall;
All things imported these to Dust convert,
And, soon, or late, by a laborious Art,
Expose that Dust to public view again,
To show corruption only their does reign.
That Governs all, whilst no eye can perceive
The cunning Manufacture of the Grave.
Let bodies swim in oil, and carefully
Preserved in Glasses, boast Eternity.
Let them be swallowed down, let them be kep't
In Fishes bellies, or confusedly heap't,
One bove another, in some nasty hole,
Or in small atoms reach from pole to pole,
Or squandred in the bottom of the Seas,
Yet certainly, at length, all by degrees,
Must become Dust, which when I shall perceive,
With men on Earth, I Will no more commerce have,
But keep firm correspondence with the grave,
Corruption I will my Father call,
The Worms my Mother, Brethren, Sisters all.
Then where are all my hopes? what look I for 15. Where is now then my hope, or
who shall consider the thing I hoped for?

On this side time? why should I labor more,
TO uphold my spirit, in vain expectation,
Of future bliss, and worldy restoration?
When after all I clearly may perceive
There is no hope for me, but in the Grave.
In that dark dwelling I must only rest,
And in Deaths silent shades must only taste,
That, which, on Earth, I never can attain,
That ease, which I from Life expect in vain.
Then farewell all my hopes; -- I Will hope no more,
But here all expectations give over.
Let others hope to see their misery
Turn to a Sunshine of prosperity.
Let others hope to see their sorrows crowned
With a fair issue, and themselves abound
In wealth, and peace, my hope is under ground,
Thither, -- O thither only will I go,
And in those Regions finish all my woe.
Let others then hope still, when I am gone,
Let others live, I am for death alone.
All Earthly hopes are vain, and perishing, 16. They that go down into the
bottom of the pit, surely they shall ly together in the dust.

The course of life is a mere changeling.
There Is nothing here, that we can lasting call,
The joys of Mankind are mere cous'nage all.
Wit, Honors, Riches, Courage, Titles, Fame,
Are but the hiccups of the Worlds esteem
In which vain man buoyed up does proudly swim.
But when the black clouds of adversity
Begin to gather, and the angry Sky
Threatens a storm, then one may plainly see
What timorous, insipid things those be,
Which we so much admire, for, in a tryce,
Those men, with all their glorious qualities,
At first approach of woes begin to shrink,
And then ( their Bladders-bursting) downright sink.
Down to the bottom of the Pit they fall,
Where, in a moment, they are hudled all,
In one great mass of Dust, no difference
'Twixt a poor Beggar and a splendid Prince
There to be seen, but all in heaps do ly
In the large Garner of Mortality,
As all were but one Grain; and there is an end
Of all we speak, act, fancy, or intend.
All the proud Boasters of the World at length,
For all their Riches, Honor, Wit, and Strength,
In which they placed their confidence, and trust,
Assemble all together in the Dust.
O then, let no man put his confidence
In earthly blessings, nor permit his sense
To have command, where reason should preside,
But let it, with Religion for its guide,
Order his march of life so prudently,
As he may still look to Mortality,
As the last stage of humane vanity.
Cap. XVIII.
THus having long discoursed, and become faint, 1. Then answered Bildad the
Shuhite, and said.

With speaking much, Job would have been content,
TO have had some respite for a while, but that
His friends had still resolved to debate
Upon the subject, and still meant t'evince,
That he was only punished for his sins.
Then Zophar now, and learned Eliphaz
Supposing they had argued the case
So fully, as that no more could be said,
Thinking it needless any more to plead;
Bildad, a man, who had not spoke much yet,
But listened most of the time to their debate,
Resolves now with his friend to argue too,
And try what his brisque Rhetoric can do.
When, says he, will thy flamming passions cool, 2. When will you make an end
of your words? cause us understand, and then we will speak.

When will thou cease to act the angry fool?
Why so enraged? why with such bitterness,
Against thy friends do thou thy self express?
What have we done, that thou should thus accuse
Thy best of friends? in this thou do abuse
Our gentle nature: I would then advise
Thee in thy language to become more wise,
And not upbraid us thus, as if thou thought
We were all I^eots, Dunces, men of naught.
Thou treat'st us with expressions of scorn,
Words of contempt, words hardly to be born
By men of worth, and ingenuity,
Men, who do live by rules of piety,
As well, as ever thou did hitherto,
And, in the fear of God, exceed thee now.
For thou do rave, and sometimes wilt direct
Thy speech to God, in such a Dialect,
In such expostulating words, as though,
For all the torture thou do undergo,
Thou Would challenge him as Author: him, who sends
Judgments, where he thinks fit, what he intends
None can oppose: him, who on high does sit,
And judges all the World as he thinks fit.
Yet with this God, forsooth, thou dare debate,
And with thy Maker thus expostulat,
And that in words too so impertinent,
As none that feared that Majesty would vent,
Words so imperious, words so arrogant,
Words so unusual, and extravagant,
Words so approaching open Blasphemy
That wee're afraid to bear thee company.
Thou talks't with God, as if thou did not know
It Is he, that made the Heavens, thou blustrest so,
As if thou talked with men, and do so shake
In fits of passion, in discourse so weak,
As one should say -- I know not what I speak.
Consider well now pray, if thou would dare
Address in language so familiar,
Thy self to any Prince on earth, as now
Thou do to the King of Kings; Consider too
How much already thou have roused his wrath,
And make him not pursue thee to the Death.
Thus do thou speak to God, and then anon,
Like one in frantic Fits, thou fall'st upon
Thy honest Friends, men, who do pity thee,
And are indeed much troubled thus to see
One whom they always loved, one they esteemed,
One, whom they never, ( but with honor) named:
One, whose-afflictions from their very soul,
They Are now come hither merely to condole,
In such disorder. But proceed, my friend,
Only let us know, when thou will put an end
To thy Discourse: pray let us understand,
(For all the ills we merit at thy hand)
Only when thou have done; we ask no more,
But teach us when thy speech thou will give ore,
When thou wilt an end of all this language make,
That we may know when it is time to speak.
Pray what do mean, my friend, that thou should treat, 3. Why are we
counted as beasts, and are vile in your sight?

Men of our Reputation at this rate?
Pray' what do take us for? do think but we
Can all express our minds as well as thee,
Were we inclined, with as much foolish heat
Thy rude expressions to retaliat?
Compared with thee forsooth, it seems we are all
But very beasts, or what you are pleased to call,
In thy sharp passion, men esteemed by none
To be such bruites, but by thy self alone.
We Are all forsooth but Boobies in thy eyes:
How long is it, friend, since thou became so wise?
Sure it must be of late, for formerly,
When thou did flourish in prosperity,
We knew thee, at the best, but even such,
As we are our selves: but now thou talk as much,
As though thy Wit were more than natural,
And thou of late knew more than we do all.
Pray let us know from whence this Wisdom then
Proceeds, in which beyond all other men
Thou do excel: pray let us know, my friend,
By what unheard of means, thou have attained
To so much Wisdom in so short a space,
For, since we see thee, in thy prosperous case,
Not many months are past, and truly then
We thought thee no more wise then other men.
Then cannot I conjecture whence indeed,
This so transcendent wisdom does proceed;
Nor from what source it has its derivation,
Unless it flow frim sudden inspiration.
But seriously, my friend, when I reflect 4. Thou art as one that teareth his
soul in his anger: shall the earth be forsaken for thy sake; or the rock
removed out of its place?

On what I Have heard, what I did not expect
From such a man as Job: and when I see
How most unjustly we are accused by thee,
As men come hither, without all intent
Of comforting, but merely to torment
Thy soul, with bitter words: and multiply
Thy sorrows by our unkind company;
Whilst, with debates we make thy pains increase,
When, God knows, we endeavor nothing less.
When thus, I say, in sadness, I reflect
On the rash words, which I have heard thee speak,
As, if thou were it in pure vindictive rage,
Resolved for lewd, and horrid crimes to stage,
Not only us, who are but silly men,
Such as thy self, but even to arraign
The Government of Heavens: as if that God
Did upon thee unjustly use his Rod:
On thee, a creature just, and innocent;
Who never yet knew what transgression meant,
And, on that ground, thou do conclude that he
Must be unjust, who thus tormenteth thee.
When I reflect on this, and seriously
Observe thy carriage in this misery,
I think thou art so far from being more
Prudent, and knowing then thou were before,
That thou art downright mad. --
For who, but one that is raped out of his wits,
Whose mind is troubled by invading fits,
Would make so great a noise? thus cry, and howl,
And in his anger tear his very Soul,
As thou do now thy self in wrath express,
As though thou were it first Martyr in the case.
How from my Soul do I commiserat
A man in such a sad distracted state:
Why do thou think but other men as well
As thou, my friend, the same afflictions feel?
Thy case indeed is no ways singular,
Nor are thy sufferings extraordinar:
Then why, my friend, art thou become so vain,
To think thou should not feel, what other men
As good, as thee, do daily undergo,
And make not half this noise of it, if so,
I do, with sorrow look upon thy state,
And think indeed it is more desperate
Then that of those shut up in Hospitals,
For most of these have lucid intervals,
But thou have none; their fury may be tamed,
By strength of Medicine, and they reclaimed
By time to their own wits: thine does increase,
And seems to be a madness in excess.
Thy fury seizes on thee more, and more,
Beyond the approved cure of Hall^bore.
For thou do think that God, to favor thee,
Should alter his established decree,
And even be pleased, on thy account, to change
The so well ordered course of Nature: -- strange
That any mortal man endu'd with reason,
Should dar to hatch within his breast such treason
Against Heavens King! do think that God will make
The lofty Rocks within their Sockets shake,
Or mash the Frame of Nature, for thy sake?
Do think he will make the Earth turn desolate,
To complement thee in thy sad estate?
Or make Men, Beasts, Birds, Fishes in the Sea,
Endure the same afflictions with thee?
That the whole Universe, from Pole, to Pole,
Might, with one voice thy miseries condole.
Alace, my friend, thou rav'st, thou rav'st indeed, 5. Yea the light of of the
wicked shall be quenched, and the spark of his fire shall not shine.

If thou foment such fancies: pray take heed
What thou do think, at least what thou do speak,
For thy expressions show thy judgment weak.
And (which is yet a sign more evident
Of thy distemper, and an argument
Of thy disordred mind) with confidence,
Because we seem to doubt thy innocence,
Thou calls't us fools, and dunces, which implies
As much as thou think thou art hugely wise.
Whilst all wise men conclude, without debate,
That every man wise in his own conceit,
I^ but a fool: of which alace I see,
A too true demonstration in thee.
And therefore, with more reason, I Would request,
Then thou have us, thou would not speak at least,
For, in this troubled state, I Would thee advise
To hold thy peace, and we shall think thee wise,
At least, as we have heard, with patience
All thy discourse, and taken no offense
At thy injurious words, so thou would hear
What I intend to speak, which, though I fear
Will quadrat too much with thy case, yet I
With all discretion, shall forbear t'apply,
But only shall endeavor to express,
In a few words, wy judgment on the case.
I see, my friend then (though thou still do plead,
Not guilty) yet a man may plainly read,
In thy afflictions what is the cause of all
Thy miseries; which I do freely call
Thy crying sins; thy unjust dealings: -- hence
Those woes, from these thy sufferings commence.
Thy judgments clearly do thy sins express
To all of us, though thou will not confess:
But cunningly would still plead innocent,
And truly there is no greater argument
Of guilt then still denying, when impeached:
But, for all thy defenses, God has reached
Thee in his justice, and has punished thee
For thy foul sins, in manner, as we see.
Now, as in wrath our God is formidable,
So all his orders are inviolable:
He lets the wicked man in villainy
Proceed and flourish, undisturbedly,
For a long time, until he does attain
To the full Zenith of his joys, and then
He draws the Reins, and does his pride compesce,
In the bright noontide of his happiness:
So from his earthly glory in a tryce,
He tumbles down, as from a precipice.
His radiant luster shall be no more seen, 6. The light shall be dark in his
dweling, and his candle shall be put out with him.

But his great name, as though he never had been,
Shall be razed out of the Records of Fame,
And none shall know he was, or whence he came;
Nay, those who knew him in prosperity,
Shall now abhor his very memory.
His wealth, and power, in which he did confide, 7. The steps of his strength
shall be rest^^^^d, and his own council shall cast him down.

Shall fail him: all his arts and tricks beside,
By which he used to cousen other men,
Shall be most quaintly disappointed then.
His council shall be overturned all,
And by his own devices he shall fall.
The course of life he in this Earth does steer, 8. For he is takenin the net
by his feet and he walks upon the snares.

Shall be like Ships amongst shelves, in constant fear,
With dreadful thoughts he shall be overlaid,
Of his own shadow he shall be afraid.
Sad apprehensions shall upon him seize, 9. The grin shall ta^^ him by the
heel, and the thief shall co^^ upon him.

And, in his spirits, he shall find no ease.
For, when he means by pleasures, to divert
His sorrows, and alleviate his heart
By serene thoughts, his conscience by, and by
Shall lay before him his impiety:
Which shall him also in his sleep affright,
And steal upon him, like a Thief, by night.
Shall apprehend that plots are every where 10. A snare is laid for him in the
ground and a trap for him in the way.

Laid for his life, and that men do prepare
Actions, Indytements, Jurors, evidence
Against him, and his frighted conscience
Makes him believe that men do ly in wait
To catch him, and that every man does hate
Both him, and all his execrable race,
And that he is the discourse of every place.
When on his pillow he shall lay his head, 11. Fearfulness shall make him
afraid on every side, and shall drive him to his feet.

Thinking by sleep from terrors to be freed,
Then shall fresh terrors, like a rapid stream
Break in upon his fancy, in a dream.
Then shall he start out of his sleep, and call
For Sword, for Helmet, Corslet, Shield* -- for all,
Then sleep again, but, in a tryce awake,
And nimbly to his feet himself betake:
So sleep, and wake, and wake, and sleep, by fits,
All the long night, like one out of his wits.
His Creditors on all his Means shall seize, 12. His strength shall be famine,
and destruction shall be ready at his side.

Turn out his Family, bring him by degrees
To such a sad, penurious exigent,
As he, and his shall have no aliment.
Then wasting sorrow, want of sleep, and food, 13. It shall devour the inner
parts of his skin, and the first born of death shall devour his strength.

With all things, that to nature are allowed,
Shall in his Loins, his Body, and his Head,
A complication of diseases breed:
By which the hateful wretch shall every day,
In some dark corner, rot, and pine away.
Then all his hopes, by which he formerly, 14. His hope shall be rooted out of
his dwelling, and shall cause him to go to the king of fear.

In the hottest fits of his adversity,
Would cheer his drooping spirits, and recall
His almost parting soul, then shall they all
Abandon him, and he shall then appear
Upon all hands environed with fear.
Like a poor Malefactor, who has taken
His leave of all his friends, and with some pain
Mounted the Ladder? when he looks about,
Of deaths approach he makes no longer doubt,
Concluding 'cause attended now by none,
But the horrid Executioner alone,
Sure he must die, -- for all his hopes are gone.
Fear, while he lives, shall dwell within those walls, 15. Fear shall dwell in
his house, because it is not his, and brimstone shall be scattered upon his
habitation.

Which his indeed he most unjustly calls;
Because by fraud, and rapine purchased,
In his own Chamber fear shall make its bed,
Fear with him shall at Table daily feed.
Until at length, for all his art, and pain,
By which he would his purchases retain:
An unseen Moth shall enter his Estate,
Which in short time most sensibly shall eat*
The fruit of all his Labors: then, when all
His miseries do seem apace to fall
Upon him, he begins to stir, and fain
Would weather out his troubles, but in vain,
For soon he sees (let him do what he can)
It quite surmounts the art, and wit of man,
To save those ill-got Means, which every day,
Like gangrened Members, sensibly decay.
Then all his joints do quiver, when annon
He by his Books perceives that all is gone.
All Is gone: all is lost, all his so vast Estate
Like hidden smoke, is now evaporat:
His Lands, his Means, all his effects are now
Consumed to ashes, and he knows not how.
Thus shall he perish, 'spite of all his wit,
And thus at length upon the Dunghill sit,
Asking a farthing of each one goes by,
A sad example of humane vanity.
But that is not all, for, lest some spurious brat, 16. His roots shall be^lvyed
up beneath, and above his branches shall be cut down.

Sprung from his Loins might yet repullulat.
And, in his life, revive the memory
Of such a man, the Almighty by, and by,
Does, at on blow, his Family destroy,
And leaves this Creature neither Girl, or Boy:
The World of his whole Issue he does cleanse,
And utterly consumes him, root, and branch.
His memory on no record shall stand, 17. His remembrance shall perish from the
earth, and he shall have no name in the street.

But if thereafter any shall demand,
(Who may be curious in such things, as these)
When they perceive some scattered vestiges,
Of stately buildings - who did this erect?
The neighbors shall no other answer make,
Save, that they know not, nor did ever hear,
That any great man did inhabit there.
His memory all Writers shall disclaim,
And, in discourses, he shall have no name.
His name shall wholly be obliterat, 18. They shall drive him out of the light
into darkness, and chase him out of the world.

And, with oblivion be consolidat:
It shall be chased out of the World, for shame
That ever men should a' known so vile a name,
And never man shall after of it dream.
His memory shall be condemned, and none, 19. He shall neither have son. nor
nephew among his people, nor any posterity in his dwellings.

Brother, or Sister* Daughter, Grandchild, Son,
Nephew, or Niece shall him survive, to show
If ever such a man did live, or no.
For none shall represent him, none shall dar
Own Blood with him, or call himself his Heir.
But even those wretches, who by Law might claim
His Honors, shall b'oblig'd to change their name.
Posterity shall, with amazement, hear 20. Posterity shall be astonished at his
day, and fear shall come upon the ancient.

His fall, and shall be Thunder -- struck, with fear,
Nay the most grave, and stayed amongst them all
Shall tremble, when perhaps to mind they call,
That such a thing once in the World did live,
Which to its maker such offense did give.
Sure these the Exits of the wicked are,, 21. Surely such are the inhabitations
of the wicked, and this is the place of him, that honors not God.

In which Gods Justice does it self declare:
These are the goodly Dwellings, in which all,
Who on their Riches, not on God do call.
Do here, on earth, reside: there all their Treasures
Are hoorded up, there all their worldly Pleasures:
This is the Dwelling, this the firm abode
Of those unhappy men, who fear not God.
Cap. XIX.
THus Bildad spoke, thus in a flowing strain 1. But Job answered, and said.

This learned Orator briskly did maintain
The good old Cause: though those, who spoke before
Had on the Subject said as much, and more
Then he could add with all his Eloquence,
Only the words were Bildad, but the sense
Was still the same, with that which Eliphaz
And Zophar had discoursed upon the case.
When he had then this New-old-lecture read
Job, with more calmness, answered him, and said.
Why so, my friends, I see you shall intend 2. How long will you vex my soul,
and torment me with words?

To vex my Soul: ah! shall there be no end
Of your Discourses? will you never give over,
But still your old Position more, and more
Pursue with all the reason you can make,
As if your Reputation lay at Stake,
To prove that I were one that merited
These Ills I suffer, and were punished
Most justly for my sins: in this Design
You seem all by your reasoning to Combine.
This does appear to be the utmost scope,
Of your Discourse, by which at length you hope
To force me to confess, what, to this hour,
I have denied; if it were in your power.
But I Will perswad you, all that you can speak
Will not procure it, I am not so weak
As yet, that by the force of Eloquence,
I should be charmed out of my Innocence.
No, no, my friends, for all that you can say,
I will not by Confession betray
My Conscience, and acknowledge what unless
I should belly it, I cannot confess.
Though I confess some men in my condition
Ere they would endure such frequent Repetition
Of Injuries, would acknowledge any thing,
TO avoid the torture of your reasoning.
Ten times you have reproached me to my face, 3. You have now ten times
reproached me, and are not ashamed, you are impudent toward me.

Yet not ashamed, you still pursue the chase.
Indeed your malice now is evident,
For, in your talk, you're become impudent.
I now perceive what all this while has been*
Your aim, I understand now what you mean.
I see your only purpose is to try
How a poor Soul involved in misery
Is able to endure, besides the pain
In which he lies, the rude insults of men.
Unkindly done! if this be your intent, 4. And though I had indeed erred mine
error remains with me.

Not to condole with me, but to torment
My Soul with arguing, whilst my present state
Requires smooth language, and not rough debate.
Thus by discourse, obliging me to speak,
In answer to you, when I am so weak,
As I can hardly move my lips: when all
My Teeth do gingle, when my Chops do fall,
And my slow words are merely guttural.
If for this end you three be hither come,
Indeed you had as good a stayed at home.
For I conceive this kind of disputing,
Can to afflicted men no comfort bring.
No, no more, then if one should see his friend
Fallen in a pit, and should be so unkind,
As 'stead of helping of him out, to tell him,
It Is for his sins this accident befell him.
So when you see me in this desolate
Condition, in this lamentable state,
'Stead of upholding my decaying spirits,
You always tell me, thus each Mortal merits
To be afflicted, who has done offense
To his Creator: whose own Conscience
Tells him he is guilty, yet pleads innocence.
But what says all this to the case in hand?
Pray now, my good friends, let me understand,
In these my sins where your concern does ly?
For my escapes, whether must you, or I
Make answer pray? sure I conceive that none
Must make account for those, but I alone.
Then what are you concerned? if I have erred,
The worse is mine: and if I have preferred
My pleasures to that duty, which I owe
To my so kind Creator, sure I know,
He Will none of you for these in judgment call,
But I alone must make account for all.
Nay further, my dear friends, should I allow
That I have sinned, yet sure to none of you
I ever gave offense: my sins at least,
Were acted in the closet of my breast,
My converse was to outward view upright,
My sins were perceptible by the sight
Of God alone: and so such Godly men
As you are, of no scandal can complain,
Proceeding from my carriage: pray then why
Should you upbraid me thus continually
With sins, which were you put to prove, I fear
For all your art you could not make appear
That I were guilty of them? why should you
Who are wise men, such liberty allow
To your hot passions? why should you exclaim
Against a poor afflicted man? for shame
Forbear this bitter railing, pray forbear
And if you be Comforters, let me hear
Some words of comfort, pray now let me see
If you be such, as you pretend to be.
But if in railing you will still proceed, 5. If indeed you will magnify your
selves against me, and plead against my reproach.

And think you do perform a noble deed,
In whipping one with words already spent
With sad afflictions, whilst you would torment
A dying creature, I will teach you how
To manage this trade better than you do.
I Will furnish you with store of arguments,
Better than those, which your poor wits invents:
And let you see, where your advantage lies,
Which yet indeed, for all that your're so wise
You have not hit, I Will teach how t'upbraid,
And how to say more then you yet have said,
Though after all it is but a scurvy trade.
I Would have you then, my friends, to understand, 6. Know now that God has over
thrown me, and has compassed me with his net.

That by the Power of an Almighty hand,
I Am totally undone, I Am overthrown,
And all my glory turned up side down.
I am entangled in afflictions net,
With wounding sorrows I am round beset:
And still the more I struggle to get out,
I stick the faster, when I look about
For help from man: I easily perceive,
That of all my acquaintance none do grieve,
To see their old friend in this woeful case,
But all upbraid me to my very face.
I cry out of Oppression, Rapine, Force, 7. Behold I cry out of wrong, but I am
not heard cry aloud but there is no judgment.

Plain Depredation, or what else is worse,
Yet from Heavens Court there is yet no answer made,
I call, but there is no justice to be had.
All do abhor me, all do do say it is just,
That I should have my dwelling in the Dust,
Because in wealth I many did exceed,
And had in store all things that Mortals need:
From whence as't were a Crime, they do infer,
It Is just that such as I should now be here.
For those who me in peace, and wealth did know,
Are out of envy glad to see me low.
This is my lot, this is my present state, 8. He has fenced up my way that I
cannot pass, and he has set darkness in my paths.

This is the woeful, and disconsolat
Condition of my life: I now appear
Like a distressed night-wandering Traveller,
Who sometimes falls on stones, sometimes does rush
Amongst the prickles of some silent bush:
Sometimes in Quag mires falls, from whence got out
With arms at length out stretched, he grops about
IN the horrid darkness of the night, and fain
Would follow out his way, but all in vain;
For the poor soul no sooner extricats
Himself from troubles, then in other straits
He quickly falls: now on some precipice
He finds himself advanced, then in a trice
He casts about him, and not many paces
From thence, the Trunk of some old tree embraces,
Anon from some steep Rock he tumbles down,
And finds himself amongst the Brambles soon*
Engaged with Wild goats: thence with toil, and pain
He wrestles out: and by, and by again
Falls in some Quag-mire to the Knees, and thence
He makes a passage with some violence,
And falls anon into some Ditch, at length
Over toiled with wandering, and now wanting strength
To wrestle any more with Shrubs, and Bushes,
Ditches, and Quick-setts Quag-mires, Pools, Bull-rushes*
Willows, and Elms, which ever, and anon
He does encounter: fairly he sits down
On the cold ground, and there in pain, and fear,
Resolves to watch it out, while day appear
Even such am I, such is my dismal case,
My way is closely fenced, all passages
Blocked up on every side, and every road
Stopped, as with trees a cross, by the mighty God,
So that, I cannot pass. --
Inward, and outward so my troubles now,
Do multiply, I know not what to do.
As waves upon each others back do ride,
In a full body at a growing Tide,
And with such fury fall upon the Shore
As if they would the very earth devour:
And as one breaks, another does succeed
With the same force, and in that others steed,
Another, and so wave on wave does break
So after one sad cross, I still expect
Another, and another on the back
Of that, and so until all go to wrack.
I cannot see how these rude waves will cease,
But that my woes each moment will increase
Until I be destroyed: I cannot see
What the issues of these miseries may be.
Or where my sorrows raging course will stop
Only upon a slender plank of hope
I still do ^it, expecting, after all,
The pride of these insulting waves may fall,
A calm may come, and I may get ashore
And live in plenty as I did before. 9. He has stripped me of my glory and the
crown is taken from my head.

But now the hand of God upon me lies
Most heavily, my woes and miseries
Are not to be expressed: my prosperous state
In which I was conspicuous of late,
Is now renvers'd, my Honors rent, and torn,
And I exposed to the rabbles scorn.
He who created me, he who employed 10. He has destroyed me on every side, and
I am gone, and mine hope he has removed like a tree.

His Breath in framing me, has now destroyed,
What formerly de did appoint to live,
And for that end did such allowance give
Out of Heavens treasure, as might well express,
Both his own glory, and the happiness
Of him he loved. But now I am undone,
My expectation is quite overthrown.
And as when the Earth does in her bowels find,
Strong torments of a subterraneous wind;
She trembles, as in Ague fit, and then
To ease her self of that sad inward pain,
Like one in Childbirth, for sometime she roars,
Then quickly bursts asunder, and devours
Towns, Castles, Mountains, Houses, Villages,
And by the root pulls up the tallest Trees,
Though never so firmly knit; though never so sure
Fixed in the Rocks, yet they cannot endure
That furious shock of Nature, but must all
In Earths dark Caverns, find their Burial.
So am I swallowed up alive, and none
Can help me now, for all my hopes are gone.
Against me God his Ban has issued, 11. He has also kindled his wrath against
me, and he counts me as one of his enemies.

Proscribed me, set a price upon my head.
And now as for an Outlaw every where
Search is made for me, neither here, nor there
Am I secure; but still I am espied,
My God has hemmed me in on every side.
And as a skilful wary General, 12. His troops come together, and raise their
way against me, and encamp round about my tabernacle.

E're he to close Seige of a Town does fall,
First with light Troops invests the place around,
Shut up all Passages, takes up his Ground,
As he thinks proper, then begins his Lines,
Raises his Batteries, labors in his Mines,
Makes his approaches, and does never cease,
By night, or day, until he gain the Place.
So I am now besieged: his Troops invest
My fortress on all quarters, and infest
Me with allarums, and with all the power
Of Heavens I am assaulted every hour.
Expecting no relief, I do perceive,
That all my hopes depend upon the Grave.
For all those Creatures, which we Kindred call, 13. He has put my brethren
far from me, and mine acquaintance are verily estranged from me.

My Brothers, Sisters, Nephews, Cousins, all
From whom I might expect relief, have now
Forsaken me: none of them will allow
Me one kind visit: but are pleased to hear
How I am tortured, and can scarce forbear
From smiling when they see me in this state?
All my acquaintance too, with whom of late
I kindly did converse, are now ashamed
To hear their old, but poor acquaintance named.
My kinsmen, ah! those men whom every hour,
I would oblige by what lay in my power. 14. My kinsfolk have failed, and my
familiar friends have forgotten me.

Those men, to whom I have great favors show'n,
And studied more their interest then my own,
These horrid monsters of ingratitude,
Neither with virtue, nor Gods fear endu'd,
Those Vipers, whom I in my House have bred,
And many years have at my Table fed,
Else they had starved: these have abandoned me,
These have insulted o'r me, now I see
What it is to become poor.
Nay my Domestic servants, who did sleep 15. They that dwell in my house, and
my maids count me for a stranger, I am an alien in their sight.

Under my Roof, who did my Substance keep,
And all those Creatures, who did eat my bread
Those men do look upon me now as dead.
Those, whom I with my money purchased;
Who in my Fields, and Vineyards labored,
And all those numerous maids, who formerly
Did earn their bread within my Family:
When they perceive me in so sad a case,
Are now afraid to look upon my face.
They do not know me, I cannot persuade them,
That I Am the person, formerly, who fed them:
No they will not believe that I am he,
Whom but of late in plenty they did see,
Whom they did honor, whom they did esteem,
Whom they respected, at whose very name
Those slaves would tremble, but in their conceit,
They look upon me as some counterfeit.
Of late I to a Servant called for aid,
Not by command, but as one would persuade 16. I called my servant, and he gave
me no answer, I entreated him with my mouth.

A stranger, but the man no answer made.
I called another, but he would not hear,
A third, a fourth, but no man would appear
To do me service; all a distance kep't,
And through the Hedges at their Master peep't,
As those, who were afraid of Pestilence
To be infected, all my Eloquence,
My prayers, my sighs, my tears, in any sort,
Could not from these one single word extort.
But O sad judgment! which is worst of all,
I from my very Wife for help did call: 17. My breath is strange to my wife,
though I entreated her for the childrens sake of my own body

From her, whom many years I entertained,
Not as my slave, but as my bosom friend;
In whose embraces lay depositat
The greatest treasure of my prosperous state:
From her, from my own Wife, from this same Creature,
I called for help by all the ties of Nature:
By all the dearest pledges of our love
I did conjure her, but nothing would move
This unkind Woman who has now forgot
She is my Consort, and remembers not
Our former love, but in my present state,
Unhappily is become so ungrate,
She Will not come nigh me, as she did before,
And never desires to see me any more.
She hates me, she abhorrs me, she denies
My converss, I am loathsome in her eyes.
She tells me now my breath is become strange,
But what alace makes her affection change
So suddenly? it is not my ulcerous case,
Nor all the furrows in my withered face,
Nor yet the Scent of my infectious Breath,
As she pretends, by which approaching Death
Is clearlie presaged, for she tells anon
She cannot converse with a Carrion.
No -- no these reasons have no weight at all,
Fig-leav'd excuses; mere pretenses all,
It Is none of these: it is only poverty
Occasions this Desertion; -- for why
As any man in wealth decays, or grows,
So a bad wifes affection ^bbs, or flows.
Yea little boys, who seeing me before, 18 Yea young children despised me, I
arose, and they spoke against me.

Would veil their Caps, respect me now no more
Than one who begs his bread from door to door.
They point at me, they laugh, do what they list,
And though I check them, yet they still persist,
Insulting over me in my misery,
They tell each other there poor Job does lie.
No wonder, when the parents me despise
I should be hateful in the childrens eyes.
My dearest friends too, men, whom for my heart 19 All my inward friends
abhorred me, and they whom I loved are turned against me.

I did entirely love, have now ta'n part
With all my other enemies* even those.
In whom I trusted are become my foes,
My greatest foes, yet each of them contends,
(How e're I take it) they are all my friends.
And now that I this History may close, 20 My bones cleaves to my skin, and
to my flesh, and I am escaped with the skin off my teeth.

And in one passage sum up all my woes:
See where with sores all covered I sit,
Plaistered with Scabs, and Boiles, for nothing fit,
But at some tree Root to be buried,
As Carrions are, and there like dung, to feed
The sucking Vegetable: O did I
Enjoy my health, and strength, as formerlie
How would I undervalue all my losses,
Of Means, and Children, with my other crosses:
How bravely would I bear it out, how fair
Would the Effigies of my life appear,
For all that is past: did I enjoy my health
That would be to me Children, Honor, Wealth,
Furnished with Health I Would make the Devil give over,
And be ashamed to vex me any more.
But O my sorrows! O the grievous pain
Which I endure! no part does now remain
Of all my body from these Ulcers free
No part untouched, (as every one may see)
Only my mouth, not yet by these invaded
Nor by these numerous Boils yet barricaded
Servs for a passage to my loadened heart,
By which it may its grief to the world impart,
But not blasphem, as some men would a' done
In my condition. --
No no, let God do with me what he will,
My heart and mouth shall be abstemious still
From all such inclination to evil,
And such bad instigations, of the Devil,
For (come what will on it) I had rather lie
In this sad case of life perpetually,
Before I should once curse my God, and die.
Have pity then, for Heavens sake, all my friends,
Have pity on me, let your angry minds 21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon
me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God has touched me.

Be now appeased, let all your Choler cease,
When you perceive me in this woeful case.
You see how God has punished, me you see
How all the plagues of Hell have seized on me.
How God has set me as a mark, for all
The sorrows of this world, both great, and small,
To level at: O may not this appease
Your wrath against me, when such ills, as these
Do triumph over me, when I Am led in chains
Attended by a thousand woes, and pains,
O may not this suffice; have pity then
Have pity on me; friends, as you are men,
Let all your hearts be moved with compassion,
When you behold me tortured in this fashion.
Have pity then, have pity now upon me.
O ye my friends! forth' hand of God is on me.
The hand of God does heavy on me ly, 22. Why do you persecure me as God, and
are not satisfied with my flesh?

I am involved in such perplexity
In such sad Circumstances, such distress,
No humane art, or language can express.
Yet still your persecution does proceed
Against me, the Oil of malice still does feed
Your burning wrath, you never do give over
But still oppress my Spirit more, and more
With bitter words: is it not enough you see
My body thus piece-meal'd, but you must be,
(While you pretend my losses to condole)
The cruel Executioners of my soul.
Is It not enough you see my body pined,
But you must likewise thus distract my mind?
Ah will your tedious arguing never cease?
Would as for seven days, you did hold your peace.
When first you hither came: so to this hour
You never had spoke: alace how lean, and poor
All your Discourse is on my present state
Expressing not so much your wit, as hate,
Still varieing, still mistaking of my case,
Still anvilling on one poor common place;
As if it were meritorious to assert,
Though pious in my words, yet in my heart
I am a rotten Hypocrite: indeed
If you intend in railing to proceed,
In my opinion truly it were fit,
You should at least those threed-bare tropicks quite,
You should your former Batteries neglect,
And on new grounds new arguments erect:
And, truth, I think by what I Have spoke of late,
I Have furnish*d you with matter adequat,
To more then any of you has spoke as yet.
Proceed, my friends, then, do your worst, let all
Your wits joint forces brisquely on me fall,
All your insults I shall with patience
Endure, and with my miseries dispense,
When I reflect on my own innocence.
My innocence I ever will assert, 23. O that my words were now written. O that
they were printed in a book.

For not your logic, not your wit, and art,
Shall wheedle me into acknowledgement
Of your so often repeated argument.
No, no, I never will confess, what you
To have conceded, keep so much ado,
No, I Am so far from being ashamed of what
I Have spoke, since we did manage this debate,
That I could wish my words were registrat.
I care not who hereafter do revise
The memoires of my woes, and miseries.
I am indifferent who hereafter read
My Plea, and see how I have answered
Your pointed arguments, I care not who
In after ages do peruse what now
I speak: although the words that from my mouth,
Do issue, are not so polite, so smooth,
So fine, so quaint, so fraught with Eloquence,
As yours are, yet I do presume the sense
Imports as much, as if you had abused
Your Parts, and most injuriously accused
A man, who 'spite of all your argument,,
And pungent talk; will still plead innocent.
O that my words were keep't upon record!
O that my God such favor would afford,
That what I speak in this my agony,
Might be transmitted to Posterity:
In such a fair, and lasting character,
As all our Edicts, Laws, and Statutes are.
Would they were graven with an Iron pen, 24. That they were graven with an
iron pen in the lead, and in the rock for ever.

In Lead. or Brass, that all the race of men
Might still remember on this conference,
And see how firm I Have stood to the defense
Of my, as yet, unspotted innocence.
Nor would I have you think, my friends, that I 25. For I know that my redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth.

Value my self on my integrity.
Or boldly plead my innocence, because
I fall not under reach of humane Laws.
Or that I did on Earth no trial fear,
Because my Padlock't-sins did not appear,
By evidence exposed to public view,
But cunningly were all concealed from you.
No, God forbid that ever I should assert
My innocence i'th'least, if in my heart
By strictest search I found on record that,
Which my assertion might invalidat,
No, no, such practices I do detest,
I keep a constant Jury in my breast,
By which I Am hourly tried, no allegation,
No feigned excuse no specious information,
No falsehood, no corrupted evidence,
In that impartial Court of Conscience,
Will ever be received, at any rate,
From this same Court I have certificat
Of my pure innocence.
For I Am persuaded my Redeemer lives,
I firmly do believe it is he that gives
Assurance to all those, whom he does love,
That he will interceed for them above.
I know in him I have some interest,
And upon that security I rest.
I know he will at last on Earth appear,
And make the sinful World quake for fear
Of his approach, when like a mighty king,
He shall in the Clouds appear, and in a ring
Oh Heavens great Host stand circled all around,
Issue his Edicts, and by Trumpet sound
Command both dead, and living to appear
In Judgment, where each mortal thing may hear
His just Procedure: there he will indite
Him, whom you call the cunning Hypocrite,
As well as the open sinner, him he will
Find guilty, and condemn for all his skill;
If I be such then, as you would have me be,
In that great day, my friends, you will clearly see,
What shall become of me.
For after this my Body Worms have eat, 29. And though after my skin worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.

And with their substance it is incorporat:
After my Bones are squandred in the Ground,
And of my Flesh no vestige can be found:
My Scull, my Arms, and Thigh-bones, thrown aloft,
By the Shovel of the Grave-maker as often,
As for new Guests, new Rooms he does provide,
And in the Earth my Corpse are putrifi'd:
After my Dust about the Grave is rolled,
Yet in the Flesh I shall my God behold,
Yes with these eyes, these individual eyes, 27. Whom I shall see for my self,
and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within
me.

With which, I now behold these glorious Skies;
I then shall see, that glorious Architect,
Who for his glory, did the Heavens Erect.
For though some think our Bodies made of Clay,
Which crumble in the Grave, on rising day,
Shall not stand up; but some of thinnest Air
Composed shall in their place that day appear.
Yet I Am convinced that this numerical,
This Earthly Body, this organical
Composure which we here a Body name,
Shall on that day appear the very same.
Only as Earth when vitrify'd, is still
But Earth, though richly polished by the skill
Of knowing Artists: so this piece of Clay
Shall be refined, and at appearance day,
Shall with such beauty, grace, and glory shine,
As God thinks proper for the grand design
Of its perpetual true Felicity,
Which joined with Soul, in heavenly harmony,
It shall enjoy: impassible of all
Those thwarting ills, which here we troubles call.
Then in this Body, with those very eyes
I shall perceive him, with none else, but these
I shall behold my Savior: I believe
Firmly, that in the Flesh I shall perceive
My blessed Redeemer: though my very Reins
Are shrunk within my Back, and all my Veins
Choked up with stagnant, and corrupted Blood,
Are now like Ditches full of Dirt, and Mud.
Although my moisture is all spent and gone,
And I am nothing now but skin, and bone:
Though I all humane shape, and form have lost,
And in the eyes of all more like a Ghost,
Then like a living man I do appear,
And no man will come nigh me now, for fear
Of my contagious breath: yet after all,
This body, this same individual
And putrid body shall again revive,
And I again, as formerly shall live,
And my Redeemer with those very eyes,
I clearlie shall behold, when from the skies
He shall descend to judge the Quick, and Dead,
And with those very eyes I then shall read
The Journals of his Actings: then I shall
Before my Heavenly Judge convince you all
I am no Hipocrite; as you assert,
But innocent, and upright in my heart.
Then O, my friends, why do you persecute 28. But you should say, why persecute
we him? seeing the root of the matter is found in me.

A poor man thus? why do ye contribute
All your endeavors, why is all your wit
Employed to prove that I am Hypocrite?
Ah why so cruel, why so inhumane
As still to doubt me, still to entertain
Bad thoughts of me: although you clearlie see
(What e're my faults, and outward failings be,)
Yet God to me some kindness does impart,
And his true Grace is rooted in my heart.
Then, if for my sake you will not forbear
By strength of argument to make appear
That I am guilty: be at least so kind
To your own selves: as though you in your mind
Suppose I am such, yet to hold your peace,
And not so smartly tell me in my face
That I am of the number of those men,
Whom God does hate: when you perceive how plain
And evident appears from what I speak,
(Although my body be consumed, and weak)
Yet is my living Soul inspired with faith,
With which supported, never while I breath
Shall you evince by all your wit, and art
That I Am an Outside saint, but in my heart
A rotten Sinner: truth you should be blamed
For this Discourse, indeed I am ashamed
To see wise men so over-reached with passion,
In words out run their reason in this fashion-
Now to conclude, my friends, I would advise 29 Be ye afraid of the ^^^rd, for
wrath brings the punishments of the sword.

You all hereafter to become more wise,
Than of your parts to be so proud, and vain,
As thus to insult on poor afflicted men.
As thus to stretch your argument so far,
Thus to conclude that none afflicted are,
But those who have sinned, a Principle indeed
Of dangerous import: pray my friends take heed,
How ye give Judgment in the afflicteds case,
How ye pronounce them guilty: for alace
Why should you thus presume, why should you dare
T'affirm what God himself does not declare:
For he has never yet declared that all,
Those men who in afflictions Quag-mire fall
Are meerlie sinners: or that sorrows are
Still signs of Gods Displeasure, pray be'ware
How you affirm this: for you may incense
Gods wrath by such your saucy Eloquence:
And what you all so often do repeat,
Shall be the wretch'd and miserable state
OF the wicked in this world; if you persist
In these opinions, argue, as you list,
I fear shall be your own: for you provock
Your God to wrath, and openly do mock
His Providence, and inwardly displease
Your Maker by such Arguments as these:
But when your prosperous days are vanished,
And in your Judgments you your sins do read,
When your high pride is levelled with the dust,
'Then you will clearly see that God is just.
Pray then forbear, for Heavens sake pray forbear
This foolish arguing: let me no more hear
Those vain Debates, but if you do intend
To comfort me, beseech you put an end
To this Discourse, and plainly let me know
Whether you be my real friends or no.
For, if you be, seeing how I abhor,
This trifling talk, you will argue so no more,
And if you be not, pray you then begone,
And leave me here rather to die alone,
Than a sad life in such a converse lead,
As all my other sorrows does exceed.
Cap. XX.
AS one at Bar is to be pitied,
Who having well and eloquently plead 1. Then answered Zophar, the Naamathite,
and said.

His innocence, and made the same appear
By evidence, as Sun at noontide, clear:
Yet after all, let him do what he can,
This friendlesse Creature, this unhappy man
Must be condemned: he must to Gibbit go,
Because the partial Judge will have it so.
This is this good-mans case: for all this time,
As one Arraigned for an atrocious Crime,
He has by force of reason labored
To purge himself, and for that end has made
Ample confession of his Faith, yet all
These reasons cannot with his friends prevail,
They still esteem him guilty, and maintain
(However of injustice he complain)
That he had grossly in his life provoked
His God to wrath, though cunningly he cloak't
His murdered sins, with such a specious vail
Of Piety, and World-deceiving zeal,
He closely kep't those murmuring faults concealed,
From sight of men, yet now they were revealed.
For God at length had heard their shameful cry,
And by his punishment did testify,
How much he did abhor hypocrisy.
Let us observe then here with how great heat,
Zophar the words does faithfully repeat,
Which Eliphaz himself, and Bildad too
Had spoke already, yet this wise man now,
In his old strain will lisp them out once more,
As if they never had been spoke before.
When first, says he, fame to our ears did bring 2. Therefore do my thoughts
cause me to answer, and for this I makchaste.

The dismal news of thy sad suffering,
When of thy many losses we did hear,
No men could be more troubled then we were:
We did thy griefs as heavilie bemoan,
As if thy losses had been all our own:
Nor could we in our troubled minds have peace,
When men informed us of thy woeful case,
Until we see thy self, and so forsook
All that was dear to us, and undertook
A tedious journey to this place, that so
We might perform, what every man does owe
To real friendship: that we might condole
Thy sufferings, and from our very soul
Lament with thee, as one, for whom we still
Bore great respect (think of us what thou will)
Therefore with more then ordinary speed,
We hasted hither, not that we might feed
Our eyes with such a woeful spectacle,
As now alace we do behold, or fill
The appetites of envy, and revenge,
With observations on so sad a change.
No we come hither only to declare,
That as thy friends we meant to bear a share
In thy afflictions, and so thou did see,
Seven days we sat in complaisance with thee,
With Garments rent, and ashes on our Head,
Not speaking word more then we had been dead.
We beat our breasts, we bowed, we sighed, and weep't,
And with thy sorrows a true cadence kep't.
We had resolved on silence.
But when we heard thee with great violence,
Exclaim against the works of Providence:
When we did hear thee bitterly arraign
The Justice of our God once, and again;
When with great fury thou did execrat
The hour, that gave thee Birth, and with such heat
Pursue thy foolish wishes; as if he,
Who out of meanest Dust Created thee,
Who By his powerful Breath did make thee live,
Who did to thee, wealth, honors, issue give,
Were still obliged to keep thee in that state,
And had no freedom to eradicate
Thee, and thy race, as well, as other men,
Who surely, (were it lawful to complain)
Could in as sad, and mournful tone declare,
How they did once live, and what now they are.
When we did hear thee, with such impudence,
At all occasions plead thy innocence,
As if our God had been unjust, indeed
We might have feared to have been punished
As well as thou, if we had held our peace,
And not maintained his Justice in the case.
For who I pray could such discourses hear,
And after all from answering forbear?
On this account we have spoke, and spoke again,
And for the love we bear to thee, would fain
Reclaim thee from thy errors, but alace
I fear it is all in vain: we do express
Our selves, as men, that really do fear
Their God, in all our words, and do appear
To be thy friends, but hitherto we see
There Is no convincing such a man, as thee.
For it appears that thou art obstinate
In error, and with all thy soul do hate
To be reformed: esteeming none thy friend,
Who in discourse will be so free, and kind,
As tell thee of thy faults, and let thee see,
How many men have been as well as thee
Oppressed in spirit, and in body too,
And yet have never kep't so much ado,
As thou have done in all their sufferings,
Nor used so many sinful murmurings
Against their Maker: not to speak of us,
Thy friends, whom thou do openly abuse.
For I Have observed, friend, that when Eliphaz
Did learn'dly speak, thou told him, in his face,
He did not understand so much as thou
Did know of Gods great works: when Bildad too
Expressed his mind in golden Eloquence,
And truly spoke, with as much deference
To thy condition, as men did of late,
When thou did triumph in thy prosperous state,
Thou said his tale had formerly been told,
And, so on what he spoke, thou laid no hold,
For he knew nothing, but to rail, and scold.
As for my self, however I did speak,
Thou told me all my arguments were weak.
For my part therefore, seeing 'twas in vain
To speak, I was resolved to abstain
From further talking, but that now I see
You Are pleased of late forsooth to challenge me,
As one who has injured thee, hence I find
My self obliged again to speak my mind.
My thoughts are numerous, and my brimful heart
Will burst, if I the same do not impart,
In words, for which those numerous thoughts do call,
And therefore I Am constrained to utter all
I think with freedom, and I must make haste
To speak too, for this speech shall be the last
That I shall use to thee: hear me and then
Thou shall have no more reason to complain
Of my discourse; let thy two other friends,
(As they most learn'dly can express their minds)
Continue to expostulate with thee,
Thou shall hear no more arguing from me.
Allow me then, my friend, to vindicat 3. I have heard the check of my
reproach, and the spirit of my understanding causes me to answer.

My self from those aspersions of late
You Are pleased to throw upon me: for I Am touched,
To hear my self so frequently reproached,
Even in my face: what man will be so used,
And hold his peace, I must then be excused,
If I make answer to thy late Oration,
Reflecting so much on my reputation.
Why then, my friend, were I as much a slave
To passion, as alace I do perceive
Thou art: should I give vent to wrath as thou
Have all this time done, without more ado,
I Would fall a railing on thee, all my words
Should be like pointed knives, or shearing swords,
My Tongue I Would with such acrimony whet,
Stare with my Eyes, and in such order set
My Teeth against thee, and with clutched Fist,
(Whilst in my burning fury I persist)
To menace thee so thunder out my wrath
As should make thee, I doubt wish more for Death
Than yet thou have done: I Would so belabour thee
With whips of speech as thou should quickly see
Thy foolish error in provoking me.
I would so threaten terror, and revenge
As I suppose, would make thy colors change
For all thy courage: I Would so tartly speak,
As would make all thy joints and sinews quake.
But God forbid that I should be so mad,
As to practice such an unlawful trade:
That I should to my passion give such vent,
Of which hereafter I Would no doubt repent:
No, my good friend, indeed thou do mistake
If thou believe that yet I am so weak:
No, thou shall hear me, with great calmness speak.
For since thou have reproached me to my face,
I cannot sure in honor, hold my peace,
But must make answer to what thou have said,
Though after all indeed I am afraid
I Will have not better success than before,
Only since I intend to speak no more,
Hear me but for some time with patience,
And then descant upon thy innocence,
Even as thou will; for seriously I shall
In a few mild Expressions, sum up all
What I intend to speak: so I have done
And then if thou think fit, I shall be gone.
I doubt not, friend, but thou art fully read 4. Know thou not this of old,
since man was placed upon earth.

In Naturals, and have much labored
To know the real true Origination,
Of all the glorious work of the Creation.
I also know by reading History,
Thou have great knowledge of antiquity;
Whence I conclude sure thou do understand,
How that, since with a high and mighty hand,
The King of Heavens did first the Earth Create,
And in its full possession enstate
That ungrate thing called Man. --
Since that time sure, thou can not choose but know 5. That the triumph of
the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite is but for a moment.

How God Almighty brings the wicked low.
For that accursed man, who does despise
His great Creator, though in wealth he rise
Above his neighbors, and in honors sphere,
A Star of the greatest magnitude appear.
Though like a tall Oak, he does overtop,
The lower shrubs of the World, and in his hope,
Devours whole Kingdoms, Cities, Common-weals,
States, Empires, Districts, or what ever else,
May bring him profit, honor, and delight,
And answer his voracious appetite;
Although he triumphs in the spoils of those,
Whose riches only make great men their foes,
And seizes on all that unhappy ground,
(Belong to whom it will) where can be found
That Idol of the World, which men call Gold:
To purchase which, that Creature will make bold,
To swim through seas of blood, and venture all,
For what wars, Nerves, and Sinews he does call.
Yet are his triumphs all but empty shows
And all his bloody purchases (God knows)
Of which that Heavens-contemning fool does boast
Are scarce well settled, when they are wholly lost.
His joys do only for a moment last,
And when his glorious days are overpast,
And troubles to his former joys succeed,
What miserable life shall that man lead?
Each moment haunted by the memory,
Of his few years spent in prosperity,
Which galls him more then he had never seen
Those whiffling days; nor in his life had been
Above the rank of those, who meanly beg,
Along the high ways, and will make a leg,
For a poor farthing, for its owned by all
That he, who for his pride of old did fall
From that great share of heavenly happiness,
Which, whilst he feared his God, he did possess,
Is now more tortur*d by the memory,
Of his so poorly lo^t felicity,
Then he had never those higher Regions known,
Or seen the splendor of the heavenly Throne,
But had been still in horrid darkness bred,
And from his first Creation Bill^ted,
In The Bowels of the Earth, where, for his pride,
He Is now condemned for ever to reside.
That man I say, then who does God despise* 6. Though his excellency mount up
to the heavens, and his head reaches unto the clouds.

Although in wealth, and honor he Should rise
Above all others, and in hight of pride,
Should undervalue all the world beside,
Yet shall that man so high and excellent, 7. Yet he shall perish for ever like
his own dung* they who have seen him shall say where is he?

Be looked upon but as the Excrement
Of mankind: all his splendid acts shall die
His Fame in dark oblivion shall ly,
Fettered, and speechless, to Eternity.
Those who have seen his flatt'rers to him bow*
Shall then demand, where is this gall^nt now?
For he shall quickly vanish, like a dream, 8. He shall fly away as a dream.
and shall not be found, yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night.

No Antiquary shall find out his name.
That Meteor shall soon p^sse out of sight,
As does an Ignis fatu^s in the night.
The eye which see him with the morning rise, 9. They also who saw him, shall
see him no more, neither shall his place any more hehold him.

Shall not perceive him, when the evening sky*
Approach the Earth: those glorious Palaces,
In which he thought he fully did possess
All that he could desire, shall then appear
As dreadful monuments, serving to declare
What once he was, that from these topics all,
May well conclude the greatness of his fall,
Now after he is fallen, pray let us see, 10. His children shall seek to ^lease
the poor, and his hands shall restore their goods

What will the state of this poor Creature be?
It shall be low, it shall be poor indeed,
His Children shall from Beggars beg their Bread,
And from their Fathers Slaves compassion plead.
Then for his Person (pity him who will) 11. His bones are full of the sins of
his youth, which shall ly down with him in the dust.

He soon becomes a horrid spectacle,
His Flesh is larded with his youthful sins,
And in his vigrous years, old age begins
To seize upon him, dreadful fits of the Stone,
Relics of Pox, and pains of Gout annon,
Begin their work, and take down piece, by piece,
That goodly Fabric, which in former days
Seemed to enjoy a lease of many years:
But now this stately Body soon appears.
Like an old tottering weather-beaten house,
With windows cracked, and walls so ruinous,
As they can scarce support the falling roof,
So that the boldest Artist stands aloof,
And ever he to repair it does begin,
He props't without, and standarts it within,
Yet 'spite of those supporters, after all,
This aged building to the ground does fall.
So this poor wretch now paralytick grown,
With tottering head, and joints all overflow'n,
With Goutish humors, teeth all hanging loose
Within their sockets,: a distilling Nose,
Eyes full of brackish liquor: shoulders stooping,
Under-lip in a constant spittle drooping:
Lungs with a sharp, and wasting cough oppress*t,
Which does bereave him of his nightly rest,
Pumped up the Wind-pipes, with a raging froath,
In lobs, and parcels issuing from his mouth.
His Skin with Boils, and Ulcers diaper'd,
(Of his lascivious sports the sad reward)
His Stomach useless, and his Bowels weary
With the torture of a constant disentery.
His legs now rotting to the Bones apace,
In a consuming Eres^pelas.
Som' doz'n issues, in his Shoulders, Arms,
And Neck appearing, like so many Charms,
And spells upon his Body: all his Veins
Choked with a s^^my pituite, his Reins
Buried in sand, which squandring every where,
Along the Channels of each ureter,
Mixed with some rugged peebles, does so stop
Those Conduits in their Course, that drop, by drop,
The damm'd up Urine issues with such pain,
As he would rather wish he could retain
It in his Body, then thus let it go,
With such infernal agony, although
Barred in its Current, it should upwards rise,
And force a passage at his very Eyes,
Mouth, Nose, or Ears, rather then tolerat,
His Vessels to be so excoriat
With those sharp stones, as from that narrow spout,
More drops of blood than Urine issue out.
With hands by drunken excess in his youth,
So trembling, that they scarce can to his mouth
Convey his food: such swelings in his feet,
As, when in cut out Shoes he walks in Street,
Amongst the busy crowd he dars not go,
Lest some perhaps might tread upon his toe.
But with great leisure by shop-doors does crawl,
Contemned, abhorred, and pointed at by all;
Where on he dwindles* in great wrath, and chaff,
To see how now even Boys do at him laugh,
Supported by the buttresse of a staff.
This man, I say, in such a tottering state,
Of Means, as well as Health evacuat,
Prop'd up by art may for some time subsist,
But let him use what Medicines, he list,
His ruinous moldy Carcass, after all,
Shall split, and in the Grave, in pieces fall,
And with it all those sad effects of Lust,
And other pleasures shall ly down in Dust,
These only he shall carry with him hence,
As dismal vouchers, and sad evidence,
Of days ill spent, these with this man shall die,
These with him, under the cold Turf shall ly.
Here, here is the end of him, who takes delight 12. Though wickedness be sweet
in his mouth, though he hid it under his tongue.

In acts of sin, whose curious appetite,
Feeds upon sin, dressed up with sauce of youth,
Which makes it taste like Honey in the mouth*
Of him who takes such pleasure in his vice, 13. Though he spare it, and
forsake it not, but keep it still within his mouth

As he esteems himself in Paraclise,
When tumbling amongst the downs of soft delight,
In the embraces of some catamite,
Or some rank Whore: of the lewd man, who swears,
There Is nothing to his eye so fair appears,
As those fine pleasures, which perpetually,
The preaching-fools, with violence decry,
Who hugs sin in his bosom, clings about it,
Who cannot eat, drink, wake, or sleep without it.
O thus shall end the man, who in his youth, 14. Yet his meat in his bowels is
turned, and it is the gall of asps within him.

As one keeps Sugar-tablet in his mouth,
And cause it is sweet, he will not let it o*r,
Until it melt, but sucks it more, and more*
With great delight: so sweetly sucks the juice
Of sin, as if it were his only choice.
For as a poisoned morsel to the taste,
By art is rendered pleasant, but at last,
When in the Stomach it begins to boil,
And throws up noisome fumes like sealding Oil,
Not Rhubarb, gall of Asps, or Hemlock root,
Can be more bitter: so beyond all doubt
Sin, when the pleasure of its act is gone,
And man's hot blood begins to cool anon.
Becomes so bitter, so severely tart,
As makes the poor deiuded sinners heart,
Sink in a sea of griefs, and meanly faint,
At thoughts of sin: but O how few repent,
At these sad doings! O how few abstain,
For all that sorrow, all that grief, and pain,
From shrewd repeating of those sins again.
With the same pleasure he who swallows down, 15. He has swallowed down
riches, and he shall vomit them up again, God shall cast them out of his belly.

Great quantity of worldly means, as soon
As he has got according to his mind,
His bargain's closed, the writings sealed, and signed,
The Evidents, and Keys Delivered,
His Title fixed, his Right ascertained,
Both of his Purchase, and his Warrandice,
And with his own convenience paid the price.
So that he cannot fancy for his heart,
Where lies the encumbrance on which Lawyers art
Can found Eviction. --
Then God, in anger, on this fool does look,
And as one angles Fishes, by a Hook,
So neatly busk'd, and covered with a Fly,
As in the Water to a vulgar eye,
It appears real: so when wealth entices,
This cunning worldling, by his own devices,
He Is quickly caught, and hooked, all he has got,
His Houses Mannours, Treasures, and what not,
Are quickly taken from him, and amain
He vomits all he swallowed, up again.
Like one that sucks the poison of an Asp, 16. He shall suck the poison of
asps, the vipers tongue shall s^ay him.

Or Vipers Tongue, who to his utmost gasp,
Continues in a constant vomiting,
So shall this Creature, once so flourishing:
By loss succeeding loss continually,
See himself stripped of all before he die.
Those great contentments which he did project 17. He shall not see the rivers,
the floods, the brooks of honey, and butter.

In all his actings, which he did expect,
As the reward of all his toil and pain,
Whilst he would fancy in his idle brain*
How in the affluence of all earthly pleasure,
He Would spend his years, at his own ease and leisure,
He never shall enjoy, nor shall he see,
Or understand what those contentments be.
No, he shall ever see those happy days, 18. That which he labored for he
shall restore, and shall not swallow it down, according to his substance shall
the restitution be, and he shall not rejoice therein.

Which in his great transactions. he always
Projected to himself; for though some men,
Their sinful acquests for some time retain,
Yet others for a moment scarce enjoy
Those things, in purchase whereof they employ
Much precious time; so this unhappy man,
Shall see his Lands, and Means (do what he can)
Ere he by sherking methods, and oppression,
Has got the same well in his own possession,
Quickly restored, and all he had of late,
In a few minutes wholly dissipat.
Nor must he think his substance to divide,
And that Gods justice will be satisfied
With restitution of his sinful gain,
Whilst what he fairly had, he may retain,
No, he must no such fancy entertain.
For as a few prohibit Merchandise,
In time of War, will make a Loadning Prize,
To boot, with Ship, in which these goods are found,
If to the Ports of Enemies it is bound;
So all his wealth, without distinction fall,
Under the Mene-tekel on his wall,
And for oppression he must forfeit all.
For to enrich himself, has ruined many, 19. Because he has oppressed, and
has forsaken the poor, because he has violently taken away an house which he
builded not.

Where his advantage lay, not sparing any.
Without all Law, he did oppress the poor,
Distrain'd their goods, and turned them to the door,
Half naked, with their Families to feed,
In charity, and when they begged their bread
From him, he would bid those wretches quick be gone,
Or he would cause lay them in the Stocks anon,
Because this avaricious man, God wot,
Has seized on houses which he builded not.
Therefore this man shall in his mind possess 20. Surely he shall not feel
quietness in his belly, he shall not save of that which he desired.

No real peace, nor solid quietness,
Because so often he has the poor oppress't,
In his roused conscience he shall have no rest,
He sees his numerous losses antedate,
His death: his substance all dilapidate.
Before his eyes; nor can he so much save,
As may defray his charges to the Grave,
In decent order of a Funeral,
But dies deserted, and abhorred by all.
None of his kindred shall his death bemoan, 21. There shall none of his meat
be left* therefore shall no man look for his goods.

Or take up Inventar when he is gone,
Of his effects, no man for his Estate
Shall sue, no kinsmen amongst themselves debate
Who shall succeed him: none crave sequestration
Of Writs, or put in for administration:
No, no, for all his former wealth and store,
Now he is gone, he shall be found so poor,
Shall neither have Heir, nor Executor.
And when do you think shall this oppressor fall? 22. In the fullness of his
sufficiency he shall be in straits, every hand of the wicked shall come upon
him.

Even in the hight and affluence of all
Worldly delites, and pleasure, in the prime
Of his enjoyments, in the pruning time,
Of all his projects, when his life appears,
Entitled to many happy years.
When he does triumph in his high-swoln paunch,
Then shall he be destroyed, root and branch:
Then shall his fellow-sinners fall upon him,
Kill him* and so there shall be no more on him.
Have you not seen what pleasure, and delight, 23. When he is about to fill his
belly, God shall cast the ^ury of his wrath upon him while he is eating.

A young man of a lusty appetite,
Expresses at the sight of luscious meats,
Falls to them greedily; but no sooner eats
A few small morsels, then incontinent
He changes colors, and begins to faint,
Finding the poison in its operation,
Abridge his hours beyond imagination:
Then in a fever violent and hot,
Unconquerable by any antidote;
Studded with spots, and poisonous signs, he lies
For a small time, sighs out his life and dies.
So when this man expects he may enjoy,
What he has purchased, then will God destroy
Him utterly, and send him, with his hopes,
To ly in dust amongst those silly ^ops,
Who the same thoughts in life did entertain,
But now too late, perceive they are all but vain.
Nay though he may by policy prevent 24. He shall fly from the iron weapon, and
the bow of steel shall strick him through.

The effects of an unlucky accident,
And by his cunning art stave of another,
Yet after he has escaped both one, and 'tother,
A third shall reach him which he least of all
Suspects, and make him quickly headlong fall
Down from the turret of his happiness,
And in a few hours do his business.
As he who from the raging sword does fly,
When come to handy blows, is by and by,
By Arrow from a Crosse-bow in his flight,
Wounded, or with a Bullet shot downright.
And as when one pursues his enemy, 25. It is drawn, and comes out of the
body, yea the glistering sword comes out of his gall, terrors are upon him.

With shot as thick as hail, whilst he does fly,
And beats him down, so when with furious speed,
He gallops up, and finds him not yet dead,
He draws his Arrow from the deadly wound,
Whilst the poor soul does gasp upon the ground,
And whilst he breaths, from stricking never ceases,
Till with his sword has hewed him all to pieces.
So in his anger, God will still persist,
And never from beating of this man desist,
With vengeance, upon vengeance, till he grind him
To powder, so that those who think to find him,
Dead in some ditch, and when his Corpse are found,
Would be at charge to hide it under ground,
Shall make search for his Body here, and there,
But they may as well ramble in the Air,
A hunting of the wild Boar, Fox, or Hare.
Let them search, as they will, yet without doubt,
For all their Art, shall never find him out.
Nor will our God, when he does once begin, 26. All darkness shall be hid in
his secret places* a fire not blown shall consume, it shall go ill with him,
that is left in his tabernacle.

To plague this wicked person for his sin,
In his proceedings so much favor show,
To this same man, as at one single blow
To cut him off: no, he must not expect
That God will him at once to pieces break,
No, no, it is not his custom so to deal,
With such vile Malefactors, but piece meal,
He Will take him down, as thou perhaps ha^t seen,
In thy own time, how some rich man has been,
Whilst flourishing in Wealth, not instantly,
But by degrees, reduced to poverty.
For first some tache upon his reputation,
Is fixed, which puts his credit out of fashion,
Then all those men, who deal with him suspect,
There may be something in it, and least he break,
With all their Goods, and many in his hands,
Where his effects do ly, each one demands,
And he is secure, can first extend his Lands.
Then for his person, he dars not abide,
The assaults of law, but is constrained to hide
Himself in some dark corner, out of sight,
And cast up his Accounts by Candlelight.
Or if in obscure nights he steals abroad,
Thinking to find a way, by some By-road,
To his own dwelling, he retires as soon
To his sad kennel, as he sees the Moon
Peep through the Clouds, at length the Catch-poles eye,
Does find him out, and he is by and by
Clapped up in Jayl: the news no sooner spread,
But all of his Imprisonment are glad,
And on him soon a many Actions laid.
Thus now in Firmance, his effects all seized,
Oppressed with sorrow, crazy, and diseased:
His desolate, and starving Family,
With open mouth, for Aliment do cry:
But he has nothing left, to purchase bread,
And cannot now upon his credit, feed
Those hungry things, but for one single day,
So that they are forced to shift another way,
Truss up their little Furniture, and so
All hand in hand fairly a begging go.
The news of this so shrewdly does torment
The Imprisoned man, that now (his spirits spent)
With his last breath, he pays his Creditors,
And makes the Worms his sole Executors.
Even so this grand Oppressor, whilst his Sun
Does clearly shine, is by degrees undone,
And all his friends and followers every where,
When this man falls, shall in his Judgment share.
Nor need his Judges be at so much pains, 27. The heaven shall reveal his
ini^ui^^, and the earth ^^all the up against him.

As against this man to search for evidence.
For Heavens themselves (though all men silent were)
Shall his bad actings openly declare;
And when this sinner, with up-lifted hand,
Arraigned, for hundred Crimes, at Bar shall stand:
The Earth in Judgment too shall then appear,
And make out all his Crimes, so full and clear,
As of his guilt that Court shall no more doubt,
But against him sentence speedily give out.
Then shall the Witness first of all, lay hands
On this poor soul, and as the Law commands,
Beat him to Death: that all the world may see,
With what impartial measures such as he
Are judged, and punished. --
Thus shall this tall, and famous sinner die 28. The increase of his house
shall depart, and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath.

Himself: and for his poor posterity,
They shall themselves like Rivolets disperse,
Some here, some there, through all the universe.
Poor pedling Miscreants, in great straits, and wants,
A scattered rabble, the Inhabitants
Of all the World; a sad Society
Of hateful Slaves, without all property,
Without all order, Laws and Government,
Pillaged by all, and yet dare not resent:
Nor shall this so late numerous Family,
Amongst them all erect one Colony,
That may preserve this great man's Memory.
And for his Goods and Chattels, in the day
Of Gods hot Wrath, they shall all melt away
Thus all bad men shall perish, thus they shall, 29. This is the portion of a
wicked* man* and the heritage appointed to him by God.

Who do contemn their great Creator, fall.
Presumptous Persons God does punish so,
These judgments every one shall undergo,
Who with bold language does his God upbraid,
And is not of his flamming Wrath afraid:
When he sees others punished, but persists
In Sin, thinks, speaks, and acts what he lists.
Cap. XXI.
AFter this storm of words was overblown 1. Put Job answered and said.

And Zophar, now his utmost skill had shown
In talking, and as one, who had designed
To speak no more, had fully spoke his mind.
Without all passion, with a Spirit stayed
To all this Lecture, which his friend had read,
Thus only Job in calmness answered.
I do not doubt, my friends, but when by fame 2. Heat diligently my speech, and
let this be your consolation.

Informed of my distress, you hither came,
When hearing of my lamentable state,
(Which has occasioned so much noise of late
Both far and wide) you thought it worth your pains.
with your own eyes, to visit what remains
Of your old friend. --
When you were pleased I say, to be so kind,
I make no doubt, but that you then designed,
In Sympathetick bowels of compassion,
TO afford me truly all the consolation,
Lay in your power: I make no doubt indeed,
But when you see me first your heart did bleed,
I do believe that you were stupifi*d
When me first on the Dunghill you descried,
As your kind silence fully testified.
Nay further, when you spoke, I think you meant
To give me no occasion of complaint,
As since you have done, but that you did intend,
Some words of consolation for your friend,
I am persuaded you are honest men,
Just, fearing God, and such as entertain*
No wicked thoughts, but openly detest,
That man, who is a sinner in his breast,
Though in his words, and looks, he would fain deceive
The World, and make the neighborhood believe
He Is truly pious: and that you do hate
The man, whose conscience is adulterat.
I know, my friends, what hitherto ye've said,
Was out of love, and I would fain persuade
My self to think, that all this eloquence
Is not made use of, to give me offense.
Yet after all, my friends, I would request,
You would take notice, for some time at least,
To what I speak, hear me but patiently,
Whilst I express my thoughts, and seriously,
I Will take it more kindly in my present state,
Then any thing you have spoke, or done as yet.
This will to me more consolation bring,
Then all your talk, and nauseous arguing.
Allow me, as you love me, then to speak, 3. suffer me that I may speak, and
after that I have spoken, mock on.

But some small time, for truth I am so weak,
I cannot make long harangues, and indeed
I may complain, but am not fit to plead,
With such as you: what therefore I intend,
To speak, shall very quickly have an end.
My words shall be but few, and when I Have done,
You may proceed, as formerly, mock on.
Pray mark, my friends, then I make no complaint
To mortal man: for it is most evident, 4. As for me, is my complaint to man? if
it were so, why should not my spirit be troubled?

That my complaint is made to God alone,
To thee all-hearing God, I do bemoan,
My present state: my judgments do not flow,
As you may see, from any hand below;
No they do from a higher hand proceed,
And in them I the wrath of God do read,
From him they do proceed immediately,
He Is the only author of my misery:
My plagues, alace, are extraordinary,
Not such as usually inflicted are
On other men: no they are such as none,
Have ever yet endured but I alone:
No wonder then that I cannot contain
My passion, but do heavily complain.
Nay let us even suppose, my plagues did flow,
From the hand of man, I pray, my friends, if so,
Why may not I as other men be vex't?
Is it so strange to see a man perplex't
With misery complain, as I do now?
Pray, my good friends, what would you have me do?
Will Not you allow me, where I find a pain,
As all men do, a little to complain?
My constitution is but ordinar,
And I Am but Flesh and Blood, as others are.
May not I then exhibit my complaint
To my Creator? since he is content
To hear me, since he does to me allow
That liberty, I cannot have from you.
And O, amidst my woes, and miseries,
My griefs, my terrors, and anxieties,
With all the pains, that do my soul oppress,
How happy am I, that I can address
My self to God: indeed it were not good
For me, if this grand boon were not allowed,
For were I to address my self to men,
I fear my prayers should be used in vain,
And I Would have yet more reason to complain.
Mark what I say then, mark, and be afraid, 5. Mark me, and be astonished, and
lay your hands upon your mouth.

And let your hands upon your mouths be laid.
Mark me, I pray, observe my sad estate,
And then I hope you will no more debate
Upon the subject, with such violence,
But will confess with me, that Providence
Sends plague on men, with great indifference.
Remark me, pray, observe how God, in me,
Points out so clear, that all the world may see,
What mean esteem he has of mortal race*
View me, I pray, look but upon my face,
And there behold a sad Epitome
Of Heavens displeasure. -- --
O were there no more worth your noticing,
Then this alone, it is such a dismal thing,
As if you take it in consideration,
Affords a subject of sad contemplation;
Such as might make you all ashamed to speak,
As you have done, and I Am convinced would check
The heat of your discourse, give ear then pray,
As you would be informed to what I say.
For when I think upon my former state, 6. Even when I remember I am afraid,
and trembling takes hold on my flesh.

How in the World I flourished of late,
How all my wishes did attain their aim,
And I no sooner could a blessing name,
But as soon God would send it to my door,
And bless me so till I could ask no more.
And now how wretch'd, how poor and miserable,
In yours, and all men's eyes, how despicable,
And quite undone, I here on Dunghill ly,
The hyperbole of pain, and misery.
When I amidst my groans, and lamentations,
Reflect upon the various Dispensations
Of our great God, and weigh them seriously
I quake, I sweat, I tremble, by, and by,
I shake all over, I am dampt with fear,
Like one out of his wits I do appear:
Infernal horror on my Soul does seize,
And I become all stupid by degrees,
When I consider on this sad occasion,
What unexpected fearful alteration
I Have seen of late: Oh I am all confounded,
My Soul with fear and terror is surrounded.
When I consider how the Almighty raises
This, or that man, and throws down whom he pleases.
Without regard to all these mean Defenses,
Which mortals use, these pitiful Pretenses,
Of Piety, and Virtues by which some
Would plead forsooth Exemption from his Doom,
Whilst he with great indifference on all
Sends out his plagues, then I a-trembling fall;
Then I perceive that what you all assert,
And labor to evince with so much art.
Concluding firmly God does punish none,
Nor sends afflictions, but on those alone,
Whose Sins do call for Judgments, and from thence
By an unquestionable consequence,
Infer that I am such: then, then I see
(What ever errors you would fix on me)
That your Position is both false, and vain,
Below such men as you are to maintain.
Since then my friends, by sad experience;
I know what you, who never yet had sense,
Of such afflictions cannot understand,
Me thinks I may with reason now demand
Your firm atention to what I shall speak,
Upon the subject, which you may expect
Shall be sincere: for who can so express
The Justice of th* Almighty in the case,
As he who feels it; as the man, God knows,
Who Is tasted both Prosperity and Woes?
If it be true then, what you all assert 7. Wherefore do the wicked live, and
become old, yea, are mighty in power.

That sin is only punished, for my part,
I Would gladly know why Heavens King does give
Blessings to those, who merit not to live?
Why does the race of sin the earth possess?
Why thus in Issue, Honor, Wealth increase?
Do we not daily see how sinful men
Do in their several stations attain
To all that in this life can be desired
Wished or projected? -- --
Nor does the Tide of prosperous days increase
To its full height, but for a season last,
No, as their sins, so do their blessings grow;
The current of Gods mercies still does flow
In those men's lives, whatever they demand,
To feed the sense is granted out of hand:
In a most smooth, uninterrupted stream,
Of earthly blessings, like a pleasant dream,
They Are gently wafted without Wind, or Wave,
Into the spacious Ocean of the Grave,
Thus live and die they, but this is not all, 8. Their seed is established in
their sight, and their offspring before their eyes.

For were these blessings merely personal,
And perished with themselves, we might suppose,
That their poor issue, who their eyes did close,
Shut up with these, all their felicity,
And became heirs to utmost misery.
No, no, these outward blessings, are so far,
From dying with themselves, as they appear,
Entailed upon their Family, and Race,
And settled so on their appanages,
As if inherent in the several fees.
Nay (which is more) those men whom you do call,
The worst of sinners, do perceive this all,
In their own time they see their Families
Flourish like verdant plants, before their eyes;
They see the hopes of numerous Generations,
And view the rise of many famous Nations;
In their fair Offspring: they perceive their seed,
In peace, and plenty, fully established.
Their Childrens Children, grow up in their sight,
As Heirs apparent to their Fathers Right.
In fine, those wretches see their memory,
Run on the lines of perpetuity.
These sinful men, within doors live at ease, 9. Their houses are safe from
fear, neither is the rod of God upon them.

Free from all jars, blessed with domestic peace,
They know no discords, no, nor quarrels they,
No, picques, or humors, ly a-crosse their way,
But all the day, they plentifully feed,
With pleasant converse, and at night to bed
They drill, encircled, in each others arms;
Free from all passions, clamours, fears, allarums.
And as in plenty within doors they dwell, 10. Their bull gendreth, and fails
not, their cow calveth and casts not her calf.

So with these men, all without doors goes well;
Their Cattle thrive, their Grounds are well manured,
Their beasts are from ill accidents secured,
Their Revenues are punctually paid,
Their Acts of Court Leet faithfully obeyed;
Their Tennents too, do live in wealth and peace,
Enjoying each an undisturbed lease
For many years, and richly cultivat,
Each one his parcel, of his Lords Estate;
In short, these men, are fully blessed in all
They can desire, their Vassals at a call
Attend their motions: every one contends*
Who most shall serve them, and be most their friends.
Around the neighboring fields, their wings they spread, 11. They send forth
their little ones like a flock, and their children dance.

And all the Campaign soil is overlaid,
With numerous Branches of their Families,
Which soon dilate themselves in Colonies.
And People, Countries, far remote from these,
Which first their Predecessors did possess,
Amongst themselves they make firm alliance,
And when they meet, they revel, sport, and dance;
They Correspond in mutual harmony,
And spend their time in mirth and jollity.
For when they meet at their grand Festivals, 12. They take the timbrel, and
harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ.

They eat, and drink, and then with Masks, and Balls,
They entertain themselves, the Harp, and Lute,
The Viol, Organ, Timbrel contribute,
TO increase their jovialty, and all their care
Is only for their sports, and daily fare.
In peace, and plenty, with great affluence, 13. They spend their days in
wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave.

Of worldly blessings, and convenience,
Of every thing that humane life requires,
They waste their days, and when their lease expires,
And sullen death commands them to remove,
And quite those fields, which with their souls they love,
Then do not these men die, as others do
In pain and torment: -- --
But as soft slumber on the eyes does creep,
And gently moves, when men would fall asleep.
Or as a Candle burning nigh the end,
Its light in twinkling by degrees does spend,
So in the Grave, those men do gently roll,
Not troubled with the progress of the soul,
Not anxious whither it should take its course,
After this life, for better, or for worse,
They care not whether, all is one to them,
For they think Soul and Body are the same,
And as they lived together, so they die,
Returning both to dust by sympathy:
They think reunion not imaginable,
And hold the Resurrection but a fable.
Thence void of apprehensions, after death,
With great indifference, they shut up their breath.
Nor are these men, to whom God is so kind, 14. Therefore they say unto God,
depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

Of The better sort, more polished and refined,
Then common sinners are: no they are such,
As hugg their sins, and honor vice so much,
In foulest shape, with so high veneration,
They Are not ashamed to make it their profession:
Such as our God so little do esteem,
They think his glory but a sounding name:
Such as affirm the works of Providence,
The checks, and dictats of a Conscience,
To be but stale devices forged by those
Envious men, whom Fortune does oppose:
Men who enraged because they cannot possess,
That which themselves acknowledge happiness,
Picked to see others, in a better state,
Then they themselves invent, they know not what,
To cross their joys, and fain by art would move
The World to credit, what they cannot prove,
For when outwitted by Philosophy,
They run to th're fuge of a mystery.
Yet God is even kind to such as these;
Who think so of him, and speak, what they please,
Who boldly laugh at Death, Heavens, Hell, and all,
In principles so Atheistical,
As they to God dar impiously say,
Prithee begone, disturb us not we pray:
Let us alone, torment us pray no more,
With admonitions which our souls abhor:
Forbear thy curses, and dire menaces,
Vex us no more, but let us live in peace,
And when we die, thou may dispose of us,
Even as thou will; but whilst we live, we'll thus
Employ our time in mirth and jollity,
And take our hazard of Eternity.
For who, say they, shall ever us persuade,
Or make believe that thou a soul have made,
A something, which does after death exist,
A thing which preachers call even what they list;
That such a thing of thy own essence part,
Infused into us by thy special art,
Should after separation be condemned
To endless torments, and by thee esteemed
As useless dross, because the thing did take
Pleasure in that, which thou thy self did make,
Why this, we are persuaded were to hate
Thy self, and so thy self excruciat,
For others errors: this is somewhat strange,
And in our thoughts, a very poor revenge,
Give orders, pray then, to thy preaching men,
Who in this World spend much talk in vain,
To spare their lungs, for they shall never persuade
Any of us, that thou a soul have made,
A subtle Idea, a thing Divine,
Limbeck'd to the hight, sublimat sopra fine,
To be destroyed eternally:
No let us live, say they, even as we please,
On Earth, let us enjoy our mirth and ease,
Not all thy art our pleasures shall control,
Nor shall the silly notion of a soul,
Ever be able in the least to check
What we resolve, by what we may expect.
Pray who is this God, say they, let us understand 15. Who is the Almighty that
we should serve him, and what profit should we have if we pray unto him.

Who Is this Almighty Lord, at whose command
We all must live, and die? pray let us know
Who is this Prince, to whom all here below
Must pay such homage? who is this Heavenly King,
To whom all Mortals on their knees must bring
Their praying tribute, twice a day at least,
And once a week give audience to some Priest,
Who calls himself this Kings Ambassador,
Whilst he repeats his Message o'r and o'r,
In such a saucy, and incensing strain,
As those who hear him hardly can abstain
From choler, when he is so bold to say,
All men shall be chastis'd, who do not pray
To this Great God: -- --
For what end should we pray who stand in need
Of nothing from him, those whose daily bread
Comes from his Table, those who do possess
No part of earthly Joy and happiness,
As we do all: those whom unluckie fate
Has plunged into a miserable state,
Those men may lie a begging at Heavens Gate.
But, as for us, who live in afluence,
Who spend our time in great convenience,
Why should we pray? what can he give us more,
Than we enjoy, nay whom should we adore?
Shall we adore an unknown Prince, who shrouds
Himself behind the Curtains of the Clouds?
And treats the Sons of Men with such Disgrace,
As he disdains to let us see his face.
The Sun, and Moon, we know, and daily see,
But for this God of Heaven, pray who is he?
Or if such adoration, we allow him,
What profit shall we make by praying to him?
Have any fortunes by this praying made?
Are any wealthy by this idle trade?
Do not we see, how those, who daily call
On this same God are miserable all?
Poor, and Deformed, Contemptible, and Mean,
By want of food, most scandalouslie lean:
Praying, and sleeping by a formal Rule,
Treated by all the world in Ridicule.
Why then should we to him our selves apply,
Who live in Wealth, since only Poverty
Is the return of Prayer? shall we request
That we may become such? no let us wast
Our Years in mirth, and not our selves betray
To misery, but chase all cares away,
By frolic sports, whilst Fools and Beggars pray.
Yet such, even such the God of Heavens does bless, 16. Lo their God is not in
their hand, the counsel of the wicked is far from me.

Such cursed things in Honor, Wealth, and Peace,
Do flourish here on earth, those wretched men
Have in their lives no reason to complain:
They know no judgments, nor afflictions they,
Whilst' those, who from their tender Years do pray,
And in Devotion early exercise
Their spirits, are involved in miseries,
For shame forbear, my friends, then to assert
That punishments are meerlie by desert
Inflicted, when the contrair does appear,
By what I Have said so evident, and clear:
Nor would I, my dear friends, you should mistake
My meaning, or suppose by what I speak,
Whilst I express how happy those men are,
That I envy them, or in the least appear
To harbor any thoughts of discontent,
Whilst those means plenty, with my punishment,
And wretched state of life, I do compare,
Or that I would be happy as they are.
No, God forbid, that I should entertain
Such impious thoughts, or any way complain
Of Gods good Dispensations: -- --
No, I Am so far from that, as seriously
I think, what those men call Prosperity,
Does not deserve the name of happiness,
But is at best, but like a gentle breeze,
Which blows before a Storm: I do believe
What those poor Souls, do fillilie conceive.
To be the true supreme Felicity
Is on the matter, downright Misery.
O let those men's prosperity to me
Be never known: let these eyes never see
Plenty on earth, as I have seen before,
Let my kind Maker never me restore,
To any thing which men call happiness,
Rather than I should be as one of those.
And now my friends, as I have thus expressed 17. How often is the candle of the
wicked put out, and how often comes their destruction?

How much the wicked in this life are blessed,
So I would have you know that what I say,
I do not as a firm position lay:
Nor do I think it proper on my part,
That I should so tenaciouslie assert
That all such prosper, as you stifflie plead,
That such by him, are only punished.
No, my good friends, I am not to maintain
A point, whereof the contrair is so plain;
I Am not so much in love with vain debate,
Nor am so wedded to my own conceit,
As you appear to be, that I should call
What I have said, so purelie general,
As it of no exception can admit,
No, I do not pretend to so much wit,
As to maintain, with Reasons full extent,
The truth of such a foolish Argument.
For I do only say that some, not all
Of those same men, whom you do wicked call,
Are blessed on earth: because I understand
As well as you, that on the other hand,
Many of them do in this life sustain
The Wrath of God; and undergo much Pain,
Much Hatred, much Contempt, and Poverty,
Whilst here on earth; and suffer Misery,
In its extreme Degree: I know that some
Unhappie men are wholly overcome
With Plagues, and Sorrows, and before they die,
Reap the reward of their impiety.
Though such as in this earth are punished,
And by afflictions terrors visited,
Are not so numerous, if we do compare
Their list with those on Earth, who blessed are.
How often, pray, do we see such sinful men,
Exposed to Gods displeasure? one of ten
Perhaps are so: it is true, when God does fall
Upon those villainous men, root, branch, and all,
He does destroy, their glory quickly dies,
As does the spark from flame that upward flies,
Or as the light of Candle, when its head
Is turned down, is soon extinguished,
Its splendid luster instantly is spent,
Evaporating in a noisome scent.
As Chaff, or Stuble, driven before the Wind, 18. They are as stuble before the
wind, and as chaff, that the storm carries away.

Scattered along the Fields we daily find,
Such, when God is incensed shall be the state
Of those poor men, they shall be dissipat
Upon the face of Earth, their Families
Shall go to ruin, and their Memories
Shall with themselves expire, their former glory,
Shall not be entered in the Page of Story.
Nay, that they may be further punished, 19. God lays up his iniquity for his
children, he rewards him, and he shall know it.

Their misery shall not be limited
To their own persons, for before their eyes,
They shall perceive horrid calamities,
Invading of their so late happy Race,
Destroy their pleasures, and disturb their peace.
Shall see their dearest Children beg their Bread,
And with sad roots, their hungry Stomachs feed.
Shall see them scattered every where abroad,
Sitting half-naked in each common Road,
With lift up hands most lamentably cry,
For Alms, from every one that passes by.
All this they shall perceive, and quickly know, 20. His eyes shall see his
destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty.

When God for any man designs a blow,
Though he is long-suffering, and slow to wrath,
And takes no pleasure in a sinners death:
Yet when his Choler once begins to rise,
Judgments like Lightnings issue from hit Eyes,
Upon these wretches, which with sudden flash,
Them and their issue all to pieces dash:
For when Heavens Monarch does in wrath appear,
His Judgments are so heavy and severe,
No Mortal Shoulders can his loadnings bear.
And where they would cheer their spirits formerly, 21. For what pleasure has he
in his house after him, when the number of his months is cut off in the midst.

With expectation, that their memory
Might be preserved, and men may clearly read
Their glorious names ingrav'd, when they were dead,
In The several Foreheads of their fruitful Race,
Which might proclaim their worth from place to place.
Alace what pleasure now can these men have?
When all their Race is swallowed by the Grave
In their own time? when all their pleasure dies,
And all their memories are before their eyes,
By the very hand of God obliterat,
So that no vestige of their former state
Does now remain: and they are in their prime,
(E're they are well entered in the books of Time,)
Shiffled out of the World, and quickly sent
To their so often derided punishment.
Since then, my friends, our God is pleased to bless 22. Shall any reach God
knowledge, seeing he judges those that are high.

Some sinful wretches, letting them possess
All pleasures here on Earth, and makes them dye
As they had lived, in soft tranquillity.
Whilst others of 'em are so sore oppress't
By plagues on Earth, as they can have no rest,
But wearied of their lives, incessantly
Cry our for help from death, until they d^*
Who Is he dares say that none are punished
But sinful men? that God has limited
His Judgments only to such men as these,
Whilst all the truly godly live in peace?
What man is he will undertake to teach
God what he ought to do? or vainly preach
Upon a text so far above his reach?
So then, my friends, I hope you will allow,
The Almighty God knows better things then you,
And is not to be taught at any rate,
How he his Judgments should proportionat,
With this, or the other subject, as you dream,
And in your crazy judgments do esteem.
No, no, my friends, as God does fully know,
So he does fully judge both high, and low.
Even as he pleases: nor can humane wit
Prescribe to God methods so just and fit,
As he does use, in all his dispensations
Upon the sons of men. --
Yet must we not imagine, or suppose,
That he who all men most exactly knows,
Who all things framed, who all things did create,
Who judges men, of every rank and state,
With a true knowledge, and deliberatly,
That he should let his plagues at random fly,
On this or the other, as it were by chance,
No, none are punished but by ordinance,
And firm decree of Heaven, in which does shine,
The glory of his Majesty Divine.
For though indeed we cannot understand 23. One dies in his full strength,
being wholly at case and quiet.

The Almighties ways, when we perceive his hand
Sometimes on this, sometimes on the other fall,
As if he did observe no rule at all,
In governing of the World; yet if we do,
In sad sobriety, observe but how
He lets some live in wealth and happiness,
Whilst others, in great sorrow, and distress,
Consume their days: how some in peace do dye
Larded with riches, to whom penury
Was never known; whose calm and quiet years,
Void of all cares, anxieties, and fears,
In a course so serene, so smooth, and slow,
As streams do gently through the Meadows flow,
Slide softly to the grave, as one should think
Those men knew nothing, but to eat and drink.
How with such plenty those same men are blessed, 24. His breasts are full of
milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow.

As scarce by Humane Art can be expressed;
Their bodies healthful, strong and vigorous,
As tempered Steel, nothing obnoxious
To the force of any violent disease,
But as they lived, so go to death with ease,
Their breasts with milk, their bones with marrow fall
In earthly pleasures become soft and dull.
Whilst others of those men our God permits 25. And another dies in the
bitterness of his soul, and never eats with pleasure.

To live, and die, in such tormenting fits,
Of Poverty, Fear, and Anxiety,
With all the species of Adversity.
As all their lives, they have no other fare
But tears, and do not know what pleasures are:
In tears they sleep, in tears they do awake,
Their hearts with sorrow always seem to break,
Oppress't with tears, and sighs, they eat and drink,
Nor can their minds on any pleasure think,
But in the bitter anguish of their Soul,
Conjure all living Creatures to condole
Their sad disasters, fretting constantly
At others blessings, and so cursing die.
Should we, I say, in serious meditations, 26. They shall ly down alike in the
dust, and the worms shall cover them.

Observe the course of Gods great Dispensations,
And carfully remark how all things go
With wicked men, we certainly would know
That all Gods Ways to our instruction tend,
For if of both these we behold the end,
Why all are huddled in the dust together;
Where home-bred-worms have no regard to either;
Nor make distinction betwixt any there,
But look on all flesh as their ordinar,
What ever price men put upon it; hence
On rich and poor, with great indifference,
As on their daily Commons, they do feed,
Considering no more, but that such are dead.
So that, as in the grave we cannot know*
Whether those men were punished or no,
Whilst here on life, with peace and plenty blessed,
Or whether never, while now, enjoying rest.
Even so, my friends, we cannot understand
The various motions of Gods mighty hand;
Nor give a reason, why this wicked man,
Not that is punished, more than any can
Assign a reason, why God did creat
Man's body, in such vigor, form, and state,
Only to become silly insects meat.
And now, my friends, that I have argued 27. Behold I know your thoughts, and
the devices which you wrongfully imagine against me.

So fully on the case, and labored
To state the question betwixt you, and me
So clearlie, it is because I plainly see
All your Discourse, since first you hither came,
(Though modestly you do forbear to name
The persons, whom you mean) is reallie
Designed for me, and my poor family;
For I perceive by all your Rhetoric,
(Whose nauseous Tropes would make one truly sick,
Who Is in good Health,) that all you do intend
Is not to comfort, but condemn your friend.
For, though you would with the fashion of the times, 28. For ye say where is the
house of the Prince? and where are the dwellings of the wicked?

Conceal the persons, but reprove the crimes;
Yet, when you tell me ever, and anonn,
In your proud way, that God afflicts none
But sinful men, and argue thence so much
Since I Am afflicted, I must sure be such.
I then perceive that I am all the butt
Of your Discourse. -- --
Why you had as good speak it plainly out,
And not with so much cunning, go about
To palliate your thoughts; for when you say
Where Is now this Prince? where is his dwelling, pray?
Where Is he, who swelling with felicity,
Was l^telie the head of a great family?
Where Is he, who keep'd his Neighbors all in aw,
And would to warring Nations give Law?
He who so late, with Glory and Renown,
Dwelt in this place, pray whither is he gone?
When thus, I say you speak, I clearlie do
Perceive your meaning, how that all of you
Conclude, that 'cause the Hand of God does lie
Heavy upon me, so undoubtedlie
I must by all that know me be repute
The worst of sinners, and without dispute
A person hated by Almighty God,
Because so beaten by his angry rod.
Why this is strange that you will still maintain 19. Have you not asked them
that go by the way, and do you not know their token?

This false Position, pray what do you mean?
Would you by this express your wit, and show
The world, that whether this be true or no,
Yet it is enough that you will have it so.
In this if I should hate your Arrogance,
Or have compassion on your Ignorance,
I hardly know: only I Will freely say
If you but ask the Traveller by the way,
He Will tell you that the things, which you assert,
In such as you show neither Wit, nor Art,
For it is a thing so generally known,
That to this hour it is denied by none,
But you, my friends, that Gods true love, or hate
Is not at all to be commensurate
By blessings or afflictions, since we see
How many famous passages there be
Extant ith'world to show how God does bless
Both just, and wicked, as all do confess,
That as of pious lives no argument
From blessings can be drawn, so punishment
Infers not always guilt. --
Be pleased my friends, then to enquire I say,
Even at the silly Traveller by the way;
He Will tell you plainly that he understands,
When traveling through our neighboring Hills, and Sands,
Where numerous Tombs of sinful men are placed,
Not by consuming Time as yet defaced,
Ranged at some distance by the highway side,
Serving him as so many Poles to guide
Him him in his Road; how underneath these stones,
The hateful Carrions, and accursed Bones
Of sinful wreches do securely rest,
Whilst good men here with sorrows are oppressed.
He Will tell you plainly that he thinks those men, 30. That the wicked is
reserved to the day of destruction, they shall be brought forth to the day of
wrath.

Though here on life, they fully did attain
To all the pleasures, which they could project,
And died in peace, yet can they not expect
To rest for ever, for in Cells of Death,
They Are only keep'd, unto the day of wrath.
Unto the day when all the World around,
The Almighty King of Heavens by Trumpet sound,
Shall summon every Mortal to appear,
At Bar of Justice, where each one may hear
The history of his life in public read,
And then accordingly be punished,
For all his sins; then, then, those wretched men
Shall be condemned to perpetual pain;
And stead of Graves, wherein their Bones do dwell,
They shall be quartered in the Pit of Hell.
Now then, that I may to a period 31. Who shall declare his way to his face?
and who shall repay him what he has done.

Draw my discourse, we see how the mighty God
Thinks fit, not only in his Providence,
To let some wicked livers travel hence,
As they desire, but even those hateful men,
Who so by force of laws their sins maintain,
As none dare of their injuries complain:
Even those he suffers to depart in peace,
And lets their sinful Bodies rest at ease.
He lets them under stately Tomb-stones ly, 32. Yet shall he be brought to the
grave, and remain in the tomb.

Admired by every one that passes by.
Their Statues too in Brass, or Marble wrought,
With great expense, and toil, from far are brought,
And placed upon those glorious Monuments,
To serve to all that view, as arguments
Of their fine Grandour, all their Honors too,
Are fixed about them, to demonstrat how
They lived in Earth, and all do serve to express
Their worldly splendour, pomp, and happiness.
Here in Earths bowels they shall sweetly rest, 33. The clods of the valley
shall be sweet unto him, and every man shalldraw after him.

And as in life, so in their death be blessed,
The slimy clods shall then become their beds,
Where, as on pillows, they shall lay their heads,
To the same place all mankind shall repair
As were before them, many thousands there.
Since then, I say, we see how providence 34 How then comfort you me in vain,
seeing in your answers remains falsehood.

Does not at all times favor innocence:
But that our God is oftimes pleased to bless
Even the professors of gross wickedness:
Why would you undertake to comfort me
By such discourse, in which I plainly see
The strength of all your arguments does lie
That cause afflicted of impiety
I Am guilty, which I constantly deny.
Cap. XXII.
NOW one might think after so long debate 1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered
and said,

With so much counter-arguing, and such heat
Upon the subject, where those Learned men
With all their Art endeavored to maintain,
That all the Plagues, and woes which God had sent
Upon their friend, were but due punishment
For his foul sins, because they firmly laid
This for a maxim, that none suffered
At the hand of God, but wicked men alone,
And that by such distinctions they were known
From upright men, and so would fain persuade
The Afflicted man, that he had merited
All he did undergo; and with what art
On the other hand he labored to assert
His innocence, and without heat, or passion,
Did prove by many a lively demonstration,
That where men's antecedent sins did call
For punishment, on earth, yet after all
Heavens gracious Monarch freely did permit
Those men to live, and die, as they thought sit.
Whilst pious men were often visited
With sad afflictions, and overlaid
With plagues, and torments: and that some of those
Whom they called sinful, suffered many woes,
Even in this life; from whence he did conclude
What they affirmed, must not be understood
To be a general rule, which did admit
Of no exception; and that all their wit
Was mis-imploy'd on such an argument,
And that they would surely fail of their intent,
If by the threatening of their Eloquence,
They thought to fright him from his Innocence;
One might ha'thought, I say, those learned men
Would now no longer labor to maintain
A thing not only so ofttimes denied,
But proved so learn'dly to be false beside;
Yet will they not their arguing give over,
But still assert, as stiffly, as before,
Their former Doctrine: for to all was said
The Temanite this stubborn answer made.
Why, friend, says he, I have, with patience, 2 Can a man be profitable unto
God, as he that is wise can be profitable to himself.

Heard thee descant upon thy Innocence:
I Have heard thee talk much like those quibbling fools,
Who for the reputation of their Schools,
Will upon any subject frame debate,
And even deny what is homologat
By all the knowing World: who will assert
Falshoid it self, t'express their prurient art:
And argue pro, or con, on what you will,
(As Juglers shift their Balls, to show their skill:)
Nay they will not stick to prove by argument,
That the Sun shines not in the Firmament;
And by their pestilentious parts are able
To make all things created disputable.
So thou, to show thy wit, art not ashamed
T'affirm such things as ought not to be named.
Thou tell us thou art pure, and innocent,
And why should the Almighty thus torment
One in the reputation of a Saint?
I see indeed thou fain would us persuade
It Is not for sin that thou art punished:
No, not at all, for thou insistest much
That thou art just, and always have been such,
Even in the hight of thy prosperity,
And still abhoredst all impiety:
And being yet such (in thine own conceit
At least) why thy Creator does think fit
T'afflict a man, pure, just, and innocent,
Only to try a new experiment,
That he may know how good men will behave
Under his Rod, not that men should conceive
That all afflictions are th'reward of Sin,
No, by no means; for if they should begin
To entertain such thoughts, they might conclude,
The very Saints cannot be understood
To have been just, since none ere suffered,
In all the world more sorrows than they did:
And then demandst us, if God punish none,
As we affirm, but sinful men alone:
Why do these wretches, who in sin abound
Flourish on Earth, why are so many found
Guilty of Sin, and yet not punished?
Why, here is a contradiction indeed,
Say thou, a Riddle, which I cannot read.
This is thy Doctrine, in this error thou
Endeavourest to maintain, with much ado,
Thy innocence; but, trust me, it is in vain
For we perceive how evident, and plain
Thy misdemeanors are, --
For even in this, that thou so frequently
Valuest thy self upon thy Piety,
And boast est so much of thy righteousness,
Thou sin'st, though there were no more in the case:
For I do lay it as a principle,
Beyond all question most infallible,
That let a man be never so devout,
Zealous, and just in heart, it booteth not:
For this to God no profit does afford,
It yields him no advantage, in a word,
All we can do, all that our hearts are able
To muster out, is no ways profitable
To our great God: for let us fast and pray,
Let us give alms, and labor every day
By all the lawful means, which mortals use
To make their Court with Heaven, we but abuse
Our judgments, if by these we do suppose
To merit favor of him, for God knows,
When we have labored and done all we can,
To serve our Maker, be performed by man;
Yet one with reason may us freely call
Unprofitable servants after all.
For it is not so with God, as it is with men,
Where one by parts, and prudence may attain
To profit, and enrich his mind with all
The Revenues of what we knowledge call.
Or feast his Soul with Heavenly Contemplations,
And frequently employ in Meditations
His heart with pleasure, and so happily
Improve the noble art of Piety.
No, no, all these God values not a whit
Of all our works he maks no benefit.
Then what avails it for a man to boast 3. Is it any plea-sure to the Almighty
^^at thou art right. ^^us? or is it gain to him that thou make thy ways
perfect.

Of what God does not value? what at most
Yields but some profit to himself, and so
I must with calmness tell thee, that although
Thou were even such, as thou pretendst to be
Just, Upright, Zealous, and from Errors free,
(As we conceive thou are not:) yet alace
Thus to brag of it as a great trespass.
Next then, my friend, as he who sits on hie 4. Will he reprove ^he^ for fear
of thee? ^^ll (...) enter with (...) into judgment.

Reaps no advantage by thy Piety.
So on the other hand, I Would have thee know,
He fears no hurt from thee, nor does he show
Himself offended at thy righteousness,
As in thy passion thou do often express;
No, no, mistake it not, for certainly
God quarrels no man for integrity,
Nor does he think it is his interest,
That such an one as thou should be suppressed,
Lest if perhaps thou should become too wise
His Majesty might suffer prejudice
By thy practicing with his enemies.
For as The Almighty does not apprehend
Thy merits to be such, as do transcend
The power of his reward; -- --
So fears he not thou will become so great,
But that by his eternal rules of State,
(Though thou should to the Highest pitch attain
In power with him, can be acquired by men)
Yet he with ease can take thee down again.
Since then for what is good, we plainly see
The God of Justice does not punish thee,
Nor any man, because his upright Laws
Ordain that no man should without a cause
Be punished, why sure we must conclude,
These thy afflictions must be understood
Either to be thy punishment for sin,
Or else for nothing;
And how absurd it were for one to assert
I'th'least the verity of the latter part
Of this alternative, I freely leave it
To the judgment of good men, but I conceive it
To be an error of so deep a dye,
As falls within the verge of blasphemy.
And now, dear Friend, at length I must be free, 5. Is not thy wickedness
great, and thine iniquities infinite.

And tell thee out what are my thoughts of thee:
Since thou were pleased to say, that all this time
We spared thy person, and reproved thy Crime;
It Is true indeed, in pity of thy case,
We did forbear to tell thee in thy face,
Thou were the unjust man, whom we did mean,
But since thou put'st me to' t, I shall be plain,
For thus I argue. He whose wickedness
Caused many cry to Heaven for redress:
He who was not ashamed to make profession
Of that foul sin, which men do call Oppression:
That man, I say, it is plain and evident,
Deserves from God severest punishment:
This I have still esteemed from my youth,
A proposition of eternal truth.
But so it is, thou in thy life have been,
(As is but too well known) the worst of men;
In sin thou did thy Neighbors all exceed,
And therefore thou art justly punished.
But here, because I know thou will deny 6. For* thou have taken a pledge from
thy brother ^ornoght and stripped the naked of their clothing.

What I subsume, I Will prove it instantly;
Here is my charge then, stand to thy defense,
For thus I do impeach thy innocence.
Who Is he of us that cannot say his ears
Have been infested now these many years
With th'horrid noise of thy lewd practices,
Whilst thou without distinction did oppress
Each living Soul, that came within thy reach,
And seized on all, as far as thou could stretch
Thy grasping Talons: may as we have heard
Thy avarice so palpably appeared,
And thy ^oul dealings were so understood
By all the people of thy Neighborhood,
As no men durst with thee negotiat,
Save those who better understood to cheat.
Then thou did, and we hear they were but few
Besides thy self, my friend, who so well knew
The art of Couz'ning: nay besides we hear
Thy cruelty was such, thou would not spare
Thy nearest Kins-men, but, at all occasions,
Would justle them out of their just Possessions.
When having lent them money in their need,
Upon a Mortgage, by some Counter-deed,
After true payment of the Principal,
Just, Interest, Expenses, Costs, and all,
Under the Title of some scurvy lease,
After Redemption, thou would still possess:
And, lest thy Title should be quarrelled,
Thou Would quickly purchase in some Latent-deed
Which carried the reversion, and then
The extinguished Mortgage openly retain.
Nay more, thou did not only strangers use,
After this fashion, but would even abuse
Thy very Brother, if necessity
Obliged him to demand from thee supply.
For thou were rigid, cruel, and severe;
In all thy dealings as most rich men are,
And for thy Soul alace thou took'st no care.
Interest allowed by Law would not content
Thy covetous mind, but even cent per cent
Thou Would take from some, and Pledges to the boot
Worth thrice the money; which thou did lend out.
Then, lest the Statutes might thy dealings reach,
And thee for bloody usury impeach:
Thou Would licitat the Goods, and for the fashion,
Cause a led Jury put a Valuation
Upon them, far below the sum thou lent,
And then would sell them to the full extent.
Nay, which is strange, as we are informed, the poor,
Who daily begged their alms from door to door.
Thou sometimes with provisions would supply,
And make the gleanings of thy Us^rie,
In public pass for acts of Charity.
But how pray did thou order thy affair
With those poor Souls? say now, did thou forbear
To take a Pledge from such, for what thou lent
Nay, my good friend, 'twas never thy intent.
For e're thou would wanted all, thou even would seize
On their poor rags, and make such things as these
Yield thee some profit. --
Whilst overcome with cold and penury,
Those naked creatures in the streets would die.
In fine, both rich and poor thou used to rob,
For no such famous Usurer as Job
Did in these Countries live: this was thy Trade,
By this a great Estate thou had lately made,
And for this now on Dung hill thou art laid.
Then as thou did in avarice abounds 7. Thou have not given water to the weary
to drink, and thou have witholden bread from the hungry.

So in thy petri^yed heart was found
No room at all for love, and charity,
For thou the thirsty never would supply
With one cold cup of water, or in need,
Afford the hungry one poor loaf of bread,
But, O, in these days, there was no complaining 8. But as for the mighty man,
he had the earth, and the honorable man dwelt in it.

On such as thee: as there was no regaining
Of what thou took'st, thou then did rule the land,
And had both power, and statutes in thy hand,
Men knew no other laws, but thy command.
And though thou would unmercifully treat
The poor, yet thou would fawn upon the great,
And rich men of the land, and countenance
Them in their lawsuits, that thou might advance
The interest of thy self and family,
And raise thy brats by open bribery.
Lastly (which is the greatest of oppressions) 9. Thou have sent widows away
empty, and the arms of the farherless have been broken.

When some poor widows would at general Sessions,
Implore for justice, where thou did preside,
Protesting they did starve for want of bread;
And therefore begged their suits might come to trial,
To this thy answer was a flat denial;
Either, because some great men were concerned,
In these same actions, or that thou had learned,
It was the interest of some puny friend,
Those peoples trials should not have an end,
The orphans too when thou in Judgment sat,
And acted, as a bribing Magistrate,
Did starve for want of sustenance, and cried
Aloud, when dying, Justice was denied.
Hence it is that woes environ thee around, 10. Therefore snares are round about
thee, and sudden fear troubles thee.

And sudden fears thy spirits do confound.
Hence it is that thou art levelled with the Dust*
'Cause whilst thou were a Judge, thou wast unjust.
Hence it is, that thou art every way undone, 11. Or darkness that thou can
not see, and abundance of waters cover thee.

And with a flood of sorrows overrun:
Hence it is that spoiled of goods, health, family,
In an abyss of troubles thou do ly.
But, O, whilst thy proud honors did endure, 12. Is not God in the height of
heaven? and behold the hight of the stars, how high they are.

Thou thought thou were from punishment secure,
For God, said thou, who lives above the sky,
And has his habitation more high,
Then that of fixed stars, can never know
What we do act, who live so far below
The pavement of his Heavenly Residence:
Will he be at the pains to view from hence,
The base and silly actions of men?
No it is below him sure to entertain
Such worldly thoughts; sure he has no regard,
To our mean actings, but as we are debarred
From seeing of him, so his Majesty
Employed in thoughts more elevate, and high,
Disdains to keep intelligence with such,
Whose practices he does not value much.
Thick vapors, said thou, all our actions shroud 13. And thou say how does
God know? can he judge through the dark cloud?

From him, can he perceive through darkest cloud
What we do here on Earth? pray can he see,
What daily passes betwixt thee, and me?
Cannot be imagined that he does perceive 14. Thick clouds are a covering to
him, that he sees not, and he walks in the circuit of heaven.

What here we act? or shall a man believe,
That through so many Orbs as roll between
The Heavens and Earth, our actions can be seen?
No, no, wrapped up in coverlets of clouds,
He sees us no more, then in thickest woods,
We can perceive the Sun, he knows no more
How we do live, then men upon the shore,
Can tell us what the several motions be,
Of Fishes in the bortom of the Sea.
No^ he knows neither what we act, or talk,
But undisturbed in Heavens large Court does walk.
Further, my friend, I tremble to repeat
What were thy thoughts of God, whilst thou were great,
For, as most men in grandeur vainly think,
That at their splendid errors God does wink;
And on the rabble only judgments sends,
To keep the great-men of the Earth his friends;
So thou did think, when thou did live in state,
God thought it fit thou should be always great,
As being one so justly qualifi*d
For Government, as there were none beside*
In all the Country to supply thy place,
Were thou undone, and therefore if in peace,
His Majesty would govern all above,
He thought it not his interest to remove
From Government so great a Minister,
As thou were: hence, thou vainly did infer,
That having left all to thy management,
Reward thou might, but never punishment
Expect from God.
O principles most Atheistical!
Opinions to be abhorred by all!
Do think that God, who all things did create,
Who placed us all in every rank, and state,
That he, whose eye views all things, should not know
What all of us think, speak, or act, below
His Heavenly Throne? do think the thickest cloud,
From him, who holds them in his hands, can shroud
Our actings here on Earth? do think but he,
Whose eyes see clearly through the thickest Sea:
And through the body of the Earth can tell,
What all those things do act, who live in Hell;
Do think but he with far more ease does see
Through all those rouling orbs, and clouds, what we
Act here on Earth? do think that he will permit
The sons of men to live, as they think fit:
Whilst as a mere spectator he looks on
Indifferent, and concerns himself with none?
No, sure thou think not as thou speakst, for so
Thou might as well pretend thou did not know
Whether there were a God in Heavens or no.
For to conclude with thee that Providence
Does rule the World with such indifference,
As sometimes here it strikes, and sometimes there,
Sending out plagues, or blessings every where,
As the fatal Dye does turn upon the square
As points out each man's Destiny, were even
To fancy a grand Lottery in Heaven:
Or think that God, who all men fully knows,
Should by mistake, at any time send blows
Where blessings should be sent: allow me then
To tell thee that none but the worst of men
Should vent such errors, in which thou appears
To be involved over head, and ears:
For thou think not enough thus to deny
That providence does rule with equity
But do thy error proudly justify.
Thou argu'st too by reason, as do all
Those, whom the knowing world do Athiests call*
But were there no more arguments to confute
Thee, and those prating Fellows, who dispute
The actions of their Maker, this alone
May teach you all, God will be fooled by none,
That though those wretches firmlie do believe
There is no God, yet still they do conceive
There Is some such thing, for in their mind they doubt
(Although they are ashamed to speak it out)
Whether what they believe be reallie true,
Or not, for (to give providence its due,)
They find all is ordered by some supreme hand,
Though whose it is, they will not understand.
So, though in their opinions positive,
Yet by their doubtings we may well perceive
That they with contrare thoughts are still oppressed,
And, maugre all their braving, cannot rest
On such opinions, but still apprehend
God out of Heavens will view them in the end,
And on their old age heavy judgments send*
Take heed, I do beseech thee then, from hence,
My friend, how thou do talk of Providence,
And ask no questions, pray, why wicked men
To great enjoyments in this life attain,
Whilst pious men are strictly punished:
As if here Providence did err, take heed
And do not think such things, for if thou do,
Assure thy self thou art for ever lost.
Then use no more that*trivial defense
So often repeated of thy innocence.
For we are all persuaded that our God,
Without just cause, does never use the Rod.
Remark but the History of former times,
Thou Wilt see how men have suffered for crimes.
Have thou not heard, how men before the Flood 15 Have thou marked the old way
which men have trodden?

Behaved themselves, as if they had withstood
The power of Providence, and would not bow
To the great Prince of princes, or allow
That homage to him, which the Creature owes
To its Creator, he did so dispose,
Those Clouds in which thou think he is wrapped a*round,
As in a few days all those men were drowned.
He who by power of his Almighty Hand,
Cleared all the Marches betwixt Sea and Land, 16 Who were cut down out of
time, whose foundations was overflown with a flood.

And by the same power does restrain the Floods
Above us in Borrachios of Clouds,
Was pleased then in his wrath t'unty them all,
Which caused a Deluge Epidemical.
That race of Creatures, which not long before
He had created, he did then abhore
Because they had his Government disclaimed,
And all his reverend Orators contemned,
Whom he had sent, with open mouths to tell 'em
Of those sad things, which afterward befell 'em*
But they with open mouths, those men did mock,
And told them, that they knew not what they spoke.
Nay, when the Good Man, whom the Lord designed
To be the great Restorer of Mankind,
By special Direction did begin
In view of all, to build an Ark, wherein
The Seeds of the World might be preserved entire,
Whilst all the rest did in the Floods expire;
Those silly Fools did laugh at his intent,
And often would ask what the old Fellow meant,
So in their errors these men did proceed,
Still living, as they were accustomed,
In wanton pleasures, regulating still
Their Lives by order of their foolish will.
Hence when the Cataracts of Heaven did swell,
And Floods out of the Skies upon them fell,
They were caught napping in their Festivals,
And minding nothing but their Bacchanals,
Were in that universal Deluge drowned,
With all their sins about 'em.
But O, the man who as they thought had raved,
Was in that Ark, which they derided, saved,
With all his Family, he safety found
Amidst those rolling Waves in which they drowned
And the Good-Master of Heavens only Barque,
With all his Passengers did in his Ark
O'r'e-top the Floods. --
Then on might see, when that Springtide was full,
The Stock of Mankind floating in a Hull:
The hopes of the world, the Origination
Of every future Kingdom, State and Nation,
Shut up below Decks, under Boards and Dails,
Without the help of Masts, Ropes, Oars, or Sails,
Rudder, or Compass, Steer they knew not whither,
Upon the Waters many days together;
And yet at length, as well as any now*
Who with great Art, and Skill, the Ocean plow,
Arrive at their wished Port of Ararat,
From whence they quickly did Disseminat
In fruitful Colonies, giving Birth to all,
Who now do scramble 'bout this Earthen-ball.
Such wicked men, then did not die in peace, 17 Which said unto God depart from
us, and what can the Almighty do for them.

Nor did they step into their Graves with ease,
Who said to God, depart from us, good Lord,
What more than we enjoy can thou afford,
And generally were so insolent
In sin, as they disdained to repent,
As thou affirm'st, no they were visibly,
While living, punished for Impiety.
Yet after all, with thee I must confess, ^8 Yet he filled their houses with
good things* but the counsel of the wicked is far from me.

It Is strange to think how our good God did bless
Those sinful men, for many generations,
Making them, Fathers of illustrious Nations,
He blessed them, and their Families with all
Those things on Earth, which men do blessings call;
But if such things be all such men expect,
If these be all that men on Earth project,
I don't envy them: I had rather be
Involved in sad afflictions with thee,
Than blessed with such, Lord let me never think
That though long time thou at men's ^ins do wink,
And make them happy here, but after all,
Thou will them to account most strictly call;
And send a punishment proportionate
To each man's sins, and errors, soon, or late.
And when these men are justly punished 19 The righteous see it and are glad,
and the innocent laugh them to scorn.

All truly pious, honest men are glad,
They laugh at them now in their misery,
As they at them in their prosperity
Were wont to do.
When they remember how, in former times,
Those sinful men did glory in their Crimes,
And with what foolish insolence, and pride,
They undervalued men, and did deride
Even Providence it self, as if in all,
They had been so secure, they could not fall:
Now they observe with what a silly mine,
Those fellows, scarce desirous to be seen
Appear in public, with dejected Eyes,
Because they know that all men do despise
Their persons, for their former insolence,
And look, as if by their own Conscience,
They were condemned* already, whilst they see
Their sins before 'em: and how all agree,
That they at length have justly forfalted
Their former grandeur, and are punished
As they deserve, whilst those who formerly
Run to them Cap in hand, now slightingly
Without a salutation pass them by.
Indeed they do appear so despicable,
And in their daily conference with the Rabble
Express so much fear, and solicitude,
As those who see them, firmly do conclude
Those men for all their grandeur, to have been
Men of no parts, but Spirits low and mean;
Nay such as knew them in their former state
With pain believe those men were ever great.
Thus shall our God in vengeance overthrow 20 Whereas our substance is not cut
down but the r^mna^^ of them the fire consumes.

The wicked, but with th'just it is not so:
For we, who fear the Lord shall still be blessed,
Not with contempt, or penury oppressed,
But whilst the wicked toil, we shall have rest.
Our substance shall be settled on our Heirs,
And when we are sick, we shall be free of cares
Of The world, and without all anxiety,
Or fearful notions of uncertainty,
We shall lift up our hands, and calmly dye.
And thus, my Friend, that Ihave fully shown 21 Acquaint now thy self with him
and be at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee.

How thou have erred, now in another tone,
I must cheer up thy spirits, and declare
How thou may become happy, as we are.
It Is only thus, make haste, and be acquaint
With our great God, and seriously repent
For all the sins, of which thou guilty art,
Do quickly from the bottom of thy Heart;
Conclude firm peace with God, make no delay,
But use thy time well, do, this very day,
As thou would desire he would thy plagues remove,
And change his present hatred into love.
No more complaining then, my friend, no more 22 Receive I pray thee the Law
from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart.

Of these expressions we have heard before:
But be attentive, prithee, and give ear
To what our God commands thee, let his fear
Possess thy Soul, hear what he does impart
From his own Mouth, and keep it in thy heart,
To be a sovereign cure at all occasions,
When e're thou shall encounter with Temptations.
Return, my Friend, to God, from whom thou have 23 If thou return to the
Almighty, thou shall be built up, thou shall put away iniquity far from thy
tabernacles.

Most treacherously revolted, and at last,
Thou shall be settled in thy former state,
And be more happy than thou were of late:
Sin, and its dire effects thou shall expel
Out of thy house and with contentment dwell,
Environed with thy numerous Family,
In Houses void of all Iniquity.
Like Dust in Shovels thou shall heap thy Gold, 24 Thou shall lay up gold as
du^^* and the gold of Ophire as the stones of the brooks;

Large Granaries shall scarce thy Treasure hold,
And when thy Coffers are brime full with Ore,
So closely pack't as they can hold no more:
And when with Silver, all thy bags thou have, 25 Yea, the Almighty shall be
thy defense, and thou shall have plenty of silver.

Shall be stuffed full, sealed, locked up, and made fast,
Then as thy Brokers find security,
According to thy mind, thou by and by
Shall us and all thy neighboring friends, supply.
But (which is best of all) whilst others store
Runs out in riot, and appears no more,
Our God himself shall be they Thesaurer,
So that thou shall not Thieves or Robbers fear,
Nor the wild humors of a rich man's Heir*
For then in prayer thou shall take delight, 26, For then thou shall have thy
delight in the Almighty, and shall ^^ft up thy face unto God.

And for Devotion still have appetite,
Fresh and renewed, shall have more real pleasure
In God, than in thy Family and Treasure.
Then Prayers shall become habitual 27. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him,
and he shall hear thee, and thou shall pay thy vows.

To thee, and thou on thy kind God shall call,
With confidence, for he will surely hear
Those, who address with reverence and fear,
To his high Throne, and thou shall quickly know
By the return of them, that it is so.
With God thou shall become familiar 28. Thou shall also declare a thing, and
it shall be established unto thee, and the light shall shine upon his ways.

And shall before him, at all times appear,
As one who does possess much of his ear*
In all things he shall firmly by thee stand,
And bless what ever thou do take in hand.
In all thy actings he shall thee direct,
And from temptations still thy soul protect.
Whilst others grovelling in calamities 29. When men are cast down* then thou
shall say, there is a lifting up* and he shall save the humble person.

Shall tear the very Heavens with doleful cries:
Thou shall know nothing of what these endure,
But live in great contentment, firm, and sure.
Nay those, who are in want, and misery,
To thee, as to Gods favorite, shall apply
To interceed for them, which thou shall do,
Succeeding in thy intercession too.
God will deliver for a just man's sake 30. He shall deliver the Island of the
innocent, and it is delivered by the pureness of thy hand.

Whole Towns, and Kingdoms that would go to wrake,
Were not that he did hear the prayers of such
Amongst these people, whom he values much,
Th'unspotted pureness of one just man's hand
Does make atonement often for all the land.
Cap. XXIII.
WHen the insulting Temanite had thus
Opened his charge, by which he did accuse 1. Then Job answered and said.

His friend, of gross Oppression, Bribery,
Uncharitable Dealings, Usury,
Nay Atheism it self, for which he said
God him at length had justly punished:
And by so many special instances,
Of Villainy, endeavored to press
The truth of what he boldly did assert,
By all the rules of eloquence, and art:
The poor afflicted soul, who all this while
Lay in great torment, and would sometimes smile,
To see his friend, who formerly had spared
To tax his person, now without regard
Ol old acquaintance, and the sacred ties,
And rules of friendship, thus in choler rise:
And formallie accuse him of such crimes
As he, who knew him well in former times,
Could not esteem him guilty, were he called
To be upon his jury: and yet galled
To hear his friend, with so much impudence,
Endeavor to convel that innocenc,
On which himself he so much valued,
As sure of that, all that he suffered
He undervalu'd, though now faint, and weak,
Yet he no longer could forbear to speak.
But after he had with sighs ingeminate,
Rememb'red sadly on his former state,
As soon as heavy groans, which constantly
Oppres'd his spirit, would to words give way,
To his Indictment with great modesty.
He thus put in his answer.
My friends, says he, I see with how much art
You all endeavor to undo my heart: Even to day is my ^^^^laint bitter, my
(...) heavier than my groaning.

And strive one after the other, by your words,
To hew me down, as with so many swords:
Unkindly done!
For now indeed, at length I plainly see,
All those reflections have been meant for me,
Which you from the beginning have related,
Since first the question betwixt us was stated.
I see you use no more your fained Stories,
Your painted figures, and your Allegories,
But in plain terms, you formallie do charge
Me with those numerous crimes, of which, at large
In the third person, you have formerlie
Discoursed, but now you tell me openly
I Am guilty of them all.
But to all you have said, my sole defense,
I still do found upon my innocence.
Your bitter Charge I utterly deny,
I plead not guilty, and will justify
My self at all occasions, against all
Who of such villainies shall me guilty call.
Do You think, my friends, but an ingenuous heart
Has much ado in earnest, for its part,
To Endure such language, as you're pleased to vent
Against one, who knows himself most innocent,
Of all the Crimes you talk of, pray, consider,
Were it the case of any of you, whether
Would you with patience such rude language bear,
As from your mouths I am constrained to hear.
Alace, what man from passion can abstain,
Hearing himself thus taxed once, and again;
Then why do you complain, that I complain;
Indeed my Soul is in more heaviness,
Then I by my complaining can express.
The very torments that afflict my Bones,
Are more in weight, and number, then my groans.
You tell me, I should turn to God, alace, 3. O that I knew where I might find
him? that I might come even to his feat.

I fain would do it, if I could see his face:
Would I could find him, would I could know where
He shows himself to men, I would repair
To him indeed, but since that cannot be
Allowed me, since his face I cannot see:
Yet in regard I am condemned by you,
Who are my Parties, and my Judges too:
Knowing, that he both sees, and hears me well,
To him, as supreme Judge I do appeal.
But O again, I wish I were allowed 4. I would order my cause before him, and
fill my mouth with arguments.

Free access to him, there indeed I would
So order my affair, and so deduce
My Case before my God, I would so use
That liberty, and with such moderation,
Plead my just cause, as I should find compassion
From him, I would so argue, and debate,
Upon the subject of my present state,
Before that Judge, as I am confident,
His Majesty would find me innocent.
Then would I hear, then would I understand, 5. I would know the words which he
would answer me, and understand what he would say unto me.

What can be said upon the other hand,
Against my so well known integrity,
To which, with freedom I might make reply.
O that to God then I might access have, 6. Will he plead against me, with his
great power? no, but he would put strength in me.

Let him but hear me, and no more I crave:
Let him but hear me, and before his Throne,
I shall so manage my just cause alone,
Without the help of counsel, as I shall
Be able soon to overthrow them all,
That do accuse me: let me but appear
Before my Maker, and I do not fear
What man can say against me, for I know
He will not do, as Judges here below,
Who biased by some private interest,
In Plaintiff, or Defendant, use to wrest
The Laws, to serve their turn, and sullenly,
With stern looks, and expressions terrify
The Prisoner at Bar: nor will he watch
My fearful words, to see if he can catch
Any advantage from them, or allow
Cross questions, and such tricks, as those men do,
To make me guilty, and then state the case
To the listening Jury with a double face.
No, my Creator would take no such way,
But hear me calmly what I had to say
In my defense, he would not terrify,
My panting soul with his authority:
But on the contrair, he would hear me plead,
Without once interrupting me, and stead
Of vexing me with questions, he would afford
Arguments for my safety, in a word,
Should I appear before him, I am sure,
My trial could for no long time endure:
For he would soon acquit me, and release
My Soul from pains, could I but see his face.
O blessed face* could I have liberty
To see it, I should be immediately
Free from all censure, clamo^^, calumny.
There may a just man boldly plead his cause, 7. There the righteous might
dispute with him, so should I be delivered for ever from my judge.

Not fearing danger from ambiguous Laws*
There he may speak with freedom, there he may
Unfold at large all that he has to say,
In his defense, what ever he can pretend,
He may allege, he may himself defend
Fully, for God will hear him to an end.
There, O there should I have the happiness
To be once tried, how should my righteousness
In view of all be clearly vindicat
From these asperssions, which some men, of late
Have labored to fix upon me, then,
They should perceive their malice was in vain,
For being once acquit, I shall for ever
Be absolutely free from trial, never
To be again for any fault, or crime
Brought to the Bar; nay, after posting Time
Has run its course out, and the day shall come,
Which shall appear most terrible to some
Whose names are in the Rolls then to be tried,
I shall be found already justified.
But, O, my Soul, why should thus complain, 8. Behold I go forward, but he is
not there, and backward, but I cannot perceive him.

Thou can not see him: why should thou in vain
Crave access to a God invisible,
Infinite, and incomprehensible?
A mighty God, who no where does appear,
And yet is truly present every where.
A God, whose saving wings do thee surround,
Who walks with thee, and yet cannot be found,
By all thy Art: why should thou thus in vain
Make search for him, whom no place can contain?
Forward, or backward, whither shall I go
To find my God, why, truth, I do not know,
For it is all one to me, what course I steer,
Since he is to be be discovered no where.
For should I fancy that Heavens King does stand, 9. On the left hand where he
does work, but I cannot behold him, he hides himself on the right hand that I
cadnot see him.

As some conceive, the North on his left hand;
Where he does wonders, where he daily shows
His glory, and his Cab'net does unclose,
In which his greatest rarities he keeps,
Beyond the Arctick Circle, in the deeps,
Where, Whales, like floating Castles, do appear,
The terror of the Ocean, and declare
Their great Creators power, where Nations dwell,
Who do our southern people far excel;
In strength and courage; or if I in search
Of him should to the Pole Antarctick march,
Where he in glory is no less renowned,
Why after all, he is not to be found.
But what needs more, since he will not allow me 10. But he knows the way
that I take, when he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold.

Access, yet foolish men shall not undo me,
By their false accusations, for I still
Deny my Charge, enforce it, as you will.
And here before my God I do protest,
Who knows the hidden thoughts within my breast,
That all my lifetime I have taken delight
In calling on his Name, both day and night:
How I have lived, he knows, and hithertoo
Behaved my self, and with what fervor now
I pray unto him, in my woeful case,
Though he denis to let me see his face:
Though I his favor now have forfaulted,
And fom his presence sadly banished,
As an example of his wrath I lie
Here upon Dunghill, yet he knows that I
Have still endeavored since my infancy
To honor him, and in whatever station,
To order still aright my conversation.
So that I fully do my self persuade,
When of my virtue he has trial made;
When in Afflictions Furnace, o'r, and o'r,
I Am melted down, yet ever as before,
In substance, weight, and price I shall be found
The same, and in my Conscience pure, and sound:
And after all my sufferings I am bold
To think, I shall be taken out like Gold.
Indeed, I Have sometimes had the happiness, 11. My foot has held his steps,
his ways I have kept, and not declined.

To know what did belong to righteousness;
I have devoutly all Gods Laws obeyed,
And in my conversation have not strayed
From his Commands, I have not deviate
From the true road, although it seems of late
You have perceived, my friends, that I have erred,
And firmlie do believe what you have heard
Through all the Country from my enemies:
Which, trust me, are but lies, and calumnies.
Alace, my friends, I Would fain have you believe 12. Neither have I gone back from
the commandments of his lips, I have esteemed the words of his mouth, more then
my necessary food.

Of all my torments there is none does grieve
My Soul so much: as that you should arraign
Me for such horrid Crimes, and still maintain
These to be true, which I do still deny,
Why this is even the height of Cruelty.
For still before my God I do protest
I don't remember ever in the least
That I from his Commandments have erred,
What e're to the contrair is by you averred.
His Words I have esteemed, and understood
The same to be more necessar than food.
But all that I can speak, protest, or plead 13. But he is of one mind, and who
can turn him, and what his ^^^eth, even that he does.

Is to no purpose, for God taks no heed
To my Discourse: his mind is still the same,
For he is resolved that in afflictions flame,
I shall continue, he is inexorable
To all my cries. -- --
Then since it must be so, I Will not contend
With God, but suffer all, and here is an end.
For God does what he lists, he is abbsolute
Over all his Creatures, and who dares dispute
What he commands: then let him harrass me
Even as he will, why not, his acts are free.
For what he from my Birth had ordered 14. For he performs the thing that is
appointed for me, and many such things are with him.

I should endure, that I have suffered,
And am to suffer yet upon that score
What has appointed for me, and no more.
And now I think on it, my afflictions are
By Gods Determination ordinar
For other men to endure, as well as me,
As in our converse we may daily see,
So that these being, his common practices,
With men on earth, my hopes are still the less,
That e're he from afflicting me will cease.
In thoughts of this with grief I Am overlaid, 15 Therefore am I troubled at his
presence, when I consider I am afraid of him.

I die with weeping, for I am afraid
My sad afflictions shall continue still,
Let me both do, and say even what I will.
For I perceive God is too strong for me, 16. For God makes my heart soft, and
the Almighty troubles me.

And in my sad afflictions I see
His Mighty Hand has made me soft, and tame,
So that to fear I much obnoxious am.
I fear, I fear my troubles shall endure 17. Because I was not cut off before
the darkness, neither has the darkness covered my face.

Longer than you do all expect, for sure
Had he not ordered from Eternity
That I should in afflictions Furnacely,
Until I were consumed, 'had cut my days,
That I might never have seen such woes as these.
Cap. XXIV.
Job having thus in words of modest passion, 1. Why seeing times are not hidden
from the Almighty, do they that knew him not, see his days.

Denied his Charge, and put in protestation
Of his unspotted zeal, and innocence
In all his actings, as his chief defense.
Now he makes answer to the second part
Of this sams Charge, in which his friends assert,
That God Almighty had prefixed set times,
For hearing, trying, and punishing of Crimes,
As Judges in their Circuits use to set
Days for each County, where the Shrievs must wait
Upon the Court, and give up Rolls of all
Delinquents in their Precincts, at a call,
What are their misdemeanors, where they lie,
If under Bail, or in safe custody,
And so proceed to Jayl-deliverie.
For this, as all the rest of their positions,
Without exceptions, limits, or conditions,
They hold to be infallible, and press
The truth of it by many instances.
To this Job here does calmly answer make,
Endeavoring to show them their mistake.
How comes't, says he, since God has set such times
Here upon Earth, for punishing of Crimes;
And since his Dyets are so peremptor,
As you affirm, that at a certain hour,
This, or that man, his trial may expect,
How comes't these methods of which you do speak,
Were never known before to such as fear
His holy Name? it is strange they should not hear.
Who daily do frequent his Courts, till now
Of his procedure? strange, he will not allow
That they should know such things as well as you.
For my part, I of knowledge am not proud,
But with such Parts as God has me endu'd,
I Have used my time, and have in general,
Observed as much as any of you all:
Yet am I still a stranger to what you
Of God affirm, and never heard while now,
That he had fixed his grand Court Criminal
On Earth. where he does use to summon all
Delinquents, at such Dyets to appear,
On trial to receive their Sentence here.
It Is true, I have observed some instances
Of this procedure, and I must confess,
God sometimes is so kind, as he will show,
Before he does the wicked overthrow,
Some signs of his displeasure, as he did
To those before the Flood. --
And then because his Prophets they contemn,
He will such Wretches suddenly condemn
To punishment on this side time: I know
It is his custom often to do so:
Nor would I have you think, my friends, that I
His universal prescience deny;
Or question his eternal purposes
Of punishing all kinds of wickedness,
Even in this life, in some men, but that all
Under the compass of that Statute fall,
And suffer here on Earth, I do deny,
For on the contrair I do formallie,
As I have often done before, contend
That God on all men does not Judgments send
Who do deserve them here, and visiblie
Does punish all, who of impiety
Shall be convict, reserving no man's trial
Till after death. --
But that he suffers many such in ease
To pass their days, doing even what they please,
And after all shut up their eyes in peace.
To prove the truth of this, I shall adduce 2. Some remove the landmarks, they
violently take away flocks, and feed thereof.

In the first place, a crime too much in use
Amongst us now a days, a loud-tongu'd crime,
Which may be termed Iniquity in its prime,
The grand sin of Oppression, a sin
Which makes my hair stand, when I do begin
To speak of it, a sin so black, and foul,
As all good men abhor it with their soul.
A sin so black, as I can hardly find
Words to express its nature to my mind.
A sin so vile, that, if what you have said
Were true, would never escape unpunished,
On this side time: and yet we daily see
How many such from punishments go free,
Whilst here in life: which that in terms of Art
I may demonstrate as I do assert;
I shall, with your good liberty and peace,
Deduce this sin in all it species;
And show you plainly how they all escape
Unpunished in this life. --
And first we see how some men openly
Encroach upon their Neighbors property:
Others their Neighbors cattle drive away:
And keep them, as they were their lawful prey.
The Ass, which the poor Orphan now retains, 3. They drive away the ass of the
fatherless, they take the widows ox for a pledge.

As the only relics of his Fathers Means;
Which driving daily to some neighboring Town
With Loads of Brushes, Faggots, Turf, or Broom,
To furnish those, who do such triffles need,
Makes a hard-shift to gain his daily bread:
This very beast some of these cruel men
On some pretense or other do distrain:
The Ox, which the poor Widows ground should plow,
Pretending it is their pledge, they seize on too.
Nay, which is yet more cruel, when they have seized 4. They turn the needy out
of the way, the poor of the earth hide themselves together.

On all they have, yet are their minds not pleased,
Until they have these Wretches in the tail,
And either under lock, or under bail.
Hence it is that men dare hardly keep the street,
For fear of such; but in dark corners meet:
Suspecting these same men upon pretense,
Of Debt, or Trespass, may perhaps commence
Some Suit against them, and in some mad fit,
As Soon as they perceive them, serve a Writ
Against their persons; in the ears of all
So dreadful are their names.
But yet those men have always some pretense 5. Behold as wild asses in the
desert, go they forth to their work, rising betimes for a prey, the wilderness
yields food for them, and for their children.

Of Law, which they cast up for their defense,
But there be others of that Corporation,
Who openly avow this damned Profession.
Who fly at all, and plunder openly,
In view o'th Sun, without all modesty.
For don't we in our Neighbouring-mountains see
How many powerful Families there be,
That live by open pillaging of all,
And sometimes in amongst our Flocks do fall*
In numerous troops, (as all may see alace,
Not many days ago was my own case.)
They breed their Children, from their Infancy,
In all the active points of robbery:
And when they come to age, they send them out
To earn their Bread in all the Fields about,
By Petit-larcin, which, if cunningly
They do perform; they mount them by and by
In every point, as their unlawful Trade
Requires, Bow, Arrows, Target, Shearing-bl^d^,
Short knife, and Poinyard, and then formallie
They send them out to open Robbery:
Where by the Highways, sculking here, and there,
They seize upon the unwary Passenger,
Of all his Money, Goods, and Clothes they pill him
And think the oblige him, if they do not kill him.
But when they see the Travelers advance,
Before them, in well ordered Caravans;
They stand aloof, and suffer them to pass,
Not daring to look Merchants in the face,
When in such order, but keep off for fear,
And hover at a distance on the rear.
Whilst others of 'em on the flanks do watch,
With careful eyes, to see if they can catch
The Straglers, and if any they do find
On tired Jades unluckilie behind
The company, upon them straight they fall,
And, without mercy, kill, and plunder all.
Nay, when the Sun declining in the West,
Invite the wearied Travelers to rest:
These wretches do not sleep, but still in arms,
Beat up their quarters, and give sad alarms
On every hand, and will be sure at length
To catch some prey, by policy, or strength.
Strange, what a sinful life those rogues do lead,
They know not what it is to earn their Bread
By honest Callings, Means, or Trades, not they,
But wandering idly, only live on prey.
And yet in peace, and plenty they abound,
And hardly one amongst them all is found
To dye of famine: for they do increase
In number, and the very wilderness
Affords them a subsistence, and provides
All pleasures, which their hearts desire besides.
Except perhaps a few of 'em, who stray
Amongst our fields, and missing of their way,
By Providence i'th'hands of justice fall,
And dye, on Wheel, or Gibbet, and that is all:
But the main body of 'em still subsist
Pillaging, killing, doing what they list,
Without control, for many Generations,
Under the names of Families and Nations,
Contemning Laws, and making plain profession
Of that accursed species of oppression.
What honest men do sow, those thieves do reap, 6 They reap everyone his corn
in the field, and they gather the vintage of the wicked.

And amongst themselves such correspondence keep,
As when the Vintage season does draw nigh,
Whole troops of 'em do meet, and suddenly
On the Wine-labourers with great fury fall,
Wound, drive away, kill, and make prize of all,
Without distinction, whether friends or foes
Be owners of 'em, for these men (God knows)
Have no regard at all to any man,
But from both good, and bad, take what they can;
And then draw off to the mountains with their prey,
Divide the spoil, in their accustomed way,
Disband their troops, and suddenly retire
Each to his lurking hole, where sword, and fire
Can hardly find them out.
Nay some there be of those wild Mountaineers,
Who having for a tract of many years,
Vexed those i'th'valleys with sad Robbery,
Our predecessors were compelled to buy
Their peace, and ease, from them at any rate,
Acknowledging those Thieves, as a free state,
By payment of a Tribute annual,
Not without reason, called by some black-mail:
Which, if precisely we neglect to pay,
Then do these men in troops without delay,
Fall down amongst us, and drive all away.
Under our windows they our Corns do seize,
Riffle our Stables, and do what they please.
Then they return in order, whence they came
With all our goods, and openly proclaim
Them as their lawful prey: the Country then,
Rise, and with hue and cry, pursue those men,
Thinking to overtake them, but in vain.
For in small bodies, they march speedily,
And to the Mountains soon, like Lightning, fly.
Then do we send up Deputies, to treat
For restitution, but they come to late,
For all those men are quickly dissipate.
Some there be also of that thieving race, 7 They cause the naked to lodge
without clothing, that they have no covering in the cold.

Who in their robbing are so merciless,
As having stripped men of their Goods and Purses,
Yet not contented with so easy purchase,
They strip them all of their apparel too,
And will not out of Charity allow
So much as may protect them from the cold,
But make them wander without house, or hold,
Along the Mountains, whilst they naked go,
Benumbed with cold, above the knees in Snow.
All wet, and weary, those poor Souls do crawl 8 They are wet with the showers
of the mountains, and embrace the rock for want of a shelter.

Amongst the hanging Rocks, and after all,
They think they are happy, if they find some Cave,
Where for some time they may their bodies save
From down-right-perishing in cold, or rather
Avoid the present fury of the VVeather.
Then having rested, in great fear, and pain,
Betake them quickly to their Feet again;
And night, and Day, through hills and deserts roam,
Until half-buried, they at length get home.
Nay very Infants from the breasts they pluck, 9 They pluck the fatherless from
the breast, and take a pledge of the poor.

And will not let their Mothers give them Suck,
To the full time, unless they give a pledge,
TO assure them of them, when they come to age.
These in great numbers they do yearly sell
For slaves, or otherwise, by force compel
The miserable Parents to redeem them
At whatsoever ransom they esteem them.
All men they rob, all families they spoil, 10 They cause him to go naked
without clothing* and they take away the sheaf from the hungry.

And what the poor ones do with daily toil
Amongst the reapers glean, they take away,
Making the sheaves of the hunger-starved their prey.
Nay though our Peasants for security, 11 Which make oil within their walls,
and tread their wine presses, and suffer thi^t.

From these shrewd thieves, within doors silently,
Tread out their Wines, and with great care and toil,
Do in some hidden corner make their Oil:
Yet maugre all the shifts they can devise,
Those cruel men before their very eyes,
Take all away, and cunningly do cheat
Those anxious souls of both their Drink, and Meat:
So that for want of sustenance they dye,
And in the fields their bodies scattered lie:
As food for Crows, unburied here, and there,
And, with contagious scent* infect the air:
Which quickly does engender Pestilence,
That in its rage making no difference
Betwixt the rich, and poor, does sweep away
Some thousands at a Muster every day:
Where both the guilty, and the innocent,
In the same Coffin, to the Grave are sent,
On shoulders of poor Slaves, and Pioneers,
Whilst not a man of all their friends appears
At the Graves-mouth in mourning, to condole
The Dead, or say a requiem to their Soul:
So that a man may well infer from thence,
Oppression is some cause of Pestilence.
And yet though Heavens are hourly battered 12 Men groan from out o^ the city,
and the soul of ^^e wounded ^^ver^ out, yet God laveth not folly to them.

With cries of many thousands ruined
By such Oppressors: though the Towns exclaim,
And all the Countys bitterly do blame
The Magistrate, who should by force restrain
The frequent in rodes of those barbarous men:
Though Ghosts of all the Murdered round about,
With a loud voice, for vengeance do cry out,
Yet God appears to slight, this joint address,
And still permits those Varlets to oppress.
And now that I have spoke sufficiently 13 They are of those that rebel against
the light, they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof.

Of those, whose trade is sin, who openly
Practice it, and esteem it no disgrace
To be descended of a thieving race.
Now I shall show you how on the other part,
Some men do sin as much, but with great art
Endeavor closely to conceal the same,
Not for its guilt, but to avoid its shame.
There be indeed some, who commit offense
Against the light of their own Conscience,
And therefore, as ashamed of what they do,
Because they dare not openly avow
Their sinful actings, they abhore the light,
And wrapped up in the mantle of the night,
Practice the works of darkness with delight.
Yet those, most part escape the censure too,
Which you affirm to wicked men is due,
And flourish in this life. --
Of these I shall give you some instances,
For if I should endeavor to express
The several kinds of such, who do offend,
I fear that my discourse should have no end.
I Will not then reckon all, but satisfy 14 The murderer rising ^ith the ligh^,
(...) the poor and needy, and in the night is as a thief.

My self with Murder and Adultery;
Two loud-tongu'd sins, as to the world are known,
And which are able of themselves alone,
To bring down Judgments, which might overthrow
Whole Kingdoms, States, and Nations at a blow.
Two sins, that in a constant Threnody,
Do call for vengeance, whilst most bitterly
They do accuse their actors, and in crowds,
Make for themselves a way through thickest Clouds,
Each day from hence, not resting while they be
Familiar in the Court of Heavens, and see
The very face of God, yet after all,
Although for justice every hour they call,
God will not hear them, for great reasons known
To his Eternal Majesty alone.
For let us observe but how the Murderers,
Before the Sun with morning blush appears,
On the utmost confines of our Horizon:
Are ready, armed, and to their work are gone,
Enter some Countrey-dwellings silently.
And cut the throats of all the Family;
Then riffle every Room, take all away,
And get them home before it is yet day.
The Adulterer too knowing the proper time, 15 The eye also of the adulterer
waits for the twilight, saying no eye shall see him, and disguiseth his face.

In which he may with safety act his Crime;
Longs for the twilight, when he poorly may
To his poor pleasures, his poor Soul betray:
For whilst he sick with last nights surfeit sleeps
Till noontide, then attires himself, and keeps
Within Doors at his Book, and violin,
To put himself in humor for his sin;
The closs dissembling night draws on apace,
Then does he with great art disguise his Face,
As all who go a rambling. --
Wrappp'd in long-cloak, he sneaks along the streets,
Unknown, as he conceives to all he meets:
To the evening-walks, he does direct his march,
Where he, with great anxiety does search,
In every Grove, and arbor over, and over,
Until he find out his beloved Whore;
Whom when he finds, in a most lustful passion,
He hurries to the place of assignation.
Sometimes in public, on design he walks, 16 In the dark they dig through
houses, which they had marked for themselves in the daytime; they know not the
light.

And seemingly unconcerned, converses, talks,
With one, or other, whilst still privately
Upon some Window he does cast an Eye,
Where some bewitching face he does espy.
Then on the door he sets a private mark,
That he may find the place out in the dark;
Thence to his Pandress quickly drives, and there
What he has now discovered does declare,
A beauty, O most excellent, and rare.
The old sinner views her Books, with care to see
Who this same so much cried up Whore can be:
At length by his account she seems to guess,
And tells him she will do his business,
And cunningly appoints both time, and place,
Where these do meet, and at their ease, and leisure
Until the morning, glut themselves with pleasure.
But O the morning! O the rising Sun! 17 For the morning is to them even as the
shadow of death: if one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of
death.

When that appears, this man is quite undone.
Upon his nights atchievments he reflects,
And finds himself assaulted by the checks
Of an enraged Conscience, and appears
As one distracted betwixt lusts, and fears,
Leaps from his Bed, attires himself anon,
Calls for a Bill, and fain he would begone;
Whilst the Whore yet sleeps, because he apprehends,
If he should tarry longer, by some friends,
Who early stir about their business,
He may be seen from that unlawful place
Come out, and so these men may soon proclaim
Through all the City both his sin, and shame.
On the other hand he judges he may stay
Within doors, with more safety, while the day
Be spent, and in the evening steal away.
In these reflections, and sad apprehensions,
Each moment he does alter his intentions;
His resolutions waver to, and fro,
He knows not whether he should stay, or go.
Cold fear invades his Nerves, his Blood does frieze,
His Joints do tremble, and Deaths terrors sieze
Upon his Soul, for in this pannick fear,
He thinks he sees the Husband every where,
Whom he has injured, with S^iletto armed
Ready t'assault his Person: --
He thinks he hears him swear in every place,
He shall be soon revenged of his disgrace.
At length 'twixt hope and fear, he issues out,
Down next blind-lane he slips, and veers about
By many durty windings here and there,
Until to the next fields he does repair,
Where he does walk, as if he took the Air:
But by and by, he to the Woods does fly,
For now he does suspect the Hue, and Cry
Is out against him: thus he does declare,
How for his sin he punishment does fear,
Resolving from such actions to forbear
In all time coming. --
But when his Lust begins again to to flow,
Forgetting wholly all his former woe,
To the same place, like madman, he returns, 18. He is Twist as the waters,
their portio^ts cursed in the ci^^h he beholds not the way of the vineyard.

And in those unclean flames, again he burns.
There Is one Crime more, of which I do expect
You will permit me yet, my friends, to speak,
A Crime well known by the name of piracy,
Which is on Sea an open robbery:
I have already spoke of that on Land,
And now it is fitting you should understand,
How that on Sea is no less openly
Practiced, as from those men, who live hard by
The Coasts of the Red Sea, we daily hear,
Where in great Fleets those Picaroons appear.
They*re men who having tried all Trades on Land,
And finding nothing, which they took in hand
Succeeded to their wish: in hopes of gain,
At length they became downright High-way-men.
Then out-lawed, and by justice every where
Pursued, they found there was no living there,
And so at last to Sea-towns they repair.
Where buying some small Pinnace, with a few
Hatchets, and Swords, and mustering a crew
Of Rake-hells, like themselves, to Sea they go,
And plunder all they meet, both friend, and foe.
They spoil all Trade, they make the Merchants groan,
And to all States, and Nations bemoan
Their daily losses, by such men as these,
Who against all justice do infest the Seas.
They seldom come on Land, or if they do,
It Is in some Creek, where for a day or two,
They do refresh themselves, and with great pain,
Carine their Barks, and so to Sea again.
At length, when by this vill'nous roaving trade,
Those Sea-opprssours have great Booty made,
To some small Island, where they are not known
They steer, and there themselves they boldly own
To be the Subjects of some mighty State,
Where they as Merchands do Negotiat
With the ^slanders, and riotously spend,
What by their privateering they had gained.
These in their little Wherryes skim the Seas,
And ramble on the Ocean with ease,
Killing, and Robbing, doing what they please.
Who, though each moment they have fair occasions,
TO enrich their Souls with pious Meditations,
Viewing Gods wonders in the deep: --
Yet do they still their sinful Trade practice,
And both the Laws of God, and man despise:
Though floating shrewdly betwixt Winds, and Waves,
And not four inches distant from their Graves.
Thus then we see, my friends, how at all times, 19. Drought, and heat consume
the snow waters, so does the grave those who have sinned.

Men take delight to act most horrid Crimes,
In a continued tract of villainy,
Pray let us see now how these men do dye.
Why not bereaved of Life, by Rope, or Sword,
Not drowned, not cut in pieces, in a word,
After they have grown old in sin, and known
No other trade, but that of Hell alone,
As in some places, Snow does still appear,
Until the Summer Solstice of the year,
And undissolv'd in heaps it self does show,
Until by heat it does in waters flow:
So these grown old in sin, and now no more
Able to act it, as they did before,
Do softly dwindle to the Grave, and there
Lie down, and rest, without all fear, or care.
Nay with such calmnesse, and tranquillity, 20. The womb shall forget him* the
worm shall feed sweetly on him, he shall be no more remembered, and wickedness
shall be broken as a tree.

As if they meant to sleep, they softly dye,
And with so little violence, or pain,
As even their very Mothers do abstain
From weeping at their death, and making noise
Above their Corpse, but rather do rejoice,
To see their Children in the extremity,
Of age, wealth, honors, and discretion dye.
The worms upon their Corpse do sweetly feed,
And they in Grave do find as soft a bed,
As do the bodies of those pious men,
Of whom no man had reason to complain,
Nay, though those men with sin so soul, and black,
May well be named villainy in the abstract,
Yet in their Death, there is nothing singular,
Nor do they die in horror and despair,
But like an aged Trunk, fallen to decay,
Insensibly they moulder quite away.
Now here, my friends, I thought to have given over, 21 He evil entreats the
barren, that bears not, and does not good to the widow.

And of oppression to have spoke no more,
But that I think on it, there is a species,
Of those unhappy men, who do oppress,
Of whom I have not spoke as yet: there are
Some, who for neither rich, nor poor do care:
But bolster'd up with vain authority,
Against all persons they promiscuously
Do vent their rage: men full of picquant-wrath
Who threaten still Destruction, and Death
To all, who give them but the least offense,
And to the afflicted, with great violence
They add affliction.
They take great pleasure, tartly to upbraid,
All those, on whom the hand of God is laid.
The barren woman, who in doleful tone,
In private does her barrenness bemoan,
They call an useless wretch, a barren fool,
A dry She-ass, a pitiful Night owl.
The widow too, whose lamentable state,
All truly pious men compassionate,
Those men, with all their force, and art oppress,
And makes her Life a Scene of bitterness.
Nay, on the wealthy too, their hand they stretch 22 He draws also the ^ighty
by his (...) rises up, and ^o man is sure of life.

And fleece them all, as far, as they can reach,
By heavy Fines, give way to Informations
Against them, and encourage accusations
On slender grounds, which with great art they draw
Out of the very Excrements of Law:
TO attain the lives and means of those they hate,
And satiat their Revenge at any rate.
Their dire Revenge, which no man can endure,
For who is he can of his life be sure,
If once those men by their intelligence,
Can find against them any evidence,
Then must they die for all their innocence.
Yet these, these are the men, who do possess 23 Though it be giv^^ to him to
be in (...), whereon he ^^^^th, yet his eyes are on their ways.

The good things of the earth: these men in peace
Do spend their time, whilst good and righteous men
Of want of bread, do every day complain,
But after all, though these men sillily
Suppose they sin, with great security,
And think God does not eye them, nor remark
At least their hidden actings in the dark,
Yet he does eye them, and will surely bring
Those men to an account, and reckoning,
For all these villainous deeds, and make them know,
That though he be a God to anger slow,
Yet when inflamed with a just indignation,
He Will of his anger make clear demonstration,
And cut off all their race by extirpation.
For wicked men, though in the worlds eyes 24 They are exalted for a little
while, but are gone, and brought low, they are taken out of the way as all
other, and cut off as the tops of the ears of corn.

They seem to swell, and in great foamings rise,
Blown up by winds of pride, to th'hight of all,
That which poor mortals happiness do call.
Yet are their honors, titles, dignities,
But mere delusions, vain uncertainties;
Things of no value, triffles, empty shows,
And but of short duration, God knows:
For in a few years time we shall perceive
Them, and their honors shut up in the Grave:
And their successors prodigally fall
A wasting, spending, and consuming all,
What those poor Caterpillars had with pain
Amassed together in their lives, and then
There shall be no more memory of those men.
Now to conclude then, if what I have said, 25 And if it be not so now, who
will make me a liar? and make my speech nothing worth?

Shall not be able fully, to persuade
Your minds, my friends, that what I speak is true,
Come let me hear, I pray now which of you
Will undertake the question to decide,
And make appear that I have erred, or ly'd.
Cap. XXV.
BIldad it seems did undertake to do it, 1 Then answered Bildad the Shuhite,
and said,

And in a short discourse, he thus spoke to it.
Why is it so? says he, that thou must still 2 Dominion, and fear are with him,
he makes peace in his high places.

Hold such opinions, argue what we will
To th'contrair? what has all that we have said
Of our good wishes, no impression made
In thy poor Soul? are all our labors vain?
And shall we still have reason to complain,
That after all what we can do, or speak,
We are as yet not able to correct
The fury of thy hot impatience,
But still thou tel'st us of thy innocence?
Ah! will thou never be convinced? will thou
Still wildly rave, what ever we can do
To bring thee to thy wits? art'not ashamed.
To speak thus of thy Maker, who has framed
Both thee, and us of very simple Dust,
That yet for all this thou will still be just,
What ere he say to the contrair, why my friend,
Is It fit thou with thy Maker should contend?
With him, who all perfection does transcend?
With him is fear, dominion, power, and state,
Honor, and glory: pray who can debate
With our Almighty God: with God on high,
Under whose feet we Mortals grovelling ly?
Will thou contend with him whom all obey
Whom no command or power dare gainsay?
A God unlimited, and absolute
In all his actings, and will thou dispute
With such a one?
His mighty armies are innumerable, 3. Is there any number of his armies, and
upon whom does not his light arise?

By which, at all occasions he is able
To make all men from Wars, and Tumults cease,
And keep the whole Creation in peace:
He makes his Sun on every Creature shine,
Without distinction, who then should repine,
Or say that he is partial? when his care
For all his Creatures equal does appear.
O then, since God is absolute, and high, 4. How then can man be justified with
God? or how can he be clear, that is born of a woman?

Unlimited, in power, and sovereignty,
All-seeing, wise, impartially just,
And best of men is but a mass of dust:
Who Is he that in his presence dares assert
That he is clean, and upright in his heart?
Who Is he dares undertake to justify
Himself before his Maker, or deny
That he is sinful, and by consequence
Deserves to be chastis'd for his offense?
Who Is he of Woman born that can be clean?
Was ever yet that Mortal heard, or seen
That came into the World without Sin,
Since our first Parents did of old begin
To lay the first foundation of offense,
Entailing firmly on their race, from thence
A sad inheritance of sin, a black,
And uglie spot, in a continued tract
Of Generation from the dismal time
That these (till then unknown) durst act a crime.
Then how dare thou affirm that thou art pure 5. Behold the moon and it
shines not, yea the stars are not pure in his sight.

I'th'sight of God? do think we can endure
To hear a man so impudentlie speak
Of what but even to think deserves a check?
Pray but behold the Moon: observe, I pray
How now at Nights it does its beams display
In imitation of the light of day.
View but the Stars too, and observe how these
Shine, like bright Tapers in Kings Palaces,
And though not great, yet yield an useful light
TO allay the horror of the tedious night.
Now one should think those glorious Heavenly Creatures,
By their own Constitutions, and Natures
Were pure and clean: but it is a great mistake,
For those, what ever figure they do make
Of bright unspotted glory, in which sure
They mankind do exceed, and are more pure
Than any of us all, yet in his eyes
Those glorious Creatures with Impurities
Are overspread, and in his sight appear
Unclean, and Daple-spotted every where.
Then how much more unclean, foul, and deform, 6. How much less man that is a
worm, and the son of man, which is a worm?

Is man before him? man a very Worm,
A Moth, an Aunt, a Spider, any thing
That may be thought not worth the valuing.
Man a mere Frog, a thing both mean, and base
A silly Worm, both he, and all his race.
Cap. XXVI.
TO hear such language without some offense, 1. But Job answered, and said*

Required in Job a solid patience.
Who though he is now nigh spent, and hardly able
To speak, yet hearing how his friend did table
The same Discourse, which had so often before
Been argued on both sides, over and over:
With some disdain, and seeming Indignation,
He thus put in his answer.
Pray now, good friend, if I without offense 2. How have thou helped him, that
is without power, how savest thou the arm that has no strength

To your so often displayed eloquence
May ask the question, pray now let me see
What comfort brings all this Discourse to me?
What comfort, pray my friend? is this the way,
Are these the methods, these the means, now pray,
By which you would afford me some solace,
In this my sad, and lamentable case?
No sure, for what by your Discourse appears,
Your only aim is to augment my fears:
For you still tell me that my God is great,
Absolute, Boundless, and Unlimitat,
And how compared with him, wee're all but dust,
And so conclude none can be pure, and just
In sight of our great God.
Is this to comfort pray? is this t'allay
The Fever of my Soul? is this, I say,
The way to comfort one in sad distress,
By Baiting of him, with such words, as these?
Words stuffed with terror: words of dreadful sense,
And to the afflicted of sad consequence:
Words that with comfort so repugnant are,
As they would provoke one rather to despair*
Words of severest rigor; words of death,
Words, that would shake a very solid faith:
Is this the comfort you intend? alace,
This all the pity you have on my case
To fright me with such passages as these?
For when you tell me that my sins do merit
All I endure, you do so crush my spirit,
You do so damp my wearied soul with fear,
As I am almost ready to despair:
And were it not that my God in mercy yet
Sustained my spirit; I would soon forget
My duty to him, and undoubtedlie,
As my impatient Wife did formerlie
Advise me, I should curse his Name, and die.
But O my Soul, do thou his Glorious Name,
In gratitude, to every age proclaim:
His Name, who thee so graciously supports,
When men against thee make such strong efforts.
Pray then, my dear friend, if I may demand,
Without offense: let me but understand, 3. How have thou counseled him that
has no wisdom, and how have thou plentifully declared the thing, as it is?

What do thou by this short Discourse intend,
What would infer from thence? pray to what end
Do thou with so much art delineat
The Power of God, and so expatiat
Upon his works, as if thou thought that I
Did any of his Atributes deny?
Are these the methods, by which you intend
TO instruct your shallow, and unthinking friend?
You say I Have erred, why truth it may be so,
But by what you have spoke, I do not know
As yet in what: For I, as well as you,
A firm that God to no man does allow
Such purity, as he may arrogate
The inheritance of an immortal state,
TO himself from thence: I do with you agree,
That God is great and just, and as for me,
I Am but a Worm indeed, a very Gnat,
A Fly, a Wasp, a thing, I know not what,
So mean, so low, and of so small esteem,
As baseness is it self, compared with him.
I do agree with you that sinful men,
On this side time, are often overtane
With punishment; nor do I yet deny
But God does his Displeasure signify,
By previous signs, to such, ere he does fall,
Upon them in his Wrath, for good and all.
But that he sends afflictions on none,
But those whose sins do merit Hell alone.
I still deny, and in that Confidence,
To all your bold, and cruel Eloquence,
I still oppose my Faith, and Innocence.
On these, and on Gods mercy I rely,
And if you think I argue foolishlie,
Convince me, pray, by other arguments
Then I have heard as yet.
But thus to treat me, thus to aggravate
My woes: to comfort me at such a rate,
By adding to my sorrows, is, indeed,
A comforting, of which I have not read:
It Is such a method, as I think that none
Did ever yet practice, but you alone.
I do confess, indeed, my grief is such,
As may have prompted me to speak too much
Upon the Subject; and I don't deny,
But in my sore, and bitter agony,
Some words might fall, I cannot justify.
But when you see me in this dire estate,
With griefs and sorrows so exasperate,
And plagued with such sad exercise of mind,
I did expect you would a'been so kind,
As to afford me counsel, and advice;
That such a fool as I, by men so wise
As you are, might b'instructed in the case,
But stead of that, you tell me in my face,
I Am lost, undone, and may in justice fear
More pains, and torments, then I yet do bear;
Such comforting did ever Mortal hear!
What spirit moves thee thus, my friend, to speak? 4. To whom have thou uttered
words, and whose spirit came from thee?

Do thou imagine I am yet so weak,
But that I understand as well as thou,
What is Gods greatness, and his justice too?
What spirit then does move thee thus to speak?
Do thou intend to comfort or correct
Thy poor afflicted friend? do, let me know,
Whether thou means't to comfort me, or no?
For what thou speaks't does nothing contribute
TO uphold my swouning spirits, or recruit
My so much wasted strength: I cannot see
What comfort all thy speeches yield to me.
For with such zeal, and fervor thus to press
Once, and again, what all men do confess:
Gods power, and greatness thus still to repeat
Were to suppose that we did now debate
The truth of these things, and that I denied,
What you so eagerly affirm; beside
If any man should chance to hear us now
Upon this Subject, and observed but how
Thou, and my other friends, with all the Art,
That Learning can afford, do still assert
What I deny: he would presently conclude
That you are pious men, and I a lewd
Ungodly person, whereas you all know,
And are convinced your selves, things are not so.
Pray then forbear this way of comforting,
By such reiterated arguing,
And telling of me things I don't deny:
For what does all this talking signify
TO a poor afflicted man? and if you please
Pray use such words as may afford some ease
To one in a deplorable estate,
And let me hear no more of your debate:
For what you speak, if I do understand,
Does not concern the question in hand.
But here, my friends, that you may no more Preach 5. Dead things are framed
from under the waters, and the inhabitants thereof.

Upon this Theme, as if you meant to teach
One that is dull, and ignorant, I Will show
How I Gods Greatness, and his Justice know
As well as any of you all, and how
I can descant upon his wonders too.
Allow me then his Greatness to express,
As you have done, by as few instances.
First then, that my discourse may method keep,
Let us observe his wonders in the deep;
Let Us there begin, and see how providence
So vast, so powerful, so profound, immense,
Active, and quick at all occurrences,
Does reach even to the bottom of the Seas.
There he does rule, as well as on the Land,
There all the Creatures, which his mighty hand
Has framed, submit themselves to his command.
Those Monsters of the Ocean, who afright
The admiring Seaman, with their very sight:
Those dreadful Creatures of such various frames,
As we do hardly yet know all their names:
Those numerous Giants of the deep, who scour
The Ocean with an Arbitrary power,
Swallowing their fellow creatures with such ease,
As if they claimed dominion of the Seas.
Who, when they mean to sport themselves, will make
The unbroken Waves with their strong motion shake,
Like troubled Waters, and anon, to show
Their force, whole Tuns of Water up they throw
From their prodigious Snouts, as if they would dare
By force of Water to subdue the Air.
Those huge portentuous Creatures, though they seem
In their own Sphere to be of some esteem,
To have some power, dominion, and command,
Yet are they governed by his mighty hand,
And do submit their necks, with deference
To his great Lord-Lieutenent Providence:
Who, when he sees those Creatures wantonly
Sporting along the Ocean, by and by
With single nod commands them to be gone,
Then like so many Slaves they trembling run
To the Seas bottom, where they grovelling ly,
Until from him they have the liberty
To swim aloft; and there they roam about
At every prey, till their Verloof run out.
Dead things he also orders in the Seas,
Such as Pearls, Amber, Coral, Ambergrease,
And Sperma cete, which for humane use,
He makes them as a yearly Rent, produce.
Now as he rules i'th'bottom of the Seas, 6. Hell is naked before him, and
destruction has no covering.

So in the earth he orders all with ease.
He views its darkest Caverns, and descryes
What is impervious to all humane eyes.
The Grave before him opens up her Womb,
His eyes does pierce the clossest Marble Tomb.
No place affords a shelter from his wrath,
Not all the winding Labyrinths of death;
Not Hell it self, in whose closs Vaults do ly
The burning Tares of poor Mortality;
Where damned Souls eternally bemoan
Their idle progress here on earth, whilst none
Can make them help, and to no purpose groan.
Where grining Fiends by his permission rule,
And treat our glorious World in ridicule,
Making the highest amongst the lowest ly,
Where all are Cudgelled to conformity.
Yet of this Dungeon he does keep the Keys,
And every moment does survey with ease
The actions, postures, tears of all in Hell,
And the sad living knows exactly well
Of all those Souls, who nigh Earths Center dwell.
With curious Art he does expose to the eye 7. He stretches out the north over
the empty place, and hangs the earth upon nothing.

That large and glorious Azure Canopy,
Which round this Earthen Glob, he does expand,
Whilst in its Center, with a mighty hand
He makes this Glob so spacious and fair
Unfix'd, unprop'd, unfounded any where,
Hang, like a Water-bubble in the Air.
Here then let admiration fix its eyes,
And high-flown Art, its Artless self despise,
When it considers, how beyond all Art,
And contrair to what reason does impart,
A solid Body, which should downwards tend,
By Nature, and is apt still to descend,
Should in this posture Pendulous remain,
And by its own weight, its own weight sustain.
To see gross Earth, and heavy Water mix't,
Stand so unmoving, so secure, so fixed,
Amidst the Light, thin Element of Air,
That unresisting Element, that rare
And tender'st Cob-web of the whole Creation,
Is that, which does exceed all admiration.
When even its Wing'd-Inhabitants, how e're
They at some distance to us do appear
To stand sometime i'th'Air: yet coming nigh
We see they do not stand, but softly fly,
For sure, without some motion, they could never
Subsist, but a few minutes in the Air.
To see a Mass with gravity deprest
On such a Downy Pillow sweetly rest,
And yet that Pillow firm, and solid still,
On which it rests appear: say what you will,
Is that which does all reason far transcend,
And if to know it more we do intend,
Of idle searching there shall be no end.
Now let us from the Earth a while remove 8. He binds up the waters in his
thick cloud, and the cloud is not rent under him

Our eyes, and see what order's kep't above.
Let Us make a progress through this spacious Air,
And view what curiosities are there
Remarkable; in the first place let us see,
What glomerating Bodies these may be,
Who nimbly tumble all along the Air,
And no small figure make in their own Sphere.
Those glorious embroideries of the Skys,
Whose various colors feast the curious eyes.
Those Clouds, which do above our heads appear,
What are they, 'pray? for what use are they there?
What service do they make? why, we must know,
That even in those, God does his wonders show.
For as we see in Gardens, how the care
And cautious foresight of the Gardener,
Large quantities of waters does retain
In Cisterns, to supply the want of Rain,
Whereby his Plants he moistens now and then.
So though the Earth is moistened with the Seas,
Who wash it on all hands, and by degrees,
Through all its Bowels squirt themselves, and so
At length in Springs, and Rivers gently flow
For that same end; yet he takes further care
Of this great Garden, as great Gardener:
And l^st those Springs at any time run dry,
And so the Earth grow sterile, by and by,
Whole Oceans he pumps up to the Sky.
By a great engine called Exhalation,
And in those airy Clouds to admiration,
Those waters, he does firm, and sure retain,
And only sifts them gently out in rain,
As through the Cribrous snout of Water-pot*
The Gardner softly wets his Garden Plot:
So he from thence this Earth does irrigate;
For should one Cloud but burst, without debate
A Deluge would ensue. But O, the care
Of Providence, that in those Bags of Air;
Those Hankerchiefs of condensed vapors, those
So spongious Tankards he should keep so close,
Such quantities of Waters Tunn'd, and Pal'd,
As sure, as if in Bottles, Cork'd, and Sealed;
When one would think (by rules of Art to speak)
Those shoulders for such burdens were too weak;
And that the weight of the waters they contain,
Might make those vaporous Bottles burst in twain.
Thus then we see those Clouds created were, 9. He holds back the face of his
throne and spreads his clouds upon it.

To serve the useful Waterworks in the Air.
For in these, Liquor stored in Magazine,
Is kep't in Cask entire, upon design,
Not to be drawn off, but when he would supply
The drouthy Earth, what time it becomes dry.
And yet those brim-full Clouds sometime appear,
So settled, and almost transparent clear:
As if no waters in their belly were.
And then we seem to view the Heavenly Throne,
In its full glory; but when God anon,
Intends this glory from our eyes to shroud,
It Is but to interpose a sable Cloud:
A sable Cloud, which he can quickly make
Out of the clearest: as if one should shake
A Crystal Bottle, in which, for some space,
Liquor preserved appears clear as the Glass;
Because by time its Dregs being separate
From the spirits; in the bottom take their seat,
But once being shak'd, what formerly was clear,
Now muddy, thick, and troubled does appear.
So a few Clouds, shak'd by his mighty hand,
In a thick Curtain soon themselves expand,
Which he lets fall betwixt us and the light,
And what was clear before, is dark as night:
Yet by obscuring of his glory so,
At seasons, he does make its value grow;
And causes us poor Mortals earnestly,
Long for his re-appearance in the Sky:
As those for day, who under the Pole do ly.
Now since so many Pales with Water full
Do hang above our heads; what simple, dull, 10. He has compassed the waters
with bounds until the day, and night come to an end.

Insipid Creatures must we Mortals be,
That don't the love of our Creator see?
In all his Dispensations, for if ever
His loving care of mankind did appear
In any thing: in this it is evident,
That he thus bridles that wild Element
Of Water, which would otherwise o'rflow
Us all, but that he binds its fury so,
As neither those, who 'bout the Earth does roar,
And, were it in their power, would soon devour
The Land, and be by Shores hemmed in no more.
Nor yet for all their daily threatenings dar
Those Waters, which hang over us in the air,
Upon this Earth in bodies rudely fall,
But are restrained by him, who governs all:
And still shall be by that high power restrained,
Until all what we see shall have an end.
How kind a God! how much to him we owe, 11. The pillar of heaven tremble, and
are astonished at his reproof.

Who for our Being such concern does show!
How should we love him! how should we forbear
T'incense that God, to whom we are so dear!
O, how should we to rouse his choler fear!
For, if this God do once appear in wrath,
Hell in his eyes, and in his looks is Death:
With one stern aspect, he will quickly make
Heavens most entire, and strongest pillars shake.
At his reproof the Mountains cleave assunder
By Earthquakes, and the Air is rent by Thunder,
At his command, Fire out in lightning flies,
And there is a great commotion in the Skies:
All things created do a trembling fall,
The sudden fear is epidemical,
And we expect a period of all.
And yet amidst this anger still his care, 12. He divides the sea with his
power, and by his understanding he smites through the proud.

And love for man does eminent appear.
For though he sometimes makes the Ocean swell,
To that extent, as if it would compel
The Heavens to give it way to quarter all
Its furious billows on this Earthen Ball.
When with high-winds blown up beyond Springtide;
It swaggers with intolerable pride,
Making whole heaps of Froath on high to rise,
As if it boldly meant to assault the Skies:
Yet in an instant, he can, when he will,
Make this rude Monster silent, and tranquil;
And make it soon return for all its pride,
To the progress of an ordinary tide.
And last of all, since Earth, Sea, Hell, and Air, 13. By his spirit he has
garnished the heavens, his hand has formed the crooked serpent.

We Have viewed, lets to Heavens-pallace now repair.
That he has garnished in such curious sort,
And beautified so his Empyrean-Court,
As no eye can behold, no tongue set forth,
No Art esteem, or calculate its worth.
For what created Optics can perceive
That which the mind does even with pain believe!
What mortal eye can view the precious things,
That in the palace of the King of kings
Are to be seen!
When even in some Kings-pallace here below,
Pearls, Rubies, Diamonds make such glorious show,
With Silks, and Silver, Walls and Flowers orelaid,
Cupboards with Gold, and Crystal vessels spread:
Pictures and Statues to such value wrought,
As only by great Monarchs can be bought,
Make such a strange appearance, as the eyes
Are dazzled with the sight, and do surpize
The uncurious, homebred, unexpecting mind,
When they present it Idea's of that kind.
Nay those who have seen those glorious passages,
When they relate such goodly sights, as these,
They Are not believed, and every one who hears
Their Stories, think them lying Travelers.
Then O if these so glorious do appear,
Which if with Heavens rich palace we compare,
Are but as Cottages; what must that be,
Which none but with the eye of Faith can see!
Yes, with the piercing eye of Faith alone,
Must we discover the celestial Throne,
Which when we see, our minds shall then abhore
All other sights, and wish to see no more.
The Sun, and Moon, who in their Orbs appear
Most necessary for his Glory here;
Are there of no more use, than Candles be,
After the Day is broke, for then we see
These little Rays, which sparkled in the night,
Are fully swallowed in the greater light.
So where God in his Majesty does shine,
These most resplendent Beams, those Rays Divine
Do so much light afford, as there is no need
Of Sun, and Moon: this light it self does spread
So brightlie, and so fully over all
That other Lights we may but Tapers call.
But hear, my friends, pray, even admire with me
Heavens outward Fabric, which we daily see,
Let us with admiration cast our eyes
Upon those very Heavens, and view the skies,
How Glorious, how Beautiful, and Fair,
When Sun at Noontide shines, they do appear.
When nothing in our Horizon we view,
But a Sun Radient in a Field of Blew:
Which, like a spacious Arch, appears to the eye,
Whilst we, as sitting under Canopie
Do eat in state: anon, when he inclines
To rest, and takes goodnight, in Oblique-lines,
How sweetly on the Mountain tops he shines!
Whilst round his squinting beams the skies appear,
In such bright various Colors here, and there,
So curiously damask'd at that rate,
As Artists yet, but faintlie imitat
That evening Picture, and at length confess
No Pencil can such glorious shows express;
Whilst, most part of that Field which now we view
Is shadowed Scarlet, which before was Blew.
At length, when after all, the Sun is gone,
And Darkness does invade our Horizon:
Then of what color is this Canopie?
How do the Heavens appear then to the eye?
Why then we see the Moon, and Stars do yield
A comely Figure in a Russet Field:
Under which spacious covering we sleep,
Till from the Seas the Sun again does peep:
And then, what Russet was before, we view
Now of a mixed Pearl, Orient, Gray, and Blew.
Then if these outward Heavens themselves display
In changes of attire four times a day,
And with such rare, and goodly Variation,
Affords us so much cause of admiration:
Ah! how much more should we admire, if we
The Inner-court of the third Heavens could see
The Heavens of Heavens, where in Magnificence
The Great Creator keeps his Residence!
How should we be surpised, if we could see,
What glorious sights in these Apartments be.
Where he who framed all things does sit in state,
When we so much admire the utter Gate.
Now as those curious Heavens his Hands did frame
Which every hour his Greatness do proclaim,
So, as a Limner, when to show his skill,
He makes his Pensil draw what shapes he will;
The Great Creator to express his art,
That from the highest to the lowest part,
This Universe might be replenished
With these so various works his hands had made:
The Insects too, which on the Earth do crawl,
He framed, to show his Glory shines in all,
What we can see, or fathom in our mind,
And writes his name on things of every kind.
Then, to conclude, since those few passages 14. Lo these are parts of his
ways, but ^ow little a (...) is heard of him, but the thunder of his power who
can understand.

Do so much of his Glorious Power express:
Since what with our dull eyes of flesh we see,
Which may by Computation hardly be
The hundred thousand part of that great whole
Of which the Great Creator is the soul:
Affords such grounds of serious contemplation,
How should it far exceed all admiration!
Were I, my friends, but able to relate
His Glory in its true, and real state,
But ah, there is no man able to do that.
And thus, I hope, I have demonstrate now,
I understand these things as well as you.
Let these suffice then, let these things, my friends,
Of which I Have spoke, fully possess your minds.
Debate no more, I pray, but let us all
Upon this subject to admiring fall,
That Great Creator, at whose very name
We mortals should our faces vail for shame,
And prostrat on the ground in ashes ly,
When we consider that great Deity:
That chief, and supreme Being, that so vast
Extent of Power, that glorious first, and last:
Compared with whom man is a cheaper thing,
Then is a Beggar balanced with a King,
Ten thousand times. Then O let these suffice
And let us no more in contention rise
Concerning things we cannot comprehend,
Which all our art, and reason do transcend,
In painting out of which there is no end.
Cap. XXVII.
THus having replied to what Bildad said, 1, Moreover Job continued his
parable, and said.

Expecting some should have an answer made,
Job paused a while: but then perceiving how
Those learned men had all concluded now
That he was so perversely obstinate
As not to be reclaimed at any rate,
And therefore seeing what they spoke before
Prevailed so little, meant to speak no more:
Lest he might seem to approve what they decreed,
He still in his defense did thus proceed.
Why now, my friends, says he, at length I see 2. As God lives, who has taken
away my judgment, and the Almighty, who has vexed my soul.

You think it lost labor to dispute with me:
You think all you have spoke has been in vain,
And so from speaking more you will now abstain:
Why you do well, indeed I Am glad it is so,
But should I hold my peace, I firmly know
You would undoubtedlie conclude from thence
That I passed from my plea of innocence;
Therefore I still must speak in my defense.
As the Lord lives then, as our mighty God
Eternal in the Heavens keeps his abode,
As he has heard and seen all that has past
Amongst us, and will judgment give at last
Against those of us who have erred: I here
Before you all most solemnlie do swear,
I Am wholly innocent of all these crimes,
Of which you have me accused so many times.
I know not why my Maker thus has vex't
My soul with troubles: why I Am thus perplex't
With griefs, and Sorrows, which I never did merit,
At his so gracious hands: or why my spirit
Should thus be crushed with misery and woe,
Of no crimes yet convict, I do not know.
For I protest, my friends, I firmly still
Assert (let God do with me what he will)
I know no cause for my sad punishment:
For to this hour I Am wholly innocent
Of what the injurious world lay to my charge,
And which in your discourse you have at large,
To my own hearing told.
Nay whilst Gods spirit moves within my breast 3. All the while my breath is
in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils.

And whilst I breath I solemnlie protest.
No trouble, no affliction, no oppression, 4. My lips shall not speak
wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit.

No pain, no woe, no torment, no occasion
Shall move me in my sorrow to express,
What may be even supposed wickedness.
For whilst I breath, I never do intend
To speak those words, which may my God offend.
And though, since so much woe, and misery 5. God forbid that I sheuld
justify you; till I die I will not remove my integrity from me.

Has seized upon me, I might possibly
Vent some hot words, and have perhaps expressed
My self but as a simple man at best.
Yet God forbid that I should ratify
What you have said, or my integrity
Prejudge in the least, no never while I die.
What you have spoke, my friends, is all in vain,
For I will still my innocence maintain.
To my uprightness I do still adhere, 6. My righteousness I hold fast, and will
hot let it go, my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.

Whatever to the contrair you aver:
I Will not belly my Conscience for all
That you have said, or can say, should you baul
Never so much, and bitterly exclaim
Against your poor afflicted friend, and blame
My fervent zeal to own my righteousness,
As a mere humor, as a stubbornness,
And positive opinion in the case.
For while I breath, my heart shall never upbraid
My tongue with lying; as it had betrayed
That heart, that upright, and ingenuous heart,
That heart of the first mould, void of Craft, and Art;
With any, never so small acknowledgment
Of what its altogether innocent.
Most innocent, for I again protest, 7. Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he
that rises up against me, as the unrighteous.

I do not know that thought within my breast
That for injustice can be quarrelled,
For did I think that one were harbored
Of that kind here, I Would quickly tear it out,
And for that thought abhor my self to boot.
No, no, my friends, I utterly detest
The very thoughts of sin; nor, in the least
Will I allow my heart to entertain
Such guests as those, of which you do comp^^in.
For of all men, I truly do esteem
Those Godless livers you so often name,
(However in this world they daily th^^^e,)
To be the most unhappy men alive.
No greater judgments would I imprecate,
On any, whom my very soul does hate,
Then that they live, and die in ^^ose men's state.
I therefore do beseech you now, my friends, 8. For what is the hope of the
hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his soul?

In charity to alter here your minds,
And not believe that I am on of those,
Whom you call Hypocrites, the Almighty knows
I am not such; nor would you ere conclude
That I were such, if you but understood
The difference betwixt a Hypocrite
And one that is pious, and in heart upright.
For, but observe now, here is the difference,
The Hypocrite, whilst in great affluence,
Of worldly blessings he consumes his time,
And his felicity is in its prime.
Then he rejoices, is above all hope,
'Cause all his wishes have attained their scope:
Then in Gods goodness he is confident,
Speaks piously, and passes for a Saint.
Yet he will tell you --
He Will tell you, when his Gold in heaps does ly,
That all these Riches are but vanity,
Things of no moment, only stamped Dust,
And therefore no wise man should put his trust,
Or place his confidence at any rate,
In such a mean return of humane sweat:
That product of the toil of many years,
That balance of so numerous cares, and fears,
As all the profit, after just account,
Those Riches do afford, do scarce amount
To so much, as may countervail the loss,
Which we sustain in purchasing such Dross.
Whilst he himself does place such confidence
In this same Dross, that he concludes from thence
His happiness, as Riches do increase,
And how much Land, and Cash he does possess,
'Has as much Faith exactly, and no more,
And all his Hope he measures by his Store.
For he himself in this so valueth,
As he does laugh at all the Powers of Death.
Nor can the weeklie Sermons he does hear:
To which he most attentive does appear:
Delivered with much zeal, and force of art,
Find any passage into this man's heart.
For, notwithstanding all that men can say,
And all the Burials, which he every day
Under his Windows sees, that plainly teach
More Death, than all the art of man can preach.
Yet this rich Worldling never can believe
That often repeated Fable of the Grave*
But in his mind rejects, and privatlie
Derides the Story of Mortality.
For, while in health, he minds his business,
And has no leisure for such thoughts* as these.
But change the Scene a little, homewards bear
The Plot, and let approaching Death appear:
Let this bold Sinner be imprisoned
Within the narrow compass of a Bed,
Lay the poor Carrion on his back, and then
He is the most disconsolate of men.
His troubled Conscience nothing can appease,
When now before his eyes that thing he sees,
Of which he often had heard, that ghastly thing,
Of which before he made small reckoning:
Appear at his Bedside with confidence,
And peremptorily charge him to go hence.
Then all Confusion, Horror, and Despair,
He quites all hope, and only now does fear:
He fears, he fears, he trembles all apace,
When he confiders on his future case:
Thinks all the Wealth* that he has purchased
Is very Dross, and nothing now indeed
Bus stamped Dust, whilst, when his Chests are full,
Death his reluctant Soul begins to pull
Out of his Body: --
But on the contrair, one upright, and just
Is full of hope, and in his God does trust,
When that sad hour arrives: in confidence
Of future bliss, he for his journey hence,
Prepares himself, with great alacrity,
Welcomes his stroke, and smilinglie does die.
Or if perhaps in misery he fall,
And by Heavens Wrath he is bereft of all
As I am now: his Spirits never drop,
But firmly rooted in a solid hope,
On God, as on his anchor he relies,
And all the roaring Waves of Hell defies.
Next do you think, that when this wretched man 9. Will God hear his cry; when
trouble comes upon him?

In trouble lies, let him say what he can,
That God will hear him, let him sigh, and groan,
Let him his bypast actions bemoan:
Let him his sins so cunningly lament,
As one would think him truly penitent:
No, after all, such crying is in vain;
For he from God no audience can obtain.
For well God knows, he understands full well,
Not love to him, but trouble does compel
This man to pray, and were he out of pain,
He Would soon return to his old ways again:
And therefore our Creator stops his ear
To such a subtle, and time-serving prayer,
But he that trusts in God, no sooner prays,
Then God does hear him, and his soul does raise
Out of the Quag mire of adversity,
As soon as he to Heavens for help does cry.
Again, when this man into sickness falls, 10. Will he delight himself in the
Almighty? will he always call upon God?

Then, not while then, upon Gods name he calls:
Then sighs, and prays, because he feels some pain,
And of his sins does bitterly complain,
But 'cause with pain, not with delight he prays,
His new patched up Devotion soon decays;
When Heavens afford no answer, but delays.
For how do you think a man not formerly
Accustomed to the works of piety,
Who never before upon Gods name did call,
'Till now he is forced to do it for good, and all:
Can, when in trouble, bring his earthly mind,
That never to Devotion was inclined,
In love with prayer, a thing it never knew,
Before that time, whose name to it is new.
Especially, when no return is made
As he expects, but that he is still delayed;
Whilst God his Supplication will not hear,
Though every hour he is at expense of prayer.
Why truly after he some time has spent,
In proving of this new Experiment,
Which men call prayer: and perceiving still
His pains increase, let him pray what he will,
He gives it over, and will pray no more,
But even continues as he did before
In worldly thoughts, and when approaching Death
Begins to stop the passage of his Breath.
Then he does pass a vote of None-address
Against Heavens* and falls to earthly business.
Calls for his Books his Bonds, and Evidents,
His Leases, and judicial Instruments;
Makes Notes of 'em, and quickly sums up all,
Both Land, and Money to a capital.
Is anxious to settle his Affairs,
That he may leave no trouble to his Heirs:
Pays what he owes, will die in debt to noue,
And clears accounts with all, but God alone.
Which when h'has done, he thinks to find some rest,
Or, after all, to die in peace, at least.
But O! he is disappointed, for now all
His friends, and kindred do about him craul,
As Crows about a dying Beast, and claim
Some portion of his substance, each of 'em
They buzz about him, with such outward show
Of kindness, and torment his spirit so
With their expecting looks, as he can find
No way to ease his now distracted mind,
Until he satisfy them all, and then
He thinks his spirit may be eased of pain.
So makes his Will, and names some Legacy
For each of 'em, then thinking he may die
In peace, and ease, he bids them all begone,
Since they have got their asking, but anon
Physicians, Lawyers, Scriveners appear
And each of them too do pretend a share
In that rich Booty. --
These for their labor during his Disease,
Expecting more then ordinary Fees:
These others for the pains, which they have taken
In his Affairs pretend to no small gain:
Hence wearied of his Life, and seeing now
With Riches he can have no more to do,
He signs, and seals whatever these advise
And piece meals in a thousand Legacies,
His once beloved Dross: then after all
Is gone, he faintly does for Preachers call:
'Tells them that he has given all away,
And therefore thinks it now high time to pray.
But scarce these good men do begin to speak,
When the poor Worm becomes so faint and weak,
As he is ready to expire, and then
He has no time to hear those pious men:
Only when thoy desire, out of his store,
He may appoint some small thing for the Poor:
He tells them all is now gone, 'has nothing left,
No Means, no Cash, he is now of all bereft*
Then in the view of all, with staring eyes,
Sad grinnings, bitter words, and horrid cries,
He sees his soul depart, and cursing dies.
Thus lives, and dies the wretched Hypocrite,
Who never in devotion took delight:
But O the man, on whom our gracious God
Has Grace bestowed, walks in another road.
For he acquainted in Prosperity
With daily Prayer at least, when Misery
Does seize upon him, never does give over
But still the more it does increase, the more
He prays, and take delight at all occasions,
To rouse his Soul with pious contemplations.
It Is true indeed, in excess of his pain,
A piousman may possibly complain
The Almighty does not hear him, when he prays,
And slights his cries, but O! what then he says,
Is but the Language of his fearful sense,
For in his heart, he still with confidence
Believes that God does hear him, when he cries,
And in the midst of all his miseries,
Persuades himself that God will after all
Those flying Parties of his wrath recall,
And yet restore him to his former state,
And free him from his troubles, soon, or late.
Hence then, my friends, I Would have you understand, 11. I will teach you by the
hand of God, that which is with ^he Almighty I will not conceal.

(That I may now apply to the case in hand
What I have spoke) I am no Hypocrite,
But one indeed, who truly takes delight
In Prayer, and what e're my sorrows be,
Yet still have hopes, as you may plainly see,
In all my carriage, since you hither came,
However you're unkindly pleased to blame
My reasonable, though I must confess,
Too often complainings in my sad distress.
But now, since you allow me time to speak,
I Will teach you, as my God shall me direct,
What is the truth, and wherein you have erred,
Whilst in your arguing you have still preferred
Your own opinions, to what all of you
Cannot but know is evidently true.
I Will tell you nothing, but what you have seen 12. Behold, all your selves have
seen it, why then are you thus altogether vain?

With your own eyes, although you do maintain
Opinions flatly opposite, I Will show
No more but what observing men do know.
I Will tell you of the various dispensations
Of the Almighty upon all occasions,
Which of his power are no small demonstrations.
For sure Gods actings are must wonderful
In all our eyes, and there is none so dull,
But may perceive his providence is such,
As all of us cannot admire too much.
His government of the world is so sublime,
As those poor souls, who know no more of him,
Then by effects, and do not understand,
As we do, how his high and mighty hand
All things below does solely regulate,
Yet do admire him, by the name of Fate.
Since then, my friends, as I do understand 13. This is the portion of a wicked
man with God, and the heritage of oppressors, which they shall receive from
the Almighty.

That all along the Question in hand
Has been amongst us, whether God does prove
Infallibly his anger, and his love
By blows, and blessings: which, though formerly
We Have agitate to the extremity
Of reasoning: yet that you all may see,
How in the Question we may soon agree,
If passion, and private interest,
For your own wit did not possess your breast;
I Will show you (to give your discourse its due)
What you have spoke, is in some cases true,
For all this while I never did deny,
But that our God his wrath does testify
Against bad men, by judgments visible,
And that sometimes they are infallible,
And open signs of his displeasure, when
He has a mind to plague the worst of men
With sad afflictions. --
Yet I acknowledge in his providence,
Oft-times indeed he makes a difference
Betwixt the just, and unjust man, and shows,
By the ones blessings, and he others woes,
Whom he does love, and whom he truly hates,
By demonstrations in their different states.
The portion of the wicked, I confess,
Is in my apprehension, nothing less,
Then what their foul and loud-tongu'd sins do merit,
And all bad livers justly should inherit.
For, let us observe now, though God for a while 14. If his children be
multiplied* it is for the sword* and his offspring shall not be satissiest
with bread,

Upon the wicked man does seem to smile;
And all the blessings, which his very heart
Can wish, he freely to him does impart.
Though he permits his Race to multiply,
In figure of a numerous Family,
Yet they by Sword, and Famine all shall dye.
Nay such of 'em as shall escape both these, 15. Those that remain of him shall
be buried in death, and and his widows shall not weep.

Shall in great want, and misery end their days,
In some dark corner they shall meet with death,
Who privately shall rob them of their breath;
And then their Corpse exposed to public view,
To see if any own them, but by few
Known, or regarded, without Pomp and State,
At length by warrant from the Magistrate,
In public Bear, to the grave are carried
By Pioneers, and simply buried,
Without all Ceremonious Obsequies,
Or sumptuous noise of Mercenary cries:
Nay, their own Widows shall so much abhore
Their loathsome Corpse, that they shall not deplore
Their Husbands Funerals, or Mourning wear
At such a sad occasion, but appear
Well satisfied that such bad men are gone,
And shall not think it lawful to bemoan
The Fate of such vile wretches, who deserved
No milder death, then to be stobb'd, or starved.
Now, as we see, he is punished in his race, 16. Though he heap up silver as
the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay.

Even so he shall be in no better case
As to his means, for let him silver heap,
Like very dust, let him in Prison keep
Whole Tuns of Gold: and in his Wardrobe lay
Rich changes of apparel every day:
By which vain signs, he may his wealth express,
And fancy to himself some happiness,
In these enjoyments, whilst he seems to fear
No prospect of a revolution here.
Why let him do so, let him purchase Lands, 17. He may prepare it, but the just
shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver.

Draw all the Countries Cash into his hands,
Build stately Houses, furnish them with all
What Merchants can import, and proudly call
His Summer-dwelling this, his Winter that,
These Rooms for Service, these for Pomp and State;
And for his pleasure, and convenience.
Enclose whole Manors within Wall, and Fence,
Raze Office-houses, Chapels, Villages,
Hew down great Rocks, cut Woods, drain Marshes,
And all the Hands, Horse, Carts of the Country use,
For beautifying of his Avenues.
Let him in rich, and costly Garb appear,
And flatter every season of the year,
With changes of apparel: let him do
What ever he thinks fit: let him allow
All kinds of pleasure to himself, and play
In idle fancies all his time away.
Yet of all these things he has but the trust,
He Is only a provisor for the just,
For when God thinks it time.
By just decree, he will reassume that all,
Which this poor man his properly does call:
And let it fall to those, by pure donation,
From whom this man, by cunning, and oppression,
Had wrested all this opulent Estate,
And in his person fully terminate
The expectation of his memory,
Whilst his unpitied, starving Family,
Shall on the Streets, and Highways beg their bread,
Or else in Prison, on the Basket feed.
For as that silly Insect, called a Moth, 18. He builds his house as a moth,
and as a booth that the keeper makes.

Takes up its Lodging in the finest Cloth,
With a full resolution there to dwell,
But the poor Worm is hardly settled well
In its new quarter, when the cleansing Brush
Does sweep it out, and all its Projects crush.
Or, if it escape the Brush, and longer there
It Is suffered to remain: why, all its care
Is to secure its house: yet every day
It wastes some part of its own house away.
For gnawing through the cloth in every fold,
It eats it self both out of house, and hold.
Or, as we see, how Pedlers do at Fairs,
Set up their Booths, where they expose their Wares
For a few days, and when the time is gone
Allowed for Sale, they quickly take them down.
Even so this vain possessing-fool, who dreams
On nothing, but uninterrupted streams
Of pleasures here on Earth, perpetually
Drunk with the notion of a memory,
Which he with care endeavors to erect
In Lands, and Houses, whilst he does expect
No stop to his design: Deaths cleansing Brush
Sweeps him away, not valuing a rush
His long possession: or, if at the best,
He lives yet longer, why he does but waste
What he enjoys, and eats out all at last,
For when his Merchant-time on Earth is gone,
His Pedling-booth shall soon be taken down.
And, as we see, when one lies down to sleep, 19. The rich man shall ly down,
but he shall not be gathered he opens his eyes, and he is not.

Whilst slumber on his eyes does gently creep,
How, on a sudden, from the spongious brain
Thin pituite, upon his Lungs does rain,
With such impetuous force, as, e're his eyes
Are fully opened, in this sad surprise,
Chock'd with increasing Phlegm, he quickly dies.
So a rich fool, when he himself does please
With his enjoyments, lives at his own ease.
And amongst his Coffers, in his Closet sits,
With head on arm, a racking of his wits,
By what sure methods, he may regulat
The several intrigues of his vast Estate:
And in his anxious mind does seem to doubt,
With many a groan, whether he shall give out
That useless Coin which in his Trunks does ly,
On Lands, or on some firm Security
When the poor soul of nothing less does dream,
Death siezes on him, like a sudden ^lame,
Amongst Flax, or Hemp, and in a moments space,
Does all his projects utterly deface.
For though our God permits this fool to live
Even as he pleases, and does freely give
All that he can demand, yet after all,
When this rich Mole, he to account does call
How he has lived, how he his time has used,
How he that wealth has shamefully abused,
Which God did give him: how he has employed
Those peaceful years, which he so long enjoyed.
How he has used those Parts, and Qualities,
With which he was endu'd, whilst all men's eyes
Were fixed upon him, and from so much wit
Expected some fine things, yet he thought fit
To make no use of such, but like a Clown,
To waste his time, in scrambling up, and down,
Amongst his Tennents, scraping all together
Against next Term, and never did consider
How Death approached, who'd squander in a trice,
All he had heaped up by his avarice.
How he was now become the very jest,
And scandal of his age: and was at best,
For all his riches, all his toil, and care,
Esteemed but a penurious Usurer.
When then, I say, this man's examined,
And all his silly actions canvassed:
God does not punish him by halfs, or show
Some signs of wrath, e're he inflict a blow:
No, at one single thrust, he does him maul,
And pays him home severely once for all.
For whilst before, he lived in wealth* and ease,
Enjoying of himself, like Mouse in Cheese,
The blow from Heavens is given, and anon,
E're he knows whence it comes, the man is gone.
What shall I say then? how shall I express 20. Terrors take hold of him like
waters, a tempest steals him away in the night.

The violence, the force, the suddenness
Of this man's fall? why? even as Rivers swelled
With rains* will be no more by Banks withheld,
But in the silence of the night, when all
Are fast asleep, break down their Dikes, and fall
On Neighboring Villages, and suddenly
Transport some thousands to Eternity,
Before they can awake, by force of streams,
Without once interrupting of their dreams,
But in a rapid torrent bear away
All to the Ocean, e're it is yet day.
Or as the East Wind from the Persian Shore 21. The east wind ca^^ieth him
away, and he departs, and, as a storm, hurleth him out of his place.

Upon our Coasts does suddenly flee over,
And with such fury does our fields invade,
As Trees, and Houses, on the ground are laid,
In The* twinkling of an eye, and men are toss't
On Land, as if at Sea, and many lost
In most impetuous storms, of blowing-sand,
Which Eastern-winds do raise within this land.
So sudden shall this rich-mans downfall be,
Thunderstruck from above, e're he can see
The hand that gives the blow: he is hurryed
With fury hence, and quickly buried
In his own ruins, whilst no man can tell
How, or by what means, this tall Cedar fell.
For, O, the blow, the blow from God alone, 22. For God shall cast upon him, and
not spare, he would fain flee out of his hand.

From his high hand, resistible by none,
Truly proceeds: from his Almighty hand,
Which holds the Tr^ncheon of supreme command,
Over all created things: from that alone
Judgments, as stones out of a sling, are thrown
Upon this sinning man; sorrows in heaps
Are cast upon him, whilst the Almighty keeps
Himself at distance from him: and denis
To hear his Prayer, when he sadly cries.
No, God in Wrath shall so pursue this man,
As let him run, let him do what he can
T'escape his blow, yet all shall be in vain,
For he by judgments shall be overtane,
Where e're he goes: let him run any where,
And in great horror ramble here, and there,
On Sea, on Land, and often change his Clyme,
Yet still his judgment does attend his Crime.
Gods heavy wrath pursues him constantly,
And finds him out, where ever he does fly.
For still the more, he thinks to fly, the more,
His wrath pursues him, and does never give over,
Until it lay this Rebel in the Dust,
And beat him all to pieces. --
For none, but such as he, who does not know
The good, and just inflicter of his blow,
Who with Heavens King is wholly unacquaint,
Will strive to fly, at such an exigent,
From his all-reaching-hand: but rather ly
Flat on their face, when him in wrath they spy;
And by degrees endeavor still to creep
Nigh to his Footstool; for he does not keep
His wrath against such, as in adversity
Do thither run, as to a Sanctuary,
But plagues those only, who from him does fly.
Hence all good men, when they perceive the Rod,
Endeavor quickly to draw nigh to God,
Knowing it is only as a warning sent,
That they his further anger may prevent,
By application, to the Throne of Grace,
To which the humble freely may address,
At all times, and occasions, and so,
By fervent prayer, they escape the blow.
And when the day shall come, that God thinks fit, 23. Men shall clap their
hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his place.

Against this great man to issue out his writ:
When he intends this Giant to destroy,
His neighbors all around shall shout for joy:
And at his downfall openly proclaim,
How much they did abhor his hateful name,
Whose sins did so far antedate his shame.
Cap. XXVIII.
THus then you see, how friendly I allow 1. Surely there is a vein for the
silver, and a place for the gold, where they fine it.

What you assert, but I must tell you now,
That after all, it is my opinion still,
(Reason to the contrair, as much as you will)
That though the Almighty on the wicked sends
Those ills, I have related, yet, my friends,
We must not thence conclude at any rate,
That in his actings God is limitat,
To punish only such as plagues do merit,
For I do hold that as he is a Spirit,
Infinite, and incomprehensible,
So all his actings are unsearchable.
And therefore, of a truth, I see not well,
How we can longer on this subject dwell,
And dive into the knowledge of such things,
As far exceed all humane reasonings:
Or strive to comprehend, without offense,
The various windings of his Providence.
It Is true, the wit of man, may safely pry
In things on Earth, and with security,
Unriddle all the mystic passages,
Which in the Book of Nature, do express
His Power, and Glory, and which he thought fit
TO abscond, that he might try his Creatures wit,
In finding of them out, it is true indeed,
A man with satisfaction may read
The works of God: as by his mighty hand,
Has writ them in the Caverns of the Land,
And bottom of the Seas: yea, we suppose,
One may all Natures Cabinet unclose,
By force of art: and happily find out
Each private shuttle, whilst he looks about
For things concealed, nay, there he safely may
By his own art, discover every day
The greatness of his God: especially
When in Earths bowels, with an Artists eye
In search of Mines, and Minerals he does pry.
Yes, in all these, it is lawful for a man
To try his wit, and labor what he can
To trace those By-roads of obscurity,
Which lead to the Caverns, where Earths Treasures ly.
For our great God not only does allow
Such curious searchings, but assists him too
In his endeavors, so as he does find,
Besides great wealth, a mean to enrich his mind,
By knowledge of those Mines, which certainly,
Fully compenses all his industry.
Whils't he admires to see in every Mine,
How much the glory of his God does shine,
And, as he works, discovers more, and more,
His worth, and sees his power in every Ore.
For who'd not take delight to understand,
How in Earths womb that high and mighty hand
Which all things framed, has framed those Metals too,
About which Artists keep so much ado.
Whilst some do think that in the first Creation,
All Stones, and Metals, in the very fashion,
As now we see them, did exist complete,
Against which opinion, others do debate,
That they are not of Original Creation,
But are produced by daily Generation,
'Twixt sulphur, as they think, and Mercury,
Which in Earths hidden Veins do scattered ly:
Of which, that Male, and this, they Female call,
From whose congression, every Mineral
They say does spring, and to conceal the same,
That soe^id spirit, this dry-water name.
Yet, though from this Congression they hold
All other Metals flow, they say that Gold,
As a most perfect, pure, and solid Creature,
Without all mixtion, is produced by Nature.
Others again, who make it their profession,
To know such things, say from the same congression,
Gold does proceed: for if the mixture be
In just proportions, and they both agree
In quantity, then by a temperat,
And soft Decoction, with a moderat heat,
IN the bowels of clean earth, and there condensed
With Moisture Radical, earth washed and cleans'd
From all corruption, they at length become
A fusile thing, and this is held by some
To be pure Gold; next when that mixture fails,
And Sulphur over Mercury prevails,
Then Silver is produced, which they esteem
As baser, and Gold's younger Brother name.
Then, when the substance of these is impure,
And they are not mixed with aequilibrature,
Nor in earths bowels duly tempered,
They do become Tinn, Iron, Copper, Lead.
Against this too, there is others do debate,
And say all Minerals are procreat
From th'mixture of thin Earth, with whitest Water,
Which they affirm to be the only matter
Whence Metals do proceed, and that it is so,
They prove, 'cause Metals do like Water flow,
By strength of Fire: from whence they do assert,
As all things are reduced, by Rules of Art,
To their first Principles, so when we see
Those Metals flow, their Matter sure must be
Some liquid thing: for so they say it is plain,
When they by cold are soon condensed again
As waters are. Others again assert,
And labor to make out, by Rules of Art,
That out of Earth, and Water mixed, adust,
And in Earth's Oven, baked into a Crust:
Springs Vitriol, which does all Metals breed,
From which, as their first Matter, they proceed.
Because all Metals, when dissolved, appear
Like Vitriol: besides they say, it is clear,
That Oil from Vitriol Sublimat is drawn,
By which all Metals are reduced again
To their first Matter. Others there be yet;
Who on this Subject eagerly debate,
That from earths intrails a dry breath ascends,
Which mix't with watery vapors upward tends,
And, as it meets with earth accommodate,
And by its matter become Sublimate,
Condensed by cold, this, or that Metal flows,
And it Gold, Silver, Lead, Iron, Copper grows.
And last of all, there is others that debate
That Metals are all truly procreat
'Twixt the elements, which do give both to all,
And those we name Bodies Celestial.
But whatsoever be their generation,
Sure it is a matter worth our admiration,
To think Earths bowels does such things prepare
As frets us all to know what things they are.
Mystical creatures whose origination
In vain we search; and trace their procreation,
But by uncertain rules; for after all
We must acknowledge every Mineral
Is framed by the hand of God; and seriously,
After all Arts, profound subtility,
What we suppose, their birth must be confess't
Are but sublime conjectures at the best.
Then to proceed to the several species,
Of that so vagrant subterraneous race:
First let us observe what we in Silver see,
Which from Earths-center, branches like a Tree,
And its small roots so cunningly does spread,
Some here, some there, on purpose scattered,
As though it feared to be discovered,
By the Art of Miners, yet the Art of man
Finds out this Mineral do what it can
To hide it self in Natures most recluse,
And private Cells; and for a public use
Brings it above Ground, where the silly Ore,
Which in Earths bowels signified no more
Then its own Sparr: and in no more esteem
Then Lead, or Copper, soon procures a name.
After it is washen, sifted, melted, cast
In massy Ingots, stamped, and coined at last,
Above its fellow Minerals, and does hold
In men's esteem the second place to Gold.
To Gold, why there too is a boasting Ore,
Though in its Veins it signifies no more
Then other Metals, yellow Earth at best,
Mere colored Dust, but once brought to the Test,
It Is no more dust, it is no more simple Ore,
No more a heap of Sand, as't was before:
But now a most illustrious name it bears,
Beyond all Metals, and indeed appears
To be the Worlds Idol.
This, O this, Metal! this dear Mineral!
This Earths Elixir! this fair all in all!
This Princely Dust! what figures does it make
Amongst poor Mortals! how often does it break
The bonds of Conscience, and Morality,
The interest of Blood, and common Honesty;
Makes Wars and Tumults amongst the race of men,
And quickly reconciles them all again.
Ties, and un-tyes, kills, wounds; and heals apace,
Leads men in favor, brings them in disgrace:
Sets up with this hand, and with that pulls down,
What 'ere it lists, from the Budget to the Crown,
This is the Standart, which does regulate
The actions of men; and sets a Rate,
On every Head, this puts a Valuation
On every Kingdom, State, and Corporation.
In short, this Gold makes such a mighty sound,
And keeps such Domineering, above ground,
As it gives Laws to all the World a-round.
For Gold, for Gold, alace all is bart'red now
For that proud Metal; and with much ado;
A few poor souls, who generouslie soar
Above the scent of that infecting Ore
Escape, which, were they caught, would soon be sold,
Amongst so many thousands too for Gold.
Yet that I may give this same Gold its due,
As't has its Vices, so its Virtues too
Are Eminent, which Artists do relate,
Who of the state of Minerals do treat.
It Is proved by these, then in their Operations,
(Which surely are the best of Demonstrations)
That gold is such a Metal, as the fire,
(In which all other Minerals expire,
At least much of their Weight and Substance lose
In every trial) though from Bellows nose,
Supplied with constant aid; yet after all
Can not subdue this solid Mineral;
Or make it quit the very smallest grain,
Of Weight, which in its Ore it did contain.
Next as a mark of its true purity,
We see it has this singular quality,
Above all other Metals: that it never
Leaves any Tincture on the hand, however
It frequently be handled: then again
Sharp Juyces, which all other Metals stain,
And by degrees corrodes: if Gold do ly
In such, it nothing of its quantity
Does lose: nay, to the brim a Vessel fill
With Water, then but sink it in with skill,
A lump of Gold, yet th'water shall not spill,
Or in the least run over, by which sign
Artists find out, what Gold is purely fine.
For if but allayed with the smallest Grain
Of other Metals, 't will, run over. Again
This Gold, though pure, and soft, yet it is not frail,
Nor can the Hammer in the least prevail
To break this Metal: as 't would do a Stone,
In little pieces, no, for 't is well known,
By strength of hand, upon the Anvil beat,
In such thin Leaves it does it self dilate,
As out of one Grain fifty Leaves, or more
Have been beat out by th'hammer: whence we know
Of what pure Matter Gold consists. Again
This Metal seems for ever to remain
In its perfection, for when eating Rust
Reduces other Minerals to Dust,
By length of wasting-time, on upright Gold,
What eats all other Metals, takes no hold:
On Gold: no Rust, no Verdi greese appears,
Though buried under ground a thousand years:
But after all, its Weight, and Quantity,
Pure Substance, solid Grain, and Quality
Will be the same, as when at first prepared
By Artists hand. Then if we do regard
Its usefulness for Humane Life, no Mine
Produces such a Cordial Medicine,
As is this Gold: for being cold and dry,
It guards the heart by its Frigidity,
From all infecting Exhalations, hence
Princes not only for Magnificence,
But out of Cups of Gold for Health do drink,
As out of Wholes me Metal, for some think
Gold for its dryness powerfullie resists
All Putrid Humors. --
Then for Splenetick Vapors, Plates of Gold
Made often hot i'th'fire, as often cooled
In Earthen Vessels, full of purest Wine
Drunk up by such, whom that Disease does pine,
Does quickly cure 'em: nay this Liquor too,
As most of our Physicians avow,
And some inform us by Experience,
Is a firm Antidote against Pestilence,
And these intected Cures. But what needs more,
'Twould take up too much time to reckon over
Its numerous qualities: now let us see
What other Minerals in Earths Closet be,
Why there is Iron, a Mineral that is found 2. Iron is taken out of the earth,
and brass is molten out of the stone.

Not much below the Superfice of the ground,
By the art of man, a rugged heavy stone,
Appearing of no value, but anon
Brought to the Mill, and Furnace, smelted, cast
In Bars: to the fire, and Anvil brought at last,
Becomes so firm a Metal, so entire,
And solid, as a man cannot desire
A thing more useful: for if he intend
In sweet Agriculture, his life to spend,
Without this Metal he can nothing do,
He cannot cut down Woods, he cannot plough,
He cannot make the Earth that Grain afford,
Which feeds the stock of Mankind: in a word,
He who intends this honest life to lead,
Must by his Iron win his daily bread.
Or if in War he rather takes delight,
And hating Peace he does incline to fight:
Why without this bold Metal, in his hand,
Had as good stay at home, and plough the Land,
As go the Camp: but with that furnished,
He soon gains reputation by the Blade.
Or if on the other hand his inclination
Makes him in love, with Trade, and Navigation,
Without this Metal, he is a fool that dares
To the uncertain Ocean trust his Wares.
By this the Boards are fixed, which do compose
The adventuring thing, in which to Sea he goes,
By this, when Wind-swoln waves do proudly roar,
On every side, and threaten to devour
The trembling Oak, in which this man does steer,
Even ready to expire for very fear,
When, in good earnest he does now perceive
The insulting Billows offer him a Grave:
And views the Scaly Champions of the Seas,
Who wait on such occasions as these,
(As Birds of prey for Carrions at Land)
Assemble in great Troops on every hand,
To feed upon his flesh: by this I say
He does procure a merciful delay
From gracious Providence.
On this to Hauser tied and then let drop
To the Seas bottom, under God, his hope
Alone depends; on this nailed to the Ground
He safely rides, while Death does him surround,
And Clouds of terror on all hands environ,
He owes his life to this small piece of Iron,
Which holds all sure: and when the Storm is gone?
With joy he weighs this useful thing anon;
Ties it to his Ships-bow; then on his knees,
When he perceives a calmness in the Seas,
Thanks God for his delivery, and then
Hoises his Sails, and so to Sea again
Upon his lawful Trade.
Then if for Handy-crafis he do incline,
Without this Metal, he who does design
A Manufacture; labors but in vain;
For, without Iron, he never can obtain
What he intends; but by it easily
Can all the World with useful things supply!
Nay further, if perhaps a man inclines
To become rich by Minerals and Mines,
And the other Ores, in Earths dark Kennesl trace,
It Is only Iron must do his business:
The Pick-ax, and the Shovel, without doubt,
Are the only tools can find that treasure out.
In fine this Metal, this same rugged stone;
Does for so many uses serve, that none
Of The other Metals can with it compare,
And were this vulgar Mineral as rare
As Gold, and Silver, since so many call
For it to humane use; it would them all
Exceed in value, and be quickly able
TO attain the title of inestimable.
The wit of man does find out Copper too
By Art, and Labor, and with much ado,
Brings it to' the Furnace, where it smelts it down
By a strong well fomented fire, and soon
Casts it in Plates; by Artists hand, annon
This Ore mixed with the Calaminary Stone,
And smelted down together in a Mass,
Becomes that compound Metal we call Brass.
An useful Metal, durable and fair,
And save with Gold, and Silver may compare
With all the other Ores, which in its Veins
Scaturient here and there the earth contains.
Now in all these a man may lawfully 3. He sets an end to darkness, and
searches out all perfection, the stones of darkness, and the shadow of death.

Improve his art, and by his Industry
Unrip Earths Womb, and openly reveal
What Nature in the dark would fain conceal.
Yes by this art, and labor every day
To his dear Ore he may cut out his way,
Through horrid darkness, which by Candle light
He clears, and lays all open to the sight,
What prudent nature from earths serous part
Had separate, and without help of Art,
Attracted to its Meseraick Veins,
And scattered here and there in lobs and grains;
But yet so cunningly, that after all
What man on earth can pain and labor call,
It Is so concealed, for all his art, no doubt,
He has enough ado to find it out.
Their humane art, and wicked lahour too,
Finds out those Stones, to which we do allow
No small esteem; nay in that value hold,
As some are hardly to be bought for Gold.
In search of these then, and his darling Ores,
He ventures forward, and the earth so bores
On every side, where he perceives the Vein
But half-inch-thick, as with much toil and pain,
He digs a-round it, as much scantling waste,
As may afford him lodging on his breast,
Upon which creeping, with his Tools and Sticks
The Ore out of its Veins in Grains he picks,
Which put in little Bags, the one to his Breast,
A-crosse, the other to his Back tied fast,
At least now forty fathoms under ground,
Whilst horrid damps his Senses so confound,
As he is almost stifled: yet at last
He climbs above ground: thinks all danger past
When he perceives the Sun so brightly shine,
To which he was a stranger in the Mine.
Yet many who below ground dig for Ore,
Choked with bad vapors, see that light no more.
Nor meet they only with Malignant Air, 4. The flood breaks out from the
inhabitants, even the waters forgotten of the foot, they are dried up, they are
gone away from men.

Who to these Mineral-regions repair:
But also whilst they labor under ground,
By Waters which from hidden Springs arround
Rush in upon the Mines, they are almost drowned.
Yet does the wit of man, with much ado,
At length overcome this great obstruction too,
By carrying on of Levells, in which all
The Neighboring Springs, as in a Cistern fall,
And in that Trough are secretly conveyed,
And emptied at some petty Rivers side;
Whose twinkling Streams do trindle in a Line,
Parallel with the Basis of the Mine.
Or if this Mine they work in, deeper lies,
Than any part of the Neighboring Superfice,
Then, in this Canal, safely carried
To the Shafts bottom, they are delivered,
In numerous Buckets, which do there attend,
And are let down in hundreds for that end:
And by these brought aloft, are emptied
In the next Ditch; and thence securely spread
Amongst the Neighboring Fields.
Or if they do not by these Levels drain,
And fit for work this profitable Vein;
Then by the strength of Pumps, they suck up all
Those Waters which infest the Mineral,
And render it so easy by degrees,
As they dig out their precious Ore, with ease:
Nor are they only with infecting Air, 5. As for the earth out of it comes
bread, and under it is turned up as it were fire.

And Waters, sorely vex't who labor there;
But with Fire too: for though earth's Superfice
Affords us Bread at a convenient price,
Of wholesome labor, and contentedly
Returns the product of our industry:
As willing to be Plowed and Furrowed,
Yet if in labor further we proceed,
And with presuming tools, dare undertake
TO unrip her Belly, and with pleasure rake
Her very Bowels, to find out those Ores,
There kept by Nature in concealed Stores.
Then she grows angry, then she convocats
All aid she can, from her Confederats,
Bad Air, foul Water, and consuming Fire,
Which with her every minute do conspire,
TO undo the Miners hope.
For sometimes, when she meets with Sulphur Veins,
(Which allay almost every Mine contains)
Some Sparks, that from their Lamps, or Candles fall,
Kindle that combustible Mineral,
Which flaming quickly, with a noisome smoke,
Does often times the half-breath'd Miner choke:
But in a trice by Humane Industry,
This flame is quenched, and Miners by and by
Do freely dig, and follow out the Vein,
How e're their angry Mother Earth complain.
Their Mother Earth, who angry to the heart, 6. The stones thereof are the
place of Saphires, and it has dust of gold.

To see her self Piece-meal'd, by Miners Art
Does spare no labor, but endeavors still
TO obstruct their works, (let them dig as they will)
For when she sees that neither Water, Fire,
Nor Air can stop their covetous desire,
With Stones and Dust she stops the passages,
And all the Avenues embarrasses,
Which to the so much long'* for Vein do lead;
Yet in his journey he does still proceed.
He breaks those Stones, and pounds them, sifts their dust,
In which to find some Saphires he does trust.
Because such Stones are usually found
Wrapped up amongst such baggage, under ground;
Or else to find there, some small scattered Grains
Of extravasat God, which it contains
Most usually, and of all his pains,
May pay the uncost. So then after all,
The art of man does pierce this stony wall;
Beats down those rattling Barricades of dust,
And by main force himself does further thrust,
Into Earths Inner-works, advances still,
Let the enraged thing do what it will,
T'obstruct his passage:) yet he still makes way,
Until at length her hoord becomes his prey.
A way indeed he makes unknown to all, 7. There is a path which no fowl
knows, neither has the Vulturs eye seen.

Save those alone who hunt for Mineral.
No Birds of prey, whose sharp and piercing eyes,
Discover every private hole, where lies
The lesser timorous Bird, and lurks for fear
Of those voracious Tyrants of the Air,
Do know this way. --
Nay, even the Vulture, who has sharpest eyes,
Of any ravenous murderer that flies,
And for his prey does ramble high, and low,
Through every way, yet this way cannot know.
To the Lion too, who for his prey does range, 8. The lions whelps have not
trodden it, nor the fierce lion past by it.

Both far, and near, the Miners way is strange;
For in that way such various windings are,
As no By-roads above ground can compare,
With its Maeanders, nor can we conceive,
How squib-like here, and there, the digging slave
Does squirt himself into each hidden pore,
To find the seat of this same lurking Ore:
Were but the Lion entered in this way
And there let loose a hunting of his prey,
For all his wit, he would surely go astray.
Yet the same way is so exactly known,
To him who digs for Minerals alone; 9. He puts forth his hand upon the
rock, he overturneth the mountains by the roots.

As they know all the turns, and windings there,
As well as these, who walks in the open Air,
Know all the high ways, on which men repair.
Nor will he quite this way, but still go on,
For all that either Water, fire, or Stone,
Bad Air, or Dust can do: nay, further when
He meets with Rocks, he spairs no toil, or pain,
But through their hearts, with Pick-axe cuts his way,
Though in the space of a long Summers day,
Scarce can he so much pick out of the Rocks,
After a many sad, and ponderous strokes,
As but one little Hamper can contain,
Nor in his way to his beloved vein,
Can he advance but one poor foot of ground,
But is with Time obliged to compound,
For half a foot per diem; yet at length
He breaks this Rampart too, by art, and strength.
Then when the Earth perceives that nothing can 10. He cuteth out rivers among
the rocks, and his eye sees every precious thing.

Withstand the restless endeavors of man.
That all her Fireworks, Waterworks, and Air,
Stones, Rocks, and Flints, which posted every where,
Guard all the Passes, by which searching men
Can to her hidden Magazines attain;
Do serve for nothing, but that, maugre all,
She can do, he will have this Mineral:
She convocats at last her Arrierban,
Of evil Spirits, to confound this man:
These of a little bulk, but humane shape
Appear in the Vein, and sometimes seem to ape
The Miners labor, and indeed affright
The stoutest of those Diggers, with their sight,
At the first View, but seeing here, and there,
Those scattered Demons only sent to scar
His labor, he is at length familiar
With those poor harmless Devils, and nothing dreads
Those flying parties, but for all proceeds,
Upon his work, as if he did despise
The Earth, with this her last, and stale device.
For now he is Lord of his long looked for Vein,
And his possession firmly will maintain,
Against all her strength, and art, he is settled now
In that fair Province, which with much ado,
And vast expense, has fairly purchased,
By length of time. --
And now the conquered, when she does perceive,
All Is lost, to save her life, becomes his slave:
At his command, she opens every where
Most patiently, and does her Veins prepare
For the Minors Lance, where e're he means to strick,
Tamed by his Art, and of resistance sick.
Thus master of his wish, he first cuts out
The slender canals, through the Rocks about
The Mine, where he does work, which may convey
The subterraneous waters quite away;
Which else would spoil his labor, and in these,
Sometimes his Ores too, he does wash with ease,
Whilst all Earths Treasure, every hour he sees.
That done, and free from Water, he goes on, 11. He binds the floods from
overflowing, and the thing that is hid, he brings forth to light.

And from the Chinks of every Rock, and Stone,
Which seems to arch the Mine, with Iron Pinch,
He scrambles out his Ore.
Or if upon the sides of Rocks, the Veins
Of Metals lie, with Hammer he takes pains
To beat it off, at last if none of these
Can bring it out, he does his business,
By strength of Fire, and so by heat unlocks
These Treasures which ly hid in clifts of Rocks.
At length when he has found this precious Ore,
Before he does proceed to work it more,
He of its finesse, and its purity,
Makes trial in a little quantity,
When by excoction, finding it does hold
With the true Standart, whether the Ore be Gold,
Or it be Silver, Copper, Tinn, or Lead,
Then in his work, with joy he does proceed.
First his rude Ore, as drawn out of the Vein,
Before the name of Metal it obtain,
He in a close, and solid Mortar throws,
Which (quickly broken, by redoubled blows,
From Iron Pestles, which by Water-mills
Made turn by Canals from the Neighboring Hills,
Are moved, to serve the purpose,) he takes out,
Then in some Pool, that is dug out there about,
For that same end, he carefully does washed,
Sifts it when dry, then pounds it, and at last,
He puts this Earth, now become fusible,
Within the belly of a Crucible,
Which in the Furnace, almost vitrifi'd,
Appears excandent upon every side,
Where quickly it dissolves, and Liquifyes,
Then in large Iron Spoons; --
He takes his Metal out, and in a Mould,
He pours it, then his silver and his Gold
In little Bars, and Ingots, soon are cast,
In Plates his Copper, Lead in Pigs at last,
All weighed, and stamped, entered, and registrate,
In Books, by these he reckons his Estate.
Then next, because he does perceive one Vein,
Two different Metals often do contain:
(For naturally with all Silver Ore,
And Copper, Grains of Gold, some less, some more,
Are always mixed, with Silver too some Lead,
And Iron with Copper in the same Vein do breed:
In Lead, and Iron, some Silver too is found,
As from the Veins he draws them under ground)
He quickly finds a way to separate,
The mixed Metals, at an easy rate.
By Aqua Fortis Gold from Silver Ore.
To which in the Vein, 'twas married before,
Is soon divorced; and other Metals are
By Alum and Nitre, separate with care-
But lastly, when he has all separat,
One would suppose he would Nature imitat,
When mixing all those Metals once again,
Some in the same proportion with the Vein,
Others in such proportions, great and small,
As for his ends are fit, which he does call
Temperatures out of these mixtures too,
(He Is so acquainted with all Metals now)
He frames new Metals: as when by his art,
To four of Gold, of silver a fifth part
He adds, he quickly a new Metal frames,
Out of that Mass, which he Electrum names:
With many others, such as those we call
Bell-mettal, Soldure, Pot-mettal, and all,
That are not Metals in the Original.
But what needs more, I think by what I Have said,
Any impartial man I may persuade,
That God is great above what we can reach
By art, which even those Minerals do teach,
Suppose all the Works of his Omnipotence,
Could not afford another evidence
Of his great Worth, and Glory:
Yet man may bring those hidden things to light,
Though one should think they to perpetual night
Were by his Divine Ordinance confined,
Yet he may bring them out, and please his mind,
As with the Search, before they can be found,
So with the enjoyment of 'em above ground.
But, O, should man employ his wit, and art 12. But where shall wisdom be
found, and where is the place of understanding?

In searching after things, which for his heart
He cannot find; as if he would run the Scent,
And trace the steps of Heavens Government,
Or study to find out the reason why,
This, or that good man, lives in misery,
Whilst sinners revel in prosperity.
Should he attempt by the same rules to know
The things above, as he does these below,
Should he his Reason couple with his Sense,
And go a hunting after Providence,
And proudly think, when he has found it out,
From it he will have intelligence no doubt,
Of all Gods Cabin-thoughts, and thence may know,
The reasons of his actings here below.
Should he thus use his wit, thus entertain
His mind, thus foolishly torment his brain,
In studying to find out his policy,
By which this universal Monarchy
Is governed, by which all Gods actings are
Amongst us, mortals, brought upon the square.
Why, this same study were not only vain,
Foolish, presumptous, full of useless pain,
But shrewdly sinful, and unlawful too,
For such high knowledge, God will not allow
To mortal race. --
Nor will he let them know at any rate,
What is not fit, should be communicate
To humane wit, because he wisely knows,
If we did know such hidden things, as those,
And what to each man were predestinat,
(Which must be sent upon him soon, or late)
'T would certainly cause so much pride, and fear,
As what betwixt presumption, and despair,
The world would split in two, and men should know
Too much to damn them all, if things were so.
To th'case, my friends, then why should you debate
On things above your reach! why should you state
The Question in the works of Providence,
To which, we cannot sure, without offense,
Prescribe those Rules, by which our actings here
Are rui'd, from whence it plainly does appear
There is a Wisdom, which we cannot reach,
A Divine Knowledge, which no Art can teach,
A Wisdom to our God peculiar,
With which no Earthly Wisdom can compare.
A knowledge which to know our fond desire
On no account should foolishly aspire.
Then O where is this wisdom to be found,
This heavenly knowledge, which does quite confound,
And with one simple dash oblit'rat all
That which we vainly understanding call.
Where is it pray! whence is it to be had!
On what Coast do we for this wisdom Trade!
This wisdom! O this wisdom! this divine
And God-like knowledge! from what secret Mine
Is it extracted! in what hidden Pore,
In Heavens or Earth, does this Seraphick Ore
Branch out its Veins! this wisdom mystical!
This Art of Arts! this supernatural
And un-born knowledge! whither shall we run
To find this wisdom! shall we with the Sun
Take Journey, and view all the World about
with searching eye, to find this wisdom out!
Or shall we, on the wings of contemplation,
Fly upward in some pious meditation,
In search of what on earth we cannot find,
And reach that thing by labor of the mind.
That hands cannot perform! a thing in vain
Our curious reason studies to attain!
A thing our Faith, which Reason does transcend,
On this side time, can hardly comprehend.
For what it is no mortal man can know, 13. Man knows not the price thereof,
neither is it found in the land of the living.

Or where it is to be found, it is hidden so
By him who all things framed: we cannot conceive
What thing it is, but only must believe,
This divine wisdom is not to be found
By Art of man: it is not a thing the ground,
The Seas, or Air afford: it is not a thing
To which we can attain by reasoning.
No, it is a thing, of which we neither know 14. The depth says it is not in me,
and the Sea says, it is not with me.

Its being, nor its value: for although
We search, with Reasons Taper in our hand,
The darkest Creviss, both in Sea and Land,
To find it out, our toil is all in vain,
For to its knowledge we can never attain:
But after that, by strength of contemplation,
We think of it to learn some information,
We Are forced at length to rest in admiration.
In admiration! yes contentedly 15. It cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall
silver be weighed for the price thereof.

We must admire, what all our industry,
Our wit, art, thinking, cannot comprehend,
A wisdom that all value does transcend.
It Is not in Commerce, it is inestimable,
It Is not by Gold, or Silver purchasable.
No, no, this thing cannot be bought, or sold 16. It cannot be valued with the
gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx or the Sapphire.

At any rate: not Tunns of Ophir Gold,
Not Cargoes of that precious Mineral,
Not heaps of Stones, and Jewels, which by all
Are valued at the highest estimation,
Can for this knowledge make a valuation.
Not finest Gold, nor Crystal of the Rock, 17. The Gold and the Crystal
cannot equal it, and the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of fine Gold.

OF the purest hue, can make a bartring Stock
For such a rich Commodity, not all
What Merchants here inestimable call,
Can make provisions suitable to buy
Such an inestimable Commodity.
Talk not of Coral, it is a mean Sea-weed, 18. No mention shall be made of
Coral, or Pearls, for the price of wisdom is above Rubies.

Nor Pearl, which with us silly Oysters breed;
No, nor of Rubies, though their Crimson Dye
Appears most rich and glorious to the eye:
Nor of their beauty cut in Faucet tell,
For this high wisdom does them all excel.
Your Ethiopian Topaz bright and fair, 19. The Topaz of Ethiopia shall not
equal it, neither shall it be valued with pure Gold.

Highly esteemed, because it is so rare,
With this in value never can compare
The finest Gold, which we poor Mortals hugg,
Compared with this is but a very Drugg.
From whence this wisdom then! from whence, from whence 20. Whence then comes
wisdom, and where is the place of understanding.

This sacred wit! this high intelligence,
Which does all humane knowledge far exceed,
Whence does it spring, in what place does it breed!
Where does it breed, pray! where is it to be found, 21. Seeing it is hid from
the eyes of all living, and kept closs from the fowls of the air.

In Fire or Air, above, or under ground!
What shall we do then, shall we yet enquire
What thing it is? or our invention tire,
In finding out its place, which yet no eye,
Even the most piercing ever did espy.
A thing which still the more we strive to know,
The less we in its knowledge forward go:
A thing, as not conspicuous to our eyes,
So far exceeding the abilities
Of our created Souls, to comprehend
A thing in search whereof there is no end.
It Is true, we may, by long experience, 22. Destruction and death say, we have
heard the same thereof with our ears.

Attain some knowledge of its excellence:
We may indeed by daily observations
Upon Gods great, and various dispensations,
Attain some random-notions of the thing,
Especially, when by canvassing
The affairs of the world, and viewing carefully,
With serious eyes, the instability
Of humane state: we see what shines to day
Most brightly, and is gloriously gay,
To morrow is obscured: what now is high
Beat down annon, in lowest dust does ly;
Thence in some measure, we may learn to know
What is this Wisdom.
For when we do observe, how Providence
Amongst mortal things does make no difference,
But sometimes here, and sometimes there lets fall
Blessings or Plagues, without regard at all
To this man's well improven Piety,
Or 't'others gross habitual villainy;
Yes, when we see how all our art, and care,
In guarding of our Souls by daily prayer,
In thinking, speaking, doing what is good,
(Though of our claim to Heaven we are not proud)
Nay even our pure, and Dove-like innocence
Can not prevent a blow, when Providence
Thinks fit to afflict us; and on the other hand,
How wanton sinners do securely stand
Rooted in their Possessions; and appear
As safe from danger as they are from fear.
Then sure in some proportion, we may guess
What is this Wisdom by such acts as these.
For God, with good intention, beats his own,
That he from thence may make their virtue known,
Which in the Sunshine of Prosperity,
Even in the best of men, but soberly
Makes an appearance, like a Candles-light,
Which only shines in the dark or in the Night.
And for those others, who their God do hate,
And yet their Bread, in peace, and plenty eat.
Nay to our outward senses do appear
Not ordinarily to their Maker dear:
Why if we look aright upon their case,
We'll find God only suffers such as these,
To live in plenty, 'cause he does not care
What becomes of 'em, and does only spare
Those slaughter-fed, Bread eaters; for some space,
That they their little, short lived Happiness,
(All they desire) may peaceably possess.
But, of destruction certain, they at last,
When all their days of jollity are past
Perceive there is a Divine Wisdom too,
As well as Earthly, which they never knew
Till now, and find that by its ordinance,
Hell, and Damnation's their Inheritance.
But O to our great God, to him alone 23. God understands the way thereof,
and he understands the place thereof.

This Divine Wisdom is exactly known.
To him, to him, it is appropriat,
And no man with him can participat,
In that high Knowledge: for by that alone,
He gives directions from his lofty Throne
For th'Government of the World: for well he knows,
He knows exactly what we but suppose,
Or faintlie guess: although indeed we find
No little satisfaction to our mind,
When having in our recess, meditat,
By what strange means, what hidden Rules of state;
This World is governed, whilst by what we here
Observe in earthly courts; these do appear
To counter-act all wise proceedings there.
When we, I say, with contemplations eyes,
Have viewed at random, what beyond the skies,
Is the procedure in the Government,
Of this vast Fabric: and how evident
In it that Divine Wisdom does appear,
Which is not to be learned or valued here,
Then finding how our curious Thoughts have reached
Their ne p^^s ultra, --
From Heavens high Court we modestly retire,
And with great pleasure do these things admire,
We cannot learn, since to our God alone
The Government of the world is only known.
For who can manage this vast Government, 24. For he looks to the ends of the
earth, and sees under the whole Heaven.

But he alone, who is Omniscient?
Who every moment views, with searching eye,
All that lies under Heavens Canopie.
Who only knows, who only understands
How this great body, which his mighty hands
Have framed, and molded must be governed,
Who by his wisdom has so ordered,
And all affairs disposed so prudentlie,
As far exceeds all Human Policy.
For not one puff of wind in the air does blow, 25. To make the weight for the
winds, and he weighs the water by measure.

Nor from the clouds do any waters flow,
Without his special Tolerance, for when
By his Decree some quantity of rain 26. When he made a decree for the rain,
and away for the lightning of the thunder.

Is on the earth let out, or when from high,
Out of his Cage swift Lightning is let fly:
When all these for their sudden march are clear, 27. Then did he see it, and
declare it, he prepared it, yea he searched it out.

Ere they dare move, before him they appear,
Where, with a serious, and perpending eye,
He takes review of them, and carefully,
These fierce Invaders strength does estimat,
And sees it only be proportionat,
For his Design, whether for Punishment,
A second Deluge lies in his intent,
Or that he means by lightning to destroy
Men, Beasts, and Fruits of the earth, and thence annoy
Some sinning Nations, whose lewd practices
Have called to Heavens for such returns as these,
That they may not be able to offend
The passive World, more than he does intend.
From whence, my friends, it is plain, and evident,
That the eternal solid Government
Of all things which his mighty hands have made
Is by this Divine Wisdom managed.
Then to conclude, my friends, from henceforth pray 28. And unto man he said,
behold the fear of the Lord that is wisdom.

Let us forbear, let us forbear, I say,
To argue on the Rules of Providence,
For sure we cannot well, without offense,
Make enquiry in things, which certainly
The King of Heavens, from all Eternity,
Resolved should from his Creature be concealed
And to himself belong. --
No more debating then, but let us here
Content our selves with things that do appear
Obvious to our reason: and enquire
No further in Gods secrets, but admire
His Government of the world: for after all,
To know this thing we Divine Wisdom call
Is not our business; but if we would learn
To know what our Salvation does concern.
Of all that Knowledge here is the abreviat,
Let us fear God, all sinful courses hate,
Our Neighbors love, to each his right allow,
And in this world we have no more ado.
This, this is all the Knowledge; this is that
We ought to study, without more debate,
For this alone, for this we should implore,
For who endeavors to know any more
Will find in the end he spends his time in vain,
In searching what he never can obtain,
But this by prayer may be purchased,
Whilst that to Mortals is prohibited.
Cap. XXIX.
AFter by all the strength of argument,
Job had endeavored to make evident 1. Moreover, Job continued his parable,
and said.

How much his friends did err, whilst they maintained
That God on no man did afflictions send,
But such, whose sins for punishment did call,
Which as a proposition general,
They did assert, whilst on the other hand.
This good man, by his reason did withstand,
What they did often press, with so much heat,
From whence resulted their so long debate,
Upon the Subject; and endeavored too
To show that their Great Judge did not allow
Such curious questions to be canvassed,
As by what Laws, and Rules he governed
His Native Subjects, or what unknown fashion
He used in ordering of his own Creation,
Now he subsumes. --
That his own case was a strong evidence
OF the truth of what he spoke, and that from thence
All knowing, and impartial men might see
How much his sad condition did agree
With that of many, whom their God did love,
Whilst here on Earth, and now enjoyed above,
Eternal rest: so he, for all they spoke,
Did not believe, this sad, and fearful stroke,
Under which now he lay, was merited
By his preceding sins, but only laid
Upon him, for a trial, by his God,
Who in his Divine Wisdom used his Rod,
As often on those of his own Family,
To keep them strictly in conformity
With what is good, and just: as upon those,
For punishment, who are his open foes:
And therefore thus proceeds, as formerly,
Maintaining still his own integrity,
And from that head, does modestly regrate
The doleful figure of his present state.
O that I were, says he, as I have been! 2. O that I were as in months past, as
in the days when God preserved me.

O those fair Hal^yon-days that I have seen!
O those sweet times! O those delightful hours,
Which I have seen! which like the fragrant flowers,
That shine upon Earths surface in their prime,
With fairest shows did beautify my time!
O that I were, as all my Neighbors know
I was indeed not many years ago!
When my good God did think me worth his care,
When he would hear, and grant my daily Prayer:
When he would preserve me by his Providence,
And guard me from each inconvenience,
Had else befallen me; when he would lovingly,
With all my wishes every hour comply.
When in my Person he did take delight, 3. When his candle shined upon my head,
and when by his light I walked through darkness.

And with him I was no small Favorite:
When Gods great Mercies were so eminent,
As all, who knew me see how evident
His love was to me; when they cast such light
About me round, as Candles in the Night
Afford, so that if Troubles on me fell
At any time, they did not with me dwell,
As now they do, but merely transient,
They scarce did hurt me, when their force was spent.
O that I were again. as I have been! 4. As I was in the days of my youth, when
the secret of God was on my tabernacle*

O those blessed golden hours that I have seen!
O that I were, as I was formerly*
In the smooth current of Prosperity!
As I was in the days of verdant Youth,
When, like the gentle breezes from the South,
Which with such kindness breath upon the Fields,
As to their court-ship Nature quickly yields*
And all things, in their seasons, does produce,
That any way does suit with humane use;
So God did breath upon me in his love,
And rain such showers of blessings from above,
On me, and my poor house, that I from thence,
Might well perceive the large munificence,
Of my great Patron, who did every day
Hear my request, oftener then I could pray.
When the Almighty yet was pleased to express, 5. When the Almighty was yet
with me, when my children were about me.

For my concerns great love, and tenderness:
When my dear Children lived, who now are dead,
When they, on whom base Vermin now do feed,
Like Olive-plants about me flourished.
When they for beauty, health, wit, vigor stood
Against the greatest of our neighborhood,
When fraught with hopes, of what each day did grow,
My total satisfaction here below,
Lay in those Childrens souls depositat,
And by their health, I reckoned my Estate.
When in their converse, I did take such pleasure,
As oftentimes I*d steal some hours of leisure,
To enter with them in some conference,
That I their Wit, and Parts might know from thence.
When under my poor Roof some hundreds fed,
To whom I did afford their daily Bread;
Who by my orders, twice at least a day,
Assembled in my Chappel-room, to pray,
Whilst with uplifted hands, all on our knees,
We'd offer a sweet smelling sacrifice
Of prayer, and in our private exercise,
Address our selves to him, who hears alone
All prayers: but now these happy days are gone.
Those happy days are gone, those hours are spent,
And darkness now succeeds: -- I faint, I faint, --
-- Alace, I faint, -- when I do call to mind,
And sadly think in former times how kind,
My great Creator at all times appeared,
And all my prayers with attention heard;
But now I such devotion may spare,
For when I cry aloud, he will not hear:
He will not hear me, nor will he allow,
That I should bow the knee before him now.
O then that I could have once more again, 6. When I washed my steps with
butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of oil.

But even a Prospect of what I have seen
In former times! O, that I could once more,
But live a little, as I Have done before:
When I had all things so accommodate,
And had so well improven my Estate,
As all the Hills around did Tribute pay,
In Honey, Milk, and Oil; nay, every day
They did me so much of their Growth afford,
As three parts of my Rent I might have stored,
And with the fourth, supplied my Famlly,
Through all the year well, and conveniently:
When all my Cornfieldsd yearly did produce,
Three times as much as served my private use:
When all my Cattle pleasantly did feed*
In their own Pastures, and did yearly breed,
With so great increase, as (my Stock entire)
I had all profit that I would desire.
When with a great attendance, I would go, 7. When I went out to the gate
through the city, when I prepared my ^eat in the strcet.

To the Court of Justice, and my self would show
Upon the Bench, where all would make address
To me, who in that Court had business:
And when some times with clamor I would meet,
Of shrewd oppression, in the open Street,
I Would stop, and hear both parties in their suit,
For a small time: then without more dispute,
When I had heard them both, and fully tried
The truth of all, as I found just, decide.
At my approach, young men would by and by 8. The young men saw me, and hid
themselves, and the aged arose and stood up.

Slip out of the way, scared by my gravity:
Old men, as I did pass, would, in a row,
Salute me, and their bodies humbly bow;
Nor would they one Punctilio neglect,
Of courtesy, in paying their respect.
The Lords of the Country, who at home, in State, 9. The princes refrained
talking, and laid their hands on their mouths.

Did govern all, when I in Judgment sat,
Would with submission, in the Court appear,
And from debates amongst themselves forbear,
Whilst all their Counsel I would calmly hear.
And when I did give Judgment in the case,
They Would stop their mouths, and freely acquiesce
To what I did determine: none repined
At my procedure: none of them declined
My Jurisdiction: none of them complained,
But all obeyed, what I had once ordained.
What I had once ordained did fully stand 10. The nobles held their peace, and
their tongues cleaved to the roof of their mouths.

For Law, my Sentence was a firm command:
The greatest of them all would silently,
Forthwith with my Decisions comply:
Such was my Justice: so by Rules of Law,
I gave decisions: that all stood in aw
To ask a further hearing, 'cause they knew
What I did order, needed no review.
In all the time of my authority,
(God knows, I speak this without vanity)
By his assistance, I did judge so well,
I never so much as heard of an appeal.
For in my judging, I had no respect 11. When the ear heard me, then it blessed
me, and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me.

To persons, nor did information take
From private mouths, to this man's prejudice,
Or to other: nor did I the qualities
Of Plaintiff, or Defendant e're regard,
But freely my opinion still declared,
As by the Laws and Statutes of the place,
I found should be adjudg'd upon the case.
I never would encourage my relations,
And friends to ply me with solicitations,
On any man's behalf, whose suit did ly
In Court before me: but would still deny
Access to all, that for their friend would speak,
Except in open Court: I never would take
A Bribe from any: neither would I hear,
Or look on such, as whisper in the ear,
And offer private compacts: nor allow
My servants to exact, as others do,
From Parties, who in Court had business,
That they to me might make these men's address.
Nor would I e're allow, at any rate,
That any of my Children should debate
In Court for any man; lest men might think
I might their Party favor; or might wink
At their contrivance, and adjudge the case,
To Advance their foul, and unjust purchases.
Nor would I ever suffer in the least
Defendants in their Pleas, should be oppressed,
By powerful men, to whom it was thought fit
The Plaintiffs often times should their Suits transmit.
No, for by rules of Court, I openly
Forbid such unjust dealings, and would try
Each Parties Title, e're I suffered
Either of them upon the fact to plead.
For as I all oppression did detest,
So on concussion, as none of the least
OF the many species of that loud-tongu'd Crime,
I always looked thence if at any time,
Such cases did occur, I Would carefully
Restrain such active, cunning tyranny.
For this cause all men blessed me, for this cause,
Of all who knew me I had great applause.
Because the poor whose daily cries did grieve 12. Because I delivered the poor
that cried, and the fathersess, and him that has none to help him.

My very soul, I quickly did relieve
From sad oppressions, under which they groaned,
And only by the rabble were bemoaned.
The Orphan too, and him that destitute
Of counsel in the Court did move his suit,
I freely heard, and without much debate,
In their possessions I would re-instate.
Those, who in Lawsuits all their means had spent, 13. The blessing of him
that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to sing
for joy.

And at the Court-gates daily did present
Petitions on their knees for Aliment.
I Would frequently relieve, and in return
Procure their blessings; Widows, who did mourn,
And kep't a howling with their Girls, and Boys,
Before I left the Court, I Would make rejoice.
Nor did I act thus to procure the name 14. I put on righteousness, and it
clothed me: my judgment was as a robe, and a diadem,

Of a just Judge, or by a running fame,
T^ abuse the World; but merely, I protest,
Out of a principle, which in my breast
I entertained, that taught me to deny
All fellowship with partiality.
For I in simple justice took delight,
And as no threatenings did my mind affright,
So was I not by Female-pity moved
To do injustice; nay, I ever loved
To hear both parties fully, how so e're
The ones pretensions often did appear
More favorable then the others were.
For, In my judgment I Would not contribute
To the verifying of either parties suit;
But by the rules of Justice, and in that
My self indeed I valued; for I sat,
Not as a friend to any, but to all,
A Judge most upright, and impartial.
As such indeed I did my self esteem,
More then if I had worn a Diadem.
For such, as could not their own case relate, 15. I was eyes to the blind, and
feet to the lame.

In terms of Law, I would the question state,
And even their Counsel, where 'twas evident
In point of Law, they were deficient,
By my own knowledge I would often supply,
And help their Pleadings, yet impartially.
Nay, where I see a Cause like to miscarry,
Through the influence of a potent adversary,
Though just, and fair, I would indeed from thence,
Appear for the Party, and in his defense,
Bestir my self, as wholly opposite
To all oppression, nay I took delight
To crush the projects of those powerful men,
And make their Congees, and attendance vain.
I was indeed a father to the poor, 16. I was a father to the poor, and the
cause which I knew not, I searched, out.

And always would protect them from that hour,
I see their Cause was just, and would withstand,
On their behalf, the greatest in the land.
For where by Lawyers wrangling, and debate,
Their Causes had been rendered intricate,
I Would call for the Process, and with careful eye,
In private every Article survey,
Not trusting to my Clerks, as others do,
But with my own eyes, I Would go fully through,
The several pieces, and next day report
My judgment on the case, in open Court.
So that, when the oppressor judged his prey 17. And I broke the power of the
wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth.

Was now his own, and without more delay,
He Would seize on all the poor man did possess,
Then on a sudden would I turn the chase,
And as a man out of a Lions paws,
Would tear his spoil, so the poors dying Cause,
I Would rescue by the very strength of Laws.
Yea, not so only, but I would allow
Such costs to the prevailing Parties too,
And whip the faillers with such damages,
As they should not be able to oppress,
As they had done; but thence forth should forbear,
In such foull, unjust actions, to appear.
Thus firmly rooted, thus established, 18. Then I said. I shall die in my nest,
and I shall multiply my days as the sand.

Thus flourishing, thus branching, I could read
In all those figures, and fair instances.
The History of my own happiness.
Then said I, Lord, how have thou blessed me now,
In every thing, what have I more to do,
Then thus to live in Honor, Wealth, and Peace,
And when the motion of my Lungs shall cease,
Crowned with the Laurels of Felicity
To lay my self down, and in triumph die.
For my enjoyments daily did increase, 19. My root was spread out by the
waters, and the dew lay all night upon my branches.

My joys were greater then I could express,
And there was no bounds to my happiness.
I lived in plenty, and in confidence,
Of Gods great favor, and a permanence
Of all his kindness: never did I dream
On what I now perceive, but did esteem
My self so fixed in my enjoyments here,
As not unlike a Tree I did appear,
That planted by a River with its roots,
Sock^t in the Waters, always freshly sprouts,
And 'twixt the Water, and the Dew* which lies
Each Night upon its branches, multiply^s
So in its growth, as one might judge from thence
This Tree might be of long continuance.
I thought my honor never should decay 20. My glory was fresh in me, and a^y
bow was renewed in my hand.

For I might well perceive how every day
My reputation as a Judge increased,
And I all men's affections possessed.
Yea, as I used to judge impartially,
So armed with Power, and Authority
All my Decrees I would see execute,
And my Commands obeyed without dispute.
Without dispute, for I remember well 21. Unto me men gave ear and waited, and
kept silence at my counsel.

In parts, and prudence I did so excel,
And did my Reputation so maintain,
In every point amongst my Contrymen,
That whilst on any point of Law* or State
I chanced to speak, all with attention sat,
And with great patience heard me to an end,
Whilst what I counseled they would still commend.
Yes, though before I spoke they would debate 22. After my words, they spoke
not again, and my speech dropped upon them.

The points in hand, and argue with some heat,
No sooner I Would arise, then instantly
They Would shut up all their Mouths, and by, and by
Hushed up in silence seriously give ear
To what I spoke: and greedily would hear
What my opinion was upon the case;
And after I had spoke they held their peace.
My words were to them as a casting vote, 23. And they waited for me as for the
rain, and they opened their mouths wide as for the latter rain.

For to what I held out, they replied not:
Because they always bore great deference
To my opinion, and with reverence
Would acquiesce to my determination
Of whatsoever was in agitation.
Indeed, my friends, such was my reputation, 24. If I laughed on them, they
believed it not, and the light of my countenance they cast not down.

So was I loved and honored in my station:
Such was the ambition of all knowing men
To be of my acquaintance. --
That if at any time I Would cast an eye,
On any of 'em somewhat courteously,
They Would from that very moment calculate
Their happiness, and reckon their estate
By the figures of my smiles: yet would not dare
For all that, to become familiar
With me at any rate, but warily
Would keep due distance: and not saucilie,
Encroach on my good humor, but forbear
All idle Divinations of my ear
From such Prognostics: or suppose that I
Could ere be merry out of Levitie.
But what needs more! alace I do with tears, 25. I chose out their way, and
sat chief, and dwelt as a king in the army, as one that comfort the mourners.

Reflect on the beauty of my former years;
When all at my Devotion were, when all
Obeyed my orders, as their General.
When in all their Assemblies still I sat
Amongst them as Lord Paramount, in state,
And ordered all affairs, yet would not I
At any time use that Authority
But with Discretion, and would rather aid
All men with Counsel, than make them afraid
Of me, because I in my hand did bear
That, by which men procure both love, and fear.
In fine my Grandeur, and Authority
Differed but little from pure Sovereignty,
For as a Prince, I in these days did live,
And no man questioned my Prerogative.
Cap. XXX.
BUt now the young Knaves laugh at me, the race 1. But now those that are
younger than I have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to
have set with the dogs of myflocks

Of men, who lived in miserable case:
The brood of such, as were no more esteemed
Than Slaves, with whom all good men were ashamed
To haunt, or converse. --
Poor Tag-rag-fellowes, men so low, and mean
As scarce such wretches now are to be seen,
The race of Scoundrels, silly, needy rogues,
Whom I Would scarce trust with feeding of my dogs:
Because by hunger such might have been drawn,
To cheat more useful creatures of their brawn.
The race of such as in unbridled rage, 2. Yea, whereto might the strength of
their hands profit me, in whom old age was perished.

Of sin had spent the vigor of their age,
And in a most luxuriant idleness,
Had wasted their most profitable days:
Whence in declining years, poor, hunger-starved,
Feeble, and doting they for nothing served:
So that such creatures, as those Wretches were
No man to service ever would prefer.
Hence living idle, and in horrid want 3. For want, and famine, they were
solitary, flying into the wilderness* formerly desolate, and waste.

They Would in the daylight 'bout the Shambles haunt,
Begging the Draughts of Beasts, and so would cheat
The very Butchers Mastives of their meat.
And in the night in some dark entry creep,
Where on the Stairs they would securely sleep;
At length when the careful Justice of the Place
Would give out orders to secure the Peace,
Then were we quit of all such Rogues as these.
For of their evil courses conscious,
And so afraid of a Grand Mittimus:
They Would truss up all their Rags, and silentlie,
Sneak out of the towns, and to the Deserts fly;
Where amongst Wild-beasts, wandering here, and there, 4. Who cut up mallows by
the bushes, and juniper-roots for their meat.

Many a poor shift for their daily fare,
Those abject creatures made. --
Mallows, and such Salt-herbs, as none would eat.
But those that were nigh starved for want of meat,
Juniper Roots, Thistles, or any thing,
That might preserve them from mere perishing,
They Would cut up for their food, which, with delight,
They Would eat, t'allay their clamorous appetite.
Nor dur'st those villains to the Towns repair 5. They were driven forth from
among men, they cried after them, as after a thief.

To purchase food, or ask it any where,
As licensed Beggars do, no not at all,
For if they did, the very Dogs would fall
Upon them, and the Country by and by
Would arm, and follow them, with Hue, and Cry.
Hence those poor Rascals wholly banished 6. They dwelt in the cliffs of the
valleys, in caves of the earth, and in the rocks.

From Humane converse, all of 'em were glad
To dwell in Cliffs of Rocks, in hollow Caves,
Or any holes but differing from Graves,
As Pools from Quagmires, where they might sustain
A miserable life, and sleep with pain,
Whilst hungry Tigers howling in the Night,
These sculking Wretches in their Dreams would fright,
And Lions roaring all the Fields around
In those men's ears would make a dreadful sound.
Nay of the wild-beasts they were so afraid 7. Amongst the bushes they brayed,
under the nettles they were gathered together.

As amongst the Bushes they like Asses brayed
For fear, and hunger: and in clusters creep't
Amongst the Briars and Nettles, where they keep't
Their grand Assemblies, and their business,
Was only to consult, in such distress,
From whence they might have Food, else suddenly
They and their wretched Families should die.
O brave Republic! famous Corporation! 8. They were children of fools, yea
children of base men, they were viler then the earth.

And what do you think too was their Generation?
Who were the Fathers of those beastly Men,
Of whose insulting Brats I now complain?
Why they were Fellows most obscurely base,
Mere Vagabonds rambling from place to place,
Void of all Virtue, Honor, Wit, and Grace.
Fellows, whom I my self have caused seize,
And put in the stocks, because they broke the Peace:
Then let 'em go in hopes of reformation,
But finding after all their conversation
Was still the same, in Villainy engross't,
I Would send them next time to the whipping Post:
At length obliged by their increasing Crimes,
I Would send such men by dozens oftentimes,
Fairly to the Gibbet: men so despicable
As they were no less hated by the Rabble,
Then Wolves, and Foxes: men so villainous,
And in their lives so grossly vicious,
As all disdained to bear them company,
But from such men would as from Serpents fly.
Such was indeed the Line, and Parentage 9. Yet now am I their song, yea I am
their byword.

Of those vile men, those Scandals of their Age
Of whom those Scabs, who now do openly
In Ballads, Rhimes, and bitter Raill^ry,
Upbraid me to my face, are lineally
Descended: --
From whence alace it clearly does appear,
Those wanton Youngsters, who so patly jeer,
And laugh at me now in my present case,
Are both of low Birth, and of cursed Race.
Yet do those sons of Earth, those upstart Knaves,
Who draw their line from men far worse then slaves,
Those Mushrome-cracks, those men of yesterday,
Those make me now the subject of their play.
Those Rat-catchers, whom I Would scarce heretofore,
Allow to walk before my Parlour door,
Those base-born Mangrels, whom my Serving-men,
Thought not their equals, but with great disdain,
When at their Table, they would presume to eat,
Would neither drink to them, nor carve their meat.
Yet those men now laugh at my misery,
And point at me: unhappy poverty!
There Is naught from thee more heavily we take,
Then that, thou men ridiculous do make.
Ridiculous indeed, as ever man 10. They all abhor me, they fly far from me,
and spare not to spit in my face.

Was made by men, since first the World began
Am I now made. --
And by young fools too, fellows light, and vain,
Shrewdly debauched, and openly profane,
Who flock to see me in this doleful state,
As others do, and to express their hate,
Reproach me with foul words, and bitterly
Insult over me, in my calamity:
Put on me all affronts imaginable,
And use all means to make me despicable.
But now I think on it, I should not admire, 11. Because he has loosed my cord,
and an^^c^^^ m^, they have also l^^ loose the bridle before me.

To see the Race of Criminals conspire
Against me, in this miserable state,
Because, when formerly a Magistrate;
I did indeed correct their Fathers so,
As till this time those slaves durst never show
Their heads in public; yes I did indeed,
And to this day I think those men may read
My justice plain, and clear before their eyes,
In The Histories of their several Families.
For formerly, when my Authority
Did flourish, these men living quietly,
And within bounds, durst never give offense
To any man, left my intelligence
Might reach their actings, and by Law declare
These Rogues, all Outlaws, as their Fathers were.
But now, alace, that God himself has broke
My power, and turned my Honor all to smoke:
Now that his heavy hand does on me ly,
And I am overcharged with misery:
Even those mean things now from their Kennels crawl,
And bark at me with open mouths, nay, all
Who formerly did to my person bear
Great reverence, now openly appear
My greatest enemies, insultingly
Reflecting on my former Dignity,
Of which I Am now robbed, as is ordinar,
In time of Troubles, Mutinies, and War,
When by the Rabble Prisons are broke open,
And Malefactors armed, no House, or Shop,
Is sooner ristled, than those which belong,
To the Magistrate, 'bout, which in Troops they throng,
Where all is pulled down, and with difficulty,
To save their persons, they are forced to fly.
And leave all in this lamentable case
To the fury of the hot-brained populace.
So these same lewd, and insolent young men, 12 Upon my right hand ^ife the
youth, they push away my feet, and they raise up against me the ways of their
destruction.

Whom formerly, by Law I did restrain,
Now by my fall from inquisition freed,
Uninterrupted, hourly do proceed,
By all the arts, and tricks, they can invent
To make my case most sad; whilst they torment
My soul, by frequent looking on my face,
And pointing out to all men my disgrace.
For where I would endure with patience, 13 They mark my paths, they set
forward my calamity, they have no helper.

My present sorrows, these men's insolence
Do cross my resolutions* and raise
My Spleen to some disorder, whilst they please
Themselves to see me in this sad estate,
(Which visits all ingenuous spirits hate)
And by false accusations, bitter tales,
Clamours, unjust reproaches, or what else
Those virulent vindictive fellows art,
Can in their Cups devise, or for their heart
Contrive to vex me, I am sore oppressed,
And from their Spur*gal^'d Jests can have no rest,
Nor need they great men's help to countenance
The abusive progress of their petulance,
For of themselves by their intolerable
Proud, wanton carriage, truly they are able
To do their business, with convenience,
As I have found by sad experience.
For these licentious Youths have taken delight 14 They came upon me, as a wide
breaking in of waters; in the desolation they rolled themselves upon me.

To gaze upon me here with great despite,
Whilst other clamorous Villains on pretense
Of wrongs sustained from me, with violence
Have rushed on my possessions, and seized
All my effects, disposing as they pleased
On what belonged to me, whilst each of them
Parts of my means, as by reprysals, claim.
So that even as a Town besieged I ly
Beset on all hands, by the enemy;
Who by continual Batteries have plied
Its Walls, and made at length a breach so wide,
That, as a Torrent, with great violence
Breaks through the strongest Banks, and Water-fence
O're-running all it meets, so at the breach
The Soldiers enter with a shout, and stretch
Their Front so wide, as they appear at least
Pell-mell to throng a hundred in a breast.
Even so at that great breach, which the hand of God
Has made on me, as through a beaten road,
The dregs of the Country, men of low estate,
And scarcely in Apparel, till of late,
Have in this day of my calamity,
Rushed in upon me, and maliciously
Seized on my Goods, and Chattels, riffling all,
And left me nothing, which I now may call
My own, for even what my wild neighbors spared,
These men have plundered; having no regard
To Conscience, Honor, Law, or Equity,
But take advantage of me, where I lie,
Floating in this huge gulf of misery.
And now those Donatars of my forfaulture
Those vile oppressors, those base villains, sure
Are now persuaded I am wholly gone,
Never to be restored, and ali's their own.
It Is true indeed, as far as man can see 15. Terrors are turned upon me, they
pursue my soul as the wind, and my welfare passes away as a cloud.

I Am lost for ever, there is no hopes of me,
No hopes that ever I can be restored;
And so my case is much to be deplored.
Besides, alace, within my breast I find
Oppressions of a more destructive kind:
Terrors of Conscience, ah! strange terrors now
O'rewhelm my spirit:
For as a Cloud before the Wind does roll,
So by sad thoughts my over-wearied soul
Is driven forward most impetuously,
And broke to pieces, as a Cloud does fly,
When scattered into Air, such is my case,
And of my restoration, alace
There Is no more hopes, I fear, I now may say
Then of a Cloud that vanishes away.
What am I then, my friends, pray let me know 16. And now my soul is poured out
upon me, the days of affliction have taken hold on me.

Whether I breath, whether I live, or no?
Am I a man yet? Do I yet retain
Some vestiges of reason? pray be plain.
Am I a Creature rational? or can
Such, as now see me, call me yet a man?
Is not my strength exhausted? are not all
My spirits wasted? how then shall I call
My self a living creature? --
-- Is not my soul the source of life, and strength,
By heat of woes evaporate at length?
Yes, and the part that is left of me, appears
But like the Ship-wracks of an hundred years.
A very lump of dust, a lifeless thing,
A piece of earth not worth the valuing:
A Creature so deformed, so overspread
With hideous sores, as one can hardly read
Its title in its forehead, or persuade
Himself, that such a thing a man was made
-- In this condition, in this sad estate --
You see, my friends, then, how my God of late
Has molt me in the Furnace of his wrath,
Dissolved me, and yet after all I breath.
I only breath, I live to feel the pain, 17. My bones are pierced in me in the
night season, and my sinews take no rest.

Which in my bones, and sinews I sustain: --
Such horrid pain, as cannot be expressed,
Such pain, as does allow my soul no rest
For in the night time, in the hour, when all
Submit themselves to sleep, at Natures call;
Then, -- then, -- O then* my Bones so shrewdly ache,
As I Am compelled by force of pain t'awake.
Alace such is the strength of my disease, 18. By the great force of my
disease, my garment is changed, it binds me about as the collar of my coat.

As no invention can my pains appease;
For by the course of matter purulent,
Which issues from my Sores, and represent
The foul ingredients of a common Shore)
My Garments are so stiff with bile, and gore,
That though, as formerly I now could say
I might change my Apparel every day,
Yet would I by that shifting find no ease,
Nor would the torrent of my Ulcers cease,
But in their course run most impetuously
Upon my Clothes, and never let them dry?
But make them so fast to my Body stick, --
The express on makes me both ashamed, and sick. --
And now* like Sow in puddle, I appear, 19. He has cast me into the mire, and
I am become like dust and ashes.

Wallowing in my own sores, and mired here,
As one in marish stranded, all over run
With loathsome Ulcers totally undone,
With putrid scabs, which from my Skin do fall,
When dry, and make me look, as I were all
A heap of Dust, and Ashes, Boils, and Sores,
With all that is ugly -- --
Nay, I am now so low, so mean, and base,
No language my condition can express.
But, O, what is worst of all, and does exceed 20. I cry unto thee, and thou
do not hear me. I stand up, and thou regardest me not.

All torments, I as yet have suffered,
My great Creator, to whom I do pray,
And cry aloud, a hundred times a day,
Seems unconcerned, no notice of me takes,
But before my eyes his flaming Sword he shakes,
In token of his Wrath, and now appears
To second all my jealousies, and fears,
By this b^d usage; Lord, how frequently,
As a poor Beggar at thy gates do I
Implore for thy own sake, some Charity.
How often have I, good Lord, to thee complained,
But have as yet no grace from thee obtained?
Will thou not help me, Lord? will thou not hear
Me when I pray? ah, will thou not give ear
To my sad cries? good Lord, what shall I say?
-- Shall I at all times to no purpose pray?
Wilt *not concern thy self, O mighty Lord,
With my afflictions? will thou not afford
One gracious answer? will thou still stand by?
A mere spectator of my misery,
And make no help to me, but in this case,
Suffer me to expire in great disgrace?
Alace, good Lord, I find thy wrath so hot, 21. Thou art become cruel to me,
with thy strong hand thou opposest thy self against me.

That I had rather die upon the spot,
Then live in thy displeasure, for I now
Perceive there is nothing I can ever do,
Can purchase so much as a short Cessation,
From Persecution; for thy indignation
Against me does with cruelty increase,
And there is no means left to procure my peace.
For in Afflictions Ocean, I Am so toss't 22. Thou liftest me up to the wind,
thou causest me to ride upon it, and dissolvest my substance*

'Twixt Wind, and Wave, beyond all sight of Coast,
Beyond all hopes of Calm: now raised aloft
Each Minut by the Surge, and then as often
Amongst the gaping Waves precipitate,
As I Am no better then ingurgitate
In this Abyss of Troubles. -- --
-- Now all this Tempest by thy mighty hand
Is raised against me, Lord, at thy command,
All th^se Infernal Woes assembled are,
By which I see, O Lord, thou do appear
My open Enemy: and in thy wrath
Resolv'st even to pursue me to the death.
I know thou do, nay I am very sure 23. For I know that thou will being me to
death, and to the house appointed for all living.

My Wounds are mortal past all hopes of cure,
And I must quickly die, good Lord, I know,
There is no remedy, but I must go,
To the House appointed for all here below.
To the cold Grave, where huddled up do ly,
The moldy Records of Mortality:
Where all the pride of Earth, its pomp, and glory
Are to be found in a large Repertory
Of Dust, and Ashes, thither Lord, I know, --
-- Thither annon, O thither I must go, --
Where entered in Deaths Book, my life, I fear
Shall a more famous Precedent appear
Of Humane Frailty, and the vanity,
Of this poor World, then a whole Century
Before my time can show; whilst all in me
May a most evident example see
Both of thy Goodness, and thy sad displeasure,
Dispensed in an extr'ordinary measure.
Yet here is my comfort, that when I descend 24. Howbeit he will not stretch out
his hand to the grave, though they cry in his destruction.

To Earth, my Troubles shall be at an end:
The War of my Afflictions shall cease,
And in the Grave at least I shall have peace:
For sure my God will not pursue me there,
Or make me in worse state then others are,
Who in that melancholy Cloister dwell,
But will permit me there to rest, as well,
As all my Predecessors in that place,
And when I come that length, give over the chase.
For whilst I live, I never do expect
TO have any rest, what ere I may suspect
Shall be my state of life, when life is gone
For on the matress of the Grave alone
I may have ease, but here I shall have none.
Strange! that with grief I should be thus oppress't! 25. Did not I weep for
him that was in trouble? was not my soul grieved for the poor?

Why had I ever lodged within my breast,
A heart of Flint, that never could comply
With others woes by rules of Sympathy:
Or had I been so cruelly severe,
As in my life I never would give ear
To the cries of those, who did sad troubles feel,
And amongst the billows of Afflictions reel;
But unconcerned at all their misery,
Had suffered them unpityed to die:
Then had I merit all those griefs, and woes,
I now endure: but on the contrare those,
Who were in trouble, I did pity so,
As oftentimes, tears from my eyes would flow,
When any I beheld in sad estate;
Though far from being tortured at this rate,
As I am; yet my kind, and tender soul
Would these men's troubles heartily condole*
Nay when I Would hear the afflicted wretches groan,
I Would look on their condition, as my own:
Yet ah, when I expected better things, 26. When I looked for good, then evil
came unto me, and when I waited for light, there came darkness.

For this compliance; with sad Sufferings,
I only meet; all the reward alace,
Of all my sighs, and pious tenderness,
Is nothing but the utmost of distress:
Barbarous usage, Cruelty, Oppression,
Blows, Unkind dealings, Pains beyond expression,
Ingratitude, Horror, and Poverty,
Are all the product of my Charity.
For even now whilst I speak, I find such pain, 27. My bowels boiled, and
rested not* the days of affliction prevented me.

As I Am not able longer to sustain
The weight of my Afflictions; -- Oh I faint!
-- I faint indeed, now all my strength is spent --
-- Nay in my bowels only I do find
Such pain, as would distract a constant mind.
For this cause I go mourning all the day, 28. I went mourning without the sun,
I stood up, and I cried in the congregation.

And in dark Holes, and Corners take my way,
To Caverns, where the Sun beams are unknown
And find some comfort to be there alone;
Where I my woes with freedom may bemoan.
For when at any time I do appear
In public, O how I Am ashamed to hear
My own sad exclamations: alace --
-- Now every day I see my own disgrace:
And O, my friends, d' ye think but such as I,
Who but of late lived in Authority,
Amongst those people, do now think it sad,
To be thus gazed on, as if I were mad.
To be thus gazed on, thus constrained, by pain, 29. I am a brother to dragons*
and a companion to owls.

To cry aloud, before these very men,
Who but of late did see me in this place,
In great respect, but now in sad disgrace
They see me here: for this cause do I fly
To Woods, and Deserts; where no Humane eye
May in the least perceive me: there I howl,
And screigh, like Dragon, there the dismal Owl,
I in my nightly crying imitate,
And these and I are now associat,
For we are all wild, sad, and desolate.
These are my brethren, these, and I are now
Well known to each other: for with these I do
Converse all day long, and all night we keep
A doleful consort, whilst all others sleep
It Is so indeed, for who but such as these 30. My skin is black upon me, and my
bones are burned with heat.

Would converse with a Creature in my case:
With me, a thing so fully miserable,
As all that I can speak is hardly able,
To prove I Am living man; for who alace
Would think me such, by looking on my face.
Am not I black, deformed, and withered,
And (save that I am not yet fully dead,)
From those below Ground nothing differing,
But suitable to them in every thing.
Hence all my mirth is gone, my former joys 31. My harp also is turned to
mourning, and my organ to the voice of them that weep.

Are now extinguished, and there is no noise
Of Music in my House, as formerly
Was heard, in the days of my prosperity.
My Harp does now in a dead Gamut sound,
And there is no other Music to be found,
Within my Walls, but howling night, and day,
For all my smiling days are shrunk away.
Cap. XXXI.
ANd now, my friends you see, you plainly see, 1. I made a covenant with my
eyes, why then should I think upon a maid.

What formerly you only heard of me:
You see a sad change of my former state,
You see me now on Dunghill, who of late
On the chief Bench most highly honored sat.
This is my case then, here you see me ly
An evidence of the instability
Of Humane Grandeur, a sad precedent
Of Gods displeasure: hither I am sent
By his appointment, that the World may see
His love* and hate alternative in me.
One, whom his bounty formerlie did raise
And blessed with a long tract of golden days,
Free of all Sorrow, Poverty, and Pain,
And now his wrath has taken down again.
Why this is all, my friends, it is all you see,
This is the sum of what you read in me.
Now therefore, as a man about to die,
Allow me, pray my friends, the liberty
In a few words to make a short relation
Of my short life, and show how in my station,
I labored still to live without offense,
To God, and Man: so that when I am hence,
You may bear witness to the World what were
My dying words, and from this time forbear
To call me guilty of what all of you
Make it your work to fix upon me now.
Then hear me pray, for after this I shall
Use no more words -- --
First then, my friends, I Would have you know that I
Have always studied since my Infancy
The Art of Continence: for in the least
An unclean thought never possess't my breast.
I always hated wanton Company,
And still disliked that Foolish Railery,
In which young men their time do poorly waste,
Making their sin the Subject of their Jest.
Nor did I ere desire to be acquaint
With those, whose eyes do make our blood ferment.
No, in such Intrigues, I would never engage,
Lest I might perish by Loves cousenage,
And like the foolish young men of our time,
To purchase pleasure, think no sin a crime.
For this cause, knowing that such Fooleries
Do steal in at the Wicket of the Eyes:
With these I quickly did confederate,
And in my Treaty, firmly stipulate,
They should not see a Maid at any rate.
They should not on that pleasant Object look,
Because the Bait did usher in the Hook:
But shun to see that curious piece of Nature*
Lest I were tempted with its lovely feature.
For with my self I still considered 2. For what portion of God is there from
above? and what inheritance from the Almighty on high.

This was a sin by Law prohibited,
A crying sin, and therefore to be feared
In Heavens Court it would be sooner heard
Then I my self, and make the Divine wrath
Pursue me, and my Family to death.
I thought too with my self, should those, who claim
An Interest in Heaven be barred, with shame,
From Gods good presence by the hateful means
Of a poor nasty sin: hence I took pains,
So to secure my heart, that, at no time,
The thoughts of this abominable crime
Might slip into it: and for one short pleasure,
I came to forfault an eternal Treasure.
Yes an eternal Store, a Happiness 3. Is not destruction to the wicked, and a
strange punishment to the workers of iniquity.

No Humane Art, or Language can express,
For one poor Moments pleasure, Lord how sad
To think that any man should be so mad,
As for a triffle (think on it what he list)
Which rather in the Fancy does subsist
Then in Fruition; he should wilfully
Quit all his interest in Eternity.
For sure those men, whom God does wicked call,
In his good time shall be destroyed all:
Destroyed, yes, and that by singular
And unknown methods, not as others are,
But my remarkable calamities,
Upon their Persons, and their Families
They shall be rooted out: and men shall know
That God is just.
Besides I know that his all-seeing eye, 4. Does not he see my ways, and count
my steps.

Was not to be deceived by secrecy:
Nor could my sin so cunningly be hatched,
But in the very thought I should be caught:
My heart should be exposed to his sight,
And all my hidden councils brought to light.
Now, as* I*liv'd in spotless continence, 5. If I have walked with vanity, or
if my foot has hasted to deceit.

So, further, to improve my innocence;
In all my dealings I was just, and square,
With every man, my actions were fair,
Sincere, ingenuous, honest, regular.
For proof of which, I wish my God would try, 6. Let me be weighed in an even
balance, that God may know my integrity.

The value of my life's integrity,
And all my actions as in balance poize,
Then 'twould be fully seen what was my choice.
Yes 'twould be seen, and that so clearlie too, 7. If my step has turned out
of the way and my heart walked after my eyes, and if any blot has cleaved to
my hands.

As from that weighing, without more ado,
The world might see how much I took delight
In God, and that I* am no hypocrite.
For if I ever have endeavored
To cozen mortal man, or studied
How to compel a man o're-grown with debt,
To let me have his Lands below the rate:
Or in my bargains such advantage taken,
As would have been, perhaps, by other men
On such occasions; where necessity
Obliged the unwilling Borrower to comply
With the avarice of the Lender, nay, if e're
I in a durty action did appear:
Then of afflictions would I not complain, 8. Then let me sow, and let another
eat, yea, let my off spring be rooted out.

Nor thus with sighs resent my present pain.
Nor would I think it strange at all to see
How others feed, on what was sown by me.
How others now my Lands, and Means possess*
And worse then any Beggar, here, alace,
I who was Lord of all you see around,
Deformed, and dying, grovel on the ground;
Nor How my goodly Family of late,
Now either is in grave, or dissipate,
Like Chaff before the Wind, and I alone
Survive these losses, only to bemoan
What cannot be recovered; and stead
Of living, only do envy the dead.
No, I would not think all these judgments strange, 9. If mine heart has been
deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait at my neighbors door.

Nor, in that case would I deplore my change,
But O, such things I never would practice,
O no, I never would permit my eyes
To look upon an object, how so e're,
IN the eyes of world beautiful, and fair,
That might occasion sin: no, at no rate,
But all those things I did abominate.
I did abhor those hateful practices,
And all the names of Whores and Mistrisses,
I Would stop my ears: I never had design
Upon my Neighbors Wife, or Concubine.
For if at any time a Female eye
Has raised and swol'n my passion so hie,
As I should venture on Adultery:
If I have been enticed by a Whore,
Or have set Spies before my Neighbors Door,
TO observe the glances of his amorous Wife,
Or robbed him of the pleasures of his life,
By close appointments, and dark assignations,
Where I have had my will at all occasions:
Then were it just my Wife should be so used 10. Then let my wife grind unto
another, and let others bow down upon her.

As I my self had others Wives abused,
'Twere just that she her self should prostitute
For hire, without he trouble of a suit
To every Porter, Footman, Slave, or Groom,
And for all Comers keep an open open Room,
That all l've injured (in that humble state)
May their affronts on her retalliate.
Besides, I know this was a sin so foul, 11. For this is an heinous crime, yea,
itis an iniquity, to be punished by the judge

And so provocking, as my very soul
Did still abhor it: I did still detest
This treacherous Crime, nor would I in the least
By any means into ^s Clutches fall;
Nor would I hearken to the Adulteress call,
Though by the Laws it were not capital.
A sin I always thought in Heavens sight 12. For it is a fire that consumes
to destruction, and would ^^o^ out all mine increase.

So black and ugly, that it hates the light
No more than God hates ^t: a dreadful sin,
From whence his wrath does usually begin
Against its Actors, and pursues the Chase
To the utmost extirpation of their Race.
This was my life, this was my conversation, 13. If I did despise the cause of
my manservant* o^ of my maidservant, when they contended with me.

Thus without blemish in my reputation,
I always lived, and never deviate
From Virtues narrow road: and, as with hate
I still rejected all incontinence.
So in the peace of a good Conscience,
I lived secure, whilst I administrate
Both in my public, and my private state,
Justice to all men: for to the meanest slave
Within my Walls, I Would the same way behave
In point of right, when they would to me complain
Of any wrong, as to the greatest men
In The Country, in their suits, and after all,
I thought it but my duty. --
For in my mind I often considered 14. What then shall I do when God rises up,
and when he visits what shall I answer him.

That those poor slaves, though they by Law were made
My servile Subjects, yet both they and I
Were subject to that King who sits on high
That Supreme Judge, who deals impartially
With all men..
So that if I during my eminence,
To any of these men had done offense;
Had I refused to hear their exclamations,
Or of their wrongs refused them reparations;
Had I abused that authority,
Which I had over those wretches, what could I,
Pray what could I with reason have expected
Might be my doom? for if I had neglected
My duty to the meanest here below,
Or e're denied them justice, even so
When God in justice against me should proceed,
I might my sin then in my judgment read.
For with my self, my friends, I always thought 15 Did not he that made me
make him? and did not one tashion us in the womb?

That though those men I had with Money bought,
And so by Law had power of life and death
Over them all, and might have in my wrath
Killed them, like beasts, yet these poor souls were men,
As well as I, and that a time was, when
Those now distinguished by Law, and I
Did undistinguished in the belly ly.
For in the womb what the Almighty frames
This only Man, and that he Woman names:
No more distinction there: no in that Cell
Without Precedence all as Brethren dwell;
There is no Master, there is no Servant there;
For in the sight of God all do appear
But as one Plastic matter, out of which
His mighty hand does form both poor and rich.
He whom the world does honorable name,
And he whom mean, and base, is there the same.
There Is no such thing there, as we birth do call,
For there is but one birth in to the Original,
One common source, from whence we trindle all.
Though as we daily see how from one spring
Several petty Rivers issuing,
Swollen up by other Rivers in the stream,
Do purchase to themselves a lofty name.
So the poor aerie notion of blood,
Though in the fountain barely understood
To be one species (what so e're esteem
The applause of men put on it in the stream)
As it in several Veins scaturiats,
Is valued by the Worlds Book of Rates.
Which slights the Fountain, but respects the Streams,
And this Blood base, and that Blood Noble names.
But in the Mass there is no difference,
No formal quality, no excellence.
Nor even in the stream can sharpest eye
Perceive a Physical disparity
'Twixt this, and to other Blood, for all appear
Of the same color all are equal there:
Yes, let a Princes, and a Peasants Veins
Be Launc'd together, there is no difference
Betwixt the two: for both of them to the eye
Appear to be of a bright Scarlet dye.
Only as Iron, Copper, Lead, or Brass,
Esteemed but base Metals in the Mass.
Are soon, by Princes orders raised as high,
As Gold in value: and do signify
As much in Commerce, and in Bargains go,
At no less rate if they will have it so.
Even so a Princes favor, when it shines,
On this, or 'tother Blood, in direct Lines,
It raises soon the value of the thing,
And this, or 'tother Blood to hight does bring.
Which were as mean as others in the spring.
Yet let me tell you, in a sober sense,
I truly think there is great difference
Betwixt that Blood stamped by a Prince, and that,
On which unspoted Virtue sets a rate,
The first, like vapors by the Sun exhaled
From Lakes, and Ditches, justly may be called,
Which do not firmly in the Clouds remain,
But quickly either in Hail, Snow, or Rain,
Do from their stations tumble down again.
For as by Princes smiles, that Blood was raised,
So by their frowns, it is as soon debased.
Their anger taints that current in a tryce;
On which their favor lately set a price,
Which now diverted from its former course,
Appears as low, and cheap as in the source.
But that by virtue raised, we may compare
To Elemental waters, which do there
Dwell, with a firm design of remanence,
And are not easily to be pumped thence.
For that by virtue raised, cannot be stained,
So long as that its motion does attend,
Which gave its Being: and through Princes wrath,
The owner of that Blood may bring to death,
Yet still it lives in his Posterity,
And runs in the Channel of a Memory,
For Virtue's only true Nobility.
Then where is the man, that boasts of Noble Race*
Can he his Blood from other Fountain trace,
Then that of the Womb, in which the poorest slave,
Who has no foot of Earth besides his Grave,
Has as much interest, as he, and can
Derive his Line from the ancient House of Man,
As well as those, who, with great vanity,
Can point the series of their Family.
O then, what fools must these be understood,
Who void of Virtue, only boast of Blood!
Who think their Birth affords them liberty,
Beyond the vulgar, in all villainy,
And sin according to their quality.
Sure these must be the worst of men, sure these
Of humane blood must be the very lees:
Yet such there are, and such will always be,
Who by the fable of their Pedigree,
Make way through every sin, as if, what shame
Forbids the Vulgar, were allowed to them.
And when they have made a way in luxury,
Their own Estates, then do they by, and by,
Practice new arts, and fall on several ways,
How they may live, and waste some foolish days,
Though they at last should beg from door, to door,
Yet whilst they can, they feed upon the poor.
Why now should all these men of quality,
Consider, but sometime, as well as I,
Have always done, that as we all do flow
From the head fountain of the Womb, even so
When we in streams have squandred here, and there
Where, in the eyes of the world, we do appear,
One raised in value far above another,
And now disdain to give the name of Brother,
To such as are indeed as good as we,
In the eves of God: not dreaming we shall see
Those Monuments of our low Birth once more,
In the same rank with us, as we before
Have seen, why after all, alacc, we find,
We Are all but Dust, all of one common kind.
For in our pride, when we have run our course,
As once we lay together in the source,
So Noble, Base, and Mean, all die as men,
And in the Grave we poorly meet again.
And then brave Blood! thou quaint device of men!
How will thou rank thy Lineages then!
Pray, what will be thy value, what thy rate,
When in the Grave we are all incorporate:
When in the cloisters of Mortality,
As in the Womb we undistinguished ly,
What Is then the use of thy vain Heraldry
All poor, and low, all naked there appear,
And we know none of thy distinctions there.
Then why should I have done the least offense,
To any Creature, who in Natures sense,
Is of as good Extraction, and as dear,
Does in Gods sight, as I my felf appear.
These were my thoughts, these were my meditations, 16. If I have withheld the
poor from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail.

These were my reasons, which at all occasions,
Moved me for all men, to have Charity:
So that with no man I dealt cruelly.
But, on the contrair, when the poor man's cause
Was ruined by the rigor of the Laws;
(As often it happens) their severity.
I Would temper with some grains of equity,
And do him all the favor I could do
With a safe Conscience: the poor widow too,
Whose Cause before me lay, I Would cheerfully
Assist: and to period speedily
Conduct her suit.
Nor was I less kind in my private state 17. Or have I eaten my morsel my self,
and the fatherless has not eaten thereof.

To all in want, for I would never eat,
Nor with contentment, take my daily fare,
Unless some Orphans with me had a share.
For from my youth I had great tenderness 18. For from my youth he was brought
up with me, as with a father, and I have guided her from my mothers womb.

Both for the Widow, and the Fatherless:
To these, when some Relations had refused,
And others of 'em craved to be excused
From being Tutors, I Would in Charity,
Take on my self the office of Tutory
Of these poor Creatures, though the administration
I knew would yield me nothing but vexation,
And that, --
When with great pains, I had recovered
Their squandred means, and in some fashion made
Provisions for them, when they came to be
Of age (though truly strangers all to me)
Why after all my toil, I might conclude,
To meet with nothing but ingratitude
From these my Pupills* as is ordinar,
For most of honest men who Tutors are,
Yet knowing well that men in Charity
Each others wants are obliged to supply,
Though with their own loss, an in such a case,
Had I refurd that Office to embrace,
Why those poor Orphans had become a prey
To every Petty-fogger, who'd betray
Their Pupills interest, and not care a whit,
To ruin them, for their own benefit,
That I might this prevent without regard
To the trouble of it, or my bad reward,
I never would refuse at all occasions
To take upon me such administrations.
But not to these alone my charity 19. If I have seen any p^^ish for want of
cloa^^ing, or any poor without covering.

Extended, whose weak pupularity
Did render them obnoxious to the tricks
Of all contriving Guardian Empyricks:
But even to those of age, whom poverty
Had hurried into want, and misery,
At all times I Would extend my charity.
I Would give them food, I Would give them raiment too,
And pensions out of my own stores allow
For their subsistence: so that I may say
With a safe Conscience, --
If ever mortal stood before my door,
Whom the only hand of God had rendered poor,
(For of such canting Rogues, as do oppress
The Country with a begging idleness,
I do not mean) but if e're he, I say,
Who truly merit Alms, did go away,
When begging at my door, without supply
Of both food and apparel, or did ly
Without my walls, in winters cold, and snow,
Naked, so far as ever I did know.
For on the contrare, I did with much care 20. If his ^o^nes have not blessed
me, and if he ^^re not warmed with the fleece of my sheep,

Clothing provide for those, who truly were
Objects of Charity, that every day
Those Creatures, for my well-being, would pray,
And when they on their Garments looked, would bless
The man who kindly clad them with his Fleece.
If ever I took pleasure to oppress, 21. If I have lift up my hand against the
fatherless, when I ^aw my help in the gate.

Or, in the least injure the fatherless,
By unjust suits: though by my influence
Upon the Judges, I might have from thence
Expected what I pleased, and they had been
Well pleased to favor me, though they had seen
On my side flat injustice: yet would these
Jump over the belly of the Laws, to please
So great a man as I was: no, my friends,
I scorned to use my power for such bad ends,
I did abhor such shifts, and did detest
Those sneaking Judges, who would dar to wrest
Justice, to favor any man, or bend
The bow of Law so high, to please a friend.
If ever then, I say, I did practice 22. Then ^et mine arm fall from my
shoulder bla^^, and mine (...) be broken from the bone.

Such unjust courses, or did make a prize
Of any Orphan, as I might have done
In former times, had I been such an one,
As I Have been represented, when my state
Was high, and powerful, thus I imprecate,
If I be guilty of such villainy,
Then let this arm you see be instantly
*Torn from my shoulder, let the flesh anon
In a foul Gangreen rot off from the bone.
For why should I, who firmly did believe, 23. For destruction from God, was ^
terror to me, and by reason of his highness. I could not endure.

The eye of God did all men's ways perceive,
And that, that God, who surely hears the cry
Of all oppressed, will undoubtedly
In his good time, upon such wicked men,
Death, and Destruction, plentifully rain.
Why, my good friends, should I who stood in awe,
Of his great Power, have violate his Law:
No, no, I knew my Maker was too high
To be out-brav'd by such a one as I,
And therefore I such practices forbore,
Through fear of him: and truly did abhore
All unjust dealings, that I might comply
In all my actings with that Majesty,
Who is all justice, and pure equity.
Again, because I did my self persuade, 24. If I have made gold my ho^^, or
have said to ^^ne gold thou art my confidence.

Gold was the root of every thing that is bad;
And that the love of Riches did entice,
The best of men to be in love with vice;
(For he, whose Soul does in his Coffers dwell,
With Bag, and Baggage, marches straight to Hell.)
For this cause, when in wealth I did abound,
And my huge riches made a mighty ^ound
Amongst my neighbors, I would never rate
My happiness by the bulk of my Estate.
No, no, I looked on all I did enjoy
Not worth my thoughts, nor would I e're employ
The least part of my time in valuing
My self in that contentment Gold does bring:
For, though as much as many I possess't,
Yet on that dust my spirit did not rest,
I never looked on it as a sure defense
Against misery, nor placed my confidence
In that weak Rampart, as if all my store,
(Although I had possessed some ten times more)
Had e're been able to withstand one hour,
The Battery of Divine Wrath.
No, no* what is all, that we on Earth possess,
Our Lands, our Stores, our Money, what, alace,
Do all these triffles signify when wrath
From Heaven assault us! or approaching Death
Hangs out his bloody Flag, and bids us soon
Yield up our Fortress, or he will throw it down.
O where are all our Stores, and Treasures then!
Where all our Wealth, which with much toil, and pain,
We'd had reared up, as a most sure defense
Against all troubles! where is that confidence,
Which in our countenance did before appear,
Where Is all our hope! where all our courage! where
Are all our mighty Allies, where is all
The valor of our boasting Mineral!
Oh, where is all its force when death appears,
And we are invested by an host of fears!
Nay, where are they, when Heavens King in wrath,
Against their master does his Sword unsheath,
Why, these same peaceful Warriors as soon,
As they perceive the enemy take down
Their glorious Ensigns, pack up all anon,
And in a moment they are fled, and gone,
Leaving their hopeless master all alone.
Tendure the Siege.
O brave Assistants! O stout Legionaries!
O hopes of men! O firm Auxiliaries!
Who make your owners foolishly believe
You can do wonders, when they do perceive,
What glorious show you make in time of peace,
But dar not look an enemy in the face.
Who then would trust to those same cowardly troops,
In time of trouble? who would place their hopes
In such a crew of aerie painted things,
Which we call riches! Creatures that have wings;
And on the high boughs of prosperity
Do sweetly chirp, but when adversity
Begins to fire, away like smoke they fly.
In such vain things then would I never trust,
Nor valued them more then as useful dust,
By which we live with some convenience,
But in them never would place my confidence.
Because I knew such empty things as these, 25. ^f I rejoiced because my (...)
^^cause mine hands had gotten much.

Were only the Concomitants of Peace:
And when afflictions winds began to roar,
In rising Billows signified no more,
Then wicker anchors, hausers made of dust,
Or Ropes of Feathers, in which none would trust.
Therefore, my friends, I never valued
My self, upon what I had purchased:
I never thought I should be more esteemed,
*Cause I was rich, or should be happy named,
Because in plenty: or 'cause Means encreass't,
To be repute above my neighbors bless't;
Or, because wealthy, that I lived in ease:
No, I knew always better things, then these
I knew indeed, and to this hour I know,
There Is nothing more ridiculous here below,
Nothing more silly, nothing more absurd,
Nothing more indiscreet: yea, in a word,
Nothing more wilfully irrational,
Amongst us mortals, then for men to call
This, or that Person Prudent, Knowing, Wise,
Only because he is rich, and to despise
Others, 'cause poor, and say they have no wit,
Because they have not reaped such benefit
In their transactions, as those others have,
And so by each man's success do conceive
He Is wise, or foolish. Whereas commonly,
The first are men of small sagaci^^e,
Dull, and Phlegmatic, and the latter are
Often in parts, and prudence singular.
For God has ordered, in his Providence,
It should be so, that men may learn from thence
The Art of contentment, whilst they seriously
Observe, with what discreet variety,
He does bestow his Gifts, Knowledge to these,
Wealth to these others: and that none possess
All blessings upon Earth: for he whom Wealth
Does crown with plenty, usually of health
Is destitute; whilst he whom poverty
Puts to sad pinches, with his Family,
Enjoys it fully* he whom parts adorn
Is despicably poor, and laugh't to scorn,
By those whom Means have rendered boldly proud,
Whil^^ of rich fools the world does talk aloud,
As the only wise men. To some he allows
Wealth without issue, others he endows
With a fair Offspring: but scarce competence
For feeding of 'em with convenience.
To others he gives both, but thinks not fit,
TO enrich them with a treasury of wit:
And all that God to us would signify,
By this remarkable variety
Of Dispensations is undoubtedly
This only. -- --
That since all blessings do from him alone
Proceed, and that it is in the power of none
To become masters of these qualities,
And be Rich, Fruitful, full of Health, and Wise,
Or to attain by toil, or strength of art,
That which he only freely does impart,
To whom he will, that men may not be proud
Of what to them is by his Grace allowed,
Nor boast of any prosperous condition,
Which cannot be said to be their acquisition.
Besides, if we'll but think how mean esteem
God has for Riches, we will quickly blame
That vulgar apprehension, which does pitch,
Its silly slubbering fancy on the rich;
Who generally are but men of base,
Unworthy, and unhallowed Principles,
Men of mean spirits, and deceitful hearts,
Great Master of the most pernicious arts
Of couz'ning, and oppression: men of wealth,
Termed by the world, because by cunning stealth
They Have raised Estates: men they are seldom bred
In any Learning, scarce entitled
To moral virtue: men who take no pleasure
In any Science, but upon their treasure
Do fix their Souls: and yet dare do no more,
Then with devout eyes, gaze upon their Ore,
But thinks't a sin to touch that sacred score.
Hence those poor Silkworms, with great toil, and pain,
Spin out their Bowels, to make orhers gain:
Not living, mean time, on the precious fruit
Of their own Labors (which without dispute,
Is none of theirs,) on Leaves they meanly feed.
And 'midst their riches are half-famished,
They Are men, whose sordid labors have no end,
For when great store of riches they have gained,
They vex themselves no less in the tuition,
Of these sad toys, then in their acquisition.
For there is a certain Idol, on which all
Those Sons of Earth do every moment call
An Idol by these had in great esteem,
Which in their phrase security they name,
This they with vows, this they with offerings load,
This is their patron, this their household god:
Yet that security they can never find,
For all their art, in which their troubled mind
Does fully rest, for still some point does lake,
Of this, or 'tother evident to make
A complete Right, and sure establishment
Of what these men, have purchased, or lent.
So on they go in all the Chicanries,
Which their well hired Scriv'ners can devise
To make it out: though to make them secure,
Many an honest Fam'ly should endure
Great want, and hunger, for they seize on all
Their Debtors means, and constantly do baule
About the Courts of Justice, for supply
Of legal Forces; for security,
Of what they have seized, whilst in a modest sense,
They call these rascally actings diligence.
They Are men, whose riches one would apprehend,
'Bove want had raised them, so as they might spend
Their days in peace, without all anxious cares,
Yet are they night-mar'd with continual fears,
That all their wealth may be before they die,
Converted to a scene of poverty;
Or if their treasures they entire should save,
And never bid them farewell, till the Grave
Should shroud them from their sight, yet still their fear
Increases, and they anxious appear,
In all their looks, for still they fear at least,
Their idle Heirs may prodigally waste
In a few years, what they in many gained,
And that dear wealth luxuriously spend;
Which they had purchased with much sweat, and toil,
That wealth, they fear, shall now become the spoil
Of Whores, and Gamesters: hence most anxiously,
They waste their days, in great perplexity,
How they should mould, and order their affairs,
That they may from the rapine of their Heirs,
Preserve their Means. Besides, although they are
For most part without issue, yet their care
Is not a whit the less, then that of these
Whose gaping mouths; but not their Means increase,
For then they are tortured with anxieties,
How their Estates they firmly may devise,
And answer all men's importunities,
Who do expect. --
At length when they have cruciat their brain,
In settling on it, and over, and over again,
Have formed their Wills, vexed with a thousand fears,
Not knowing whom to institute their Heirs:
Whilst all their friends, and languishing relations,
Do feed themselves with aerie expectations,
And by their several interests do strive,
To be their Heirs, whilst they are yet alive;
Age, and diseases creeping on apace,
Makes them in haste resolve upon the case,
They make some deeds, and all to these transmit,
Who least expected: yet for all their wit,
It often e^lls out, the deeds, which they cause draw
At such times in formality of Law
Are defective: so that they are hardly cold,
When the Tables being opened, some lay hold
On this, or 'tother clause: hence angry Pleas
Burst out on all hands, and each one does seize
On what he can: suits are commenced, and all
The disappointed to their actions fall:
With heat, and clamor each of 'em pretends
His Title to it, and what Gold, and Friends
Can do is then essayed: much time is spent,
In their loud pleadings, many an argument
Is shot on all hands: whilst they do debate,
Like fools, and children, with great noise, and heat,
For the possession of a fools Estate.
At last, when with such bauling wearied,
And by their actions much impov'rished,
All those, who are concerned incline to treat,
And their expense begin to calculat,
They find that Lawyers, Proctors, Scriviners,
And Clerks, not they, have been the truest Heirs
Of the poor Mole: and that which now remains,
Scarce countervails their loss of time, and pains.
These are your rich-men now, these are the men
Whom you call wise, of whom scarce one of ten,
As I Have observed, do either live, or die,
Like men of wit, and judgment, these are they
Whom the world esteem; though neither happy, wise,
Nor learned, nor moral; whilst they do despise
All that are owners of those qualities,
Because perhaps they are poor. --
O, partial world, that puts no other rate.
On men, but by the weight of their Estate!
Who from thy unjust scales record'st no more,
Then only this man's rich, and that man's poor.
Who naked virtue slights, and puts a price,
At all occasions, upon gilded vice:
Allowing naught for value, though men do
By daily commerce, in the weight allow
A fifth part less, to fine Wares in the pound,
Then to course Ware; but riches make a sound,
And proudly triumph all the world around.
Hence are their owners held in great esteem,
Though of small parts, whilst men the poor do name
But fools, and dunces, though these do possess
Within their breasts, more solid happiness,
Then riches can afford, and generally
Are men of Virtue, Learning, Piety:
Men of true solid Knowledge, men of Wit,
Men, who do reap more lasting benefit,
In The product of one single contemplation,
Reduced thereafter into conversation,
By art and prudence in the application,
Then rich, laborious Spiders do possess
In The thoughts of all their Cobweb-purchase*
Yet all rich men, my friends, I do suppose
Are not of this kind: no, I mean of those
Only, who set their souls upon their dust,
And in their changeling riches put their trust.
For I know many, who great means possess,
Yet as the least part of their happiness,
They do esteem them; but as piously
They live, so with contentment, when they die,
They leave their means to their posterity.
Nay such, as waste their profitable years,
Without a mixture of some worldly cares,
Pleasing themselves with things of the present tense,
And lay up nothing for convenience,
In their old age: nor labor to entertain
Their Fam'lies by some sober, lawful gain;
If it be in their power; though men of parts,
Of Virtue, Knowledge, Literature, and Arts,
I hold for Fools, and Sinners: I confess
I never was in love, with Idleness,
In any man; nor do I think it just
Men should live idly, and pretend they trust
In Providence; no, there is great difference,
'Twixt trusting in, and tempting Providence.
For, though, at first, the Almighty did demise
To man this vast, and spacious superfice
Of The Earth, to have, and hold it for his use;
That without manuring, it might produce
All that the state of Humane Life required
Or the interest of Society desired,
Yet was this noble Grant original
Quickly renvers'd, and cancelled by the Fall;
For now perceiving that such affluence
Was inconsistent with man's innocence
After the forfaulture in Paradise,
On other terms, he did this Earth devise
To the sons of men, that it should yield them naught,
But what with labor, and great toil they bought.
Hence it is if any man should think to obtain
The good things of this Earth, without some pain,
For all his Virtue, Wit, and Literature,
It Is just that by a second forfaulture,
His portion of this Earth he should amit,
And be condemned to live upon his Wit,
'Cause contrair to the tenor of his Grant,
He does not labor to supply his want.
As you have heard me then impartially
Discourse of that stupendous vanity,
Which we call Wealth: I hope you will believe
My friends, that I, when Rich, did not conceive
My self the happier cause I did possess
Those things, which only Fools call Happiness.
No, for if I could in Prosperity,
Have only bragged of Riches, certainly
Then had I merit in all just men's eyes
TO have been thought neither happy, just, nor wise.
And now, my friends, since you have patiently 26. If I beheld the sun, when it
shined, or the moon walking in brightness.

Heard an account of my Morality,
In the next place, I must request of you
To hear the account of my Religion too:
That when I Am gone, you freely may declare
These passages of me, which now you hear,
And, as good men, your justice testify,
At least in showing how you heard me die:
That the unjust World at length may be ashamed
To have me without Reason so defamed:
From such just men, as you, I do expect
No less; to you therefore I shall direct,
My full, but last Confession of Faith,
That, if not in my life, yet after death
Has stopped my mouth, when you hear any speak,
Of your deceased friend, with disrespect,
You may assure them, I was no such man,
As I was represented: nay you can,
(If you believe what I now speak is true)
You can, I say that Argument pursue,
With so much Candor, Art, and Eloquence,
As you may soon persuade all men of sense
How much I Have been abused, how much injured
By bloody Tongues, and they may be assured
That all the ill things they have heard of me,
When I Have been censured in a high degree
By foul-mouthed Tiplers, 'have been only Lies,
Unjust Reproaches, and base Calumnies.
First then, my friends, I since my Infancy,
Firmly believed, that from Eternity
There was one God, who all things did create,
One only God; whose Power does regulate
The universal World in Sovereignty,
And does by a Supreme Authority
Give Laws to all: and save that God alone,
Man of a Woman born should worship none.
And therefore those, that did the Sun adore,
The Moon, or Stars, I truly did abhore.
Nay, though those splendid Creatures I esteemed 27. And my heart has been
secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand.

Beyond all others, which his hands had framed,
Yet were those glorious parts of the Creation
Only the subject of my admiration,
But not of my devotion: for indeed
As in a Picture, I in these would read
The immense Power of him, whose mighty hand
At first did mould them, by whose sole command
They did exist; and to this Power obey
Their first directions: whilst the Sun by day,
The Moon, and Stars by night the World survey,
By his sole order, and acknowledge none
For their Superior, but Heavens King alone.
Hence would I look on them with admiration,
But at no time, with secret veneration,
Only as those at Court a leg will make
TO the Princes Servants, for their Masters sake:
So when I Would see the Sun, at morning rise,
With great devotion, I would turn my eyes
To the East, and with uplifted hands, confess
Gods greatness, and my own unworthiness,
TO approach the Throne of that bright Deity,
Who keep'd such servants in his Family,
As was that Creature, in one single beam
Darting more splendour, then all those we name
Kings here on Earth, with all their glorious shows,
Patched up in one can on the World impose.
Again, when I this Creature could espy
Shining at Noon-tyde in his Majesty;
Then would my soul fly out in admiration,
Of him, who is Author of the whole Creation,
When such a member of it in its Sphere
So worthy admiration does appear,
And through that glorious Prospect I Would descry
The beauty of the Divine Majesty-
As at great distance. When again at night
I Would see it from the World withdraw its light,
Then would I think, what is all our glory here,
When even the illustrious Sun, which did appear
In stately splendour, but some hours ago,
Is now extinct, with all it pompous show.
Then, when I Would see the Moon, and Stars draw out,
Like the Night-watch, and walk the Round about
This spacious Globe; I Would think, O what must he,
Who entertains such Guards, what must he be!
What must he be, to whom those glorious things,
Perform such service! sure he is King of kings:
For there is no Prince on Earth, with all his power
That can command those Forces, for one hour
To stop their march: nay not the Sun by day,
Nor in the night will Moon, and Stars obey
Their Edicts, but proceed in their Carreer,
And on their duty still by turns appear,
As their instructions from their Master bear.
Thus, for respect to him, who these did frame, 28. This also were an iniquity
to be punished by the judge, for I should have denied the God that is above.

Which, as so many Heralds do proclaim
His Glory far, and wide; at all occasions,
I Would honor them with pious Contemplations,
As Servants of that Heavenly Majesty,
Under whose feet all things created ly:
And by the splendour of such things, as these
I would the glory of their Maker guess;
As Artists, by Proportions Rules will show
The Bodies bulk, by measure of the Toe.
But, all my lifetime, I would never allow
To any of 'em that honor, which is due
To God alone: though such Idolatry
Were not by Law repute Grand Felony.
Hence in this God alone I put my trust, 29. If I rejoiced at the destruction
of him that hated me, or lift up my self when evil found him.

And 'cause he was impartially just:
When any one did me an injury,
To him alone I would my self apply.
I never was vindictive, never knew
That humor, which is but unknown to few,
That prompts men to revenge: I Would never strive
TO encroach upon his high Prerogative,
To whom alone Revenge does appertain,
But would (shut up in patience) remain:
Until that God did think it proper time
For him to punish, and revenge the Crime.
Yea though my cruel Enemies, God knows, 30. Neither have I suffered my mouth
to sin, by wishing a curse to his soul.

Would every day, when from their Bed they rose,
Bitterly curse me, and my Family
Instead of Morning Prayer, yet would not I
Though these did hate me, as I hate the Devil,
To their unguarded souls wish any evil.
Nay though my followers, when they would perceive 31. If the men of my
tabernacle said not, O that we had of his flesh* we cannot be satisfied.

How much I was injured: would truly grieve
To see my usage, and at all occasions
Would own my Quarrel with dire imprecations,
And often wish it were to them allowed
To take revenge, angry they were withstood
By my commands: and often would repeat,
Would we had of those Villains flesh to eat,
Who have injured our Master, we would make
Those Slaves a bloody Victim for his sake.
Yet would I never consent, I Would never agree
That ever man should take revenge for me:
But on the contrair I would pardon those
Who wronged me, were they even my greatest Foes:
I never on revenge would meditate,
Nor thought my self obliged at any rate,
To quarrel those, who did me injuries,
Which rather then resent I would despise.
But O I took delight in Charity. 32. The stranger did not lodge in the
streets, but I opened my door to the traveller.

By taking always opportunity
TO assist all Persons, whom I knew to be
In want, as often as they applied to me.
The wearied Traveller, whose lean Purse did shrink
Below the credit of a cup of Drink;
Whose Visage, and Apparel looked so thin,
He was a very Bugbear to an Inn:
All destitute, or'edaub'd with Dust, and Sweat,
Ready to take up lodgings in the Street;
Into my House I Would always kindly take,
And entertain him, for his Makers sake.
Now though those Virtues did possess my breast, 33. If I c^^ered my
transgression as Adam, by hiding my iniquity in my bosom.

And I all sinful courses did detest:
Yet, if at any time, I Would chance to fail,
And some strong sin against me did prevail
Then would I not my Conscience abuse,
By framing of some pitiful excuse:
As once poor Adam did to extenuate
The error, which he could not pailiate:
No no, such stale devices I abhorred,
And therefore, when I failed, I Would in a word,
Upon my knees, with hands uplifted, cry,
Lord I have sinned: Lord I have wilfully
Incurred thy anger at this sad occasion,
And so deserve to bear thy indignation.
For, trust me, such as freely do confess
Their sins, and with an open heart address
Themselves to God, are always better heard,
Then those, whose cautious Mouths, as if affear'd
TO accuse their Hearts, do mincingly declare
What hardly they desire that God should hear.
And here, my friends, I must again protest, 34. Did I fear a great multitude,
or did the contempt of families terrify me, that I kept silence, and went not
out of the door.

I don't remember ever in my breast,
Such sinful thoughts did entertainment find,
As those, to which too many are inclined.
For (trust me now) though I in Wealth, and Power
Did live for many years, yet to that hour
That God was pleased to visit me, I never
Would use that Power, on what account soever,
To the prejudice of any man, although,
Had I inclined to have used my Neighbors so,
As others did, I might have done with ease,
What ever might a rich man's humor please.
For I to others could have given Law
And made all in my District, stand in aw;
Yet I Would not injure the most despicable,
Nor do offense to the meanest of the Rabble.
But what needs more! O now that God would hear 35. O that one would hear me,
behold my desire is that the Almighty would answer me, and that mine adversary
had written a book.

What I have spoke: O that he would declare,
From what I have expressed in my defense,
His just opinion of my Innocence.
O that my God would hear me, O that he
Who knows Hearts-secrets would declare me free,
From those Aspersions, Lies, and Calumnies
Thund'red against me, by my Enemies.
For O should he a hearing once allow,
I Would laugh at these, and all their Libels too.
Nay let them write a Volumn, if they will
Yes, let them rail, and article their fill:
Let them paint out my actings, as they please,
And break my reputation by degrees:
Let them me Rogue, let them me Villain call,
Let God but hear me, I Would contemn them all.
For all, what these invidious men could say 36. Surely I would take it upon my
shoulder, and bind it as a crown to me.

Against me, in their wrath, should in the day
That God should hear me, prove for my defense,
And, stead of sullying, clear my Innocence:
For then their malice should it self declare
And in its own true Colors should appear: 37. I would declare unto him the
number of my steps, as a Prince would I go nigh unto him.

But to my Judge I freely could confess
My hidden sins: and for the sins, which these
Lay to my charge; I Would give such evidence
Before him of my injured Innocence,
As I should by him be acquit from thence.
O let him hear me then, let God but hear
My Case himself, and then I do not fear
What all the World can say: for I do still
Assert my Innocence, (take it as you will.) 38. If my land cry against me, or
that the furrows likewise complain.

And now, my friends, that I may put an end
To my Discourse, because I apprehend
You Are weary now of hearing, as indeed
I am of speaking: I shall therefore plead
No more upon the case: but once for all,
My great Creator I to witness call;
That what I have professed, dear friends, to you,
Is not at all devised, but simply true.
For all my life, I safely may assert,
Before that God, who fully knows my heart;
That, to my knowledge, truly I did never,
In what state, or capacity soever,
Do any unjust thing: for to this day,
(What e're men speak) I can with freedom say,
If any man, who served me, can complain
That ever I his Wages did retain.
If of my ground the increase I have eat, 39. If I have eaten the fruits
thereof without money, or have caused the owners thereof to lose their life.

Without first paying for the toil, and sweat
Of those, who labored it, or in the least
Muzzled the mouths of either man or beast
Who did tread out my corns: or did refuse
At any time the laborers honest dues;
If ever I did strive to multiply
My Revenues by fraud and usury:
Then let those grounds (which I do yet expect 40. Let thistles grow in stead
of wheat, and cockle in stead of barley.

I may possess) be cursed for my sake:
Let Cockle, stead of Barley, stead of Wheat,
Let Thistles all my grounds emacerate.
Now I have done, my friends, shall add no more,
But once again, as I have done before,
I do conjure you by the love you owe
To your own souls, my dearest friends, although
You have no love for me; that you will declare
Hereafter to the world, what now you hear:
This favor I expect you will not deny
TO allow, for all that is past, to th'memory
Of one shriev'd by your selves, but boldly show
The abused world, more then as yet they know.
And tell that Job, whom even good men envied
Wicked men hated, and all now deride,
Of avarice, hypocrisy, and pride,
Did clear himself, and as he lived he died.
PART. IV.
Cap. XXXII.
AND now the long debate is at an end, 1. So these three men ceased to answer
Job, because he was righteous in his own eyes.

For the other three perceiving how their friend
Still unconvinc'd, himself did justify,
And would not pass from his integrity,
But that to every proof and evidence,
Which they adduc'd, to rouz his Conscience,
He still oppon'd his unstained innocence.
All over wearied, and perceiving now
'Twas but in vain to have any more to do
With one, who was beyond their reasoning,
Hence now all silent. --
As in some pleadings, you have, after all 2. Then was kindled the wrath of
Elihu, the son of Barachel the Buzzite, of the kindred of Ram, against Job his
wrath was kindled, because he justified himself rather then God.

Have spoke, observed th'Actorney-General
Resume the series of the whole debate,
And in good order recapitulate
Both Parties Arguments, and then declare
Wherein, in his opinion both do err,
And where agree with Law: so after these
And Job at large had argued the case:
One, who had sit by all the while, and heard
All that had past, but had not yet appeared
In the debate, one Elihu by name,
A pious young man, of the house of Ram,
Descended, as is thought of Nahors race,
Residing not far distant from the place
Where Job did live: come hither to condole
As well, it seems, as the others: this man's Soul
Enraged at what he heard both Parties speak,
Resolves at length to tell his mind, and check
Both of 'em for their errors: and first here
Begins with Job, because he did appear
To justify himself, and usually
Would in his passion ask a reason why
He was afflicted thus, as if that he
Had known no sin, had been from error free;
And God, whom he with fervency and zeal,
Had always served, now had not used him well:
But laid him low, and so by consequence
He was unjust in whipping innocence.
Next at his three friends he was angry too, 3. Also against his three friends
was his wrath kindled, because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned
Job.

'Cause they had all this while kept such ado,
With long discourses, edged with eloquence,
And argued with great heat, and violence,
Against a man, whom God had visited
With sorrows, as if he had merited
Those evils, by his sins: yet after all,
They could not prove that he was Criminal
Of what they did accuse him; but indeed
Did rather for him, then against him plead.
Because with all their painted Allegories,
Their pitiful, and often repeated Stories,
Of great men's down-falls; and the Tragical
Exits of those, whom the world does happy call:
They were so far from proving what they aimed,
As he admired such men were not ashamed
To so small purpose to have argued,
When he observed to all that he had said,
The Afflicted man had with such gravity,
Such polished reason, and solidity,
So wisely, and discreetly answered,
As they had not yet any progress made
In what they undertook, nor could they prove
That he was one found guilty from above.
Yet had all three concluded he was such
As those great men of whom they talked too much.
Now this same Elihu, this knowing Youth 4. Now Elihu had waited till Job had
spoken, because they were elder then he*

Sat silently not opening of his mouth,
During the whole Debate, and with attention,
Had heard them speak, what in his apprehension,
Might have been spared: yet would not undertake
To interrupt them, whilst they yet did speak,
In reverence to their Age, and that true sense
Of things afforded by experience,
With which he thought those men were richly stored,
And therefore, whilst they argued, not one word
Upon the Subject from his mouth did fall,
Though in his mind he kept record of all.
But now that Job his last Discourse had ended, 5. When Elihu saw that there
was no answer in the mouth of these three men, then his wrath was kindled:

And he, with patience, had some time attended,
To see if any of 'em would answer make,
That not succeeding, as he did expect,
In indignation, he began to speak.
I Am young, says he, it is true, and you are old, 6. And Elihu the son of
Barachel the Buzite answered, and said, I am young, and you are old, wherefore
I was afraid, and durst not show you my opinion.

On which account I durst not be so bold,
Whilst you persisted in your reasoning,
To give you my opinion of the thing:
But now, that I perceive you at a Bay,
And it appears you have no more to say;
Not knowing further, as the Case does stand,
How to pursue the Argument in hand:
And that Jobs Reason's strong. yours low, and weak
I think it is high time for me to speak.
For, truth, I with the Vulgar, had esteem 7. I said, days should speak, and
multitude of years should teach wisdom.

For every Formal Fop, that bore the name
Of solid Judgment hudled up in years,
And had a great respect for Silver hairs.
But now I see, now I perceive at last, 8. But there is a spirit in man, and
the inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding.

(Reflecting seriously on what is past,)
The fallacy of this Vulgar Error, now
I clearly see, what it is to have to do
With men of reason; who, as well appears,
Are not to be out-brav'd by boasting years.
Now I perceive, what we Experience call
And aged Judgment, is mere cous'nage all.
For when it is brought to the Test, and we expect
Our gray-hair'd Sires, like Oracles should speak,
And utter nothing, but grave Sentences;
In you, my friends, I Have seen, I do profess
Nothing but a tenacious wilfulness.
For I Have observed, with how much heat, and passion
You spoke, and used but little moderation
In your Discourse: which, if I may divine,
The Judgment, by the Tongue, is no good sign
Of real wisdom: and I now conceive,
That we of younger years, are made believe,
Old men, to be the only men of sense,
Because enriched with long experience,
And that no man, while old can become wise,
Merely by th'unperceived artifice
Of bare Tradition: as the idle tales
Of Fairies, and Hobgoblins, or what else
Good women, to affright their babes devise
Do pass for truths, though little more then lies.
No, trust me, wisdom is not purchased
By length of days, nor can a man be said
To be an owner of that quality,
Which we call wisdom, or solidity,
Only because of his antiquity.
Alace, you are deceived, if you think so,
For, by what I have learned, I tell you no.
I tell you no, -- for I am confident,
There is a Spirit, which from Heaven is sent
Into our Breasts, by which we learn to know,
What all our toil, and labor here below
Cannot attain: for (to be plain with you)
I always thought, but am confirmed now,
That wisdom is a spark of Divine flame,
A piercing glance of him whose hand did frame
The Universe: a most conspicuous sign
Of what we know, but cannot well define.
I think it one of those Celestial Rays,
Which neither does consist in years, nor days:
A thing that is not in a Sanguine air,
Or a brisque Mine, though one would think that there
Great Spirits lodged, nor in a serious eye,
Or sad deportment does this wisdom lie.
Nor in a dull, and slow phlegmatic sense,
Which does not yield the world much eloquence,
But by a forced frugality of speech,
Would make us think what is above its reach,
Were jealously shut up within its breast,
Whilst this wise thing, knows of all others least.
Nor in a sullen melancholy look,
Which seems to order all things by the Book,
And in all subtle Arts, and Sciences
Knows more, then it has language to express,
No, I think wit consists in none of these.
It Is neither in Earth, Water, Air, nor Fire,
But God alone, true wisdom does inspire.
It Is true, I know there is a rational,
And well prepared soul infused in all
The Race of Adam, by which they indeed
From other Creatures are distinguished:
And that this soul, which (being the same in all
The Sons of men,) we do a Spirit call:
May be by Art, and curious Industry
So much improved, and elevat so hye,
'Twill stoop to nothing, but Divinity:
Yet in that Spirit Wisdom does not dwell,
For there is a Spirit, that does yet excel
That Spirit; which we may call Divine Grace,
There, there true Wisdom has its dwelling place,
There it resides, and in that Spirit, God,
For man's instruction keeps his firm abode.
Hence those that are not furnished with this Spirit,
Let them all Learning, Parts, and Wit inherit:
Let them with stretches of a large dimension,
Exceed the reach of humane apprehension,
In their high, subtle notions: let them raise
Themselves beyond the faculty of praise,
Yea, let all men them wise, and prudent call,
Without this Spirit, they are but dunces all.
For don't we see how those, whom all esteem 9, Great men are not always wise,
neither do the aged understand judgment.

Prudent, learned, wise, and Politicians name
The great eyes of the world: the knowing things
Whom we call Statesmen, by whose wisdom Kings
Are ruled, who rule us all. --
When by their carnal wit, and policy,
Void of all grace, they labor foolishly,
To do great things; that thence they may attain
The reputation of contriving men,
When by their wit they make alliances
And break them too, to serve their purposes,
More then their Princes interest, for their zeal
Neither regards the Crown, nor Commonweal,
But their own ends, until the Princes eye
Begins to make some sharp discovery
Of their ill actings; then their wit appears,
Their great experience, and their length of years
To be mere folly, and they now too late
Do find that something not precogitate
Does lack, which would ha'made their wits complete
For now estranged from their Princes face,
They find their wisdom was not that of grace:
And now the poor discarded man of wit,
In solitude most pensively does sit,
Whilst with his former greatness he begins,
At once to call to mind his former sins:
And so concludes, for all his wit and art,
He was deceived by a deceitful heart,
Which made him still believe that without grace,
His parts would fully do his business;
But now he sees he is but a very fool,
A child, and yet but entering to the School
Of real wisdom: and endeavors now
In the short time he has with much ado
To know but even the Rudiments of that,
Which far transcends all gilded Rules of State.
Since wisdom then in years does not consist, 10. Therefore I said, hearken
unto me, I also will show my opinion.

Nor in high knowledge, (think you what you list)
For my part, I think one that has not yet
Attained to either, freely may debate
Upon a subject, where both young and old
Are equally concerned: I must be bold
To tell you then, of what you three have said,
And what our friend has spoke, that I have made
My own weak observations, and am now
Ready to show you, what I do allow,
What not, in all you have spoke. --
Then after all your learned reasoning,
Be pleased to hear my judgment of the thing.
Why then, my friends, during your long debate, 11. Behold I waited for your
words. I gave car to your reasons, whilst you searched out what to say.

I have observed your words, whilst you did state
The Question in hand, and eagerly
With all your art maintained the verity
Of your assertions: yet me thought, indeed
That all the while you never answered
The Arguments, which Job in his defense
Often adduc'd, to prove his innocence:
So well, and fully, as you might have done;
But that --
'Stead of refuting of what he maintained,
You rather fortin'd him, and have gained
Nothing as I perceive by this debate,
But rather seem by him to be defeat.
For when I had considered all you spoke, 12. Yea, I attended unto you, and
behold there was none of you that convinced Job, or that answered his words.

I found your reasons were but empty smoke:
And all your Arguments to me appeared
But a^ryknacks; for yet I have not heard
Any of you, for all your pungent wit,
In your discourse judiciously hit
Upon the point: as truth you should a'done,
And you shall hear how I shall do anon.
Then do not think that you have overcome 13. Lest you should say, we have
found out wisdom, God th^usteth him down, not man.

Job with your reasons, and have made him dumb
By force of argument, for what you said
That God was just, and only punished
Such as deserved; which you did all maintain
To be a maxim, and once, and again
Would urge it strongly, truth I take to be
A point debatable; because I see
No inconsistence 'twixt the equity
Of God th'afflicter, and th'integrity
Of him, who is afflicted; for I know
God keeps a many worthy persons low,
For their own good; whom we must not conceive
To be offenders, or with you believe
That none but such do suffer: at this rate
You Have argued all this while, but I shall state
The matter otherwise, and plainly show
That though this man were innocent, yet so
To bluster in his trial, and complain
Of his hard usage, as if he would arraign
The God of justice, for iniquity
Is such a fault as none can justify.
Now then, my friends, as I am not engaged 14. Now he has not direct his words
against me, neither will I answer him with your speeches.

In quarrel with this man; nor have I stag'd
My self his opposite: and with such heat,
As you have done, managed a long debate,
With one in his sad circumstances, so
I will not use your reasons, for I know
My friends distemper, and I will endeavor
By other means, then yours, to cure his fever.
Especially, because I now perceive 15. They were amazed, they answered no
more, they left off speaking.

You're silent, I have reason to believe
The heat of your sharp arguing now is spent,
And you will no more pursue your argument.
For I expected, that in such a case, 16. When I had waited, ^or they spoke not
but stood still and answered no more.

Your language with your reason would increase,
But now I see you're mute, and hold your peace.
I therefore think, it is now high time for me 17. I sard I will answer also my
part, I also will show my opinion.

To speak my thoughts, and let you plainly see
Your error in the subject, and defend
At least, in some points, our distressed friend.
For when my Makers honor lies at stake, 18. For I am full of matter, the
spirit within meconstraineth me.

If ever, I am now obliged to speak,
I Am now obliged to speak; because I find
The spirit within me bids me speak my mind.
For as new wine in Bottles does ferment, 19. Behold my belly is as wine, which
has no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles.

And quickly bursts, if it does find no vent,
So, if I speak not, what the spirit now,
In a well ord'red zeal does promp me too,
I doubt my mind with matter so replete,
Will force a passage, and expatiate
It self in some disorder, or at least,
My words will issue through my very breast.
That therefore to my numerous thoughts I may, 20. I will speak that I may be
refreshed, I ^^ll open my lips, and answer.

What e're be the event, make some speedy way,
And so refresh my spirits, I must speak,
Though possibly in such a dialect,
As will not please both parties, yet I must
Express my mind, and truth I shall be just
To all of you, and so far, as I can,
Avoid to give offense to any man.
But I must tell you that you may expect, 21. Let me not, I pray you, accept
any man's person, neither let me give flattering titles to man.

My mind I will impartially speak;
I Will flatter none of you, but will express
With freedom, what I think upon the case:
Without regard to this poor man, who lies
On Dunghill now, and whom all men despise,
Or you, who think your selves extremely wise.
For I could never to this hour persuade 22. For I know not to give flattering
titles, in so doing, my maker would soon ^ake me away.

My self on any terms to learn the trade
Of flattering, especially where
The Cause of God's in hand, for there, O there,
Without regard to men, I must be free,
As all of my Profession should be.
Else, if I should at any time forbear
To speak, what God commands me, out of fear,
Of any Earthly Power, or meanly shrink
At threats of any, I might justly think,
I were unworthy of that Character
Which all that speak by inspiration bear.
Cap. XXXIII.
WHerefore I pray thee, Job, but hear me now, 1. Wherefore Job, I pray thee,
hear my speeches, and hearken to all my words.

And to what I design to speak, allow
But some attention, and I shall commend
Thy Patience, if thou hear me to an end.
For now, dear friend, that I intend to speak 2. Behold now, I have opened my
mouth, my tongue has spoken in my mouth.

Upon thy Case, I will indeed expect
Attentive silence, whilst impartially
I both demonstrate where thy Errors ly,
And where thou have spoke right, for now I see
The whole weight of the Matter lies on me.
I therefore plainly do intend to show 3. My words shall be of the uprightness
of my heart and my lips shall utter knowledge clearly.

What I by certain information know:
Not what old Women feign, or old men dream,
Or what is scattered by injurious Fame
Through all the Neighborhood, on this occasion,
But openly, without dissimulation,
I Will show thee, what my thoughts are of the thing,
On which I have heard so much reasoning.
Now, though I am not far advanced in years, 4. The spirit of God has made me,
and the breath of the Almighty has given me life.

And neither Head, nor Face, as yet appears
In the grave dye of a few withered Hairs.
Yet I Am a Man, a Creature rational,
And know as much, as any of you all,
For that good Spirit, which did me create,
Has taught me both to speak, and to debate,
On such occasions; and I do not know
Why that Almighty God, who first did blow
On this poor lump of Clay, might not have then
Informed me full as well, as other men,
With that high Knowledge, and made me advance
Beyond my years, in what, with Arrogance,
Our aged Men would to themselves enhaunce.
Again, my friend, I Would have thee to give ear 5. If thou can answer me, set
thy words in order before me, stand up.

To what I speak, because I am not here
To take advantage of thy misery,
And tell thee in thy face, so bitterly,
As these thy friends have done, that thou art lost,
Undone, adjudg'd to Wrath, thy Doom engross't;
And that blessed Countenance, that Light divine,
Which on all those, whom God esteems does shine,
Is as to thee eclipsed, and will no more
Refresh thy Soul, as it has done before.
No, in such terms I Will not my self express,
Nor use such harsh reflections, as these
Upon thy bypast life; which if, or no
'Twas such as they allege, I do not know.
Nor will I check thee, when I hear thee speak
Of thy Integrity, or answer make
To what I charge thee, with firm Protestation,
Of thy unspotted Life, and Conversation.
No, thou shall have free liberty for me
To answer for thy self, thou may be free,
In what thou have to say in thy defense,
And openly lay out thy Innocence,
With all the art thou can: take courage then,
And be not overcome by what those men
Have spoke against thee: for I lay no hold
On their assertions; be thou therefore bold,
And speak out freely what in thy defense
Thou can allege, with all the eloquence,
God has afforded thee; be not afraid
Of mortal men, who usuallie upbraid
Their friends with sin, though near so innocent,
When they perceive them in this exigent,
As thou art now, for if thou truly be
Just, innocent, upright, from error free,
As thou seem to pretend, by all that is past,
Why should thou not stand to it to the last.
Yes, why should not stand to it, for what thou 6. Behold* I am according to
thy wish, in Gods stead. I also am formed out of the clay.

Have all this while desired is granted now:
Thou did desire that thou with God might plead,
Why do it now, for I am in his stead:
I have Commission from our Great Creator
To hear thee speak at large upon the matter:
Thou did desire that he would hear thy case,
Why then, imagine I am in his place,
Appointed as his Auditor, say then,
Speak out thy mind, be not afraid of men:
For I, although I bear the character
Of the Almighties High Commissioner,
Yet I am but a man, as thou art, made
Of dust, and clay, be not thou then afraid
That I will crush thee, or increase thy woe,
By screwing up thy doleful sorrows, no,
I will not use such methods, but appear
As soft, as if I whispered in thy ear.
I will not use thee, as thy friends ha'done, 7 Behold my terror shall not
make thee afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee.

Nor shall my Language in their Channel run:
Such picquant words, as they have spoke, shall be
In my speech on the subject far from me.
To tell thee freely then, I must complain 8 Surely thou have spoken in mine
hearing, and I have heard the voice of thy words, saying*

Of what I Have heard thee speak once, and again:
I must reprove thee for some rash Expressions,
Which thou have often used in thy Passions;
For, to my grief, my friend, I Have heard thee speak,
What from a wise man I did not expect.
O, said thou, I am clean, and innocent, 9 I am clean, without transgrassion,
I am innocent, neither is there iniquity in me-

Free of all sin, in Virtue eminent:
I know not what belongs to vice, not I,
Nor am acquainted with Iniquity.
Yet has my great Creator punished 10. Behold he finds occasions against me,
he counts me for his enemy.

Me no less, then if I had merited
Such Judgments by my sins: his Wrath has seized
Upon my very soul; and he is pleased,
'Stead of rewarding my Integrity,
To look upon me, as his Enemy:
'Has picked a Quarrel with me, and of late
'Has sore oppress't me, for I know not what.
For, as a Malefactor I am used, 11. He puts my feet in the stocks, he
marketh all my paths

Arrested, clap't i'th'Stocks, Arraigned, Accused,
Condemned, and Forfault, and yet all this time
He Will not let me so much as know my Crime.
Why here, it is now, here, my friend, indeed 12. Behold in this thou art most
just, I will answer thee, that God is greater then man,

Thou grossly err'st: and if thou do proceed
In such untain'd Expressions, as these,
Allow me, friend, to tell thee in thy face,
Were thou as upright, innocent, and just
As he, whom God did out of pregnant Dust
At first creat, before his foul Offense
Did stain the beauty of his Innocence:
Yet thus to talk, thus foolishly to prate,
Thus with thy Maker to expostulate,
As if he were thy Equal, is, my friend,
Such an escape, as no man can defend.
This is thy Crime, this is the Fault indeed,
Thus guiltily thy Innocence to plead;
Thus in asserting thy Integrity
T'accuse Heavens Monarch of Iniquity,
Who is all Justice: Pray what do thou mean,
Do think if thou be from all Error clean,
But he is far more clean; if thou be pure,
Upright, and just in all thy ways, why sure
He, who inspired thee, he who made thee live,
He, who to thee these Qualities did give
Must be more just, and upright, he must be
Far more then thou art, from all Error free.
And as he is just, so he is likewise great, 13. Why do thou strive against
him, for he gives not account of any of his matters.

For his Dominion is unlimitate:
He rules this spacious Universe alone,
And truly is accountable to none
For his procedure: why then would contend
With him, whose strength, and power does far transcend
Thy weak Capacity: why would dispute
With him who is supreme, and absolute
In The government of the World: with him, who sends
Blessings or Plagues on Enemies, or Friends,
As he thinks fit, and is not tied to give
To any curious Mortal that does live,
A reason for his actings; no, not he;
And yet forsooth thou think he will humor thee:
Thou thinks't he will thy longing satisfy,
And condescend t'assign a reason why
He thus does plague thee: O yes, and do that,
In complaisance to thee, which he as yet
Has never done to any: prithee then
Forbear thy fretting, do no more complain;
But rest assured as well as other men,
That -- --
For any man, as thou do to debate
With this great God, who all things did create,
Is such a piece of folly, as I may,
In truth, assert most freely, to this day
I have not heard the like: then once again,
My friend, I tell thee, do no more complain
As thou have done, for if, with patience,
Thou cans't endure what God does now dispense,
If thou can suffer, what he does ordain
At this time for thy Sentence; and abstain
From such Debatings, and Expostulations,
As only sinful men at such occasions
Do use, then by that single Argument
Thou'l't prove that thou art just, and innocent
More then by any I have heard, as yet
Managed by thee in all thy long Debate.
But why all this complaining, why alace 14. For God speaks once, yea twice,
yet man perceives it not.

Do thou so much debate upon the Case,
As if God sent out Judgments here, and there,
Without so much as once declaring War,
But catching of his opportunities,
Did ruin honest Mortals by surprise.
Why here thou err'st too: here indeed, my friend,
Thou do with God most foolishly contend:
For look you here now, why should we complain
That he does deal surprizingly with men?
When every day he does so openly
By th'out-crys of his sweating Ministry,
By Signs, Diseases, Visions, and even
By all the dreadful Heraldry of Heaven
Forwarn us of his Wrath to come, and yet
We understand not, till it be too late
This Universal Language, but complain
When Judgments come, that we are overtane
By mere surprise, and foolishly cry out
We had no warning, whilst in truth I doubt
We did not understand the Dialect,
Of him, who does so often to us speak.
So that, my friend, thou should st not thus exclaim
Against thy Maker, for thou art to blame,
Who did not understand such revelations,
As usually preceed sad visitations.
For certainly, if thou will call to mind
Thy by past life, I doubt not but thou wilt find
Thou Have had some warnings, were it but in a dream,
Of thy afflictions long before they came.
Yes, in a dream, for oftentimes I know, 15. In a dream, in a vision of the
night, when deep sleep falls upon men; in ^lumbrings on the bed.

God is accustomed seriously to show
To men (what often they conceal for shame)
Their future state in the mirror of a dream.
For when the active soul outwearied,
With toil of the day, at night is brought to bed
Of a sound sleep; then it begins to fly,
Then liberat from the bodies drudgery,
It soars aloft, and in another sphere
Begins to act: nay, then it does appear,
To be, what we cannot imagine here.
For being then as fit for contemplation
Almost, as 'twill be after separation,
By vision intuitive it sees
The state of things to come, and by degrees
Becomes so subtle, and does at that rate,
In contemplation then expatiate.
With such delight, as if it did not mean,
By natural Organs e're to act again:
But when some hours it has thus wandered,
And in that time God has discovered,
What for its profit he intends at large,
Then he commands it to its former charge.
Have you not sometimes seen a General, 16. Then he opens the ears of men,
and seals their Instruction.

His Officers to his Pavilion call,
Whilst all the Army do securely sleep,
Save a few Companies, who Guard do keep;
And there inform them what he would have done,
Give every one his Orders, and anon,
Command each to his Post: so let us suppose,
When in profoundest sleep, the eyes are close,
The Body, one would think, o're-come by death,
(Were It not that only it did softly breath.)
The Almighty then is pleased, as 'twere, to call
The soul unto him, and inform it all
What he intends to do with it, and then
Commands it to the sleeping Corpse again:
Whether* when come the sad Noctambulant,
In a cold sweat, with fear, and rambling faint,
Rouzes the Body from its sleep, and then
Shows its instructions, and begins t'explain
What it has seen, and heard, and plainly shows
What Miseries, Calamities, and Woes,
They may expect God will to them dispense,
If not prevented by true penitence.
Then, as if God himself to them did speak,
When on these admonitions they reflect,
With fear, and horror they begin to quake.
For they consider that his sole intent 17 That he may withdraw man from his
purpose, and hide pride from man.

By these night-warnings, is but to prevent
Their total fall, and by such signs, as these,
Divert them from those foolish purposes,
Which in their hearts they proudly do intend
To prosecute, did he not kindly send
Such seasonable messages to show
What will be the event, if they forward go,
In such mad projects, and by consequence
Make them to understand the difference
'Twixt humane power, and his Omnipotence.
By Dreams and Visions then he does alarm 18 He keeps back his soul from
the pit, and his life from perishing by the sword.

The unwary race of man, and from all harm
Preserve both soul and body; which alace
Would fall into the dreadful ambushes
Of the enemy of the world, were not that he
Who framed both soul and body, thus did free
Them both from danger, and did constantly
Mind their concerns, with a Paternal eye.
For else the murdered body soon would drop
Into the grave, the soul without all hope
Of pardon, in that deep abyss would fall,
Which God in justice has designed for all
Whom he does hate, and dolefully, in Chains,
Compare short pleasures, with eternal pains,
Thus then we see how much we should esteem
The ordinar Phenomenon of a dream,
And not contemn it, because usual,
As if a common accident to all
Occurring in their sleep, ane a^ry thing,
Of which the wiser make no reckoning:
For sure those dreams, and visions contain
The mind of God, and are not shown in vain.
Next, as by dreams, so by diseases too 19 He is chastned also with pain upon
his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pains.

The Spirit of God is pleased to allow
Kind warnings to us: for, if understood,
All sicknesses of body for our good,
Are sent upon us; so that did we know
What kindness by diseases God does show
To our poor souls, we never would complain,
But think our selves most happy in our pain.
For let us observe now, don't we daily see
How man in health from all diseases free,
Consumes his precious years so wantonly,
As if he never did expect to die.
He so imploys his time in sinful pleasure,
As for devotion he can find no leisure:
But when diseases on his body seize,
And conquering death approaches by degrees:
When the lungs all overflow'n with constant rain
Of Pituite, that falls down from the Brain,
Afford scarce room for breathing, when the Blood
Is in its Circulation withstood
By stagnant humors, when the Bones do ache,
And all the Pillars of the Body shake,
When for his food he has no appetite, 20 So that his life abhors bread, and
his soul dainty meat.

And in his Table he takes no delight.
But every dainty Dish does nauseate,
On which, with pleasure he did feed of late.
When all his flesh, in health so plump and fair, 21 His flesh is consumed
away that it cannot be seen, and his bones, that were were not seen, stick out.

Now rotten, and consumed, does not appear
As formerly, but shrunk quite to the bone,
The bones, which were not seen before, anon
Stick out i'th'figure of a Skeleton.
When in this sad condition on his bed 22 His soul draws nigh to the grave,
and his life to the destroyers.

Helyes, and sees that all his hopes are fled,
And he must die: when all he can perceive
Is nothing but the avenue o'th'grave,
And with himself he now considers
There Is no avoiding of a certain death.
Then he begins with horror to reflect 23 If there be a messenger with him, an
interpreter, one amongst a thousand to show man his uprightness.

Upon his by past actions, and take
Account of all his wanderings: then he falls
On thoughts of Heaven, and for Preachers calls:
For pious men, who in this sad occasion,
May by their words afford him consolation,
And teach him how he may attain salvation.
Then all his former ways he does abhor,
Complains on sin, and can endure no more
To hear the voice of pleasure in his ears;
But buried now in sorrows, pains, and fears,
His only thought, his sole consideration
Is what shall become, after separation
Of his poor soul: how that in death shall fare,
For which, in life, he took so little care.
And if, perhaps (which is rare to be found)
A man of God appear, who can expound
The matter to him, and before his eyes
Draw out the Map of his iniquities,
Speak to his soul, and to his anxious heart.
The gracious language of the Heavens impart.
Then will this good man to his God address, 24 Then he is gracious to him, and
says, deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom.

And say, have pity on this sinners case,
Father of mercy, for I Am confident
He of his sins does seriously repent:
Restore him to his health, and let him see
How much, O Lord, he is obliged to thee;
Who, when thou could have ruined him with ease,
And made him perish in this sad disease,
Art pleased to let him live, that he may yet
Express thy glory in his mortal state.
To this petition God shall lovingly
Make answer well, this sinner sholl not dye:
For I have found him in this exigent
Vexed at his sins, and truly penitent:
Then let him live, for I his heart have tried,
And for his errors he has satisfied;
I Am reconciled, and freely to him give
Full liberty yet for some years to live.
At this his sickness shall decrease apace, 25. His flesh shall be fresher
then a child's, he shall return to the days of his youth.

His spirits shall return, and in his face,
The blossoms of new life shall then appear.
As when the Spring does usher in the year:
His flesh shall be as soft, and delicate,
As it appeared once in his infant state.
But that is not all, for as to health restored, 16. He shall pray unto God, and
he will be favorable unto him, and he shall see his face with joy, for he will
render unto man his righteousness.

So God to him most kindly shall afford
That sweet communion with himself, which all
Esteem so much, who on his Name do call:
And that blessed comfort, which afflictions cloud,
So long time from this poor man's soul did shroud,
Shall then more bright appear, and shine again,
As when the Sun triumphant after rain,
Unto the longing Earth himself displays,
And chears her up with warm refreshing rays:
Then he shall be above all calumny,
And shall rejoice in his integrity:
Shall pray to God, with success, and no more
Sadly suspect, as he had done before,
That he, who dwells in Heaven did disdain
So much as to hear him, when he did complain,
And all his tears, and prayers were in vain.
For our good God in mercy infinite, 27. He looks upon men, and if any say, I
have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not.

Be sure, my friend, does take no small delight,
To save a sinner that is penitent,
When he perceives him heartily repent:
For often upon men he casts his eye,
Where if he in a corner does espy
Some poor heart-bursting sinner on his knees,
Whose outrun eyes are now upon the lees,
Whose voice with crying to that note is shrunk,
As if he muttered through a hollow Trunk:
Who after many a sad, and killing groan,
Whose heat would almost melt a heart of stone,
In a few words, can only stammer out,
Lord, I have sinned, -- and now what does it boot?
What does it boot, good Lord, what after all
My trade of sin, can I my profit call?
Ay me, good God, to what, by just account?
Does the provenue of all my sins amount?
What have I gained, alace, what have I gained?
To what have I by my dear sins attained?
How foolishly, good Lord, as now appears,
Have I consumed my profitable years,
And spent the cream of all my youth, and strength,
In prosecution of what now at length,
Affords no profit to my soul, but brings
The thoughts of sad, and execrable things
Into my mind; which though I do deplore,
And, by thy grace, intend to act no more,
Yet the remembrance of my wanton years,
Present a prospect of perpetual fears
Before my eyes; and I still apprehend
That I shall justly suffer in the end
For all my sins, unless that thou in Grace
Wilt hear me, and have pity on my Case.
This poor convinced sinner God will hear, 28. He will deliver his soul from
going into the pit, and his life shall see the light.

And to him soon most gracious appear;
He will not let him perish, but will save
His soul from Hell, his body from the Grave.
Thus then by Dreams, by Visions, and Diseases, 29. Lo all these things works
God oftentimes with man

And by his Preachers, whensoere he pleases,
He warns us of our danger, and commands
His killing Angels often to hold their hands,
For a few years at least, that he may see
What the effects will of these Warnings be.
For in men's ruin he no pleasure takes, 30. To bring back his soul from the
pit, to be enlightened with the light of the living.

But even suspends his Justice for their sakes,
That they may have some leisure to repent,
And not be reeking in Offenses sent
Like Devils, to endure eternal punishment.
But of their foolish Errors undeceived,
Spite of themselves they may at length be saved.
Then pray; my friend, remark what I have said 31. Mark well, O Job, hearken
unto me, hold thy peace, and I will speak.

And to what I have yet to say take heed:
Observe me, pray, and to my words give ear
For it is fit thou with attention hear
What God has by Commission ordered me
To speak, dear friend, in reference to thee.
Yet if the have any thing to say, my friend, 32. If thou have any thing to
say, speak, for I desire to justify thee.

In thy defense, I Will not be so unkind,
As to command thee silence, but allow
Thee liberty to speak, and argue too
Against what I have said, for my intent
In The series of my present Argument,
Is, (if I can) to prove thee Innocent.
If not, pray hold thy peace, be silent pray 33. If not, hearken unto me, hold
thy peace, and I shall teach thee wisdom.

And with attentive mind mark what I say,
Mark what I say, for by his Divine Grace,
Who ordered me to speak upon this Case,
I Will teach thee Wisdom, more then ever yet
Thou understood'st, although thou were of late
Renowned for Wit, and Literature, at least,
In Reputation ranked amongst the best,
Of those sharp Wits, who live here in the East.
Cap. XXXIV.
AFter some pause, as if he did expect 1. Furthermore Elihu answered, and said.

An answer, seeing Job no answer make
To what he said, he thus continued
To speak, and argue on the common Head.
And now, says he, you see how I am sent, 2. Hear my words, O ye wise men, and
give ear unto me ye that have knowledge

By warrant from my God, to represent
His judgment of the Question in hand,
And therefore I must let you understand,
(As I Am commanded) with Authority,
Where you have done right, and where your Errors ly.
Shall then request you of my audience;
Whom I esteem men of great eminence,
For wit, and parts, to hear with patience,
What I am now to speak. --
For I am not to speak before a Rabble 3. For the ear trveth words, as the
mouth tastes meat.

Of The Vulgar, but before those, who are able
To judge of my Discourse: before such men,
As on this Subject, can themselves explain
Better then I, and handle, with more wit,
The Question, if their Passion would permit.
Let Us then impartially consider now, 4. Let us choose to us judgment, let us
know among our selves what is good.

Without all heat, what it is we have to do:
With moderation, let us the Question state,
And understand on what we are to debate:
For I am not ambitious in the least,
Nor do I entertain within my breast
Such a proud thought, as that I may be said
TO have had the better of you, no indeed,
I Am none of those, that argue for applause,
Or love to preach for reputations cause,
Or in discoursing make it all my care,
To angle Ears, and become Popular,
By flourishes of studied Eloquence,
Or gain the name of learned, with great expense,
Of painted Language, as too many now,
Of my Profession are in use to do:
No, no, my friends, I hate such practices,
And only shall in a few passages,
Without all Art, a short Relation make,
Of what my God has ord'red me to speak.
To come to the point then, as I Have formerly 5. For Job has said, I am
righteous, and God has taken away my judgment.

Show'n how the Almighty, by his Ministry,
By Dreams, Diseases, Visions, and such means,
Is, in his Mercy, pleased to take much pains,
To show the sons of Men what he intends,
Before upon them he Afflictions sends,
That by the prospect of their Punishment,
He may persuade them timely to repent:
Especially, when thus before their eyes
He lays the scene of their Calamities,
By which you see, he deals not, by surprise
With any man; (from whence I do maintain,
That he who of his Judgments does complain,
As if such Woes, without prediction were
Poured out upon him, does extremely err.)
So, in the next place, I intend to show,
That when our God is pleased to inflict a blow
On any man, I think, in conscience,
The afflicted man should with great patience,
Endure it, as a thing which suddenly
Has not befallen him, and not foolishlie
Cry out, as Job has done, O Lord, thou see
I Am righteous, pure, and just, and yet oppressed
By sad afflictions: I am innocent,
My uprightne^s is clear, and evident,
My life has still been spotless, and unblam'd,
Yet without hearing I am now condemned.
O, says he, why should I my my self belie,
Why should I pass from my integrity 6. Should I lie against my rig^t? my
wound is incurable without transgression?

For what has yet befallen me, no indeed,
Though I Am condemned, though I am punished,
Yet will I not, for all that, guilty plead.
Here lies the matter then my friends, see here,
See here how much the best of men may err 7. What man is like Job, who
drinks up scorning like water?

Under sad Trials; how much those may fail,
Over whose patience Sorrows do prevail.
For pray now, let me hear from such as you,
Who this wise man in days of plenty knew:
Who were entirely with him then acquaint,
Before the arrival of his punishment:
Tell me, my friends, did ever you expect,
So like a fool, to hear this wise man speak?
Did ever man talk so ridiculouslie,
As he does now of his integrity?
Did ever man of Knowledge, Wit, and Sense
Insist so much upon his Innocence?
His Dove-like*Innocence; his Uprightness,
His pious Candor, and his Righteousness:
When God, in Justice, has thought fit to send
Afflictions on him, as if he would defend
Himself, by such weak Arguments, as these,
Against the righteous God of Righteousness.
And flatly say that such a man as he,
An upright man, a man from errors free,
A man, in all his Life, and Conversation,
So blameless, as he never would give Occasion,
By any crime to so much Provocation
Of Divine Wrath: that such a man as he
Should feel the Wrath of God, to that degree,
As if he were the most flagitious,
Most openly profane, and vicious
Of all the race of Sinners, and repute
Of all that live on Earth most dissolute:
That such as he should thus be punished
Is a most strange Procedure, and indeed,
In his opinion, does import no less,
Then if our God did favor Wickedness,
And most unjustly punished Righteousness,
Yes, thus, or to this purpose he has spoke 8 Who goes in company with the
workers of iniquity, and walks with wicked men.

Oftener then once, as if he seemed to mock
The Almighty in his works of Providence,
And by his Logic, would infer from thence,
That he, who lives by rules of Piety,
Observes Gods Laws, and studies zealously
TO obtain his favor; and the sinful Wretch,
Who vainly thinks himself without his reach,
And therefore scorns to call upon his Name,
But takes his pleasure, without fear, or shame,
Are all one on the matter, and as well
The one, as the other may his anger feel,
And suffer what he pleases to dispense,
This for his sin, that for his innocence,
By an unguarded cast of Providence.
Yes, to my knowledge, thus I heard him speak
Most frequently, although I would not check
His lewd Discourse, 'cause you had undertane
By solid Reason to convince the man,
Of his Impiety, but when I see
You on the matter erred as well, as he,
Then would I fain have spoke, but still did shun
To tell my thoughts on it, until you had done
But how can I from speaking now forbear
When I do such unruly Language hear?
When I do hear a man so sinfully,
Assert forsooth his own Integrity,
By blaming of his Maker, as if he,
To whom both this injurious man, and we,
And all the mortal Stock of Mankind owe
Our Life, and Being, did not fully know
Each individual of his own Creation,
And did observe the Life, and Conversation,
Of every man alive, and so from thence,
Could freely judge, with great convenience
Both of men's Guilt, and of their Innocence,
Could be unjust.
What man is he, who this great God does fear,
That can without some indignation hear
Such scandalous Expressions? at this rate
The unwary man seems to homologate
The Principles of the most lewd, profane,
Sensual livers, and the worst of men.
For, when he talked so often, how God did bless 9. For he has said, it
profits a man nothing, that he should delight himself with God.

Those, who contemned his Laws, and did oppress
His faithful Servants, and did so complain
Of his own sad Estate, once, and again,
And how that notwithstanding of his zeal,
And fear of God, he was not used well:
Who would have thought, but that he meant from thence,
That seeing Piety could be no defense
Against Gods Wrath, it was not worth the expense
Of so much time and labor, as some men
Bestow upon it, but was all in vain.
Strange language truly! I beseech you then, 10. Therefore hearken unto me, ye
men of understanding, far be it from God, that he should do wickedness; and
from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity.

Who hear me now, as wise, and prudent men:
Did y'ever hear a godly man express
His mind, in such unlawful words, as these?
Did y'ever hear a man for wit repute,
Above his neighbors, so with God dispute?
O, how I pity, and would fain reclaim
This good man from his errors: though I blame
Him not, as you have done, for horrid crimes
Committed by him in his prosperous times;
For, truth, I think the man was always such,
As he does now assert, but that so much
He now insists on his integrity,
As if that God had done him injury,
In thus afflicting of him, is indeed
Such an offense, as cannot be suffered.
For God forbid, that any of us here,
Or through the world, who our great God do fear,
Should even but by a random supposition,
Imagine him to be in that condition,
As that he is of injustice capable,
At any rate: no this were palpable,
And downright blasphemy; pray God forbid,
That any man then should be so misled,
But even to rally in such words as these,
Were It but to show his wit, for I confess,
Though I relate them, on this sad occasion,
Merely upon design of refutation
Of his gross errors, yet when I do speak,
In such prohibit words, my bones do shake.
For God's so far from doing injury, 11. For the work of a man, shall he render
unto him, and cause every man to find according to his ways.

To any man, that he will gratefully,
Reward each mortal for his piety,
In his own time: for when the day shall come,
In which all sinners shall receive their Doom,
Then will his kindness unto those appear,
Who live by rules of piety, though here,
Such is their weakness, and impatience,
Consulting only with desp^nding sense,
They see not the design of Providence.
Nay, I do lay this for a principle, 12. Yea, surely God will not do wickedly,
neither will the Almighty pervert judgment.

And firmly hold, that it is not possible,
For the great God of justice, him, from whom,
Both in times past, and in all times to come,
All justice flows, (let us fancy what we can)
To be injust in the least to any man.
Besides, how can we think that he, whose power 13. Who has given him a charge
over the earth? or who has disposed the whole world?

Did all things frame, and governs to this hour,
All he has made, so uncontrolably,
By rules of justice, and pure equity,
Can be unjust? then who is he so sick
In his own judgment, as dares contradict
What he, who is accountable to none,
In his eternal purpose will have done?
For, mark me now, if he, who breath did give 14 If he set his heart upon man,
if he gather unto him his spirits, and his breath.

To any man, by which he made him live,
Be pleased to reassume that breath again,
Which is his own, why should a man complain?
Why should a man complain? a living man, 15 All flesh shall perish together,
and man shall turn again unto dust.

Who knows at best his life is but a span;
And in a little interval of breath,
He lives, but troubled still with thoughts of death:
For when his God thinks fit, that he should die,
Then must he quit this breath, and instantly
In the cold grave lie down, and be no more
A living mortal, as he was before.
All flesh shall perish, every creature must,
At his command be pounded into dust.
Then why of God should any man complain?
When he injures him not, or why in vain,
Should he upbraid him with his innocence,
When he is afflicted, as if providence
Were tied to th'rules of his convenience.
And now because, my friend, what I have said 16 If thou have understanding,
hear this; hearken to the voice of my words.

Concerns thee most, I Would fain my self persuade
That thou do with attention hear me speak,
And do thy own use of my Doctrine make;
If thou have understanding then, take heed
To my discourse, for thus I do proceed.
You see then how I Have urged all along, 17 Shall even he, who hates righ,
govern? and will thou condemn him who is most just?

That our just God to no man can do wrong:
Nor that he, in inflicting punishment,
On any man, though never so innocent,
Can be esteemed unjust, since he can never
Do an ill thing, on what account soever.
For, were he such, how could he regulate
The Universe in every rank and state,
With so much justice, mercy, and compassion,
As no created thing can in that fashion
Govern some Petty Province, yet does he
With great discretion govern all we see,
Although he here, and in Heavens, (knows not what
It Is in dominion to be limitat.)
How in thy raving then dare thou express
Thy self in such unheard of terms, as these
Which I have taxed? how dare thou thus exclaim
Against the justice of thy God? for shame,
For shame such exclamations forbear,
And let us no more of thy complaining hear.
For pray now, let me ask thee, is it fit 18 Is it fit to say to a king, thou
art wicked, and to princes, ye are ungodly

Do think for any man of solid wit,
To tell an earthly Monarch in his face,
That he is unjust, or does in any case
That which is sinful: would thou tell a King
He Is such, as he deserved not to reign:
Would tell him flatly, that his Government
Were arbitrary and did represent
The seas, whose politics, tyrannical,
Allows the great fish to eat up the small.
Would speak at this rate, prithee to a King,
A Potentate, or any ruling thing
That sits in State? I doubt thou would not do
So foul a thing, especially thou
Who know*st all powers on earth from God proceed
And upon him depend, as on their head:
By him Kings rule, and in their Royal seat,
Impartial Justice do administrat
To all their Subjects: 'countable to none
For any actings, but to God alone.
To God alone, whose mighty hands did frame
This Universe, and to it gave the name
Of earth, --
Which he has slyc'd in many Provinces,
And over them has placed those Deputies
Whom we call Princes, men of great esteem,
Since the great King of kings is pleas*d to them
To grant Commissions of Lieutenancy,
Each, in his own distinct Locality
In all the parts of earths vast Monarchy.
Hence all men are obliged in conscience,
To pay that due respect, and deference
To all in power, which God has ordered,
Especially to a Crowned head;
Whose individual power in Government,
Does that of Heavens more highly represent,
Then any other Government as yet
Devised by men; for in that single state
He represents his God, who gave him power,
And who in his great wisdom to this hour
Maintains the state of Kings, and will defend
The Crown, and Scepter, to the worlds end.
His power is such, as none should countermand,
Or, when he strikes should bid him hold his hand:
Nay, though he act unjustly, yet should none
Accuse him for it, since to God alone
He Is countable; and though he should commit
The worst of sins, I do not think it fit
Each Subject should reprove him, or because
Of his few pers'nal failings, slight his Laws:
Or enter into plots of discontent,
To alter, or subvert his Government:
Because he is not such, as they would have him,
Or with their clamorous tongues, and pens out-brave him.
No, not at all, for though a Prince may err,
As other mortals, we should not infer
From thence, that it is lawful to rebel
Against him, for as such bad thoughts from Hell
Are prompted to us, so we should forbear
To Have intercourse with any rebels there,
Whose work it is to raise rebellion here.
For though the Prince should err, the authority
Is still the same, which flowing certainly
From the Almighty, we should all obey,
And to our sovereign Kings all honor pay.
I ask thee then, would think it fit to use
Such language to a King, would thou accuse
A Monarch in his face? I think indeed,
Thou would not so imprudently proceed,
With any such, but rather hold thy peace,
Then run the risque, whatever were thy case,
Of his displeasure: or, at least, I doubt,
Would use smooth words, and be thought wise to boot.
If then to Kings on Earth thou would not speak 19. How much less to him,
that accepts not the person of Princes, or regards the rich, more then the
poor, for they are all the work of his hands.

In such rude language, why art thou so weak,
As in such jargon boldly to address
Thy self to the King of Kings? I must confess,
This is a piece of that extravagance,
As I admire thou have the countenance
To look up to Heavens, when thou do reflect,
How insolently thou did lately speak
Of their great Monarch: one, before whose Throne
All Kings most bow, and with submission own
Him as their Patron, and their Sovereign too,
And think it their greatest honor so to do.
One who has no regard for this, or'tother,
Who e're he be, nor one before another
Esteems, as we do here, because he is great,
Wears costly Diadems, and sits in State;
For, they are but all his Creatures, and depend
Upon their God, how e're they may pretend
To soveraignity here; whilst they abuse
Their power, and with fine titles would amuse
Their fellow mortals; but it is all in vain,
For God alone, above all Kings does reign:
He governs all that Nature comprehends,
And fully acts, what ever he intends.
Whilst Kings and Princes, with their swords in hand,
Before him ready, for performance stand,
Of all that he thinks proper to command.
Yet none of these can really be said,
Actively to concur, and furnish aid
To him in all his glorious operations;
The thoughts of which exceed our meditations,
More then if one should undertake to prove,
That wheels in Engines by themselves do move
Without a Spring: or that without all air
A man can live: which clearly does declare
That all these Monarchs, whom we here adore,
Not moved by the first Mover, are no more,
With all the force they to the field can bring,
Then Wheels in Engines are without a Spring.
For, as so many puppits here below,
By the hand of God they are hurried to, and fro,
While he is pleased to keep up the Show.
But when he does withdraw his mighty hand,
They move no more.**
O, this great Monarch of the universe!
Who can his glorious Attributes rehearse!
Who can the power of this great Prince express!
Who can his glory even but faintly guess!
He who does Kings, and Emperors create,
As he thinks fit, and orders every state
Below the Heavens, as he thinks pertinent,
Whether for blessing, or for punishment,
Who can describe him! --
For, if at any time he does intend
To plague a Nation, thither he does send
Some sullen Tyrant, fraught with Cruelty,
Pride, Anger, Avarice, and Impiety:
And where he means a blessing to a State,
Thither as quickly he does delegate
Some sober, prudent Prince, of generous Parts,
A friend to peace, a favourer of Arts,
Where either in their stations do move,
As they receive directions from above.
Sure then, as he is undoubted Lord of all
This spacious World, so he is impartial,
In all his ways, he no man will despise,
'Cause poor; for rich, and poor are in his eyes,
Both the same thing: their riches, and their crimes,
He does reward, and punish at all times,
As either of them in their Orbs do rise,
Without distinction of their qualities.
For all those powerful Princes, who to day, 20. In a moment shall they d^* and
the people shall be troubled at midnight, and pa^s away, and the mighty shall
be taken away without hand.

Appear in Robes most gloriously gay:
Who with their present state so proudly swell,
They laugh at the Romance of Heaven, and Hell:
To morrow you may see them poorly ly,
Like other parcels of Mortality,
Incorporat with Dust, for all must die
When God commands, all must resign their breath,
Without exception, all must stoop to Death:
Nay, greatest men are often suddenly,
Conveyed hence i'th'twinkling of an eye:
By poison, Dagger, or the blows of War,
To which great Monarchs most obnoxious are,
They Are snatched out of the world, and in their fall,
Bring on their Subjects sometimes national,
And fiery judgments, whilst Competitors,
For their Succession muster all the force
They can to make their several titles good,
And all the People are involved in blood,
By their ambition, that the world may see,
There is no Monarch absolutely free,
But him, who is above all Monarchy,
By whom all Earthly Monarchs live, and die.
Why since it is so then, since Majesty
Only belongs to him, who sits on high,
Which on the Rock of Justice, firm, and sure
Established, to all ages does endure:
Should any breathing thing composed of dust,
Dare but to think, that God can be unjust!
Besides, my friend, I Would have thee understand 21 For his eyes are upon the
ways of man, and he sees all his goings.

That as this Monarch by his mighty hand
All that we see has framed, and 'stablished,
And governs by the same, what he has made,
Above all powers, so his all-piercing eye
Views all our thoughts, and actions carefully;
For, trust me, at he is Omnipotent,
So, without doubt, he is Omniscient.
He all things sees, his all-discerning eye 22 * There is no darkness, nor
shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.

Looks through the bowels of obscurity:
Not earths dark Caverns, where perpetual night
Does cover all, can cover from his sight
The works of darkness, or i'th'least conceal
Those villainies, which he means to reveal,
No, let a sinner run from Pole to Pole,
From East, to West; not any lurking hole
Will the poor Creature find, where he may lie
Safely concealed from that all-searching eye.
How then should any foolish man suppose
That he, who all things sees, and all things knows,
Can be unjust? or that he should direct
Wilfully, or by error, and mistake,
That to be done, in any mortals case,
Which is unjust. --
No sure, for as he each man's sins does know; 23 For he will not lay upon man
more then right, that he should enter into judgment with God

Though wrapped up in the clossest thoughts: even so,
He knows his strength, he knows what he can bear,
And thence, my friend, no living man should fear
That what sad woes his Maker has decreed
He should endure, will e're his strength exceed.
Since then our God is just, and equitable 24 He shall break in pieces mighty
men without number, and set others in their stead.

In all his ways; it is not tolerable
To hear a man complain, as thou have done
Of him, that can do injury to none.
Nay further, though 'twere lawful to complain,
Yet all our exclamations are in vain:
For he, whose power is full, and absolute
Over all mankind, may without dispute,
Do what he lists: for don't we daily see
How even the greatest Monarchs are not free
From their afflictions: how the mighty men
Who think their grandeur can his wrath sustain,
Are broke to pieces in their hight, and laid
As low as these, who were of them afraid.
Without all help, by his own strength alone
He pulls the greatest of' em from his Throne,
And, with the same breath, ere the wretch be dead,
Sets up another Pageant in his stead.
For all their actings he does carefully ^5 Therefore, he knows their works,
and he overturneth them in the nighe, so that they are destroyed.

Observe, and laughs at all their policy.
Their Cabin-Councils are to him revealed
(Although by them industriously concealed)
Yes, he knows all, and though he does permit
These for a while to do, what they think fit;
Yet, when he thinks it time to punish them,
He takes them down, with much disgrace and shame:
All their designs he does annihilate,
And cancells their memorials of State:
He sweeps them off the world, like dust, and makes
Their Subjects feel great judgments, for their sakes.
Nay, he does strike them openly, that all 26 He strikes them as wicked men in
the open ^ight of others.

May learn, and take example by their fall;
What it is for men to abuse that power, which he
Entrusts them with, and so may plainly see
That all upon that mighty God depend,
Whose absolute dominion knows no end.
Because his just commands they did despise, 27 Because they turned back from
him, and would not consider any of his ways.

And did forget they were his Deputies:
Nor did remember of his kindnesses
Show'n to them, in the days of their distress:
Nor how he had appeared in their defense,
And mercifully by his providence
Had saved them from the plots and treacheries
Oftener then once, of their great enemies;
Nor thanked him for his kindnesses renewed,
But stead of that, with great ingratitude,
Proudly rejected his authority,
And meant to rule by their own Majesty.
For, stead of ruling faithfully and well, 28 So that they cause the cry of the
poor to come unto him, and he hears the cry of the ^^^^^ted.

They to oppressing of their Subjects fell:
Whose cries did mount to Heavens, when they complained,
And audience quickly from that King obtained,
Who rules all Kings below, and does redress
All the afflictions, and just grievances,
Of those that are oppressed; hence, by and by,
He makes those Kings as low, as they were high:
In view of all he does those men debase,
And sets up others quickly in their place.
For what he does intend, who can withstand? 29 When he gives quietness, who
then can make trouble? and when he hides his face, who then can behold him?
whether it be done against a nation or against a man only.

Who can resist his high and mighty hand?
Who can obstruct his progress? tell me who
Can hinder what be has a mind to do?
Whether on single men his wrath does fall,
Or that he means a Judgment National:
For if to any he gives quientness,
What fury can distrub that peoples peace?
Of if he means to punish them with war,
Who can resist him? who are they, that dare
Oppose their breasts to the torrent of his rage,
Or, with the Armies of his wrath engage?
When he intends to pull a Tyrant down, 30 That the hypocrite reign nor, lest
the people be ensnared.

And, in his anger reassume that Crown,
Which he did lend him, lest his people may,
By his example, learn to disobey
Their Supreme Monarch, and be cunningly
Enamoured with his Apostasy;
What counsel, what device, what power below,
What leagues, what armies can prevent the blow?
And now, my friend, by all that I have said, 31. Surely it is meet to be said
to God. I have born chastisement* I will not offend any more

I have no other aim, but to persuade
Both thee, and these who hear me, to forbear
Such language, as I am ashamed to hear
On this occasion; and in stead of cries,
Complaints, rash questions, and apologys,
To use another method, and express
Thy self in terms more moderat* then these
Which I have heard: For thus I think indeed,
At such a time as this, thou should proceed
In thy expressions, and no otherwise,
If thou wilt be pleased to follow my advice.
Lord, I have sinned, and given provocation,
For which I have sustained thy indignation:
Pardon me, Lord, and teach me to abhore
My former ways, that I may sin no more.
If all this while, Lord* I have not perceived 32. That which I see not, teach
thou me, if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

My errors, but have foolishly believed
That I was free of sin, Lord, teach thou me,
And now, at length, be pleased to let me see,
In what, good Lord, I have offended thee,
And I Will do so no more. --
Now, choose thee then, my friend, such things are so, 33. Should it be
according to thy mind? he will recompense it, whether thou refuse, or whether
thou choose, and ^ot I, therefore speak what thou know.

Whether thou wilt follow my advice, or no,
For pray consider seriously, my friend,
Is It fit that God according to thy mind
Should now dispose of thee: or rather do
What he thinks proper? which of these thinks't thou
Does most agree with him, who certainly
Knows better what is fit, then thou, or I,
For any man to endure: he does indeed,
And will in his own methods still proceed,
Whether thou will, or no: go to then, speak,
See what defense thou for thy self can make:
If thou wilt not follow my advice, speak on,
And I shall hold my tongue while thou have done:
Speak out thy mind, but pray remember now,
It is with God, not me, thou have to do:
For, if thou in the least can make appear
That I have erred, henceforth I shall forbear
To speak upon the subject, but give over
All my discoursing here, and speak no more.
But only this, my friend, I Will boldly say, 34. Let men of understanding tell
me, and let a wise man hearken unto me.

That men of understanding, who to day
Have heard me speak, will fully testify,
That what I Have said, is naked verity.
And that what thou have spoke, since thou began 35. Job has spoken without
knowledge, and his words were without wisdom.

T'open thy cafe, is much below a man
Of underctanding, and does savor so,
Of one that his Creator does not know,
That I Am afraid, they will think what thou have said
In thy defense, rather appears to add
To thy offense, and so will find the Bill
Against thee, say, or argue what thou will.
But after all, my friends, I think it yet 36. My desire is that Job may be
tried to the end, because of his answers for wicked men.

Proper to speak on this man's present state,
Because I think he is not yet humbled so
As I would have him: --
I Would therefore wish his trial might endure
Yet for some longer time, until his cure
Were perfect, and I might perceive, my friend
Converted from his Errors in the end.
For by what yet I in his carriage see, 37. For he adds rebellion to his sin,
he clap^eth his hands amongst us, and m^lti^lieth his words against God.

Without dissembling, truth, I must be free
To tell you all that I perceive no less
Then that his sins do, with his pains increase;
So that if I my speaking should give over,
And to his passion make an open door,
I fear he will miscarry as before
'Has done in his Discourse, I Will therefore speak,
And to himself my speech I will direct.
Cap. XXXV.
UPon the Question in hand intent 1. Elihu spoke moreover, and said,

Thus then he prosecutes his Argument*
Do think, says he, my friend, you are in the right, 2. Think thou this to
be right, that thou said, m^ righteousness is more then Gods?

Or rather do not sin against thy light,
When in thy raving thou art pleased to express
Thy thoughts so much of thy own Righteousness,
As if thou would seem to argue all along,
That God both just, and good had done thee wrong?
For thou have said it is very strange to see 3. For thou said what advantage,
will it be to thee? and what profit shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin?

That God has no regard to such as thee,
Who have observed his will, and piously
Demeaned thy self even from thy Infancy:
And therefore think Piety is a thing
Of no advantage, not worth studying:
But to be guilty, or be innocent,
Are in themselves but things indifferent.
Well I shall answer quickly all these questions, 4. I will answer thee, and
thy companions with thee.

And easily refute those mean suggestions
Of a disordered spirit, and assert,
Against thee, and all those Fools, who take thy part,
That thus for one (though just, and innocent,
Upon whom God has sent a punishment)
To argue that it is a vanity,
For any man to study Piety,
As thou have done, since God alike regards
The just, and unjust, and so ill rewards
His faithful Servants, as thy case does show,
That therefore to be guilty yea, or no
Is all one thing, since Judgments thus are sent
Both on the guilty, and the innocent.
Is no less error, than if one should say
(As many do) come let us pass away
Our time in sin, and not so foolishly
Study the useless art of Piety,
As this good man has done, and after all,
Like him, in saddest of afflictions fall.
Are these thy thoughts then? has afflictions force 5. Look unto the heavens,
and see, and behold the clouds, which are higher then thou.

Driven thy Spirit to such weak Discourse?
Have sorrows so distracted thee, my friend,
That in such terms thou should express thy mind?
Why if thou be with grief so overcome,
'Twere good, in my opinion, thou were dumb,
That whatso'er thou think, might at least
Be keep't within the kennel of thy breast,
And not break out in such rude eloquence,
As to all pious ears does give offense.
For, if thou would but for a moment check
The fury of thy passion, and direct
Thy eyes to Heaven, then would thou plainly see
The difference betwixt thy God, and thee:
Then would thou see how high and excellent,
(Besides what all on earth do represent,)
That Mighty God, whom we both love and fear,
Above all things created does appear.
For but observe the clouds, see how they fly
Hither* and thither through the spacious sky,
And often do themselves conglomerate
In a thick body, which to dissipate
The Sun attempts in vain. --
For with a dark line of Circumvallation,
They so surround us, that with Consternation
We Are oftentimes for many days together,
Locked up in Prison of bad soultry weather:
Whilst all the while the Sun his Chamber keeps,
But now, and then, that through the chinks he peeps,
For at Noontide he dares no more appear,
Than one at Change-time, who a Writ does fear:
Yet after all themselves they rarifie
Into a pleasant, calm serenitie.
Who is it, do think, that makes these Vapors march,
In so good order through the spacious arch?
That makes these clouds condense, and then dilate,
Sure this no humane art can operate:
What need I tell thee, it is our God alone,
Who on these clouds does sometimes place his Throne,
That Monarch, who eternally does live,
To question whose Supreme Prerogative,
Is a great madness, without all debate,
In any thing, that e're he did create.
Since then he is so high, and we so low,
As hardly we by Contemplation know
What these things are, which over our heads do fly,
And make such preety figures in the sky,
Since all the Wit, that God has to us given
Can hardly seann that Portcullice of Heaven:
Since we know no more, what the rambling means
In The air of all those glorious Machines,
And can the nature of these clouds express,
No better, than by art we faintly guess:
What must we think of him, pray what must he,
Who formed these rolling clouds; what must he be?
What must he be, when even we do admire
The least part of his Glory? I desire
To know of thee, my friend, if ever thou
Did so much spare time to thy self allow
As to contemplate even such things, as these,
For if thou had, thou never would express
Thy self so foolishlie, as thou have done
Of him, to whom both Clouds, Stars, Moon, and Sun
Are but mean Servants, and his Errands run.
Considering this, why should so sillily 6. If thou sinnest, what do thou
against him? or if thy transgressions be multiplied; what do thou unto him?

Value thy self on thy integrity?
Why brag'st thou so much of thy uprightness,
And keep'st such coyl about thy righteousness?
As if all thou could do, with all thy art,
(Though to him thou would offer up thy heart)
Could add to that bright Glory in the least,
Of which already he is so much possessed.
Then if thou sin'st, thy self thou do injure,
Not him, who is so glorious and pure,
As all the clouds of thine iniquity
Cannot offuscate his bright Majesty.
If righteous, what do thou on him bestow? 7. If thou be righteous, what
give thou him? what receives he of thine hand?

What does he to thee for thy virtue owe?
Is It not thy duty? pray now let me hear
How would thou from a hired Servant bear
Such saucy Language, as if he would profess
He honored thee, and for his services
Expected of thee mutual kindnesses,
Because he had obliged thee? sure anon
Thou Would tell him all that he had said, or done
Was but his duty. Pray consider then
What are the actions of the best of men!
What are their virtues? what their services?
What all their vows? what their performances?
What all their prayers? what their pious tears?
What their good works! why truly it appears
(Though they should often repeat them over, and over)
To be their duty only, and no more;
Like those, who for their services are paid,
For to his glory these can nothing add.
Or if thy sins should multiplied be,
What does he value either them, or thee?
It Is true, by sin thou may perhaps devise 8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man*
as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the son of man

To such, as thou art, hurt, and prejudice;
And by well-doing too, thou may perchance
Thy Neighbors interest, or thy own advance.
But what is all this to God? thou can not stretch
Thy hand out upon him; nor can thou reach
Him by thy actings, whether bad, or good,
For all thy ways are fully understood
By him: and, as thy sins he does deride,
So, trust me friend, for all thy zealous pride,
Without thy concurse he will be glorified.
I must confess it is usual, with men, 9. By reason of the multitude of
oppressions, they make the oppressed to cry: they cry out by reason of the arm
of the mighty.

When under sad Oppressions, to complain:
It Is usual to cry out, it is customary
For men at such occasions to miscarry,
(As thou of late have done) in their expressions,
Because of the multitude of their Oppressions.
I know indeed, by Nature men are prone,
With bitter exclamations to bemoan
The sad Disasters, which they undergo
By reason of Oppression: I know
Oppression truly in its full carreer
Is hard for any mortal Man to bear,
Hence some think they may be allowed to cry,
When under such a bitter Agony.
It Is true indeed this is the usual way
Of many godly persons in the day
Of their affliction; this is that indeed
Which most of men do for their Errors plead.
But this is not the method men should use 10. But none says, Where is God my
maker, who gives songs in the night?

Under Oppression: hence I don't excuse
Those, usual complaints, and exclamations,
In which men vent themselves, at such occasions.
For O, if they considered things aright,
They would not thus with their afflictions fight,
Nor vex at their oppressions, like Fools,
Or cry aloud, and weep, like Boys at Schools.
No, no, they should to God themselves address,
To him alone they should, in their distress,
Apply themselves, with zeal, and fervency,
For he can only send them remedy
In time of Troubles: he alone can give
True comfort to them, he can make them live,
When they are about to die: when help from men
Has failed, and for supply they look in vain
From th'arm of Flesh, he unexpectedly
Does bring them out of all their Misery:
He makes them change their notes, and gladly sing
Amidst their greatest pain and suffering.
Nay we should even in gratitude apply 11. Who teaches (...) more then the
bea^^ of the earth, and makes us wiser then the fowls of heaven.

Our selves to God, in time of Misery;
Because he Reason on us has bestowed,
And us with many Qualities endowed,
Beyond all beasts o'th'Field, or birds o'th'Air,
None of which can i'th'least with Man compare:
And therefore we are obliged on all occasions
Of such sad Woes, to make our applications
To him alone, as we would wish to be,
In his good time from our afflictions free.
It Is true, some men do in affliction cry 12. There they cry, but none gives
answer, because of the pride of evil men.

To God, and seem with servour to apply
Themselves to him in prayer, but after all,
The Almighty does not hear them, when they call:
Because they are not yet sufficiently
Humbled for their offenses.
Besides, Faith of all prayer is the ground,
And without that, it is but an empty sound.
Such as do not by faith themselves address,
He will not hear: faith does his ear possess,
Great Master of Requests, chief favorite
In The Court of Heaven, Protector of the right
Of all true Supplicants, this, this alone,
Makes all addresses to the Heavenly Throne.
No formal, faithless prayer the Almighty hears, 13. Surely God will not hear
vanity, nor will the Almighty regard it.

Nor does he value mercenary tears.
No, though all these, whom we on Earth admire,
The glorious Chanters of the Heavenly Quire,
And all the Saints, and Martyrs with a shout,
Should usher in our prayers, and to boot
Good works, with all their meritorious sense
Should seem to make a Lane, by violence;
Yet without faith, all these attempts are vain,
For after all this courtly toil, and pain,
Such prayers will drop down in our mouths again.
As then, my friend, I judge it is a crime 14. Although thou say, thou shall
not see him, yet judgment is before him, therefore trust thou in him.

For men oppress't with grief, at any time,
(As thou do) of their Maker to complain,
So I esteem it absolutely vain,
Because I do assert God is so high,
And we so low, as to his Majesty*
We Should our selves, in humble terms apply;
And not in proud, and rash expostulations
Bitter complaints, and tragical expressions
Of our distressed conditions, as if none
Had suffered e're the like as we had done.
So I esteem it likewise labor lost,
Thus often of thy integrity to boast,
As I have heard thee. Then, I yet do see,
Another fault, which I must tax in thee,
And that is great despondency. indeed
In that thou do most palpably exceed.
For I Have observed in all thy frequent fits
Of passion, like one out of his wits,
Thou used in such expressions to rave,
"Why am I tortured thus, can I not have
"Access to God himself? can I not see
"That mighty Judge, who does so punish me?
"To him I would with confidence address,
"To him I Would speak, to him lay out my case,
"And show how I am pure, and innocent,
"And so deserve not this great punishment.
But O, where is he to be found? ah where
Does he reside? shall I search here, or there,
North, South, East, West, why all is but in vain,
For after all I never can obtain
A sight of him: from whence I plainly see
There Is nothing left, but black despair for me.
So that my soul of life is wearied,
And would choose even strangling to be freed
From its sad pains: O how I life abhor,
I hate it, and desire to live no more.
O let me die then, for I know his wrath
Will never cease, so long as I do breath.
For it is in vain to think that ever I
Can be on this side of mortality
Restored to my late prosperity.
Why truly, friend, it is no small provocation
For one to use such terms of desperation,
Under sad woes: it is true, men without hope
Will think upon a Dagger, or a Rope,
Not knowing God: but for those men who fear
This God, in saddest trials to despair,
Is a great sin, a fault intolerable,
A foul offense, a crime unpardonable.
What, to despair! to give all over for lost,
When in the Ocean of afflictions toss't!
To let our spirits fail, and weakly faint,
Like Female souls, in such an exigent,
When we have most need to be confident!
To show some courage in prosperity,
And in the Battle of adversity,
When we have most use for it, to have none,
Is truly, what I cannot think upon,
Without disdain! to sink, when we should swim,
To lie flat on the ground, when we should climb
To th'mountain tops, so cowardly to shrink,
When we should stand to it bravely: is I think
A quality which he, who valueth
Has neither courage, prudence, grace, nor faith,
Thus to despair, alace how meanly base!
And unbecoming one of Abrams race,
Of Abraham, that supereminent
Undaunted, constant, and believing Saint;
Who in his God such confidence did place,
As he could not despair in any case:
And for that reason was of all esteemed
The father of the faithful, -- --
Should thou despair then! one who art descended
OF the house of faith, one who has still depended
Upon the promise to thy Fathers made:
And as I see, do yet thy self persuade
That thy Redeemer lives, whom no man has
Seen ever yet, but with the eyes of faith:
What, one of so much faith thus to despair!
It Is truly, friend, a thing not ordinar.
Yes, one of his integrity so fond,
Which should support his faith, thus to despond!
Like those, who conscious of some horrid crimes,
Spin out their days in melancholy Chines!
-- What to despair! let us hear no more for shame
Of this despair: I hate its very name.
-- Despair! I know indeed some impious men,
Who thinking death will ease them of their pain,
Which here they suffer for their sins, and that
By it their crimes will be obliterat,
Like madmen, at such time for death do baul,
Supposing the kind grave will cover all
Their lewd offenses; but I hope, my friend,
You Are none of those who think death puts an end
To all our pains, nay surely thou do know,
And firmly do believe things are not so.
For then the fiery trial, but begins,
And after death, we are punished for our sins,
More then in life: now we are but arraigned
And may plead mercy; then we are constrained
TO endure those torments, which God has ordain*d
For unrepenting sinners, and must ly
Under his wrath to all eternity.
Rouz up thy self then, and despair no more,
But trust in God, for he will yet restore
Thee to thy former state, and let thee see
He does retain more kindness yet for thee,
Then thou do either merit, or expect:
Trust in him then, let faith thy heart direct
In this sad trial, do no more despair,
For he is a loving God, and will take care
Of thee, and thy concerns and after all
When he has tried thee fully, he will let fall
His wrath against thee; and in pure compassion,
Deliver thee out of this sad temptation?
He will restore thee to thy former state,
For all that thou have seen, or suffered yet.
And now, my friends, I must again to you 15 But now because i^ is not (...),
he has united in his anger, yet he knows (...) not in great extremity.

Address my self once more: you see then how
This good man is not so much punished
For former sins, as he is visited,
In wrath, for his despondency, and passion;
Though yet our God has used such moderation
In trying of him, as he has no cause
TO exclaim against the rigor of his Laws,
For yet he lives, and may yet live to see
Himself from all his present sorrows free.
Judge then if he has reason, constantly
Thus to complain, and foolishly to cry,
When he has suffered no extremity.
I therefore do conclude that Job has spoke 1^ Therefore does Job open his
mouth in vain, h^^ mul^^y lies words without knowledge.

Such language in his pains, as might provoke
The wrath of God, and make him yet to pour
Worse judgments on him, then he to this hour
Has ever felt, and it were equity,
That he, with whom he has so tenderly
Dealt all this while, for his despondency
Should yet be further punished, but I hope
He Will have compassion on him now, and stop
The current of his Wrath; which for my part*
I wish he may do quickly from my heart:
Lest, if his torments be continued,
He may in his extravagance proceed:
And so his Heavenly Father irritate,
As he for ever may exheridate
This ungrate wretch, and never own him more
To be his Child, as he has done before;
This winnowing trial, and may do again,
Could he from his unjust complaints abstain.
Cap. XXXVI.
BReathing a while, till he might recollect 1. Elihu also proceeded, and said.

His spirits, he begun again to speak,
As formerly, and with a judgment stayed
The zealous young man thus continued.
Suffer me yet a little while, said he, 2. Suffer me yet a little, and I will
show thee, that I have yet to speak on Gods behalf.

To speak* my friend, and I Will impart to thee
What further I have yet to plead, and say
On Gods behalf, suffer me now, I pray
To speak but yet a little, in defense
Of my great Master, that I may from thence
Inform thee of his Power, and Majesty,
And thy own dullness, and stupidity,
Who all this while have boldly argued
Against his procedure in thy case, and said
'Twas hard to send so great a punishment,
Upon a man so just, and innocent
As thou art: I shall therefore freely show,
How much thou to this mighty God do owe,
Who has been pleased, with so much patience,
To hear thee talk so on thy innocence,
And even attempt t'arraign his Providence;
Without inflicting yet some harder things,
Upon thee, for thy sinful murmurings.
Allow me then to speak, for I intend 3. I will fetch my knowledge from afar*
and I will ascribe righteousness to my maker.

Against all opponents stoutly to defend
The honor of my Maker; and maintain
Against all mortals, who of him complain,
That he is all justice, mercy, and compassion,
And uses in his wrath great moderation;
That he is all virtue, truth, and righteousness,
And more then I am able to express.
Allow me then to speak, allow me, pray,
And seriously advert to what I say
Upon the subject; for though my intent
Be to pursue my former argument,
And show the power of him, who sits on high,
Clothed with eternal Light, and Majesty:
Yet not from reasons topics, but indeed,
From such as do all reason far exceed,
I mean to draw my mediums, and prove
That the first mover, by whom all things move,
Who no beginning had, and knows no end,
Is what our reason cannot comprehend.
I Will speak of him, as of that Deity,
Perceptible by the spirit, not by the eye.
Who Is great beyond our reach, who is all in all,
Whose Character is supernatural.
Be pleased to hear me then, for seriously 4. For truly my words shall not be
false: he that is perfect in knowledge is with thee.

I mean to speak, with great sincerity,
Upon the matter; I intend to speak
Nothing but truth, as God shall me direct.
In sober terms, I shall my self express,
In what concerns thy present wretchedness,
For I do fully understand thy case.
First then, that I may speak in vindication, 5. Behold God is mighty, and
despises not any, he is mighty in strength, and wisdom.

Of my great Maker upon this occasion:
I Would have thee know that even the best of men
Do, but with great difficulty, obtain
Some random knowledge of the qualities
Of that great God, who dwells above the Skies.
The language of his ways we cannot read,
Whence all our gross mistakes of him proceed:
Our ignorance of him makes us to err
In our behavior to him, whensoe're
He Is pleased t'afflict us: and imagine that
He censures none, but those, whom he does hate,
That he has no regard to innocence,
When such good men are punished, and thence
Reflecting on our own integrity,
We think he does us no small injury.
Advert then pray, and I will teach thee now,
By a most lively demonstration, how
Thou may hereafter know him perfectly,
And thence thy former errors, rectify.
Behold then, he is mighty, and exceeds
In power the reputation of his deeds:
He Is high, and mighty, and does far excel
All Kings, and Princes that on Earth do dwell:
In strength he is highly super-eminent,
His mighty arm does shake the Firmament:
In wisdom, he so fully does abound,
And is in every knowledge so profound,
That all our knowledge, all our art, and wit,
Is but mere folly, laid in scale, with it.
Yet as he is great, so he is good, and just,
And will do wrong to nothing made of dust.
Ready at all occasions he appears
To do men justice, and he gently hears
All their Petitions; he will not despise
The poor man in his suit: for in his eyes
Both rich, and poor are equal: every man
Who with uplifted hands, but faintly can
Say, Lord have mercy on me, he will hear,
And all may freely, without any fear,
To him approach; all may to him address
In person, and with ease lay out their case.
Access to him is easily obtained,
Without the introduction of a friend:
Without expense of waiting, and delay;
And being shifted still from day to day,
As men in Courts of mortal Kings are used,
And after all, either their suits refused,
Or laid aside; and when their means are gone,
Pitied by many, but supplied by none,
To Endure the hateful name of hingers on.
No, all men may from him have audience,
What ever be their case, without expense
Of any thing but Prayer; and quickly find
Though he is great, yet he is just, and kind
To all that truly call upon his Name,
And, if we have not audience, we may blame
None but our selves: nay, though we should be mute,
If even our hearts but speak, he will grant our suit.
Now, as he is great, and just, so he is kind 6 He preserves not the life of
the wicked, but gives right to the poor.

To all good men: for when he calls to mind,
How some bad persons void of conscience,
Triumphing in their formal violence,
Taking the advantage of the times, and glad
To have occasion to oppress, have laid
Themselves to do all mischiefs to those men,
Who, when injured only to God complain.
Hence, though these godless men have done much wrong
To many, and yet God has let them long
Live at their ease unpunished; after all
Armed with pure Justice, he will upon them fall;
Break them to pieces, seize what they possess,
And spoil them of their unjust purchasses:
In their estates he will make a sudden change,
And all those poor men's injuries revenge,
Upon the Persons, and the Families
Of those, who did commit these injuries.
And, though he suffer those bad men to live 7 He withdraws not his eyes from
the righteous; but with kings are they on the throne: yea, he does establish
them forever, and they are exalted.

Long time, in plenty, and to them does give
What e're their hearts can wish, yet all the time
He spares their persons, he does mind their crime
He lets the righteous suffer misery,
And sad distress, but has a watchful eye
On all that do them wrong: and in the end,
All those good men, that upon him depend,
Not only he will restore, to all which these
Oppressors did most inhumanely seize.
But will bring them in favor, and esteem
With those that wear the Sacred Diadem.
Whence they shall be enabled to protect
All pious men from the oppressing Sect.
Nay; though some time The Almighty God permits 8 And if they be bound in
fetters, and be holden in cords of affliction.

Such ravenous men, in their oppressing fits,
To do even what they list against his Saints,
As if he seemed to slight their sad complaints,
Whilst in closs Prison, fettered, manacled,
Fast tied with cords, on bread and water fed:
Sleeping on boards, and benches at the best,
They in their wearied bones can have no rest;
Whilst thieves, and drunkards, Rogues and murderers,
Are now their only fellow prisoners;
And lodged in the same room with them, whilst none
Dare pity them, or but emit a groan
On their behalf, without a strong suspicion,
That they are favorers of their superstition.
Whilst choked with breathing of the crowd, and stink
Of those, who void, and those, who smoke, and drink:
Whereall the day is spent, as it were night
In a perpetual flame of Candlelight:
Whilst their sad ears are pestered constantly
With noise of horrid oaths, and ribaldry,
So that they find no opportunity
For their devotion; whilst arraigned, condemned,
And the hour of their execution named.
So that, by all appearance, there is none
Can think, with reason, but these men are gone:
He breaks their fetters; he does soon unty
Their cords, and sets them all at liberty,
Who were perhaps next day designed to die.
For by all these afflictions his intent 9 Then he shows them their works, and
their transgressions, that they have exceeded.

Is only, in great love, to represent
To these good men, how grossly they have erred,
As well as others have done, and preferred
Their own conceits to what was right and just,
And have not in his mercy put their trust.
Hence he persuades them quickly to apply 10 He opens also their ears to
discipline and command^^h that they return (...) iniquity.

Their minds to true, and solidpiety,
With greater zeal, then they did formerly.
By these afflictions he does them convince
Of all their failings, their escapes, and sins;
And makes them for the future live so well,
As they no more sad persecution feel.
For if such men do with unfeigned heart 11 If they obey, and serve him, they
shall spend their days ^n prosperity, and their years in pleasure.

Return to God; all blessings he will impart
To them, their days in pleasure they shall spend,
Their years in honor, joy, and wealth shall end.
But if they don't, but follow foolishly 12. But if they obey not, they shall
perish by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge.

The sinful methods of hypocrisy,
As many do, who yet would be esteemed
Great saints, and are such by the vulgar named:
Whilst in their hearts they think on nothing less,
But entertain all sort of wickedness,
Which they imagine, may promove in the* least*
The smallest part of their own interest.
Then shall they fall like such, then shall they die,
Like all the followers of hypocrisy.
Hypocrisy! and here is a sin indeed, 13. But the hypocrites in heart heap up
wrath: they cry not, when he binds them.

Which in Gods sight does many sins exceed.
A complex sin, made up of many parts,
A catalogue of all pernicious Arts:
A close concealer of all villainy,
A great debaucher of integrity:
A gilded sin, composed of all that is bad,
A crying sin in pious masquerade:
A couz'ning sin, a sin so intricat,
As all, save God, it easily does cheat.
A sin so painted, sized, and varnished,
With pious Oils, and so well shaddowed,
As it can hardly be discovered
To be a sin, by any mortal eye.
A sin, that seems t'abhor impiety,
And yet does hug it; such a sin indeed,
In my opinion does all sins exceed.
And sure I know, God, who does falsehood hate,
Above all others does abominate
This cunning sin; and thence we often read
How this close sin God has discovered
By his great art. For as we daily see,
How many counterfeited Coins there be,
By worst of villains stamped, and fashioned,
Where Silver is so cunningly allayed
With courser Metals, as they will endure
The Touchstone, and the File, and seem so pure,
As one would think they of true fineness were;
Yet put them in a crucible, and there
By heat of Fire, the cheat will soon appear.
So when the Hypocrite does pleasantly
Enjoy himself in great tranquillity,
With such a specious, but adulterat show
Of piety, he gulls the people so,
As in his Fig-leav'd Coat, and zealous paint,
He passes current for an upright Saint.
But let him once be brought, as others are
To the fiery trial, then he does appear
To be the person that he is indeed,
Then all his falsehood is discovered;
His timorous spirit soon does liquify,
His soul begins to shrink: he cannot apply
Himself to God, but passes stupidly
His time away, without all meditation,
Or thoughts of Heaven, as upon such occasion
All good men do:
But hardened in his sins, and knowing well
How much his former actions merit Hell:
He thinks that now it is hardly worth his pain
T'apply to God for mercy, or complain
To him, whom he has so much irritate;
But as contented with his present state,
Takes of his Masque, and acts now openly,
What he before performed more cautiously.
Then he lets loose the reins of inclinations, 14. They die in youth, and their
life is among the unclean.

And runs like mad man into all temptations;
Then as in youthful veins, his blood does rage,
And he must find out pleasures to assuage
The horrid torment of his melancholy;
And so expends some years in sin, and folly.
For that so rude, disordered fermentation,
Of The mass of Blood, does quickly give occasion
To sharp Diseases, which do warmly fall
Upon his body; and e're he can call
To God, for mercy, without more delay
Do hurry him, and all his sins away.
Thus then, my friend, we see Afflictions are 15. He delivers the poor in his
affliction, and opens their ears in oppression.

Most necessary, and we must prepare
Our selves for Trials, and severe Temptations,
(As thou do now endure) at all occasions:
Because by these, our God is used to try
The difference betwixt true Piety,
And base sophisticate Hypocrisy.
For, as the best of Grain is pestered
With the foul mixture of some specious Weed,
Which growing up in the same Field with it,
Does the good Grain so slily counterfeit;
As while cut down, thresh'd out, and winnowed,
The false Grain cannot be discovered.
So in the Summer of Prosperity
When true Religion, and Hypocrisy
Appear to grow up in one Field together,
It Is hard for Mortals to distinguish either;
But in the Harvest of Adversity,
When cut down, thresh'd, and winnowed, by, and by
We can distinguish what is bad, what is good,
And Hypocrites are quickly understood
In time of Trouble: then indeed, as Wheat
Is from the Chaff, by winnowing separate:
So Hypocrites are all discovered,
And from just, pious men distinguished.
But those, my friend, who are in heart sincere,
Though their ingrain'd Afflictions appear
To be of the deepest die, and do endure,
For a long time; yet God at length will sure
Deliver them out of them all, and show
That neither to themselves, nor friends they owe
Such great deliverance, but to him alone,
Who Is their Redeemer; and forsakes none
In their Afflictions, who upon him call,
But hears them, and at length does grant them all
Their hearts can wish; and does instruct them too
What for the future such good men should do
TO evite such Troubles.
Even so, my friend, if thou had put thy trust 16. Even so would he have
removed thee out of the strait into a broad place where there is no straitness,
and that which should be set on thy table, should be full of fatness.

In his great Name, and not have been unjust
In thy Complaints; he had relieved thee too,
Out of thy sad Afflictions, long ere now,
Before this time he had thee liberate
From these sad pains, and, without all debate.
Restored thee fully to thy former state.
But thou in thy Afflictions have raved, 17. But thou have fulfilled the
judgment of the wicked, judgment and justice take hold on thee.

And have so very foolishly behaved,
The have so provoked him, as it would appear,
'Had left thee in a Labyrinth of fear,
And of thy restitution took no care.
And now that I thy Case have opened, 18. Because there is wrath, beware, lest
he take thee away with his stroke, then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.

And shown'n thee, why thou art so punished;
In the next place, I must give thee advice
Not to esteem thy self too just, and wise;
Nor think that God has done thee injury,
By plunging thee in so much misery,
When all the have suffered must be understood
TO have been intended merely for thy good.
But, with great calmness, humbly meditate
On the circumstances of thy present state:
Confess thy Errors, seriously implore
His pardon, and resolve to do no more,
As thou have done: lest, in his burning wrath
He prosecute thee closely to thy death:
And then no offers of some thousand Prayers,
Largitions, Fastings, Pennances, and Tears
Can ransom thee, for thou must quickly die
Without Repentance, and for ever ly
In the dark Prison of Eternity.
Assure thy self, my friend, this is thy Case, 19. Will he esteem thy riches?
no not gold, nor all the forces of strength.

If thou repent not quickly, this alace
Will be thy final Sentence; this thy Doom,
Which thou must suffer in all time to come.
And of this Sentence no Reprival can
Be purchased by the Art, or Wit of Man:
Nor Gold, nor Friendship, nor all Artifices
Of Humane Labor: nor the close devices,
Of cunning Interceeders can delay
The Execution, but for half a day
Of this same Sentence: for be confident
With Gifts thou can not bribe the Omnipotent.
But O me thinks I hear thee say, if Death 20. Desire not the night, when
people are cut* off in their place.

Be all that I must suffer in his Wrath:
Why let him kill me, I am well content,
And shall esteem Death a kind Punishment:
For I am wearied of my Life, and know
I never shall have rest until I go
Down to the Grave. Why here, my friend, again
Is a gross error, and I must complain
Of thy so frequent wishing thou might die,
And in the Grave enjoy tranquillity.
For though Death be a thing I must confess,
Which we ought all to meet with cheerfulness:
And every man, who does the Almighty fear
Should surely, at all times himself prepare
To welcome Death, yet thus before the time
Designed by God, to wish it is, is a crime.
And is, as if one in a raging fit,
Should headlong throw himself into a Pit.
We must not wish for death, nor foolishly
When winds of troubles blow, desire to dye:
No, we must leave the rules of life and death
To God alone, and whilst he gives us breath,
We ought to live content with every state,
Which he is pleased for us to allocate,
From time to time, and when he thinks it fit
That we should die: why let us then submit
All our concerns, with patience to the blow,
And not down to the grave in anger go,
As if we would die whether he would or no.
Take heed then pray, lest through impatience 21 Take heed* regard not
iniquity: for th^s thou have rather chosen then affliction.

Of thy afflictions thou give God offense.
For men should rather choose to undergo
Even the extremity of pain, and woe,
Then by complaining, in some sullen fit,
(As thou alace have often done) commit
The least of sin. Nay if thou do expect
That such complaints as these at length may break
The stream of thy afflictions, and so
Thou through the River of thy woes may go
With ease, and safety, and be thence relieved
From misery, trust me, thou art deceived.
For, as young Children vex't with their disease
Of Itch, by scratching think to find some ease,
But after they have scratched their skin to pieces,
In stead of finding ease, their pain increases.
So thou, my friend, by such complaints as these,
May well augment the force of thy disease,
But thou can not allay it; trust me then,
It Is a great folly for thee to complain.
For what is complaining else, but quarrelling 22 Behold God exalts by his
power: who teaches him?

Of Gods procedure? What but murmuring
Against his justice? What but ignorance
Of what God is, and foolish arrogance,
Which thence proceeds? allow me then again,
Allow me, pray, a little to explain
The Power, Dominion, Wisdom, Majesty,
And Equity of him, who sits on high:
All which I do intend to evidence
Even from the common works of Providence;
That I may show thee all thy weaknesses,
For, had thou understood such things as these,
Which are so obvious, and at all occasions,
Afford us subject of high Contemplations:
Under thy Trial thou had not behaved
So sinfully, the had not so madly raved
In thy expressions, nor, with so much spleen,
Quarreled thy Maker, over, and again.
Know then, my friend, whatever be our state,
We must not quarrel God at any rate:
Or, if we do, we'll find our labor vain
And we had better suffer, then complain.
For as he is himself exalted far
Above all Powers, that e're created were:
So whom he pleases, he does quickly raise,
And others he as quickly does debase,
As he thinks fit: in all which he is so wise,
As he from none on Earth does need advice.
And as his Supreme Power does not allow 23. Who has enjoined him his way? or
who can say, thou have wrought iniquity?

That any man should teach him what to do,
So we to what he does should all submit,
For he will do whatever he thinks fit.
Remember then he is thy God, and know 24. Remember that thou magnify his
works, which men behold.

How much the whole Creation does show
His Power, and Glory: for by what we see
In all his works, we know that none but he
Does rule the World, and by computation,
Of what we do admire in the Creation,
We may attempt to take his elevation.
For even from these common Phoenomena 25. Every man may see it, man may behold
it afar off.

Some little Maps we may with safety draw,
Of the vast Region of his Providence,
And through the very Microscope of sense
Perceive so much, as we may learn from thence
How great he is. -- --
Yet after all, the best of us I doubt, 26. Behold God is great, and we know
him not, neither can the number of his years be searched out.

Cannot with all his curious Wit, find out
His true Perfection, which no Mortal sure
Can further see, then in the Miniature
Of his external works: for he is great
Beyond what all our Art can calculate.
He governed all, before what now we see,
Appeared to us: 'twas God, 'twas only he,
That ruled all before Infant Time did fly
Out of the belly of Eternity:
To which (though we on Earth would fain restrain
Its rapide flight) it hastes, with speed again.
Before it in the World set up a Shop,
And sold that necessary Toy called Hope,
Which every day we buy at any rate,
The Pedling Churl is pleased to estimate,
Before this Time appeared, e're it was known,
He ordered all things from his heavenly Throne,
And will so do, when Time is broke, and gone.
Let none attempt then by Philosophy,
T'unriddle this great divine mystery
Of Providence: but rest content with what
May with their reason be proportionat:
For even the knowledge of those common things,
Which we by art can fathom, surely brings
No little satisfaction to our mind:
For as in Copper Ore we sometimes find
Some grains of Gold ly hidden in the Vein:
So, without doubt, Gods outward works contain
Some scattered grains of his Excellency,
Perceptible by a just, serious eye.
Though, after all, the knowledge we attain
By all these outward signs do not explain
What God is fully, no, that is indeed
A knowledge, which does all our art exceed.
For God's a thing incomprehensible,
Infinite, boundless, and invisible,
And by no rules of art definible.
Then let us view the Heavens, and see what there, 27. For he makes final the
drops of water, they pour down rain according to the vapor thereof

Does worth our admiration appear:
And first we may discern with little pain,
Even in that small phenomenon of rain,
No small appearance, no small demonstration,
O'th God of Natures powerful operation,
In ord'ring on it: for he commands the Sun,
As in his daily progress he does run,
About the Earth, to suck up here, and there
What vapors moist, and unctuous do appear
Upon its surface, which he gathers
In several Clouds, and these distributeth
In all the quarters of the spacious Air,
Whilst out of the vapors he does rain prepare.
That finished, and those clouds all mustered
Before him, ready, if so ordered,
With their whole force upon the Earth to fall,
And in a general Deluge drown us all.
As once they did loosed by his mighty hand,
And would do yet, if he should so command:
He kindly does their violence restrain,
And makes them only squirt themselves in rain.
So, that, as through a Seive, in little drops, 28. Which the clouds do drop,
and distill upon man abundantly.

Those waters now do fall, and feed the hopes
Of The Labourer, when he perceives his Grain
Spread out its ears, by the influence of rain:
And every drop, which on the Earth does fall,
In its due season prove spermatical.
But O, what art, what language can declare 29. Also can any understand he
spreadings of the clouds, or the noise of histabernacle.

The motions of these Clouds, whilst here, and there
In troops they ramble, and to us appear
T'observe no order; but so scattering
Themselves, as if they went a forraging,
Through all the spacious Sky, would make us stand
Amazed, if so we did not understand
The Almighty is their Captain General,
That he commands in chief, and gives out all
The orders for these motions, so that we
Even in those ramblings do his glory see.
For when by their great Master ordered,
IN the twinkling of an eye, they will over spread
The face of Heavens, and make all darkness there,
Where late the Sun most brightly did appear*
There in Battalia for some time they stand,
Expecting further orders; when at hand
Another Body of hot Clouds he makes
Fall on that Host, which, with great fury breaks
That mighty Squadron, yet it does not yield
At first, nor in disorder quit the Field,
For all the others fury, but does make
A strong resistance to their fierce attaque:
Long time they fight, whilst we with fear and wonder,
Expect they will tear the Universe assunder:
For Lightnings in small Parties furiously
Burst through the thickest Clouds, and in the Sky
Make a strange Figure, and not only there,
But even on Earth their fury does appear,
When now and then beasts, buildings, men, what not
Are burnt, and wounded by their random shot.
Nay Fishes in the Sea, when they do hear
Such rumbling in the Firmament, do fear
A general Conflagration, and run
Down to the bottom of the Seas, to shun
The fury of those Combatants: but there
They hardly safety find, for every where
Those Warring Clouds do make a mighty sound,
And fright all both above, and under ground.
Yet after all, when we do still expect 31 For by them he judges the people,
and gives meat in abundance.

Those Clouds of Water will in pieces break,
By this so strong collision; when we
Confounded quite, by what we hear and see,
Do think those Clouds will let their Liquor out,
Not as through Sieve, but as through Water-spout,
And in great horror, and sad consternation,
Expect a full and general inundation;
Why then we see how gracious Providence
Does order, that for our convenience,
Which we suspected had been ordered
For our destruction; and imagined
We were all lost* --
For when those Warriors have their fury spent,
And with their mutual force, each other rent:
The event of this Battle does produce
No more, than what is proper for the use
Of every thing that lives: for by and by
Those Clouds do only drop, as formerly,
In showers of Rain; as they are accustomed,
By which the earth is kindly moistened;
Rewarding all the laborers toil and sweat,
And by fair Harvest, does afford us meat.
Then if at any time to evidence 32 With clouds he covers the light, and
commands it not to shine, by the cloud that comes betwi^t.

The vast extent of the power of Providence,
He should command the Sun to hide his face,
(Which so much of his glory does express)
And gathering in his scattered rays to shroud
Himself within the mantle of a cloud:
Why he is obeyed: and we, for many days,
Condole the absence of those glorious rays:
Whilst Clouds, Foggs, Rain, are the only things which now
We see about us, and with much ado
Deprived of that comfortable light
We faintly do distinguish day from night.
Yet must we not despair, but still expect
That when our God thinks fit, the Sun will take
That covering from his face, and by and by
Appear as bright, as he did formerly.
And now again I must with no small wonder, 33 The voice thereof shows
concerning it, the cattle also concerning the vapor.

Speak of this great Phoenomenon of Thunder,
This dreadful subject, this stupendous thing,
That only should attend so great a King,
And in its high, commanding Dialect,
The pomp and grandeur of its Master speak.
A thing, whose horrid noise does so confound
The race of Creatures all the world around,
That those, that live on Earth, in Sea, and Air,
At noise of Thunder, tremble all for fear.
Cap. XXXVII.
AT this I also quake, my heart does beat, 1 At this also my heart trembles
and is moved out of its place.

Frighted almost out of its proper seat:
For when on this great work of God I think,
The very name of Thunder makes me shrink.
Hark how the Almighty does his speech direct 2 Hear attentively the noise of
his voice, and the sound that goes out of his mouth.

To us in this same thundering Dialect:
Hark -- even at this time, whilst I yet do speak:
Hark -- how the noise increases more and more,
Whilst all Heavens great Artilery do roar:
Hark how his words do sound from North to South,
In flames, and lightning issuing from his mouth.
All under Heavens do hear them, and adm 3 He directs it under the whole
heaven, and his lightning unto the ends of the earth.

The voice of God amidst those clouds of fire:
Not that this Thunder is of such extent,
As all that breath below the Firmament,
Hear it at once, as if it were general;
No, at one time he does not speak to all;
But to what ever people he would speak,
Thither as soon he does himself direct
In this same dreadful language, for he will
Be heard by all: yes, he will thunder still,
Until the deafest, and most hardened ear
Do all the words of that loud message hear.
For first, before we hear this dreadful voice, 4 After it a voice roareth, he
thundereth with the voice of his excellency, and he will not stay them when his
voice is heard.

Before our ^lower sense can hear the noise,
Which, when the mighty Prince of Princes speaks
Amidst that heap of rattling Clouds, he makes;
We see some Troops of Avant-Curiors fly
Hither, and thither, lightly through the Sky,
Known by the name of Lightnings, these appear
Only to show to mankind, as it were,
That the Almighty does himself draw near.
Not, but that first, with reason we suppose
The watery Clouds, through whose Battalions those
Have made their way by force, are wholly broke,
Not able to sustain the furious shock
OF the fiery Clouds, by which the noise is made,
But that by the eye these are discovered,
Before the duller, counterwinding ear
The noise in its perfection can hear.
For the light lightning in an instant flies
Through the Air, and soon appears before our eyes;
Whilst the heavier sound a slower march does make,
And through the Azure by degrees does break;
But in a little, after these appear;
Then a most sense-confounding voice we hear:
A voice of power, a voice of excellence,
A voice of glory, and preeminence
Above all voices: a stupendous noise,
A most majestic, and commanding voice.
Nay, after in the Thunder he does speak,
Yet still these Lightnings light incursions make,
Even to our very Gates, yea furiously
In at our doors and windows they do fly.
As if, whilst the main body of this Thunder
Encamped aloft, t'augment our fear, and wonder,
These forragers were sent to kill, and plunder.
For these Pickeerers, firing here and there,
Do with their small Shot raise no little fear,
Killing, or making of such subtle wounds,
As even their sight the Surgeons skill confounds,
Whilst by a Thunderbolt, the bones within
Are broke to pieces, and the outward skin
Untouched: nay sometimes these adventurers will
Perform some other pranks, to show their skill
In shooting, even on things inanimate,
As if with sport they would us sometimes treat,
And to allay our fears, would play the wag,
Melting a sum of Money in a Bag,
This still tied, sealed, and closs, or emptying
A Hogshead full of Wine; whilst no such thing
Does to the Cooper, by the Cask appear,
That being still untouched, sound, and entire:
With many such too numerous to relate,
Both on things living, and inanimate,
As we may daily see. Yet God will not
For all his Thunder, stay those murdering shot.
But still permits the allarum'd world to feell
Some hurt from those small bombs, which makes them reel
Like mad men, and in their reiterat fits,
Run almost out of all their little wits.
Thus, when our God does speak, in fire, and thunder, 5. God thundereth
marvellously with his voice, great things does he, which we cannot comprehend.

He seems to rent the very Heavens assunder,
As if he now to mankind, in his wrath,
Did nothing, but a full destruction breath:
As if he meant t'unhinge the doors of Nature,
And let in death on every living creature.
Nay, so he speaks, as if he did intend
To bring this goodly Fabric to an end.
Yet after all he is still so kind to men,
As he shuts up this terrible Campaign,
At last in a Cessation of rain.
But what needs more, 'twere tedious to relate,
How many other things both high, and great,
Our God performs: things strange and mavelous,
Things neither known, nor understood by us:
Things, which our proud philosophy transcend,
Things, which our reason cannot comprehend.
Of such great things then I shall speak no more,
But only here, as I have said before,
By these great outward works, we may perceive
With how much reason, we do all believe,
That he, who made all these, must surely be
In greatness far beyond all that we see.
On less things now then my discourse shall run,
A word of snow, and frost, and I have done.
He, who did all create, does all command, 6. For he says to the snow, be the^
on the earth, likewise to the small ^^in, and to the great ^ain of his strength.

Holds all the Keys of Nature in his hand,
Unlocks the doors of these great Magazines
Of rouling Clouds, where vapors of all kinds
Are keep'd in store. --
Whence as he judges it convenient,
Now this, now that upon the Earth is sent:
And but a word he uses, for annon,
As he does speak, the business is done.
He says to Snow, go thou, and quickly fall
On Earth, and as soon we are pouldred all;
Woods, Mountains, Valleys, Houses, all below
Are wrapped up in a sheet of ivory snow,
Annon he calls for rain, both great, and small,
And bids now this, now that upon us fall,
All do obey him: all do quickly run,
Where ordered, and what he commands is done.
For instantly down from the Clouds does fall, 7. He seals up the hand of
every man; that all men may know his work.

Such quantity of rain, as makes us all
Give over our works in the field, and lay aside
Our laboring Tools, and within doors abide.
Then go the Beasts too to their several dens, 8 Then the beasts go into dens,
and remain in their places.

And there themselves do shelter, while it rains.
Not able to resist the storm, and there
The fiercest of them is a Prisoner:
Until the rain be over, and the sky
Again put on a bright serenity.
That rapid wind, which wrapped up in a cloud 9 Out of the south comes the
whirlewind, and cold out of the north.

Around us for some time does roar aloud:
The whirlwind, which on all hands blusters so,
As if it out of every Point did blow,
Does, as I take it, from the Southern Pole,
Upon us, with a deal of fury roll.
As by the boistrous North Wind cold is thought
To be into our Southern Countries brought.
For with that wind the hoary frost appears 10 By the breath of God frost is
given, and the breadth of the waters is straightened.

With Ice-sickles dangling about his ears:
Upon our running Rivers he does seize,
And spite of their swift current makes them freeze,
As also Lakes, Pools, Ditches, Marshes;
And where before we sailed, now in a trice
We run in Sledges all along the Ice.
He makes the Clouds, with constant drudgery, 11 Also by watering he wearieth
the thick cloud: he seat tereth his bright cloud.

(Like Slaves condemned to pump) incessantly
Fill all our Canals; and the earth supply,
With water at all times, as it does need,
And in that service, they are so hurried
Hither, and thither posted, here, and there,
In this, or the other place, nay every where,
As he thinks fit; that as't were out of breath,
They halt, till with his hand he scatters
Them all along the Sky, and makes them flow
In gentle rain, whether they will or no.
For all those numerous vapour-chests, which we 12 And it is turned round about
by his counsels: that they may do what soever he commands them upon the face
of the world in the earth.

Call clouds, and counter-tumbling daily see
Above our heads, by him are ordered,
Assembled, or in parties quartered
Even as he will: he makes them turn, and reel
In The Air, like the swist motion of a Wheel;
When he thinks fit: he makes them pour out rain
In any place of the earth he does ordain.
Those Clouds on several errands he does send, 13 He causes it to come,
whether for correction, or for his land, or for mercy.

Some judgments, others mercies do portend:
Each of 'em does its own commission bear,
For good, or ill: and none of 'em appear,
Without a special warrant any where.
And now observe, O Job, take heed I pray, 14 Hearken unto this, o ^ob,
standfull, and consider the wondrous works of God.

Compose thy self, advert to what I say,
Consider, pray, consider seriously
The works of God; and in sobriety
Remark the methods of his providence,
His power, his justice, and his excellence.
Do understand those things? do thou conceive 15 Do thou know when God
disposed them, and caused the light of his cloud to shine?

The meaning of those wonders? do believe
That all those Clouds, do march, retire, disband,
Or war amongst themselves at his command.
Do understand their motions, here and there, 16 Do thou know the
b^ll^ncing of the clouds, the wondrous works of him which is perfect in
knowledge?

Or how by a just Balance in the Air,
He makes them hang above us? do thou know
On what they do depend? or can thou show
By what art he does raise those Clouds on high,
Beyond the reach of sight, and by and by,
Does let them down so low, as one with pain,
Would think they could be hoised up agaen.
Which certainly is a great demonstration
Of his vast knowledge, and with admiration
On such things we should look. --
Do understand, my friend, from whence the heat* 17 How thy garments are
warm, when he quieteth the earth by the southwind?

Proceeds, which is so violently great,
As sometimes it can scarce be tollerat?
When gentle Breezes from the South do blow,
But when out of the North, it is not so.
Do understand how he the Air has spread, 18 Have thou with him spread out
the sky, which is strong, and as a molten looking glass?

Like a fair Sheet of Lawn above thy head?
The thin, and fluid Air, often broke to pieces
By justling Clouds, and violent impresses
Of Lightnings: and yet after all, this Air
Appears transparent, and so calmly fair,
As it in pleasant brightness, does surpass
The beauty of the finest Crystal Glass.
If then thou understandest all those things, 19 Teach ^s what we shall say
unto him; for we cannot order our speech, by reason of darkness.

And would thy self plead with the King of kings,
In person: pray be pleased to let us hear,
What thou would say, if God should now appear
Upon his Throne? if he should show his face,
And bid thee freely speak upon thy case?
What could thou say? or if thou dare not speak
To him thy self, but do perhaps expect
That we should be thy Proctors, tell us pray,
What we to God on thy behalf shall say?
For thou, it seems, great knowledge do enhance,
Whilst we are buried in deep ignorance.
Then which of us thy friendswouldst have to speak 20 Shall ^ betold him, that
I speak? it a man speak, surely he shall be swallowed up.

To this great God in thy defense, and make
Apology for thee: pray let us hear,
For, if thou do desire I should appear
In thy behalf, I must demand excuse,
For, seriously, my friend, I do not use
To plead with God for any man, indeed
I do not think it lawful so to plead:
But if thou will that I should pray for thee
To that just God, who does both hear, and see
What passes now amongst us, let me know
And I shall quickly do it, for if so,
I do but that good office, which I owe
To all men: I in Prayer dare address
At all times, and for all men, but to press
My God to give a reason, why he now
Does punish thee: truth that I dare not do.
No, no, for to be free with thee; my friend,
There Is no man here dares so express his mind,
As thou have done? at least, I Am not the man
Dares undertake this; for I neither can
Nor dare, by public Program, intimate
That I am with my Maker to debate:
For, if I did, I might expect a stroke
From him* whom, by so doing I Would provoke
To wrath against me, and for my offense,
That I by death should soon be hurried hence.
But what needs further, let us cast our eyes, 21 And now men see not the
bright light, which is in the clouds: but the wind passes, and clean set in
them.

But, at this instant, up into the Skies:
Let us observe but how the troubled Air,
All overspread with Clouds does now appear:
Who by their throng Eclipse the Heavens light,
And keep the glorious Sun out of our sight.
See how those Clouds from every quarter march,
In several bodies through the spacious Arch,
In dreadful squadrons strong, and numerous,
All hastening to the general Rend^vous:
To Attend the King of Heavens, who, as I guess,
By such great preparations, as these,
Intends himself in person to appear; --
Hark, how these Clouds do ramble: -- dos't not hear
A noise of Thunder? do not now espy
The Vanguard of his lightnings nimbly fly,
In rambling parties through the darkened Air? --
Yes sure, our God himself will now appear:
For, as by dust afar, we quickly know
The Approach of mighty armies; even so
By such prognostics, we may understand,
The Lord of Hosts is now himself at hand:
Unless the winds do clear that troubled state,
And all those foggy vapors dissipate.
For, if the Northern winds should blow apace, 22. Fair weather comes out of
the ^^^th, with God is terrible majesty.

'Twould scatter soon those sad appearances;
And by its cold, and cleansing blasts restore
The Air to the same state, as it was before.
But still I think the Almighty God draws nigh, 23. Touching the Almighty, we
cannot find him out: he is excellent in power, and in judgment, and in plenty
of justice, he will not afflict.

The Almighty terrible in Majesty,
And that these great (though usual preparations)
Are but so many signs, and demonstrations
Of his approach. -- Here then he comes, -- he comes --
With such a noise, as millions of Drums,
Trumpets, and Symbals cannot parrallel:
The Almighty God, who does in power excel,
All that we can imagine now draws near,
And he himself in judgment will appear:
That after all this tedious debate, 24. Men do therefore fear him, he
respects not any that are wise of heart.

Managed on all hands, with such zealous heat,
The supreme Judge of the world may decide
The controversy: and show either side,
Where they have been i'th'right, where in the wrong,
And let thee see, my friend, how all along,
Upon the matter thou have erred, and now
What thou so often desired, he will allow:
He Will hear thee now himself, he will challenge thee
Now to debate, and thou shall quickly see
What it is before the Almighty God to plead,
Yes, now thou shall perceive, thou shall indeed,
What it is to speak with him, remember now,
It Is not with us thy friends thou have to do;
But it is with God, that will not be abused
By such wild reasoning, as thou have used
With us: no, don't mistake, thou have to do
With no less then the Judge of Judges now.
With thy Creator: one whom mortal Men
Cannot esteem too much: prepare thee then
To hear him; be attentive, when he speaks,
For hear how in the Thunder he directs
His speech to thee: I therefore shall forbear
Further to speak, since he does now appear,
But what he speaks, shall with attention hear.
PART. V.
Cap. XXXVIII.
THE Storm increasing, and the Clouds appearing 1. Then the Lord answered Job
out of the whirlwind, and said,

Still to augment the Darkness, stead of clearing,
The Thunder roaring, and the Lightning flying
Before the face of God so terrifying,
As both the afflicted man, his friends, and those,
Who then were present, firmly did suppose
This threatening Storm would suddenly renverse
The goodly Fabric of the Universe:
At least they fancied those distracted Clouds
Would shake out quickly most prodigious Floods
On the Earth, and by a Deluge general,
As once before, again o'rewhelm them all.
In these sad apprehensions, damped with fear,
At length out of the Whirlwind, they could hear,
After the ceasing of that dreadful noise,
A soft, but most intelligible Voice:
A Voice so audible, a Voice so free,
A Voice, which all could hear, but none could see
The mighty Speaker. -- --
And now both Plaintiffs, and Defendant too
Undone with horror, could, with much ado,
Retain their spirits, when they see indeed
That God himself to Justice would proceed,
Himself in Person, and determine what
Had been the occasion of so much debate:
Whilst none of 'em would yield to each other, none
Would be determined but by God alone.
He therefore, to make all their jarrings cease,
Does thus at length give judgment on the Case.
Who Is he, says God, presumes thus to debate, 2. Who is he that darkneth
council, by words without know ledge?

On what I Have ordered? who is ^e dares state
Himself my Party? who is the man? -- who is he,
That offers to debate the Case with me?
Who, who is the man, that, with such insolence,
Dares canvass thus my acts of Providence?
Who Is he, to whom I Have given life, and breath,
Dares utter such rebellious words of Death?
Show me the man, you Slaves, amongst you all,
That dares what I design in question call?
Because forsooth, in kindness, I Have bestowed
A little Reason on you, you grow proud:
Why could not I, you Things profusely vain,
At first have made you Beasts as well as Men,
Nay cannot I reduce you all again
To your first Principles, and let you see
All your Subsistence does depend on me?
Why then? -- --
Should such, as I from nothing did create,
Presume to be my Secretars of State?
Should such as you, whom I Have distinguished
From other Creatures, offer to implead
That Power, which made you such? or when you meet
In your wise Consults, offer to debate
On my Proceedings? should such Wasps, as you
Dare but repine at any thing I do?
Should such as only by my favor live,
Presume to quarrel my Prerogative?
Can any humane Reason comprehend
What I have done, or what I do intend?
No -- know, all of you, I Am your God, and King,
No more then of your foolish reasoning.
Now as for thee, thou Job, whom I did raise, 3. Gird up now thy loins like a
man, for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me.

And let thee see a deal of golden Days,
Who of all earthly blessings made collection,
And lived most happy under my protection,
Enjoying all thou could project, yet now,
Thou ungrate man, thou must be prating too:
Thou must be meddling with my Providence,
And asking Questions, with great impudence,
Why I permit this, or that man to live,
At their convenience, and all blessings give
To such, as do not merit at my hand,
Whilst others at my doors, unserved stand,
Whose Piety did merit better things?
And so proceeds in foolish murmurings
Against my Actings: nay thou do proceed
To greater hights: and do desire to plead
Thy Case with me, and that so freely too,
As one man with another man would do.
I Have heard thee all this while, with patience,
Make formal Harrangues on thy innocence:
I Have heard thee speak, and argue all along
Against me, as if I had done thee wrong.
Because I did think fit to change thy state,
Therefore in passion thou would expostulate
With me for doing so: since then thou have
So often denied to plead with me, at last
Shall have thy wish: and since thou will not be
Convinced by those, who have discoursed with thee
By my appointment, and will yield to none
In thy opinions, but to me alone --
-- It shall be so: -- I Will argue now the case
My self with thee, and show thee in thy face
How thou have erred, I Will let thee plainly see
I am not such as men take me to be,
But am, what neither thou, nor any thing
That breaths on earth from woman issuing
Can comprehend. --
Go too then Job, behave thee, like a man,
I Will ask the question, answer if thou can.
Say then, poor mortal man, where wast thou -- say 4. Where wast thou when I
laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou have understanding.

When I at first did Earths Foundations lay?
Where wast thou pray, had thou a being then?
Did thou exist, wast thou created when
I did this Glorious Work at first commence,
And ordered all things so by Providence;
As I no sooner did this thing intend,
Than instantly the work was at an end.
Who did the Model of this World design? 5. Who has laid the measures thereof,
if thou know? or who has stretched the line upon it?

Who drew the Plan thereof? who stretched the Line
From Pole, to Pole, on which as all may see,
It yet does roll, as on an Axel-tree.
Who measured out at first the vast extent
Of this huge Glob? or by what instrument
Was all, that now the universe is named,
At first into a perfect Circle framed?
Upon what grounds are the Foundations laid 6 Whereupon are the foundations
thereof fastened? or who laid the cornerstone thereof?

Of this great Fabric, which my hands have made?
Can thou, O man, by all thy art find out
On what this Glob of earth does rest? I doubt
Thou never can imagine how a thing
Of so much weight, in the open air can hing,
Without some Nail, on which by Chain or String,
Such a vast ponderous body should depend:
I know this does thy reason quite transcend.
Do know how every Atome does support
Each other in that Mass in such a sort,
As no part upon any part does rest,
Nor are light parts by heavy parts deprest,
But altogether solid, firm, and sure,
Ly in one lump, by Aequilibrature:
And for the Air, that subtle, fluid, thing,
Which 'bout this Orb, like a soft rind, does cling,
And fills up every waste, hole pore, or chink,
That Is in this Glob; what do thou of it think,
Do think that can so great a weight sustain,
That in its own sphere does subsist with pain
Shattered each hour, by Thunder, Lightning, Rain,
No truly, it does upon nothing rest,
So that all your opinions at the best
Of the supporters of this earthen Ball
Are but mere notions, and conjectures all.
Then where were thou when I at first did lay 7. When the morning stars sang
together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy.

The Worlds Foundations, when the blushing Day
Did first appear, and all my numerous crowd
Of Angels did for joy cry out aloud,
When they perceived all I had done was good.
Where wast thou pray, when all that now thy Eye
Perceives distinct did in confusion ly.
When the luxuriant Seas did issue out 8. Or who shut up the sea with doors
when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb?

Of Natures pregnant womb, and grasped about
The spongious Earth so close, as by the Floods
Its face was covered, as it is now by Clouds:
When then in these the Earth lay sopp'd around,
And nothing like dry Land was to be found,
All being under Water. -- --
Who did their rage (else boundless) limitate,
And within doors, as 'twere incarcerate
Those furious Seas, which now with all their power
Cannot overflow Earths surface to this hour.
Who was it then that first this Earth did drain, 9. When I made the cloud the
garment thereof; and thick darkness a swaddling band to it.

And from the Land so separate the main,
As they should never be unite again?
Who was it pray? do know? why it was I,
Thy God, and Maker: I did speedily
As with a swaddling Band of darkest Clouds,
Ty up those Infant, and disordered Floods.
Then in a distinct body I did frame
Those rouling Waves, and them a Sea did name.
I cast them off the Earth, and by and by
I did assign them a Locality,
In which they might thereafter domineer
And roar their fill, but never more appear
Upon the Earth, and overwhelm the Land
Without my warrant, and express command.
Such bounds I for these Billows measured out 10. And brake up for it my
decreed place, and set bars and doors.

As I thought good, and fenced them round about,
With earthen Ramparts, such as might expel
Their fury, when they should begin to swell,
And make them tamely within bounds contain,
For all their lofty pride, and numerous train,
Assaulting often these Ramparts, but in vain.
I said unto them -- thus far shall you go: 11. And said, hitherto shall thou
come, but no further: and here shall thy proud waves be stayed.

No further, in High Spring-tydes shall you flow,
I charge you that you do encroach no more
Upon the Earth, this Line shall be your Shore.
Do know what light is pray, or to what end 12. Have thou commanded the
morning since thy days? and caused the day spring to know his place.

Both this, and darkness, I on Earth did send?
Do know the reasons, which made me conclude
At first upon this strange vicissitude
Of day and night? or why I overspread
The glorious face of Earth, which I have made
With clouds of darkness? so that what of late
Appeared in a most beauteous pomp, and state,
Whilst light did shine, and feasted curious eyes,
With all the choice, and rich varieties.
That heart could wish, does suddenly appear
An object, not of pleasure, but of fear?
When then the Sun is gone, when he is fled,
And darkness does the face of Earth o'respread:
Can thou command him to return, with light,
T'allay the horror of a Winters night?
Or can thou hire him to diffuse his rays
Before his time? did ever in thy days,
Attempt such a light windmill enterprise,
As to make day spring e're the morning rise.
But when this Sun by my command appears 13. That it might take hold of the
ends of the earth, that the wicked might be shaken out of it.

Upon Earths utmost confines, and still bears
Upward to his full Orb: -- --
Then does your darkness quickly steal away,
With all its allies, at the break of day,
For when the Sun out of his sleep awakes,
Those things like downs from coverlet he shakes,
Which do in darkness trade: at sight of the Sun
Night-walkers, into holes, and corners run.
Whilst the Earth, which by its absence void of light, 14. It is turned as clay
to the seal, and they stand as a garment.

Shut up behind the curtains of the night,
Appeared without all form; at break of day,
As upon washen, and well tempered Clay,
A new impression brightly does appear,
Is in her morning dress, most bright, and clear.
At break of day, the labourer breaks his rest, 15. And from the wicked, their
(...) is withholden, and the high aim shall be broken.

And to the field, with every working beast,
He cheerfully does march: nothing afraid,
Because pursuing of his lawful trade.
Whilst Drunkards, Camesters, Whores, Adulterers,
Murderers, Lifters, Thieves, and Burglarers,
Who in the nightime do their business,
Assoon's the Sun begins to show his face,
Run all into their lurking holes annon,
And at the break of day they are broke, and gone.
Next, as to darkness: -- do thou comprehend
What thing that is? or what I do intend 16. Have thou entered into the spring
of the sea, or have thou walked in the search of the depth.

By this privation, what is the use of it?
What is its scope? for what end is it fit?
Sure thou who understand'st not what is light,
Which every day is obvious to thy sight,
Can never understand obscurity,
A thing that is not perceptible by the eye.
Did ever into the Seas bottom dive?
Or can thou yet, with all thy art contrive
A way to trace, and measure the extent
Of that dark Land? or know what Government
Is used by th* Planters of these Provinces,
Situate in the bottom of the Seas?
Do know the Springs, and Conduits, that supply
With fresh recruits of Water constantly
The restless Ocean? pray now let me hear,
Do know what things the weeping sources are;
Do understand these things? or do thou know
How from the Seas all Springs and Rivers flow.
In all thy lifetime have thou ever seen 17 Have the gates of death been
opened unto thee? or have thou seen the doors of the shadow of death?

Deaths gates cast open? has thou never been
Conversant under ground? did e're descry
That dreadful prospect of mortality,
Of those who scattered in earths bowels ly?
Did e're thy curiosity lead thee there?
No. at the gates sure thou had died for fear.
Do know earth's true Diameter, can tell 18 Have thou perceived the breadth
of the earth? declare, if thou know it all

How far in*breadth its Globous bulk does swell?
Can see both Poles at once by art, or can
Thy eye discover each Meridian?
Go to then, can thou point the place, from whence 19 Where is the way where
light dwells? and as for darkness. where is the place thereof?

Light does proceed? do know its residence?
Do know the Cave where darkness does reside,
And closly all the day it self does hide?
That thou should trace the way to its abode, 20 That thou should take it
to the bound thereof, and that thou should know the paths to the house
thereof.

And through the windings of that dreadful road
Find a safe passage to its dwelling place,
And take the picture of its duskly face?
I think thou do not know, nor can declare 21 Know thou it* because thou
wast then born? or because the number of thy days is great?

What things, O man! the light and darkness are
Because when I created night, and day,
Thou in the belly of first matter lay.
Th*hadst not a being then, thou wast not made,
When light, and darkness I distinguished.
Nor can thou know more, by experience,
Then that both this, and that affect thy sense,
But what they are, from what hid cause they flow,
No art, no length of days, can make thee know.
Have thou observed, with a computing eye, 22 Have thou entered into the
treasures of the snow^? or have thou seen the treasures of the hail?

At any time, and viewed seriously
Th'innumerable stores of Snow, and Hail,
Which I do keep in Heavens great Arsenal?
Have viewed those inexhaustible provisions, 23 Which I have reserved against
the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war?

How they are stored in several divisions?
So that when I intend a war with those
Who on this earth do my decrees oppose:
Sometimes I use the one, sometimes the other,
As I think fit, and sometimes both together,
By force of both, or either, in a trice
I break the force of my proud enemies.
Do understand how Lightnings separate 24 By what way is the light parted,
which scatters the east wind upon the earth.

The Clouds of Wind: and quickly dissipate
The strongest Bodies of these vaporous foes,
Which do the fury of their course oppose?
Do understand this thing, or do thou know
Why wind does sometimes from one quarter blow,
Sometimes out of another, East, or West,
South, North, Nore-west, South-west, or South-South-east.
Who does restrain the torrents of those floods, 25 Who has divided a water
course for the overflowing of waters, or a way for the lightning of thunder?

Which after Thunder break from broken Clouds,
In such abundant streams, without cessation,
As men do fear a total inundation.
Who makes deep Canals, into which conveyed
Those Waters, as in Levels, gently slide,
Both above ground, and under ground with ease,
Into the bottom of the spacious Seas?
Who makes the Clouds above thy head retain 26 To cause it to rain on the
earth, where no man is: on the wilderness, wherein there is no man.

Great quantities of Waters, and, in rain,
As from a Sponge, thus shake them out again.
And that not only upon fertile ground,
But on the Deserts, where no man is found.
That in due season, they may pasture yield 27 To satisfy the desolate, and
waste ground, and to cause the bud of the tender herb to spring forth.

To all the beasts, that feed upon the field:
And feed those creatures too, whose idleness
Makes them frequent the barren wilderness,
As also make the Vegetables sprout,
And in their Leaves, and Flowers, shoot fairly out
From the earths belly, where they buried were
Until the Mid-wife-Season of the year
By help of rain does bring them forth, and spreads
Through all the fields the product of those Seeds.
Now, if thou think this rain is procreat 28 Has the rain a father? or who
has begotten the drops of dew?

As other creatures are, who did beget
This useful thing? or who supposest thou
Did procreat the Crystal drops of dew?
By which the Labourer rising from his bed,
Perceives his grounds all kindly watered.
And then, as if the Sun had only sent
Those little cordial drops, to complement
The widdowed earth, that does his absence mourn,
And in sad veil, did long for his return,
With warming beams, he suddenly does drain
The earth, and sucks up all those drops again.
Do know what Ice is? whence the same proceeds? 29 Out of whose womb came the
ice, and the hoary frost of heaven? who has gendered it?

Who did beget it? in what womb it breeds.
It Is worth thy knowledge (though thou knew no more)
To understand this costive Meteor.
Do see the Rivers, how they sweetly pass 30 The waters are hid as with a
stone, and the face of the depth is frozen,

In gentle streams through pleasant fields of grass,
Whilst Trees, and Shrubs, which in their Banks do grow,
By their reflex, do make a goodly show,
Upon the Waters, so transparent clear,
As through the Streams the very Skies appear:
These same pellucid Rivers, in a trice
You may see covered with a crust of Ice:
And what was lately soft, appear annon
As hard, and solid, as if paved with stone:
Nay, even the Seas; who not long time before
Did break their curled Waves, upon the Shore,
And round the Earth triumphed with so much pride,
Spreading their boistrous Billows, far, and wide:
As if the power of the restraining Ice,
(Which fetters inland floods) they did despise;
These very Seas at length are forced to bow
To conquering Ice, and they are frozen too:
So that where tallest Sh^ps did lately steer,
Now Sledges, Carts, and Wagons do appear:
Nay, as upon firm Land with all their force,
Whole armies in baitalia, foot, and horse,
Securely march along the frozen Seas,
Fighting, retiring, s^irmishing with ease.
Have then observed this? can assign a reason,
Why waters are bound up so in their season?
Or to what end, I make the Rivers freeze,
And thus incrustate even the raging Seas?
Indeed vain mortals, you do all pretend 31. Can thou bind the sweet
influence of Pleiades? or loose the bands of Orion?

By philosophic rules to comprehend
The nature of all Meteors, and know
By second causes, whence they all do flow:
As when such constellations do appear,
You guess the several seasons of the year,
As this the Spring, that Summer, Harvest that
And this cold Winter does insinuat:
'Cause their appearance is habitual,
And custom teaches you: but that is all
You understand: you know that such things are,
Because to you they frequently appear:
But who is the man can tell? who is he does know
The reason why these Stars themselves do show
At such set times? art thou the man? can thou
With all thy curious art demonstrat how
The Stars were made? why some of them appear
In modeled bodies, others here, and there
Are singly scattered in the Heavens? do know
Why some are fixed, some ramble to, and fro
In their own Orbs, and why too some of these
Consume as many years, as others days
In running out their course? do understand
The reason of these things? can thou command
These Stars? or make the meanest of 'em all
Forbear their course? or vanish at thy call?
Can thou restrain the sweet influences,
And pleasant aspects of the Pleiades,
Who, when the Sun in Taurus does appear,
Calmly, and gently usher in the year?
Or when the sullen, barbarous Orion
Attended by an host of storms, leads on
The dreadful Winter, which over runs you all
And makes you with ingeminat groans recall
Your ever kind (but then far distant) Sun
To your assistance, else you're all undone
With killing cold. -- --
When this same Orion does then appear
In wasting terror to shut up the year;
And bury all in Snow, can thou restrain
His violence, and force him back again?
Can thou repel the fury of his Winds,
His Rains, his Hail, and Tempests of all *kinds?
And make that never yet conquered Constellation
Draw off his Troops with fear, and consternation?
Can, in his season bring out Mazzaroth 32. Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth
in his season, or can thou guide Arcturus with his sons?

That torrid Constellation of the South,
And make him in his Summer garb appear,
To celebrate the Solstice of the year?
Say -- can thou make this Constellation shine,
This Canis major which beyond the Line
Lies quartered, and from its pleasant seat*
Draws out but as a Sammer guard, to wait
Upon the motion of the glorious Sun
What time he his three greatest heats does run.
Can thou by Art a certain survey make
Of all the Chambers in the Zodiac,
That spacious College, that magnificent
And stately Inns of Court; that eminent
And princely Fabric of great excellence;
Where the Twelve Signs do keep their residence.
And though they hold their chief Demeurage there,
Yet in their several Circuits, appear
The twelve conspicuous Judges of the Year.
Each Month, by turns: attended by no less,
Then the bright Sun himself, with all his rays,
Who for the time keeps House, with each of them;
Then what can say to this? would thou reclaim
Against this order? or in spite, decry
This method? can thou by authority
Inhibite their procedure? and allow
No such Appartments but to one, or two
Of all the twelve? -- --
Or can thou make the Sun, per saltum, pass
Into the Rams head, from the Balances?
And baulking the five Melancholy Signs,
( In which he rather looks a squint, then shines)
Make him continue his warm influence
In every corner of the Earth, and thence,
By that new, heretofore unknowen device,
Evite the trouble of the Winters Ice.
Can make the Northern Stars live orderly,
And rule Arcturus, with his Family?
Who in the Harvest season does appear,
Attended with his great, and little Bear,
And the other Troops of the Septentrions,
Drawn out of all his Northern Garrisons,
TO invest, as't were, the year, whilst Orion
With the main body follows quickly on?
Can make celestial bodies influence 33. Know est thou the ordinances of
heaven? can thou set the dominions thereof in the earth?

Bodies sublunary? dost' know from whence
That rich, but hidden Virtue does proceed,
Which amongst you mortals, strange effects does breed?
Whilst some Diseases, others Health, afford:
Some fair, and some foul weather, in a word
Each constellation in its aspect bears
A consequence of either hopes, or fears.
But not a cause: for that to me alone
Belongs, which I communicate to none,
Whom I Have created: for in sober sense,
These Stars have in themselves no influence
On any thing, but as determined
By second Causes, which are furnished
By my appointment, and the Subject Matter,
With which they meet. -- --
Yet, I know some of you ( sad Creatures too)
Pretend by study to demonstrare how
All things are ordered in my Cabinet,
Ere they be brought to action, and relate,
By knowledge of these Stars, strange passages
Of my designs, long e're they came to pass:
Fools! whence have you so good intelligence
Of my intents, and purposes? from whence
Have you this knowledge? is it from the Stars?
Do You think such mean things are my Counselors?
That such as these forsooth should be acquaint
With the deep Intrigues of my Government?
Presumptuous Mortals! that you thus should dare
To think you know what my intentions are,
When you own Reason fully may convince
You of your folly: for if even a Prince,
Of my creation, that on Earth does dwell,
And must make use of Council, can so well
Conceal his Secrets, as what he intends,
Is neither known to Enemies, nor Friends:
How think you then. -- --
That I, who use no Council in the least,
But that which does reside within my breast,
Should of my Secrets take so little care,
As any thing in Heavens, Earth, Sea, or Air,
Nay even my Angels, who my Court attend
Should e're discover what I do intend,
But from my Mouth? yet from a silly Star,
With which you correspond, of Peace, and War
Intended Famine, Fire, or Pestilence,
You Mortals have all your intelligence:
Would not you of that Statesman make a sport,
Who from the Lacqueys of a Princes Court,
Pretended he did draw intelligence,
Of all his Cabin-councils, and from thence
Would take his measures? pray what else are those,
With whom you correspond, do you suppose
That I make any other use of these,
But as of Grooms, to carry Messages?
Nor is it lawful for you to erect
Your Figures, on Nativities; and make
From thence Conclusions: or by Art to frame,
From the conjunctions of the Stars, a Scheme
Of The life, and death of any private man,
That lives on Earth: a thing no mortal can,
With safety undertake: or if he do,
Know all of you that I do not allow
Such Practices: for hidden things are known
To me who am your Sovereign alone
But things revealed to you are only showen.
The Knowledge then, in which I do permit
The wisest of you all to try your Wit,
Is to distinguish, as these Stars appear,
The several times, and seasons of the Year;
To know them all both fixed, and wanderers,
And gaze upon them as Astronomers:
To know besides their influences so,
As when it is time to plant and when to sow:
When to set sail, when to return again:
When to endure, when to cast off your pain:
How in the darkest night your course to steer,
At Sea or Land: when to hope, when to fear:
When to rejoice, when sadly to Lament,
Especially when flaming Stars are sent
As Heralds of my Wrath, when to repent.
All this I do allow, and you may pore
Upon this Knowledge, so far but no more:
For none of all these Stars can in the least
Have influence on either man, or beast
As Causes; but they only do appear
As signs to show my actions every where.
Can thou by keeping coyl, and noise below, 34. Can thou lift up thy voice
to the clouds, that abundance of waters may cover thee.

Persuade the Clouds to let their Vapors go
And water all thy Sun-burn'd Grounds with Rain,
When they at any time of Drought complain?
Can thou by single lifting of thy hand, 35. Can thousend lightnings, that
they may go, and say unto thee, here we are?

Make all the Troops of Lightning understand
Thy pleasure, and appear, at thy command.
All ready armed, in order instantly,
And hotly forward in thy service cry,
Lord we are here; -- let us have thy orders now,
Pray what would have thy Soldiers to do?
Give us the Word, and Sign; let us understand
Upon what Service thou would us command:
For here we are ready, as one man, to act,
Whatever thou would have us undertake.
But all these things, and many more, then thou 36. Who has put wisdom in the
inward parts? or who has given understanding to the heart?

Or any man can fancy, I can do.
I can with ease oblige the whole Creation
TO obey my Orders, as I find occasion
I can make the Universe, at my command
Return to its first Chaos, Sea, and Land
I can confound, and mix them so together,
As the wit of man cannot distinguish either:
I can do more then all you can conceive:
I can do what you but with pain believe.
Nay so much too thou know, for frequently
I Have heard thee in thy sharpest agony,
Express thy self, with zeal, and admiration,
Upon the copious Theme of the Creation.
I Have heard thee too, with no small Eloquence,
Discourse upon my works of Providence.
I ask thee then who made thee understand,
Who made thee know, that by my mighty hand
All things in Heaven, and Earth were fashioned,
And to this hour are daily ordered?
Who taught thee these things? who instructed thee,
Had thou this Wit from any else, but me?
Did not I lend thee Parts, and made thee know
How from my Power all things created flow?
How all your Wisdom, of which you do boast,
Is not your acquisition, but at most
A simple loan of my benevolence;
Which I to this, or that man do dispense
As I think good. -- --
By rules then of your own Philosophy,
If from me Wisdom flows, then certainly
I who, bestow it must be wiser far,
Then the accutest of you Mortals are,
Who all your Knowledge do derive from me,
Since that for which a thing is such, must be
More such it self: I do demand thee then
Thou most pretending to it, of all men,
Is It fit that any Mortal should be proud,
Of what in Loan I only have allowed
To him, upon design that he should know
What he is himself, and then what he does owe
To me, who made him such; but not to state
Himself my Party; or, like thee, debate
On my Proceedings, but that he should be
Content to know, that he knows all from me.
For what is all your Wit? what all your Parts? 37. Who can number the clouds
by wisdom, or who can stay the bottles of heaven.

What all the subtle Sciences, and Arts,
Which you do study, and profess to know,
Nay, what is all that Wisdom here below
On which you men value your selves so much?
What is it? how do you rate it? is it such,
As by it you can even but calculate
The number of the Clouds? or estimate
The value of those Magazines of Rain
What quantity of Vapors they contain?
Under what Lock, and Key they are all secured?
How guarded, by what Policy ensur'd,
At all Adventures from the craft, and force
Of the other fiery rambling meteors?
Can all your wit, at any time restrain,
The falling of the smallest drop of rain,
Out of those heavenly bottles, which you see,
That both are filled, and emptied by me.
For when by drouth the Earth to flying dust 38. When the dust grows into
hardness, and the clods cleave fast together.

Appears converted, then I let out just
As I think fit, such quantities of rain,
As may reduce it to soft clay again.
Thus much for Heavens; now let us to Earth repair, 39. Will thou hunt the prey
for the lion? or fill the appetite of the young lions?

And see what absolute power I have there,
For thou will say the Meteors o'th'Air
Are far above thee; and it is no wonder,
Though rain, and snow, hail, lightning, frost, and thunder,
Be things unknown to thee: I Will lead thee then
To objects that more obvious to men
In the same Earth, with you converse, which though
Thou see, and hear them daily, yet I Will show
For all thy wit, and art thou do not know
The nature of them, I will show thee then,
That there are many things unknown to men,
Even in this Earth. Do then but cast thy eyes
Upon my Parks, my Ponds, and Volaries,
Thou Wilt quickly see, that I have creatures there,
Which thou know hardly either what they are,
Or how they live. --
First then, you have the Lion such a creature,
As best of you do hardly know his nature:
A creature full of fury, full of wrath,
That to all other creatures threatens death,
If once withstood: but when to him they yield,
There Is no more generous beast in all the field:
For his opposers he in pieces tears,
But such as do submit to him he spares.
Observe this Lion then; he must be fed,
As well as thou, he must be nourished:
Who therefore taught him, pray' to find his prey,
And how to feed his young ones every day?
Knows then what shifts he uses for his food,
And makes provision for his tender brood?
In the wild Forest, where there is no trade,
Where, for a price no meat is to be had?
Do know how in their Dens they couchant ly 40. When they eouch in their
dens, and abide in the covert to ly in wait.

To catch th'unthinking beasts that passing by,
Do not their cunning ambuscade espy?
Next there is the Raven, such a creature too, 41. Who provideth for the raven
his food? when his young ones cry unto God, they wander for lack of meat.

As lives by prey, as well as Lions do:
Who does provide its food? who entertains
This idle creature? who is at the pains
To feed its young ones, when the naughty dame,
Unkindly in the Nest abandons them?
When the raw-chicks do squeek, and crock aloud,
Half-starv'd for want of meat, who gives them food?
Who does with Worms those shiftless creatures feed,
Which 'bout the nest, in Ravens dung do breed?
Do understand who is it that supplies
Those small forsaken things with Dew, and Flies?
Or when as yet pin-feather'd they are thrust
By the cruel Dame out of the Nest, and must
Make shifts (although not able yet to fly)
For their subsistence in the world, or die,
Who hears them pray, when they for hunger cry,
And does them, with an Aliment supply?
So that for all these hardships, they do grow
To a great age, and ramble to and fro,
Catching their preys, and live as well as these,
Who, from their birth, enjoyed both food and ease.
Cap. XXXIX.
NExt, I demand thee, know thou who it is 1 Know thou the time when the
wild goats of the rock bring forth? or can thou mark when the hindes do calve?

That does preserve the several species
Of all those Creatures? by what hidden means
Are they assisted, when they take their pains?
Do know what art those artless Brutes do use
At such occasions? how they do produce
Their young ones? who is their Midwife? who takes care
Of them, in that estate? who does prepare
All that is suitable? who makes provision
Of necessars for them, in that condition?
Who lays them up? who cures them of their sores?
Who is it, that them to perfect health restores?
As first, for instance, the wild Goat, who rambles
Amongst the Rocks, and on sharp Briars and Brambles
Does often thrust her Belly, and her Brood,
Whilst in the Cliffs she searches for her food:
So that a man would think this same unwary,
And climbing Creature, surely would miscarry:
Who does take care of her? when does she bring
Her young ones forth, do know her reckoning?
Or know thou when the Hinds do calve? what pain
These Creatures in their labor do sustain? 2 Can thou number the months
that they fulfill? or know, est thou the time when they bring forth?

Can tell how long those Beasts do pregnant go?
Or do the time of their delivery know?
The time of their delivery indeed, 3 They bow themselves, they bring forth
their young ones, they cast out their sorrows.

Of all the Creatures that on earth do feed,
Both rational, and brutal, there is none
Endures such torment, as these Hinds alone
Do in the birth: --
They bow their bodies over, and again,
In labor to alleviate their pain:
Nay, these weak Creatures too, to make them able
TO endure their pains, of a mean Vegetable
Make use, and by that natural Midwisery,
As well as those, who use much industry,
And help of knowing Surgeons to boot,
With horrid toil, they cast their sorrows out.
Yet the same young ones, though with so much pain 4 Their young ones are in
good liking, they grow up with corn, they go forth, and return not unto them.

Brought to the world, do not long remain
With their kind Dames, but taught by nature, do
Run out, and make a shift for Victuals too,
For quickly they grow fat, and fed with store
Of Corn, and Grass, they see their Dames no more.
Then there is the wild Ass, an undocile creature, 5 Who has sent out the wild
ass (...) or who has loosed the bonds of the wild ass?

So different from the tame Ass, that by nature,
It loves as much its rambling liberty,
As the other stoops to servile drudgery.
Who taught this stupid Creature so to prize
Its liberty, and proudly to despise
Alluring mankind, who would fain entise
This thing to serve them, but it is all in vain,
For not by Dogs, nor Nets it will be taken.
But to evite the tyranny of man, 6 Whose house I have made in the wilderness,
and the barren land his dwelling.

It strives as much as any creature can,
Against both hunger, parching heat, and snow,
And in the Wilderness will undergo
A thousand pinches, rather as be tamed,
And a poor slave to its fellow-mortals named.
He laughs at all your Citizens, who dwell 7 He scorneth the multitude of the
city. neither regards he the crying of the driver.

In plenty at their ease, and faring well,
Laugh at all those in wants, he will not sell
His liberty for all those toys, nor be
Subject to the lashing of the Whip, not he,
For all the sure allowance he might have
Of food, were he, like other beasts, your slave.
But rather is content in Wilderness 8 The range of the mountains is his
pasture, and he searches after every green thing.

To make a shift, and feed on acid grass,
Salt herbs, or any thing, that may sustain
Its life, then under bonds with man remain.
Then there is the Unicorn (or if you will, 9 Will the unicorn be willing to
serve thee, or abide by thy crib?

The wild Bull) pray have thou attained such skill,
As but to catch it? and far less to tame
A creature of that strength, or but to dream,
Of bringing of that beast at any rate,
To serve thy use, who does all bondage hate?
Or being caught, can thou by feeding bribe
This wanton beast to tarry by thy Crib?
Can this fierce Creature to thy laboring break, 10 Can thou bind the
unicorn with his band in the furrow, or will he harrow the valleys after thee?

And calmly lay the Yoke upon his neck?
Can make him softly foot it before the Plow,
And keep the furrows, as the Oxen do?
Or will he draw the Harrows orderly
After thee, when thou sowest? or decently
Turn at the furrows end, and follow thee
With the same pace, as men do daily see
The beasts of labor are accustomed,
And when unyok'd, with the others tamely feed?
Will thou be such a fool, because he is strong, 11. Will thou trust him,
because his strength is great? or will thou leave thy labors to him?

And able to endure much fatigue long,
As trust thy laboring to him? do expect,
That he the yoke will suffer for thy sake?
Will thou be so unmann'd, as in the least, 12. Will thou believe him, that he
will bring home thy seed, and gather it into thy barn?

Be made believe that wild unruly beast,
Will in the Harvest yoked in Cart, or wain,
From Field, to Barn-yard, carry home thy Grain?
For if thou do, who would not justly thee
Suspect to be a greater beast then he.
Yet all these beasts (though never so feirce, and wild,)
I can by single word make tame, and mild;
I can, with ease, make all such creatures bow,
And yoked, or unyok'd, with submission too,
Serve me, what e're I have a mind to do.
For thou must not think that I do in vain,
Those savage creatures in the fields maintain,
But that I have an use for each of them,
As well as men for creatures that are tame.
And now to show thee how much those do err, 13. Gave thou the goodly wings
to the Peacock? or wings and feathers unto the Estrich?

In understanding who with me compare:
Or think they can by any Science reach,
The knowledge of what none but I can teach:
I Will question thee on things familiar,
Of home bred creatures, such as daily are
About thy doors: and thence I Will plainly show,
Thou do not even those creatures fully know.
As first who on the Peacock has bestowed,
Such a fair train? Who is it that allowed
Such outward beauty to that screeching creature:
Who made his neck rise in such comely feature,
Adorned with such a changing set of Plums,
As proud of his apparel, he presumes
To think himself a creature most complete,
Were It not that sometimes he does view his feet,
Which black, and loathsome, and so differing
From his whole body, makes the lofty thing
Despise it self, and seems to let him know*
That there is nothing that is complete below.
Or do thou know from whence the Estrich had
These curious feathers in her wings, which made,
And sowed in plums, adorn the proudest crest,
That dares appear, of either man, or beast.
And teach you too, that man for all his pride,
(In which he undervalues all beside,
That live on Earth) to make himself appear
More beautiful then other creatures are,
Is forced to borrow Plums out of the wing
Of a poor naughty Bird, and fairly bring
His fairest head-attire from such a creature.
As is the most insipid thing in nature.
A stupid creature, one that is memorable 14. Who leaves her eggs in the earth,
and warmeth them in the dust.

For nothing, but its bulk: and hardly able*
To rank it self for its sagacity,
Amongst the meanest of the birds that fly:
A blockish creature, of so dull a sense,
As were it not merely for my Providence,
Its species would be lost: for when sh'has laid
Her Eggs, and with light sand them overspread,
She simply thinks her business is done,
And without more ado, away she is gone,
Whilst to the wide world she her brood does trust,
And carelessly does leave them in the dust.
Forgetting how these things obnoxious ly 15. And forgets that the foot may
crush them, or that the wild beast may break them.

To th'foot of every one that passes by
The place, where she has left them, nay at least,
(Though men may have discretion) yet the beast
Of The Forest, who does not observe its paces,
With its hard hoof, might crush them all to pieces.
Thus to her own brood she is unnatural,
And seems to have no thought for them at all, 16. She is hardened against her
young ones, as if they were not hers, her labor is in vain, without fear.

But quite forsakes those poor adventurers,
And looks upon them, as they were not hers:
So that her labors, and her pains appear
To Have been in vain, when thus, without all fear
Of what may be the event, foolishly
She leaves her issue, and most barbarously,
Not only leaves them, but forgets them too,
A thing no creature, but her self would do.
And what is the reason, why this stolid creature 17. Because God has deprived
her of wisdom, neither has he im^arted to her understanding.

Acts contrare to the very rules of nature?
Why thus it is: because I thought not fit
At first t'allow her so much mother-wit,
As even to take a care of what is her own,
And as for understanding, she has none.
But what she wants of wit, and common sense,
I do supply it by my Providence:
For of those Eggs by her abandoned,
I do take care, and have so ordered,
That on the open sand where these do ly,
The Sun should the unkind mothers place supply:
And by the heat of his warm, transient rays
Should hatch those Eggs, and save her species;
Which else by her extreme, supine neglect.
Would totally decay, and go to wrack.
And yet as dull, and stolid as she is, 18. What time she lifeth up her self on
^ugn, she scorneth the horse, and his ^lder.

She may be thought sagacious in this,
That when pursued by the Hunter, she on high
Does lift her self, and though she cannot fly,
By reason of her heavy bulk, so well
As other birds, yet she appears to sail,
And fly, and run together, for with feet
And wings, she nimbly makes her way so fleet,
As none can overtake her, nay she knows
How to defend her self, when Hunters close
Approach her with their Poles, for then she throws
Behind her with her feet, to stop the chase,
Small stones, sand, dust, and gravel in the face,
Of those who do pursue her, and defyes
All their attaques, whilst thus she runs and flies
To save her life, with so much art, and force,
As she despises both their Foot, and Horse.
The Horse, why there is a creature, that indeed 19 Have thou given the horse
strength? have thou clothed his neck with thunder?

In wit, strength, courage, does as much exceed
The most of Beasts, which on the earth do breed,
As the Estrich does in dullness: there is a creature
For the use of man accommodate by nature,
A lofty thing, that on its Joints does rise,
Stands straight, lifts up his Crest, with flaming eyes:
Appears a creature full of generous pride,
With other so fair qualities beside.
As to serve mankind he is no less able,
Then to his fellow-brutes he is formidable.
Who gave him this same strength, who made him shake
His dangling Maine, and Perwig, his neck
With horrid curles, and friezlings, when in wrath
He seems to threaten nothing less then death?
Who gave him so much courage, that he fears
Nothing that moving on the earth appears?
But with such resolution in he flies
Amongst the thickest of his enemies,
As unconcerned, as Thunderbolt, which breaks
Even where it pleases, so he havoc makes
Of all that do oppose him, for he soon.
By valor bears the proudest of 'em down.
Can thou then make this noble beast afraid, 20 Can thou make him afraid as
a grasshopper? the glory of his nostrils is terrible.

And like a timorous Ass, hang down his head?
Can stop his nostrils, when he fiercely neighs,
And with his voice does seem to pierce the skies?
His martial neighing makes the Hills resound, 21 He paweth in the valley, and
rejoi^ceth in his strength: he goes on to meet the armed man*

When with his angry hoof, he tears the ground,
Erects his Crest, and chops upon his Bit,
With gnashing teeth, 'cause it will not permit
His fury to run out as he thinks fit.
His Bit, like Soap-ball, rouling in his mouth,
Makes him spit out much of his wrath in froath,
Whilst with a longing not to be expressed
By mortal man, this strong, courageous beast,
This most magnanimous, and fearless thing,
Longs to be at his sprightly skirmishing:
For joy he praunces, and courvetts, when he
Does preparations for the Battle see:
When there are sudden hopes of death, and wounds,
And nothing in his ears, but terror sounds.
When all the fields are covered far and nigh.
With thick Battallions of stout Infantry
And closs-rank'd-Squadrons of brave Cavalry:
O how he is tickled with that deathful sight,
As if in nothing more he took delight,
(For things, which you do black, and dreadful call,
He fancies the most pleasant things of all,
That life affords) he would not quit the sport
He there expects to have, in any sort,
For all the whiffling pleasures of a Court.
No man for loves fruition has such charms,
As he to meet the enraged man at arms.
Yes, all the charms, which do his breast possess, 22 He mocketh at fear, and
is not affrighted, neither turns he back from the sword.

He by his frequent neighings does express,
And still expecting with impatience
When his beloved Battle should commence.
He chaffs and foams at mouth so furiously,
As even his Rider, with difficulty,
For all his strength, and skill, by force of Rein,
Can this now half-engaged Beast restrain.
When he perceives the glistering Sword appear,
And over Helmet brandished every where,
Make no small threatening Figure in the Air:
For to afright him, no device is able,
The Sword is to him but a very bauble.
The rattling Quiver stuck, with Arrows full, 23 The quiver ratleth against
him, the glittering spear, and the shield.

The Spear, and Shield to him appear but dull,
And empty Symbols of approaching War;
For he fears nothing that a man can dare.
But when he sees the Forces on each side 24 He swalloweth the ground, with
fierceness and rage, neither believes he that it is the sound of a trumpet.

Draw up in order, and both far and wide
Extend their Front: --
O how he huggs himself, because he now
Expects some action without more ado:
O how he paw^, and with his foot does wound,
In his hot rage, the unprovocking ground;
As if the harmless Turff, on which he stood,
Withstood his fury: how he neighs aloud,
And stretching out his head, once, and again,
In passion almost breaks the curbing Rein.
At sound of Trumpet, he is no more afraid,
Nor at the thundering noise of Drums dismayed,
Then if one whistled through a Flagelet,
Or on the bottom of a Barrel beat.
For this undaunted Beast does so rejoice 25 He says among the trumpets, ha,
ha^ and he smells the battle afar off; the thunder of the captains, and the
shouting.

In the redoubling of that horrid noise,
Which Drums, and Trumpets do afford, and takes
Such pleasure in the noise the Army makes:
Whilst Officers on Horse back, here and there
Traversing through the Ranks and Files, prepare
All things for action, and aloud command
What they think fit, with Truncheons in their hand*
That with his neighing he does answer make,
And Echoes all the Language which they speak,
With such wild noise, as does the Air confound;
But when the Trumpet does in earnest sound
The signal to the fight -- Sa -- sa -- he cries,
Bears down his head, shoots lightning from his eyes,
And with top-gallop to the Battle ^yes.
Have you not seen a Faulcon in his flight,
Chasing his prey, as in a Line, downright,
When far above it in the open Sky,
With so great strength, and force upon it fly,
As to the ground it bears it by, and by.
So this brave beast, so soon as Trumpet sounds,
Contemning noise, and clamor, dangers, wounds,
Nay death it self, upon its enemies,
And on its prey, with mighty valor flys.
And now we speak of Hawks: why there is too, 26. Does the hawk fly by thy
wisdom, and stretch her wings toward the south?

A noble bird, which I have made to bow
For humane use, a roaving bird of prey,
Which in the air so swiftly cuts a way,
With stretched, slow-moving wings, as to the eye;
He seems like arrow from a bow to fly,
Who taught her so to fly then? pray was it thou
Her tutor? did thou teach her? though it is true,
By art the meanest of you do attain
The knowledge how to tame, and how to train
This ravenous bird, and bring her to your lure,
And make her for your use her prey secure.
But what is all that? by nature she knows more,
Then you can teach her, and did know before
You caught her, how to catch her prey, and fly,
As well as you by all your industry
Can e're instruct her in the thing; although
You think you more then such poor creatures know,
Well then I Will ask thee
When the wild Hawk does her old feathers cast,
And fears en cuerpo, the cold northern blast
May do her harm: is it thou who did advise
That naked creature to become so wise,
As to avoid the winters cold, in time,
To make a progress to a warmer clime,
Until her feathers do grow up again?
Do think she is taught so by the art of men?
Or does the princely Eagle soar on high, 27. Does the Eagle mount up at thy
command, and make her nest on high?

And to the tops of Rocks, and Mountains fly
At thy command? where she does build her Nest,
And with her young ones does securely rest?
For safety she with pleasure does dispense, 28. She dwells, and abides on
the rock, upon the craig of the rock, and the strong place.

And amongst the Rocks she keeps her residence:
Whilst other birds do lodge in trees, and bushes,
In banks of rivers, marshes, bull-rushes,
Heaths, and cornfieldsd, house-tops, and some such places,
This bird inhabits, where no humane traces
Are to be found, and as the sovereign
Of all the winged nation, does remain
In her strong castle, where secure she lies,
Under the covert of a precipice.
There she resides, in that strong citadel, 29. From thence she seeks her
prey, and her eyes behold a far off.

She like a Lady paramount, does dwell;
From whence the country all around she spies,
And views afar: her sharp, and vigorous eyes,
Make a large Horizon: from thence, with ease,
As from a watchtower, she at a distance sees
The inferior Birds, who unconcern'dly fly,
And so securely ramble through the Sky,
As if indeed they feared no Enemy.
Then from her Fortress she flys out amain,
Falls in amongst them, and with little pain
Snatches so many of 'em, as at least
Upon those slaughtered Captives, she may feast
Both she, and her voracious Family,
For a long Summers-day conveniently.
Her raw, and tender young ones for their food, 30. Her young ones also suck up
blood, and where the slain is, there is she.

Are taught by her betimes to suck up blood:
For where the slain in clustered heaps do ly,
Thither the Eagle, with her brood does fly.
Cap. XL.
THus the Almighty having fully showen 1. Moreover the Lord answered Job, and
said,

What was to the afflicted man unknowen;
(For all the wit, to which he laid pretense)
From what was said, he draws this inference.
Then since, he says, I now do plainly see 2. Shall he that contendeth with the
Al* mighty, ^nstruct him? he that reproves God, let him answer it.

These questions on the Creatures puzzle thee
To frame an answer to'em: sure if I
Should ask what think of my Divinity,
And what a mighty one thou did suppose
Thy God must be, who made both thee, and those
Of which I Have questioned thee, thou would far less know
What answer thou should make; why even so
When thou cry'st out thou art oppressed with pain,
And of afflictions do so often complain:
Asking a reason why thou art thus vex't,
Why thus with woes, and miseries perplex't?
And gladly would thy Case with me debate,
Thou do not understand what thou do prate.
For if thou do not understand the Creature,
And cannot comprehend the works of Nature,
O how much less: -- --
Wilt understand the works of Providence,
Which both transcend thy Reason, and thy Sense?
Then be not curious any more to know
The reason why thou art afflicted so:
Because what state of life does best agree,
And what is most convenient for thee
At any time, is only known to me.
Though you of Mortal Race imagine when
I let Afflictions out on pious men;
I seem to counteract what all of you
Firmly conclude to Piety is due:
So what I long since have premeditate,
And from Eternity predestinate,
For any of you, when it takes effect,
Because it is not such, as you expect,
Your ignorance makes you admire to see,
What knowingly is brought to pass by me.
Forbear hereafter then t'expostulate
Upon thy case, or offer to debate
With me, who gave thee life: know therefore thou,
Who seem to teach me what I ought to do,
That were it not I have some kindness yet
For thee, and will not totally forget
Thy former actions: I would let thee see
What it is truly to contend with me:
And show thee how, when with afflictions cross't
Others are humbled, thou appear'st to boast
Of thy great merits, and presumptuously
Do think thou meet'st with incongruity,
In these my Dispensations: know then, know
I will not suffer thee to bluster so,
In thy mad humors, on my providence;
Or canvass thus my actings, but from hence
I do command thee silence; speak not then
In thy late Gibbrish: -- do no more complain
Of my proceedings -- no -- for if thou do it.
He that reproves his God, let him see to it.
And now the man, who formerly did speak 3. Then Job answered the Lord, and
said.

In a bold tone, and lofty dialect;
Who thought he so well understood his case,
As he could even debate it face to face,
With God himself: all overcome with fear,
Just like a man condemned, does now appear:
With Joints all trembling, Visage pale, and lean,
Eyes sunk so hollow, as if he had been
Within an hour to die. --
At the appearance of his Judge afraid,
Prostrate upon the ground, to all was said,
He only this short, humble answer made.
Why, Lord, says he, I freely do confess 4. Behold I am vile, what shall I
answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth.

I am all sin, I am all guiltiness:
I am all vileness, nay I am not able
By strength of words to express how despicable
And mean a thing I am; what do expect?
What answer, Lord; can such as I am make,
To all thy questions? what, good Lord, I pray
Can such a silly Worm as I am say
To all thou do demand? -- no I will lay
My hand upon my mouth: I will forbear
My former language, and with silence hear
What thou will speak, for now I clearly see
There Is no more arguing in the case for me.
Then, since what I have spoke has given offense 5. Once I have spoken, but I
will not answer; yea, twice, but I will proceed no further.

To thee, good Lord, I shall forbear from hence
To speak one word, as I have done before,
But here shut up my mouth, and speak no more.
To this the Almighty soon did answer make, 6. Then answered the Lord unto Job
out of the whirlwind, and said.

And out of Whirlwind, thus again did speak.
Well now I see thou art convinced that what 7. God up thy loins now like a
man: I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.

In thy wild ravings thou have spoke of late
Deserves reproof; I see thou have some sense
Of thy extravagant impatience;
But notwithstanding all that thou have said
Has not such total satisfaction made
As I require: I Will therefore question thee
Again what are thy thoughts concerning me;
Go to then, and behave thee like a man
I will demand thee, answer if thou can.
Thou say that thou art righteous, do not know 8. Will thou also disanul my
judgment? will thou condemn me that thou may be righteous?

Iniquity in the least: -- why be it so: --
Then here the question lies 'twixt me and thee,
Which of us two most righteous must be:
For either I in my proceedings must,
Or thou in thy complaining be unjust:
There is no medium, as the Case does ly:
And think thou this the way to justify
Thy self, by quarrelling of my equity?
Consider well what thou have done, reflect
Upon thy misdemeanors; recollect
Thy Reason, and examine how of late
Thou with thy Maker have expostulate:
Then judge thy self, if for what thou have said
Thou do not merit to be punished.
For now I ask thee, can thou in the least 9. Have thou an arm like God? or
can thou thunder with a voice like him?

Give room to such a motion in thy breast
That any thing like parity can be
But even supposed betwixt thy God, and thee?
That thou should value thy own righteousness
At such a rate! and so thy self express,
As if to afflict so good a man as thee,
Did savor of iniquity in me.
Well wherein then do think the equality
Can be conceived 'twixt God and thee to ly?
Canst' make huge Armies at thy call assemble,
And with uplifted hand make Nations tremble?
Can make the Sco^ts of Lightnings fly abroad,
And manage Thunder, with a voice, like God?
Canst' thou appear in splendid majesty, 10. Deck thy self now with majesty and
excellency, and array thy self with glory and beauty.

Equal in beauty, and excellency;
With me? can thou, poor-dying man, display
Such glory, and thy self with light array,
More bright then the Sun at Noontide of the day?
Can thou send out the Sergeants of thy Wrath, 11. Cast abroad the rage of
thy wrath, and behold every one that is proud, and abase him.

Bring in the proud, and prosecute to death
All those who dare presumptuously dream
They Are such, as I can hardly humble them:
Can thou, sad Creature, cover such with shame?
As I can do? can in the view of all
With great contempt make such high-soarers fall
From top of all the hopes, which they conceive
Down to the very bottom of the Grave?
Can break the Projects long time harch'd by such, 12. Look on every one that
is proud, and bring him low, and tread down the wicked in their place

As are ambitious to command too much:
Who vex their Neighbors with unjust Pretenses,
And will not hearken to their just Defenses;
But with their Sword in hand, do boldly seize
On what they can, and do even what they please:
Whom Oaths, and Treaties can no longer tie,
Then with fresh Troops they can themselves supply*
Which done, -- --
A Quarrel suitable to their design
Is slily fabricate, and then the Mine
Does quickly spring, and at the Trumpets sound,
The peaceful Nations are involved around
In Blood again; whilst the voracious things
Mounted aloft upon Ambitions wings,
With confidence at no less Prey do fly,
Then that of universal Monarchy.
Do thou then, -- thou --, thou man of words, do know
The ways and methods how to bring such low?
Canst' take them down? can their ambition crush,
And make those mighty Conquerours sadly blush
To see themselves outdone by such as they
Did look upon as conquered 't other day?
And where their Armies used abroad to roam,
Canst' turn the chase, and give them work at home?
Canst' crumble all these men in dust together, 13. Hide them in the dust, and
bind their faces in secret?

And send them, with their glory, who knows whither?
In some dark corner can thou make them die,
Where they are attended by no weeping eye,
And not in public, where the pitying Crowd
Of curious Spectators can make proud
The dying Wretches, where they cannot declaim,
Or bribe the favor of a whiffling same,
By a set speech:
Where none are present, where no standers by*
Observe with what composed looks they die,
And so spoil Deaths beloved Pageantry?
If all this thou can do, then I Will confess 14. Then will I confess unto thee
that thine own right hand can save thee.

And willingly acknowledge you are no less
In power then I am, and that thou can save
By thy own strength thy body from the Grave.
But since thou are a man so mean, and weak,
As thou can hardly speak what I can act:
Then O, poor Mortal, how I pity thee 15. Behold now Behemoth which I made with
thee, he eats grass as an ox.

That proudly offerest to debate with me
Not knowing, as thou should do, who I am,
Nor valuing the glory of my Name
At its true rate: for if thou did but know
With whom thou had to do, thou had not so
Expressed thy self, as thou of late has done,
Like madman, in the view of the open Sun.
For thou must know that I who formed both thee
And all what thou around do hear, or see,
Must know how all things should be governed,
Better then any creature I have made.
Know then, that though on Earth there were no more
TO express my power, then those of which before
I Have made relation: yet since they transcend
Thy knowledge, and thou cans't not comprehend
How, and for what use they at first were framed,
And why not men, as well as beasts were named,
I Will show thee in two special instances,
The one on Land, the other on the Seas,
How much my creatures do my worth express.
Observe then Behemoth a first-rate creature,
A beast indeed of a stupendous feature,
Which you may think is that which you do call
The Elephant: -- well then, there is one for all,
Observe his body, how he does exceed
In bulk all creatures that on Earth do feed.
This same huge Animal I did create:
This bulky thing these hands did fabricate:
And yet for all his bulk, and vast extent
Of bones, and sinews I made him content
With the poor Ox, that labors in the plow,
To feed on grass, and Hay, and glad so too.
Observe then, Job, of how much strength, and force 16. Lo now, his strength is
in his loins, and his force is in the navel of his belly.

This creature is, exceeding far the Horse,
And Lion: for all creatures in the field,
To the Elephant in force, and strength do yield.
His legs, like brazen pillars, do sustain
His close-built body, which with little pain
They bear from place to place, as he does ramble,
Whilst all the other beasts in forest tremble
At his appearance: no less honoring
That stately creature, then he were their king.
When his proboscis in the Air he shakes, 17. He moves his tail like a cedar,
the sinews of his stones are wrapped together.

With violence, he such a figure makes,
As if a tall, and lofty Cedar spread,
Its Trunk, with all its boughs above its head.
It Is wonderful to think what strength does ly
In this proboscis, what activity,
What art, what cunning, what dexterity.
When with it, as one with his hand would do,
He Will manage Faulchion, Sword, and Dagger too?
When with it he on man, or beast will seize,
Lift them from ground, and throw 'em up with ease,
To the Garrison of the Tower upon his back,
Where they are killed: the sinews, which do make
His Trunk so strong, are twisted so together,
As branches of a tree, and move it hither,
And thither, as it pleases wantonly,
Though big, and long, with great agility.
Like staves of brass his great bones do appear, 18. His bones are as strong
pieces of brass, his bones are like bars of iron.

His lesser bones like bars of Iron are.
Amongst the beasts he terrible appears, 19. He is the chief of the ways of
God, he that made him, can make his sword approach unto him.

His Trunk the Horse in battle only fears:
The Lion, when he sees him, shrinks apace,
The Tiger dares not look him in the face:
The Boar, the wild Bull* the Rhinoceros,
The Unicorn, and Panther are but dross
Beside pure metal. when with him compared,
The Stag, the Bear, the Wolf, and Leopard
Are all afraid of him, and run for fear,
When, like a walking-Tower, he does appear.
Yea, man himself no less amazed does fly,
When he perceives this dreadful Beast draw nigh.
For when you men do in closs Battle stand,
And threatening Swords appear in every hand,
With many Bows, and Shields, and many Spears,
And pointed Lances, yet he shrewdly fears
The approach of this four-footed Warrior;
Whose blows and throwings he cannot endure.
Yet this same dreadful Beast, I can with ease
Beat down, like other creatures, when I please,
For though --
By reason of his bloods frigidity,
He sometimes lives a hundred years, yet I,
Who made him live, can make him sooner die.
And now this Beast, as dreadful as he is, 20. Surely the mountains bring him
forth food: where all the beasts of the field play.

Is tame, and gently peaceable in this,
That with the other Creatures, who do breed
Upon the Mountains, he on Grass does feed;
As if they were his equals every day,
Whilst round him all the lesser Beasts do play,
Now fearless, not suspecting in the least
The killing wrath of this familiar Beast.
Yet though by day he on the Hills does feed, 21 He lies under the shady
trees, in the covert of reeds, and fens,

When night approaches he does make his bed
In warmer places, and delights to ly
Under the sweet, and spacious Canopy
Of some small branching Oak: where this tall Beast
As in a Palace does securely rest:
Or under covert of Bull-rushes, Reeds,
Low-spreading Willows, or thick bushy Weeds,
That flourish about Fenns, and Marshes,
And there he lays him down, and sleeps with ease.
Under the shadow of the Trees he lies, 22 The shady trees cover him with their
shadow: the willows of the brook compass him about.

Couching upon his Belly, with his Thighs
And Legs laid under him, and does not lean
Upon the Trunk of the Tree, as some do faign,
'Cause wanting Joints, he could not rise again,
Should he ly down: no, but as other Beasts,
For all his bulk, he feeds, he moves, he rests.
When to the River he for drink draws nigh, 23 Behold, he drinks up a river,
and hastes not: he trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth.

Like other Beasts, he drinks not hastily,
As if the Huntsman, with his Hounds were by:
Nor stands he on the Bank, but boldly wades
Into the Channel, and securely treads
The ouzy Bottom, whilst his bulk does seem
To stop the very current of the stream.
For, ere he drink, he plunges for some time,
And with his feet does raise, and mix the slime,
O'th* bottom with the current, till it be
So thick, and muddy, as he cannot see
His feet below him, for he does not care
To drink the water, when it is pure, and clear,
As other beasts are used to do, but when
He has thus troubled all about him, then
He drinks securely at his ease, and leisure,
Void of all fear, with great delight, and pleasure.
Yes, Tuns of Water to appease his drouth,
He by his Trunk does pump into his mouth.
Nay, should he chance by Jordans streams to graze
He Would drain that River in not many days.
For in his thirst he greedily does seem, ^4 He takes it (...)* his (...)
through (...).

As at one draught, he would swallow up the stream:
And then he drinks too, with such eagerness,
As though both Reeds and Bushes he does press
For water, and what else does him oppose,
He bores it through with his prodigious nose.
Now this same creature, though he does excel
In strength, both thee, and all on earth that dwell;
Yet owes he all this strength to me alone,
Who gave it to him, and will stoop to none,
But me, for while he has my liberty,
He lives, when I recall it, instantly
For all his strength, he must ly down, and die.
Cap. XLI.
THus having shown thee how I do command ^^ Can thou draw out Leviathan with
a hook? or his tongue with a cord* which thou let down?

All things that have their being on the land:
Now I Will inform thee of my power at Sea,
And show thee what vast Creatures too there be
Within that District, which though they appear
To thee, and others, to be Sovereign there;
And by their bulks, to those, who Plow the Seas
Would something like unlimit power express,
Yet they are but my Vassals, and are even
Subject to the Admirality of Heaven,
As well as all the smallest Fishes are,
That swiming in the Ocean appear.
To give you then for all, one notable,
And famous instance, as most suitable
To my intent: I Would have thee seriously
Observe (but with a meditating eye)
The Princely Leviathan, such a creature,
As shall hereafter furnish no small matter
Of dispute in your solemn Homilies,
What this same Leviathan signifies.
But whatsoever it be, it is a thing
Of such a force, beyond all reasoning,
As all the force of man cannot subdue,
And where it swimes is yet but known to few.
Can draw this Leviathan then, with ease
By simple hook, or line out of the Seas,
Like other Fishes? hale him on the Land,
By force of rops, and kill him on the sand?
Can thou with angle catch this Fish? can thou, 2. Can thou put a hook
into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a thorn?

When caught, as men with lesser Fishes do,
String him upon a hook, a thorn, or cleck,
And bear him lightly home upon thy back?
Do think, if thou should catch him, that he will cry, 3. Will he make many
supplications unto thee, will he speak soft words unto thee?

To thee for quarter, and degeneratly
Offer to be thy slave, as the Elephant,
And all the other beasts will covenant 4. Will he make a covenant with thee?
will thou take him for a servant for ever?

To save their lives? or will he offer thee,
As others do, a ransom to be free?
Do think he will supplicat, and speak thee fair,
That thou forsooth in pity should him spare,
And not with Hatchet cut him down to pieces,
And of his bulk make havoc, as thou pleases?
Can tame him so by art, as thou can make 5. Will thou play with him, as
with a bird? will thou bind him forthy maidens?

Thy boys in playing with him pleasure take,
As they with other beasts are used to do,
And birds of several species? can thou,
As with a pretty linnet, with him dandle?
And make him gentle for thy girls to handle?
Upon him shall thou, and thy partners feast, 6. Shall thy companions make a
banquetof him? shall they part him among the merchants?

And of his fat, and oily bulk make waste?
Gobbets of him to friends, as tokens send,
And to each merchant give his dividend?
Dare thou with barbed Irons boldly fall 7. Can thou fill his skin with
barbed irons? or his head with fish spears?

Upon this Fish, as men do on a Whale,
And when his body is stuck full of these,
Let him at ropes-end tumble in the Seas;
Till overcome with pain, he forcibly
Does rush his belly on the shore, and die?
Do -- lay thy hands upon him, then thou wilt see 8. Lay thine hand upon him,
remember the battle, and do no* more.

By sad experience, he is not to be
So tamely caught: thou wilt see what he can do,
What cunning art he will practice, and how
To save his life, he will all his force assemble,
And make the very stoutest of you tremble.
Then, as thou would desire to live, forbear 9. Behold the hope of him is in
vain, shall not one be cast down even at sight of him?

T'assault this warlike thing with hook or spear:
That man who thinks to catch him, is not wise,
For he can kill one with his very eyes.
Since then there is none of you, who dares attacque 10. None is so fierce, as
dare stir him up: who is then able to stand before me?

This mortal creature, which my hands did make:
Since no man dares contend with him: who is he
That lives on Earth, and dares contend with me?
Who Is he amongst you all, that dares contend 11. Who has prevented me, that I
should repay him? whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine.

With me? who is he of you, that dares pretend
By any merit to have obliged me so,
That I should to him any kindness show?
Fools that you are! does even the best of you,
By all your tears, good works, and fastings too,
Or any thing that man on Earth can do
Suppose you can of Heaven a purchase make,
Or of your God, in gratitude expect,
Not as a favor, but as a reward,
What I have from Eternity prepared,
For such of you as I intend to bless,
After this life, with so much happiness.
A happiness to which no man can claim,
And those are fools, that confidently dream,
They by their art of living can attain,
What all, without my aid, attempt in vain,
Nor am I obliged in this Earth to show
Kindness to any of you, or bestow
A foot of ground upon the best of you,
For any good, you by your selves can do,
No all you do possess: all you design,
Your property on Earth is simply mine:
And what you think your own inheritance,
Is only yours by my pure tollerance.
I do to this man a large portion give,
To the other hardly whereupon to live.
I do allow: from this man I do take
What I have given, and I do quickly make
The other rich, for all that you can see
Under the tract of Heavens, belongs to me,
So that, --
If what I give, I do assume again,
Who Is he, that of me justly can complain?
When only I dispose of what is my own,
As I think fit, as being bound to none
For any favor: and what all of you,
In your own triffling matters daily do.
And now that I may further evidence, 12. I will not conceal his parts, nor his
power, nor his comely proportion.

Besides the bulk, the worth, and excellence
Of this great Leviathan: I will show,
What of this creature yet thou do not know.
Who Is he so bold, as dares cut off his fin? 13. Who can discover the face of
his garment? or who can come to him, with his double bridle?

Sieze on his body, flea him of his skin?
Make a rude bit reverberat his tooth?
Or make a double bridle rule his mouth?
He, who by main force, can his lips unfold, 14 Who can open the doors of his
face? his teeth are terrible round about him,

And underprop his jaws, may there behold,
How like a Princes Court his mouth does show,
Where teeth, like Halbardiers, stand all arow
To guard the tongue, which there does ly in state,
And underth' arched palate keeps its seat.
Like a strong shield of proof his scales appear 15. His scales are his pride,
shut up together, as with a close seal,

So that he does not any mortal fear,
Covered with these, but does in them confide,
And shows in these a great part of his pride.
For they together are indented so, 16. One is so near to another, that no air
can come between them.

As 'twixt their junctures no sharp air can blow.
They stick together so conglutinate 17 They are joined one to another; they
stick together, that they cannot be sundered.

By nature, as no art can separate
Those clinging scales, which altogether make
A figure, as if he upon his back
Did wear a Coat of Steel, of Brass, or Iron,
And tempered Metals did him all environ.
But when at any time he does appear 18 By his neezings a light does shine, and
his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning.

Above the Water, what a horrid fear
Spreads he upon the Seas, both far and near.
For, when from Topmast, Mariners descry
This floating Mountain, they do by and by
Steer to the weather-hand, to shun his wake,
With all the Sail, they for their lives can make,
Because, as if he neez'd, he often throws
Such quantity of Waters from his nose,
Up in the Air, which by the Suns reflex 19 Out of his mouth go burning lamps,
and sparks of fire fly out.

Appear at distance, like a flame unequal:
As no Ships dare approach him, out of fear,
He Would overwhelm them, if they should draw near.
For from his mouth, --
The broken waters flee, like sparks of fire,
Which causes the Sea-faring-man admire
What Creature this must be, that with such ease
Can raise a tempest in the calmest Seas.
Smoke from his Nostrils issues out so hot, 20 Out of his nostrils goes smoke,
as out of a seething pot, or caldron.

As from a Cauldron, or a boiling Pot,
When he does belch out no small quantity,
Of thick, and fulsome vapors in the sky.
Yes, for he is able by his breath to blow 21 His breath kindles coals, and a
flame goes out of his mouth.

Fire out of Coals, and out of darkness show
A flaming light: for from his mouth, by turns,
As at first kindling, when a Coal-fire burns,
Now sulfurous smoke, then flames do issue out,
And fill with terror all the Seas about.
In his thick neck such strength and vigor lies, 22 In his neck remains
strength, and sorrow is turned to joy before him.

As all the force of Iron he defyes:
For all the power of man he does not care,
And laughs at things which other creatures fear.
The fibers of his flesh are joined together 23 The flakes of his flesh are
joined together, they are firm in themselves, they cannot be moved.

So firmly, that none can distinguish either:
So solidly compacted, and comprest
Each within other, as nor Fish, nor Beast
Can show the like, so strongly grained, and fresh,
As it does rather look like Oak, then Flesh.
Now as for strength, he is wonderfully made, 24 His heart is as firm as a
stone, yea, as hard as a piece of, the nether millstone.

So he in courage all things does exceed
That ever life enjoyed: he knows no fear,
But does a heart of resolution bear:
A heart so firm, and so unmovable
By any threats, as it is incapable
Of that weak passion, with which others are
Infected, so well known by name of fear.
For he is so far from being capable 25 When he raises up himself, the mighty
are afraid, by reason of breakings, they purify themselves.

Of fear himself, that he is intolerable
In his insults, and able too to raise
Such terror amongst the inhabitants of the Seas,
As by one look he can make all, that is there
Yea, even the swiming Oak, to sweat for fear,
And shrewdly damps the stoutest Mariner.
For all a-board a Ship, when from the Deck
They see the Waters at great distance break:
By which, as by an usual Sign, they guess,
The Leviathan tumbles in the Seas,
As if their death approached, do quickly fall
Upon their knees, and to Devotion all
Apply themselves, because they sadly think
He Will by his Water-spout their Vessels sink.
Or if there is any of the Crew so bold, 26 The sword of him that lays at him,
cannot hold, the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon.

As thinks upon this creature to lay hold,
By force of Arms they do attempt in vain,
For this undaunted thing will not be taken
At any rate: the Sword, Dart, Javelin,
Do but make such a noise upon his skin,
As one with Steel would strike upon a Bell,
And, 'stead of piercing, make it only knell.
But where he does assault, there is no defense
Against his blows, with so great violence
He rushes on, as he does soon prevail
Against your cuirass, or through Coat of Mail.
Iron, as Chaff, and Straw he does contemn, 27 He esteems iron as straw, and
brass as rotten wood.

And Brass, as rotten Wood he does esteem.
The force of Arrows cannot make him fly, 28 The arrow cannot make him fly:
sling-stones are turned with him into stubble.

Though the Archer on him his best skill should try:
No Engine can prejudge him, life, or limb,
Stones from the Sling are but Boyes-play to him.
Your pointed Darts, which men do at him throw, 29 Darts are counted as
stubble, he laugheth at the shaking of a spear.

And think, by force, and art to catch him so,
He does no more, then Straws, or Rushes fear,
And laughs aloud at shaking of your Spear.
Then for his Lodgings, where do you suppose 30 Sharp stones are under him, he
spreads sharp pointed things upon the mire.

This creature makes his bed? not in the Ouze,
As other Fishes, or in muds or mires,
Not he, for he no softer quilt desires
Then sharpest Rocks in bottom of the Seas,
Where, as on Bed of Douns he sleeps with ease.
When he does swim, his motion is so strong, 31 He makes the deep to boil like
a pot, he makes the sea like a pot of ointment.

That one would think the Ocean all along,
Where he does move, by the great scum of Oil,
Appears about him, really did boil.
Yes, where he moves, he leaves a foaming line 32 He makes a path to shine
after him, one would think the deep to be a hoary head.

Behind him, on the surface of the Brine,
Which does, like flames, at a great distance shine.
The Waves are with its froath so pouldered,
As one would think the deep a hoary head.
In fine, he does in strength so much excel, 33 Ugon earth there is not his
like, who is made without fear.

The spacious earth has not his parallel.
At his approach, the trembling Seas make way,
And with profound submission obey
His transient orders: furnish him with all
What he for his convenience does call;
Where e're he marches, and allow for meat,
What of their subjects he thinks best to eat.
All other creatures, with disdainful eye 34. He beholds all high things, he
is a king over all the children of pride.

He views: no creature in conceit so high,
Inhabits under Heavens Canopy.
For all that in the Ocean do swim,
Daily, and hourly tribute pay to him:
They pay whatever they are by him assess't,
And dare not whisper that they are oppress't:
For if upon their grievances they fall,
And of their laws, and privileges bawl,
He Will at one breakfast, soon devour them all.
Never let crowned head with him dispute,
No King on Earth can be so absolute.
Cap. XLII.
THus the Almighty having opened^ 1. Then Job answered the Lord, and said,

His Cabinet of Nature, and displayed
His glory by the works of his Creation,
And of them all made wholesome application,
To the present state of this afflicted man,
Then Job, with great submission, began
To answer; and thus openly confess
Gods wisdom, and his own great foolishness.
Now, says he, Lord, I fully do believe, 2. I know that thou can do every
thing, and that no thought can be witholden from thee.

Now, as the light, I clearly do perceive,
That thou, -- thou art that God Omnipotent,
Who has his Throne above the Firmament.
Now I Am convinced that never hithertoo
I fully understood, as I do now
How great thou art: although I fancyed
I knew thee so well, that I did not need
Further instruction; but now thou have shown,
That I before this time have nothing known,
Of what I ought most to have studied,
And now, my God, I do confess indeed,
That in my great impatience, all this time,
I Have foully erred; I do confess my crime.
Lord, I knew nothing, but I now do know
That thou art he, to whom all things below
Do owe their Being: that thy eye does see
Better then we our selves, what ever we
Do act, or speak: that every secret thought
Lodged in our breasts, before thy Bar is brought,
There tried, convict, condemned, or acquit,
As thou our Sovereign Judge think just, and fit:
I know that all things are to thee revealed,
And nothing from thy eye can be concealed.
And where is the man now? -- where is that so wise 3. Who is he that hides
counsel without knowledge? therefore have I uttered that I understood not
things too wonderful for me, which I knew not.

And knowing thing, that in his own vain eyes
Appeared in much esteem, and thought he knew
His Maker fully, -- ah -- where is he now?
I am the man, Lord, I am he, alace,
That did my thoughts, in passion, express
Of thee below thy worth: I am the man,
That of all mortals, since the world began,
At thy just hands does most deserve indeed
For his miscarriage to be punished.
Nor can I from my passion draw excuse
For my great errors, for that were to use
One crime, to palliat another: -- no,
I can make no excuse, because I know
To be in passion was it self a crime,
And so I have supported all this time
One error with an other: I am he
Then that has doubly sinned: -- Lord do by me
As thou thinks just: I no more deprecate
Thy wrath, but in my present sad estate
Am still content to live, and patiently
Endure it to the last extremity,
Without repining; since thou have decreed,
And by thy Providence so ordered,
That I should be afflicted for my sins,
I shall imagine that my woe begins,
Even from this instant, and without all passion,
From this hour forward bear thy indignation.
Only I do demand the liberty
To ask some questions of thy Majesty; 4. Hear, I beseech thee. and I ^ill
speak: I will demand of t^^^, and declare thou unto me.

Not to debate, (for now I plainly see
What it is for frail man to contend with thee)
I ask then, since I am convinced now
Of my late errors, Lord, what shall I do
To make atonement, for my great offense;
What course of living shall I take from hence,
That into so great inconvenience,
I may not be by passion led again,
But may some favor at thy hands obtain.
Before this I have only heard by fame 5. I have heard of thee by the hearing
of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee.

Of thy great actings, and thy mighty name:
But now, Lord, with my eyes, I thee behold:
These eyes have seen thee: now I may be bold,
Since I have heard thee speak upon my case,
To say that I have seen thee face to face.
My self I therefore utterly abhore, 6. Wherefore I abhore myself, and repent
in dust and ashes.

And on my Parts I will presume no more:
I Will think I have known nothing all this while,
And at my own unknowing-knowledge smile:
I Will think I now know more then e're I did,
Since thou, in kindness, have discovered,
How little I in former times have known,
Of what I should have studied alone.
I thought indeed my knowledge had been such,
And by experience I had learned so much,
As I, in excess, not defect, might err,
But now, alace, it fully does appear
That I knew nothing in regard of what
From thy own mouth, I Have been informed of late.
Now I Am convinced that I have sinned: from hence
I Will no more vainly plead my innocence,
But for my failings piously lament,
And of my errors from my heart repent.
Job thus accused, convict, and censured, 7 And it was so, that after the Lord
had spoken these words unto Job, the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My
wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have not
spoken of me the thing that is right, as ^y servant Job has.

For his impatience: God does next proceed
To show his three Friends, wherein they had erred,
Whilst they had stiffly all along averred
That Job was sinful, because punished,
And so augmented, not diminished
The good man's sorrow, which they should ha'done,
Had they been his true friends: but they alone,
Appear to have accused him, and in stead
Of comforting him, to have truly plead
He was a man of so much wickedness,
As for his sins, he had deserved no less
Than what he suffered: and with so much heat,
Upon that subject, did with him debate,
As if they meant to make him desperate.
Now after all, the Supreme Judge thinks fit
To show them likewise, how upon their wit,
Indeed themselves they valued too much,
And out of humor more to be thought such,
Then for his glory, they had argued
Against their friend on that mistaken head.
Thus then to th'wise and learned Eliphaz
The Almighty sharply did himself address.
I do perceive, says he, you are one of those,
That do mistake my actings, and suppose
That my proceedings must be regulate
By Humane Reason, and accommodate
To your capacity: for you have said
That in affliction one may plainly read
His sin, and my displeasure, and that none
But sinful, and flagitious men alone
Do in affliction tumble, and from thence,
(As you thought, wisely) with much eloquence
Inferred that Job, whom I long time have known
To be upright, and still for such do own:
Because afflicted, of necessity,
Must be a man of great impiety.
Who taught you thus to speak? who taught you so
To argue, as if you did fully know
The method of my Government, and were
Of Council with me? who taught you t'inferr
Such positive conclusions, as these
From any unaffording premises,
Of my proceedings? who gave you commission
To speak thus to a man in Jobs condition:
As if a man, whom I had visit, you
Would in afflicting language visit too.
Know then I Am angry with thee, and thy friends,
Because you have so rashly spoke your minds
Of my proceedings, in the present case
Of my good Servant Job. --
For you have not talked of my Providence,
With that entire respect, and deference,
As did become you: nor have you at best,
In any of your reasonings expressed
Your selves like men of zeal, and piety,
As Job has done, but rather foolishly
Maintained your own opinions right, or wrong
Against the suffering person all along.
Nay, you pretended too, you plead for me,
Whilst neither to the other two, nor thee,
I ever gave commission so to do;
And therefore you have all three erred; but now
That I intend to set my Servant free
From his afflictions, and let all men see,
That what this man has suffered, was meant
For trial only not for punishment,
And make of him a famous President,
In all time coming, of my Providence,
And an example of great patience;
I Will censure you no more, but for the time
Let it suffice that I have touched your crime.
Only it is fit you go to Job, and make 8. Therefore take unto you now seven
bullocks, and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for your
selves a bu^n-offering, and my servant Job shall pray for you; for him I will
accept, lest I deal with you after your folly, in that ye have not spoken of me
the things which are right, like my servant Job.

Atonement for your faults, go therefore take,
Seven Bullocks, and seven Rams, and offer these
As a burnt offering for your trespasses.
Go -- do what I command, for you have erred,
And your own knowledge to my words preferred.
But for your sins make a burnt-offering now,
And so my servant Job shall pray for you.
Him, because truly pious, I will hear,
On your behalf, and for his sake forbear
To punish you: although what you have said,
Since you begun to speak, has merited
Much of my wrath: but go -- do so no more,
And I will pardon what you have done before.
Prostrat upon the ground lay Eliphaz, 9. So Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the
Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite went and ^^d according as the lord had
commanded them: the Lord also accepted Job.

With his two friends, ashamed to show his face,
While God did speak, because convinced at length
That they had labored, with the utmost strength
Of argument to broach a Heresy,
Which had descended to Posterity,
As a firm truth, and been received of all
As a position fully general,
That all Gods actings were determined
By those of men, and that none suffered
But for their sins: if God had not declared
By his just Sentence, that these men had erred.
Without replying then to what was laid
By God Almighty to their charge, they prayed
Their injured friend for them to interceed:
Now, all obedience they did quickly bring,
As God had ordered, their sin-offering;
And with great zeal, did make atonement
For their unsound, presumptuous argument.
Whilst Elihu, who, as appears, has been
A learned young man, pious, upright, and clean
In The* eyes of God, and had by inspiration,
From his great Maker, spoke on this occasion,
Is not reproved, and therefore we may guess,
He joined his prayer with Job in this address
For these three men; which prayer God did hear,
And gently for their sake, was pleased to spare
Those who had erred. Thus God determined
The case of Job: thus he at length decreed,
For the afflicted man against his friends,
And thus in mercy the grand Trial ends.
For now, as when the Sun imprisoned 10. And the Lord turned the captivity of
Job, when he prayed for his friends, also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he
had before.

Long time amongst thick clouds, begins to spread
His rays abroad, and shine as formerly,
The proud, insulting vapors by, and by
Dissolve themselves into a subtle air,
And now the Sun triumphant does appear
In his full splendor, darting every where
His warming beams, and makes the Skys again,
After the storm, look pleasant, and serene.
So now The Almighty having fully tried
The worth of Job, and being satisfied
Of his deportment in his misery,
Dispels the clouds of his adversity,
And puts an end to Jobs captivity.
Restores him quickly to his former state,
And makes him happier, then he was of late.
For he of earthly means does give him more,
By the one half, then he possessed before.
And now, the days of mourning being gone, 11. Then came there unto him, all
his brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his
acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in his house, and they bemoaned
him, and com^orted him over all the evil that the Lord had brought upon him*
every man gave him a piece of money, and every one an ear-ring of gold.

We must suppose that Job returned annon
To his own house, and in tranquillity,
Bless't with firm health, and wealth, as formerly,
He lived, whilst all his scattered family,
Did by degrees return: that every where
He viewed his grounds; and daily did repair,
What by injurious times had been destroyed,
And here, and there, his serving-men employed
In Ditching, Fencing, Planting, Laboring,
In Pits, and Q^arries, Plowing, Harrowing,
Pasturing, Dra^ing, and each other thing
That might recover the sad desolation
Of his affairs, by th'horrible vastation
Made there of late:
Not only by th'incursions of those,
Who lived on spoil, but even of such, God knows
Of his own friends, and unkind contrymen,
Who thinking Job would never return again;
Upon his whole Estate had fairly seized,
And amongst themselves divided, as they pleased,
All his Effects: thinking them now their own
By Right, since all his Race were dead, and gone,
And he a Beggar, countenanced by none.
At least they thought, if e're it should fall out
He should return again, beyond all doubt,
His Spirits would be so with Sorrows spent,
That he would surrender for an Aliment,
During his life, all what they did possess,
And not adventure upon tedious Pleas
For the recovery of it, but in peace,
Desire to end the residue of his years,
And then they would be as it were his Heirs.
Therefore we may not without ground suppose
That seeing God resolved to put a close
To all Jobs Woes, and Sorrows, and restore
This man ex postliminio, what before
His late Affliction to him did pertain
Was soon by him recovered again
From these Intruders, by a short complaint,
Exhibit to those in the Government,
Whose hearts now God had moved; unfeal'd their eyes,
And let them see, what wrongs, and injuries
His Servant had even by their Laws sustained
Whilst poor, and friendless, under Bonds restrained,
Absent, and sick, not able to defend
His legal Title, and just Interest,
He was by formal ch^canery oppress't.
And therefore now to make full expiation
For their Intrusions, and their malversation,
In countenancing such illegal deeds,
The Court on his Petition, proceeds
To a full restitution, and declares
All other Titles ( save Job and his Heirs)
To that Estate to be now null, and void
Renvers'd, rescinded, cancelled, and destroyed.
Orders him full Possession again,
And finds in Law that those intruding men
Were violent Possessors, and ordain
These to make Count, and Payment of what Rent
They had uplifted, during his Restraint,
As violently seized, and fined beside
Those men in Costs, and Charges to be paid
To the injured Party, for what Damnages
He had sustained: -- --
For so much some think humbly may be guess't
Without offense, from what is here expressed,
That seeing God himself did Job restore
To twice as much as he possessed before;
Why might he not by way of Justice so
Have ordered things, as that he might bestow
Upon his faithful Servant the Estates
Of these, whom for their wickedness he hates.
Since that we know God is accustomed,
When he by rules of Justice does proceed
Against the race of Sin, to overthrow
Them totally, and graciously bestow
Their Means on good men, in retalliation
Of what they suffered by these men's oppression.
And though the Gift the Damnage should exceed
By two parts more, yet that does nothing plead
Against Gods Justice, since their sins do call
Aloud for extirpation general
Of them and all their Race: if then he may
By Justice take their whole Estates away
From them, and theirs, why may he not dispose
What is his own undoubtedly, to those
Who merit at his hands much better things,
As is the custom among earthly Kings
To gratify their Subjects Loyalty,
By Spoil, and Plunder of the Enemy.
But howsoever it was, Jobs restoration
Is, truth, a most conspicuous demonstration
O'th'justice, greatness, goodness, equity,
And gratitude of him, who sits on high:
For it we ponder all his circumstances,
How in Prosperity he now advances;
And how, his Clouds of woes now dissipate,
His last is better then his first estate:
We'll find that God has only laid him low,
That when restored he might the better know
The real sweetness of Prosperity,
By his reflections on his Misery.
For those, who all their lifetime live at ease,
And know no trouble, suffer no disease,
But waste their time in dull felicity,
Because they do not know it is contrary,
They do not know it self: since it is confess't
By all the knowing World that Contrares placed
Beside each other make each other known,
Better then when considered alone.
For if a man shall first some Aloes taste
And then some Sugar: why he finds the last
Is sweeter far, when he reflects upon
The bitterness o'th'first, then if alone
He had the latter tasted: even so
When Job reflects how miserably low,
And scandalously poor he was of late
Which by reflection on his former state
Was much augmented; so he now esteems
His present happiness the more, yet seems
With so much moderation to bear
His restoration, as if yet he were
Upon the Dunghill, and betwixt the two
Extremities of both Conditions, now
He lives like one, that his Condition knew.
Not elevat, when all his Kindred come
With joyful voice to bid him welcome home
His worthy Kindred! O his kind Relations,
Who formerly had in his sad occasions
Deserted him, and spoke of him, with hate,
Now come, by dozens, to congratulate
His happy Restitution.
Those who did from him in Affliction fly
Are now his stout friends in Prosperity.
By turns they feast him, striving who shall treat
A man, to whom they would not give of late
One Loaf of Bread: but O his great Estate!
His Means, and Honors now such figure make
As all of them do covet to partake
The happiness of his society
And wait upon him, with alacrity.
With Jewels, and Gold earrings they present him,
And with broad Silver Medalls complement him.
All his acquaintance too make now addresses
To him, and trouble him with fresh caresses,
And salutations in Prosperity,
Who did not mind him in Calamity.
For now -- --
His Friends, Acquaintance, Kinsmen, in a word,
All that e're knew him, seeing him restored
Do crowd about him, every one denies,
At least make fashion of Apologies,
For their unkindness, whilst he was of late
In a most sad, and despicable state:
But Job considering that those, who forsook him
When in Affliction, if again it took him,
Would do the like, did with great moderation,
Receive the addresses of that Corporation:
Because he knew such Wardrobe-friends, as these
Were not for Storms, but for Festival days.
For he is the only friend, who men does own
In trouble: other friendship there is none;
And friendship's never, but in Affliction known.
Now after this so signal restoration, 12. So the Lord blessed the latter end
of Io^ more then his beginning: for he had 14000 sheep, and 6000 camels, and
1000 y^ke of oxen. and 1000 she asses.

Job used with so much grace, and moderation,
His new Prosperity, that God did bless
His labor daily, for he did increase
In Wealth, and Riches, and did now possess
Twice as much Means, and had a greater Store
By the one half, then that he had before*
Upon his Pasture Grounds he now did keep
A lusty Stock of fourteen thousand Sheep:
And so of Camels, Oxen, Shee-asses,
He now just twice the number did possess.
In Honors too, and Offices beside
No doubt he now was highly magnified:
So that the figure of his latter days
Appeared more glorious then his former was.
But what do Wealth, and Honors signify 13. He had also seven sons, and three
daughters.

Without the prospect of Posterity?
And therefore that in all Job might be bless't
His hopeful Issue, with his Wealth increas't.
For now his Wife, who all this time had strayed,
And had belike in th'Country begged her Bread,
During her Husbands Misery; at last
Learning by public Fame, what late had past
In his Affair, had to her former station
Returned, and lived, in sweet association,
With her kind Husband: ( for we do not read
That ever Job another Wife did wed)
By the same Wife then, as it here appears,
He had ten Children in his latter years:
Seven Males, three Females, and, as here related,
Never were Girls more beautiful created.
Then were Jobs Daughters, so completely fair, 14. And he called the name of
the first, ^emima and the name of the second, Kezia, and the name of the third,
Keren-happuch.

So brisque, so smooth, so sweet, and debonnair,
So amiable, of such comely features,
As both their names, and faces with their natures
Did fully suit: the eldest Jemima
He named, 'cause of complexion bright, as day.
The second Kezia, which does signify
One of an odorifick quality,
As sweet as Cassia: the third was known
By th'name of Keren-happuch, as to none
Inseriour in beauty: these Coheirs, 15. And in all the land were no ^^men
^ound ^o (...) as the daughters of ^ob* and their father gave them inheritance
among their brethren.

With their seven Brethren, as by the Text appears
Were institute, and without all debate,
By equal parts their Fathers great Estate
They did possess, living in unity
Amongst themselves, as if one Family:
Free of Lawsuits, each with their Dividend
Did live content: none of them did contend
For th'right of Primogeniture, or claimed
More then their Father t'each of them had named.
And now, to crown this good man's Happiness 16. After this lived Job an hundred
and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons sons, even four generations.

Full sevenscore years in Honor, Wealth, and Peace,
Job after this did live, and fairly see
His Childrens Children to the fourth Degree.
At length, as all the Race of Mortals must 17. So Job died, being old, and
full of days.

When Time is spent, return again to Dust:
So Job, whom God with both Estates had tried,
Old, full of happy days, and blessings died.
O so let all with Sorrows now oppress't
In thy good Time obtain Eternal Rest:
Let all afflicted trust in thee alone
Great God, besides thee comfort there is none.
Let no man in his Sufferings repine*
For both Lifes-Sorrows, and Delights are thine,
Which to each Mortal, Lord, thou do dispense
As thou thinks't good; O let Jobs Patience
Be a grand Copy, which, in my sad state,
My anxious Soul may strive to imitate.
That pious thoughts each hour may lenifie
The Paroxisms of my Adversity.
FINIS.

