HIS Majesty's Propriety, AND DOMINION ON THE British Seas ASSERTED:

Together with a true Account of the Neatherlanders Insupportable Insolences,
and Injuries, they have committed; and the Inestimable Benefits they have
gained in their Fishing on the English Seas:

As also their Prodigious and Horrid Cruelties in the East and West Indies, and
other Places.

To which is added, an Exact Mapp, containing the Isles of Great Britain, and
Ireland, with the several Coastings, and the Adjacent Parts of our Neighbors:
By an Experienced Hand.

London, Printed by T. Mabb, for Andrew Kembe near St. Margarets-Hill in
Southwark, and Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain; and
Robert Clavet, at the Staggs-Head in Ivy-Lane, 1665.

To the Most Illustrious, and Heroical, George Duke of Aubemarle, Earl of
Torrington, Baron Monck of Potheridge, Beauchamp, and Teys, Captain General of
His Majesty's Landforces, Garrisons, Forts, and Castlos within any of His
Majesty's Dominions; Master of the Horse; Knight of the Most Noble Order of the
Garter; And one of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please Your Highness:
THese Papers concerning His Majesty's Right and Propriety to His Dominion on
the British seas, do here most Humbly Address Themselves to Your Highness
Most Illustrious Hand, and Submit Themselves as much to the Affability of Your
Candor, as they implore the Greatness of Your protection, to which they are
Encouraged both by Reason and Religion; for Your Highness being the Great
Instrument which all along attended the Divine Providence, in Restoring His
Majesty to His Own, both by Sea and Land, and in Establishing Religion as well
as Loyalty; The same Reason does persuade me, that these Assertions may be
Acceptable to You, and that your Highness will vouch-safe Your Patronage to
that Subject which you so Happily and Heroically have Effected; and for which
all Ages shall Renown your Memory.

May it please Your Highness:

The Profits which the Dutch have made by their Fishing on the English Seas,
are as vast as their Ingratitude is abominable, which with an Elaborate Malice
they have Expressed by their manifold outrages committed in the East and
West Indies, where (that no Villainy may be unpractised) to Improve their
Interests, they have added Hypocrisy to their Avarice, and to their Ambition,
Murder. The Innocent Blood which they have spilt, does cry aloud for Vengeance;
Nor can the guilt of it fall asleep, but will be lodged in the Memories of
Righteous Men, and kept awake by the Industry of faithful Historians; and by
this Ruder Pen of him who is,

(May it please Your Highness,) Your Most Humble, and most devoted Servant,
Robert Codrington.

THE PREFACE TO THE Reader.
THe Combinations and Endeavors of the States General of the United Provinces
against His Majesty, and this Nation have been so insupportably Insolent, that
the Parliament not long since, upon the Cry of the whole Nation, did solicit
him to take some extraordinary way to give Redress unto his Subjects for the
many and daily Injuries they sustained from them by their Depredations at Sea,
for the Horrid and Barbarous Cruelties inflicted on them in the East and
West Indies, which being as odious in their Nature, as they are remarkable in
their Number, have been the only Cause that these pains are taken to give a
general satisfaction to the World, by exhibiting this Brief, but most true
Account of His Majesty's Undoubted Right, and sole Propriety in the English,
Scottish, and the Irish Seas: A truth as Ancient, as it is Eminent, and not
only held forth and attested by the Laws of our Land, and the Records of the
Tower, and the High Courts of Parliament, but heretofore confessed also by
diverse of their own Nation, as in this Book you shall find it faithfully
represented to you; But it has been the late practice of the Hollanders
(without examining the Lawfulness of the Act) to put their Oars into every
Boat, where Gain and Profit does appear. It was this, that tempted them to
invade the Islands of Moluccos, Lantore, and Polleroon, which in the Name of
the Crown of England the English for some years had possessed, neither did they
entertain the least jealousy of opposition from the Hollanders, who they knew
heretofore had been oblidged to them for many ancient good Offices in a time,
when their greatest safety did depend upon them, and who lately were conjoined
with them in a strict Alliance and Confederacy for Partnership in the
East-Indie-Trade, in the year 1619. Neither did they fear the Natives, whom
they found to express a greater Inclination of good will unto them then to the
Hollanders, for the English aimed at nothing more, then a lawful and competent
profit by Commerce and Traffic with the Natives, and the Dutch; And though in
some places the English had erected some Forts, and settled some Strength, yet
it was not by any Force or Violence, nor against the good will of the People of
the Country, but with their own good liking, and consent, for the better
security of their Trade, and upon the voluntary submission of the Natives to
the Obedience and Sovereignty of the Crown of England, in which submission the
Ancient Laws and Liberties of the said Natives, and all their own Immunities
were comprehended, and reserved: In this Establishment the English did conceive
themselves to be secure enough; when behold the Dutch (who would be no better
Neighbors to us in the Indies then in Europe) began to quarrel with us, and to
hinder us in our Trade to free Places, the which the better to obtain, they
oftentimes seized upon our Ships, and Goods, and finding this violence not to
Answer their Expectation, they at the last contrived to make themselves the
absolute Masters of the vast profits of those Places; In the pursuit whereof,
they have razed and demolished the English Forts, and laying violent hands on
the English themselves, who made not the least Resistance; they have tied them
to stakes with Ropes about their Necks; they have seized upon their Goods, they
have Imprisoned their Persons, they have Whipped them at the Post in the open
Market Place, and having washed their torn and wounded Bodies with Vinegar and
Salt, they have again doubled their scourges to multiply their Torments; they
have dragged them from thence to places almost inaccessible, by reason of their
steepness and roughness, and having thrown them down the Rocks, if any Sense of
life remained, they have added new oppression to their weary and bruised limbs,
by the heavy weights of Iron; To these deliberate Torments the cruelties of
other Nations are but Courtesies, and Death it self a Mercy; And as if they
were the absolute Lords in the Indies they have assumed a Power to themselves
in the deciding of the controversies between the English and the Indians for
matters passed quite out of their jurisdiction, and when Law and Right have
pleaded against them, they have Executed their Decrees by violence. These be
they who have laid a claim to His Majesty's Interests on his own British Seas,
and rather then allow them proper unto Him, they have declared them common unto
All: At the first they begged leave for their Fishing on the English Seas,
which being granted them by the accustomed Indulgence of our Princes, they have
so presumed upon their lenity, that at the last they have made a Law in their
own Country, That the English shall Sell no white Herrings, nor other Fish there
upon penalty of Confiscation; They are Fishing on the English Seas from June
unto November, and seem there to dwell amongst the Fish for 26 weeks together,
in which time the havoc which they make in destroying the Spawn and Fry of
Fish that comes into their Netts, and otherwise is as remarkable as what they
carry away with them. The Reverend and Learned Mathematitian, Doctor Dee, Vide,
Doctor Dee, his British Monarchy, pa. 44.
almost one hundred years since, speaking of the incredible spoil of Fry and
Spawn, which is yearly made on the River of Thames, and other Rivers belonging
to this Island, does conclude, that there are yearly spoiled on those Rivers,
2000 Cart-loads of fresh fish, which would have so proved to be Market-able, if
they had not been destroyed in their Nonage; I shall give you his Assertion in
his own words; It is probable, says he, that in all England by the manifold
disorder used about the destroying of Fry and Spawn, there is yearly spoiled or
hindered the Brood of 2000 Cart-loads of fresh Fish of middle
Marketable-skantlin.

The value of which 2000 Cart-loads, do amount to 90000 Bushels of fresh Fish,
six Quarters going to a Cart-load, which one with another being rated at five
shillings a Bushel, does amount in current English Money, to the sum of20500l.

Which quantity of Fish also would maintain for one day, One thousand thousand,
and eight hundred thousand Men; or nine hundred thousand Men two days; or
three hundred thousand Men six days, or a hundred thousand, eighteen days, or
fifty thousand Men thirty six days, or five and twenty thousand Men six and
twenty days.

If by our own Neglect, so great a destruction of Fish is made in our own
Rivers, what may we conceive the disorders to be which are made on the English
Seas, by those whose business it is, to think all is Fish that comes to Net,
and whose Trade to Plunder; The time of our patience has been long, their
promises of Redress numerous, and the daily Injuries we have received
insupportable: To give you in this place a more large Account of them, were to
Anticipate your Understanding; I shall therefore for your further Satisfaction,
refer you to the particulars in the Book it self: Farewell.

map of England, Ireland, Scotland, and Western Europe.

An Exact* Map* Containing the Isles of Great Britain and Ireland, with the
Several Coastings that Surround the Same: As also the adjacent parts of all
the other neighboring Nations: Drawn according to the best and latest
Discoveries, Sold by A. Kembe, E. Thomas, and R. Clavell by an experienced Hand
lower half of map on page 9.

THE Propriety and Dominion of the KING of Great Britain on His SEAS; Asserted
against all Opposers, and Confirmed from all Ages, to this Present Time.
FOR the better Understanding of the following Discourse, we shall in the first
place lay down these Two Propositions:

First, That the Sea by the Law of Nature and Nations is not common to all Men,
but is capable of Private Dominion, as well as the Land.

The Second, Is, That the KING ofGREAT BRITAIN Is LORD of the SEA Flowing
about, as an Inseparable and Perpetual Appendant of the Brit^^sh Empire.

Before we shall insist on these Propositions, We shall in the first place,
remove some Objections that may be made against them: Some are drawn from the
Freedom of Commerce or Traffic, which by many are affirmed to be so
Natural, that they can no where be abolished by any Law or Custom, and that
by the Law of Nations it is unjust to Deny Merchants the Benefit of Commerce
and Navigation.

Other Objections are drawn from the Nature of the Sea it self, for it is
commonly alleged that the Sea is altered, and shifted every Moment, and the
State thereof, through a continued succession of new waters, always uncertain,
and remains so little the same in all things, (the Channel only excepted) that
it is impossible it should ever be retained in the Possession of any One
Particular.

As to the first, It is easy to be proved by the Ancient Interpreters of the
Mosaical Law, Lyren. ad ^umer. 34.
That the Sea is altogether as capable of Private Dominion, as the Land; The
Words of GOD in the Book of Numbers are express; And let your Borders be the
Great Sea; that is, say the Rabbis, the main Ocean, and its Isles; And it is
plainly to be proved, that a Private Dominion of the Sea no otherwise then of
Land arose from humane Distribution: Dion. lib* 36.
We read, that Pompey the Great, being Master of a Huge Navy, had a Commission
given him from the Senate, as absolute Lord of the Sea; The like had Mark
Anthony some few years after him; And many of the Roman Historians have called
the Sea, their Sea; because it was wholly subdued to the Roman Power.

We might here allege many Examples how long the Lidians, the Phygians, the
Rhodians, the Phaenicians, and many other Eastern Nations, one after another
have been Lords of the Sea: Thy Borders are in the midst or heart of the Sea
says the Prophet Ezekiel of the Tyrians: Quintus Curtius affirms, that the
City of Tire builded by Agenor, Chron. Canon. p. 128.
made not only the neighboring Sea, but what Seas soever her ships sailed
into, to be of her Dominion: There was an ancient custom used in the East,
that when Great Kings had a design to bring any Nation under their Power, they
commanded Water, and Earth, the pledges of Empire and Dominion to be delivered
unto them, conceiving that the Command of the Sea, as well as the Land was
signified by such a token.

The like may be affirmed of the West, Florus, lib. 2. cap. 6.
for both Polybeius, and Appian affirm that the Carthaginians Enjoyed the
Command of the Sea without all Controversy, as received from their Ancestors;
And if we take a view of these late Times, as to the Rights and Customs of
other Nations, which at this present are in high Reputation, we shall find
that the Commonwealth of Venice have enjoyed the Dominion of the Adriatic Sea
for many Ages: The Tuscans to this day have an Absolute Dominion in the Tyrhene
Sea, and those of Genoa in the Lygustick; the like we may allege of the Danes,
the Swedes, and the People of Norway; And to conclude, that the Dominion of the
Sea is admitted amongst those things that are lawful, and received into the
Customs of Nations, is so far from contradiction, that nothing at all can be
found to control it in the Custonies of our latter Times, unless it be by
some, who being Borderers upon the Sea-Dominions of others, do strive to
violate the Rights of their Neighbors, under the pretense of Civil Community.

Now as to the Objection concerning the Freedom of Commerce and Passage
pretended to be common to All; It is most evident from the Customs of all
Times, that Commerce, and Free Passage has ever been so limited by Princes in
their Territories, that it is either permitted, or prohibited according to the
various Concernments of the Public Good. Princes are concerned to be wary and
careful, that they admit no such Strangers or Commerce where the Commonwealth
may receive any Damage thereby: And Aristotle plainly and expressly says,
Aristo. Polit. lib. 7. cap. 6.
That provision ought to be made by Laws, with whom Subjects may, or may not
converse: Moreover it is commonly provided in Leagues, that it shall not be
lawful for either Party to sail into each others Ports, Coasts, or Harbors
with such a number of Ships, as may give a just occasion of Fear or Jealousy
that Force is intended; except leave be first had of that Party under whose
Jurisdiction those Places are, or unless they be driven thither by Tempest, or
other Necessity, to avoid a greater Force, or the Danger of Shipwreck: And to
conclude, Bodine affirms, That it is lawful to prohibit any Forreigner from
entering the Borders, and also to force him out, if he has entered the Borders,
not only if a War be on foot, but also in Time of Peace, that the Privileges,
Safety, and Welfare of the Inhabitants may not be corrupted by conversation
with Strangers.

As to that Objection concerning the uncertainty of the Sea, which (it is
alleged) does render it unfit for private Dominion, because it is ever in
motion, and in no wise remains the same: Suppose we grant that it be so
flowing, as is usualy said of the most Northernly Seas; Strabo. Geograp. lib. 1.
yet certainly the Channels, and Places through which the waters flow remain
ever the same, although the waters themselves do shift, and change continually.
In the Germane Empire, (according to the Civil Law) Rivers are all of them of
Public Use, yet for all that, they are reckoned in the Emperors private
Patrimony, Seneca Ep. 39.
and amongst the Royalties belonging to his Exchequer; So that the Emperor, or
others by his Grant, have a yearly Revenue out of the Fisheries in them;
Neither is there any thing more common then an Asserting of the Private
Dominion of Rivers, in the Laws of France, Spain, Poland, and Venice, and, in
a word, of all Nations whose Customs are known; seeing therefore that a
Dominion and Propriety of Rivers has been every where acknowledged, why should
it not in the like manner be acknowledged, that there may be Owners of any Sea
whatsoever? Since the always running and flowing Nature of water can no more
hinder a Dominion in the one, then in the other, for the Rivers themselves are
but little Seas; as the Sea it self, to its fluide Constitution, is but a
River, the one differing only in bigness from the other; and so it has been
taken by the Ancients; In the very History of the Creation, all the Gatherings
together of the waters are called Seas: Many Lakes have been called Seas; Luke
5. 1.
Tiberias by St. Luke is called a Lake, but by the other Evangelists a Sea.
Asphaltites is by Pliny, Solinus, and others, termed a Lake, but by Moses in
the Fourteenth of Genesis, the Salt Sea, and by most of the late Writers, the
Dead Sea.

They indeed, who make use of such frivolous subtilties, as these to oppose the
Dominion of the Sea deserve to be turned over to the Philosophers, Heraclitus
and Epicharmus, who taught that every thing is so altered, changed, and
renewed, that nothing in this World continues the same, as it was in the
instant immediately going before. Our Bodies (says Seneca) are hurried like
Rivers; whatsoever thou see, runs with Time; Not one of all those things
that are visible continues; I even whilst I speak of these changes am changed
my self: But let such men as dream that the fluide Inconstant Nature of the Sea
disproves the private Dominion of it, entertain the same opinion if they please
with these Men, and then they must of necessity grant also, that themselves are
not Owners or Possessors, of Houses, Lands, or Money, or any other thing
whatsoever.

As to that Argument, that the water is open to All, and therefore by Law, it
must lie open at all times to all men, it is a very trifling Argument. Before
the first Distribution of things, there was no Land which did not lie open unto
All before it came under particular Possession: In many places payment is made
for the use of water; as amongst the Hollanders, they have in Delph-Land a
Custom, called, Jus Grutae, which has ever been under the care of those
Officers, called in Dutch, Pluymgraven, whereby the Beer-Brewers are obliged to
pay them the hundredth part for the use of the water.

Some men may here object that saying of Antonius, Forcus in cap. Juris. cap. 9.
I am Sovereign of the World, but the Law is Sovereign of the Sea. The True and
Genuine sense of those words is this, I am Lord of the World, because I Govern
the World by my own Law; but the Rhodian Law, is the Law of the Sea, because by
this Law Justice is administered on the Sea; therefore let this case of Eudaemon
concerning Navigation be determined by the Rhodian Law, so far as none of our
Laws does oppose the same. There is no man unless he will renounce his own
Reason, who will affirm, that any Denial is made of the Dominion of the Sea in
that Answer, or that the least Tittle can be found in it against the Dominion
thereof.

Having thus in general given you an account, that almost amongst all Nations,
there has been allowed a Private Dominion of the Sea; we shall now come more
particularly to our selves, and acquaint you, that the Ancient Britains did
Enjoy and Possess the Sea as Lords thereof, before they were subjected to the
Roman Power: It is upon good ground concluded, that the most Ancient History,
whereunto any credit ought to be given about the Affairs of Britain, is not
elder then the Time of Cajus Julius Caesar, Seld. Mar^ Clausum 158.
the Ages before him being too obscured with Fables; but at his coming we find
many clear passages of the Britains Dominion of the Sea flowing about them,
especially the South and East part thereof, as a perpetual Appendant of the
Sovereignty of the Island; For at that time, they not only used the Sea as
their own, for Navigation, and Fishing, but also permitted none, besides
Merchants to sail into the Island without their leave; nor any Man at all to
view, or sound their Seacoasts, or their Harbors: And though at Caesar's first
Arrival, they were Terrified with the sight of his long ships beaked with Brass
or Iron; and they fled to the shore, and from it to the In-lands, being not
sufficiently provided for such a Sea Fight as was then at hand, and which they
never had been acquainted with, yet most certain it is, that they had Vessels
of their own in which they used to Coast about the Neighboring Seas: And
though mention is made by Writers, that commonly they were framed with Twiggs
(as the fashion then was in the more Ancient Nations) and covered with
Oxe-Hides; yet with good ground we may conceive, that they were wont to Build,
and set forth ships of War; of a far more commodious, and solid substance, for
the Guarding of the Seas, and the Isles: We read in Caesar's Commentaries, De
Bello Gallico. lib. 9.
that they were strong at Sea, and it is not to be doubted, but that besides
their Twiggs and Leathern Vessels, they had a considerable Navy which was able
at pleasure to Encounter the ships of their Neighbors that were best Armed:
But the Southernly Parts of Great Britain being Invaded by the Emperor
Claudius, and the Isle of Wight surrendered to them; the British Sea, following
the Fate of the Island, was annexed with it to the Roman Empire.

From the Dominion of the British Sea, as being continually United to the
Island, or an Inseparable Concomitant thereof, many remarquable passages have
proceeded amongst those who have left unto Posterity the Achievements of the
Romans, when they were Masters of this Island: But when the Roman Empire was
declining, and they had scarce Forces enough to Guard the City it self, The
Britains about the Year of our Lord, Zosimus Hist. lib. 6.
Four Hundred and Fourscore, did cast off the Roman Government, and settled a
Commonwealth after their own liking: In the mean time the Saxons Inhabiting
the Shore over against them, had a great and greedy mind unto it, who being a
People extremely given to Piracy, the Romans were accustomed to appoint an
Officer to drive them away, called, The Count of the Saxon Shore throughout
Britain. These Saxons being sent for by the Britains to Assist them against
the Scots and Picts, did get at length the whole Power into their own hand.
Bid, De Natura Rerum. cap. 28.
These Saxons being Arch Pirates, did not only know, but were familiarly
acquainted with the Dangers of the Sea. The same may be said of the Danes and
Normans, for these names being promiscuously used, do often signify the same
Nation, as is sufficiently attested, by Regino, Dudo, the Monk of Malmesbury,
and others: And these People had so great and so admirable a Knowledge of the
Sea, and Sea Affairs, that by an exquisite observation of the Tides, and
Ebbings of the Sea, they were accustomed to reckon their Months and Years, yea,
and to frame Computations of years thereby. In Ancient Records, diverse
particulars are to be seen, which most plainly show, that both the Saxons and
Danes had a Dominion over the Sea, whilst they Reigned in Britain.

In the Reign of the English Saxons, M^. In Bibleotheca Cottoniana.
we read in Asserius Bishop of Sherburn, that Hengist being invited into
England by the Persuasions of Vortigern, there came presently afterward to
recruit him Octa and Ebissa, who putting Pitates aboard his ships, he charged
them to Guard the passages of the Sea. You are to understand that the word
Pirate was not then taken (as now commonly it is) for Robbers or Rovers, but
for such who being the most skillful in Sea-Affairs, were judged to be the
fittest Men to Encounter with their Enemies; The word, says my Author, does
seem to be derived from the Greek, for (...), or Pira, in the Greek Tongue
signifies Craft, or Art, and from this Art in Maritine Discipline they are now
called Pirates which infest the Seas. But amongst these Kings none was more
Potent then King Edgar, who possessing an Absolute Dominion of the Seas, sailed
round about it every Year, and secured it with a constant Guard. It is Recorded
that these ships being very stout ones, Hunting. lib. 5.
were in number One Thousand Two Hundred; Other Writers affirm that they were
Four Thousand; the Abbot of Jorvaux, John Bramton by name, does number them to
be Four Thousand, and Eight Hundred sail: And what Dominion King Edgar had, as
Absolute Lord of the Sea, appears in these words; I Edgar King of England, and
of all the Kings of the Islands, Guil. Malmesb. lib. 2. cap. 8.
and of the Ocean lying round about Britain, and of all the Nations that are
Included within the Circuit thereof Supreme Lord and Governor, do render my
thanks to Almighty GOD My KING, who has Enlarged my Empire, and Exalted it
above the Royal Estate of my Progenitors, who although they Arrived to the
Monarchy of all England ever since Athelstan; yet the Divine Goodness has
favored me to Subdue all the Kingdoms of the Island in the Ocean with their
most Stout and Mighty Kings, even as far as Norway, and the greatest part of
Ireland, together with their most Famous City of Dublin.

After him King Canutus left a Testimony whereby he most expressly Asserteth the
Sea to be a part of his Dominion: For placing himself by the Sea side in the
time of a High Tide upon Southampton shore, he is reported to have made trial
of the Obedience of the Sea in this manner; Thou, O Sea art under my Dominion,
as the Land also which I sit upon is mine; And there was never any that
disobeyed my Command without Punishment; Therefore I command thee not to ascend
upon my Land, nor do thou presume to wet the Feet or Garments of Thy Sovereign:
But although the Event did not answer his Expectation, yet most plain it is,
that here he openly professed himself to be Sovereign of the Seas, as well as
of the Land.

From the Testimonies of the Saxons and Danes, we shall Descend to the
Government of the Normans; where by many Notable and Clear Proofs we shall
find; That

1. The Custody, Government, or Admiralty of the English Sea did belong unto
the King, together with the Dominion of the Adjacent Islands.

2. That the Leave of Passage through this Sea, was granted unto Foreigners
upon Request.

3. That the Liberty of Fishing, was upon Courtesy Allowed to Foreigners and
Neighbors, and Protection given to the Fishermen.

4. That Laws, and Limits were Prescribed to Foreigners; who being in
Hostility the one with the other, but both in Amity with the English, made
Prize of each other on the Sea.

5. The Records whereby this Dominion is expressly Asserted as a most
Undoubted Right, and that not only by the Kings, but by the Parliaments of
England.

As for the First, There is nothing more Clear, than that the Kings of England,
have been Accustomed to Constitute Governors, or Commanders, who had a Charge
to Guard the English Seas, and these were called Custodes Navium, or Custodes
Maritimi. These were the Officers that were called Butsecarli, as may be
gathered out of that Breviary of England, called Doomes Day: Rot. Pat. 48. Hen.
3.
In this Number was Thomas de Moleton, who is Styled Captain and Guardian of
the Sea; and Hugh de Cerquen; Afterward the Title of Guardians, was changed
into that of Admiral, as is alleged by Thomas Walsingham, in the days of
Edward the First. 22. Edw. 1.
We find that in the days of Edward the third; The Principal End of Calling
that Parliament, was concerning the Preservation of Peace, both by Land and
Sea; giving us to understand, that the Land and Sea together made one entire
Body of the Kingdom of England. In the time of Richard the Second, 2. Rich. 2.
Hugh Calverley was made Admiral of the Sea, says the same Author, and the
Universal Custody of the Sea was committed by our Kings, to the High Admirals
of England.

And that the Dominion of the Seas, is properly in the Power and Jurisdiction
of the King, may appear by those Tributes and Customs that were Imposed and
Paid for the Guard and Protection of them; The Tribute called the Danegeld,
was paid in the Time of the English Saxons, which amounted to four shillings
upon every Hide of Land, for the defending of the Dominion by Sea. Annal. 1.
part, page 276.
Roger Houerden affirms, that this was paid until the Time of King Stephen.
Afterward Subsidies have been demanded of the People in Parliament, upon the
same Account; and in the Parliament-Records of King Richard the Second, it is
Observable; That a Custom was imposed upon every Ship that passed through the
Northern Admiralty, that is, from the Thames along the Eastern Shore of
England toward the North-East, for the Maintenance of a Guard for the Seas.
Neither was this Imposed only upon the English, but also upon the Ships of
Foreigners, payment was made at the Rate of six pence a Tun upon every Vessel
that passed by, such Ships only excepted, that brought Merchandise out of
Flanders into London. If a Vessel were employed to Fish for Herrings, it paid
the Rate of Six pence a week upon every Tun; If for other kind of Fish, so much
was to be paid every three weeks, as they who brought Coals to London from
New Castle, paid it every three Months; But if a Vessel were bound
North-wards, to Prussia, Scone, or Norway, or any of the Neighboring
Countries, it paid a particular Custom according to the Weight and Proportion
of the Freight; And if any were unwilling, it was Lawful to Compel them to pay.

In this Place we shall give you the Copy of the usual form of a Commission,
Rot. Parl. 2 Rich. 2. part 2. Act 38.
whereby the High Admiral of England is Invested with Authority for the Guard
of the Sea; it runs in these Words,

WE Give and Grant to N. the Office of our Great Admiral of England, Ireland,
Wales, and of the Dominions and Islands belonging to the same, also of our Town
of Calais, and our Marches thereof, Normandy, Acquitayn, and Gascoign; and we
have Made, Appointed, and Ordained: And by these Presents we Make Appoint, and
Ordain, ^im the said N. our Admiral of England, Ireland, and Wales, and our
Dominions and Isles of the same, our Town of Calais, and our Marches thereof,
Normandy, Gascoign, and Aquitayn, as also General Governor over all our Fleets
and SEAS of our said Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, and our Dominions and
Islands belonging to the same; And know ye further, that we of our especial
Grace, and upon certain Knowledge, do Give and Grant to the said N our Great
Admiral of England, and Governor General over our Fleets and Seas aforesaid;
all manner of Jurisdictions, Authorities, Liberties, Offices, Fees, Profits
Duties, Emoluments, Wracks of the Sea, cast Goods, Regards, Advantages,
Commodities, Preheminences, Privileges whatsoever, to the said Officer our
Great Admiral of England and Ireland, and of the other Places and Dominions
aforesaid, in any manner Whatsoever Belonging or Appertaining. Thus we see we
have a continual Possession or Dominion of the Kings of England by Sea, pointed
out in very Express Words for very many years; We may add to this, that it can
be proved by words plain enough in the form of the Commissions, for the Command
of High Admiral of England; that the Sea for whose Defense he was appointed by
the King of England, who is Lord and Sovereign of it, was ever bounded toward
the South by the Shores of Aquitain, Normandy, and Picardy; for although those
Countries sometimes in the Possession of the English are now lost, and for many
years under the Jurisdiction of the French, yet the whole Sea Flowing betwixt
our British Isles, and the Provinces over against them, are by a Peculiar
Dominion and Right of the King of England on those Seas, subject unto them whom
he puts in Command over the English Fleet and Coasts, that there remains
neither Place nor Use for any other Commanders of that kind: And as for the
Islands of Gernesey, Jersey, and the rest; Mr. Seldom affirms, that before a
Court of Delegats in France, in express terms it has been acknowledged, that
the King of England has ever been Lord, not only of this Sea, Seld. Mare
Clausum page 334.
but also of the Islands placed therein, Par raison du Royalmed' Angleterre,
upon the Account of the Realm of England, or as they were Kings of England; And
in the Treaty held at Charters, when Edward the Third Renounced his Claim to
Normandy, and some other Counties of France that bordered upon the Sea; it was
added, that no Controversy should remain touching the Islands, but that he
should hold all Islands whatsoever which he Possessed at that time, whither
they lay before those Countries yt he held there, or others; For Reason
required this, that he should maintain his Dominion by Sea; And both Gernesey
and Jersey, as well as the Isles of Wight and Man, in several Treaties held
betwixt the Kings of England and other Princes, are acknowledged not only to
lie near unto the Kingdom of England, but to belong unto it.

But to give a greater Light to this Truth, we may from several Records produce
many Testimonies; that the Kings of England have given leave unto to
Foreigners upon Request to pass through their Seas, he gave permission to
Ferrando Vrtis de Sarachione a Spaniard, to Sail freely from the Port of London
through his Kingdoms, Dominions, and Jurisdiction, to the Town of Rochel.

There are Innumerable Letters of safe Conducts in the Records, Rot. Fran. 5
Hen. 4.
especially of Henry the Fifth, and Sixth, whereby safe Port and Passage was
usually granted; And it is worthy of observation, that these kind of Letters
was usually superscribed, and directed by those Kings to their Governors of
the Sea-Admirals, Vice-Admirals, and Sea-Captains,. And to clear all at once,
the Kings of England have such an absolute Dominion in the English Seas, that
they have called the Sea it self their Admiralty. And this we find in a
Commission of King Edward the Third; The Title whereof is, De Navibus
Arrestandis and Capiendis, For the Arresting and Seizing of Ships: The Form of
it runs in these Words; The King to his beloved Thomas de Wenlock his Sergeant
at Arms, and Lieutenant, To our Beloved and Trusty Reginald de Cobham, Admiral
of our Fleet of Ships from the mouth of the River of Thames, toward the
Western parts Greeting: Be it known unto you, that we have appointed you with
all the speed that may be used by you, and such as shall be Deputed by you; to
Arrest and Seize all Ships, Flie-Boats, Barks, and Burges of ten Tun burden
and upwards, which may happen to be found in my foresaid ADMIRALTY (that is, in
the Sea, reaching from the Thames Mouth, toward the South and West) and to
bring them speedily, well, and sufficiently Armed to Sandwich, etc. All
Officers also in the said Admiralty, are Commanded to yield Obedience and
Assistance upon the same Condition; Thus, That the Sea it self was contained
under the Name of the Admiralty, is most clearly manifest, by what already we
have shown you.

And as a Freedom of Passage, so also* we do find, that a Liberty of Fishing
has been obtained by Petition from the Kings of England, we have already made
mention, that King Richard the Second, imposed a Tribute upon all persons
whatsoever that used Fishing on his Seas. We read also, that Henry the Sixth,
Rot. Fran. 38 Hen. 6.
gave leave to the French, and other Foreigners, sometimes for a Year,
sometimes but for six Months, to go and Fish throughout his Seas, provided
that the Fishing-Boats and Busses, were not above thirty Tuns; And if any
Foreigners, whither French, Dutch or others, should Disturb or Molest any of
the Kings Subjects as they were Fishing, they were to loose the benefit of
their License.

But in the Eastern Sea which washes the Coasts of Yorkshire, and the
Neighboring Counties; It has been an Ancient Custom for the Hollanders and
Zelanders to obtain leave, by Petitioning to the Governor of Scarborough
Castle. It is worth the while, says the Reverend Mr. Cambden, to observe what
an extraordinary gain the Hollanders and the Zelanders do make by fishing on
the English Seas, having first obtained leave from the Castle of Scarborough;
For the English have ever granted them leave to Fish, reserving always the
Honor, and the Privilege to themselves, but through a negligence resigning
the Profit unto Strangers; for it is almost incredible (says he) to believe
what a vast sum of Money the Hollanders do make by this Fishing upon our Coast;
Mr. Hitchock also, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, presented a Book to the
Parliament written in the English Tongue concerning the Commodity of Fishing;
in which he specifies, that the Hollanders and Zealanders every year toward
the latter end of summer, do send forth four or five hundred Vessels called
Busses, to Fish for Herrings in our Eastern Seas; but before they fish, they
ask leave of Scarborough, they are his very Words. Care was also taken by K.
James, that no Foreigner should Fish on the English or Irish Seas without leave
first obtained, and every year at the least, this leave was renewed from the
Commissioners for that purpose appointed at London. But the Reason why we do
not so often meet with these Forms of Licenses is, because by the Leagues made
with the Neighboring Princes, a License, or Freedom of that kind was so often
allowed by both parties, that as long as the League was in Force, the Sea
served as it were a Common Field, as well for the Forreigner y was in Amity, as
for the King of England himself, who was the Lord and owner of it. But a
remarkable Example of Fishing in this Nature we find in the days of King Henry
the Fourth. An Agreement was made betwixt the Kings of England and France, that
the Subjects of both Kingdoms might freely Fish throughout that part of the
Sea, which is bounded on this side by the Ports of Scarborough and Southampton,
and on the other side by the Coast of Flanders, and the Mouth of the River of
Sein; The time was also limited betwixt Autumn, and the beginning of January.
And that the French might securely enjoy the Benefit of this Agreement, the
King of England sent Letters unto all his Sea Captains and Commanders. By this
we may plainly see, that these Limits wholly excluded the French from that part
of the Sea which lies toward the West, and South-West, as also that which
lies North-East of them as being so limited by our Henry at his own pleasure,
as Lord and Sovereign of the whole.

There is amongst the Records of Edward the First an Inscription, Pro Hominibus
Hollandiae, etc. For the Men of Holland, Zealand, and Friesland, to have leave
to Fish near Jernemuth, now called Yarmouth; The Kings Letter for their
Protection, runs in these Words.

Rot. Patent 23. Edvar.
The King to his Beloved and Trusty, John de Buteturte Warden of his Port of
Jernemuth Greeting;
For as much as we have been certified, that many men out of the Parts of
Holland, Zealand, and Freisland who are in Amity with us, intend now to come,
and Fish in our Seas near unto Jernemuth, we command you that public
Proclamation be made once or twice every week, that no Person whatsoever
employed abroad in our Service, presume to cause any Injury, Trouble, Damage,
Hinderance, or Grievance to be done unto them, but rather when they stand in
need, that you give them Advice, and Assistance in such manner, that they may
Fish and pursue their own Advantage, without any Let or Impediment. In
Testimony whereof, we have caused these our Letters to be made Pattents, and to
continue in Force until after the Feast of St. Martins next ensuing.


Here you see, that the King grants a Protection to Fish, and he Limits it
within the space of two Months. He alone also Protected the Fishermen upon the
German Coast, nor might the Fishermen use any other kind of Vessels then what
were Prescribed by our Kings. Upon which Accounts all kind of Fishing was
sometimes prohibited, and sometimes admitted; this Restriction being added, hat
they should Fish only in such Vessels as were under the Burden of Thirty Tun;
And this appears by the Letters of King Edward the Third concerning the Laws of
Fishing, which were directed unto the Governors of several Ports, and Towns on
the Eastern Shore, the Words are these;

For as much as We have given License to the Fishermen of the Neighboring
Ports, and to others who shall be willing to come unto them for the Benefit of
Fishing; that they may Fish and make their own Advantage with Ships and Boats
under the burden of thirty Tuns, any Prohibition or Commands of ours whatsoever
to the contrary notwithstanding, we command you to permit the Fishermen of the
said Towns, and others who shall be willing to come to the said places for the
Benefit of Fishing, to Fish, and make their own Advantage with Ships and Boats
under-thirty Tun, without any Let or Impediment, any Prohibitions or Commands
of ours made to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

This is evident also in the Records of King Edward the Fourth, for he invested
three Persons with Naval Power, whose Office it was to Protect and Guard the
Fishermen upon the Coasts of Norfolk and Suffolk; and the charges of the Guard
were to be Defrayed by the Fishermen of the said Seas at the pleasure of the
King of England, although they have Letters of Public Security and Protection
from Foreign Princes; Neither were any Persons admitted to a Partnership in
this kind of Guard, except those who were appointed by the King of England;
least by this means, perhaps it might Derogate from the English Right, which is
a manifest Sign and Evidence of their Dominion, and Possession of the place;
And this may yet more clearly appear by the Laws and Limits usually set by our
Kings to such Foreigners as were at Enmity with each other, but in Amity with
the English: and to this effect, is the Proclamation of King James; who having
made Peace with all Nations, did give equal Protection to the Spaniards, and
the United Neatherlands, at that time exercising Acts of great Hostility one
against another; Our Pleasure (says he) and Commandment is to all our Officers
and Subjects by Sea and Land that they shall Prohibit as much as in them
lies, all hovering of Men of War of either Spaniard or Hollander near to the
Entry of any of our Coasts or Havens; and that they shall Rescue and Succor
all Merchants, and others that shall fall within the Danger of any such as
shall Await our Coasts: And it is further to be observed, that as our Kings
have very often Commanded that all manner of persons should cease from
Hostility throughout all the spaces extended into their Territories by Sea; so
they indulged the like Privilege for ever throughout the more Neighboring
Coasts of the French shore, that all manner of Persons, though Enemies to one
another, should securely sail to, and fro, as it were* under the wings of an
Arbitrator, or Moderatour of the Sea, and also freely should use the Sea,
according to such spaces, and limits, as they were pleased at first to appoint,
which without doubt is a clear Evidence of Dominion.

In this next place, I shall cite some of the Public Records which are kept in
the Tower of London, in which the Dominion of the Sea is expressly Asserted, as
belonging to the Kings of England; We Read, that Edward the Third in his
Commissions given to Geoffery de Say, Rot. Scotia 10. Edvar.
Governor or Commander of the Western and Southern Seas, and to John de
Norwich of the Northern, expresses himself in these following words: We
calling to mind, that our Progenitors* the Kings of England, having before
these times been Lords of the English Sea on every side, yea and Defendors
thereof against the Invasions of Enemies, do strictly Require and Charge you by
the Duty and Allegiance wherein you stand bound, that you set forth to Sea with
the Ships of the Ports, and the other Ships that are ready, and that you Arrest
the other ships under our Command, and that with all Diligence you make search
after the Galleys and Ships of War that are abroad against Us, and that stoatly
and manfully you set upon them if they shall presume to bend their Course
toward any part of our Dominions, or the Coasts of Scotland, etc. Then
follows a Power to Press Seamen, and other matters of that kind.

We read also in the Reign of the said King, in the preferring of a certain
Bill in Parliament (which is the voice of the Estates of the Realm) that he was
usually accounted King or Sovereign of the Seas by all Nations; The words in
French are to this sense in English; Rot. Parli. 46. Edv. 3.
The Nation of the English were ever in the Ages past Renowned for Sea-Affairs
in all Countries near the Seas, and they bad also so numerous a Navy, that the
People of all Countries Esteemed, and called the K. of Engl. the K. or
Sovereign of the Sea.

Another Testimony to the same Effect we read in the Parliamentary Records of
Henry the Fifth, where the Tenor of the Bill runs after this manner: The
Commons do pray, that seeing our Sovereign Lord the King, and his Illustrious
Progenitors have ever been Lords of the Sea, Rot. Parli. 8. Hen. 5.
and now seeing through Gods Grace it is so come to pass, that our Lord the
King is Lord of the Shores on both sides of the Sea, such a Tribute may be
imposed upon all Strangers passing through the said Sea, for the Benefit and
Advantage of our said Lord the King, as may seem agreeable to reason, for the
safeguard of the said Sea. The Answer subscribed to the said Bill, was, Soit
avise par le Roy, which is, Let the King Himself be advised of it. For the King
at that time Resided in France, being Lord of that Country, as well by
Conquest, as Inheritance; And Humphrey Duke of Gloucester was then President of
the Parliament, and Leivtenant of England, by whom as the Kings Deputy that
Answer was given to the said Bill; but when the King was present in person, Le
Roy S' advisera, the King will Advise, was the Answer from the Ancient, down to
our present times, in such Bills as were to be passed into Acts; Many other
Testimonies in this Nature may be produced, which for brevities sake are
purposely omitted.

Neither has the High Court of Parliament only given this Attestation to our
Kings, as Supreme and Sovereign of the Seas: But to confirm it, we shall
produce the Testimonies of Robert Belknap, Rich. 2. Fitz Herbert Tit.
protection, 46.
an Eminent Judge in the Time of Richard the Second, who affirms, that the
Sea is Subject to the King, as a part of his Kingdom, or of the Patrimony of
the Crown; And it appears by Public Records, containing diverse main points,
touching which the Judges of the Land were to be consulted for the good of the
Commonwealth, that the Kings Sea-Dominion, Edw. Cook part 5. fol. 108. and in
Com. ad Littleton, Sect. 439. fol. ^60.
which they called, The Ancient Superiority of the Sea, was a matter out of
Question amongst all Lawyers of that Age, and Asserted by the Determinations
and Customs of the Law of the Land, and by the express words of the Writs and
Forms of the Actions themselves.

Neither is this Truth confirmed only by our Laws, but by our Medals. There
has been a piece of Gold very often Coined by our Kings, called a Rose-Noble,
which was stamped on the one side of it with a Ship, floting in the Sea, and a
King Armed with a Sword and Shield, sitting in the Ship it self, as in a
Throne, to set forth a Representation of the English K. by Sea: The first
Author hereof was Edward the Third, when he Guarded his own Seas with a
Numerous Navy, consisting of Eleven Hundred ships, at which time, as at others
he marched victoriously through France: But what need we labor to produce so
many Testimonies at home from our Records in the Tower and other places, from
our High Courts of Parliament, from our Laws, from our Coyns, and from our
Histories, to prove this Truth; since it is acknowledged even by Foreigners
themselves whom it most concerns, by their usual striking of sails,
according to the ancient Custom by every ship of any Foreign Nation
whatsoever, if they sail near the Kings Navy, or any ship belonging to it at
Sea, which is done not only in Honor to the English King, but also in
acknowledgement of His Sovereignty, and Dominion at Seas. The Antiquity of this
Custom, and that it has been in use for above these Four Hundred years may
appear by this following testimony: At Hastings, a Town situate upon the Shore
of Sussex, it was Decreed by K. John, in the Second Year of His Reign, with the
Assent of His Peers, That if the Governor, or Commander of the Kings Navy in
His Naval Expeditions shall meet with any Ships whatsoever by Sea, either Laden
or Empty, M^. Commentar de Rebus Admiral, fol. 28.
that shall refuse to strike their sails at the Command of the Kings Governor
or Admiral, or his Lieutenant, but make resistance against any who be long unto
his Fleet, that then they are to be reputed Enemies, and if they be taken,
their Ships and Goods to be Consiscated, as the Goods of Enemies; And that,
although the Masters or Owners of the Ships shall Allege afterward, that the
same Ships and Goods do belong to the Friends and Allies of our Lord the King,
yet the persons who shall be found in these Ships, are to be punished with
Imprisonment at discretion, for their Rebeltion. It was accounted Treason
(says Master Seldom) If any ship what soever had not acknowledged the Dominion
of the King of England in His own Sea by striking sail, and they were not to
be protected upon the Account of Amity, who should in any wise presume to do
the contrary; Penalties were also appointed by the Kings of England in the same
manner, as if mention were made concerning a Crime committed in some Territory
of his Land.

But above all, that as yet has been said, there can hardly be alleged a more
convincing Argument, to prove the Truth of all that has hitherto been spoken,
then the Acknowledgement of the Sea-Dominion of the King of England by very
many of our Neighboring Nations. At what time the Agreement was made by Edward
the First of England, and Philip the Fair of France, Reyner Grimbald, Governor
of the French Navy, Intercepted and Spoiled, on the English Seas, the Goods of
many Merchants that were going to Flanders, as well English, as Others, and not
contented with the Depredation of their Goods, Rot. Parl. 31 Edw. 1. Membran.
16.
He Imprisoned also their Persons, and delivered them up to the Officers of the
King of France, and in a very insolent manner justified his Actions in Writing,
as done by Authority of the King his Masters Commission. This being alleged to
be done to the great Damage and Prejudice of the King of England, the Prelates,
Peers, and the rest of the Nation, a Bill against Reyner Grimbald, was
exhibited, and managed by Procurators on the behalf of the Prelates, Peers, and
of the Cities and Towns throughout England, and lastly, of the whole English
Nation, by an Authority (as I believe) of the Estates Assembled in Parliament;
with these were joined the Procurators of most Nations bordering upon the Sea
throughout Europe, (Viz.)

The Genoeses, The Catalonians, The Spaniards, The Almayns, The Zealanders, The
Hollanders, The Freislanders, The Danes, The Noruegians, The Hamburghers, etc.


All these instituted a Complaint against Reyner Grimbald who was Governor of
the French Navy, Ibidem ut Supra.
in the time of the. War of Philip King of France, and Guy Earl of Flanders;
And all these Complainants in their Bill do jointly affirm, that the King of
Englandand his Predecessors have time out of mind and without Controversy,
Enjoyed the Sovereignty and Dominion of theEnglish Seas, and the Isles
belonging to the same by Right of their Realm of England, that is to say, by
Prescribing Laws, Statutes and Prohibitions of Arms, and of Ships otherwise
furnished, then with such necessaries, and Commodities as belong to Merchants,
and by demanding Security, and affording protection in all places where need
should require, and ordering all other things necessary for the conservation of
Peace, Right, and Equity between all sorts of People passing through that Sea,
as well Strangers as others in Subjection to the Crown ofEngland; Also that
they have had, and have the Sovereign Guard thereof with all manner of
Cognizance, and Jurisdiction in doing Right and Justice, according to the said
Laws, Ordinances and Prohibitions, and in all other matters which may concern
the Exercise of Sovereign Dominion in the said places.

This is the Declaration of the Nations above named, manifestly acknowledging
the Sovereignty and Dominion of our Kings over the Seas, and thereupon
demanding protection for themselves; Tilius in Recucil. destraictes, fol. 4.
But more particularly we do find an acknowledgment of the Sea-Dominions of
the Kings of England, made by the Flemmings themselves in the Parliament of
England, in the Reign of Edward the Second; the Records of the Parliament speak
it thus.

In the Fourteenth Year of the Reign ofEdward the Second, Rot. Parl. 14. Edvar.
2. Membran 26.
there appeared certain Ambassadors of the Earl of Flanders, to Treat about
the Reformation of some Injuries they received; and as soon as the said
Ambassadors had been admitted by our Lord the King to Treat of the said
Injuries, amongst other particulars they required, that the said Lord the King
would at his own Suit, by Virtue of his Royal Authority, cause Enquiry to be
made, and do Justice about a Depredation by the Subjects of England upon the
English Seas, taking Wines and other sort of Merchandises belonging to certain
Merchants of Flanders, toward the parts of Crauden within the Territory and
Jurisdiction of the King of England; Alleging that the said Wines and other
Merchandises taken from the Flemmings were brought within the Realm, and
Jurisdiction of the King, and that it belonged to the King to see Justice done,
in Regard thatHE IS LORD OF THE SEA, and the aforesaid Depredation was made
upon the said Sea within his Territory, and Jurisdiction,etc. This we have
Cited out of the Parliament Records which may Declare an Acknowledgement of the
Sea-Dominion of our Kings, made by those Foreign and Neighbour-Nations who were
most concerned in the Business.

Having given you thus (besides the Attestation of our own Writers) the
acknowledgment of Foreign Nations, that the King of England has the Dominion
of the Seas; we shall now come to give you an Account of those Northern Seas,
which came unto the Subjection of the Kings of England, at what time King James
of Blessed Memory by reducing the two Nations into one Great Brittanie United
the Crown of Scotland to the Crown of England. Odericus in his Ecclesiastical
History informs us, that the Orcades was subject heretofore to the King of
Norway, and that the people of the Orcades do speak the Gothish Language to
this day; these Isles are Numerous, and only Twenty Eight of them are at this
day Inhabited. Above One Hundred Miles beyond the Orcades toward Norway, are
the Shetland Isles in Number Eighteen, which are at this day Inhabited, and in
subjection to the King of Scotland; Cambd. in Insul. Britan. p. 849.
concerning which, there has been a great Quarrel in former Ages between the
Scots and Danes, but the Dane kept the Possession. All these Islands, did
Christiern King of Denmark peaceably Surrender, together with his Daughter in
Marriage, to James King of Scots, until that either he himself or his Posterity
paid to the Scottish King or his Successors the sum of Fifty Thousand Rhenish
Florens, which were never discharged to this day; But afterward when the Queen
had been delivered of Her Eldest Son, the Danish King being willing to
Congratulate his Daughters good Delivery, did for ever Surrender his Right in
the Islands of the Orcades, Shetland, and the rest unto the Scottish King. This
was in the days of James the Third of Scotland in the Year, 1468. A Claim was
afterward laid to Iseland, by Q. Elizabeth, And her Successor K. James the
Sixth of Scotland, Cambden Annal. Elizab.
and first of England, has a Dominion in the Sea which lies far more
Northerly then Iseland which is that of Greenland; For that Sea having never
been entered by Occupation, nor used in the Art and Exercise of Fishery, was
first of all rendered very gainful through a peculiar Fishing for Whales by
those English Merchants of the Muscovie Company, who first Sailed that way. The
use of a Sea never entered by Occupation, and such a kind of profit being first
discovered, does according to the manner of the Claim give a Dominion to the
Discoverer, who claims it in the Right of another, as here in the Name of the
Sovereign of England; Upon which ground it was, that King James in his Letters
of Credence given to his Ambassador in Holland, Sir Henry Wotton did very
justly say that the Fishing in the North Seas was His only, and His by Right.

In the Seventh year of the Reign of King James, this Right was more
strenuously asserted by Proclamation, and all persons excluded from the use of
the Seas upon our Coasts, without particular License; the Grounds whereof you
have here set down in the Proclamation it self.

A Proclamation, Touching Fishing.
JAMES by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all and singular persons so whom it may appertein, Greeting.
Although we do sufficiently know by Our Experience in the Office of Regal
Dignity (in which, by the Favor of Almighty God, We have been placed and
exercised these many years) as also by the observation which We have made of
other Christian Princes exemplarie actions, how far the absoluteness of
Sovereign Power extends it self, and that in regard thereof, We need not
yield account to any person under God, for any action of Ours, which is
lawfully grounded upon that Just Prerogative: Yet such has ever been, and
shall be Our care and desire to give satisfaction to Our Neighbour-Princes, and
Friends in any action which may have the least relation to their Subjects and
Estates, as We have thought good (by way of friendly premonition) to declare
unto them, and to whomsoever it may appertain as follows.

Whereas we have been contented since Our coming to the Crown, to tolerate an
indifferent and promiscuous kind of liberty to all Our Friends whatsoever, to
Fish within Our Streams, and upon any of Our Coasts of Great Britain, Ireland,
and other adjacent Islands, so far forth as the permission or use thereof
might not re^ound to the impeachment of Our Prerogative Royal, nor to the Hurt
and Damage of our loving Subjects, whose prefer^ation and flourishing Estate We
hold Our self principally bound to advance before all worldly respects: So
finding that Our continuance therein, has not only given occasion of
overgreat encroachments upon Our Regalities, or rather questiening of Our
Right, but has been a means of daily wrongs to Our own People that exercise
the Trade of Fishing, as (either by the multitude of strangers which do
pre-occupie those places, or by the injuries which they receive most commonly
at their hands) Our Subjects are constrained to abandon their Fishing, or at
least are become so discouraged in the same, as they hold it better for them,
to betake themselves to some other course of living; whereby not only diverse
of Our Coast-Towns are much decayed, but the number of Mariners daily
diminished, which is a matter of great consequence to Our Estate, considering
how much the strength thereof consists in the Power of Shipping and use of
Navigation; We have thought it now both just and necessary (in respect that We
are now by God's favor lineally and lawfully possessed, as well of the Islands
of Great Britain, as of Ireland, and the rest of the Isles adjacent) to
bethink Our selves of good lawful means to prevent those inconveniences and
many others depending upon the same. In consideration whereof, as We are
destrous that the world may take notice, that we have no intention to deny Our
Neighbors and Allies, those fruits and benefits of Peace and Friendship, which
may be justly expected at Our hands in Honor and Reason, or are afforded by
other Princes mutually in the point of Commerce, and Exchange of those things
which may not prove prejudicial to them: so because some such convenient order
may be taken in this matter, as may sufficiently provide for these important
considerations which do depend thereupon; We have resolved first to give notice
to all the world that Our Express Pleasure is, That from the beginning of the
Month of August next coming, no Person of what Nation or Quality soever, being
not Our natural born Subject, be permitted to Fish upon any of Our Coasts and
Seas of Great Britain, Ireland, and the rest of the Isles adjacent, where most
usually heretofore any Fishing has been, until they have orderly demanded and
obtained Licenses from Us, or such Our Commissioners, as we have Authorized in
that behalf, viz. at London for Our Realms of England and Ireland, and at
Edenborough for Our Realm or Scotland; which Licenses Our intention is, shall
be yearly demanded, for so many Vessels and Ships, and the (...) thereof, as
shall intend to Fish for that whole year, or any part thereof, upon any of Our
Coasts, and Seas as aforesaid, upon pain of such chastisement, as shall be
(...) to be inflicted upon such wilful Offenders.

Given at our Palace of Westminster the 6. day of May in the 7th. year of Our
Reign of Great Britain* Anno Dom. 1609.
Notwithstanding this Proclamation, the Netherlanders proceeded still in their
way of encroachment upon our Seas and Coasts, through the whole Reign of King
James, and were at length so bold as to contest with him, and endeavor to
quarrel His Majesty out of his Rights, pretending, because of the long
connivence of Himself and Queen Elizabeth, that they had a Right of their own
by Immemorial Possession; which some Commissioners of theirs that were sent
over hither, had the confidence to plead in Terminis, to the King and his
Council. And though the King, out of his tenderness to them insisted still upon
his own Right, by his Council to those Commissioners, and by his Ambassador to
their Superiors, yet they made no other use of his indulgence, than to tire out
his whole Reign, The Hollanders Insolence.
and abuse his patience by their artificial Delays, Pretenses, Shifts,
Dilatorie Addresses, and Evasive Answers. And all that the King gained by the
tedious disputes, overtures, and dispatches to and again, was in conclusion
only a Verbal acknowledgment of those Rights; which at the same time that they
acknowledged, they usually designed to invade with much more insolence than
before. But you have the main of what passed in those days in this particular,
with their insolent demeanor, lively described in these following Collections,
taken out of several Dispatches that passed betwixt Secretary Naunton, and Sir
Dudly Carlton Lord Ambassador from the King, to the States of the United
Provinces.

In a Letter of Secretary Naunton's to the said Ambassador, dated at
Whitehall the 21. of December 1618. I find these passages.
I Must now let your Lordship know, that the States Commissioners and Deputies
both, having attended His Majesty at New Market, and there presented their
Letters of Credence, returned to London on Saturday was a seven-night, and upon
Tuesday had Audience in the Council Chamger; where being required to
communicate the points of their Commission, they delivered their meditated
Answer at length, The Lords upon perusal of it, appointed my Lord Bining and me
to attend His Majesty for directions, what Reply to return to this Answer of
theirs; which I represented to their Lordships yesterday to this effect: That
his Majesty found it strange, that they having been so often required by your
Lordship His Majesty's Ambassador, as from himself, in their public
Assembly, to send over Commissioners fully Authorized to Treat and Conclude,
not only of all differences grown between the Subjects of both States,
touching the Trade to the East Indies, and the Whale-Fishing, and to Regulate
and settle a Joint and an even Traffic in those Quarters, but withal to take
order for a more indifferent course of determining other Questions, growing
between our Merchants and them about their Draperies and the Tare; And more
especially to determine his Majesty's Right for the sole Fishing upon all the
Coasts of his Three Kingdoms, into which they had of late times incroached
farther then of Right they could; And lastly, for the reglement and reducing of
their Coyns to such a proportion and correspondence with those of his Majesty's
and other States, that their Subjects might make no Advantage to transport our
Moneys by inhansing their valuation there: All which they confessed your
Lordship had instanced them for in his Majesty's Name; that after all this
attent on his Majesty's part, and so long deliberation on theirs, they were
come at last with a Proposition to speak only to the two first points, and
instructed thereunto with bare Letters of Credance only, which His Majesty
takes for an Imperious fashion of proceeding in them, Their Imperious fashion
of Treating.
as if they were come hither to Treat of what themselves pleased, and to give
Law to His Majesty in his own Kingdom, and to propose and admit of nothing but
what should tend merely to their own ends.

To the second; Whereas they would decline all debate of the Fishings upon His
Majesty's Coasts, first by Allegations of their late great Losses and an
Esmeute of their people, who are all interessed in that Question, and would be
like to break out into some combustion to the hazard of their State which has
lately escaped Naufrage, and is not yet altogether calmed; What is this put to
raise an advantage to themselves out of their disadvantage? But afterward they
profess their lothnesse to call it in doubt or Question, claiming an
immemorial possession seconded by the Law of Nations; To which His Majesty will
have them told, that the Kings of Spain have sought leave to Fish there by
Treaty from this Crown; and that the King of France (a nearer Neighbor to our
Coast then they) to this day requests leave for a few Vessels to Fish for
Provision of his own household; And that it appears so much the more strange to
His Majesty, that they being a State of so late date, should be the first that
would presume to question His Majesty's Ancient Right, so many hundred years
inviolably possessed by His Progenitors, and acknowledged by all other Ancient
States and Princes. That themselves in theit public Letters of the last of
June, sent by your Lordship, seemed then to confirm their immemorial possession
(as they term it) with diverse Treaties, as are of the year, 1550. and another
between His Majesty's Predecessors and Charles the Fifth, as Prince of those
Provinces, and not by the Law of Nations. To which their last Plea, His Majesty
would have them told, that he being an Islander-Prince, is not ignorant of the
Laws and Rights of his own Kingdoms, nor does expect to be taught the Laws of
Nations by them, nor their Grotius, whose ill thriving might rather teach
others to disavow his Positions; and his honesty called in question by
themselves, might render his Learning as much suspected to them, as his Person.
This His Majesty takes for an high point of his Sovereignty, and will not have
it slighted over in any fashion whatsoever.

Thus I have particulated unto you the manner of our proceeding with them; Let
them advise to seek leave from His Majesty, and to acknowledge Him, His Right,
as other Princes have done, and do; or it may well come to pass, that they
that will needs bear all the World before them, by their Mare Liberum, may soon
come to have neither Terram and Solum, nor Rempublicam liberam.

And in a Letter of the said Lord Ambassador Carlton to Secretary Naunton, of
the 30. of December, 1618. from the Hague, we find this Return, touching the
business of Fishery.
WHether the final resolution here will be according to His Majesty's desire,
in that point concerning the Fishing upon the Coasts of His Three Kingdoms, I
cannot say; And by somewhat which fell from the Prince of Orange, by way of
Discourse when he took leave of me on Monday, last, at his Departure; I suspect
it will not, in regard the Magistrates of these Towns of Holland, being newly
placed, and yet scarce fast in their Seats, who do Authorize the Deputies which
come hither to the Assembly of the States in all things they are to Treat and
Resolve, will not Adventure for fear of the people, to determine of a Business,
on which the livelihood of Fifty Thousand of the Inhabitants of this one single
Province does depend. I told the Prince, that howsoever His Majesty, both in
Honor of His Crown and Person, and Interest of his Kingdoms, neither could nor
would any longer desist, from having His Right acknowledged by this State, as
well as by All other Princes and Commonwealths, especially finding the same
openly oppugned both by their Statesmen, and men of War, as the Writings of
Grotius, and the taking of John Brown the last year may testify; yet this
acknowledgment of a Right and a Due was no exclusion of Grace and Favor; and
that the people of this Country paying that small Tribute upon every one of
their Busses, (which is not so much as disputed by any other Nation whatsoever)
such was His Majesty's well-wishing to this State, that I presumed of his
permission to suffer them to continue their course of Fishing; which they might
use thereby with more Freedom, and less apprehension of molestation and let
then before, and likewise spare the Cost of some of their Men of War, which
they yearly send out to maintain that by force, which they may have of
Courtesy.

The Prince answered, that for himself at His Return from Utrecht, he would do
his best endeavor to procure His Majesty contentment, but he doubted the
Hollanders would apprehend the same effect in their payment for Fishing, as
they found in the passage of the Sound, where at first an easy matter was
demanded by the King of Denmark, but now more exacted then they can possibly
bear: And touching their Men of War, he said, they must still be at the same
charge with them, because of the Pirates. Withal, he cast out a question to me,
whether this freedom of Fishing might not be redeemed with a sum of money? To
which I answered, It was a matter of Royalty more then of Utility, though
Princes were not to neglect their profit.

And in another Letter of the said Lord Ambassador from the Hague to Secretary
Naunton, of the 14. of January, 1618. He gives him to understand, That having
been expostulated with, but in friendly manner, by certain of the States about
his late Proposition, as unseasonable and sharp, they said, they acknowledge
their Commissioners went beyond their limits in their terms of Immemorial
possession and immuable Droict de Gens; for which they had no order. Then,
says he, I desire them to consider, what a wrong it is to challenge that upon
right, which these Provinces have hitherto enjoyed, either by connivence or
courtesy, and yet never without claim on His Majesty's side, etc.

In another Letter of Secretary Naunton's to the Lord Ambassador Carlton, of
the 21. of January, 1618. we read thus:
AS I had dictated thus far, I received direction from His Majesty to signify
to the States-Commissioners here; That albeit their earnest entreaty and His
Gracious consideration of the present trouble of their Church and State, had
moved His Majesty to consent to delay the Treaty of the great Fishing* till the
time craved by the Commissioners; yet understanding by newand fresh complaints
of His Martiners and Fishers upon the Coasts of Scotland, that within these
four or five last years, the Low-Country-Fishers have taken so great advantage
of His Majesty's Tolleration, that they have grown nearer and nearer, upon His
Majesty's Coasts year by year, then they did in preceding Times, without
leaving any Bounds for the Country. People and Natives to Fish upon their
Prince's Coasts, and oppressed some of His Subjects of intent to continue their
pretended possession; and driven. some of their great Vessels through their
Nets to deter others by fear of the like violence from Fishing near them, etc.
His Majesty cannot forbear to tell them that he is so well persuaded of the
Equity of the States, and of the Honorable respect they bear unto him, and to
His Subjects for His sake, that they will never allow so unjust and intolerable
Oppressions; for restraint whereof, and to prevent the inconveniences which
must ensue, upon the continuance of the same. His Majesty has by me desired
them to write to their Superiors to cause Proclamation to be made, prohibiting
any of their Subjects to Fish within Fourteen Miles of His Majesty's Coasts
this year, or in any time hereafter, until order be taken by Commissioners to
be authorized on both sides, for a final settling of the main business. His
Majesty has likewise directed me to command you from Him, to make the like
Declaration and Instance to the States there, and to certify His Majesty of
their Answer, with what convenient speed you may.

Thus sarr Secretary Naunton to the Ambassador.
Now what effect the Ambassadour's Negotiation with the States had, appears by
a Letter of his from the Hague, of the 6. of February, 1618. to Kings James
himself, where, among other passages he has this.
I find likewise in the manner of proceeding, that treating by way of
Proposition here, nothing can be exspected but their wonted dilatory and
evasive Answers; their manner being to resey such Propositions, from the States
General to the States of Holland. The States of Holland take advice of a (...)
Council residing at Delph, which they call the Council of the Fishery. From
them such an Answer commonly comes, as may be expected from such an Oracle. The
way therefore (under correction) to effect Your Majestiesintent, is to begin
with the Filhers themselves, by publishing, against the time of their going
out, Your resolution, at what distance You will permit them to Fish, whereby
they will be forced to have recoursero their Council of Fishery; that Council
to the States of Holland; and those of Holland to the States General, who then
in place of being sought unto, will for contentment of their Subjects, seek
unto Your Majesty.

A Proclamation by King Charles the First, For restraint of Fishing upon His
Seas and Coasts without Lisence.
WHere as Our Father of Blessed Memory Kings James, did in the Seventh Year of
His Reign of Great, Britain, set forth a Proclamation touching Fishing whereby
for the many important Reasons therein expressed, all Persons, of what Nation
of Quality soever (being not His Natural born (...)) were restrained from
fishing upon (...) the Coasts and Seas of Great Britain, Ireland, and the rest
of the Istes adjacent, where most usually heretofore Fishing had been, until
they had orderly demanded, and obtained Licenses from Our said Father, (...)
Commissioners in that behalf, upon pain of such ^^^^sement as should be fit to
be inflicted upon such wilful Offenders: since which time, albeit neither Our
said Father, nor Our Self have made any considerable execution of the said
Proclamation, but have with much Patience expected a voluntary conformity of
Our Neighbors and Allies, to so just and reasonable Prohibitions and
Directions as are contained in the same.

And now finding by experience, that all the inconveniences which occasioned
that Proclamation, are rather increased then abated: We being very sensible of
the premises, and well knowing how far We are obliged in Honor to maintain
the rights of Our Crown, especially of so great consequence, have thought it
necessary, by the Advice of our Privy Council to renew the aforesaid restraint
of Fishing upon Our aforesaid Coasts and Seas, without License first obtained
from Us, and by these presents to make public Declaration, that Our resolution
is (at times convenient) to keep such a competent strength of Shiping upon Our,
Seas, as may (by God's blessing) be sufficient, both to hinder such further
encroachments upon Our Regalties, and as^^^t and Pro^^^^ those Our God Friends
and Allies who shall henceforth, by virtue of Our Licenses (to be first
obtained) endeavor to take the benefit of Fishing upon Our Coasts and Seas, in
the places accustomed.

Given at our Palace of Westminster the 10 day of May, in the Twelfth year of
our Reign of England, Scotland, France and Ireland.
This Proclamation being set forth in the year, 1636. served to speak the
intent of those Naval preparations made before in the year, 1635. which were so
numerous and well-provided, that our Netherland Neighbors being touched with
the apprehension of some great design in hand for the Interest of England by
Sea, and of the guilt that lay upon their own Consciences, for their bold
Encroachments, soon betrayed their Jealousies and Fears, and in them a sense of
their offenses, before ever the Proclamation was made public: As I might show
at large (if it were requisite) by certain Papers of a public Character yet in
being. But there is one, Instar omnium, which may serve in stead of all; and it
is an acute Letter of Secretary Coke's that was written to Sir William Boswel,
the Kings Resident then at the Hague, the Original whereof is still reserved
among the public Papers: In which Letter, he sets forth the Grounds and
Reasons of preparing that gallant Navy, with the Kings resolution to maintain
the Right derived from his Ancestors, in the Dominion of the Seas; and
therefore I here render a true Copy of it, so far as concerns this business,
as most pertinent to our purpose.

(SIR,)
BY Your Letters and otherwise, I perceive many jealousies and discourses are
raised upon the preparations of His Majesty's Fleet, which is now in such
forwardness, that we doubt not but within this Month it will appear at Sea. It
is therefore expedient both for your satisfaction and direction, to inform you
particularly what was the occasion, and what is His Majesty's intention in this
work.

First, we hold it a principle not to be denied, That the King of Great
Britain, is a Monarch at Land and Sea to the full extent of His Dominions, and
that it concerns him as much to maintain His Sovereignty in all the British
Seas, as within His three Kingdoms because without that, these cannot be kept
safe; nor he preserve his honor and due respect with other Nations. But
commanding the Seas, he may cause his Neighbors and all Countries to stand
upon their guard whenever he thinks fit. And this cannot be doubted that
whosoever will encroach upon him by Sea, will do it by Land also when they see
their time. To such presumption Mare liberum gave the first warning-piece,
which must be answered with a defense of Mare clausum: not so much by
Discourses, as by the louder Language of a powerful Navy, to be better
understood, when overstrained patience sees no hope of preserving her Right by
other means.

The Degrees by which his Majesty's Dominion at Sea has of latter years been
first impeached and then questioned, are as considerable as notorious.

First, to cherish, and as it were to nourish up our unthankful Neighbors, We
gave them leave to gather wealth and strength upon our Coasts, in our Ports, by
our Trade, and by our People. Then they were glad to invite our Merchants
Residence, with what privileges they would desire. Then they offered to us
even the Sovereignty of their Estates, and then they sued for License to Fish
upon the Coasts, and obtained it under the Great Seal of Scotland, which now
they suppress. And when thus by leave or by connivence, they had possessed
themselves of our Fishings, not only in Scotland, but in Ireland and England,
and by our Staple had raised a great stock of Trade; by these means they so
increased their Shiping and power at Sea, that now they endure not to be kept
at any distance: Nay, they are grown to that confidence to keep guards upon our
Seas; and then to project an Office and Company of Assurance for the
Advancement of Trade; and withal, prohibit us free commerce even within our
Seas, and take our Ships and goods, if we conform not to their Placarts. What
insolences and cruelties they have committed against us heretofore, in
Ireland, in Greenland, and in the Indies, is too well known to all the world.
In all which, though our sufferings and their wrong may seem forgotten, yet the
great interest of His Majesty's honor, is still the same, and will refresh
their Memories as there shall be cause. For, though charity must remit wrongs
done to private men, yet the reflection upon the public may make it a greater
charity to do Justice on crying crimes. All this notwithstanding, you are not
to conceive that the work of this Fleet, is either revenge or execution of
Justice for these great offenses past, but chiefly for the future to stop the
violent Current of that presumption whereby the Men of War and Free-booters of
all Nations (abusing the favor of His Majesty's peaceable and gracious
Government, whereby he has permitted all His Friends and Allies, to make use
of His Seas and Ports in a reasonable and free manner, and according to his
Treaties) have taken upon them the boldness, not only to come confidently at
all times into all his Ports and Rivers, but to convey their Merchants ships as
high as his chief City, and then to cast Anchor close upon his Magazins, and to
contemn the Commands of his Officers, when they required a farther distance:
stance: But which is more intolerable, have assaulted and taken one another
within his Majesty's Chamber, and within his Rivers, to the scorn and contempt
of his Dominion and Power; and this being of late years an ordinary practice
which we have endeavored in vain to reform by the ways of Justice and
Treaties, the world I think will now be satisfied, that we have reason to look
about us. And no wise man will doubt that it is high time to put our selves in
this Equipage upon the Seas, and not to suffer that Stage of Action to be taken
from us for want of our appearance.

So you see the general ground upon which our Counsels stands. In particular,
you may take notice, and publish as cause requires, That His Majesty by this
Fleet intends not a Rupture with any Prince or State, nor to infringe any
point of his Treaties; but resolves to continue and maintain that happy peace
wherewith God has blessed his Kingdom, and to which, all his Actions and
Negotiations have ohitherto tended, as by your own instructions you may fully
understand. But withal considering, that Peace must be maintained by the arm
of power, which only keeps down War by keeping up Dominion; His Majesty thus
provoked, finds it necessary even for his own defense and safety, to reassume
and keep his ancient and undoubted Right in the Dominion of these Seas, and to
suffer no other Prince or State to encroach upon him, thereby assuming to
themselves or their Admirals, any Sovereign command: but to force them to
perform due homage to his Admirals and Ships, and to pay them acknowledgements,
as in former times they did. He will also set open and protect the free Trade
both of his Subjects and Alies: And give them such safe Conduct and Convoy, as
they shall reasonably require. He will suffer no other Fleets or Men of War to
keep any guard upon these Seas, or there to offer violence or take prizes or
booties, or to give interruption to any lawful intercourse. In a word, his
Majesty is resolved, as to do no wrong, so to do Justice both to his Subjects
and Friends, within the limits of his Seas. And this is the real and Royal
design of this Fleet, whereof you may give part as you find occasion to our
good Neighbors in those parts, that no Umbrage may be taken of any hostile act
or purpose to their prejudice in any kind. So wishing you all health and
happiness, I rest

Your Assured friend and Servant, JOHN COOK.
White Hall, 16. April, 1635. our style.
The inestimable Riches and Commodities of the British Seas
THe Coasts of Great Britain do yield such a continual Sea-harvest of gain,
and benefit to all those that with diligence do labor in the same, that no
time or season in the year passes away without some apparent means of
profitable employment, especially, to such as apply themselves to Fishing,
which from the beginning of the year unto the latter end, continues upon some
pat or other of our Coasts, and therein such infinite sholes and multitudes of
Fishes are offered to the Takers as may justly move admiration, not only to
strangers, but to those that daily be employed among them.

The Summer-Fishing for Herring, begins about Midsummer, and lasts some
part of August.

The Winter-Fishing for Herring, lasts from September to the middle of
November, both which extend in place from Boughones in Scotland, to the Thames
mouth.

The Fishing for Cod at Alamby, Whirlington, and White Haven, near the Coast of
Lancashire, from Easter until Whitsontide.

The Fishing for Hake at Aberdenie, Abveswhich, and other places between Wales
and Ireland, from Whitsontide to Saint James-tide.

The Fishing of Cod and Ling, about Padstow, within the Land, and of Severn
from Christmas to Mid-lent.

The Fishing for Cod on the Westpart of Ireland frequented by those of Biscay,
Galicia, and Portugal, from the beginnig of April until the end of June.

The Fishing for Cod and Ling on the North, and North-East of Ireland, from
Christmas until Michaelmas.

The Fishing for Pilchers on the West coast of England from Saint James-tide
until Michaelmas.

The Fishing for Cod, and Ling upon the North-East of England, from Easter
until Midsummer.

The Fishing of great Staple-Ling, and many other sorts of Fish lying about the
Island of Scotland, and in the several parts of the British Seas all the year
long.

In September, not many years since, upon the Coast of Devonshire, near
Minigal, Five Hundred Tun of Fish were taken in one day. And about the same
time three thousand pounds worth of Fish in one day were taken at Saint Ives in
Cornwall by small Boats, and other poor provisions.

Our five-men-Boats, and cobles adventuring in a calm to launch out amongst the
Holland Busses, not far from Robinhood's Bay returned to Whitbie full fraught
with Herrings, and reported that they saw some of those Busses take Ten,
Twenty, Twenty four lasts, at a draught, of Herrings, and returned into their
own Country with Forty, Fifty, and an Hundred Lasts of Herrings in one Buss.

Our Fleet of Colliers not many years since, returning from Newcastle, laden
with Coals, about the Well, near Flanborough-Head, and Scarborough, met with
such multitudes of Cod, Ling and Herring, that one amongst the rest, with
certain ship-hooks, and other like instruments, drew up as much Cod, and Ling
in a little space of time, as were sold well near for as much as her whole
Lading of Cole. And many Hundred of ships might have been there laden in two
days and two nights.

Out of which wonderful affluence, and abundance of Fish swarming in our Seas,
that we may the better perceive the infinite gain which Foreign Nations make,
I will especially insist upon the Fishing of the Hollanders in our Coasts, and
thereby show how by this means principally they have increased.

1. In Shipping. 2. In Mariners. 3. In Trade. 4. In Towns and Fortifications.
5. In Power extern or abroad. 6. In public Revenue. 7. In private Wealth. 8.
In all manner of Provisions; and store of things Necessary.
1. Increase of Shipping.
BEsides Seven Hundred Strand-Boats, Four Hundred Evars, and Four Hundred
Sullits, Drivers and Tod-boats, wherewith the Hollanders Fish upon their own
Coasts, every one of those employing another Ship to fetch Salt, and carry
their Fish into other Countries, being in all, Three Thousand Sail,
maintaining and setting on work at least Four Thousand persons, Fishers,
Tradesmen, Women and Children; They have One Hundred Doyer Boats, of One
Hundred and Fifty Tuns apiece, or there abouts; Seven Hundred Pinks, and
Well-Boats from Sixty to One Hundred Tuns apiece, which altogether Fish upon
the Coasts of England and Scotland for Cod, and Ling only. And each of these
employ another Vessel for providing of Salt, and transporting of their Fish,
making in all One Thousand Six Hundred ships, which maintain and employ persons
of all sorts, Four Thousand at least.

For the Herring-season, they have One Thousand Six Hundred Busses at the
least, all of them Fishing only upon our Coasts from Boughonness in Scotland
to the mouth of Thames. And every one of these makes work for three other
ships that attend her; the one to bring in Salt from Foreign parts, another to
carry the said Salt, and Cask to the Busses, and to bring back their Herrings,
and the third, to Transport the said Fish into Foreign Countries. So that the
Total Number of Ships and Busses plying the Herring. Fare, is, Six Thousand
Four Hundred; whereby every Busse, one with another, imployeth Forty Men,
Mariners and Fishers within her own Hold, and the rest Ten Men a piece, which
amounts to One Hundred Twelve Thousand Fishers and Mariners. All which
maintain double, if not treble so many Tradesmen, Women, and Children a land.

Moreover, they have Four Hundred other Vessels at least, that take Herring at
Yarmouth, and there sell them for ready money: so that the Hollanders (besides
Three Hundred ships beforementioned fishing upon their own shores) have at
least Four Thousand Eight Hundred ships only maintained by the Seas of Great
Britain, by which means principally Holland being not so big as one of our
shires of England, containing not above Twenty Miles in length, and three in
breadth, have increased the number of their shipping, to at least Ten Thousand
sail, being more then are in England, France*, Spain, Portugal, Italy,
Denmark, Poland, Sweden, and Russia. And to this number they add every day,
although their Country it self affords them neither materials, or victual, nor
merchandise to be accounted of toward their setting forth.

Besides these of Holland, Lubeck has Seven Hundred great ships, Hamborough
Six Hundred, Embden Fourteen Hundred, whereunto add the ships of Bremer,
Biscay, Portugal, Spain, and France, which for the most part fish in our Seas,
and it will appear that Ten Thousand sail of Foreign Vessels and above, are
employed and maintained by fishing upon our Coasts. So that in Holland there
are built a thousand sail at the least to supply ship-wracks, and augment
their store, which as the Prince, and common Nursery, is the chiefest means
only to increase their number.

2. Increase of Mariners.
THe number of ships fishing on our Coasts, as being aforesaid Eight Thousand
Four Hundred. If we allow but twenty persons to every Ship one with another,
the total of Mariners and Fishers, amounts to One Hundred sixty eight
Thousand, out of which Number they daily furnish their longer Voyages to all
parts of the World; for by this means they are not only enabled to brook the
Seas, and to know the use of the Tackles and Compass, but are likewise
instructed in the Principles of Navigation, and Pilotage; insomuch as from
hence their greatest Navigators have had their Education and breeding.

3. Increase of Trade.
BY reason of those multitude of Ships and Mariners, they have extended their
Trade to all parts of the World, exporting for the most part in all their
Voiages our Herring, and other Fish for the maintenance of the same. In
exchange whereof they return the several commodities of other Countries.

From the Southern parts, as France, Spain, and Portugal, for our Herrings they
return Oils, Wines, Prunes, Honey, Wools, etc. with store of Coin in Specie.

From the Straits, Velvets, Sattins, and all sorts of Silks, Alums, Currants,
Oils, and all Grocerie-ware, with much money.

From the East-Countries for our Herrings, and other French and Italian
commodities before returned, they bring home Corn, Wax, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar,
Sope-Ashes, Iron, Copper, Steel, Clap-board, Wainscot, Timber, Deal-board,
Dollers, and Hungarie-Gilders.

From Germany, for Herrings, and other salt Fish, Iron, Steel, Glass,
Mil-stones, Renish-wines, Buttonplate for Armor, with other Munition; Silks,
Velvets, Rashes, Fustians, Baratees, and such like Frankford-commodities, with
store of Rix-dollers.

From Brabant they return for the most part ready money with some Tapestries,
and Hull-shop. Yea, some of our Herring are carried as far as Braseil.

And that which is more strange and greatly to our shame, they have four
hundred Ships with Fish, which our men of Yarmouth, within ken almost at land
do vent our Herrings amongst us here in England, and make us pray for the Fish
taken upon our own Coast ready money, wherewith they store their own Country.

4. Increase of Towns and Forts.
BY this their large extent of Trade, they are become as it were Citizens of
the whole world, whereby they have so enlarged their Towns, that most of them
within these four hundred years are full as great again as they were before;
Amsterdam, Leyden, and Middleburgh having been lately twice enlarged and their
steets and buildings so fair, and orderly set forth, that for beauty and
strength, they may compare with any other in the world, upon which they bestow
infinite sums of moneys, all originally flowing from the bounty of the Sea,
from whence, by their labor and industry, they derive the beginning of all
that Wealth and Greatness, and particularly for the Havens of the aforesaid
Towns whereof some of them cost forty, fifty, or an hundred thousand pound.
Their Fortifications also both for Number, and strength, upon which they have
bestowed infinite sums of Money, may compare with any other whatsoever.

5. Increase of Power abroad.
SUch being then the Number of the Ships and Mariners, and so great their
Trade, occasioned principally by their Fishing; they have not only
Strengthened, and Fortified themselves at home to repel all Foreign Invasions,
as lately in the War between them and Spain; but have likewise stretched their
power into the East and West Indies, in many places whereof, they are Lords of
the Seacoasts, and have likewise fortified upon the Main, where the Kings and
People are at their devotion. And more then this, all Neighbour-Princes, in
their differences, by reason of this their power at Sea, are glad to have them
of their party. So that, next to the English, they are now become the most
redoubted Nation at Sea of any other whatsoever.

6. Increase of Public Revenue.
MOreover how mighty the public Revenue, and Customs of that State are
increased by their Fishing, may appear in that above thirty years since, over
and above the Customs of other Merchandise, Excises, Licenses, Waftage, and
Lastage, there was paid to the State, for Custom of Herring, and other
salt-Fish, above three hundred thousand pound in one year, besides the tenth
Fish, and Cask paid for Waftage, which comes at the least to as much more
among the Hollanders only, whereto the tenth of other Nations being added, it
amounts to a far greater sum.

We are likewise to know, that great part of their Fish is sold in other
Countries for ready moneys, for which they commonly export of the finest gold,
and silver, and coming home recoin it of a baser allay, under their own stamp,
which is not a small means to augment their public Treasure.

7. Increase of private Wealth.
AS touching their private Wealth, if we consider the abundant store of
Herrings, and other Fish by them taken, and the usual prises that they are s^ld
for, as also the multitude of tradesmen and Artizans, that by reason of this
their fishing are daily set on work, we must needs conclude, that the gain
thereof made by private men, must of necessity be exceeding great, as by
observing the particulars following will plainly appear.

During the Wars between the King of Spain, and the Hollanders before the last
Truce, D^nkirk by taking, spoiling, and burning the Busses of Holland, and
setting great ransom upon their Fishermen, enforced them to compound for great
sums, that they might Fish quietly for one year; whereupon the next year after
the Fishermen agreed amongst themselves to pay a Doller upon every last of
Herrings, toward the maintenance of certain Ships of War to waft and secure
them in their Fishing, by reason whereof there was a Record kept of the several
lasts of Herrings taken that year, and it appeared thereby, that in one half
year there were taken thirty thousand lasts of Herrings which at twenty pound
per last, amounts to Three Millions six Hundred Thousand, and at sixteen,
twenty, thirty pound the last, they are ordinarily sold, then transported into
other Countries, it comes at least to Five Millions, Whereunto if we add the
Herrings taken by other Nations, together with the Cod, Ling, Hake, and the
Fish taken by the Hollanders, and other our Neighbors upon the British Coasts
all the year long, the total will evidently arise to be above Ten Millions.

The great Trade of Fishing employing so many Men and Ships at Sea, must
likewise necessarily maintain as great a Number of Tradesmen, and Artizends on
Land, as Spinners, and Hemp-winders to Cables, Cordage, Yarn-twine for Nets and
Lines, Weavers to make Sail Clothes, Cecive Packers, Tollers, Dressers, and
Cowchers to sort and make the Herring lawful Merchandise. Tanners to Tan their
Sails and Nets; Coopers to make Cask, Block, and Bowl-makers for Ships,
Keel-men, and Laborers for carrying and removing their Fish, Sawyers for
Planks, Carpenters, Shipwrights, Smiths, Carmen, Boat-men, Brewers, Bakers, and
a number of others, whereof many are maimed persons, and unfit to be otherwise
employed. Besides the maintenance of all their several wives, and children, and
families. And further every man and maidservant, or Orphant, having any poor
stock, may venture the same in their Fishing-Voiages, which affords them
ordinarily great increase, and is duly paid according to the Proportion of
their Gain.

8. Increase of Provisions.
AND to conclude, it is manifest that Holland only affording in it self some
few Hops, Madders, Butter and Cheese abounds notwithstanding (by reason of
this Art of Fishing) in plentiful manner with all kind of Provisions as well
for life, as in Corn, Beef, Muttons, Hides, and Clothes; as for Luxury, in
Wines, Silks and Spices; and for defense, as in Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Timber.
All which they have not only in comperent proportion for their use, but are
likewise able from their several Magazines to supply their Neighbour-Countries.

The premises considered, it makes much to the ignominy and shame of our
English Nation, that God and Nature offering us so great a Treasure even at our
own doors, we do notwithstanding neglect the benefit thereof, and, by paying
Money to Strangers for the Fish of our own Seas, impoverish our selves to make
them Rich. Insomuch that for want of industry and care in this particular, two
hundred twenty five Fisher-Towns are decayed and reduced to extreme poverty,
whereas on the contrary by diligent endeavoring to make use of so great a
blessing, we might in short time repair these decayed Towns of the Kingdom, and
add both honor, strength, and riches to our King and Country, which how easily
it may be done, will appear by some few observations following.

By erecting Two Hundred and fifty Busses of reasonable strength and bigness,
there will be employment made for a Thousand Ships, and for at least Ten
Thousand Fishermen and Mariners at Sea, and consequently for as many Tradesmen
and Laborers at Land.

The Herrings taken by the Busses will afford His Majesty two hundred thousand
pound yearly custom outward, and for commodities returned inward, thirty
thousand pound and above.

We have Timber sufficient, and at reasonable rates, growing in our own Kingdom
for the building of Busses, every Shire affords hardy and able men fit for
such employment, who now live poorly and idle at home.

We have Victuals in great plenty sold at easy rates without payment of
Excises, or Impost.

Our shores and harbors are near the places where the Fish do haunt.

For drink, or nets, salting and packing our Fish; and for succor in stress of
weather, we may bring our Fish to Land, salt and pack it, and from some part of
His Majesty's Dominions be at our Markets in France, Spain, or Italy, before
the Hollanders can arrive in Holland.

We have means to transport our Fishing into some Northern CounCountries, where
the Hollanders seldom or never come. And though we had as many Busses as the
Hollanders, yet is there vent for all, or more, for in the East and Northern
Countries, and in many other places, Herrings are every days meat, Winter and
Summer, as well to draw on drink, as to satisfy hunger, and in most places the
greatest part of the year they be scarce to be had; for presently after
Michaelmas the Sound and Rivers are frozen up, so as no Herrings can be
transported into twenty several Kingdoms, and free States until July, which is
for thirty weeks space together; so that when Lent comes, there are few to be
bought for money.

Lastly, since by care and industry we gained from the Flemmings, doubtless so
by the means we may as easily grow expert in the Art of Fishing, and in time
make it a staple-commodity of our own.

But this we shall the better and sooner do, if we consider and endeavor to
reform certain wants and abuses which hitherto have hindered us from effecting
that good and great work, whereof these that follow are none of the least.

1. General liberty of eating Flesh contrary to old custom, and the
Statute-Laws provided for observing Fish-day, from whence our scarcity and
dearth of Fish proceeds; for where Flesh is ordinarily spent, Fish will not
be bought, and want of sale decays all Trade, gain being the Nurse of
Industry.

2. Want of order and discretion in our Fishing, every man being left to
himself and permitted to Fish as best likes him: whereas amongst the
Hollanders two of the best experienced Fishermen are appointed to guide the
rest of the Fleet, all others being bound to follow them, and to cast their
lines according to their direction.

3. The Hollanders and other Nations set forth with their Busses in June, to
find the shole of Fish, and having found it, dwell amongst it till November,
whereas we stay till the Herring come home to our Rode-steads* and sometimes
suffer them to pass by ere we look out, our Herring-Fishing containing only
seven weeks at the most, and theirs twenty.

4. The Hollanders Busses are great and strong, and able to brook foul weather,
whereas our Cobles, Crayers, and Boats being small, and thin sided, are easily
swallowed by a rough Sea, not daring to adventure far in fair weather, by
reason of their weakness for fear of Storms.

5. The Hollanders are industrious, and no sooner are discharged of their
lading, but presently put forth for more, and seek for Markets abroad as well
as at home; whereas our English after they have been once at Sea, do commonly
never return again until all the money taken for their Fish be spent, and they
in debt seeking only to serve the next Market.

6. The Hollanders have certain Merchants, who, during the Herring-season do
only come to the places where the Busses arrive, and joining together in
several companies, do presently agree for the lading of thirty or forty Busses
at once, and so being discharged, they may speedily return to their former
shipping; whereas our Fishermen are uncertain of their Chap-men, and forced to
spend much time in putting off their Fish by parcels.

These and other effects would carefully be taken into consideration, and
certain orders made to make our Fishing prosperous, and succesful, especially
considering the fearful mischiefs, the neglects hereof has brought to the King
and Kingdom in general, and to many good Towns and Corporations in particular,
as by Authority even of Parliament it self in the Statute of 33. Hen. the
eight, is plainly testified, which I have summarily here set down, to avoid the
prolixity of the original.

Because the English Fishermen dwelling on the Seacoasts did leave off their
Trade of Fishing in our Seas, and went the half-Seas over, and thereupon they
did buy Fish of Pickards, Flemmings, Normans, and Zelanders, by reason whereof
many incommodities did grow to the Realm, viz. the decay of the wealth and
prosperity as well of the Cinque Ports, and Members of the same, as of other
Coast-Towns by the Seaside, which were builded, and inhabited by great
multitudes of people, by reason of using and exercising, the craft and feat of
Fishing. Secondly, the decay of a great number of Boats and Ships. And thirdly,
the decay of many good Mariners, both able in body by their diligence, labor,
and continual exercise of Fishing, and expert by reason thereof in the
knowledge of the Seacoasts, as well within this Realm as in other parts beyond
the Seas. It was therefore enacted, that no manner of Persons English,
Denizens, or strangers at that time, or any time after dwelling in England,
should buy any Fish of any strangers in the said Ports of Flanders, Zealand,
Picardie, France, or upon the Sea between shore and shore, etc.

This Act by many continuances was continued from Parliament to Parliament,
until the first of Queen Marie, and from thence to the end of the next
Parliament, and then expired.

For Conclusion, seeing, by that which has formerly been declared, it
evidently appears, that the Kings of England, by immemorable prescription,
continual usage, and possession, the acknowledgment of all our
Neighbour-States, and the Municipal Laws of the Kingdom, have ever held the
Sovereign Lordship of the Seas of England, and that unto his Majesty, by reason
of his Sovereignty, the supreme command and Jurisdiction over the passage, and
Fishing in the same rightfully apperteineth; considering also the natural Site
of those our Seas that interpose themselves between the great Northern Commerce
of that of the whole world, and that of the East, West, and Southern Climates,
and withal the infinite commodities that by Fishing in the same is daily made;
It cannot be doubted, but his Majesty, by means of his own excellent Wisdom and
Virtue, and by the Industry of his faithful Subjects and People, may easily,
without injustice to any Prince or Person whatsoever, be made the greatest
Monarch for Command and Wealth, and his People the most opulent and Flourishing
Nation of any other in the world. And this the rather, for that his Majesty is
now absolute Commander of the British Isle, and has also enlarged his
Dominions over a great part of the Western Indies; by means of which extent of
Empire, (crossing in a manner the whole Ocean) the Trade and persons of all
Nations (removing from one part of the world to the other) must of necessity
first, or last, come within compass of his power and jurisdiction.

And therefore the Sovereignty of our Seas, being the most precious Jewel of
his Majesty's Crown; and (next under God) the principal means of our Wealth
and Safety, all true English hearts and hands are bound by all possible means
and diligence to preserve and maintain the same, even with the uttermost
hazard of their Lives, their Goods and Fortunes.

Thus you see what wondrous advantages may redound to the Felicity, and Glory
of this Nation, if God give hearts and resolutions to vindicate those rights
which are now most impiously and injuriously invaded.

There is also another Dominion of the Sea belonging to the King of Great
Britain, and that of a very large Extent upon the Shore of America, as on the
Virginian Sea, and the Islands of the Barbados and Saint Christophers and many
other places; but how far our English Colonies Transported into America, have
Possessed themselves of the Sea there, is not exactly as yet discovered.

A further Assertion that the Sea is under the Laws of Propriety, Declared in a
full Convention betwixt Ferdinando Emperor of Germany, and the Republic of
Venice in the Year, 1563.
AT this Convention the Complaints on both sides were opened; And it being
required in the Name of his Emperial Majesty, that it may be Lawful for his
Subjects and others, to Traffic freely in the Adriatic Sea; It was answered
by the Advocate of the Commonwealth of Venice, that Navigation indeed ought to
be free, yet those things at which his Imperial Majesty found himself agrieved
were no ways repugnant to this Freedom, How far Navigation is to be free.
for as much as in Countries which are most free; Those who have the Dominion
thereof receive Custom, and do give Bounds, and prescribe Order, by which way
all Merchandise shall pass, and therefore none should find themselves agrieved
if the Venetians for their own Respects, did use to do so in the Adriatic Seas
which is under their Dominion, there being nothing more known then that the
Commonwealth of Venice were Lords of the Adriatic Sea, and do exercise that
Dominion which from time out of mind it had always done, as well in receiving
of Customs as in assigning of places for the Exaction of it; And that
according to former Capitulations, the Subjects of the Venetians were to have
no less liberty in the Lands of the Austrians, then the Austrian Subjects in
the Sea of Venice; And if his Imperial Majesty within his own State upon the
Land, will not permit that the Subjects of the Commonwealth of Venice shall go
which way they list, but does constrain them to go by such places only where
customs is to be paid, he cannot with Justice demand that his Subjects may
pass by or through the Sea of the Republic which way they please, but must
content himself that they pass that way only, which shall best stand with the
Advantage of those who have the Dominion over it; And if his Majesty cause
Custom to be paid upon his Land, why may not the Venetians likewise do it upon
their Sea? He demanded of them if by the Capitulation they would have it that
the Emperor should be restrained or hindered from the taking of Custom? And if
not, why would they have the Venetians tied thereunto by a Capitulation, which
speaks of both Potentates equally with the same words; He proceeded in a
Confirmation of the Truth that the Republic had the Dominion of the Sea, and
although the proposition was true, that the Sea is common and free, yet it is
no otherwise to be understood there in the same sense when usually we say, The
Sea in His Majesty's Dominions no more common nor free, then is the Highway by
Land.
that the highway are common and free; by which is meant, that they cannot be
Usurped by any private Person for his sole proper service, but remain to the
use of every one; Not therefore, that they are so free, as that they should not
be under the Protection and Government of some Prince, and that every one might
do therein Licenciously whatsoever pleases Him, either by Right, or by Wrong,
for as much as such Licenciousness, or Anarchy both of God, and Nature, as well
by Sea, as by Land; That the true liberty of the Sea excludes it not from the
protection and superiority of such as maintain it in Liberty, nor from the
Subjection to the Laws of such as have Command over it; but rather necessarily
it includes it; That the Sea no less then the Land is Subject to be divided
amongst men, and appropriated to Cities and Potentates which long since was
ordained by God from the beginning of man kind, as a thing most Natural; And
this was well understood by Aristotle, The Dominion of the Seas appropriated to
such and such places ever since the beginning of Mankind.
when he said, that unto Maritine Cities the Sea is the Territory, because from
thence they take their Sustenance, and Defense; A thing which cannot possibly
be, unless that part of it be appropriated in the like manner as the Land is,
which is divided betwixt Cities and Governments not by equal parts, nor
according to their Greatness, but as they have been, or are able to Rule,
Govern, or Defend them. Bern, he said, was not the greatest City of
Switzerland, and yet it has as large a Teritory, as all the rest of the twelve
Cantons together; The City of Norimburg is very great, and yet the Dominions
and Teritories of it do hardly exceed the walls. The City of Venice it self for
many years was known to be without any possession at all upon the firm Land.
Upon the Sea likewise, certain other Cities of great Force and Valor have
possessed a large quantity of it, and other Cities of less force have contented
themselves with the next waters; Neither are there wanting Examples of such who
notwithstanding they do border upon the Sea, yet having fertile Lands adjacent
to them, have satisfied themselves with their Land Possessions without ever
attempting to gain any Sea Dominion. Others there are, who being awod by their
more mighty Neighbors, have been constrained to for bear any such Attempt, for
which two causes, a City notwithstanding it be Maritine, and bordereth upon the
Sea, may happen to remain without any possession of the Sea.

He added, that God did institute Principalities for the maintenance of
Justice, to the benefit of Mankind, which was necessary to be executed, as well
by Sea as by Land; And St. Paul said, that for this cause there were due unto
Princes, Customs and Contributions, that it should be a great Absurdity, to
praise the well Governing, Regulating, and Defense of the Land, and to condemn
that of the Sea; The Propriety of the Seas, according to the Laws of God.
And that if the Sea in some parts thereof, for the ampleness and extreme
distance of it from the Land is not possibly to be Governed, and Protected, it
does proceed from a Disability, and Defect in Mankind, as in the same
consideration there are Deserts or Wildernesses so great upon the Land, as it
is altogether impossible to protect them, witness the many sandy parts of
Africa, and the Immense Vastities of the World but lately discovered; And as
it is a gift of God that a Land by the Laws, and published Power be Ruled,
Protected, and Governed, so the same happens to the Sea; He said, that those
were deceived by a gross Equivocation, who affirmed that the Land by reason of
its Stability and Firmness may be governed, but not the Sea, for being an
unconstant Element, it passes, and has a motion proper to it as well as the
Air; And if by the Sea, and the Air, all and every part of those fluent
Elements be intended, it is a most certain thing that they cannot be governed,
because whilst a man secureth himself with any one part of them, the other
fliteth out of his power; And this also hapeneth unto Rivers, which cannot be
restrained in their fluent motions; But when mention is made to rule over a Sea
or River, it is not understood of the Element but of the Site where they are
placed; The water of the Adriatic Sea does continually run out of it, neither
can it at all be kept in, and yet it is the same Sea, as well as the Thames,
the Rhine or the Po are the same Rivers now, as they were one Thousand years
ago, The Sea not to be without Protection.
and this is that which is Subject to the Protection of Princes. He asked the
Germans, if their pretense were that tho Sea should be left without Protection,
Protection, so that any one might do therein whatsoever he listed, by Robing,
Spoiling and making it Unnavigable; This he said, would be so absurd in reason,
that he durst answer for them that they had no such pretense; he therefore
concluded, that therefore his Majesty of Germany by a necessary Consequence
must acknowledge, that it ought to be kept Governed, The Sea to be protected by
those to whom it does appertain by Divine Disposition.
and Protected by those unto whom it did appertain by Divine Disposition, which
if it were so, as indeed it is, he desired to understand if in their Judgment
it seemed to them a Just thing, that such should do it with the expense of
their own Pains, and Treasure, or rather that should contribute toward it who
equally did enjoy the Benefit; And as to this, he said, he durst answer for
them, the Doctrine of Saint Paul being clear in this particular, that all such
who are under Government and Protection, are thereby bound to pay Customs and
Contribution; Much he said, might be alleged in matter of Law to confirm this
Truth; And thereupon he concluded, that if the Commonwealth of Venice were
that Prince to whom it did appertain to Govern and Protect the Adriatic Sea,
it of necessity must follow, that whosoever Traffic, and Saileth on their Sea
ought to be subject to their Laws, in the same manner as such are who travail
through a Country upon Land.

From hence he did proceed to show that this Dominion over the Sea from time
out of mind did belong to the Commonwealth of Venice; And to prove this, he
caused to be read out of an Abstract which he had taken the opinion of Thirty
Famous Lawyers who from the Year One Thousand Three Hundred until the present
time, did speak of the Dominion which the Commonwealth of Venice had over the
Sea, as of a thing most known, and of which even in their Times, the mind of
man knew not the Contrary, some of them affirming that the Commonwealth of
Venice had no less Dominion over the Sea, then over the City of Venice; Others
maintaining that the Adriatic Sea is the Territory and the Demeans of the said
City; And to render this more evident, they do make mention of the lawful Power
which the Venetians have to establish Laws over Navigation, and to impose
Customs upon such as traffic on those Seas; The Power of the Sovereign of
the Seas, to impose Customs in his own Jurisdiction.
And he added, that he never read any Lawyer which held forth to the contrary,
moreover he told the Advocate of the Emperor, that if he would not believe
those Authors who testified that the Sea belonged to the Venetians, whereof
they had possession from time out of mind, before the age wherein those
Authors lived, yet ^he could not deny to receive them for the Testimonies of
such things, which they saw, and knew in their times, and to hold them as
witnesses far above all Exception, being all of them Famous men, though dead so
many years ago, and whose Impartial Pens could no ways be interested in the
present Differences. And because more then two hundred and fifty years were
passed from the time that the Authors whom he alleged as Witnesses hereof, did
Write to the time of those whose Names he last of all did mention in that
behalf; he urged that by their Attestation it was sufficiently proved, that for
a long time more then so many years the Commonwealth has commanded the Sea,
and therefore he could not deny the assured and certain possession of it to the
present.

Then Addressing himself to the Judges, he desired them to consider, that
notwithstanding some of the above mentioned Authors do speak in general words,
and name at large the Sea of the Venetians, neither taking care to declare the
Quality or the Quantity thereof, yet others more expressly do give it the Title
of the Adriatic Sea, which evidently does demonstrate not only the Site, but
also the Quantity of the Sea possessed, and hereupon he explained himself, that
those who speak more precisely ought to clear the passages of those who write
more generally, according to the common Precept which is, that with clear
places the more obscure are to be illustrated; He mentioned also the diverse
manner of speaking of the same Lawyers, some deriving the Dominion of the
Republic over the Seas from Custom, some from Prescriptions, others from an
induced Subjection, and others from a Privilege, which did arise all from this
Reason; Because, as they were most assuredly informed of the Possession and
Jurisdiction of the said Sea, which they both heard and saw to belong to the
Commonwealth time out of mind; So they Writing on the same Subject not at the
Instance or the Command of any One, but of their own proper Motions, and by way
of Institution only, every one of them judged it most convenient to express the
Title of that Jurisdiction, some with one Term, and some with another, without
coming to use the sole, true proper Term, as they would have done if they had
been put to write for the Interest of any one, in which Cases the Lawyers are
always conformable, receiving from the Person interested the like Instructions.

After the Declination of the Constantinopolitan Empire, the Adriatic Sea was
found to be for many years abandoned in such manner, as it remained unregard,
and without the Protection and Government of any Prince, and under the
Jurisdiction of none, until it came into the Power of the Venetians, who to
receive their livelihood thereby, were constrained to maintain it in freedom,
and thereupon taking it into their protection, they obtained the Government,
and the Dominion over it: In like manner, How the Sea comes into the Dominion
of Princes
as by the Law of Nature, and of Nations, the Land, the Sea, and other things
which are not under the Dominion of any other, come Justly into the hands of
those who first do get the possession of them; by which Reason, the first
Empires were founded, as well upon the Sea, as on the Land, and daily there are
new ones in the same manner formed, when any of them, either through Age, or
Vice becoming weak wants Force, and sinketh of it self, The which Custody and
Government of the Sea acquired the Commonwealth of Venice, has daily advanced
by the keeping of Powerful Fleets, with the expense of much Treasure, and the
effusion of as much Blood, both of their Citizens, and Subjects, continuing
without Interruption in the sight of all the World their Dominion and Custody
of the said Sea, and overcoming and removing all Impediments, as either by
Pirates, or by Potentates, have at diverse times been raised against them. After
the testimony of the Lawyers, he added, that of the Historians, who do relate,
that the Commonwealth of Venice for more then three hundred years past, did
receive Custom of such as sailed that Sea, and kept armed Vessels in a
readiness to compel all such ships so sailing to go to Venice, testifying
moreover, that even unto their present time the same custom was observed: But
he dwelled not much upon their Attestations, saying, that although they were
good Testimonies of preceding Occurrences; yet when we undertake to prove
either the interests of Princes, or of private Persons, he ought to help
himself by Authentic Writings, and to use the Historians with great
Discretion, some of them being moved by Love, others with Hatred, and others
with hopes of Preferment, which constrains them oftentimes to use Flatteries,
or Hyperboles, upon which cannot be laid any sure Foundation: He therefore did
produce an Act of the General Council held at Lions in the year, one thousand
two hundred seventy four, where the Abbot of Nervesa being delegated by the
Pope did Sentence, that the Venetians should not be molested in the Defense,
and Protection of the Adriatic Sea, against the Saracens and Pirates, neither
should they be Disturbed by any from exacting their Rights and Customs, which
they had of Victuals, Merchandise, or any other portable Commodities. He added
also that there remain the Registers of Licenses granted to pass their said
Sea, with armed Vessels, or Ships of War, and to the Persons and Goods
belonging to their use, at the request of diverse Princes who had their
Possessions on the shore of the Adriatic Sea: But for the greater confirmation
of all that had been said, he remembered the yearly Ceremony used at Venice,
where the Duke in the presence of the Ambassadors of other Princes, and more
particularly of the Emperors of Germany does constantly use to Espouse the Sea
by casting a Ring of Gold into it with these words, Desponsamus to Mare in
signum very and perpetui Dominii: We do Marry thee O Sea, in sign of our true
and perpetual Dominion over it; Which Ceremony, as many Writers do affirm, had
its beginning when Pope Alexander the third was in Venice, notwithstand they do
add withal, that it was Instituted in sign of the Dominion which the Republic
had formerly gotten by the Right of War.

At the Conclusion he produced the Letters of many Princes and Potentates who
jointly acknowledged the Truth of what he spoke, two of them were from the
Emperor Frederick to Giovanni Mocernigo Duke of Venice, where having
acquainted him of a certain quantity of Corn, that was to pass through the
Adriatic Sea, he desires that he may be permitted to have a free passage,
which will be to him a great pleasure, and he shall acknowledge it with many
thanks. Another Letter was from Beatrice Queen of Hungary to the Duke above
mentioned, where having informed him that she had diverse things to pass through
the Adriatic Sea, which could not be without his permission she desired that
for Courtesies and Friendships-sake it might be granted her, which she should
take for a great Favor, and correspond with him on the like occasion. Another
Letter was from Matthias King of Hungary to the Duke of Venice, where relating
how the Commonwealth of Venice was accustomed every year to give License for
the Transportation of a certain quantity of Corn, he prayed that the same Grace
might be showed unto him, and that he would acknowledge it for a Favor, and
correspond accordingly.

Thus as in a Glass, you may see the Dominion of His Majesty in His British
Seas clearly represented, asserted, and fully proved by that propriety of Title
and Soverainty of Power which the Duke of Venice exercises on the Adriatic
Sea, which by the manner of prescription, the consent of Histories, and even by
the confession of their Adversaries themselves is almost the same with His
Majesty's of Great Britain; But His Majesty has one Title more above all
theirs, which is, the Title of Successive Inheritance, confirmed as well by the
Law of Nature, as of Nations, and is so much the more considerable, in regard
of the infinite Advantages of the profits of it, as the British Ocean in its
Latitude and Circumference exceeds the small Boundaries of the Gulf of
Venice.

But in this great Disputation (where were present the most Remarkable Vide the
Venetians Title unto the sole Domin^o^ of the Adriatic Sea.
Wits of Italy and Germany, and where the Imperialists themselves and amongst
them, one of the most Eminent, Stephen, Baron of Gourz Attested openly, that
the Commonwealth of Venice was Patron of the Adriatitk Sea, and might impose
what Customs they thought fitting, and that all other the Commissaries thought
so in their Consciences:) There is enough, as may be thought in Reason to
convince all Opponents, that may pretend to differ in Judgment from us; Yet so
it is, that the Indulgence of the Kings of England to their Neighboring
Nations, especially to the Hollanders, by giving them too much liberty has
encouraged them to assume a Liberty to themselves, and what at the first was
but a License, they improve into a Custom, and make that Custom their
Authority; Insomuch, that some of the most busiest of them have openly declared
against the Kings Propriety on the British Seas: Amongst these is one Hugo
Grotius, a Gentleman of great Ingenuity, but in this particular so inclined to
obey the Importunities, and serve the Interests of his Countrymen, that he
disobliged himself of the Truth, and moreover (to speak the truth) of his
Conscience it self, Hugo Grotius, Sylv. lib. 2.
for it you look into his Silvae, upon the first Inauguration of King James of
ever Blessed Memory, he is pleased to express himself in these words, Tria
Sceptra profundi in magnum Cojere Ducem, which is, that the Rights of the
English, Scottish, and Irish Seas are united under one Scepter, neither is he
satisfied with this bare profession, but he goes on, Sum animas a Rege tuo,
Quis det Iura Mari, which is in English, Take courage from the King, who gives
Law unto the Seas: In the same Book, in the contemplation of so great a Power,
he concludes, Finis hic est, qui fine caret, etc; that is, This is an end
beyond an end, a bound that knows no bound, a bound, which even the winds and
the waves must submit unto.

But with what ingratitude have the Dutch Answered the many Royal Favors,
which the Kings of England have almost perpetually conferred on them: If there
be no Monster greater then Ingratitude, what Monsters are these Men, who of
late are so far from acknowledging their thankfulness, that like Vipers, they
would feed upon, and consume those Bowels which did afford them Life and
Spirit? We may observe, that in their Lowest Condition, which is most suitable
to the Name of their Abode, called the Low Countries, they Petitioned to the
Majesty of the Queen of England, whose Royal Heart and Hand being always open
to those that were Distressed, especially those that were her Neighbors, upon
the account of Religion, Vide the Observations concerning the Affairs of
Holland.
she sent them Threescore Thousand Pound, upon the account of Sir Thomas
Gresham in the year, One Thousand Five Hundred Seventy and Two; and presently
afterward, there followed Colonel Morgan, Colonel Gilbert, Colonel Chester to
Assist them in their Wars, who were the Commanders of so many Regiments of Men;
And after them the War increasing, there were sent over Colonel North, Colonel
Cotton, Colonel Candish, and Colonel Norris, and some other persons of an
Eminent Name, who for the Honor of the English Nation made there Excellent
Demonstrations of their Valor, and Redeemed the Dutch from the Power of those
who otherwise would have brought them to a better understanding of their
Duties: Great supplies of moneys were sent over to maintain so great a charge:
At the last, the Prince of Orange being slain presently after the Death of the
Duke Alanson (Brother to Henry the third of France,) who (if the success had
Answered the Expectation) was wisely enough made Duke of Brabant; the Queen of
England sent over unto them Robert Duke of Leicester with great provision both
of Men and Money, accompanied with diverse of the Nobility and Gentlemen of
good account; And although the said Earl, not long afterward, returned into
England and the affairs of the Hollanders were doubtful until the fatal Battle
at Nieuport, yet Queen Elizabeth of ever Blessed Memory, out of her unspeakable
goodness to the distressed, and to those that suffered for Religion, did as
long as she lived constantly Assist the Hollanders both with Men and Moneys;
she gave them Hope in Despair, she gave them strength being weak, and and with
the Charity of her Princely Hand did support them being fallen; And although
the Hollanders do ungratefully allege, that it was a Benefit great enough for
the English to Assist them in reason of state, because by so doing they kept
out a War from their own Country. It is most certain, that at that time the
English had need to fear no War, at all, but only for their Cause, and for
taking their parts; for it was for their Cause that the English in the year,
One Thousand Five Hundred, and seventy one, had seized upon the sum of Six
Hundred Thousand Ducats, on the West Coast of England, The Hollanders
Objections Answered.
being the money designed from Spain to the Duke of Alva for the Advancement of
the Spanish Interests in the Neatherlands: And although the Hollanders do
further allege in their own Excuse, that they were so grateful, as that they
offered unto the Queen of England the Sovereignty of the Neatherlands, which
she would not accept, and therefore it was not their fault that she obtained it
not; It is in reason truly answered, That the Queen of England, well knowing
that she was in danger to draw a perpetual War upon her Self, and her
Successors, by the accepting of such a Gift to which she had no Right, did
wisely refuse their Liberality; And yet for all that, she continued still to
aid them without that chargeable obligation. The Hollanders do further allege,
that the Queen of England had the Cautionary Town of Brill, Flushing, and the
other places delivered into her Hands: It is true she had so, and thereby
enjoyed only the Benefit of being at more Expense, both of Men and Money; and
let the Reader take notice, that most certain it is, that the Hollander had no
sooner made a Truce with the King of Spain, and the Archduke Albertus, but he
began presently to set the English at naught, and to take the Bridle out of
their Hands; whereupon immediately insued their Forbiding of the bringing of
English clothes died, and dressed into Holland, and the adjoining Provinces
without ever making the King of England or his Ambassador Leiger at the Hague
Privy thereunto.

And to make amends for this their Saucy and Insolent Affront, The Impudent
Affront of the Hollanders to the late Kings of England.
in a more High and Peremptory way they demeaned themselves to King James
himself; for whereas the Duke of Lennox, as Admiral of Scotland, had by order
from the Majesty of King James in the year, One Thousand Six Hundred and
Sixteen, sent one Master Brown to demand of the Hollanders then fishing upon
the Coasts of Scotland a certain ancient Duty called, Size Herring, they began
to contest with him about it, and after a long Disputation they paid it, as in
former times it had been accustomed, but not without some affronting terms;
that it was the last time it should be paid.

And it is most observable, that the same Gentleman coming the year following
with the same Authority and Commandment with one only Ship of His Majesty's to
demand the Duty aforesaid; And with Order, if he were denied, to take witness
of the refusal in writing, and so peaceably depart: He came aboard one of their
Ships, and no sooner demanded the aforesaid Duty, but by the Master of the
Ship, he was denied it, who as plainly, as peremptority told him, That he was
commanded by the States of Holland not to pay it unto the King of England any
more, of which he took witness according to his Order from His Majesty. This
taking of witness did so startle the Dutch, that before Master Brown had got
off to his own Ship, the Master of another Ship of Holland came presently
aboard that Ship in which he was, who demanding of Master Brown, his Name, he
replied that his Name was Brown; Why then, quoth he, if you be the Man, I have
Order to Arrest you, and to carry you into Holland; whereof Master Brown gave
notice to the Master of the Kings Ship, requiring him to advertise His Majesty
of this Insolency; and Master Brown was in this manner Arrested, and carried
away Prisoner into Holland, where for a while he was detained. I do read, that
much about the same time one Master Archibald Ranthin a Scotch Gentleman, and
residing at Stockholme in Sweden, where he solicited for the payment of some
sums of moneys due to the English Merchants, there was at the same time in the
same City one Vandyke, who lying there as an Agent for the States of Holland,
Vide Observations concerning the Affairs of Holland.
said unto some Principal Persons of the Swedes, that they need not be so hasty
in paying any Moneys to the Subjects of the King of England, or to give them
any high Respect, because the said Kings promises were not to be believed, nor
his threatenings to be feared; for which Vile and Insolent Speeches bring
afterward challenged by Master Archibald Ranthin, he had no better Excuse,
then to say, he was drunk when he did speak those words (for deny them he could
not;) and by this means his Excuse of playing the Beast; did excuse him for
playing the Man.

Now from these Insolent Affronts by words, let us proceed, and come to what
they have done by deeds, where in the first place, we may observe their rude
demeanor to our English Nation in the Northern Seas on the Coasts of
Greenland, and those parts, about the Fishing for Whales, and the Commodity of
Train Oil, where violently they have offered unpardonable abuses by giving of
blows, and chasing the Englishmen away, and by procuring much loss and
prejudice unto them; their Pride of Heart was so high, that it would not give
their Reason leave to apprehend that Fishing at Sea is free for every Man where
it is not upon the Coast of any Country, unto which the Dominion of the Sea
belongs by ancient Prerogative.

And yet all this is but inconsiderable in regard of their usage of our Nation
in the East Indies, where in open Hostility they have as fiercely set upon
them, as if they had been most mortal Enemies, having in several Encounters
slain many of our Men, and sunk sundry of our Ships; And when they had taken
our Men Prisoners, they would use them in the sight of the Indians, in such a
Contemptible and Disdainful manner, as if at their own Home, and in the
Country of the Butter-Boxes; the English in respect of them were but a sordid
and a slavish Nation, and the Hollanders were either their Superiors, and
might use them at their own pleasure, or the English were so spiritless, or so
unpowerfull, that they durst not be revenged, but quietly must put up all the
Affronts and Injuries which they received at their Hands.

And as for the Commodious Trade which the English have had in Muscovy for
above these fourscore years, and some other Countries that lie upon the East
and North, which the Hollanders, have now gotten quite out of their Hands,
Their spoiling of our Trade in Muscovy, and other Countries of the East.
to the great Grief and Prejudice of many Merchants in this City: What shall we
say, seeing not long since they have been acting the same again with our
English Merchants in Turkey: And it is a practice so usual with them to spoil
the Trade of other Nations, that when they cannot find any Occasion to do it,
they will show a Nature so wretchedly Barbarous, that they will not stick to
spoil one another; so great is their Covetous and most Insatiable desire of
Gain: And yet all this proceeds out of an ignoble and a sordid spirit, for
let them arrive to what Wealth they will, they can never be the Masters of a
Noble, and a Generous Disposition.

Had it not been for their Neighboring Nation of the English, they had never
arrived to the liberty of a Free State, yet so ungrateful have they been, that
they have endeavored to forget all the Obligations of Humanity, and have
dug into the very Bowels of those who did preserve them. Many Examples of
this may be instanced; I shall look a little back again on the cruelty of their
proceedings in the East Indies, before their studied malice at Amboyna, and
afterward of their horrid Massacre at Amboyna it self. As their Avarice was
unsatisfied, so their quarrels with the English were many; Covetousness and
Ambition not long enduring a Co-partner.

Queen Elizabeth being translated into a better World, and the Hollanders (to
be the more ready to set the English at naught,) having by the Assistance of
Sir Ralph Winwood got the Cautionary Towns into their own Possession, they
presently began to appear in their true Colors, by adding Cruelty to
Hypocrisy, and Avarice to Insolence; The English that were Trafficking in the
East Indies being sensible thereof, and finding no redress, preferred their
Just Complaints to the Majesty of King James, on which ensued the first Treaty
in the year, One thousand six hundred and thirteen, in the City of London, and
after that, another Treaty in the year, One thousand six hundred and fifteen,
at the Hague in Holland, which taking up much time to little effect; there was
a third Treaty which was held in London in the year, One thousand six hundred
and nineteen, touching the Differences between the English and Dutch in the
East Indies, in which a full and solemn Composition was made, and a fair Order
set as to the Management of the Affairs for the Time to come; but so restless
were the Spirits of the Hollanders to make themselves the entire Masters of the
profits of the Indies, that having driven from thence the Spaniards and
Portugals, they at the last determined with themselves by subtility as well as
strength, to force from thence the English also; In pursuance whereof, some
four years before the most Barbarous Proceedings at Amboyna, they endeavored
to dispossess the English of the Islands of Banda, Polleroone, and some others,
famous for the Rich Spices of Nutmeggs, Cloves and Mace; and understanding by
one of their Spies, that Captain Courtupe was gone from his House and Factory
in Polleroon to one of the adjacent Clove-Islands, called Lantore, they did
shoot him as he was in his Boat upon his Return, and being demanded the cause
of so unexpected a Murder, they sent word to the English that they should take
no more care for him, for he was dead, and he should be buried; Although this
was a great discouragement to the English that were there in their Occupation
of Merchandise, yet some were afterward so venturous, as to endeavor a
settlement at Lantore, amongst whom was Master Woofe a Factor there, Vide,
Master Woofes Discourse on the Tyranny of the Dutch upon the English pa. 10.
and the Author from whom we have received this Discourse, and one who being
taken not long afterward by the Dutch, endured almost as much misery, as a
Created Nature can be capable of, which the ensuing Narration will make
manifest: He writes of the Dutch, That as often as he thinks of their
unparralleld and barbarous Cruelty, he cannot but admire, and praise that Great
God who so much strengthened and enabled him to undergo those heavy Tortures
and Pressures which were laden on him by those bloody Patrons of Cruelty. The
Dutch had no sooner notice that the English had raised a Factory in the Island
of Lantore, but sailing from Iaccatra, now by them called Bata via, they
importuned the Natives to surrender the Island into their Hands and Custody;
Sometimes they thought to have prevailed upon them with persuasions, and fair
words failing; they would make use of foul, and threaten them with Sword and
Fire; And although they were not ignorant that a Treaty had been held in
London, and a full Composition for the ending of all Controversies, yet they
informed the Natives, that although they had given the Island to the King of
England, they need not to fear to disclaim what they had done by making them to
become Masters of it, Ibid pa. 12, and 13.
for they said they could, nay, and they would interpose between all Dangers
and them, and assured them that they had Strength enough to defend them against
all the Nations in the World; They only desired of them a Seizin of security to
enjoy the profit of their Fruits on those Terms which the English had
conditioned with them. The Natives of the Island being hereat in a great
perplexity, and doubting amongst themselves what might be the event, if they
refused a proffer, which carried an Obligation of so much safety with it, did
Address themselves unto the English, and desired of them to be informed, how
they might secure themselves from that deceitful and cruel Generation of men,
whose persuasions were as plausible, as their threatenings terrible; And
understanding by the English, that they expected a considerable Recruit both of
Men and Ships to come suddenly unto them, they were resolved to be Courageous,
and not to yield to their treacherous persuasions: In this apprehension, the
Dutch not long afterward desired of them after some flattering Asseverations
to give them, A Seizin of Security; At which the Natives pretending Ignorance,
told them, that they knew not the signification of the World, and seemed to be
extraordinarily curious to understand the Interpretation of it; At which the
Dutch with as much Mirth as Confidence, having whispered amongst themselves,
did after some deliberation tell them, That they must bring a great Brass Basin
filled with Earth, and plant in the middle of it the Branch of a Nutmeg-Tree
laden with Fruit, and cause it to be presented to them by the Chiefest Men of
their Islands; And this they told them was the Sense and Interpretation of the
word.

The Natives having received this Answer, did suddenly acquaint the English
with it, to whom they were more inclined then to the Dutch, as all the rest of
those Nations are; and having advised with one another, they told the Dutch in
plain terms, that their Demands were Impossibilities, for should they recede
from what already they had done, both God and Man might justly brand them with
Infidelity, for to their apprehensions, they seemed to un-interest the English
of what was their proper Title, which by no means they could be induced to
consent unto; At which the Hollanders being much incensed, told them, that
since no persuasions would allure them to a knowledge of their own Happiness,
they must expect to find the reward of their obstinacy, for rather then be
frustrated of their Intentions, they were resolved to make a Benefire of the
Island, they did advise them, not to trust to the English strength which could
stand in no Competition with theirs, for they owned them but as a Handful in
comparison with themselves.

This Dispute being frustrated, and the Dutch finding the Natives of the Island
to be intractable to their Demands, they prepared a great Vessel which they had
with Battery Guns, with a resolution forthwith to Assault the Town; This great
Ship was called the Float* and besides her, they had in a readiness other less
Ships that lay against that part of the Town, where the English Factory was;
Having for two days planted their Batteries, and played against that place
where by the Flaggs and Pendants of the Red Cross, they found the English
Factory to be, and finding the Event not to answer the expectation, on the
first of March, (five days after their first Assault) they found the means to
Land their Men, and Enter the Town; they had placed in their Front a
considerable number of the Nation of Japan being all armed with Guns like unto
Cullivers with barrels of Brass, who making way for the Hollanders, did such
Execution, that the Outcry in the Streets was terrible, Ibidem pa. 18.
Men, Women, and Children being cut in pieces, and the Town a Shamble of dead
persons. The English being but few in number were taken Prisoners, and saluted
with the Titles of base Rogues and Villains, they were bound unto posts by
Hands and Neck, they were bruised, beaten and buffered, they were afterward
tied back to back, and so the stronger was enforced to carry the weaker to one
of the Dutch Ships, called the Holland, where they were laden with Irons, and
tormented with variety of Tortures; Insomuch, Ibidem pa. 20.
that the Author of this Discourse, who was a Factor at Lantore, and one of
those who did partake in these grievous torments, has these express words; For
my own part, I seriously protest, that if it pleased God, the great Determiner
of all things, to command me to yield my Body to be Tortured, I had rather by
far choose the Turkish then the Dutch Tormentors, for their Cruelties I am
confident are far transcending the Turkish Extremities, and I know their
viperous inclinations to the English will not be consumated until their
completed Jury shall surfeit it self into an unparalleld Revenge.

Many days were they thus Tormented, and some of them being most sadly
troubled with the Flux, these unmercifull people would not let them out of
their Bolts, but compelled them to use the same Dish to receive their
Excrements, in which all of them constantly did eat their meat; these things
were unsavory indeed, but these Inhumane Creatures would not be sensible of
their Calamities; At the last it pleased God, that some English Ships sailing
that way, and being informed what the Dutch had acted at Lantore, one of the
Captains, Captain Fitz Herbert by Name, sent to the Dutch to Demand the
Prisoners, who being conveyed to his Ship, he wondered at their unsightly
complexion, and the lameness of their bodies, the one being eaten in with
Irons, and the other quite decayed for want of eating; By his means their
Release being obtained, they had liberty to depart to the Island of Polleroon.

And here they continued not long, but the Dutch who would have no Factories in
the East Indies but their own, did again seize upon them, and having plundered
them to their very shirts, they Imprisoned them in a Castle which was in that
Island, where they continued enduring many Extremities until the noise of their
sufferings, and durance being again divulged, they were again relieved by some
English ships that passed that way; And the reason why they used so much
cruelty to the English, being demanded, no other thing being to be laid unto
their Charge, but only their buying of Cloves upon the Islands; the Dutch at
their Discharge told the Prisoners, that in regard they were the first
Englishmen that ever they took buying of Cloves upon that Island, they were
willing to spare their lives, but if for the time to come, they should ever
take an Englishman in the same nature, they would not be so favorable as to
hang him, but they would whip him to Death; And speaking in contempt of the
English, they have been heard to speak words to this Effect. Alas! what is
England if compared to our High and Mighty States of the Neatherlands, we know
that we have Ships enough to block up all the English, and if any difference
should arise, the proof should manifest the truth, for they would show us what
the Dutch Men were, if ever they could find opportunity to put their Designs in
Agitation; The Author of this Discourse to show the candor of his spirit,
Ibidem p^. 42.
in the representation of so sad a subject; I protest, says he, and shall be
ready at any time to justify it with my life, that I have not expressed any
thing but what is really correspondent to the truth, and I am very much
astured, that there be those now living, who can testify with me the many
Tragioal Designs, that have not only been acted on us, but upon many others.

Neither was this their Arrogance, and Cruelty expressed to the English alone,
but the Inhabitants of China have had the sad Experience of it, it being the
common practice of the Dutch to seize upon their Vessels as they came down to
Trassique in those Rivers, and and having plundered their ships, to drown the
Men.

In the year, One thousand six hundred and seventeen, the Inhabitants of the
Banda Islands, made a Present to Captain Ball, at that time President of
Bantam, and besought him that he would so far be pleased to compassionate their
sorrowful conditions, as to accept of their Present, and receive their Islands
into his Jurisdiction, by defending them from the Tyrannies of the intruding
and unmerciful Hollanders, whose practice it was, daily to exact upon them, and
to murder them at their pleasures, and to abuse their Wives whiles themselves
were enforced to look on, and not dare in the least to resist them; Moreover
their Drunkenness was such, and so habitual to them, that it was almost a
wonder to see them sober; they told him, if he were pleased to accept of what
they proffered, he should very much oblige them, and no ways prejudice himself
nor the English Nation. To which Captain Ball replied, that he much lamented
their misfortune, but in regard that they had made a surrender of their Island
already to the Dutch, it was not consonant to Reason, that he should take away
that by force from the Dutch, which they had obtained by favor, he therefore
desired them to cease their importunity; to which the Bandaneses replied, that
if that were all the obstacle, it might easily be removed, for they generally
protested, they never gave the least consent to the Hollanders to possess their
Islands, but that they wilfully and violently entered upon them without their
consent, and though that oftentimes they had desired, yet the Dutch had never
received any assurance of submission from them, the unworthiness of their
Actions having deterred the Bandaneses from condescending to their persuasions.
Hereupon Captain Ball became willing to receive them into his Protection to the
great comfort of the afflicted Indians.

Captain Ball continued President not long after, for Captain Iourdan Arrived
with Sir Thomas Dailes Fleet, in the year, 1618. at what time Captain Ball was
commanded home; howsoever the Cruelties against the poor Bandeneses in many of
their Islands still continued, and grew to such a height, that they hardly
could be paralleled, and for no other cause, but that their Affections were so
generally, and so servently expressed toward the English.

Mention has already been made of the taking of the Chief Town in the Island
of Lantore, and how barbarously the Dutch dealt with the English Factory there;
It is worthy your observation, that the greatest part of the Inhabitants flying
for their safety into the highest Hills of that Island, were courted by the
Dutch to submit, and surrender themselves, and that they should be received
into favor and protection; Hereupon they came down in great numbers, and four
hundred of the Chiefest of them being picked out amongst the rest, they were
transported into an adjacent Island, where having washed themselves,
accordingly as they had been advised, they were all invited to a great dinner,
and entreated with many welcomes; they told them, they were heartily sorry that
they should so much distrust them as to fly to the English, there being none
that desired their safety and welfare more then themselves, and that they would
be friend them against all Opposers; they desired that all differences
whatsoever may be absolutely composed; and all former injuries forgotten; to
which purpose, to give them a manifestation of their Respects, they had
transported them thither, and provided what for the present could be had for
their Refreshment. The Poor Inhabitants being much surprised at this unusual
manner of Respect, having fed heartily, and expressed their thankfulness,
prepared for their departure, but the Dutch leading them to a window, told
them, that they must walk to yonder Green, and take their Farewell of them
there, for there their Executioners stood in a readiness to dispatch them;
whereat the poor Bandeneses being much amazed, cried out, O Apetow! which is in
English, O what is this! Immediately they were hurried away to the place of
Execution, and by the Iapan Slaves, the cruel Instruments of the Hollanders,
they were cut asunder in the middle alive, and their divided Quarters were sent
some of them to Lantore, some of them to Polleroon, and other Islands belonging
unto Banda.

In the same year, they put to Death the Chiefest of the Inhabitants of
Polleroon, amongst whom was the Chief Priest of that Island, in whose side the
Dutch having cut a hole, they commanded that Gunpowder should be put into it,
which at that instant being set on fire, by a new way of torment they deprived
him of his life.

It is very observable, that although these Inhabitants of Polleroon were under
the English Protection, yet their numbers being inconsiderable to the strength
of the Dutch, the English durst not contradict them; So that these poor people
were not only murdered before their faces; but the English perceiving how
Tyrahnical withal the Dutch were, and how incroaching upon them, and what were
their cruelties which they practiced at Amboyna, of which more in its due
place; in the year, One thousand six hundred and twenty two, The English
abandoned the Banda Islands, and the reason of it.
they abandoned the Banda Islands which the Dutch have ever since possessed,
and do still wrongfully and unjustly enjoy, not permitting the Enlish to have
any Commerce with them.

And in this place I shall not forget to give you the memorable account of the
innumerable Shoales of Mackerell which was the Chiefest thing that supported
those Islands, they came always in their season in great Multitudes, and if at
any time they appeared not so numerous, they were sure to have arrived within
the limits of two or three days, and in far greater abundance then usually
before; but after that the English had left those Islands, they did forsake
them also, as places polluted with Blood, and Avarice, or as if they would come
to no Coasts, but where Humanity and Probity, or at least where the English had
their Residence.

Much about the same time, Vide, The Dutch Tyranny, page 64.
Captain Iourdan sailing from Bantham with two Ships, the one called the
Sampson, the other the Hound, to the great Islands of Burnew, he discovered
three or four Dutch Ships standing in for the same Port, and being confident
that they intended no good to him, he gave order to prepare for the Encounter,
fully resolving to fight it out to the last Man, rather then to yield himself
to the unmerciful hands of his Insulting and Approaching Enemies; the Dutch
summoned the English to deliver the Ships upon fair Quarter, but Captain
Iourdan a well complexioned Man, who had a great heart in a little body,
absolutely refused to yield upon any Condition whatsoever. The Dutch pretending
to be unwilling to shed blood, called out to the English, and told them, that
they knew very well that little Captain Iourdan was there, and desired them to
persuade him to Parley with them; Captain Iourdan being informed of it, refused
to have any conference with them; whereupon they desired that he would but show
himself upon the Quarter Deck, that by a fair compliance they might stop the
effusion of blood, which otherwise must come to pass; Whereupon Captain Iourdan
(thinking that to speak with them could not much prejudice him) did show
himself on the Quarter Deck, and after the exchange of some few words; told
them, that he knew the Justice of his Cause, and the Injustice of Theirs, and
was resolved to fight it out: The Hollander alleging that their strength was
far greater then his, and it was rather Desparateness then true Valor to fight
upon such a Disadvantage; it prevailed nothing at all with Captain Iourdan, who
told them, he questioned not his own strength, but was resolved to fight it
out, and to leave the success unto God. The Dutch finding him intractable to
their Demands, did hold him still in Discourse, until a Musket Bullet from one
of their ships laid him dead upon the Deck, as he was in Parley with them: At
that very instant of time, whether by Treachery, or by Accident it is
uncertain, a part of our other English Ship called the Hound, was blown up, and
many of our men mortally hurt; the Amazement was so great, that the English
were enforced to yield to the mercy of their Enemies, who having taken them,
did cause them to be laden with bolts, and did not allow them so much favor as
to the Heathen, for they were permitted to walk up and down with a chain of
Iron, which is far more easy then to lie in bolts of Iron.

Thus may we observe, what injury and wrong we have all along sustained by the
Dutch, who have got many of those Islands where now they have seated themselves
by cruelty and bloodshed, and by murdering the English and their Friends;
These indeed are sad Relations, and though dismal in themselves, they are but
the Prologues to the Tragedy at Amboyna.

Amboyna is an Island lying near unto Seran, fruitful of Cloves, for the buying
and gathering whereof the English Company had for their parts planted five
Factories, the Chiefest whereof was at the Town of Amboyna; but the Hollanders
who had already dispossessed them of their residence at Polleroon, and at
Lantore, had a laboring desire to heave them out also at Amboyna, and at
Bonda, several complaints and discontents did every day arise, which were
transferred to Iaccatra in the Island of Iava Major to the Council of Defense
of both Nations there residing, who also not agreeing in points of difference
did send them over into Europe to be decided by both Companies here, or if they
could not agree amongst themselves, they should then be determined by the Kings
Majesty, and the Lords the States General according to the Article of the
Treaty in the year One thousand six hundred and nineteen, which although it was
then Articled and Agreed upon by both Nations, yet the Ambition and Avarice of
the Dutch, would not admit of so deliberute a course, but with rash hands would
of themselves cut their way to their own ends, and use neither delay nor
conscience where gain or profit did appear. The English Factories at Amboyna
began to be rich, and were a great eye-fore unto them who could not endure that
any should Traffic there but themselves; On the eleventh therefore of
February, in the year, One thousand six hundred and twenty two, a laponen who
served the Dutch as a Soldier was apprehended upon suspicion of Treason, and
put to the Torture, the pretense was for asking the Sentinel, what was the
strength of the Castle? The Extremity of the Torture was such, that it prompted
him to confess whatsoever he perceived they would have him to say, which was,
that himself, and sundry others of his Countrymen there had contrived the
taking of the Castle; Upon this confession (which made a great noise amongst
the Dutch, and administered them a subject upon which to act, even according to
their own desires) diverse other Iaponers were examined and tortured; This
Examination continued four days, during which time, diverse English Men that
belonged to the Factory, had every day their ingress into the Castle and egress
from it, they heard of the torturing of the Japoners, and of the crime laid to
their charge, never dreaming of the bait that was prepared for themselves: at
the same time there was Prisoner in the Castle one Abel Price, an English Man,
for threatening in a drunken humor to set a Dutch Man's house on fire: The Dutch
being glad they had such an Instrument to work on in their Custody, they showed
him some of the Japoners whom most grievously they had Tortured, and told him,
they had confessed that the English had combined with them for the taking of
the Castle; whereupon having put him also to the Torture, they enforced him to
confess whatsoever they desired of him; Immediately upon this, Captain Towerson
and the rest of the English that were in Amboyna, were sent for to the
Governor of the Castle: They in obedience to the command, did all of them
repair unto him, one man excepted, that was left to keep the Factory; The
Governor told Captain Towerson, that he and many other of the English Nation
were Accused of a Conspiracy to surprise the Castle, and were to remain under
Custody until a further Trial; instantly they attached the person that was
left at home in the Factory, and the Merchandise of the English Company was
taken into the Dutch Custody by Inventory; All their Chests, Boxes, Books,
Writings, and whatsoever was of any Value in the English House were seized on,
Captain Towerson was committed to his Chamber, having a Guard of Dutch
Soldiers; Emanuel Thomson, one of the Chiefest of the Factors, was kept
Prisoner in the Castle, seven others, viz. John Beaumont, Edward Collins,
William Webber, Ephraim Ramsey, Timothy Johnson, John Fardo, and William Brown
were sent aboard the Ships of the Hollanders then in Harbor, some to one ship,
some to another, and all made fast in Irons: The rest of the English that were
in the other Factories in the same Island were apprehended; Samuel Colson, John
Clark, George Sharrock were found in the Factory at Hitto, and Edward Collins,
William Webber, and John Sadler in the Factory at Larica, who were all brought
Prisoners to Amboyna. John Powel, John Weatheral, and Thomas Ladbrook were
apprehended at Cambello, and John Beaumont, William Griggs, and Ephraim Ramsey
at Loho, and brought in Irons to Amboyna on the 20th. day of February.

In the mean time the Governor and the Fiscal intend to lose no opportunity,
in the prosecution of the fine Plot that was contrived; John Beaumont, and
Timothy Johnson are sent for from aboard the Unicorn; Being come into the
Castle, Beaumont was left with a Guard in the Hall, and Johnson was taken into
the place of Torture, where by and by to the great grief and astonishment of
his heart and understanding, Beaumont heard him to make a lamentable Outcry,
and then to be silent for a little while, and not long afterward to be as loud
in his hideous complaints, if not louder then before; After this Torture Abel
Price the Chyrurgion, who was first of all wracked, was brought in to accuse
him; But Johnsons heart being as stout as it was innocent, and not confessing
any thing, he was remanded to the Torture again, where Beaumont heard him to
roar, and cease from roaring, and then to roar out again, enough to soften the
hardest stones into compassion; Having been a whole hour in this Purgatory of
Fire and Water, they brought him forth wet all over, and burned in several
places of his body, and so laid aside in a by-place in the Hall, with a
Soldier to watch him that he should speak to no man. After him Emanuel Tompson
was examined in a room adjoining to that where Johnson had been Tortured, where
being an hour and a half in his Examination, and his Torment, he was carried
another way, and passed not through the Hall, where Beaumont attended, and
every hour expected the dreadful summons; At the last, Beaumont was called in,
and with deep protestations denying what was propounded to him, he was made
fast to the Rack, and the cloth being tied about his Neck, and two men with
Jarrs of Water in their hands being ready to pour it on his head, the Governor
commanded that he should be taken down again saying, that he would forbear him
a day or two longer, because he was an Old Man.

The next day being Sunday, Robert Brown was called in, and being on the Rack,
and the Torment of Water given him, he confessed all as the Fiscal asked. After
him was Edward Collins called in, whose Hand and Feet being fastened to the
Rack, he prayed to be respited, saying, he would confess all; But being let
down, with great Oaths and Execrations he protested his innocence as before,
yet told them, that because he knew that by Torture, they would: make him to
confess any thing, though never so contrary to the Truth, they should do him a
great favor to tell him what they would have him to confess, and he would
acknowledge it to avoid the torture; At which the Fiscal being angry, he was
hoysted up again, and the Torment of Water being given him, he was not able to
endure it, but prayed to be let down again to his Confession* After which
having deliberated a little with himself, he confessed he had a hand in the
Plot for the surprisal of the Castle, and being demanded of the Fiscal, whether
Captain Towerson were not an Associate in the Conspiracy; He Answered, No;
Whereupon the Fiscal told him, that he lied, for said he, Did not he call all
of you of the English Factories unto him, and tell you, that the daily Affronts
and Abuses of the Dutch had put a Plot into his head, and that he wanted
nothing but your Consent and Secrecy * A Dutch Merchant standing by said; And
did not you all swear upon the Bible to be secret to him? Collins with great
Protestations replied, that he knew nothing at all of it: Being then delivered
again into the hands of the Executioner, the sense of the late Torture so
prevailed upon him, that he confessed all to be true which they had spoken.
Being thus respited, he was demanded, whether the President of the English at
Iaccatra, or Master Welden Agent for the English at Banda were not privy to the
business; to which he again answered, No; Afterward the Fiscal propounded
other Interrogatories unto him, and perceiving that Collins knew not what
answer to make, he helped him to confess those things which he thought most
conducing to his purpose.

Next to him was Samuel Colson brought in, who for fear of the pain when he saw
Edward Collins come forth, chose rather to deny nothing that was propounded to
him then undergo the Torments of Fire and Water in the Attestation of his
Innocence: But John Clark was of another Resolution, he was no sooner brought
in by the Soldiers and Officers, but by and by he was heard to make a hideous
and a lamentable complaint, which continued for the space of two hours, during
which time as they abated or increased his Torments, he diminished or doubled
his cries at the Sense and horror of his Sufferings. The two Elements of Fire
and Water, although merciles of themselves, by making their Fury more
deliberate, were here instructed to be more unmercifull, whiles accurate
cruelty did torment even invention it self to torment the Innocent; The Rack
ordained for the confession of great and grievous Offenses is oftentimes but an
unfaithful discoverer of them; for whiles men are put to those torments, which
Flesh and Blood are not able to endure, they confess those crimes which their
Flesh and Blood were no ways accessory to. Two hours was this poor Man under
the torment of Fire and Water, yet confessed not any thing, at which his
Tormentors being amazed, they did cut off his hair, thinking belike, that the
strength of his Resolution lay in his hair, when indeed it lay in the Justice
of his Cause, and the Innocence of his Conscience. Afterward they hoysed him
up again, and with lighted candles they did burn him in the bottom of his feet,
until the moisture that dropped from them did put out the candles, yet even
then they applied fresh lights unto him; They burnt him also in the elbows, and
in the palms of his hands, and so horridly under his armpits, that his Inwards
might evidently be seen* At the last, when they perceived that he could make no
handsome Confession, they led him along with questions of particular
circumstances which they had framed of themselves; And being wearied and
overcome with Torments, he at last, according to their own wishes, made Answer
to whatsoever they demanded of him. Being then released from his Martyrdom,
they sent him out by four Negroes, who carried him between them to a Dungeon,
where he lay five days without any Chyrurgian to dress his wounds, until his
flesh being putrified great Maggots creeped and dropped from him in a most
loathsome, and noisome manner.

In the like manner, the rest were all Examined, but none of them were so
heavily Tortured, for some of them to avoid the Torment, made sudden
Confessions, others at the first or second drenching with the water, Answered
to all the Interrogatories of the Fiscal. Captain Towerson himself being
reserved amongst the last, until the Torments of those that were Examined
before him might Rack out something from them that might Evidence against Him,
was brought into the Court, where these younkers of Holland, like another
Council of Rehoboam sat in Judgment upon Him, he deeply did protest his
Innocence, to Encounter which they produced the Persons and Confessions of
Samuel Colson, William Griggs, and John Fardo, Samuel Colson being told, that
unless he would make good his former Confession against Captain Towerson, he
should be commanded again to the Torture of Fire and Water, did coldly and
faintly re-affirm what before he said, and so was dismissed; the other two
being brought face to face before Captain Towerson, he charged them, as they
would Answer it at the dreadful Day of Judgment to speak nothing but the
truth, at which both of them trembled down upon their knees, and besought him
for GOD's sake to forgive them, they openly acknowledged that that whatsoever
they formerly had confessed was most false, and spoken only to avoid the
Torment; Upon these words the Fiscal, and the rest of this High Court of
Justice did command them again to the Torture, which they would not endure, but
affirmed their former Confession to be true.

I do find this Torment was so terrible to Flesh and Blood, that it even
startled the Courage of Captain Towerson himself, who either to avoid the
horror of the Torment, or the infamy of it, confessed some words which the
Factor of Cambello in the Isle of Seran, Master John Weatherall should speak,
who being sent for, and Examined on the day following, the Captain was brought
forth to justify what before he had confessed, who desiring Mr. Wedtheral to
speak the truth, and nothing but the truth as God should put it into his heart;
Mr. Weatheral was in a great Amazement, and being ordered to undergo the
torture of water, and told, that if water would not make him to confess, fire
should; he prayed them to tell him what he should say, or to write down what
they themselves pleased, and he would subscribe unto it; but being told that he
needed no Tutor, and that they would make him to confess of himself, having
hoysted him up four several times, and perceived that he knew not what to say,
they did read unto him the Confession of the other Men that had been Examined,
and asked him from point to point, and he observing very well which way the
world did go, and that his Life must become a Sacrifice to the Rage and Rapine
of the Dutch, did still answer yea unto all.

On the 26 of February old style, the Prisoners were all brought into the great
Hall of the Castle to be prepared for death, by their Ministers, being solemnly
Condemned the day before, some few of them found mercy, and had their lives
saved; Captain Towerson, was kept apart from the rest, and so was Mr. Emanuel
Tomson, but some of them by writing found the opportunity to leave a Testimony
of their Innocence behind, amongst whom was Captain Towerson, who in the end of
a Bill or Obligation wrote these words; Firmed by the Firm of me Gabriel
Towerson now appointed to die, guiltless of any thing that can justly be laid
unto my Charge, God forgive them their guilt and receive me into his Mercy.
Amen.

William Griggs, also did leave a paper to be sent to Mr. Welden Agent at
Banda, which came afterward into his hands; the Tenor of it was in these
Words:
We whose Names are here specified, John Beaumont, William Griggs, Abel Price,
Robert Brown, Prisoners in the Rotterdam, being apprehended for Conspiracy for
blowing up the Castle of Amboyna, being adjudged to Death, were through Torment
constrained to speak that which we never meaned or imagined, the which we take
upon our deaths and salvation, for they tortured us with that extreme torture
of Fire and Water, that Flesh and Blood could no ways endure it; and this we
take upon our deaths, that they have put us to death being guiltless of our
Accusation: So therefore we desire that those who employed us may understand
these wrongs, and that you your selves would have a Care to look to your
selves, for their intent was to have brought you in also; They asked concerning
you, and if we had been Tortured on that particular, we must have confessed you
also.

And so Farewell.

Master Welden having perused this Letter, and observed the bloody and
inveterate Malice of the Dutch against the English, did not long afterward
leave the Island of Banda to the Dutch, and the English Factories in the
Mollu^co Islands did follow his Example.

Samuel Colson, also in a Psalter which he had, did leave this Attestation of
his Innocence.
The Japoners were taken and brought to Examination, and being most Tyrannously
Tortured were asked if the English had any hand in their Plot, which Torture
made them say yea; Immediately Mr. Tomson, Mr. Johnson, Master Collins, and
John Clark were Examined, and burned under the Arms, Armpits, the Hands, and
Soals of the Feet, with another most miserable Torment, of Water, some of them
being almost Tortured to Death, were forced to confess that which they never
knew, by reason of the great Torment, which Flesh and Blood is not able to
endure. Then were the rest of the English Men called, (amongst whom I was one,)
being wished to confess, or else I must go to Torment; they withal caused
Master Johnson, who was before Tormented, to witness against me, or otherwise
he should be Tormented again, which rather than he would endure, he said, he
would confess whatsoever they would have him: And for my part, I also must
confess that which I never knew, or else I must go to Torment, which rather
than I would suffer, I confessed that, which (as I shall be saved before
Almighty God) is not True, being forced to it for fear of Torment. At the last
they did make us to bear witness against Captain Towerson, and by the same
violence for fear of most Cruel Torments, they made Captain Towerson to confess
the like, for which we all must dye. As I hope to have pardon for my sins, I
know no more than the Child unborn of this Business, for which we all must
suffer.

Written with my own hand the first of March, Stilo novo. Samuel Colson.


Other Attestations there are to the same effect, which for brevities sake I
omit, I shall only insert, that all things being prepared for Execution, the
Condemned were brought forth out of the Hall, and passed along by the Chamber
where the Acquitted and Pardoned were, who stood in the door to give and take
the farewell of their Countrymen that were then going to the Execution; Making
a little stay for this purpose, they entreated and charged those that were
saved to bear witness to their Friends in England of their Innocence, and that
they died not like Traitors, but as so many Innocents merely murdered by the
Hollanders, whom they prayed to God to forgive their blood-thirstiness, and to
have mercy on their own souls.

It is observable, that being brought into the Yard, their Sentence was there
read unto them from a Gallery, and from thence they were carried to the place
of Execution, together with Nine Japons and one Portugal, whom their specious
malice to give a better pretense unto their cruelty, had contrived to be of the
same Confederacy: They did not go the ordinary and short way, but round about
through the Town, and were guarded with five Companies of Soldiers, Dutch and
Amboyners, and the Natives of the Island flocked together to behold this
Triumph of the Dutch over the Innocent and Condemned English. And it is not to
be forgotten, that, on the day before, the English desired of the Dutch
Ministers, that they might all receive the Sacrament, as a Seal of the
forgiveness of their sins; which by no means would be granted them; whereupon
Master Colson said unto them, You declare unto us the danger of dissimulation
in this Case; But tell us, if we suffer guiltless, being true believers in
Christ Jesus, what shall our Reward be? The Minister Answered, By how much the
more Innocent you are, by so much the Glorious shall be your Resurrection; Upon
that word Mr. Colson embraced him, and gave him his Purse and such money as was
in it, saying, Sir, God bless you, tell ^he Governor I freely forgive him, and
intereat you to exhort him to repent of his Bloody Tragedy wrought upon us poor
Innocent Souls, and proceeding in his Discourse, he spoke with a loud voice in
these words, According to my Innocence in this Treason, so O Lord pardon all
the rest of my sins, and if I be guilty thereof more or less, let me never be
partaker of thy Heavenly Joys; At which words every one or the rest cried out,
Amen for me, Amen for me, good Lord. This being said, each of them knowing whom
they had Accused, addressed themselves one unto another, begging forgiveness
for their false Accusations, being wrested from them either by the pain, or by
the fear of Torture; whereupon they all of them freely did forgive one another,
for none of them had been so falsely Accused, but he himself had as falsely
Accused another. In particular George Sharrock knecled down to John Clark and
craved forgiveness at his hands, who freely did forgive him, saying, How shall
I look to be forgiven of God, if I should not forgive you, having my self so
falsely Accused Captain Towerson and Others. This Master ^olson had contrived a
Prayer in writing which he did read to his Fellows the night before their
Suffering, and now also at the place of Execution, where having devoutly
pronounced the fame, he let the Paper fall from his hand, which the Governor
caused to be brought unto him, and he kept it. The Names of those that Suffered
were,

Cap. Gabriel Towerson, Samuel Colson, Emanuel Tomson, Timothy Johnson, John
Weatheral, John Clark, William Griggs, John Fardo, Abel Price, Robert Brown.


They had prepared a Cloth of black Velvet for Captain Towerson's Body to fall
upon, after his Head had been severed from it, which being stained, and defaced
with his Blood, they sent to the English Company and put it on their Account.
They sent the Mourning Cloth to the English, but the Scarlet of their
Blood-Guiltiness they retained to themselves.

Having thus given you an Account of the Barbarous Cruelty of the Dutch in the
East Indies, it is now high time to look to their Proceedings in the
West Indies, where we shall find their Cruelty as unparalled as their Avarice.

The Perfidiousness and Ingratitude of the Hollanders to the English may be
traced all along ever since the shook of their Obedience to the King of Spain
even unto this present time. But we will pass from their Hypocrisic and Cruelty
practiced abroad, and look on their Actions at Home; How, almost but the very
other day, did they labor to impose upon His. Majesty, and Sir George Downing,
his Envoy Extraordinary, by delivering Papers to many Public Ministers of
State at the Hague, as if His Majesty and his Envoy had been prepossessed with
them, when they had not the least notice of any such thing? How have they
seemed to be most desirous of Peace, when at the same time they have omitted no
days, even those appropriated for Holy Duties to drive on their preparations
for War? How have they stood in defense of their violent and unjust
Proceedings, and instead of redressing their Injuries, they have increased
them? About three years since, they concluded a Treaty with the English, and
having engaged, that better order should for the future be observed, they have
since heaped new Injuries to the utter overthrow of all the Trade of His
Majesty's Subjects in the East and West Indies; Witness our Ships, the
Hope-well, the Leopard, and some others in the East Indies; And the Charles,
the James, the Mary, the Sampson, the Hopeful Adventure, the Speed-well on the
Coast of Africa; And after all these Acts of the Highest Injustice, and their
utmost endeavors for driving on a War, they would make the world believe that
his Majesty is the first undertaker of it, who from his own Mouth to their
Ambassador in England, and by his Injunctions to Sir George Downing his
Minister at the Hague has given so many, and such Remarkable Demonstrations to
the contrary: What can they say to the Memorial of the complaints which Sir
George Downing exhibited to the States General, importing that in the space of
a very few years almost twenty English Ships with their whole Lading, to a very
great value, have been seized upon in a horrible manner, and the Men in them
most Barbarously, and most Inhumanely Treated, being put into stinking and
nasty Dungeons, and Holes at Castle. del. Mina, where they did lie bedded and
bathed in their own Excrements, having nothing but bread and water given them,
and not enough of that neither to sustain Nature, [their Bodies being under the
Fury of Exquisite and Horrid Torments;] and when any of them died, the living
and the dead were left together, and such as outlived that cruelty, were
exposed in the woods to famine, or to the mercy of wild beasts in those
desolate Countries, or to be carried into Captivity by the Natives by which
means several Hundreds of His Majesty's Good Subjects have perished and been
destroyed; And unto this hour, notwithstanding all solicitations and endeavous
of his Majesty's Envoy, not one penny of Satisfaction can be had, either for
the loss of the Ships, or the Persons concerned in any of them, but to the
contrary they have ever since hindered, and shot at the English Ships that have
Anchored by them, and have took by force all the Boats of those Natives who
have endeavored to come aboard them, and have seized also upon the English
Boats that would go on shore, and deprive them of all manner of Provision, nor
suffer so much as fresh water to be brought unto them; And to give a further
proof of their Confidence and Ambition, they have published a Declaration,
wherein they assume and challenge to themselves a Right to that whole Coast, to
the Exclusion of all other Nations; Although, by Order from His Majesty, Sir
George Downing, both in Public Conferences with the Deputies of the Lords
General, as also with those of Holland in particular, has at large
Remonstrated His Majesty's Right, and Interest in some part therein, having by
his Subjects bought the Ground of the King of that Country for a valuable
Consideration, and built a Factory thereon; And yet for all this, some of the
Dutch-West-India Company by Fraud and ireachery have got into the place, and no
hopes of the Restitution of it, but they are resolved to keep by violence what
they have gained by deceit. Moreover, what can they say for themselves
concerning their stirring up the King of Fantin by rewards and sums of Money,
and supplying him with all manner of Arms and Ammunition for the surprising of
his Majesty's Castle at Cormantin in the West Indies; so that an absolute
Necessity is imposed upon his Majesty, and his Subjects, either of losing all
that have been actually taken from them, and abandoning for ever that Trade it
self, or of betaking themselves to some other ways for their Relief; And what
Hope is there of their Restoring back any place which they have once taken. The
Island of Polleroon has been upon surrendering back to the English, ever since
the year, 1622. at which, by a Solemn and Particular Treaty it was promised to
be done; and again, by another Treaty in the year, 1654. and by an Order of the
States General, and the East Company of that Nation in the year, 1661. and
again by another Treaty in the year following; And yet to this day, there is
not the least mention of any thing Restored; And should any Man then think it
strange, that His Majesty after so long an experience of the perverseness and
deceitfulness of that Nation should suffer his Subjects to repossess themselves
of those places, which by the hand of Violence and Oppression they have forced
from them.

Now as for the business of the New-Neatherlands, as they are pleased to call
it, It has been abundantly elsewhere proved, that the said Land is part of
the Possession of His Majesty's Subjects of New England, which their Charter
plainly and precisely expresses: And those few Dutch that have lived there
heretofore, have lived there merely upon the connivence and sufferance of the
English, which has been permitted to them so to do, so long as they demeaned
themselves peaceably and quietly; but the Dutch not contenting themselves
therewith, have incroached more and more upon the English, imposing their Laws
and Customs, and endeavoring to raise Contributions and Excises on them, and
in those places where the Dutch had never been, whereupon they have been
necessitated several times to send Soldiers for the repulsing of them: Since
the Conclusion for the late Treaty the Dutch have made new Incursions upon the
English, and given them many new Provocations, and have ordained a Trial of
Causes amongst themselves, and a proceeding by course of Arms, without any
appealing into Europe at all. And can any Prince then think it strange,
especially the King of France, if His Majesty of England suffer his Subjects to
rescue themselves from such continual Vexations, seeing the King of France
himself has been pleased this year, to Order his Subjects to re-possess
themselves by force of Arms of a certain place called Cayen, which the French
allege has been wrongfully kept from them by the West India -Company of the
Neatherlanders. As for the business of Captain Holmes at Capo Verde in Guiney,
a complaint was no sooner made to His Majesty, this last year, in the Month of
June; But His Majesty immediately returned Answer, that he had given no Order
nor Direction there into Captain Holmes, and that upon his Return, he would
examine the business, and see that Right should be done according to the nature
of the Offense: In order whereunto, when Captain Holmes was returned, His
Majesty sent him to the Tower, and being afterward allowed the liberty of some
few days to follow his particular business, he was again Commanded back, where
being strictly and thoroughly Examined touching the management of the whole
matter complained of, he so fully, and so clearly upon every point did acquit
himself, that His Majesty was graciously pleased to grant him his Enlargement,
and to restore him again to His Princely Favor. We might in the next place
allege De Ruyters leaving the English Fleet, when with United Councils and
Forces, they were to Act against their Common Enemies, the Pirates and
Barharians in the Midland-Seas. We may allege their Instructions this last
year given to Van Campen, at what time His Majesty entertained not any open War
against them; which Instructions was in downright Terms, To Attach and Fall
upon His Majesty's Subjects in the West Indies, and to carve out their own
Satisfaction and Reparation. Vide, The Discourse of Sir George Downing.
And if this be not Affront enough to provoke His Majesty to maintain the
Justice of His Cause by the Force of Arms, we leave to the World, and to His
Enemies themselves to Judge, and surely that Sword is to be feared* which
strikes with the Hand of Justice.

FINIS.
The LOYAL MARTYROLOGY. Or brief Catalogues and Characters of the ^ost of
Eminent Persons who suffered for their Conscience (...) of Rebellion, either by
Death, Imprisonment, Banishment, or Sequestration; Together with those who were
Slain in the King's Service. As also, Dregs of Treachery: With the Catalogue
and Characters of those Regicides, etc. And are to be sold by Edward Thomas at
the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1665.


