Vera Effigies IOHANNIS CLEAVELAND


Printed for Not: Brook at the Angel in Cornhill

CLIEVELANDI VINDICIAE: OR, CLIEVELAND's Genuine POEMS, Orations, Epistles,
etc. PURGED FROM The many False and Spurious Ones which had usurped his Name,
And from innumerable Errors and Corruptions in the True Copies. To which are
added many never Printed before, with an account of the Author's Life.
Published according to the AUTHOR'S own Copies.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Harford, at the Angel in Cornhill near the
Royal Exchange, 1677.

TO THE Right Worshipful And Reverend FRANCIS TURNER D. D. Master of St. John's
College in Cambridge, and to the Worthy Fellows of the same College.
Gentlemen,
THat we interrupt your more serious Studies with the offer of this Piece, the
injury that has been and is done to the deceased Author's ashes not only
pleads our excuse, but engages you (whose once he was, and within whose
walls this standard of wit was first set up) in the same quarrel with us.

Whilst Randolph and Cowley lie embalmed in their own native wax, how is the
name and memory of Clieveland equally profaned by those that usurp, and those
that blaspheme it? By those that are ambitious to lay their Cuckows eggs in his
nest, and those that think to raise up Phenixes of wit by firing his spicy bed
about him?

We know you have not without passionate resentments beheld the prostitution of
his name in some late Editions vended under it, wherein his Orations are
murdered over and over in barbarous Latin, and a more barbarous Translation:
and wherein is scarce one or other Poem of his own to commute for all the rest.
At least every Curiasier of his has a fulsom Dragooner behind him, and Venus
is again uneequally yoaked with a sooty Anvilebeater. Clieveland thus revived
dies another death.

You cannot but have beheld with like zealous indignation how enviously our
late Mushrom-wits look up at him because he overdroppeth them, and snarl at his
brightness as Dogs at the Moon.

Some of these grand Sophys will not allow him the reputation of wit at all:
yet how many such Authors must be creamed and spirited to make up his Fuscara?
And how many of their slight productions may be gigged out of one of his
pregnant Words? There perhaps you may find some leafgold, here massy wedges;
there some scattered rays, here a Galaxy; there some loose fancy frisking in
the Air, here Wit's Zodiac.

The quarrel in all this is upbraiding merit, and eminence his crime. His
touring Fancy soareth so high a pitch that they fly like shades below him. The
Torrent thereof (which rises far above their high water mark) drowneth their
Levels. Usurping upon the State Poetic of the time he has brought in such
insolent measures of Wit and Language that despairing to imitate, they must
study to understand. That alone is Wit with them to which they are
commensurate, and what exceeds their scantling is monstrous.

Thus they deifie his Wit and Fancy as the Clown the plump Oyster when he could
not crack it. And now instead of that strenuous masculine style which breaths
in this Author, we have only an enervous effeminate froth offered, as if they
had taken the salivating Pill before they set pen to paper. You must hold your
breath in the perusal lest the Jest vanish by blowing on.

Another blemish in this monster of perfection is the exuberance of his Fancy.
His Manna lies so thick upon the ground they loath it. When he should only
fan, he with Hurricanos of wit stonnieth the sense and does not so much delight
his Reader, as oppress and overwhelm him.

To cure this excess, their frugal wit has reduced the World to a Lessian
Diet. If perhaps they entertain their Reader with one good Thought (as these
new Dictators affect to speak) he may sit down and say Grace over it: the rest
is words and nothing else.

We will leave them therefore to the most proper vengeance, to humor
themselves with the perusal of their own Poems: and leave the Barber to rub
their thick skulls with bran until they are fit for Musk. Only we will leave
this friendly advice with them; that they have one eye upon John Tredeskant's
Executor, lest among his other Minims of Art and Nature he expose their slight
Conceits: and another upon the Royal Society, lest they make their Poems the
counter-ballance when they intend to weigh Air.

From these unequal censures we appeal to such competent Judges as your selves,
in whose just value of him Clieveland shall live the wonder of his own, and the
pattern of succeeding Ages. And although we might (upon several accounts)
bespeak your affections, yet (abstracting from these) we submit him to your
severer Judgments, and doubt not but he will find that Patronage from you which
is desired and expected by

Your humble Servants. I.L. W.D,

A short Account of the Author's Life.
HE was born at Hinckley, a small Market Town in the County of Leicester, if we
may esteem that small which glories in so great a Birth.

His Father was the Reverend and Learned Minister of the Place. Fortes creantur
e fortibus. Being thus well descended for a vein of Learning he even lisped
wit, like an English Bard, and was early ripe for the University, who was one.

To cherish so great hopes, the Lady Margaret drew forth both her breasts.
Christ's College in Cambridge gave him Admissio^n, and St. John's a Fellowship.
There he lived about the space of nine years, the delight and ornament of that
Society. What Service, as well as Reputation he did it, let his Orations and
Epistles speak; to which the Library owes much of its Learning, the Chapel
much of its pious Decency, and the College much of its Renown.

The Rays which he thus shed upon others, reflected upon himself. But that
which alone may suffice for his honor is, that after the Oration which he
addressed to that Incomparable Prince, of Blessed Memory, Charles the First,
the King called for him, and (with great expressions of kindness) gave him his
hand to kiss, and commanded a Copy to be sent after him to Huntington, whither
he was hastening that Night.

Thus he shined with equal light and influence until the general Eclipse; of
which no man had more Sagacious Prognostics. When Oliver was in Election to be
Burgess for the Town of Cambridge, as he engaged all his Friends and Interests
to oppose it, so when it was passed, he said with much passionate. Zeal, That
single Vote had ruined both Church and Kingdom. Such havoc the good Prophet
beheld in Hazael's face. Such fatal Events did he presage from his bloody beak.
And no sooner did that Schrich Owl appear in the University but this Sun
declined. Perceiving the Ostracism that was intended, he became a Voluntier in
his Academick Exile, and would no longer breath the common Air with such Pests
of Mankind.

From thence he betook himself to the Camp of his Sovereign, and particularly
to Oxford the Head-Quarter of it, as the most proper and proportionate Sphere
for his Wit, Learning and Loyalty; and added no small Luster to that with which
that famous University shined before.

His next Stage was the Garrison of Newark, where he was Judge Advocate, until
the Surrender: and, by an excellent temperature of both, was a just and prudent
Judge for the King, and a faithful Advocate for the Country. There he drew up
that gallant Return to the Summons of the Besiegers, which spoke him, and the
rest that were embarked with him, resolute to sacrifice their Lives to their
Loyalty, had not the King's Especial Command, when first he had surrendered
himself into the hands of the Scots, made such stubborn Loyalty a Crime. And
here again he was Vates in the whole import of the word, both Poet and Prophet:
for, beside his passionate resentment of it in that excellent Poem, The King's
Disguise, upon some private Intelligence, three days before the King reached
them, he foresaw the Pieces of Silver paying upon the Banks of Tweed, and that
they were the price of his Sovereign's blood, and predicted the Tragical Events.

Thenceforth he followed the Fates of ^istressed Loyalty, for which, when he
had been long imprisoned at Yarmouth, he addressed his Petition to Oliver;
wherein he courteth his freedom with such insinuations as might neither do
violence to his Conscience, nor betray his Cause.

After many intermediate Stages (which contended as emulously for his abode, as
the seven Cities for Homer's Birth) Gray's Inn was his last: which when he had
ennobled with some short residence also, an Intermitting Fever seized him,
whereof he died. A Disease at that time Epidemical: and if it had taken him
only away (so public was the loss) it deserved to carry the name of a Common
Mortality.

He was buried upon the first day of May (for which nothing but the 29. can
atone) in the Parish Church of St. Michael Royal upon College Hill London,
Anno 1658. To which being attended by many Persons of Learning and Loyalty, Mr.
Edward Thurman performed the Office of Burial, and the Reverend and Learned Dr.
Pearson (now Lord Bishop of Chester) Preached his Funeral Sermon, and made his
Death Glorious.

And now there wants nothing but a Monument for him: and in this Book he has
erected one to himself, which Envy may repine at, but cannot reach.

CLIEVELANDI Manibus, Parentalia.
UMbra diu Elisii lacrymabilis accola Pindi,
Pieriis haesit quae taciturna vadis,
Pegaseo meritae nudataque remige primae
Serpsit humi, gemino dignior illa jugo;
Tandem cum cursum popularior awra negasset,
Trajecit famae vela datura suae.
Luce nova radians, jam fulgida cernitu umbra,
Cui numen Phoebus foenerat, atque facem.
Ridet Hyampe^ que humilem de vertice vallem,
Et volitat penna non nisi vecta sua.
Iam reparat famae damnosa silentia, tota
Qui caniturque Deae, Pieridum que tuba.
Cumque sua, quae jam durabunt carmina, cedro,
Elusere minas temporis and tineae.
Blatta suo vexet Clievelandum Critica morsu,
Vsque suos ungues rodat, and usque virum;
Commistum salibus tamen ut gustarit acetum,
Deciduae ultricem mittet hirudo cutem.
Vsque Cothurnato conculcent carmina socco,
Queis, praeter fastum, nil sua Roma dedit;
Vsque necet Vatem crudum de pegmate Drama,
Et levis excipiat tam grave visus opus,
Attamen in meritos transibunt Sibila plausus,
Clamosumque, premet murmur inane, Sophos*
Altior incedit vates pumilone Cothurno,
Grandius and superat pegmata celsa decus,
Nostra quidem proavos aetas male passa Poetas,
Vix canos gemino suscipit ore dies:
Sed resplendet adhuc aeterni nominis umbra,
Atque Poetastris dat sine nube diem.
Cui Tagus est Helicon, and Mons Auratus, Olympus,
Qui totas numerat Carmine divitias.
Plurima cui nitido collucet gemma libello,
Quamvis non panxit Sardonychata manus.
Dissimili ingenio qui plumbea saecla flagellat,
Quique alter Musis praesit Apollo suis.
Cedit in exemplar venturi temporis, aetas
Seraque Clievelandum consulet Archetypum.
J. L.

1.
HAil venerable Relics! unto whom
Old and new Idolatrous Rome
Might pay devotion
Free from superstition.
Your sacred Oracles found the Sibyl's fate,
Equally divine, alike unfortunate.
Injurious time did both disperse,
Like Pompey's Ruins, through an Universe.
Whose leaves (like these) scattered were,
The burden of the swelling Air,
Though fallen, yet like their Laurels flourishing and fair.
Those sacrificed to Tarquin's Fame,
Derived their splendor from their flame.
These from Charles his name
Illustrious became.
2.
Hail Mercury's and Apollo's Son!
If not by Nature, sure by Adoption.
By whose joint gift thou do inherit
Cicero's tongue, and Virgil's spirit.
Worthy thou enshrined to rest
In a sacred Vatican,
Or learned Tusculan,
Worthy of Mecoenas breast.
Justly the Muses styled, and Caesar's Laureate*
Since in the State
Thy pen did the sword's business anticipate.
Thy quill the Roman Eagles did outfly,
And conquering taught the Rebel Scot fidelity;
The noblest triumph, and the happiest victory.
The Caledonian Satyr scarce thine withstood;
Unto thy Laurel stooped the glory of his wood,
From thee Montross had learned to write in wounds and blood.
3.
Thou Caesar like, for sword and book renowned,
Both in the Muses camp, and Martial crowned;
(As if thy sacred wreath was meant
Both wits and lightnings fl^shes to prevent,
Both for security and ornament)
Thy no less flourishing praise
Deserves Minerva's double bays
Who sang so sweet in troublesome, and Halcyon days;
Trent's dying Swans we see o'rcome with thy Mantum lays.
Both ready to resign that breath
With which you sing your own, and Countries death.
Of Newark's, and your own sad story,
The equal grief and glory.
4.
Hail celestial Vrn!
Whose ashes like the neighboring stars do shine and burn'
And liberally dispense
To the Poetic world wit's benevolence;
Whose greater Orb the less does influence.
Hail Reverend Bard! whose name in British story
Shall raise new Monuments of glory,
Whereon thou sublimed shall sit
The Genius of wit.
The winged Pegasus mounts so high,
As if to the wind the Gennet owed his Progeny.
The lofty Pindar stops his flight,
Avd only gazeth at, not emulates thy height.
Whom at that distance placed we see,
There Is no parallel for thy Degree,
But thine own Climax, or Hyperbole,
Which out soars Dedalus his pitch, without his destiny.
L. T.

In Tertiam (at vero primam) Editionem Poematum Iohannis Clievelandi.
QVid video? Video, et laetor spectare cluentis
Quam been vulgati Tertia scripti libri.
Annon prima valent? nec adhuc genuina secunda
Quis spurias chartas edidit hasce suas?
Quis fuit hos pupos, strigosos, and male sanos
Qui genuit? prolem and te genuisse blatit:
Hujus Tune parens? imo nec Compater, ipsam
Consortem Tumuli ne patiare Tui:
Sed sic ludit iners and credula fama popelli,
Vnus delirat, plectitur innocuus,
Non nova peccanti res est simulare parentem,
Non nova mentiri nomen, and ora viri,
Filius ast tandem Clievelandi en Filius ipse.
Natus and ex Cerebro, ut nata Minerva Jovis,
Et cum Cromvelicis nova Troja erat obruta slammis
Filius ut veteris sustulit ille Patrem. (ipsum,
Non est quod clubites (lector) patrem exprimit
Regius, omnino Regius, Acta sonans,
Ingenio eloquioque po^ens, sed verba fatiscunt,
Solus qui potis est dicere, Toll Librum.
Gasparus Justice.

In mortem Doctissimi, and Poetarum plane Principis Domini Clievelandi
Epicedium.
QVi metricis nollet pedibus Cantare Poetam
Pierides faciant, ut pereat podagra
Quae vestros Clievelande manus non pingit honores,
Scaevola, vel Tecum sentiat esse rogum.
Pullatus lachrymor, quoties Lux ista recurrit
Rubricam mortis quae memorare jubet.
Hinc Epocham, numeret Luctus, Ecclesia and inde
Proh dolor! Exitium Carolus ipse suum.
In Scotos gladio Tibi Musa potentior olim:
Versibus and Victi succubuere Tuis
Vota utinam in Terris Regem renoventque Poetam
Hic Te Tuque illo Carole, dignus erat.
Sic Cecinit summo Cum moerore Edvardus Thurman.

On Mr. Clieveland and his Poems.
CLieveland again his sacred head does raise
Even in the dust crowned with immortal Bays,
Again with Verses armed, that once did fright
Lycambes's Daughters from the hated light,
Sets his bold foot on Reformations neck,
And triumphs o'r the vanquished Monster Smeck,
That Hydra whose proud heads did so increase
That it deserved no less an Hercules.
This, this is he who in Poetic rage
With Scorpions lashed the madness of the Age,
Who durst the fashions of the Times despise
And be a Wit when all mankind grew Wise,
When formal Beards at twenty one were seen
And Men grew Old almost as soon as Men,
Who in those days when Reason, Wit, and Sense
Were by the Zealots grave Impertinence
Y^leped Folly, and in Ve-ri-ty
Did savor rankly of Carnality,
When each notch'd Prentice might a Poet prove
For warbling through the Nose a Hymn of Love,
When Sage George Withers and Grave William Pryn
Himself might for a Poets share put in,
Yet then could write with so much art and skill
That Rome might envy his Satyrick Quill,
And crabbed Persius his hard lines give o'r,
And in disdain beat his brown Desk no more.
How I admire thee, Clieveland! when I weigh
Thy close wrought sense, and every line survey?
They are not like those things which some compose
Who in a Maze of words the wandering sense do loose,
Who spin one thought into so long a thread,
And beat their Wit too thin to make it spread;
Till it is too fine for our weak eyes to find
And dwindles into nothing in the end.
No; they are above the Genius of this Age
Each word of thine swells pregnant with a Page.
Then why do some Men's nicer Ears complain
Of the uneven harshness of thy strain?
Preferring to the Vigor of thy Muse
Some smooth, weak Rhymer, that so gently flows,
That Ladies may his easy strains admire
And melt like Wax before the softning fire.
Let such to Women write, you write to Men;
We study Thee, when we but Play with Them.
By A. B.

CLEVELAND'S Poems Digested in Order. SECT. I. Containing LOVE-POEMS.
Fuscara or the Be Errant.
NAture's Confectioner the Be,
(Whose Suckets are moist Alchimy;
The Still of his refining Mold
Minting the Garden into Gold)
Having rifted all the Fields
Of what Dainties Flora yields.
Ambitious now to take Excise
Of a more fragrant Paradise,
At my Fuscara's sleeve arrived,
Where all delicious Sweets are hiv'd.
The Airy Freebooter distrains
First on the Violet of her Veins,
Whose Tincture could it be more pure,
His ravenous kiss had made it blewer.
Here did he sit, and Essence quaff,
Till her coy Pulse had beat him off;
That Pulse, which he that feels may know
Whether the World's long lived, or no,
The next he preys on is her Palm,
That Alm'ner of transpiring Balm;
So soft, it is Air but once removed,
Tender as 'twere a Jelly glov'd.
Here, while his canting Drone-pipe scanned
The mystic Figures of her hand,
He tipples Palmestry, and dines
On all her Fortune-telling Lines:
He bathes in Bliss, and finds no odds
Betwixt this Nectar and the Gods.
He pearches now upon her Wrist
(A proper Hawk for such a Fist)
Making that Flesh his Bill of Fare,
Which hungry Canibals would spare,
Where Lillies in a lovely brown
Inoculate Carnation.
Her Argent Skin with Or so streamed,
As if the milky-way were cream'd;
From hence he to the Woodbine bends
That quivers at her fingers ends,
That runs division on the Tree,
Like a thick-branching Pedigree;
So it is not her the Be devours,
It is a pretty Maze of Flowers.
It is the Rose that b^eeds, when he
Nibbles his nice Phlebotomy.
About her finger he does cling
In The fashion of a Wedding Ring,
And bids his Comrades of the Swarm
Crawl like a Bracelet 'bout her Arm,
Thus when the hovering Publican
Had sucked the Toll of all her Span,
(Tuning his Draughts with drowsy Hums*
As Danes Carouze by Kettle-drums)
It was decreed (that Posie gleaned)
The small Familiar should be weaned.
At this the Errant's Courage quails;
Yet aided by his native Sails,
The bold Columbus still designs
To find her undiscovered Mines.
To the Indies of her Arm he flies,
Fraught both with East and Western Prize,
Which when he had in vain essayed,
(Armed like a Dapper Lancepresade
With Spanish Pike) he broached a Pore,
And so both made and healed the Sore:
For as in Gummy Trees there is found
A Salve to issue at the Wound;
Of this her breach the like was true,
Hence trickled out a Balsom too.
But oh! What Wasp was it that could prove
Raviliack to my Queen of Love?
The King of Bees now jealous grown,
Lest her Beams should melt his Throne,
And finding that his Tribute slacks,
His Burgesses and State of Wax
Turned to an Hospital; the Combs
Built Rank and File, like Beadsmens Rooms,
And what they bleed but tart and sour
Matched with my Danae's golden shower,
Live Honey all, the envious Elf
Stung her, cause sweeter than himself.
Sweetness and She are so allied,
The Be committed Paricide,
The Senses Festival.
I Saw a Vision yesternight
Enough to sat a Seeker's sight,
I wished my self a shaker there,
And her quick Pants my trembling Sphere.
It was a She so glittering bright,
You Would think her Soul an Adamite,
A Person of so rare a frame,
Her Body might be lined with the same.
Beautie's chiefest Maid of Honor,
You may break Lent with looking on her.
Not the fair Abbess of the Skies
With all her Nunnery of Eyes
Can show me such a glorious Prize.
And yet because it is more Renown
To make a shadow shine, she is brown,
A Brown for which Heaven would disband
The Galaxie, and Stars be tanned;
Brown by Reflection, as her Eye
Deals out the Summer's Livery.
Old dormant Windows must confess
Her Beams, their glimmering Spectacles,
Struck with the Splendour of her face,
Do the office of a Burning glass.
Now where such radiant Lights have shown,
No wonder if her Cheeks be grown
Sunburned, with Luster of her own.
My Sight took pay; but (thank my Charms)
I now impale her in mine Arms
(Love's Compasses, confining you
Good Angels, to a Circle too.)
Is not the Universe strait laced,
When I can clasp it in the Waste?
My amorous Fold about thee hurled,
With Drake I girdle in the World;
I hoop the Firmament, and make
This my Embrace the Zodiac.
How could thy Center take my Sense,
When Admiration does commence
At the extreme Circumference?
Now to the melting Kiss that sips
The J^llied Philtre of her Lips;
So Sweet there is no Tongue can prays't,
Till transubstantiate with a Taste,
Inspired like Mahomet from above
By the Billing of my Heavenly Dove.
Love prints his Signet^ in her Smacks,
Those ruddy drops of squeezing Wax,
Which wheresoever she imparts,
They Are Privy-Seals to take up Hearts.
Our mouths encountering at the sport,
My slippery Soul had quitt the Fort,
But that she stopped the Sally-port.
Next to these Sweets, her Lips dispense
(As Twin-conserves of Eloquence)
The Sweet Perfume her Breath affords
Incorporating with her Words.
No Rosary this Votress needs,
Her very Syllables are Beads.
No sooner 'twixt those Rubies born,
But Jewels are in Earrings worn.
With what delight her Speech does enter,
It is a Kiss oth' second Venture.
And I dissolve at what I hear,
As if another Rosamond were
Couched in the Labyrinth of my ear.
Yet that is but a preludious Bliss,
Two Souls Pickeering in a Kiss.
Embraces do but draw the Line,
It Is storming that must take her in.
When Bodies join, and Victory hovers
'Twixt the equal fluttering Lovers,
This is the Game; make stakes, my Dear!
Hark, how the sprightly Chanticlere
(That Baron Tell-clock of the Night)
Sounds Boute-sel to Cupid's Knight.
Then have at all, the Pass is got,
For coming off, oh name it not!
Who would not die upon the spot?
To Julia to expedite her Promise.
SInce it is my Doom, Love's Undershrieve,
Why this Reprieve?
Why does my She A-dvowson fly
Incumbency?
Panting Expectance makes us prove
The Anticks of benighted Love,
And withered Mates when Wedlock joins,
They Are Hymen's Monkies, which he ties by the Loins,
To play alas! but at rebated Foins.
To sell thy self do thou intend
By Candle's-end,
And hold the Contract thus in doubt
Life's Taper out?
Think but how soon the Market fails,
Your Sex lives faster than the Males;
As if to measure Ages span,
The sober Julian were the Account of Man,
Whilst you live by the fleet Gregorian.
Now since you bear a Date so short,
Live double sor't.
How can thy Fortress ever stand,
If It be not Manned?
The Siege so gains upon the Place,
Thou Wilt find the Trenches in thy Face.
Pity thy self then, if not me,
And hold not out, lest like Ostend thou be,
Nothing but Rubbish at Delivery.
The Candidates of Peter's Chair
Must plead gray hair,
And use the Simony of a Cough
To help them off;
But when I woo thus old and spent,
I Will wed by Will and Testament*
No; let us Love while crisp'd and curled;
The greatest Honors on the aged hurled
Are but gay Furlows for another World.
To morrow what thou tendrest me
Is Legacy.
Not one of all those ravenous hours
But thee devours:
And though thou still recruited be,
Like Pelops, with soft Ivory;
Though thou consume but to renew,
Yet Love, as Lord, does claim a Heriot due;
That Is the best quick thing I can find of you.
I feel thou art consenting ripe
By that soft gripe,
And those regealing Crystal Spheres.
I hold thy Tears
Pledges of more distilling Sweets,
Than the Bath that ushers in the Sheets.
Else pious Iulia, Angel-wise,
Moves the Bethesda of her trickling Eyes
To cure the Spittle-World of Maladies.
The Hecatomb to his Mistress.
BE dumb you Beggars of the rhythming Trade,
Geld your loose wits, and let your Muse be spade.
Charge not the Parish with your bastard Phrase
Of Balm, Elixir, both the India's,
Of Shrine, Saint, Sacrifice, and such as these,
Expressions common as your Mistresses.
Hence you Fantastic Postillers in Song,
My Text defeats your Art, ties Nature's tongue,
Scorns all her Tinsoyl'd Metaphors of Pelf,
Illustrated by nothing but her self.
As Spiders travel by their bowels spun
Into a Thread, and when the Race is run,
Wind up their Journey in a living Clew;
So is it with my Poetry and you.
From your own Essence must I first untwine,
Then twist again each Panegyric Line.
Reach then a Soaring Quill that I may write,
As with a Jacob's Staff to take her height.
Suppose an Angel darting through the Air
Should their encounter a religious Prayer
Mounting to Heaven, that Intelligence
Would for a Sunday-Suit thy Breath condense
Into a Body. Let me crack a string,
And venture higher. Were the Note I sing
Above Heaven's Ela; should I then decline,
And with a deep-mouthed Gammut sound the Line
From Pole to Pole, I could not reach her worth,
Nor find an Epithet to shadow't forth.
Metals may blazon common Beauties; she
Makes Pearls and Planets humble Heraldry.
As then a purer Substance is defined
But by an heap of Negatives combined,
Ask what a Spirit is, you will hear them cry,
It has no Matter, no Mortality:
So can I not describe how sweet, how fair,
Only I say, she is not as others are:
For what Perfection we to others grant,
It is her sole Perfection to want.
All other Forms seem in respect of thee
The Almanack's mishap'd Anatomy:
Where Aries head and face, Bull neck and throat,
The Scorpion gives the Secrets, Knees the Goat;
A Brief of Limbs foul as those beasts, or are
Their namesake Signs in their strange Character.
As your Philosophers to every Sense
Marry its Object, yet with some dispense,
And grant them a Polygamy with all,
And these their common Sensibles they call:
So is it with her, who, stinted unto none,
Unites all Senses in each action.
The same Beam heats and lights, to see her well
Is both to hear and see, and taste and smell:
For can you want a Palate in your Eyes,
When each of hers contains the beauteous prize,
Venus's Apple? Can your Eyes want Nose,
Seeing each Cheek buds forth a fragrant Rose?
Or can your Sight be deaf to such a quick
And well-tuned Face, such moving Rhetoric?
Does not each Look a Flash of Lightning feel,
Which spares the Body's sheath, yet melts the steel?
Thy Soul must needs confess, or grant thy Sense
Corrupted with the Object's Excellence.
Sweet Magic, which can make five Senses lie
Conjured within the Circle of an Eye!
In whom since all the five are intermixed,
Oh now that Scaliger would prove his sixth!
Thou Man of mouth that can not name a she,
Unless all Nature pay a Subsidy,
Whose Language is a Tax, whose Musk-cat Verse
Voids naught but Flowers for thy Muses Hearse,
Fitter than Celia's Looks, who in a trice
Can state the long disputed Paradise,
And (what Divines hunt with so cold a scent)
Can in her bosom find it resident;
Now come aloft, come now, and breath a Vein,
And give some vent unto thy daring strain.
Say the Astrologer who spells the Stars,
In that fair Alphabet reads Peace and Wars,
Mistakes his Globe, and in her brighter eye
Interprets Heaven's Physiogmony.
Call her the Metaphysics of her Sex,
And say she tortures Wits, as Quartans vex
Physicians; call her the squared Circle; say
She is the very Rule of Algebra:
What e're thou understand'st not say it of her,
For that is the way to write her Character.
Say this and more, and when thou hop'st to raise
Thy fancy so as to enclose her praise,
Alas poor Gotham, with thy Cuckoe-hedge!
Hyperboles are here but Sacrilege.
Then roll up Muse what thou have ravel'd out,
Some Comments clear not, but increase the doubt.
She that affords poor Mortals not a glance
Of Knowledge, but is known by Ignorance.
She that commits a Rape on every Sense,
Whose Breath can countermand a Pestilence.
She that can strike the best Invention dead,
Till baffled Poetry hangs down the head.
She, she it is that does contain all Bliss,
And makes the World but her Periphrasis.
The Antiplatonick.
FOr shame thou everlasting Wooer,
Still saying Grace, and never ^^all to her!
Love that is in Contemplation placed
Is Venus drawn but to the waste.
Unless your Flame confess its Gender,
And your Parley cause Surrender,
You Are Salamanders of a cold desire,
That live untouched amidst the hottest fire:
What though she be a Dame of stone,
The Widow of Pigmalion:
An hard and un^elenting she,
As the new-crusted Niobe;
Or (what does more of statue carry)
A Nun of the Platonic Quarry?
Love melts the rigor which the Rocks have bred,
A Flint will break upon a Feather-b^d.
For shame you pretty Female Elves,
Cease thus to candy up your selves;
No more you Sectaries of the Game,
No more of your calcining Flame.
Women commence by Cupid's Dart,
As a King hunting Dubs a Heart.
Love's Votaries enthral each other's Soul,
Till both of them live but upon Parol*
Virtue's no more in Womankind
But the Green sickness of the Mind.
Philosophy (their new Delight)
A kind of Charcoal Appeti^e.
There is no Sophistry prevails,
Where all-convincing Love assails;
But the disputing Petticoat will warp,
As Skilful Gamesters are to seek at sharp.
The Soldier, that Man of Iron,
Whom Ribs of Horror all environ;
That Is strung with Wire instead of Veins,
In whose Embraces you're in Chains;
Let a Magnetic Girl appear,
Straight he turns Cupid's Cuiraseer.
Love storms his Lips, and takes the Fortress in,
For all the bristled Turnpike of his Chin.
Since Love's Artillery then checks
The Breast-works of the firmest Sex:
Come let us in affections riot;
The are sickly pleasures keep a diet:
Give me a Lover bold and free,
Not Eunuch'd with Formality;
Like an Ambassador that beds a Queen
With the nice caution of a Sword between.
Upon Phillis walking in a Morni^^ before Sunrising.
THe sluggish Morn as yet undrest,
My Phillis brake from out her East,
As if she would made a match to run
With Venus, usher to the Sun.
The Trees, like Yeomen of the Guard
(Serving her more for Pomp than Ward)
Ranked on each side, with Loyal Duty,
Weaved Branches to enclose her Beauty.
The Plants, whose Luxury was lopped,
Or Age with Crutches underpropp'd,
(Whose wooden Carkases were grown
To be but Coffins of their own)
Revive, and at her general Dole
Each receives his Ancient Soul.
The winged Choristers began
To chirp their Mattins, and the Fan
Of whistling Winds like Organs played,
Until their Voluntaries made
The weakened Earth in Odors rise
To be her Morning Sacrifice.
The Flowers called out of their Beds,
Start and raise up their drowsy Heads;
And he that for their color seeks
May see it vaulting to her Cheeks:
Where Roses mix; no Civil War
Divides her York and Lancaster.
The Marygold (whose Courtier's face
Echoes the Sun, and does unlace
Her at his rise, at his full stop
Packs and shuts up her gaudy Shop)
Mist^kes her Cue, and does display:
Thus Phillis antedates the day.
These Miracles had cramped the Sun,
Who fearing that his Kingdom's won,
Powders with Light his frizled Locks
To see what Saint his Luster mocks.
The trembling Leaves through which he played,
Dappling the Walk with light and shade,
Like Lattice-windows give the Spy
Room but to peep with half an eye;
L^st her full Orb his sight should dim,
And bid us all good night in him;
Till she should spend a gentle ray
To force us a new fashioned day.
But what religious Palsie's this,
Which makes the Bows divest their bliss,
And that they might her footstep, straw,
Drop their Leaves with shivering awe?
Phillis perceived, and (lest her stay
Should wed October unto May,
And as her Beauty caused a Spring,
Devotion might an Autumn bring)
Withdrew her Beams, yet made no Night,
But left the Sun her Curate-light.
To Mrs. K. T. who asked him why he was dumb, written calente Calamo.
STay, should I answer, Lady, then
In vain would be your Question.
Should I be dumb, why then again
Your asking me would be in vain.
Silence, nor Speech, on either hand,
Can satisfy this strange demand.
Yet since your Will throws me upon
This wished Contradiction;
I Will tell you how I did become
So strangely, as you hear me, dumb.
Ask but the chap-fallen Puritan,
It Is Zeal that Tongue-tyes that good man;
(For heat of Conscience all men hold
Is the only way to catch that cold:)
How should Love's Zealot then forbear
To be your silenced Minister?
Nay your Religion, which does grant
A Worship due to you my Saint,
Yet counts it that Devotion wrong,
That does it in the Vulgar Tongue.
My ruder words would give offense
To such an hallowed Excellence;
As the English Dialect would vary
The Goodness of an Ave Mary.
How can I speak that twice am checked
By this, and that Religious Sect?
Still dumb, and in your Face I spy
Still Cause, and still Divinity.
As soon as blessed with your Salute,
My Manners taught me to be mute,
Lest I should cancel all the Bliss
You signed with so divine a Kiss.
The Lips you seal must needs consent
Unto the Tongue's Imprisonment.
My Tongue in hold, my Voice does rise
With a strange Ela to my eyes.
Where it gets Bail, and in that sense
Begins a new found Eloquence.
Oh listen with attentive sight
To what my prating eyes indite!
Or, Lady, since it is in your choice
To give, or to suspend my Voice,
With the same Key set open the Door
Wherewith you locked it fast before.
Kiss once again, and when you thus
Have doubly been Miraculous.
My Muse shall write with Handmaid Duty
The Golden Legend of your Beauty.
He whom his Dumbness now confines
Intends to speak the rest by Signs.
A Fair Nymph scorning a Black Boy courting her.
Nymph. STand off, and let me take the Air,
Why should the smoke pursue the fair?

Boy. My Face is smoke, thence may be guest
What Flames within have scorched my breast

Nymph. Thy flaming Love I cannot view
For the dark Lanthorn of thy Hue.

Boy. And yet this Lanthorn keeps Love's Taper
Surer than yours that is of white Paper.
What ever Midnight can be here,
The Moonshine of your Face will clear.

Nymph. My Moon of an Eclipse is 'fraid;
If thou should interpose thy shade.

Boy. Yet one thing, Sweetheart, I will ask,
Take me for a new fashioned Mask.

Nymph. Done: but my Bargain shall be this,
I Will throw my Mask off when I kiss.

Boy. Our curled Embraces shall delight
To checker Limbs with black and white.

Nymph. Thy Ink, my Paper, make me guess
Our Nuptial-bed will prove a Press,
And in our Sports, if any come,
They Will read a wanton Epigram.

Boy. Why should my Black thy Love impair?
Let the dark Shop commend the Ware;
Or if thy Love from black forbears,
I Will strive to wash it off with Tears.

Nymph. Spare fruitless Tears, since thou must needs
Still wear about thy mourning Weeds.
Tears can no more affection win,
Than wash thy Ethiopian Skin.

A Young Man to an Old Woman courting him.
PEace Beldam Eve, surcease thy Suit,
There Is no Temptation in such Fruit.
No rotten Medlars, whilst there be
Whole Orchards in Virginity.
Thy Stock is too much out of date
For tender Plants to inoculate.
A Match with thee the Bridegroom fears
Would be thought Incest in his years,
Which when compared to thine become
Odd Money to thy Grandam Sum.
Can Wedlock know so great a Curse,
As putting Husbands out to Nurse?
How Pond and Rivers would mistake,
And cry new Almanacks for our sake?
Time sure has wheeled about his Year,
December meeting Ianiveer.
The Egyptian Serpent figures Time,
And stripped, returns into his prime.
If my Affection thou would win,
First cast thy Hieroglyphick Skin.
My Modern Lips know not, alack,
The old Religion of thy Smack.
I count that Primitive Embrace,
As out of Fashion, as thy Face;
And yet so long it is since thy fall,
Thy Fornication's Classical.
Our Sports will differ thou must play
Lero, and I Alphonso way.
I Am no Translator, have no vein
To turn a Woman young again;
Unless you will grant the Taylor's due,
To see the Fore-bodies be new.
I love to wear Clothes that are flush,
Not prefacing old Rags with Plush,
Like Aldermen, or Under-shrieves
With Canvas Backs, and Velvet-Sleeves:
And just such Discord there would be
Betwixt thy Skeleton and me.
Go study Salve and Triacle, ply
Your Tenant's Leg, or his sore eye.
Thus Matrons purchase Credit, thank,
Six penny worth of Mountebank;
Or chew thy Cud on some Delight,
That thou did taste in Eighty eight*
Or be but Bedridden once, and then
Thou Wilt dream thy youthful sins again:
But if thou needs wilt be my Spouse,
First hearken and attend my Vows.
When Aetna's fires shall undergo
The Penance of the Alps in Snow*
When Sol at one blast of his Horn
Posts from the Crab to Capricorn;
When the Heavens shuffle all in one,
The Torrid with the Frozen Zone;
When all these Contradictions meet,
Then, Sybil, thou and I will greet:
For all these Similies do hold
In my young Heat, and thy dull Cold.
Then, if a Fever be so good
A Pimp as to inflame thy Blood,
Hymen shall twist thee and thy Page,
The distinct Tropicks of Man's Age.
Well, Madam Time, be ever bald,
I Will not thy Perriwig be called:
I Will never be 'stead of a Lover,
An aged Chronicle's new Cover.
Upon an Hermaphrodite.
SIr, or Madam, choose you whether,
Nature twists you both together,
And makes thy Soul two Garbs confess,
Both Petticoat and Breechess dress;
Thus we chastise the God of Wine
With Water that is Feminine,
Until the cooler Nymph abate
His wrath, and so concorporate.
Adam, till his Rib was lost,
Had the Sexes thus ingrost.
When Providence our Sire did cleave,
And out of Adam carved Eve,
Then did Man 'bout Wedlock treat.
To make his Body up complete.
Thus Matrimony speaks but thee
In a Grave Solemnity:
For Man and Wife make but one right
Canonical Hermaphrodite.
Ravel thy Body, and I find
In every Limb a double kind.
Who would not think that Head a pair,
That breeds such Faction in the Hair?
One half so churlish in the Touch,
That rather than endure so much,
I would my tender Limbs apparel
With Regulus his nailed Barrel:
But the other half so small,
And so amorous withal,
That Cupid thinks each Hair does grow
A String for his invisible Bow.
When I look Babies in thine Eyes,
Here Venus, there Adonis lies;
And though thy Beauty be high Noon,
Thy Orb contains both Sun and Moon.
How many melting Kiss^s skip,
'Twixt thy Male and Female Lip?
'Twixt thy upper Brush of Hair,
And thy nether Beard's despair?
When thou speak (I would not wrong
Thy Sweetness with a double Tongue,
But) in every single Sound
A perfect Dialogue is found,
Thy Breasts distinguish one another,
This the Sister, that the Brother.
When thou joyn'st Hands my Ear still phancies
The Nuptial Sound, I John take Frances.
Feel but the difference soft and rough,
This a Gantlet, that a Muff.
Had sly Ulysses at the Sack
Of Troy brought thee his Pedler's Pack,
And Weapons too to know Achilles
From King Lycomedes, Phillis
His Plot had failed; this Hand would feel
The Needle, that the Warlike Steel.
When Music does thy pace advance,
Thy right Leg takes the left to dance:
Nor is it a Galliard danced by one,
But a mixed Dance, though alone.
Thus every Het'roclite apart
Changes Gender, but thy Heart;
Nay those which Modesty can mean,
But dare not speak, are Epicene.
That Gamester needs must overcome,
That can play both with Tib and Tom.
Thus did Nature's Mintage vary,
Coining thee a Philip and Mary.
The Author to his Hermaphrodite made after Mr. Randolph's Death, yet inserted
into his Poems.
PRoblem of Sexes! Must thou likewise be
As disputable in thy Pedigree?
Thou Twins in one, in whom Dame Nature tries
To throw less than Aums Ace upon two Dice.
Were thou served up two in one Dish, the rather
To split thy Sire into a double Father?
True; the World's Scales are even, what the Main
In one place gets, another quits again.
Nature lost one by thee, and therefore must
Slice one in two to keep her number just.
Plurality of Livings is thy State,
And therefore mine must be Impropriate:
For since the Child is mine, and yet the Claim
Is intercepted by another's Name,
Never did Steeple carry double truer,
His is the Donative, and mine the Cure.
Then say, my Muse, (and without more Dispute)
Who it is that Fame does superinstitute.
The Theb^n Wittal, when he once descries
Jove is his Rival, falls to Sacrifice.
That Name has tipp'd his Horns; see on his Knees
A health to Hans-in-kelder Hercules:
Nay Sublunary Cuckolds are content
To entertain their Fate with Complement;
And shall not he be proud whom Randolph daigns
To quarter with his Muse both Arms and Brains?
Gramercie Gossip; I rejoice to see
The have got a Leap of such a Barbary.
Talk not of Horns, Horns are the Poet's Crest;
For since the Muses left their former Nest
To found a Nunnery in Randolph's Quill,
Cuckold Parnassus is a Forked Hill.
But stay, I Have waked his D^st, his Marble stirs,
And brings the Worms for his Compurgators.
Can Ghost have natural Sons? Say Og* is it meet
Penance bear Date after the Winding Sheet?
Were it a Phenyx (as the double kind
May seem to prove, being there is two combined)
I would disclaim my Right, and that it were
The Lawful Issue of his Ashes swear.
But was he dead? Did not his Soul translate
Her self into a Shop of lesser rate;
Or break up House, like an expensive Lord,
That gives his Purse a Sob, and lives at Board?
Let old Pythagoras but play the Pimp,
And still there is hopes 'tmay prove his Bastard Imp.
But I Am profane; for grant the World had one
With whom he might contract an Union;
They two were one, yet like an Eagle spread,
In The Body joined, but parted in the Head.
For you, my Brat, that pose the Porph'ry Chair,
Pope John, or Joan, or whatsoever you are,
You are a Nephew, grieve not at your state;
For all the World is Illegitimate.
Man cannot get a Man, unless the Sun
Club to the Act of Generation.
The Sun and Man get Man, thus Tom and I
Are the joint Fathers of my Poetry;
For since, blessed Shade, thy Verse is Male, but mine
Oth' weaker Sex, a Fancy Feminine;
We Will part the Child, and yet commit no slaughter,
So shall it be thy Son, and yet my Daughter.
SECT. II. Containing POEMS which relate to STATE AFFAIRS.
Upon The King's Return from Scotland.
Returned; I Will never believed; first prove him hence,
Kings travel by their Beams and Influence.
Who says the Soul gives out her Gests, or goes
A flitting Progress 'twixt the Head and Toes?
She rules by Omnipresence; and shall we
Deny a Prince the same Ubiquity?
Or grant he went, and 'cause the knot was slack
Girt both the Nations with his Zodiac;
Yet as the Tree at once both upward shoots,
And just as much grows downward to the Roots;
So at the same time that he posted thither
By Counter-Stages he rebounded hither.
Hither, and hence at once; thus every Sphere
Does by a double motion interfere,
And when his Native form inclines him East.
By the first Mover he is ravished West:
Have you not seen how the divided Dam
Runs to the summons of her hungry Lamb;
But when the Twin cries halves, she quits the first,
Nature's Commendum must be likewise nursed?
So were his Journeys like the Spider spun
Out of his Bowels of Compassion.
Two Realms, like Cacus, so his steps transpose,
His feet still contradict him as he goes.
England's returned, that was a banished Soil,
The Bullet flying makes the Gun recoil.
Death's but a Separation, though indors'd
With Spade and Javelin, we were thus divorced.
Our Soul has taken wing, while we express
The Corpse returning to their Principles.
But the Crab-Tropick must not now prevail,
Islands go back, but when you're under sail:
So his Retreat has rectified that wrong;
Backward is forward in the Hebrew Tongue.
Now the Church Militant in plenty rests,
Nor fears, like the Amazon, to lose her Breasts.
Her means are safe, not squeezed, until the blood
Mix with the Milk, and choke the tender Brood.
She that has been the floating Ark, is that
She, that is now seated on Mount Ararat.
Quits Charles; our Souls did guard him Northward thus,
Now he the Counterpart comes South to us.
A Dialogue between two Zealots upon the etc. in the Oath.
SIr Roger from a zealous piece of Freeze,
Raised to a Vicaridge of the Children's Threes,
Whose yearly Audit may by strict Account
To twenty Nobles, and his Vailes amount,
Fed on the Common of the female Charity,
Until the Scots can bring about their Parity*
So shotten, that his Soul, like to himself,
Walks but in Cuerpo: This same Clergy-Elf
Encountering with a Brother of the Cloth,
Fell presently to Cudgels with the Oath.
The Quarrel was a strange misshapen Monster
Et caetera, (God bless us) which may conster
The Brand upon the Buttock of the Beast,
The Dragon's Tail tied on a Knot; a Nest
Of young Apocryphas, the fashion
Of a new mental Reservation.
Whilst Roger thus divides the Text, the other
Winks and expounds, saying, my pious Brother,
Hearken with reverence; for the point is nice,
I never read on it, but I fasted twice:
And so by Revelation know it better,
Than all the learned Idolaters oth' Letter,
With that he swelled, and fell upon the Theme,
Like Great Goliath, with his Weaver's Beam.
I say to thee, Et caetera, thou lie,
Thou art the curled Lock of Antichrist;
Rubbish of Babel; for who will not say
Tongues are counfounded in Et caetera?
Who swears Et caetera, swears more Oaths at once,
Than Cerberus out of his triple Sconce.
Who views it well, with the same eye beholds
The old false Serpent in his numerous folds.
Accursed Et caetera! Now, now I scent
What the prodigious bloody Oysters meant.
O Booker! Booker! How came thou to lack
This Fiend in thy Prophetic Almanac?
It Is the dark Vault wherein the Infernal Plot
Of Powder against the State was first begot.
Peruse the Oath, and you shall soon descry it
By all the Father Garnets that stand by it;
Against whom the Church (whereof I am a Member)
Shall keep another Fifth day of November.
Yet here is not all, I cannot half untruss
Et caetera, it is so abdominous.
The Trojan Nag was not so fully lined.
Unrip Et caetera, and you shall find
Og the great Commissary, and (which his worse)
The Apparitor upon his skew bald Horse.
Then finally, my Babes of Grace, forbear,
Et caetera will be too far to swear:
For it is (to speak in a familiar Style)
A Yorkshire Wea-bit longer than a Mile.
Here Roger was inspired, and by God's diggers
He Will swear in words at length, but not in Figures.
No by this Drink which he takes off, as loath
To leave Et catera in his liquid Oath;
His Brother pledged him, and that bloody Wine
He swears shall seal the Synod's Catiline.
So they drank on, not offering to part,
'Till they had sworn out the eleventh Quart:
While all that saw, and heard them jointly pray,
They and their Tribe were all Et caetera.
Smectymnuus, or the Club-Divines.
SMectymnuus! The Goblin makes me start;
In The name of Rabbi Abraham, what art?
Syriak? or Arabic? or Welsh? what skilt?
Ape all the Bricklayers that Babel built.
Some Conjurer translate, and let me know it;
Till then it is fit for a West Saxon Poet.
But do the Brotherhood then play their Prizes,
Like Mummers in Religion, with Disguises?
Out-brave us with a Name in Rank and File?
A name, which if 'twere trained would spread a mile.
The Saints Monopoly, the Zealous Cluster,
Which like a Porcupine presents a Muster,
And shoots his Quills at Bishops and their Sees,
A devout Litter of young Machabees.
Thus Jack of all Trades has distinctly shown
The twelve Apostles in a Cherry-stone.
Thus Faction's A-la-mode in Treason's fashion,
Now we have Heresy by Complication.
Like to Don Quixot's Rosary of Slaves
Strung on a Chain, a Murnival of Knaves
Packed in a Trick; like Gypsies when they ride,
Or like the College which sit all of a side:
So the vain Satyrists stand all a row,
As hollow Teeth upon a Lute-string show.
The Italian Monster pregnant with his Brother,
Nature's Diaeresis, half one another;
He with his little Sidesmam Lazarus
Must both give way unto Smectymnuus.
Next Sturbridge Fair is Smec's; for lo his side
Into a fivefold Lazar multiplied.
Under each Arm there is tucked a double Gizzard,
Five Faces lurk under one single Vizard.
The Whore of Babylon left these Brats behind,
Heirs of Confusion by Gavelkind.
I think Pythagoras's Soul is rambled hither
With all her change of Raiment on together.
Smec is her general Wardrope; she will not dare
To think of him as of a thorough-fare.
He stops the Gossiping Dame; alone he is
The Purlew of a Metempsychosis:
Like a Scotch Mark; where the more modest sense
Checks the loud Phrase and shrinks to thirteen pence;
Like to an Ignis fatuus, whose flame,
Though sometimes tripartite, joins in the same.
Like to nine Tailors, who (if rightly spelled)
Into one Man are Monosyllabl'd.
Shorthanded Zeal in one has cramped many,
Like to the Decalogue in a single penny.
See, see how close the Curs hunt under a sheet,
As if they spent in Quire, and scanned their feet.
One Cure, and five Incumbents leap a Truss,
The Title sure must be Litigious.
The Sadduces would raise a Question,
Who shall be Smec at the Resurrection.
Who cooped them up together were to blame,
Had they but wire drawn and spun out the name,
'Twould make another Prentices Petition
Against the Bishops and their Superstition.
Robson and French (that count from five to five,
As far as Nature fingers did contrive.
She saw they would be Sessers, that is the cause
She cleft their Hoof into so many Claws)
May tire their Carret-Bunch; yet never agree
To rate Smectymnuus for Polemoney.
Caligula (whose Pride was Mankind's Bail,
As who disdained to murder by Retail,
Wishing the World had but one general Neck)
His glutton Blade might have found Game in Smec.
No Echo can improve the Author more,
Whose Lungs pay use and use to half a score.
No Felon is more lettered, though the Brand
Both superscribes his Shoulder and his Hand.
Some Walshman was his Godfather; for he
Wears in his Name his Genealogy.
The Banns are asked, would but the times give way,
Betwixt Smectymnuus and Et caetera:
The Guests, invited by a friendly Summons,
Should be the Convocation and the Commons;
The Priest to tie the Foxes tails together
Mosely, or Sancta Cl^ra, choose you whether.
See what an Offspring every one expects;
What strange Plurality of Men and Sects?
One says he will get a Vestry, but another
Is for a Synod; Bets upon the Mother.
Faith cry St. George! Let them go to it and stickle
Whether a Conclave, or a Conventicle.
Thus might Religions Catterwaul and spite
Which uses to Devorce, might once unite:
But their cross Fortunes interdict their Trade,
The Groom is Rampant, but the Bride is Spade.
My Task is done, all my he Goats are milk'd;
So many Cards in the Stock, and yet be bilk'd?
I could by Letters now untwist the Rabble,
Whip Smec from Constable to Constable.
But there I leave you to another's dressing;
Only kneel down and take your Father's Blessing;
May the Queen Mother justify your fears,
And stretch her Patent to your Leather ears.
The Hue and Cry after Sir John Presbyter.
WIth Hair in Character, and Lugs in Text,
With a splay mouth, and a nose circumflext,
With a set Ruff of Musket-bore, that wears
Like Cartrages, or Linen Bandileers
Exhausted of their Sulphurous Contents
In Pulpit Fireworks, which the Bombal vents;
The Negative and Covenanting Oath,
Like two Mustachoes issuing from his Mouh.
The Bush upon his Chin like a carved Story
In a Box-knot, cut by the Directory;
Madam's Confession hanging at his ear
Wire-drawn through all the Questions, How and Where;
Each Circumstance so in the hearing felt,
That when his ears are cropp'd he will count them gelt.
The Weeping Cassock scared into a Jump,
A sign the Presbyter's worn to the stump;
The Presbyter, though charmed against Mischance
With the Divine Right of an Ordinance;
If you meet any that do thus attire 'em,
Stop them they are the Tribe of Adoniram.
What zealous Phrenzy did the Senate seize,
That tare the Rotchet to such rags as these?
Episcopacy minced; Reforming Tweed
Has sent us Runts even of her Churches breed*
Lay interlining Clergy, a Device
That Is Nickname to the Stuff called Lops and Lice.
The Beast at wrong end branded, you may trace
The Devil's footsteps in his cloven face.
A face of several Parishes and sorts,
Like to Sergeant shaved at Inns of Court.
What mean the Elders else, those Kirk Dragoons,
Made up of Ears and Ruffs like Ducatoons.
That Hierarchy of Handicrafts begun;
Those New Exchange-men of Religion.
Sure they are the Antic heads which placed without
The Church, do gape and disembogue a Spout:
Like them above the Commons House to have been
So long without, now both are gotten in.
Then what imperious in the Bishop sounds
The same the Scotch Executor rebounds:
This stating Prelacy the Classick Rout
That speak it often, ever it spoke it out.
So by an Abbey's Skeleton of late
I heard an Echo supererogate
Through Imperfection, and the Voice restore,
As if she had the Hiccop o'r and o'r.
Since they our mixed Diocesans combine
Thus to ride double in their Discipline,
That Paul's shall to the Consistory call
A Dean and Chapter out of Weaver's Hall,
Each at the Ordinance for to assist
With the five Thumbs of his groat changing Fist.
Down Dagon-Synod with thy Motley Ware,
Whilst we are Champions for the Cowmon Prayer,
(That Dove-like Embassy that wings our Sense
To Heavens Gate in shape of Innocence)
Pray for the Mitred Authors, and defy
Those Demicastors of Divinity.
For when Sir John with Jack of all Trades joins,
His Finger's thicker than the Prelates Loins
The Mixed Assembly.
FLea-bitten Synod, an Assembly brewed
Of Clerks and Elders ana, like the rude
Chaos of Presbyt'ry, where Laymen guide
With the tame Woolpack Clergy by their side.
Who asked the Banns '^wixt these discolor'd Mates?
A strange Grotesco this; the Church and States,
Most divine Tick Tack in a Pye-bald Crew
To serve as Table-men of diverse hue.
She that conceived an Ethiopian Heir
By Picture, when the Parents both were fair,
At sight of you had born a dapled Son,
You chequering her Imagination.
Had Jacob's Flock but seen you sit, the Damms
Had brought forth speckled and ring-streaked Lambs:
Like an Impropriator's Motley Kind,
Whose Scarlet Coat is with a Cassock lined:
Like the Lay-Thief in a Canonick Weed,
Sure of his Clergy ever he did the Deed.
Like Royston Crows, who are (as I may say)
Friars of both the Orders, Black and Gray.
So mixed they are one knows not whether's thicker
A Layre of Burgess, or a Layre of Vicar.
Have they usurped what Royal Judah had,
And now must Levi too part stakes with Gad?
The Scepter and the Crosier are the Crutches,
Which if not trusted in their pious Clutches
Will fail the Cripple-State. And were not pity
That both should serve the Yardwand of the City?
That Isaac might go stroke his Beard, and sit
Judge of (...) and Elegerit.
O that they were in Chalk and Charcoal drawn!
The Miscellany-Satyr and the Fawn,
And all the Adulteries of twisted Nature
But faintly represent this ridling Feature,
Whose Members, being not Tallies, they will not own
Their Fellows at the Resurrection.
Strange Scarlet Doctors these; they will pass in Story
For sinners half refined in Purgatory;
Or parboyl'd Lobsters, where there jointly rules
The fading Sables, and the coming Gules.
The Flea that Falstaff damned thus lewdly shows
Tormented in the Flames of Bardolph's Nose;
Like him that wore the Dialogue of Clokes,
This Shoulde^ Iohn-a-Stiles, that Iohn-a-Nokes.
Like Jews and Christians in a Ship together
With an old Neck-Verse to distiguish either.
Like their intended D^scipline to boot,
Or whatsoever has neither Head nor Foot:
Such may these stripped Stuff-hangings seem to be,
Sacrilege matched with Codpiece Simony.
Be sick and dream a little, you may then
Fancy these Linsey-Woolsey Vestry-men.
Forbear good Pembroke, be not over-daring,
Such Company may chance to spoil thy Swearing;
And thy Drum-Major Oaths (of bulk unruly)
May dwindle to a feeble, By my truly,
He that the Noble Piercie's Blood inherits,
Will he strike up a Hot-Spur of the Spirits?
He Will fright the Obadiah's out of tune
With his uncircumcised Algernoon;
A Name so stubborn, it is not to be scanned
By him in Gath with the six fingered Hand;
See they obey the Magic of my Words,
Presto; they are gone: and now the House of Lords
Looks like the withered Face of an old Hag,
But with three Teeth like to a triple Gag.
A Jig, a Jig, and in this Antic Dance,
Fielding and Doxie-Marshal first advance.
Twisse blows the Scotch-Pipes, and the loving Brace
Puts on the Traces and treads Cinq^e-a-pace.
Then Say and Seal must his old ham-strings supple,
And he and rumpled Palmer make a Couple.
Palmer's a fruitful Girl, if he will unfold her,
The Midwife may find work about her Shoulder.
Kimbolton, that Rebellious Boanerges
Must be content to saddle Doctor Burges.
If Burges get a Clap, it is never the worse,
But the fifth time of his Compurgators.
Nol Bowls is coy, good sadness cannot dance,
But in obedience to the Ordinance.
Here Wharton wheels about, till Mumping Lidie
Like the full Moon has made his Lordship giddy.
Pym and the Members must their Giblets levy
TO encounter Madam Smec, that single Bevy:
If they two truck together, 'twill not be
A Childbirth, but a Jail-deliver.
Thus every Gibelline has got his Guelf;
But Seldom he is a Galliard by himself;
And well may be; there is more Divines in him,
Than in all this their Jewish Sanhedrim;
Whose Canons in the Forge shall then bear date,
When Mules their Cousin Germans generate.
Thus Moses Law is violated now,
The Ox and Ass go yoked in the same Plough.
Resign thy Coach-box Twisse, Brook's Preacher, he
Would sort the Beasts with more Conformity.
Water and Earth make but one Globe, a Roundhead
Is Clergy-Lay, Party-per-pale compounded.
Rebellis Scotus.
CVrae Deo sumus, ista si cedint Scoto?
Variata spleniis Domina Psych^ est suis,
Aut Stellionatus rea. (...)
Companulae omnes; totus Ucalegon fio;
Coriaceae cu^ millies mill hydriae
Subur bicanis pensiles Paraeciis
Non siut refrigerio. Poeticus furor
Cometa non minus, vel ore flammeo
Commune despuente fatum Stellula,
Dirum ominatur. Ecquis e Stoa suam
Iam temperet bilem, patria quando Iue
Tam Pymmiana, id est pediculosa, perit,
Bombimacbidisque fit bolus myrmeciis?
Scotos nec ausim nominare, carminum
Nisi inter amuleta, nec medit arier
Nisi cerebello, quod capillitio rubens
(Quale autumo coluberrimum Furiis caput)
Quot inde verba, tot venena prompserit.
Rhadamantheum fac, gut^ur esset nunc mihi,
Sulphurque, patibulumque copiosius
Ructans, Magus quam taenias Bombycinas
Poteram, ut Agyr^a Circulator, pilulas
Vomicas loqui, aut (...) Styga;
The Rebel Scot.
HOw! Providence! and yet a Scottish Crew!
Then Madam Nature wears black Patches too,
What shall our Nation be in bondage thus
Unto a Land that truckles under us?
Ring the Bells backward; I am all on fire,
Not all the Buckets in a Country-Quire
Shall quench my rage. A Poet should be feared
When angry, like a Comet's flaming Beard.
And where is the Stoic can his wrath appease
To see his Country sick of Pym's disease;
By Scotch Invasion to be made a prey
To such Pig-Widgin Myrmidons as they?
But that there is Charm in Verse, I would not quote
The Name of Scot without an Antidote;
Unless my head were red, that I might brew
Invention there that might be poison too.
Were I a drowzy Judge, whose dismal Note
Disgorgeth Halters, as a Jugler's throat
Does Ribbands? Could I in Sir Empericks tone
Speak Pills in phrase and quack destruction,
Aut ut Genevae stentores Perilleis
Tartara and equuleos boar Pulpitis,
At machinauti par forem nunquam Scoto
Cunctis Sclopetis hisce gutturalibus.
Vt digna Dii duint, vorem par est prius,
Praestigator ut sicas and acinaces.
Huc, huc, Iambe, gressibus faxo tuis,
At huc, Iambe morsibus faxo magis,
Satyraeque tortrices tot huc adducite
Flagella, quot praesens meretur seculum.
Scoti Veneficis pares; audax stylum
Horum cruore tinge, sic nocent minus;
Vt Martyrs olim induebant belluis
(Quasi sisterent Rogis sacros bypocritas)
En hos eodem Schemate, aut retro, Scotos,
Extra Scotos, intus Feras, and sine tropo.
Fallax Jerna viperae ^ihil foves
Scoto Colono? Non ego Britanniam
Lupis carentem dixerim, vivo Scoto.
Quin Thamesinus Pyrgopolinices Scotus
Poterat Leones, Tigrides, Vrsos, Canes
Proprii Inquilinos pectoris spectaeulo
Monstrasse, pro obolis omnibus quibus sol^t
Spectare Monstra Cratis; and Forisimul
Or roar like Marshal that Geneva Bull,
Hell and Damnation a Pulpit full.
Yet to express a Scot, to play that prize,
Not all those Mouth-Granados can suffice.
Before a Scot can properly be cursed,
I must like Hocus, swallow Daggers first.
Come keen Iambicks with your Badgers feet,
And Badger-like bite till your Teeth do meet:
Help ye tart Satyrists to imp my rage
With all the Scorpions that should whip this Age.
Scots are like Witches; do but whet your Pen,
Scratch till the blood come, they will not hurt you then.
Now as the Martyrs were enforced to take
The shapes of Beasts, like Hypocrites at stake
I Will bait my Scot so, yet not cheat your eyes;
A Scot, within a Beast, is no Disguise.
No more let Ireland brag, her harmless Nation
Fosters no Venom since that Scot's Plantation:
Nor can our feigned Antiquity obtain;
Since they came in, England has Wolves again.
The Scot that kept the Tower might have shown
Within the Grate of his own Breast alone,
The Leopard and the Panther, and engrossed
What all those wild Collegiats had cost.
Pene ocreatum vulgus. Et patria Feras
Scotos, eremum indicat terrae plaga.
Vel omnipraesentem negans Deum, nisi
Venisset inde Carolus, cohors nisi
Crafordiana, miles and Montrosseus,
Feritatis eluens notam paganicae,
Hanc praesti^isset semivictimam Deo.
Nec Scoticus est totus Leopardus, Leo,
Habent and Aram, sicut Arcam foederis,
Velut Tabellae bifidis pictae plicis
Fert Angelos pars haec, and haec Cacodaemonas.
Cui somniante Tartarum suasit pavor
Sic poenitere, viderat regnum velim
Nigrius Scotorum semel, and esset innocens.
Regio maligna quae facit votum prece,
Relegetur ad Gyaros breves nunquam Incola!
Punisset ubi Cainum Nec exilio Deus,
Sed, ut ille trechedipnum, magis domicoenio.
Vt Gens vagans recutita, vel Contagium,
Aut Beelzebub, si des Vbiquitarium.
Hinc erro fit semper Scotus, certos locos,
Et hos, and illos quoslibet cilo nauseans.
Vt frusta divisi Orbis and Topographicae
Mendicitatis offulas, curtas nimis.
Ipse Vniversitatis haeres integrae,
Et totus in toto, Natio Epidemica.
The honest high-shoes in their termly Fees,
First to the Salvage Lawyer, next to these.
Nature her self does Scotchmen Beasts confess,
Making their Country such a Wilderness;
A Land that brings in question and suspense
God's Omnipresence, but that Charles came thence;
But that Montross and Crawford's Loyal Band
Atton'd their Sin, and Christened half their Land.
Nor is it all the Nation has these Spots,
There is a Church as well as Kirk of Scots.
As in a Picture where the squinting paint
Shows Fiend on this side, and on that side Saint.
He that saw Hell in's melancholy Dream,
And in the Twy-light of his Phancie's Theme
Scared from his Sins, repented in a fright,
Had he viewed Scotland had turned Proselite.
A Land where one may pray with cursed intent,
O may they never suffer Banishment!
Had Cain been Scot, God would have changed his Doom,
Not forced him wander but confined him home;
Like Jews they spread, and as Infection fly,
As if the Devil had Ubiquity.
Hence it is they live at Rovers and defy
This, or that place, Rags of Geography.
They Are Citizens oth' World, they are all in all,
Scotland's a Nation Epidemical;
Nec gliscet ergo jargonare Gallice,
Exoticis aut Indicis m^dis, neque
Iberio nutu negare, nec studet
Callere quem de Belgicis Hoghen Moghen
Venture tumens, aut barba Canthari r^fert
(Quae coriatis una men's Nostratibus)
Pugna est in animo, atque in patina Scoto;
Huic Struthioni suggeret cybum Chalybs
Et denti-ductor appetitus baltheo,
Pro more pendulos molares inserit.
At interim nostras quid involant dapes?
Serpens Edenum, non Edenburgum appetit,
Aut Angliae, cuijam malum est Haemorrhois,
Haematopotas bos posteris meatibus
Natura medica supposuit hirudines,
Cruore satiendas licet nostro prius,
Nostro, sed and cruore moribundas quoque.
Nec computo credant priori, nos item
Novum addituros, servitutem p^istinae
Aliam, gemellam nuperae, fraterculos
Palpare, quando coeperant (charos nimis)
Suffragiorum scilicet Poppysmata,
Et crustulam impertire, velut offam Cerbero
Subblandiens decreverat Senatulus.
Nos era loculis? arma visceribus prius
Indemus, usque and usque, vel capulo tenus.
And yet they ramble not to learn the Mode,
How to be dressed, or how to lisp abroad;
To return knowing in the Spanish Shrug,
Or which of the Dutch States a double Jug
Resembles most in belly, or in beard,
(The Card by which the Mariners are steered)
No, the Scots Errant fight, and fight to eat,
Their Ostrich Stomachs make their Swords their Meat.
Nature with Scots as Tooth-drawers has dealt,
Who use to string their Teeth upon their Belt.
Yet wonder not at this their happy choice,
The Serpent's fatal still to Paradise.
Sure England has the Hemorrhoids, and these
On the North-postern of the Patient seize,
Like Leeches; thus they Physically thirst
After our blood, but in the Cure shall burst.
Let them not think to make us run oth' score
To purchase Villenage, as once before
When an Act past to stroke them on the Head;
Call them good Subjects, buy them Ginger-bread.
Not Gold, nor Acts of Grace, it is Steel must tame
The stubborn Scot, a Prince that would reclaim
Seri videmus quo Scotum tractes modo.
Princeps Rebelli mitior tergo, quasi
Sellas equino detrahens, aptat suo.
At jus rapinas has defendit vetus?
Egyptus ista perdit, aufert Israel
An Bibliorum nescis hos Satellites
Praetorianis queis Cohortibus (novae
Jerusalem triariis) Spes nititur
Sororcularum? Cardo, Cardo vertitur
Cupediarum, primitiva Legis?
O bone Deus! quanti est carere linteis!
Orexis ut Borealis and fames movet!
Victuque, Vestibusque cassi, hinc Knoxio
Sutore simul and Knoxio utuntur Coquo,
Pie quod algeant, quod esuriant pie.
Larvas quin usque detrahas, and nummulis
Titulisque, ut animabus, subest fallacia.
Librae and Barons (detumescant interim
Vocabulorum tympana) quanti valent!
Hic Cantianum pene, pene villicum,
Solidosque totos illa, sed gratis, duos.
Apage superbae fraudulentiae simul
Prosapia pictos, fide and pictos, procul:
Opprobrium Poetico vel stigmati,
Etiam Cruci Crux; non aliter Hyperbolus
Hyperscelestus Ostracismo fit pudo^.
Rebels by yielding, does like him, or worse,
Who sadled his own back to shame his Horse.
Was it for this you left your leaner Soil,
Thus to lard Israel with Egypt's Spoil.
They are the Gospel's Lifeguard; but for them
(The Garrison of New Jerusalem)
What would the Brethren do? The Cause! The Cause!
Sack-Possets, and the Fundamental Laws?
Lord! what a godly thing is want of Shirts!
How a Scotch Stomach and no Meat converts!
They wanted Food and Raiment; so they took
Religion for their Seamstress, and their Cook.
Unmask them well, their Honors and Estate,
As well as Conscience, are sophisticate.
Shrive but their Title and their Moneys poize,
A Lord and twenty pence pronounced with noise,
When construed but for a plain Yeoman go,
And a good sober two pence, and well so.
Hence then you proud Impostors, get you gone,
You Picts in Gentry and Devotion.
You Scandal to the Stock of Verse, a Race
Able to bring the Gibbet in disgrace.
Hyperbolus by suffering did traduce
The Ostracism, and shamed it out of use.
Americanus ille qui coelum horruit,
Quod Hispanorum repat eo sed pars quota!
Viderat in Orco si Scotos (hui tot Scotos!)
Roterodamus pependerat medioximus.
Sat Musa! semissa fercularia
Medullitus vorans, Diabolis invides
Propriam sibi suam Scoti, paropsideus
Vt Berniclis enim Scoti; sic Lucifer
Saturatur ipsis Berniclatioribus.
Nam lapsus a furca Scotus, mox and styge
Tinctus, suum novatur in Plant-Anserem.
The Indian that Heaven did forswear,
Because he heard some Spaniards were there;
Had he but known what Scots in Hell had been,
He would Erasmus-like have hung between.
My Muse has done. A Voyder for the nonce,
I wrong the Devil should I pick their Bones;
That Dish is his; for when the Scots decease,
Hell like their Nation, feeds on Barnacles.
A Scot when from the Gallow-tree got loose
Drops into Styx, and turns a Soland Goose.
The King's Disguise.
ANd why so coffined in this vile Disguise,
That who but sees blasphemes thee with his eyes?
My Twins of Light within their Penthouse shrink,
And hold it their Allegiance to wink.
O for a State-Distinction to Arraign
Charles of High Treason against my Sovereign!
What an Usurper to his Prince is wont,
Cloister and shave him, he himself has don't.
His muffled Feature speaks him a Recluse,
His Ruins prove him a Religious House.
The Sun has mewed his Beams from off his Lamp,
And Majesty defaced the Royal Stamp.
Is It not enough thy Dignitie's in thrall,
But thou wilt transcribe it in thy shape and all?
As if thy Blacks were of too faint a die
Without the Tincture of Tautology.
Flay an Egyptian for his Cassock-skin
Spun of his Countrie's darkness, lin't within
With Presbyterian badge, that drowzy Trance
The Synod's sable, foggy Ignorance.
Nor bodily, nor ghostly Negro could
Rough cast thy Figure in a sadder mold.
This Privy-Chamber of thy Garb would be
But the Close-Mourner to thy Royalty.
Then break the Circle of thy Taylor's Spell.
A Pearl within a rugged Oyster's Shell.
Heaven, which the Minster of thy Person owns,
Will fine thee for Dilapidations.
Like to a martyred Abbey's courser doom,
Devoutly altered to a Pigeon-room;
Or like a College by the Changeling Rabble,
Manchester's Elves, transformed into a Stable.
Or if there be a Profanation higher,
Such is the Sacrilege of thine Attire;
By which the art half deposed, thou look like one
Whose Looks are under Sequestration:
Whose Renegado-form at the first glance,
Shows like the Self-denying Ordinance.
Angel of Light and Darkness too (I doubt)
Inspired within, and yet possessed without:
Majestic Twy-light in the state of Grace,
Yet with an Excommunicated Face.
Charles and his Mask are of a different Mint,
A Psalm of Mercy in a miscreant print.
The Sun wears Midnight; Day is beetle-brow'd,
And Lightning is in Kelder of a Cloud.
O the accursed Stenography of State!
The Princely Eagle shrunk into a Bat.
What Charm; what Magic vapor can it be
That checks his Rays to this Apostasy?
It is no subtle fi^m of Tiffany-air,
No Cobweb-Vizard (such as Ladies wear;
When they are veiled on purpose to be seen,
Doubling their Luster by their vanquished skreen.)
No, the false Scabberd of a Prince is tough,
And three pil'd darkness, like the smoaky slough
Of an imprisoned flame; it is Faux in grain,
Dark Lanthorn to, our bright Meridian:
Hell belched the Damp, the Warwick Castle Vote
Rang Britain's Curfeu, so our Light went out.
A black Offender should he wear his Sin
For Penance, could not have a darker Skin.
His Visage is not legible; the Letters
Like a Lord's Name writ in Fantastic Fetters.
Clothes where a Switzer might be buried quick;
Sure they would fit the Body Politic.
False Beard enough to thatch a Poet's Plot
(For that is the Ambush of their Wit, God wot)
Nay all his Properties so strange appear,
Y' are not in the Presence, though the King be there.
A Libel is his Dress, a Garb uncouth,
Such as the Hue and Cry once purged at Mouth.
Scribbling Assassinate! Thy Lines attest
An ear-mark due* Cub of the Blatant Beast:
Whose Breath before it is syllabled for worse
Is Blasphemy unfledged, a callow Curse:
The Laplanders when they would sell a wind
Wafting to Hell, bag up thy Phrase and bind
It to the Barque, which at the Voyage end
Shifts Poop, and breeds the Colic in the Fiend.
But I Will not dub thee with a glorious Scar,
Nor sink thy Sculler with a Man of War.
The black-mouthed Siquis, and this slandering suit
Both do alike in Picture execute.
But since we are all called Papists; why not date
Devotion to the Rags thus Consecrate?
As Temples use to have their Porches wrought
With Sphynxes, Creatures of an Antique draught,
And purling Portraitures, to show that there
Riddles inhabited; the like is here.
But pardon Sir, since I presume to be
Clerk of this Closet to your Majesty;
Methinks in this your dark mysterious Dress,
I see the Gospel couched in Parables.
The second view my purblind fancy wipes,
And shows Religion in its dusky Types,
Such a Text Ro^^l, so obscure a shade,
Was Solomon in Proverbs all arrayed.
Come all the Brats of this Expounding Age
To whom the Spiri^^s in Pupilage:
You that damn more than ever Sampson slew,
And with his Engine the same Jaw Bone too.
How is it he scapes your Inquisition free;
Since bound up in the Bible's Livery?
Hence Cabinet-Intruders, Pick-Locks hence,
You that dim Jewels with your Bristol-sence,
And Characters, like Witches, so torment,
Till they confess a Guilt, though Innocent.
Keys for this Cipher you can never get,
None but Saint Peter's open this Cabinet;
This Cabinet, whose Aspect would benight
Critic Spectators with redundant light.
A Prince most seen is least. What Scriptures call
The Revelation, is most mystical.
Mount then thou Shadow Royal, and with haste
Advance thy Morning Star, Charles overcast.
May thy strange Journey contradictions twist,
And sorce fair Weather from a Scottish mist.
Heavens Confessors are posed; those Star-ey'd Sages
T'interpret an Eclipse thus riding Stages.
Thus Israel-like he travels with a Cloud,
Both as a Conduct to him and a Shroud.
But O! He goes to Gibeon, and renews
A League with moldy bread and clouted shoes.
Rupertismus.
O That I could but vote myself a Poet,
Or had the Legislative knack to do it!
Or like the Doctors Militant could get
Dubbed at adventure Verser Banneret.
Or had I Cacus trick to make my Rhymes
Their own Antipodes, and track the times,
Faces about says the Remonstrant Spirit,
Allegiance is Malignant, Treason Merit.
Huntington-Colt that posed the Sage Recorder
Might be a Sturgeon now and pass by Order.
Had I but Elsing's Gift (that splay-mouth'd Brother)
That declares one way, and yet means another:
Could I thus write asquint, then Sir long since
You had been sung a Great and Glorious Prince.
I had observed the Language of these days,
Blasphemed you, and then periwig'd the Phrase
With humble service, and such other Fustian,
Bells which ring backward in this great Combustion
I had reviled you, and without offense
The Literal and the Equitable sense
Would make it good. When all fails this will do it,
Sure that Distinction cle^t the Devil's foot.
This were my Dialect, would your Highness please
To read me but with Hebrew Spectacles;
Interpret counter what is cross rehearsed;
Libels are Commendations when reversed.
Just as an Optique Glass contracts the Sight
At one end, but when turned does multiply't.
But you're enchanted, Sir you're doubly free
From the great Guns and Squibbing Poetry;
Whom neither Bilbo, nor Invention pierces,
Proof, even against the Artillery of Verses,
Strange! That the Muses cannot wound your Mail,
If not their Art, yet let their Sex prevail.
At that known Leaguer where the Bonny Besses
Supplied the Bow-strings with their twisted Tresses,
Your Spells could never have fenced you, every Arrow
Had lanc'd your noble Breast and drunk the Marrow:
For Beauty, like white Powder, makes no noise,
And yet the silent Hypocrite destroys.
Then use the Nuns of Helicon with pity,
Lest Wharton tell his Gossips of the City,
That you kill Women too, nay Maids, and such
Their General wants Militia to touch;
Impotent Essex! Is it not a shame
Our Commonwealth, like to a Turkish Dame,
Should have an Eunuch Guardian? May she be
Ravished by Charles, rather than saved by thee.
But why, my Muse, like a Green Sickness Girl,
Feed'st thou on Coals and Dirt? A Gelding Earl
Gives no more relish to thy Female palate
Then to the Ass did once the Thistle-Salat.
Then quit his barren Theme, and all at once
Thou and thy Sisters, like bright Amazons,
Give Rupert an Alarm. Rupert! one
Whose name is Wit's Superfoetation;
Makes Fancy, like Eternitie's round womb,
Unite all Valor past, present, to come.
He, who the old Philosophy controuls,
That voted down Plurality of Souls.
He breaths a Grand Committee; all that were
The Wonders of their Age constellate here.
And as the Elder Sisters Growth and Sense
(Souls paramount themselves) in Man commence
But faculties of Reason Queen; no more
Are they to him, who was complete before,
Ingredients of his Virtues. Thread the Beads
Of Caesar's Acts, Great Pompey's and the Swedes,
And it is a Bracelet fit for Rupert's hand,
By which that vast triumvirat is span'd.
Here, here is Palmestry; here you may read
How long the World shall live, and when it shall bleed.
What every Man winds up that Rupert has;
For Nature raised him on the Public Faith.
Pandora's Brother, to make up whose store
The Gods were fain to run upon the score.
Such was the Painter's Brief for Venus Face,
Item an Eye from Jane, a Lip from Grace.
Let Isaac and his Cit^ ^lay off the Plate.
That tips their Antlets, for their Calf of State.
Let the Zeal-twanging Nose that wants a Ridge,
Snuffling devoutly, drop his silver Bridge;
Yes and the Gossip's Spoon augment the Sum,
Although poor Caleb lose his Christendom.
Rupert outweighs that in his Sterling self,
Which their Self-want pays in Committee-pelf.
Pardon, Great Sir; for that ignoble Crew
Gains when made Bankrupt in the Scales with you.
As he who in his Character of Light
Styled it God's shadow, made it far more bright
By an Eclipse so glorious (Light is dim,
And a black Nothing when compared with him)
So it is Illustrious to be Rupert's foil,
And a just Trophee to be made his spoil.
I Will pin my Faith on the Diurnal's sleeve
Hereafter, and the Guild Hall Creed believe.
The Conquests which the Common Council hears
With their wide listening Mouth from the Great Peers
That run away in Triumph; such a Foe
Can make Men Victors in their Overthrow.
Where Providence and Valor meet in one,
Courage so poised with Circumspection,
That he revives the Quarrel once again
Of the Soul's Throne; whether in Heart, or Brain,
And leaves it a drawn Match; whose fervor can
Hatch him, whom Nature poach'd but half a man.
His Trumpet, like the Angels at the last,
Makes the Soul rise by a miraculous blast.
Was that Mount Athos carved in shape of Man,
As was designed by the Macedonian,
Whose right hand should a populous Land contain,
The left should be a Channel to the Main;
His Spirit would inform the Amphibious Figure,
And straight laced sweat for a Dominion bigger.
The terror of whose Name can out of seven,
Like Falstaf's Buckram-men, make fly eleven.
Thus some grow rich by breaking; Vipers thus
By being slain are made more numerous.
No wonder they will confess no loss of men;
For Rupert knocks 'em till they gig again.
They fear the Giblets of his Train, they fear,
Even his Dog, that four-leg'd Cavalier.
He that devours the Scraps that Lunsford makes,
Whose Picture feeds upon a Child in stakes;
Who name but Charles he comes aloft for him;
^ut holds up his Malignant Leg at Pym:
Against whom they have these Articles in Souse,
First, that he barks against the Sense of the House;
Resolved Delinquent; to the Tower straight;
Either to the Lions, or the Bishop's Grate.
Next for his ceremonious wag of the Tail;
But there the Sisterhood will be his Bail;
At least the Countess with Lust's Amsterdam,
That lets in all Religions of the Game.
Thirdly; he smells Intelligence; that is better
And cheaper too, than Pym's from his own Letter,
Who Is doubly paid (Fortune or we the blinder!)
For making Plots, and then for Fox the finder.
Lastly; he is a Devil without doubt;
For when he would lie down he wheels about;
Makes Circles and is couchant in a Ring,
And therefore score up one for conjuring.
What can thou say, thou Wretch? O quarter! quarter!
I Am but an Instrument, a mere Sir Arthur:
If I must hang, O let not our Fates vary,
Whose Office it is alike to fetch and carry!
No hopes of a Reprieve; the mutinous stir,
That strung the Jesuit will dispatch the Cur.
Were I a Devil, as the Rabble fears,
I see the House would try me by my Peers.
There Iowler there! ah Iowler! 'st, it is naught,
What ever the Accusers cry, they are at default,
And Glyn and Maynard have no more to say,
Then when the glorious Strafford stood at bay.
Thus Libels but amount to him we see
TO enjoy a Copyhold of Victory.
Saint Peter's shadow healed, Rupert's is such
'Twould find Saint Peter work, and wound as much*
He gags their Guns, defeats their dire intent,
The Cannons do but lisp and complement.
Sure Jove descended in a leaden shower
To get this Perseus; hence the fatal power
Of Shot is strangled; Bullets thus allied
Fear to commit an Act of Paricide.
Go on brave Prince, and make the World confess,
Thou art the greater World, and that the less.
Scatter the accumulative King; untruss
That five-fold Fiend the State's Smectymm^^,
Who place Religion in their Vellam-ears,
As in their Phylacters the Jews did theirs.
England's a Paradise, and a modest word,
Since guarded by a Cherub's flaming Sword.
Your Name can scare an Atheist to his prayers,
And cure the Chin-cough better than the Bears.
Old Sibils Charm Toothach with you, the Nurse
Makes you still Children, and the ponderous Curse
The Clown salutes with is derived from you,
Now Rupert take thee Rogue, how do thou do?
In fine the Name of Rupert thunders so,
Kimbolton's but a rumbling Wheelbarrow.
Upon Sir Thomas Martin who subscribed a Warrant thus, We the Knights and
Gentlemen of the Committee, when there was no Knight but himself.
HAng out a Flag and gather pence a piece.
Which Africa never bred, nor swelling Greece
With Stories Tympany; a Beast so rare,
No Lecturer's wrought Cap, or Barthol'mew Fair
Can match him, Nature's Whimsey that outvies
Tredescant and his Ark of Novelties;
The Gog and Magog of Prodigious Sights;
With reverence to your eyes, Sir Thomas Knights.
But is this Bigamy of Titles due?
Are you Sir Thomas and Sir Martin too?
Issachar couchant'twixt a brace of Sirs,
Thou Knighthood in a pair of Panniers.
Thou that look wrapped up in thy warlike-leather*
Like Valentine and Orson bound together.
Spur's Representative, thou that art able
To be a Voyder to King Arthur's Table;
Who in this Sacrilegious Mass of all,
It seems, has swallowed Winsor's Hospital.
Pair Royal, headed Cerberus his Cousin;
Hercules Labors were a Baker's dozen,
Had he but trump'd on thee, whose forked neck
Might well have answered at the Font for Smec.
But can a Knighthood on a Knighthood ly?
Metal on Metal is false Heraldry.
And yet the known Godfry of Bouloign's Coat
Shines in Exception to the Herald's Vote.
Great Spirits move not by Pedantick Laws,
Their Actions, though Eccentrick, state the Cause.
And Priscian bleeds with honor. Caesar thus
Subscribed two Consuls with one Julius.
Tom never oaded-Squire, scarce Yeoman high,
Is Tom twice dipped; Knight of a double die?
Fond man, whose Fate is in his Name betrayed,
It is the setting Sun doubles his shade:
But it is no matter; for amphibious he
May have a Knight hanged, yet Sir Tom go free.
The General Eclipse.
LAdies that guild the glittering Noon,
And by Reflection mend his Ray,
Whose Beauty makes the sprightly Sun
To dance, as upon Easter Day;
What are you now the Queen's away?
Courageous Eagles, who have whet
Your Eyes upon Majestic Light,
And thence derived such Martial heat,
That still your Looks maintain the Fight;
What are you since the King's Goodnight?
Cavalier-buds, whom Nature teems,
As a Reserve for England's Throne,
Spirits whose double edge redeems
The last Age, and adorns your own;
What are you now the Prince is gone?
As an obstructed Fountain's head
Cuts the Intail off from the Streams,
And Brooks are disinherited;
Honor and Beauty are mere Dreams,
Since Charles and Mary lost their Beams.
Criminal Valors! who commit
Your Gallantry, whose Poean brings
A Psalm of Mercy after it;
In this sad Solstice of the King's,
Your Victory has mewed her wings.
See how your Soldier wears his Cage
Of Iron, like the Captive Turk,
And as the Guerdon of his Rage!
See how your glimmering Peers do lurk,
Or at the best work Journey-work!
Thus it is a General Eclipse,
And the whole World is al-a-mor^;
Only the House of Commons trips
The Stage in a Triumphant sort,
Now e'n John Lilburn take 'em for it.
SECT. III. Containing MISCELLANIES.
Upon Princess Elizabeth born the Night before New Year's Day.
AStrologers say, Venus, the self same Star
Is both our Hesperus and Lucifer;
The Antitype, this Venus makes it true,
She shuts the old Year, and begins the new.
Her Brother with a Star at Noon was born,
She like a Star both of the Eve and Morn.
Count o'r the Stars, fair Queen, in Babes, and vie
With every Year a new Epiphany.
Upon a Miser who made a great Feast, and the next day died for Grief.
NOr scapes he so; our Dinner was so good
My liquorish Muse cannot but chew the Cud,
And what delight she took in the Invitation
Strives to taste o'r again in this Relation.
After a tedious Grace in Hopkin's Rhyme,
Not for Devotion, but to take up time,
Marched the Train'd-Band of Dishes, ushered there
To show their Postures, and then as they were:
For he invites no Teeth, perchance the Eye
He will afford, the Lover's Gluttony.
Thus is our Feast a Muster, not a Fight,
Our Weapon's not for Service, but for Sight.
But are we Tantaliz'd? Is all this Meat
Cooked by a Limner for ^o view, not eat?
The Astrologers keep such Houses when they sup
On Joints of Taurus, or the heavenly Tup.
What ever Feasts he made are summed up here,
His Table vies not standing with his Cheer;
His Churchings, Christnings; in this Meal are all,
And not transcribed, but in the Original.
Christmas is no Feast moveable; for lo,
The self same Dinner was ten years ago!
'Twill be immortal, if it longer stay,
The Gods will eat it for Ambrosia.
But stay a while; unless my Whinyard fail,
Or is enchanted, I Will cut off the Intail.
Saint George for England then! have at the Mutton,
Where the first cut calls me blood-thirsty Glutton.
Stout Ajax with his anger-codled brain
Killing a Sheep thought Agamemnon slain;
The Fiction's now proved true, wounding the Roast,
I lamentably Butcher up mine Host.
Such Sympathy is with his Meat, my Weapon
Makes him an Eunuch, when it carves his Capon.
Cut a Goose Leg, and the poor Fool for moan
Turns Cripple too, and after stands on one.
Have you not heard the abominable sport
A Lancaster Grand Jury will report?
The Soldier with his Morglay watched the Mill,
The Cats they came to feas^, when lusty Will
Whips off great Pusses Leg, which (by some Charm)
Proves the next day such an old Woman's Arm*
It Is so with him, whose carcass never scapes,
But still we slash him in a thousand shapes,
Our Serving-men (like Spanniels) range to spring
The Fowl which he had cluck'd under his wing.
Should he on Woodcock, or on Widgeon feed
It were, Thyestes-like, on his own Breed.
To Pork he pleads a Superstition due,
But we subscribe neither to Scot, nor Jew.
No Liquor stirs; call for a Cup of Wine;
It Is Blood we drink, we pledge thee Catiline.
Sawces we should have none, had he his wish;
The Oranges in the Margin of his Dish.
He with such Huckster's care tells o'r and o'r,
The Hesperian Dragon never watched them more.
But being eaten now into despair,
(Having naught else to do) he falls to prayer.
Thou that did once put on the form of Bull,
And turned thine Io to a lovely Mull,
Defend my Rump, great Jove, allay my grief,
O spare me this, this Monumental Beef!
But no Amen was said; see see it comes;
Draw Boys, let Trumpets sound, and strike up Drums.
See how his Blood does with the Gravy swim,
And every Trencher has a Limb of him.
The Ven'son's now in view, our Hounds spend deeper,
Strange Deer which in the Pasty has a Keeper
Stricter than in the Park, making his Guest,
As he had stol't alive, to steal it dressed!
The scent was hot, and we pursuing faster
Than Ovid's Pack of Dogs ever chased their Master,
A double prey at once we seize upon,
Acteon, and his Case of Venison.
Thus was he torn alive, to vex him worse,
Death serves him up now as a second Course.
Should we, like Thracians, our dead bodies eat,
He would have lived only to save his Meat.
Lastly; we did devour that Corpse of His
Throughout all Ovid's Metamorphosis.
On the Memory of Mr. Edward King drowned in the Irish Seas.
I Like not tears in tune, nor do I prize
His artificial Grief who scans his eyes.
Mine weep down pious Beads; but why should I
Confine them to the Muses Rosary?
I am no Poet here; my Pen's the Spout
Where the Rainwater of mine eyes run out
In pity of that Name, whose Fate we see
Thus copied out in Grief's Hydrography.
The Muses are not Mer-mayds, though upon
His Death the Ocean might turn Helicon.
The Sea's too rough for Verse; who ryhmes upon it
With Xerxes strives to ^etter the Hellespont.
My Tears will keep no Channel, know no Laws
To guide their streams, but like the waves, their cause
Run with disturbance, till they swallow me
As a Description of his Misery.
But can his spacious Virtue find a Grave
Within the Impostum'd bubble of a Wave?
Whose Learning if we sound, we must confess
The Sea but shallow, and him bottomless.
Could not the Winds to countermand thy death
With their whole Card of Lungs redeem thy breath?
Or some new Island in thy rescue peep
To heave thy Resurrection from the Deep;
That so the World might see thy safety wrought
With no less wonder than thy self was thought?
The famous Stagirite (who in his life
Had Nature as familiar as his Wife)
Bequeathed his Widow to survive with thee
Queen Dowager of all Philosophy.
An ominous Legacy, that did portend
Thy Fate, and Predecessor's second end.
Some have affirmed that what on Earth we find,
The Sea can parallel for shape and kind.
Books, Arts and Tongues were wanting, but in thee
Neptune has got an University.
We'll dive no more for Pearls; the hope to see
Thy sacred Relics of Mortality
Shall welcome Storms, and make the Seaman prize
His Shipwreck now more than his Merchandise.
He shall embrace the Waves, and to thy Tomb,
As to a Royaler Exchange shall come.
What can we now expect? Water and Fire,
Both Elements our ruin do conspire;
And that dissolves us which does us compound,
One Vatican was burnt, another drowned.
We of the Gown our Libraries must toss
To understand the greatness of our Loss;
Be Pupils to our Grief, and so much grow
In Learning, as our Sorrows overflow.
When we have filled the Rundlets of our Eyes
We'll issue't forth, and vent such Elegies,
As that our Tears shall seem the Irish Seas,
We floating Islands, living Hebrides.
An Elegy upon the Archbishop of Canterbury.
I Need no Muse to give my Passion vent,
He brews his Tears that studies to lament.
Verse chymically weeps, that pious rain
Distilled by Art is but the sweat of the Brain.
Who ever sob'd in Numbers? Can a Groan
Be quaver'd out in soft Division?
It Is true, for common formal Elegies
Not Bushel's Wells can Match a Poet's Eyes
In wanton Waterworks; he will tune his Tears
From a Geneva-Jig up to the Spheres:
But then he mourns at distance, weeps aloof,
Now that the Conduit Head is our own Roof,
Now that the Fate is Public, (we may call
It Britain's Vespers, England's Funeral)
Who has a Pencil to express the Saint,
But he has Eyes too washing off the Paint?
There is no Learning but what Tears surround,
Like to Seth's Pillars in the Deluge drowned.
There is no Church, Religion is grown
So much of late that she is encreast to none.
Like an Hydropick Body full of Rheumes,
First swells into a bubble, then consumes.
The Law is dead, or cast into a Trance,
And by a Law dough-bak'd an Ordinance.
The Liturgy, whose doom was voted next,
Did as a Comment upon him the Text.
There Is nothing lives, Life is, since he is gone,
But a Nocturnal Lucubration.
Thus you have seen Death's Inventory read,
In the Sum total Canterbury's dead.
A sight would make a Pagan to baptize
Himself a Convert in his bleeding Ey^s.
Would thaw the Rabble, that fierce Beast of ours,
That which Hyena-like weeps and devours
Tears that flow brackish from their Souls within,
Not to repent, but pickle up their Sin.
Mean time no squalid Grief his Look defiles,
He guilds his sadder Fate with nobler Smiles.
Thus the World's Eye with reconciled Streams
Shines in his showers, as if he wept his beams.
How could Success such Villainies applaud?
The State in Strafford fell, the Church in Land,
The Twins of public rage, adjudg'd to die
For Treasons they should act by Prophecy.
The Facts were done before the Laws were made,
The Trump turned up after the Game was played.
Be dull great Spirits, and forbear to climb;
For Worth is Sin, and Eminence a Crime.
No Churchman can be Innocent and High,
It Is height makes Grantham Steeple stand awry.
Epitaphium Thomae Spell Coll. Divi Iohannis Praesidis.
HIe jacet Quantillum Quan^i,
Ille, quatenus potuit mori
Thomas Spellus:
Fuit nomen, erit Epitheton.
Post humus sibi perennabit, idem
Olim and olim.
Ille qui sibi futurus Posteri,
Vt esse poterat Majores sui,
Honestis quicquid debuit Natalibus
Mactus in sese; disputandus utrum
Sui magis, an ex Patrum traduce;
Quem vitae Drama Mitionem dedit;
Qui verba protulit, ut Alcedo pullos
Omine pacis;
Quocum sepul^a jacet Vrbanitas,
Et Malaci mores tanquam Soldurii
Commoriuntur.
Pauperum Scipio, and amor omnium.
Collegii Coagulum, Honorum Climax,
Scholaris, Socius, Senior, Praeses,
Et Pastor gregis in cruce providus.
Oculos a fl^ndo non moror amplius.
Vixit.
Mark Anthony.
WHen as the Nightingale chanted her Vespers,
And the wild Forrester couched on the ground;
Venus invited me in the Evening Whispers
Unto a fragrant Field with Roses crowned;
Where she before had sent
My Wishes Complement,
Unto my Heart's content
Played with me on the Green;
Never Mark Anthony
Dallied more wantonly
With the fair Egyptian Queen.
First on her cherry Cheeks I mine Eyes feasted,
Thence fear of Surfeiting made me retire;
Next on her warmer Lips, which when I tasted
My duller Spirits made me active as fire;
Then we began to dart,
Each at another's Heart,
Arrows that knew no smart;
Sweet Lips and Smiles between.
Never Mark, etc.
Wanting a Glass to plate her Amber Tresses,
Which like a Bracelet rich decked mine Arm,
Gawdier than Juno wears, when as she Graces
Jove with Embraces more stately, than warm;
Then did she peep in mine
Eyes humor Chrystalline
I in her Eyes was seen,
As if we one had been.
Never Mark, etc.
Mystical Grammar of Amorous Glances;
Feeling of Pulses, the Physic of Love,
Rhetorical Courtings and Musical Dances,
Numbering of Kisses Arithmetic prove
Eyes, like Astronomy,
Straight-limb'd Geometry
In her Art's Ingeny,
Our Wits were sharp and ke^n.
Never Mark Anthony
Dallied more wantonly
With the fair Egyptian Queen,
The Author's Mock-Song to Mark Anthony.
WHen as the Nightingale sang Pluto's Mattins,
And Cerberus cried three Amens at a Howl,
When Night-wandring Witches put on their Pat^ns.
Midnight as dark as their Faces are Foul:
Then did the Furies doom
That the Nightmare was come;
Such a misshapen Groom
Puts down Su. Pomfret clean.
Never did Incubus
Touch such a filthy Sus,
As this foul Gypsy Queen.
First on her Goosberry Cheeks I mine eyes Blasted,
Thence fear of vomiting made me retire
Unto her Blewer Lips, which when I Tasted
My Spirits were duller than Dun in the Mire;
But when her Breath took place,
Which went an Usher's pace,
And made way for her Face,
You may guess what I mean.
Never did, etc.
Like Snakes engendring were platted her Tresses,
Or like to slimy streaks of Ropy Ale;
Uglier than Envy wears, when she confesses
Her Head is periwig'd with Adder's Tail*
But as soon as she spoke,
I heard a Harsh Mandrake:
Laugh not at my Mistake,
Her Head is Epicene.
Never did, etc.
Mystical Magic of Conjuring Wrinckles;
Feeling of Pulses, the Palmstry of Hags,
Scolding out Belches for Rhetoric Twinckles,
With three Teeth in her Head like to three Gags;
Rainbows about her Eyes,
And her Nose Weather-wise,
From them the Almanac lies,
Frost, Pond and Rivers clean.
Never did Incubus
Touch such a filthy Sus,
As this soul Gypsy Queen.
How the Commencement grows new.
It Is no Curranto-News I undertake,
New Teacher of the Town I mean not to make,
No New England Voyage my Muse does intend,
No new Fleet, no basd Fleet, nor bonny Fleet send:
But if you will be pleased to hear out this Ditty,
I Will tell you some News as True and as Witty;
And how the Commencement grows new.
See how the Simony-Doctors abound,
All crowding to throw away forty pound:
They Will now in their Wives Stammel Pettticoats vaper
Without any need of an Argument-Draper;
Beholding to none, he neither beseeches
This Friend for Ven'son, nor the other for Speeches,
And so the Commencement grows new.
Every twice a day the Teaching Gaffer
Brings up his Easter-book to Chaffer:
Nay some take Degrees, who never had Steeple,
Whose Means, like Degrees, come from Placers of people*
They come to the Fair, and at the first pluck,
The Toll-man Barnaby strikes 'um good luck,
And so, etc.
The Country Pa^sons they do not come up
On Tuesday Night in their own College to Sup;
Their Bellies and Table-Books equally full,
The next Lecture-Dinner their Notes forth to pull:
How bravely the Marg'ret^Professor Disputed,
The Homilies urged, and the School^men Confuted?
And so, etc.
The Inceptor brings not his Father, the Clown,
To look with his Mouth at his Grogoram Gown;
With like Admiration to eat Roasted Beef,
Which Invention posed his Beyond- ^rent-Belief;
Who should he but hear our Organs once sound,
Could scarce keep his Hoof from Sellenger's Round,
And so, etc.
The Gentleman comes not to show us his Satin,
To look with some Judgment at him that speaks Latin;
To be angry with him that makes not his Clothes
To answer, O Lord Sir, and talk Play-book-oaths,
And at the next Bear-baiting (full of his Sack)
To tell his Comrades our Discipline's slack.
And so, etc.
We have no Prevaricator's Wit.
Ay, marry Sir, when have you had any yet?
Besides no serious Oxford man comes
To cry down the use of Jesting and Hums
Our Ballad (believe't) is no stranger than true;
Mum Salter is Sober, and Jack Martin too.
And so the Commencement grows new.
Square-Cap.
COme hither Apollo's Bouncing Girl,
And in a whole Hippocrene of Sherry
Let Us drink a round till our Brains do whirl,
Tuning our Pipes to make our selves merry;
A Cambridge-Lass, Venus-like, born of the Froth
Of an old half filled Jug of Barly-Broth,
She, she is my Mistress, her Suitors are many,
But she will have a Square-Cap, if ever she have any.
And first, for the Plush-sake, the Monmouth-Cap comes
Shaking his Head, like an empty Bottle,
With his newfangled Oath by Jupiter's Thumbs,
That to her Health he will begin a pottle:
He tells her, that after the Death of her Grannam
She shall have God knows what per Annum.
But still she replied, Good Sir La-bee,
If ever I have a Man Square-Cap for me.
Then Calot Leather-Cap strongly pleads
And fain would derive his Pedigree of fashion.
The Antipodes were their Shoes on their Heads,
And why may not we in their Imitation:
Oh! how the Football noddle would please,
If it were but well tossed on Sir Thomas his Lees:
But still she replied Good Sir La-bee
If ever I have a Man, Square-Cap for me.
Next comes the Puritan in a Wrought-Cap,
With a long-wasted Conscience toward a Sister,
And making a Chapel of Ease of her Lap;
First he said Grace, and then he kissed her:
Beloved, quoth he, thou art my Text;
Then falls he to use and Application next,
But then she replied your Text Sir I Will be;
For then I Am sure you will never handle me.
But see where Sattin-Cap scouts about,
And fain would this Wench in his Fellowship marry,
He told her how such a Man was not put out,
Because his Wedding he closely did carry,
He Will purchase Induction by Simony,
And offers her Money her Incumbent to be,
But still she replied, Good Sir La-bee,
If ever, I have a Man Square-Cap for me.
The Lawyer's a Sophister by his Round Cap,
Nor in their Fallacies are they divided,
The one Milks the Pocket, the other the Tap,
And yet this Wench he fain would have Brided:
Come leave these threadbare Scholars, quoth he,
And give me Livery and Seisin of thee.
But peace Iohn-a Nokes, and leave your Oration,
For I never will be your Impropriation:
I pray you therefore, Good Sir La-bee;
For if ever I have a Man, Square-Cap for me.
The Character of a Country-Committee-man, with the Ear-mark of a Sequestrator.
A Committee-man by his Name should be one that is possessed, there is number
enough in it to make an Epithet for Legion. He is Persona in concreto (to
borrow the Solecism of a Modern Statesman.) You may translate it by the
Red-Bull Phrase, and speak as properly, Enter seven Devils solus. It is a well
trussed Title that contains both the Number and the Beast; for a Committee-man
is a Noun of Multitude, he must be spelled with Figures, like Antichrist
wrapped in a Pair-Royal of Sixes. Thus the Name is as monstrous as the Man, a
complex notion, of the same Lineage with Accumulative Treason. For his Office
it is the Heptarchy, or England's Fritters; it is the broken meat of a
crumbling Prince, only the Royalty is greater; for it is here as in the Miracle
of Loaves, the Voyder exceeds the Bill of Fare. The Pope and he rings the
Changes; here is the Plurality of Crowns to one Head, join them together and
there is a Harmony in Discord. The Tripleheaded Turn-key of Heaven with the
Tripleheaded Porter of Hell. A Committee-man is the Relics of Regal
Government, but, like Holy Relics, he outbulks the Substance whereof he is a
Remnant. There is a score of Kings in a Committee, as in the Relics of the
Cross there is the number of twenty. This is the Giant with the hundred hands
that wields the Scepter; the Tyrannical Bead-Roll by which the Kingdom prays
backward, and at every Curse drops a Committee man. Let Charles be waved, whose
condescending Clemency aggravates the Defection, and make Nero the Question,
better a Nero than a Committee. There is less Execution by a single Bullet,
than by Case-shot.

Now a Committee man is a party-colored Officer. He must be drawn like Ianus
with Cross and Pile in his Countenance; as he relates to the Soldiers, or
faces about to his fleecing the Country. Look upon him Martially, and he is a
Justice of War, one that has bound his Dalton up in Buff, and will needs be of
the Quorum to the best Commanders. He is one of Mars his Lay Elders, he shares
in the Government, though a Nonconformist to his bleeding Rubric. He is the
like Sectary in Arms, as the Platonic is in Love, keeps a fluttering in
Discourse, but proves a Haggard in the Action. He is not of the Soldiers and
yet of his Flock. It is an Emblem of the Golden Age (and such indeed he makes
it to him) when so tame a Pigeon may converse with Vultures. Methinks a
Committee hanging about a Governor, and Bandileers dangling about a fur'd
Alderman have an Anagram Resemblance. There is no Syntax between a Cap of
Maintenance and a Helmet. Who ever knew an Enemy routed by a Grand Jury and a
Billa vera? It is a left handed Garrison where their Authority perches; but the
more preposterous the more in fashion; the right hand sights while the left
rules the Reigns. The truth is the Soldier and the Gentleman are like Don
Quixot and Sancha Pancha, one fights at all Adventures to purchase the other
the Government of the Island. A Committee-man properly should be the
Governor's Matress to fit his Truckle, and to new-string him with sinews of
War; for his chief use is to raise Assessments in the Neighboring Wapentake.

The Country people being like an Irish Cow that will not give down her Milk,
unless she see her Calf before her: Hence it is he is the Garrison's Dry-Nurse,
he chews their Contribution before he feeds them; so the poor Soldiers live
like Trochilus by picking the Teeth of this sacred Crocodile.

So much for his Warlike or Ammunition-Face, which is so preternatural, that it
is rather a Vizard than a Face; Mars in him has but a blinking Aspect, his
Face of Arms is like his Coat, Party per pale, Soldier and Gentleman much of
a scantling.

Now enter his Taxing and deglubing Face, a squeezing Look, like that of
Vespasianus, as if he were bleeding over a Closestool.

Take him thus, and he is in the Inquisition of the Purse an Authentic Gypsy,
that nips your Bung with a Canting Ordinance: not a murdered Fortune in all
the Country but bleeds at the Touch of this Malefactor. He is the Spleen of the
Body Politic that swells it self to the Consumption of the Whole. At first
indeed he Ferreted for the Parliament, but since he has got off his Cope he
set up for himself. He lives upon the Sins of the People, and that is a good
standing Dish too. He verifies the Axiom, Iisdem nutritur ex quibus componitur;
his Diet is suitable to his Constitution. I have wondered often why the plundered
Countrymen should repair to him for succor; certainly it is under the same
Notion, as one whose Pockets are picked goes to Mal Cutpurse, as the
Predominant in that Faculty.

He out-dives a Dutch man, gets a Noble of him that was never worth six pence;
for the poorest do not escape, but Dutch-like, he will be dreyning even in the
driest Ground. He aliens a Delinquent's Estate with as little Remorse, as his
other Holiness gives away an Heretick's Kingdom; and for the truth of the
Delinquency, both Chapmen have as little share of Infallibility. Lie is the
Grand Salad of Arbitrary Government, Executor to the Star Chamber and the
High Commission; for those Courts are not extinct, they survive in him, like
Dollars changed into single Money. To speak the truth, he is the Universal
Tribunal: for since these Times all Causes fall to his Cognizance; as in a
great Infection all Diseases turn often to the Plague. It concerns our Masters
the Parliament to look about them; if he proceeds at this rate, the Jack may
come to swallow the Pike, as the Interest often eats out the Principal. As his
Commands are great, so he looks for a Reverence accordingly. He is punctual in
exacting your Hat, and to say, Right his due, but by the same Title as the
upper Garment is the Vails of the Executioner. There was a time when such
Cattle would hardly have been taken upon suspicion for Men in office, unless
the old Proverb were renewed, That the Beggars make a Free Company, and those
their Wardens. You may see what it is to hang together. Look upon them
severally, and you cannot but fumble for some Threads of Charity. But oh, they
are Termagants in Conjunction! like Fiddlers, who are Rogues when they go
single, and joined in Consort, Gentlemen Musicianers. I care not much if I
untwist my Committee-man, and so give him the Receipt of this Grand Catholicon.

Take a State-martyr, one that for his good Behavior has paid the Excise of
his Ears, so suffered Captivity by the Land-Piracy of Ship Money; next a
Primitive Freeholder, one that hates the King because he is a Gentleman,
transgressing the Magna Charta of Delving Adam. Add to these a Mortified
Bankrupt, that helps out his false Weights with some Scruples of Conscience,
and with his peremptory Scales can doom his Prince with a Mean Tekel. These
with a new blew-stockin'd Justice, lately made of a good Basket-hilted Yeoman,
with a short-handed Clerk, tacked to the Rear of him to carry the Knapsack of
his Understanding; together with two or three Equivocal Sirs, whose Religion,
like their Gentility, is the Extract of their Acres; being therefore Spiritual,
because they are Earthly; not forgetting the Man of the Law, whose Corruption
gives the Hogan to the sincere Juncto. These are the Simples of this Precious
Compound; a kind of Dutch Hotch-Potch, the Hogan Mogan Committee-man.

The Committee-man has a Side-man, or rather a Setter, hight a Sequestrator,
of whom you may say, as of the Great Sultan's Horse, where he treads the Grass
grows no more. He is the States Cormorant, one that fishes for the public, but
feeds himself; the misery is, he fishes without the Cormorant's Property, a
Rope to strengthen the Gullet, and to make him disgorge. A Sequestratour! He is
the Devil's Nut-hook, the Sign with him is always in the Clutches. There are
more Monsters retain to him, than to all the Limbs in Anatomy. It is strange
Physicians do not apply him to the Soles of the Feet in a desperate Fever, he
draws far beyond Pigeons. I hope some Mountebank will slice him and make the
Experiment. He is a Tooth drawer once removed; here is the difference, one
applauds the Grinder, the other the Grist. Never till now could I verify the
Poet's Description, that the ravenous Harpie had a Humane Visage. Death himself
cannot quit scores with him; like the Demoniack in the Gospel, he lives among
Tombs, nor is all the Holy Water shed by Widows and Orphans a sufficient
Exorcism to dispossess him. Thus the Cat sucks your breath, and the Fiend your
blood; nor can the Brotherhood of Witch-finders, so sagely instituted with all
their Terror, wean the Familiars.

But once more to single out my embossed Committee-man; his Fate (for I know
you would fain see an end of him) is either a whipping Audit, when he is wrung
in the Withers by a Committee of Examinations, and so the Sponge weeps out the
Moisture which he had soaked before; or else he meets his Passing-peal in the
clamorous Mutiny of a Gut-foundred Garrison: for the Hedge-sparrow will be
feeding the Cuckoo, till he mistake his Commons and bites off her head.
Whatever it is, it is within his desert: for what is observed of some
Creatures, that at the same time they Trade in productions three Stories high,
Suckling the first, Big with the second and Clicketing for the third: a
Committee-man is the Counterpoint, his Mischief is Superfetation, a certain
Scale of Destruction; for he ruins the Father, beggars the Son, and strangles
the hopes of all Posterity.

The Character of a Diurnal-maker.
A Diurnal-maker is the Sub-almoner of History, Queen Mabs Register, one whom,
by the same Figure that a North-country Pedlar is a Merchant-man, you may style
an Author. It is like overreach of Language, when every Thin, Tinder-cloak'd
Quack must be called a Doctor; when a clumsie Cobbler usurps the Attribute of
our English Peers and is vamp'd a Translator. List him a Writer, and you
smother Geoffry in Swabber-slops; the very name of Dabler over-sets him; he is
swallowed up in the phrase, like Sir S. L. in a great Saddle, nothing to be
seen, but the Giddy Feather in his Crown. They call him a Mercury, but he
becomes the Epithet, like the little Negro mounted upon an Elephant, just such
another Blot Rampant. He has not Stuffings sufficient for the Reproach of a
Scribler; but it hangs about him like an old Wifes Skin, when the Flesh has
forsaken her, lank and loose. He defames a good Title as well as most of our
Modern Noble Men; those Wens of Greatness, the Body Politick's most peccant
Humors, Blistred into Lords. He has so Raw-bon'd a Being, that however you
render him, he rubs it out and makes Rags of the Expression. The silly
Countryman, who seeing an Ape in a Scarlet-coat, blessed his young Worship,
and gave his Landlord joy of the hopes of his House, did not slander his
Complement with worse Application, than he that names this Shred an Historian.
To call him an Historian is to knight a Mandrake: it is to view him through a
Perspective, and by that gross Hyperbole to give the Reputation of an Engineer
to a Maker of Mouse-traps. Such an Historian would hardly pass muster with a
Scotch Stationer in a Sieveful of Ballads and Godly Books. He would not serve
for the Breast Plate of a begging Grecian. The most cramped Compendium that the
Age has seen since all Learning has been almost torn into Ends, outstrips him
by the Head. I have heard of Puppets that could prattle in a Play, but never
saw of their Writings before. There goes a Report of the Holland Women, that
together with their Children, they are delivered of a Sooterkin, not unlike to
a Rat, which some imagine to be the Offspring of the Stoves. I know not what
Ignis fatuus adulterates the Press but it seems much after that fashion, else
how could this Vermin think to be a Twin to a Legitimate Writer; when those
weekly Fragments shall pass for History, let the poor man's Box be entitled
the Exchequer, and the Alms-basket a Magazine. Not a Worm that gnaws on the
dull Scalp of Voluminous Hollinshed, but at every Meal devoured more Chronicle,
than his Tribe amounts to. A Marginal Note of W. P. would serve for a
Winding Sheet, for that man's Works, like thick-skinn'd Fruits, are all Rind,
fit for nothing but the Authors Fate to be pared in a Pillory.

The Cook, who served up the Dwarf in a Pie (to continue the Frolic) might
have lapp'd up such an Historian as this in the Bill of Fare. He is the first
Tincture and Rudiment of a Writer, dipped as yet in the preparative Blew, like
an Almannack Well-willer. He is the Cadet of a Pamphleteer, the Pedee of a
Romancer; he is the Embryo of a History slink'd before Maturity. How should he
Record the Issues of Time, who is himself an Abortive? I will not say but that
he may pass for an Historian in Garbier's Academy; he is* much of the size of
those Knot-grass Professors. What a pitiful Seminary was there projected! yet
suitable enough to the present Universities, those dry Nurses, which the
Providence of the Age has so fully reformed, that they are turned Reformado's:
But that is no matter, the meanner the better. It is a Maxim observable in these
days, That the only way to win the Game is to play Petty John's. Of this number
is the Esquire of the Quill; for he has the Grudging of History, and some
Yawnings accordingly. Writing is a Disease in him, and holds like a Quotidian;
so it is his Infirmity that makes him an Author, as Mahomet was beholding to the
Falling Sickness to vouch him a Prophet. That nice Artificer, who filed a Chain
so thin and light, that a Flea could trail it (as if he had worked Short hand,
and taught his Tools to Cipher) did but contrive an Emblem for this Skip-Jack
and his slight productions.

Methinks the Turk should license Diurnals, because he prohibits Learning and
Books. A Library of Diurnals is a Wardrobe of Frippery; it is a just Idea of a
Limbo of the Infants. I saw one once that could write with his Toes, by the
same token I could have wished he had worn his Copies for Socks; it is he
without doubt from whom the Diurnals derive their Pedigree, and they have a
Birth right accordingly, being shuffled out at the bed's feet of History. To
what infinite numbers an Historian would multiply, should he ^^umble into Elves
of this Profession? To supply this smalness they are fain to join Forces, so
they are not singly but as the Custom is in a Croaking Committee. They tug at
the Pen, like slaves at the Oar, a whole Bank together; they write in the
Posture that the Suedes gave fire in, over one another's heads. It is said
there is more of them go to a Suit of Clothes than to a Britannicus: in this
Polygamy the Clothes breed, and cannot determine whose Issue is Lawfully
begotten.

And here I think it it were not amiss to take a particular how he is
accoutred, and so do by him as he in his Siquis for the Wall-ey'd Mare, or the
Crop Flea-bitten, give you the Marks of the Beast. I begin with his Head, which
is ever in Clouts, as if the Nightcap should make Affidavit, that the Brain
was pregnant* To what purpose does the Pia Matter lie in so dully in her white
Formalities: sure she has had hard Labor; for the Brows have squeezed for it,
as you may perceive by his Buttered Bon grace, that Film of a Demicastor; it is
so thin and unctuous that the Sunbeams mistake it for a Vapor, and are like
to Cap him; so it is right Heliotrope, it creaks in the Shine and flaps in the
Shade: whatever it be, I wish it were able to call in his ears. There Is no
proportion between that Head and Appurtenances; those of all Lungs are no more
fit for that small Noddle of the Circumcision, than Brass Bosses for a
Geneva-Bible. In what a puzzling Neutrality is the poor Soul that moves betwixt
two such ponderous Biasses? His Collar is edged with a piece of peeping
Linnnen, by which he means a Band; it is the Forlorn of his Shirt crawling out
of his Neck: indeed it were time that his Shirt were jogging; for it has served
an Apprentiship and (as Apprentices use) it has learned its Trade too, to
which effect it is marching to the Paper-mill, and the next week sets up for it
self in the shape of a Pamphlet. His Gloves are the shavings of his Hands; for
he casts his Skin like a cancelled Parchment. The Itch represents the broken
Seals. His Boots are ^he Legacies of two black Jacks, and till he pawned the
Silver that the Jacks were tipp'd with, it was a pretty Mode of Boot-hose-tops.
For the rest of his Habit he is a perfect Seaman, a kind of Tarpawlin, he
being hanged about with his course Composition, those Pole-davie Papers.

But I must draw to an end; for every Character is an Anatomy-lecture, and it
fares with me in this of the Diurnal-maker, as with him that reads on a begged
Malefactor, my Subject smells before I have gone through with him; for a parting
Blow then. The word Historian imports a sage and solemn Author; one that curles
his Brow with a sullen Gravity, like a Bull-neck'd Presbyter, since the Army
has got him off his Jurisdiction, who Presbyter like sweeps his Breast with a
Reverend Beard, full of Native Moss-Troopers: not such a squirting Scribe as
this, that is troubled with the Rickets, and makes penny-worths of History. The
College-Treasury that never had in Bank above a Harry-groat, shut up there in a
melancholic solitude, like one that is kept to keep possession, had as good
Evidence to show for his Title, as he for an Historian: so, if he will needs be
an Historian, he is not Cited in the Sterling acceptance, but after the Rate
of Blew-caps Reckoning, an Historian Scot. Now a Scotch-man's Tongue runs high
Fullams. There is a Cheat in his Idiom; for the sense Ebbs from the bold
Expression, like the Citizen's Gallon, which the Drawer interprets but half a
Pint. In sum; a Diurnal-maker is the Antimark of an Historian; he differs from
him as a Dril from a Man, or (if you had rather have it in the Saints Gibbrish)
as a Hinter does from a Holder-forth.

The Character of a London-Diurnal.
A Diurnal is a puny Chronicle, scarce Pin-feather'd with the wings of Time. It
is a History in Sippets: The English Iliads in a Nutshel: The Apocryphal
Parliament's Book of Maccabees in single sheets. It would tire a Welshman to
reckon up how many Aps it is removed from an Annal: for it is of that Extract,
only of the younger House, like a Shrimp to a Lobster. The Original Sinner in
this kind was Dutch, Gallobelgicus the Protoplast, and the modern Mercuries but
Hans-en-kelders. The Countess of Zealand was brought to bed of an Almanac, as
many Children as days in the year. It may be the Legislative Lady is of that
Lineage, so she spawns the Diurnals, and they at Westminster take them in
Adoption by the names of Scoticus, Civicus, Britannicus. In the Frontispiece of
the old Beldam Diurnal, like the Contents of the Chapter, sits the House of
Commons judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. You may call them the Kingdoms
Anatomy before the weekly Calendar; for such is a Diurnal, the day of the Month
with what Weather in the Commonwealth. It is taken for the Pulse of the Body
Politic, and the Emperick-Divines of the Assembly, those Spiritual Dragooners,
thumb it accordingly. Indeed it is a pretty Synopsis; and those Grave Rabbis
(though in the point of Divinity) trade in no larger Authors. The
Country-carrier, when he buys it for the Vicar, miscals it the Urinal; yet
properly enough, for it casts the Water of the State ever since it staled
Blood. It differs from an Aulicus, as the Devil and his Exorcist, or as a black
Witch does from a white one, whose office is to unravel her Enchantments.

It begins usually with an Ordinance, which is a Law still-born, dropped before
quickened by the Royal Assent. It Is one of the Parliament's By-blows, Acts only
being Legitimate, and has no more Sire than a Spanish Gennet that is begotten
by the Wind.

Thus their Militia, like its Patron Mars, is the Issue only of the Mother,
without the Concourse of Royal Jupiter: Yet Law it is, if they Vote it, in
defiance to their Fundamentals; like the old Sexton, who swore his Clock went
true, whatever the Sun said to the contrary.

The next Ingredient of a Diurnal is Plots, horrible Plots, which with
wonderful Sagacity it hunts dry-foot, while they are yet in their Causes,
before Materia prima can put on her Smock. How many such fits of the Mother
have troubled the Kingdom; and for all Sir W. E. looks like a Man-Midwife, not
yet delivered of so much as a Cushion? But Actors must have Propertie^; and
since the Stages were voted down, the only Playhouse is at Westminster.

Suitable to their Plots are their Informers, Skippers and Tailors, Spaniels
both for the Land and Water. Good conscionable Intelligence! For however Pym's
Bill may inflame the reckoning, the honest Vermin have not so much for Lying
as the Public Faith.

Thus a zealous Botcher in Moorfields, while he he was contriving some
Quirpocut of Church Government, by the help of his outlying Ears and the
Otacousticon of the Spirit, discovered such a Plot, that Seldom intends to
combat Antiquity, and maintain it was a Taylor's Goose that preserved the
Capitol.

I wonder my Lord of Canterbury is not once more all-to-be-traytor'd, for
dealing with the Lions to settle the Commission of Array in the Tower. It would
do well to cramp the Articles dormant, besides the opportunity of reforming
these Beasts of the Prerogative, and changing their profaner names of Harry and
Charles into Nehemiah and Eleazar.

Suppose a Corn-cutter being to give little Isaac a cast of his Office should
fall to paring his Brows (mistaking the one end for the other, because he
branches at both) this would be a Plot, and the next Diurnal would furnish you
with this Scale of Votes.

Resolved upon the Question, That this Act of the Corn-cutter was an absolute
Invasion of the Cities Charter in the representative forehead of Isaac.

Resolved, That the evil Counselors about the Corn-cutter are Popishly
affected and Enemies to the State.

Resolved, That there be a public Thanksgiving for the great deliverance of
Isaac's Brow-antlers; and a solemn Covenant drawn up to defy the Corn cutter
and all his Works.

Thus the Quixots of this Age fight with the Windmils of their own heads, quell
Monsters of their own Creation, make Plots, and then discover them; as who
fitter to unkennel the Fox than the Tarrier that is part of him?

In the third place march their Adventures; the Roundheads Legend, the Rebels
Romance; Stories of a larger size, than the Ears of their Sect, able to
strangle the Belief of a Solifidian.

I Will present them in their order. And first as a Whifler before the show enter
Stamford, one that trod the Stage with the first, traversed his ground, made a
Leg and Exit. The Country people took him for one that by Order of the Houses
was to dance a Morris through the West of England. Well, he is a nimble
Gentleman; set him upon Banks his Horse in a Saddle rampant, and it is a great
question which part of the Centau^e shows better tricks.

There was a Vote passing to translate him with all his Equipage into
Monumental Gingerbread; but it was crossed by the female Committee, alleging
that the Valor of his Image would bite their Children by the Tongues.

This Cubit and half of Commander, by the help of a Diurnal routed his Enemies
fifty miles off. It Is strange you will say, and yet it is generally believed he
would as soon do it at that distance as nearer hand. Sure it was his Sword for
which the Weaponsalve was invented; that so wounding and healing (like loving
Correlates) might both work at the same removes. But the Squib is run to the
end of the Rope: Room for the Prodigy of Valor. Madam Atropos in Breeches,
Waller's Knight-errantry; and because every Mountebank must have his Zany,
throw him in Hazlerig to set off his Story. These two, like Bell and the Dragon,
are always worshipped in the same Chapter; they hunt in couples, what one does
at the head, the other scores up at the heels.

Thus they kill a man over and over, as Hopkins and Sternhold murder the Psalms
with another of the same; one chimes all in, and then the other strikes up as
the Saints-Bell.

I wonder for how many Lives my Lord Hopton took the Lease of his Body.

First Stamford slew him, then Waller outkill'd that half a Bar; and yet it is
thought the sullen Corpse would scarce bleed were both these Manslayers never so
near it.

The same goes of a Dutch Headsman, that he would do his office with so much
ease and dexterity, that the Head after Execution should stand upon the
Shoulders. Pray God Sir William be not Probationer for the place; for as if he
had the like knack too, most of those whom the Diurnal has slain for him, to
us poor Mortals seem untoucht.

Thus these Artificers of death can kill the Man without wounding the Body,
like Lightning, that melts the Sword and never singes the Scaberd.

This is the William whose Lady is the Conqueror; This is the City's Champion
and the Diurnals delight; he that Cuckolds the General in his Commission; for
he stalks with Essex, and shoots under his belly, because his Excellency
himself is not charged there; yet in all this triumph there is a Whip and a
Bell; translate but the Scene to Roundway Down, there Hazelrig's Lobsters
turned Crabs and crawled backwards; there poor Sir William ran to his Lady for
an use of Consolation. But the Diurnal is weary of the arm of flesh, and now
begins an Hosanna to Cromwell; one that has beat up his Drums clean through the
Old Testament; you may learn the Genealogy of our Savior by the names in his
Regiment: the Muster-master uses no other List but the first Chapter of Matthew.

With what face can they object to the King the bringing in of Foreigners, when
themselves entertain such an Army of Hebrews? This Cromwell is never so valorous
as when he is making Speeches for the Association; which nevertheless he does
somewhat ominously with his Neck awry, holding up his ear as if he expected
Mahomet's Pigeon to come and prompt him. He should be a Bird of Prey too by his
bloody Beak: His Nose is able to try a young Eagle, whether she be lawfully
begotten. But all is not Gold that gli^ters. What we wonder at in the rest of
them is natural to him, to kill without Bloodshed; for the most of his Trophies
are in a Church window, when a Looking glass would show him more Superstition.
He is so perfect a hater of Images, that he has defaced God's in his own
Countenance. If he deals with men, it is when he takes them napping in an old
Monument* then down goes Dust and A^hes, and the stoutest Cavalier is no
better. O brave Oliver! Time's Voyder, Subsizer to the Worms* in whom Death,
who formerly devoured our Ancestors, now chews the cud. He said Grace once as
if he would have fallen aboard with the Marquess of Newcastle; nay and the
Diurnal gave you his Bill of fare; but it proved a running banquet, as appears
by the Story. Believe him as he whistles to his Cambridge-Teem of
Committee Men, and he does wonders. But holy Men, like the holy Language, must
be read backwards. They rifle Colleges to promote Learning, and pull down
Churches for Edification. But Sacrilege is entailed upon him. There must be a
Cromwell for Cathedrals as well as Abbeys; a secure sin, whose offense carries
its pardon in its mouth: for how shall he be hanged for Church-robbery, that
gives himself the benefit of the Clergy?

But for all Cromwell's Nose wears the Dominical Letter, compared to Manchester,
he is but like the Vigils to an Holy day. This, this is the Man of God, so
sanctified a Thunderbolt, that Buroughs (in a proportionable Blasphemy to his
Lord of Hosts) would style him the Archangel giving battle to the Devil.

Indeed as the Angels each of them makes a several Species; so every one of his
Soldiers makes a distinct Church. Had these Beasts been to enter into the Ark,
it would have puzzled Noah to have sorted them into pairs. If ever there were a
Rope of Sand, it was so many Sects twisted into an Association.

They agree in nothing but that they are all Adamites in understanding. It is a
sign of a Coward to wink and sight, yet all their Valor proceeds from their
Ignorance.

But I wonder whence their General's purity proceeds; it is not by Traduction:
if he was begotten a Saint it was by equivocal Generation; for the Devil in the
Father is turned Monk in the Son, so his Godliness is of the same Parentage
with good Laws, both extracted out of bad manners; and would he alter the
Scripture, as he has attempted the Creed, he might vary the Text, and say to
Corruption, Thou art my Father.

This is he that put out one of the Kingdom's Eyes by clouding our Mother
University; and (if this Scotch Mist farther prevail) he will extinguish the
other. He has the like quarrel to both because both are strung with the same
Optic Nerve, Knowing Loyalty.

Barbarous Rebel! who will be revenged upon all Learning, because his Treason
is beyond the Mercy of the Book.

The Diurnal as yet has not talked much of his Victories, but there is the
more behind; for the Knight must always beat the Giant, that is resolved.

If any thing fall out amiss which cannot be smothered, the Diurnal has a help
at maw. It is but putting to Sea and taking a Danish Fleet, or brewing it with
some success out of Ireland, and then it goes down merrily.

There are more Puppets that move by the wyre of a Diurnal, as Brereton and
Gell, two of Mars his Petty-toes, such sniveling Cowards, that it is a favor
to call them so. Was Brereton to fight with his Teeth (as in all other things
he resembles the Beast) he would have odds of any man at the weapon. O he is a
terrible Slaughter-man at a Thanksgiving Dinner! Had he been cannibal to have
eaten those that he vanguish'd, his Gut would have made him valiant.

The greatest wonder is at Fairfax, how he comes to be a Babe of Grace,
certainly it is not in his personal, but (as the State-Sophies distinguish) in
his Politic Capacity; regenerate ab extra by the Zeal of the House he sat in,
as Chickens are hatched at Grand Cairo by the Adoption of an Oven.

There is the Woodmonger too, a feeble Crutch to a declining Cause; a new
Branch of the old Oak of Reformation.

And now I speak of Reformation, Vous avez, Fox the Tinker, the liveliest
Emblem of it that may be: for what did this Parliament ever go about to reform,
but Tinkerwise, in mending one hole they made Three?

But I have not Ink enough to cure all the Tetters and Ringworms of the State.

I will close up all thus. The Victories of the Rebels are like the Magical
Combat of Apule^us, who thinking he had slain three of his Enemies, found them
at last but a Triumvirate of Bladders. Such, and so empty are the Triumphs of a
Diurnal, but so many Impostumated Phancies, so many Bladders of their own
blowing.

A Letter sent from a Parliament-Officer at Grantham to Mr. Cleveland in Newark.
SIR,
THough I have no reason to be guilty of much good meaning to your Garrison;
yet I thought it not unfit to tell you, that on Friday last, one Hill by name,
in no other condition than my Servant, entered your Ark, and with him of my
Moneys 133 l. 8 d. This precise Sum I was willing you should know, supposing
your Wisdom might own the moneys, though your Honesty could hardly allow the
Act: which i^ so, and that hereafter we shall find it no Sin to violate your
Sanctuary, and upon the Audit find the Receipt, we may happily count it a Loan,
and not a Loss, it being in hands responsible for greater matters. And now,
Sir, let me speak to you as a Judge, not as an Advocate. Give the Fellow his
just reward; prefer him, or send him hither and we shall: if you dare not Trust
him, let him be Trussed; if you dare, I shall wish you more such Servants; and
for that only reason excuse me for the present, that I dare not say I am yours

W. E.

Mr. Cleveland's Reply.
Sixthly, Beloved,
IS it so then, that our Brother and Fellow Laborer in the Gospel is start
aside? then this may serve for an use of Instruction, not to trust in Man, nor
in the Son of Man. Did not Demas leave Paul? Did not Onesimus run from his
Master Philemon? Besides, this should teach us to employ our Talent, and not to
lay it up in a Napkin. Had it been done among the Cavaliers, it had been just;
then the Israelite had spoiled the Egyptian; but for Simeon to plunder Levi,
That! That! You see, Sir, what Use I make of the Doctrine you sent me; and
indeed since you change Style so far as to nibble at Wit, you must pardon me,
if to quit scores, I pretend a little to the Gift of Preaching. Sir, I expected
to hear from you in the Language of the lost Groat, and the Prodigal Son, and
not in such a Tantivy of Language; but I perceive your Communication is not
always Yea, Yea; now and then a little Harlotry-Rhetorick. You say that your
Man is entered our Ark: I am sorry you were so ignorant in Scripture, as to let
him come single. The Text had been better satisfied, if you had pleased to bear
him company; for then the Beasts had entered by Couples: But though he came
alone, yet well lined it seems, with 133 l. 8 d. Sure your Hue and Cry has
good Lungs, it would have been out of breath else, before it had reached the
Eight pence. This is the Sum; but why you call it the Precise Sum, since it
is thus fallen away, I understand not. But how come you to reckon so
punctually? Did Ananias tell it upon the Table Dormant? What year of the
Persecution of the Saints? I wonder you did not rather count it by the Shekels,
that is the more sanctified Coin. You mistake in the Sanctuary you speak of;
for that which your Man has taken is Welbeck, one of our Chapels of Ease, not
the Mother Church, our Garrison of Newark; but the best is they are both
without the reach of your Sacrilege. Whereas you account your Loss but a Loan*
we shall grant it a Debt, but bearing the same Date of Payment with that which
you borrowed on the Public Faith. I suspect your hand was troubled with the
Palsy, when you wrote of a Judge; your Man however shall find me an Advocate;
for what say you to an occasional Meditation? Reflect but upon your self, how
you have used your Common Master, and I doubt not but you will pardon your Man.
He has but transcribed Rebellion, and copied out that Disloyalty in Short
hand, which you have committed in Text. Sir, I bemoan your Losses* and am sorry
I cannot as easily repay that of your Money, as your Man, being resolved to
supply that place my self; and to make it appear by wearing the Livery of this
Title, Sir,

Your Servant I. C.

The Officer's Rejoinder.
SIR,
HAd not Indulgent Mercy provided for troubled Spirits Sacred Oracles, how
troubled had you been to contrive something worthy of Laughter? How easy had
the Expense of your Wit been trussed up in an Egg-shell. I dare not trace in
holy Ground, it is not safe nibbling there. You see what Doctrine I make of
your Use; but yet so far as yours is Profane give me lieve to nibble at Wit.
Though I dare not undertake like a mighty Coloss (whose very motion does Cleave
Land, like Terram findere) to devour indigested lumps of Wit, as the Cyclops
Men at a Morsel, and then retail it out, as a Juggler does Inkle, by the Yard;
yet allow me to nibble, and I Will allow you the Gift in Preaching. Pity it is
the provission of so many savoury Lessons, wholesome Instructions, even so many
pious Collections, as might worthily have entitled you to the comfortable
Subsistence of a well-gleb'd Vicarage. Besides the Advantage of a Wit, which
would require another Wit to tell how great; such a Divine Knowledge, as might
enable you to profane every Leaf of Holy Writ; Unknown Sanctity, and a
Conscience so tender I dare not touch. Pity it is such accomplished Gifts and
prodigious Parts should be misemploy'd in Secular affairs. Such an Holy Father
might have begot as many Babes for the Mother Church of Newark, as our Party of
late has done Garrisons, and converted as many Souls as Chaucer's Friar with
the Shoulder Bone of the lost Sheep. But you say you expected (I thought you
had had more than you expected) but however you expected Penitential Language
and Humble Style, (the Groat I will not meddle with, it is Holy Coin) an
Address full of Complaints; Sir, we, like your selves, can speak big of our
Losses, and yet with more Ingenuity confess them; though I for modesty will not
ask you who stole from you of late a Fort-town? or who run away with the King?
But of that -- For that precise Sum, I see you are willing to quarrel at
Preciseness; it was to tell you, Revenge would have transferred it upon your
very -- How you quarrel at your good! Had you mistaken him for a Tax-gatherer,
and eased him of his Portage before he arrived at your Chapel of Ease, I would
not you should have abated him a fourth part for his Forwardness, and put it
upon the File of Contribution for his Majesty's good Garrison of Newark; I
should have liked the Security well, and when your Works had failed to save
you, expected a return upon the Public Faith; the Meditation whereof puts
me upon this Advice: Think not Profaneness can compact with Mud, to cast up a
Trench of Security. Attempt not (though a Giant) to reach at Stars; to throw
that Proverb at you,

Be wise on this side Heaven.
Mr. Cleveland's Answer.
SIR,
THE Philosopher that never laughed but once, when he saw an Ass mumbling of
Thistles, would have broke his Spleen at this Rejoinder of yours; for who would
not take that to be an Emblem of this, observing how gingerly and with what
caution you nibble at my Letter, lest it should prick your Chops? But something
must needs be replied. Repetitions are usual with the Saints at Gra^^ham. I
look upon your Letter as a Spittle-Sermon; Salinger's Round, the same again. I
perceive your Ambition how you would prove your self to be a clean beast,
because you know how to chew the Cud; for the first Sentence where you speak of
troubled Spirits and sacred Oracles, you talk as if you were in Doll Commons
Ecstasy. Certainly your spirit is troubled, else your Expression had not run so
muddy; for never was Oracle more ambiguous, if possible to be reconciled to
Sense. The Wit which you say may be trussed up in an Egg-shell, I fear your
Oval Crown has scarce Capacity enough to contain. you disclaim being a Coloss;
Content; I have as diminitive thoughts of you as you please. I take you for a
Jack-a Lent, and my Pen shall make use of you accordingly, three Throws for a
penny. But you cannot Cleave Land like Terram findere. What a chargeable
Commodity is Wit at Grantham, where the poor Writer plays the Pimp, and jumbles
two Languages together in unlawful Sheets for the Production of a Quibble: but
I applaud your Cunning, for the more unknown Tongue you jest in, your wit will
be the better. And why cannot you Cleave the Land? Tread but hard, and your
cloven Foot will leave its Impression. You talk of Cyclops and Jugglers (indeed
hard words are the Juggler's Dialect:) But take heed, the time may come, when
unless you can play Presto be gone, your Runaway King may cause you
Juggler-wise to disgorge your Fate, and vomit a Rope instead of Inkle. But to
Echo your Comparison, and to return you an Inventory of your good Parts. Is it
not pity that the pure Extract of sanctified Emmanuel, parboiled there in the
Pipkin of Predestination, and since well read in the Sick man's Salve and the
Crumbs of Comfort, and liberally fed with all the Minced Meat in Divinity? Is it
not pity such a Goggle of the Eye, such a melodious ^wang of the Nose, a
pliable Mouth drawn awry, as if it were edifying the Ear in private, besides
Cheverel-Lungs that will stretch as far as Seventeenthly? Is it not pity that
these gallant Ingredients of Modern Devotion, which might justly have qualified
you for a Tub Lecturer, and in time made your Diocese as large as that of
Heidelberg; that these ineffable Parts which pass all understanding, should
thus be sequestered from their Primitive Use, and of a godly Lanspresado in the
Church Militant be converted to a Brother of the Blade. Such a walking
Directory, such a zealous Roger as this might have saved more Souls than
Sampson slew, and with the same Engine, the Jaw Bone of an Ass. Your Pen is
coy, and you wave the Holy Ground and Holy Coin with a squeamish Preterition. I
am glad to hear you acknowledge there is Holy Ground; for then I hope
Hatcham-Barn is not as good a Congregation as St. Paul's. For the Holy Coin,
you must pardon me if I suspect the Chastity of your Fingers. I am sure those
of your Party have been troubled with Felons; witness the Church-Revenues, and
the several Sacrileges which cannot be pared off with your Nails: But there is
another Reason why you abstain from the Idiom of the Saints. You were in hopes
to retrieve your Money, and Verily* Verily Re^ never springs the Partridge. You
would have your Man taken for a Tax-gatherer. Lord how the C^ime alters the
Man! When he was with you he was one of the Scribes and Pharisees* and here he
must pass for a Publican and Sinner. Sir, We cast up no Trench of (...), though
we might have Dirt enough in your Language to do it; and yet we hope to be
saved by our Works, for all the strength of your Faith, whereby you hold your
selves able to remove Mountains. For your Advice not to throw Stars at your
head, I embrace it; for what need I, so long as there is Goose-shot to be had
for Money. My Wit shall be on what side Heaven you please, provided it ever be
Antarctick to yours. For the appellation of Giant, I accept it, only I am sorry
I am not he with the hundred hands, that I might so often subscribe my self,

SIR, Your Servant I. C.

An Answer to a Pamphlet written against the Lord Digby's Speech, concerning
the Death of the Earl of Strafford.
IT IS the wittiest Punishment that the Poets phancied to be in Hell, that one
should continually twist a Rope, and an Ass stand by and bite it off. I know
not how this Noble Gentleman should ever deserve it, but such is his Fate; for
while the Pamphleter strives to tear his Speech, to Ravel this Twist of
Eloquence and Judgment, what does he but make my Lord and himself the Moral of
the Fable? The first word in his Penny-libel is ominous for a Duel. The Sand
was always the Scene of Quarrelling, and so he calls the Speech. If this be
Sand, I shall easily incline to Democritus his Opinion, who thought the World
to be composed of A^oms, and shall be able to render a reason hereafter, why
Jupiter, when he was most Oraculous, was called Jupiter Ammon, Jupiter of the
Sand: but as Thomas Mason says, am I bound to find you Wit and History? Why the
Sand? The Sand, that is, the Incoherent. You shall never tak a Pamphleter, one
of these Haberdashers of small Wares, without his Videlicets or his Vtpotes. An
ingenious Metaphor needs no spokes-man to the Apprehension, but is entertained
without a pimping Videlicet. A Videlicet is an Hic Canis; it argues a Bungling
Writer, as that a Painter. But wherein Incoherent? Because it shows wherein the
same Man may both condemn and acquit the same Man. Why, is that such a Riddle?
May not I commend you for a Single-soul'd Rythmer, one that can Chime All-in to
an Execution, and yet use the Scotch Proverb, and turn your Nose where your
Arse was in point of State Policy. Though you have a pretty Faculty in Country-
Tom and Cambery-Bess, yet faces about in State Affairs. A diverse Quatenus
commends and vilifies, condemns and acquits. But a Pox of all English Logic.
He has found Idem qua idem somewhere Translated, and that is it which raises
all this Dust, disturbs the Sand. Well, grant it be Sand; what becomes on it?
Why, Captain Puff will blow it away. My Adversary, I perceive, has eaten
Garlic, and wholly relies upon the Valor of his Breath; and indeed I question
not the strength of that, I find it sufficiently in the Rankness of his
Language. Certainly he has a great mind to be painted like Boreas in the great
Ship, with that ingenious Impress, Sic Flo. But, hark you Gaffer; you that will
tear the Speech and blow away the Sand; before you and I part, I shall so prick
the Tympany of your Cheeks, and so mince your Pamplet, that the least Sand
shall be a Grave sufficient for the biggest piece of it. But, see the Prowess
of our Domitian; he will kill this Fly himself, and not with an Axe, or a Bill of
Attainder. He scorns to cry Clubs; he will not oppugn it with the Votes of the
Houses, with the Judges Opinions; nor are we so mad to enter the Lists of such
a Comparison. But this is but one of his ordinary Solecisms. The Speech must be
considered as when first made; then the Houses had not Voted; then the Judges
had not determined, and (what is as Material as any thing) the Rabble had not
yell'd for Justice and Execution then; and therefore to commit them with this
Speech, what were it but to fancy a Prolepsis? to antedate Combatants that
were not yet in being? so that if any thing add to the strength of the Speech,
beside its own Nerves, it is the weakness of the Confuter, not of the Reader. I
make no question but your Reader is quit with you for that Abuse. You say, My
Lord steals his Affection; I dare purge you of that Felony: Marry, if you will
needs cry Guilty, it cannot amount to above Pety Larceny; so much as may ask
the Bauns betwixt your Shoulders and a piece of Pack-thread: for whereas you
damn my Lord's Arguments to the Hospital; I am sure yours stand in need of
Bedlam, and the wholesome Phlebotomy of a Whip, to fetch the Dog Days out of
your Scull; and so, though you stand like Death over the Belfrey, with a great
Scythe, comparing the Speech to Grass, the Event will disarm you of your
Utensil; and in stead of a Scythe for Mowing, give you a Whetstone for Lying.
Hitherto he has been Tuning the strings, now he strikes up. Pray you mark the
Lesson. Will you see an Argument of this Paper, and indeed a Paper-Argument?
Did you ever hear the Changes better rung upon two Bells? I am persuaded the
Author would dance well upon the Ropes, he keeps himself so equally poised.
Heads and Points; the Argument of the Paper, the Paper-Argument. Well, score up
one in the Column of Quibbles. The Argument that he runs division upon is this:
It does not appear to him by two Testimonies, that the Irish Army was to be
brought over to reduce this Kingdom; Therefore the Earl of Strafford is not
guilty of High Treason Now he breaks the neck of this Ergo thus: If three or
four other Treasons be objected and proved, though they be at a loss in one,
this does not straight evince his Innocence. To this Belief he will draw you
(as he says) by a Comparison. Let him put himself in his Geers. Let him play
his Tricks of Fast and loose. In the Interim thus I gird up his tedious
Quemadmodum. If one be tied with three or four Cords, he is not at liberty,
though one of them be loosed, as being still bound with the rest. Even as, Even
so. Philip writing to the Spartans, prefac'd every Sentence with If, If, If;
they studying their Laconical Brevity, and denying the Contents of the Letter,
returned nothing but the same Monasyllable. The Objection runs in Philip's
fashion. If, is the Postilion of every Line; and I know not but the Answer may
be as apposite. If three or four Treasons be proved; if he be tied with three
or four Cords; but if those Treasons prove but Misdemeanors, if those Cables
be but Threads; if Sampson that was bound with them have ^witch'd them in
pieces; then I must say your Cords come in very unseasonably* unless it be to
put you in mind of your Mortality. But he doubles his Files. Faults in this
Paper (he says) go not alone; that is the Reason he bears the Author company to
the end of his Speech; that if there be any Faults, his Answer may match them
with Twin-brothers. Though this Reducing the Kingdom by an Irish Army be not
proved by Retail, yet it is Treason in the Lump. Rip but up the bowels of a
former Testimony and there you shall find it. His Majesty is absolved from all
Rules of Government and may do what Power will admit. So ho! whither now? My
Task is to justify the Speech in what it Treats, not to declame the Question
at large. This is not to confu^e his Speech, but his Conscience that would not
be convicted. I am not tied to follow you in your Wildgoose chase; yet I am so
confiden^ (whether of the strength of the Cause or your Weakness* I say not)
that I wish you and I might plead it on a Pillory, and he that lost the day pay
Ear-rent for us both. But there is danger in following an Ignis Fatuus whither
it will lead you, especially when he makes up at the Throat of Majesty. He sees
that Power will admit the use of an Irish Army, or any other which that Power
can purchase. A Suspicion which deserves to be answered with a Thunderbolt; but
it is out of fashion; and I am afraid I shall be laughed at, if I speak any
thing in defense of the King: yet (thanks be to God) there is no great need
on it. His Majesty's Virtues are his strongest Guard. A King, like a Porcupine,
is a living Quiver of Darts; every Beam of Majesty is a Fulmen Terebrans to his
Blaspheming Enemies. My Fellow-traveller stepped aside a little to give his Brain
a Stool, and now is returned into the Road, His Lordship, he says, multiplies
and is fruitful in Absurdities. It Is true by an equivocal Generation; for so he
begat your Pamphlet, meeting with the putrid Matter of your Invention, as the
Sun produces Insect Animals. The Absurdity is, he has no Notion of Subverting
the Law Treasonable, but by Force; and here we must score up the second
Quibble, for then (he says) This Argument will never subvert the Law, as having
no Force. Truly I am of a mind, that if my Antagonist were both to Dispute and
Answer himself, he would have the best on it, and that is the Course he takes
here. He frames an Argument where none is intended. His Lordship says he knows
no other, nay and there is no other; but he does not infer the latter from the
former, therefore there is no other, because he knows no other; so that this is
a Brat of your own Brain, not drawn from his Lordship's Ignorance (as your
scandalous quill foamed at the mouth) but from your own Impudence; and if it
halt (as you say) it confesses its Father, it halts before a Creeple. You do
well therefore to let Nature work to help your lame Dog over a Style, to cast
it, as you conceive, in a right Frame. There is no way of Subverting the Law
but what I know; but I know no way of Subverting the Law but by force. You
would be loath a man should say this is no Syllogism; and yet it is true.
There Is no Figure will give it a Tenement to hide its head in. I could give you
a Remove now and set you upright; but I had rather you should take it asunder,
and my Lord and you part Stakes; part Propositions; He the Major, you the
Minor, because in the first you say there is so much Knowledge, in the latter
so much Ignorance. You see you are in a Bog; but I will throw my Cloak about
you and dance you out; for lo, a most Eloquent Si quis in quest of the Author
of our Tenent. Who says this? Is it some ancient Judge? No, I thank you as the
Case goes; Or is it one that looks more into the Court than the Inns of Court?
I perceive I must count Quibbles as they do Fish; thou art three; there he
bounceth out with his (...) [ A Young Gentleman knows not the Law.] I do not
wonder you writ it in other Characters; for it is a most acute Apothegm, (though
I say it that should not say it) and such an one as may well beseem the Rumpend
of Licosthenes at the next Impression. But he makes a Transition from Common
Law to Common Reason, and he hopes to be scored up for that Quarter-Quibble,
but I cannot afford it. If nothing but Force can subvert Law, then Judges when
they pronounce false Judgments* stop lawful Defenses, let loose the
Prerogative, and all that Rout of Instances which he has rallied up, do not
subvert the Law. Well, to do you a Courtesy, they do not. It Is one thing to
stop a Pipe, to cut an Aqueduct and divert a Conveyance, and another to spoil a
Springhead. The Law in this Case suffers a Deliquium, but she is not dead. The
Subversion of Laws is Root and Branch. A Castle may be dismantled, made
unserviceable, and yet it is not said then to be quite overthrown. When you
usurped the Chair of Logic and made a false Syllogism, were the Laws of Logic
then subverted? No, but Trangress'd; so that if our Author suffer by Injustice
(as I hope you are more Historian than Prophet) he will not involve the Laws in
his Ruin. Your Apostrophe to Tressilian is a true Apostrophe, for it is from
the Cause; for will ye introduce a Parity in Offenses too? Scan the Cases and
you shall find them diverse. But give me lieve by the way to admire your Phrase
of the Iron Laws. It Is a good Argument to me that there is no Alchymy,
otherwise the Corruption of so many Judges, by this time had turned them into
Gold: but my Lord must Dispute again. Do you carry the Knapsack of his
Arguments? My Lord has a fine time on it, that you should feed him thus with a
Spoon? It Is thus; The Earl of Strafford 's Practices have been as high as any.
The Practices of Tressilian have been as high as High Treason. I wonder where
you got all this Logic; at Furnival's Inn? But I know the Reason of it,
because Plutarch attributes Logic to a Fox, and King James maintains Discourse
in a Hound, that is it which puts you upon Sillogisms. You would be loath to
come short of any of your Fellows. For the words of the Major (which are only
my Lord's, and which indeed I had as lieve he should justify as I) you must
know they are a Comparison: now Comparisons are betwixt things of the same
kind: As high as any, that is, in the rank of Misdemeanors. The Painter, when
his Picture would not sell for a God, made a special Devil of it, and so he
vented it. Though my Lord cannot yield that the Earl of Strafford's Practices
should be sublimated into Treason; yet place them in the front of any lower
Offenses, and it seems he will pass it. This Similitude of mine does not run of
all four, no more must you think of that, As high as any. But to make few
words; suppose I should grant you your Conclusion, that the Earl of Strafford's
Practices were as high as Treason, yet if they be not specified by Statute for
Treason, my Lord does justly abstain his hand from his Dispatch. You ask how
these words should sound in the mouth of a Judge. Truly I have not the measure
of your Ears, they are of too large a size for me. I being a Judge hold your
Guilt to be as high as Treason, yet having no Law to give me Commission, I Will
have no hand in your Sentence: So that supposing all Cases to be like this, I
grant you the Assizes would be in vain; the Judges Circuit would be like the
wheeling of a Mill, move continually, but never nearer their Journey's end: but
when the Law has provided sufficiently, unless in a Case as this,
Extraordinary, the Vanity and Mockery which you speak of recoils upon him that
first discharged them. For your last, where you would have Sir Henry Vane's
Oath to be preferred before my Lord's Suspicion, I would willingly answer as he
did with Meditation; at the first time nothing, as much at the second, and at
the third Vous avez Sir Henry Vane. You say his Oath gets an addition of Belief
from the Speeches before and from the Memorials that day; so that you imply
what I dare not say, that it is not full of it self, but wants a Supplement of
Credit to gain our Faith. As for the words Recorded whencesoever they had their
Venom, it seems they were poisoned; (for to that, and not to their Pregnancy do
I attribute it) that they swelled into such a bigness, that one Testimony
appeared double: But that you should entitle Mr. Pim to this Mistake, that he
should look through a Multiplying Glass in a Case so weighty as that of
Treason; the Gentleman's known Integrity saves me the labor of his Defense. So
that the Testimonies being but such, though the Charges be many; be the Earl of
Strafford as high in his Practices as it pleases my Lord to make him, yet my
Lord's Dipthong may easily be justified, and the Earl both at once Condemned
and Saved. Thus I have entreated Patience of my self to Counterpuff your
Pamphlet, when by the help of a Pennyworth of Pears, I could (more sutably to
your Defects) have confuted you backward. But I did it in hopes that you would
muzzle your self hereafter; for though your Teeth be hollow and cannot Bite,
yet wanting Cloves they may Infect.

To the Protector after long and vile Durance in Prison.
May it please Your Highness;
RUlers within the Circle of their Government have a Claim to that which is
said of the Deity; they have their Center every where, and their Circumference
no where. It is in this Confidence that I address to your Highness, knowing
that no place in the Nation is so remote, as not to share in the Ubiquity of
your Care; no Prison so close as to shut me up from partaking of your
Influence. My Lord, it is my Misfortune, that after ten years Retirement from
being engaged in the Differences of the State, having wound up my self in
private Recess, and my Comportment to the Public so inoffensive, that in all
this time, neither Fears nor Jealousies have scrupled at my Actions. Being
about three Months since at Norwich. I was fetched by a Guard before the
Commissioners, and sent Prisoner to Yarmouth, and if it be not a new offense to
make an enquiry wherein I offended (for hitherto my Fault was kept as close as
my Person) I am induced to believe that next to my adherence to the Royal
Party, the Cause of my Confinement is the Narrowness of my Estate; for none
stand Committed whose Estate can bail them. I only am the Prisoner who have no
Acres to be my Hostage. Now if my Poverty be Criminal (with Reverence be it
spoken) I implead your Highness, whose Victorious Arms have reduced me to it,
as Accessory to my Guilt. Let it suffice, my Lord, that the Calamity of the War
has made us poor, do not punish us for it. Who ever did Penance for being
Ravished? Is it not enough that we are stripped so bare, but it must be made in
order to a severer Lash? Must our Sores be engraven with our Wounds? Must we
first be made Creeples* and then beaten with our own Crutches? Poverty, if it
be a Fault it is its own Punishment, who pays more for it, pays use upon use. I
beseech your Highness put some Bounds to the Overthrow, and do not pursue the
chase to the other World. Can your Thunder be levelled so low, as our Grovelling
Condition? Can your Towering Spirit, which has quarried upon Kingdoms, make a
stoop at us, who are the Rubbish of these Ruins. Methinks I hear your former
Achievements interceding with you, not to fully your Glories with trampling
upon the prostrate, nor clog the Wheel of your Chariot with so degenerous a
Triumph. The most renowned Hero's have ever with such Tenderness cherished
their Captives, that their Swords did but cut out work for their Courtesies.
Those that fell by their Prowess sprung by their Favor, as if they had struck
them down only to make them rebound the higher. I hope your Highness, as you
are the Rival of their Fame, will be no less of their Virtues. The Noblest
Trophie that you can erect to your Honor is to raise the Afflicted; and since
you have subdued all O^p^^ition, it now remains that you attack your self, and
with Acts of Mildness vanquish your Victory. It is not long since, my Lord*
that you knocked off the Shackles from most of our Party, and by a grand
Release did spread your Clemency as far as your Territories. Let not new
Prescriptions interrupt your Jubilee. Let not that your Lenity be slandered as
the Ambush of your farther Rigor. For the Service of his Majesty (if it be
objected) I am so far from excusing it, that I am ready to allege it in my
Vindication. I cannot conceit that my Fidelity to my Prince should ^aint me in
your Opinion, I should rather expect it should recommend me to your Favor. Had
we not been Faithful to our King, we could not have given our selves to be so
to your Highness; you had then trusted us gratis, whereas now we have our
former Loyalty to vouch us. You see my Lord, how much I presume upon the
Greatness of your Spirit, that dare prevent my Indictment with so frank a
Confession, especially in this which I may so safely deny, that it is almost
Arrogance in me to own it: for the Truth is, I was not qualified enough to
serve Him; all I could do was to bear a part in his Sufferings, and to give my
self to be Crushed with his Fall. Thus my Charge is doubled; my Obedience to my
Sovereign, and what is the Result of that, my want of Fortune. Now whatever
reflection I have upon the former, I am a true Penitent for the latter. My
Lord, you see my Crimes; as to my defense, you bear it about you. I shall plead
nothing in my Justification, but your Highness's Clemency, which as it is the
constant Inmate of a valiant Breast, if you graciously be pleased to extend it
to your Suppliant in taking me out of this withering Durance, your Highness
will find, that Mercy will establish you more than Power, though all the days
of your Life, were as pregnant with Victories as your twice auspicious third of
September.

Your Highness's Humble and Submissive Petitioner J. C.

To the Earl of Newcastle.
THough to Command and Obey be the fittest Dialogue betwixt you and us; yet
since your Lordship pleases to descend from your Right and only to Request,
pardon us, if, by your Example we entrench upon you, and presume upon an
Answer. Sir, We are sorry our Duty is not phras'd in Action, nor can we
determine, whether it was more grateful to us, that you required our Service,
or grievous, that at this time we could not express it; for no sooner were we
informed of your pleasure, but so obligatory is your Will, that poysing your
Letters with our Laws, we thought our Statutes were at Civil Wars. The College,
like an Indulgent Mother, Entails her Preferments on her own Progeny. Your
Lordship prefers a stranger, whom to Adopt were not only to Bastard her present
Issue, but disinherit all succeeding hopes. If it seem a Delinquency to be thus
tender of her own, she will entitle her offense to your Lordship, who when you
honored her with your Admission, taught her to set a greater price upon her
Children. Thus hoping you will abstract our Will from our Power, we honor your
Lordship, desiring that occasion may present us with some service, whose
difficulty may add a deeper Dye to the Observance of

The Master and Fellows of S. J.

To the Earl of Holland, then Chancellor of the University of Cambridge.
Right Honorable,
YOU have raised us to that height by writing unto us, that we dare attempt an
Answer; in which Presumption, if we have dishonored your Lordship, you must
blame your own Gentleness, like the Sun, who if he be masked with Clouds, may
thank himself who drew up the Exhalations. Sir, they that assign Tutelar
Angels, betroath them not only to Kingdoms and Cities, but to each Company.
Your Goodness hovers not aloft in a general care of the University, but stoops
by a peculiar Influence to every private College. That Omnipresence which
Philosophy allots to the Soul, to be every where at once through the whole Man,
your Noble Diligence exemplifies in us. There is not the least Joint of our
Body, but in its Life and Spirits confesses the Chancellor. Nor have we in
special the least share of your Favors, as appears by many pregnant
Demonstrations of your Love; among which this is not the meanest, that you
would deign to require our Service. To offend against so Gracious a Patron,
would add a Tincture to our Disobedience; yet such is the Iniquity of our
Condition, that we are forced to defer our Gratitude. We have many in the
College, whose Fortunes were at the last Gasp; and if not now relieved, their
hopes extinct: Whereas he whom your Lordship commends, gives us farther day of
Payment by his green years. He is yet but young, but the Beams of your Favor
will ripen him the sooner for the like Preferment; which if it please your
Lordship to antedate by a present Acceptance of our future Obedience, We shall
gladly persevere in our old Title of.

To the Earl of Westmorland.
My Lord.
IT were high Presumption in me not to be proud of this Occasion; and I should
be no less than a Rebel to Eloquence, if your Lines you sent me had not raised
me above my ordinary Level; so that to express my Gratitude, I must renounce my
Humility, and purchase one Virtue at the price of another. And well may my
Modesty suffer in the Service, when my Reason it self is overwhelmed with the
Favor. To see a Person of your Lordship's Eminency possessed of Nobility by a
double Tenure, both of Birth and Brain, so to bend his Greatness as to stoop to
me, who live in the Vale both of Parts and Fortune, is so high an Honor, that
who justly considers it, if he be not stupidly senseless, will be stupid with
Ecstasie. I, for my part, am lost in Amazement, and it is mine Interest to be
so; for not knowing otherwise how to give your Present a fit Reception, it is
the best of my play to be beside my self in the Action. You see, my Lord, how I
^mpty my self of my Native Faculty to be ready for those of your Inspirings, as
the Prophets of old in a Sacred Fury ran out of their Wits to make room for the
Deity. I shall not need hereafter to digest my Love-passions, I shall speak by
Instinct: for when your Honor deigned to visit me with your Lofty Numbers,
what was it else but to make me the Priest of your Lordship's Oracle? Such is
the Strength and Spirit of your Fancy, that methought your Poems (like the
Richest Wine) sent forth a Steam at the opening. What flowed from your Brain
sum'd into mine. It was almost impossible to read your Lines and be sober. You,
You, my Lord, are the Favorite of the Muses. Your Strain is so happy and has
the Reputation for so Matchless, as if you had a double Key to the Temple of
Honor to let in your Lordship's self and exclude Competitors. It Is you, my
Lord, have cut the Clouds and reached Perfection, who having mounted the Cliff,
lends an hand to me, who am laboring in the Craggy Ascent. So towering are the
Praises you please to bestow on me, and my Desert so grovelling, that to show
you my Head is not worthy your Height, it is not able to bear them; it grows
giddy with the Precipice. It pains me to be on the Last of an Hyperbole; you do
but crucify my tender Merits, to distend them thus at length and breadth.
Consider, I pray you, that the Leanest Endowments would be plump and full, thus
blown up with a Quill; and that there are some so Dwarfish whom the Rack will
not stretch to a proper Man. It is an excellent Breathing for a puissant Wit to
overbear the World in the Defense of a Paradox; and a good Advocate will
weather out the Cause, when there is neither Truth nor Invention. I persuade my
self you had never undertaken to write my Panegyric, but that you saw it was
to combat with the Tide, and to put your Abilities to the utmost Test in so
unlikely a Subject. Little do you think what store of Opposers your Opinion
will breed you; for though you be so powerful in the Art of persuasion, that
should you turn Apostate, there would need no more but to Towl the Bell for
Religion, yet this is an Heresy where you stand alone, and like Scaeva in the
Breach, with your single Valor duel an Army. Now, my Lord, if I be not
mistaken, I have found the Motive that induced you to oblige me; you are tied
by your Order to give Protection to the Weak and Succourless; so I must change
my Addresses, and thank your Red Ribband for my Commendations. Such, and so
many are the Flowers of Rhetoric you have heaped upon me, that I run the
hazard of the Olympic Victor, who was stifled with Posies cast upon him in
approbation of his Worth; which Fragrant Fate, if I should sustain, what is
there more to make me enamored of Death, but that the same Flowers should
straw my Corpse in a Funeral Oration? Could you think (my Lord) that your
suppressing your Name was able to conceal you, when it is easy to wind you by
your Phrase? The Sweetness of the Language discovered the Author, like that
Roman Senator, who hiding himself in time of Proscription, his Perfumes
betrayed him. But I shall not arrest your Lordship too far with a farther
Interruption. My Lord, you have Ennobled me with your Testimony, and I shall
keep your Paper as the Diploma of my Honor. Yet give me lieve to tell you,
that among all the Epithets you pile so Artificially to raise my Fame, there is
one wanting to accomplish my Ambition, and that which I beseech your Lordship I
may enjoy for the future; that is, to be esteemed

SIR, Your Honor's etc. John Cleveland.

A Letter to a Friend dissuading him from his Attempt to Marry a Nun.
THough no man's Arms can be opened wider to receive you on shore and give you
possession of his Breast; yet I know not whether with the usual Complement I
may welcome you home, as doubting your Country may have Mewed that Relation in
so long an Absence; she having exposed her Noble Issue, being Conviction enough
to make you disclaim her. Besides there is such a new Face of things since your
Departure, that what was formerly the Character of the Inhabitants, is now the
Kingdom's, To be a Stranger at home: Insomuch as were you designed for a second
Journey, it might be a part of your business to travel other Countries in quest
of your own. Indeed she is such an Alien in her Look that most of her Off
spring dare not ask her Blessing. Her Countenance is not Denizen of her self:
you would think she were some Floating Island, that had made a voyage only to
Truck for an outlandish Visage. Some who have spelled her Lineaments say she
Copies out the Dutch, and to make good the Parallel they doubt not to instance
in our Hogen Governors. It is in a broken Kingdom as in a cracked
Looking-glass, wh^re in stead of one Face, that Monarch-like should represent
the whole, you may have Variety of lesser ones glimmering in its room, and the
Aspects of all of them fierce and frowning. Well then a Foraigner she is and
her Complexion borrowed; so that as as our new Philosophers would have the
Earth to move and the Heavens to stand still, the same may be said of this
State of ours, and the Royal Train that you were part of. It was the Kingdom
wandered, not you that left it. You are fixed and England in Exile. When a
Country reels from its settled posture, there is no Defection in him that quits
it, it having first abandoned it self. In this case* though it be a Fallacy in
the sense, it holds good in Reason, that the Shore moves and falls off from the
Sayler; whence you see, Sir, there is some possibility I might reverse your
Travels, were it not for one Argument which abundantly confirms them, The sage
Experience you have Treasured up in your Observations; for no sooner had you
lost your Native Soil; but by way of Reprisal you took in others. The Dominions
you visit you carry along with you, and by a Victorious Industry make them pay
Tribute to your Understanding. Not like a number of our Roaring Gallants, who
return so empty and without their Errand, as if their Travel (like Witches in
the Air) were nothing but the Waftage of a deluded Fantasy, persuading
themselves that they Circle the Globe, when the Card they sail by is nothing
else but a slumbring Imposture. But methinks we are too Grave, Sir. What if we
unbend a while, and presume to tell you, that in all your Errantry there is no
Adventure so much affects me, as that of the Nun, where I cannot determine,
whether your Love it self were more Exotic, or the form of accosting it: For
although it be natural for Jealousy to study Fornication,. and every Cuckold
within his own Precincts to be an Engineer; yet never before have I heard of a
Mistress fenced with a Portcullice, or an amorous Visit managed with the
Caution which suspicious Kings use in an Enterview. This manner of Greeting may
not unfitly be termed Cupid's Barriers; a breathing Exercise, rather than a
Combat, where the Sporting Champions have a Rail to part them, that they may
not fight it out to the uttermost. Had your old Romancing Spirit possessed you,
the Brandished Blade would have freed the Lady from her Enchanted Durance. Nor
had you been less concerned in the Rescue than the Fair Recluse; for who that
blows short in expectation of his Love, and in the Heat of Impatience, should
be severed from his Hopes by a few envious Bars, would not feel himself (like
another St. Laurence) broiled on a Gridiron? But see how Customs vary with the
Clime. As there are some Regions who salute one another by putting off their
Shoes instead of their Hats; so it seems, where you have been, there is as
different a form of Imprisonment or Commitment. The Prisoner is at large and
without the Grates, wishing for Admittance, and she at whose Suit his Soul is
arrested, close clapped up and abridg'd of Liberty. Sure at this Grate those
Chrisom Lovers, called Platonicks, had their first Training. Those Queasie
Gamesters that diet themselves with the very Notion of Mingling Souls, without
putting the Body to farther Brokage than kissing of Hands and twisting of
Eye-beams. For your part, Sir, you are none of those puling Stomachs: You have
an Appetite for a whole Cloister. It is but Trifling sport for you to pull down
an Out-lyer, unless you leap the Pale and let slip at the Herd. I wonder what
Exorcisms the Abbess used to get quit of the Incubus; for had she not checked
your Hovering Temptations, I am confident by this time you had transformed the
Covent, and turned the Nunnery into a Seraglio. But in sober Sadness, why a
Nun, Sir? How came you out of the Active Torrent into that Solitary Creek?
Princes seldom Treat of Matches, but in foraign Dominions. Your Affection takes
greater State, as fixing upon one of another World. Had your Passion been
Centred on the Beauty of her Soul, I had looked upon it as the Act of your
Conversion. Such a Love might justly have been Christened by the name of Zeal,
being settled on a Person, with whom to be enamored is in a sort to take
Orders. Hence it is there want not some who suspect your Religion, left
equivocating from the Beauty of her Person to that of her Profession, you
should turn Monastic. Others, who are better acquainted with the warmth of
your Temper* are rather solicitous for the Church in General, lest with Luther
you should marry a Nun, and so with him make her a Jointure in a new Religion.
If this be your Plot, Consider, I pray you, how difficult it is to Innovate
farther in this Age of Novelties, when the World is so spent in new Inventions,
that for want of Gain, even Rust and Rottenness are flourished over with a
seeming Verdure. Not one of all those Beldam-Heresies that did Penance formerly
by the Doom of the Ancients, but has cast her Skin since these Confusions, and
gives her self out for a Blooming Virgin. But I think I may spare this piece
of Counsel, I dare be your Compurgator for meddling with Religion. That which
fired your Spirits was the Ambition of the Enterprise; nor could you entertain
a more Aspiring Frenzy, but by making Love to a Glorified Body. Tell me, I
pray you, how many Beads did you drop in Wooing? By what Liturgy did you frame
your Courtship? Laick Applications are here scandalous; nor will it avail to
say, you languish without her Compassion. A Sensual Man is able to vitiate the
Vestal Flame, even by his Martyrdom; other Lovers in the Jollity of their Trope
are wont to Canonize their Mistresses, as being of opinion that the Native
Rubric of their Cheeks has hallowed them. Will you run Counter to that
Consecration and degrade a Saint by Mortal Addresses? If you have no room in
your Calendar for Persons upon Earth, yet do not profane a Probationer of
Heaven; as if the readiest way to rectify Superstition, were, with our Modern
Reformers, to bow it into Atheism. Let me advise you, Sir, to retrieve your
self back from this Carnal Sacrilege. Catch not at Herostratus his Fame by
setting fire on the Temple, and dispute not a share of Guilt with Lucifer, in
causing a second Fall of Angels. Nay, never Start, Sir, nor look about at the
Expression: for I persuade my self, that those Divines who allot to each of us
a Tutelar Angel for our Protection, would not prejudice their Opinion, should
they leave her to her own Tuition, as hardly knowing in such a Person how to
distinguish between the Charge and the Guardian. Sir, I was entreated by our
Noble Friend, that what my Fancy suggested upon this Subject, I would mould
into Number; but I must beg your pardon, it being a Request with which to
comply were to be your Fellow-criminal, and by a Conformity of Guilt pervert a
Votary: for even my Muse is Vowed and Veiled too, she is set apart for the
Service of my Mistress, and what is that but entering Orders in the true
Religion. The Truth is this; she is so chastely confined to that sole
Employment; that should I in Verse attempt to yield you an account how much I
honor you, not a whole Grove of Laurel would bribe her to a Distich: whereas
in Transitory Prose, were I a Master of all those Languages, which I make no
question but you have gained by your Travels* I should hold them all too few to
give you sufficient Assurance that I am, SIR,

Your most Faithful Servant J C,

The Piece of a Common Place upon Romans the 4th. Last Verse.
Who was delivered for our Offenses, and rose again for our Justification.
THE Athenians had two sorts of Holy Mysteries, two distinct times, November
and August, for their Celebration: but when King Demetrius desired to be
admitted into their Fraternity, and see both their Solemnities at once, the
People past a Decree, that the Month March, when the King requested it, should
be called November, and after the Ceremonies due to that Month were finished,
it should be translated to August, and so at the second return of this new Leap
year they accomplished his Request. Two greater Mysteries are the parts of my
Text, the Passion and the Resurrection; several times appropriate for either
Good Friday or Easter. But as the Athenian Decree made November and August meet
in March, so give me lieve by a less Syncope of Time to contract Good Friday
and Easter both to a day, as the Passion and Resurrection are both in my Text;
Who was delivered for our offenses, etc. And I may the rather link them both on
a day, because the Text is willing to admit some Resemblance. The Evening and
the Morning make the day, says the Holy Spirit; the Method of my Text observes
as much: here is the Evening, the Passion, when our Savior stripped himself of
those Rags of Mortality, and lay down in the Bed of Corruption, where he stays
not long; but the Morning breaks in the Resurrection, when this Corruptible
shall put on Incorruption, and this Mortal shall put on Immortality. So then my
Text is a Day from Sun to Sun, Soles occidere and redire possunt, from the
Sunset of his Passion to the Sunrise of his Resurrection.

The Dew of his Birth is as the Dew of the Morning. There is a Morning-Dew and
there is an Evening-Dew; the Evening-Dew, the Tears that are shed at the Sun's
Funeral, and they may justly decypher the Passion; the Morning-Dew, the Tears
of Joy and Welcome at his new Return; and what is that but a Transcript of the
Resurrection?

My Discourse then must be changeable, composed of a Cloud and a Rainbow.

Nocte pluit tota --
A Deluge of Grief-showers down in the Passion, but the Waters will cease, and
the Dove will return with a Leaf in her mouth, -- Redeunt Spectacula mane,
Nothing but Joy and Triumph, Pomp and Pageants at the Resurrection. But
methinks St. Paul puts new Cloth into an old Garment, mends the Rent of the
Passion with the Resurrection. Can the children of the Bride-chamber weep while
the Bridegroom is with them? While the Resurrection is in the Text, who can
Tune his Soul to lament his Passion; again, by the Waters of Babylon is no
singing the Songs of Sion. When Grief has locked up the Heart with the story
of the Passion, what Key of Mirth can let in the Anthem of the Resurrection?
Different Notes you see, and yet we will attempt an Harmony. Bassus and Altus, a
Deep Base that must reach as low as Hell to describe the Passion, and thence
rebound to a joyful Altus, the high-strain of the Resurrection.

I begin with the Evening, and so I may well style the Passion, since the
Horror thereof turned Noon into Night, and made a Miracle maintain my
Metaphor. The Sun was obscured by Sympathy, and his Darkness points us to a
greater Eclipse. The Sun and the Moon, what are they but Parables of our
Savior and the Soul of Man? The Moon is the Soul; I am sure her Spots will not
Confute the Similitude. I might here slacken the Reigns of my Comparison, and
show you how the Moon of her self is a dark Body, and what Light she partakes,
she receives it from the Sun at second hand. How every Soul is by Nature sinful
and in the Shadow of Death, till the Light that lightens the Gentiles, till the
dayspring on high visit us. I might pursue my Allegory in the Eclipse. The
Shadow of the Earth intercepts the Beams of the Sun, and so the Moon suffers an
Eclipse. Pleasure and Profit, those two Dugs of the World what are they but
Earthly shadows that Eclipse the Soul, and deprive it of the sweet influence of
the Sun of Righteousness. But I hold me to the Metaphor, my Text will warrant
the Parallel. As the Moon is Eclipsed by the Earth, so she her self Eclipses
the Sun. The Soul is not only sinful, but makes God suffer; (...) is a
Physick-word, and signifies the Labor of a Disease. Cure thy self, and there
will be no Eclipse in him: Apply but Salve to thy self, and thou wilt heal the
Wounds that thy Sins have made. Passus est Deliquium propter Delicta nostra.
Deliquium and Delictum proceed both from a Root. He had never been delivered
unto Death, but for the Jail-deliver of our Offenses. See the Difference
betwixt God's and Man's Eclipse. Man's sets God and him at odds; God's
reconciles them. The Moon when she is Eclipsed is always in Opposition with the
Sun. The Soul will sin, though she be at Enmity with God for it: but the Sun
when he is Eclipsed is always in Conjunction with the Moon. God will be Friends
with Man, though he purchase the Union with his Passion, and seal the Covenant
with his own Blood. But that all things which concern the Passion may be
miraculous, we will proceed in Method and restrain that to Order and Distinction,
which put Nature out of Frame, and threatened the World with Confusion. Consider
then my Text, like the Veil of the Temple rent in twain, (...) and (...), He
was delivered for our Offenses; nay it is rent from top toth' bottom; the same
parts will serve for the Resurrection, He rose again for our Justification.

And well may my Text be divided by the Temple, since our Savior shadowed both
parts of it under that Nation. I will destroy this Temple, and within three
days I will build it again. And now* I begin with Simon of Cyrene, to bear his
Cross, and labor, as he did, under the burden. The Death of the Cross, all
the Languages upon it cannot express it: but we see the Sun better by looking
into the Waters, than by affronting his Beams. The only way to comprehend the
Sufferings of our Creator, is by feeling the Pulse of the Creature. What shall
I say to the Convulsion of the Rocks? The Lapidary tells you how the
Compassionate Turcoise confesses the Sickness of his Wearer by changing
color. The whole Rocks suffered with our Savior, they were cleft; and shall
not this rend our stony hearts? O that Deucalion's Men were not now a Fable!
Caucasus is supple in comparison of our Breasts. Marble can weep, whilst we
are Pumices. Moses his Rod will sooner fetch a River out of a Rock, than a Tear
from a Rebellious Sinner. The Earthquake is the next Miracle. Tremble thou
Earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. She
tottered under the Burden of so great a Sin. She had lost the Author of her
being, and so might well be struck with a dead Palsy. It Is a good Observation
of Aristotle, that among all the absurd Opinions of the old Philosophers; who
held the Soul to be Fire; some Air, some Water; none ever had so gross a Soul
as to conceive it to be Earth. O that in this case we were Earthy-minded! That
we were affected with this Religious Palsy! Then should we see that Motus
Trepidationis, the Motion of the Heavens as well as the Earth. We must work out
our salvation with fear and trembling. But the Earth has quaked so long till
it has awakened the Dead: nor is it a wonder that the Dead live, when Life it
self can die. Heaven descends into the Bowels of the Earth, and, to make up the
Anagramm, the Graves open and the Dust arises. Thus were all things shuffled,
and Nature rung the Bells backwards, as if every Creature desired to bear the
Burden of our Savior's Elegy. Attendite and videte -- Behold and see if ever,
there was sorrow like unto my sorrow. Cyrus to be revenged of a River cut it
into so many Channels, that it lost its Name. This is the way to allay a Grief,
to divide it into so many streams, to pour it into other Bosoms; but even this
is denied to our Savior. The Sons of Zebedee do not now petition to drink his
Cup: They would not now be one on his right hand, another on his left; no, he
is crucified betwixt two Thieves. The Quality of his Companions augments his
Misery. He was born among Beasts, and does he not die so too? Man without
understanding is like unto a Beast that perishes. Betwixt two Thieves. You see
Vice to Virtue is two to one: Virtue is in the Center, Vice in the
Circumference; vast is the Circuit; Vniversus orbis, the whole World lies in
Wickedness, whilst Virtue like the Center is but an Imaginary point. Thieves,
and well too, Barrabbas was too good for him now; mark but their Election; Not
him, but Barrabbas. But methinks his Crown might command a Distance; but it is a
Crown of Thorns: and if you consider well the Troubles annexed to a Crown, it
may seem a Tautology. Every Crown is a Crown of Thorns. See here Cruelty
Quartering her Arms with Division. Pseudo-Philippus, that Counterfeit of the
Macedonian King, when he was taken by the Romans, had so much honorable
Calamity indulged unto him; Quod de eo tanquam de vero Rege triumpharetur. They
Crown him, but it is for Sacrifice. They never acknowledge him King of the Jews,
till upon the Cross, that so his Title might set off his Misery.

The Answer to the Newark-Summons.
BUT that it argues a greater Courage to pass the Test of a Temptation
uncorrupted, than with a timorous Virtue to decline the Trial, so jealous is
this Maiden Garrison of sullying her Loyalty, that she had returned your
Summons without perusal. Which rebound of your Letter, as it were a laudable
Coyness to preserve her Integrity; so it is the most compendious Answer to what
you propound. For I hope you intend it rather as a Mode and Formality to
preface your design, than with expectation of an Issue suitable to your Demands.
You cannot imagine this untainted Newark, which has so stoutly defended her
Honor against several intended Rapes, should be so degenerous from her Virgin
Glory as to admit the Courtship of either your Rival Nations. Having therefore
received a Letter subscribed with Competition of both Kingdoms, she wonders not
at your busy endeavor to divert her Trent, since the Thames and Tweed with
equal Ambition would crowd into her Channel* Which Letter, since it proceeded
from a Committee, and was directed after the same Garb, as to a
Committee-Governour, by putting the Gentlemen and Corporation in equal
Commission (though the joining us together was with Intention to divide us) I
shall in satisfaction of yours unanimously desire you to reflect upon the
King's Letter, lately sent to both Houses of Parliament, where, in a full
Compliance with all their Desires upon the softest Terms, and gentlest
Conditions that ever Prince propounded, he offers to disband all his Forces,
and dismantle his Garrisons. To what end then do you demand that of of the
Steward whereof the Lord and Master makes a voluntary tender? In vain do you
court the Inferior Streams, when the Springhead prevents your expectation. It
is our Duty to trace his Commands, not to outstrip them. So that if Honor and
Conscience would permit the Delivery, mere Manners would retard us, lest by an
overreaching speed we frustrate his Majesty's Act of Grace, and antedate his
Royal Disposal. I shall wave the Arguments wherewith you endeavor to evince
our Consent. I am neither to be stroak'd into an Apostasy, by the mention of
fair Conditions in a misty Notion: Nor to be scared into Dishonor by your
running Division on the Fate of Chester. For as I am no Huckster in the War, to
measure my Allegiance by my interest for the former; so I disdain that Poverty
of Spirit, by a Resemblance of Chester to be executed in Picture. I shall be
Loyal without that Copy, and I hope never to be the Transcript of their
Calamity. You may do well, Gentlemen, to use your Fortune modestly, and think
not that God Almighty does uphold your Cause by reason of your Victories;
perchance he fattens it with present Success for a riper Destruction. For my
part I had rather embrace a Wrack floating upon a single Plank, than imbarque
in your Action with the fullest Sails to dance upon the Wings of Fortune.
Whereas you urge the expense of the Siege, and the pressures of the Country in
supporting your Charge, there I confess I am touched to the quick: But their
Miseries, though they make my Heart bleed, must not make my Honor. My
Compassion to my Country must not make me a Parricide to my Prince. Yet in
order to their ease, if you will grant me a Pass for some Gentlemen to go to
Oxford, that I may know his Majesty's pleasure, whether, according to his
Letter, he will wind up the Business in general, or leave every Commander to
steer his own Course; then I shall know what to determine. Otherwise I desire
you to take notice, that when I received my Commision for the Government of
this place, I annexed my Life as a Label to my Trust.

Oration in Scholis Publicis habita cum junior Baccalaureus in Tripodem
disputaret Cantab.
QVos ne videre possum citra oculorum hyperbolen, quomodo vos compellarem? Et
cum altissimus vester gradus sine scala occupari nequeat, quaenam Orationis
Climax vestram scandet dignitatem? Vestram dum suspicio in meo vultu invenio
purpuram; and ingentis curae quae praestandae observantiae me habet solicitum,
non novi subtilius argumentum quam stuporem. Quod autem Poetarum Princeps
Deorum Senatum cogit ad suam Batrachomyomachiam, pari audacia liceat and mihi
vos ad ludicrum hoc cer^amen nostrum invitare. Vmbra est haec nostra contentio
and Icon belli. Murium and Ranarum pugna, quid aliud quam Iliadis
Brachygraphia? and in pusillis istis animalibus Hector and Achilles (tanquam
Iliades in nuce) coarctantur. Ea siquidem est pensi nostri conditio, ut hic
etiam Mars and Venus implicati jacent. Pugna est, sed ludicra; Ludus, and tamen
bellicus; ita ut nec bis cincta placeat Philosopia, nec nuda Cytherea. Qui
virili toga indutus, necdum reliquit nuces, sed totus jocos crepat, hujus ego
Palladem posthumam cerebri sui prolem existimabo. Qui in hisce Floralibus solus
Cato, and inter Philosophiae spinas nullos admittit Rhetoricae flores, hujus
Minerva (ad Amazonis instar) altera mamma destituitur. Ille demum sit noster
Miles, qui and sese praestet ingenii Velitem, and Philosophiae Cataphractum;
qui and viriliter audet disputare, and pueriliter cum Bipede Tripode par impar
ludere. Me quod spectat ita rationem ad agendum subduxi meam, ut utrinque munus
moliar and subterfugiam, and pudibunda metum inter and officium Musa, and fugit
ad salices, and videri cupit.

Oration Salutatoria in Adventum Illustrissimi Principis Palatini.
Serenissime Comes Palatine.
SI Archetypam corporis vestri elegantiam possem transcribere, and Orationem
meam tanquam venustatis Metaphoram a vestro vultu deducere, ita Imaginem
vestram aemulis encomiis exprimerem, ut qui spectatum venias, venires
spectandus, and unicum esset Iohannense spectaculum teipsum tibi ostentare. Sed
quoniam ad hosce solares radios caligat penitus Atheniensis Noctua, gratulor
mihi meam inertiam, stuporem jacto: ita enim cum Sacratissimo Principe in
trutina quadam collocatus sum, ut in quantum me deprimit mea humilis facultas,
in tantum sursum nititur vestra sublimitas. Salve igitur, desideratissime
Princeps, hujus Collegii Anima, vel potius omnium animarum Collegium; ita tibi
singuli devoti sumus, and in obsequium vestrum juncta phalange omnes ruimus.
Ecce tibi Majorum tuorum Monumenta! Margaretae coct a maenia, quae Semiramis
invideat Margaretae! Henrici Septimi, and nostrum omnium Matris; quae uno partu
enixa est quot Herculem fabulantur genuisse, quinquaginta Socios. Nec Tibi,
Stemmatique vestro solam Margaretam debemus, quin and paternae gloriae haeres
esto; Fredericum volo beatissimae memoriae, qui viginti abhinc plus minus
annis, una cum Augustissimo Carolo tunc temporis surgente Iulo, ad hanc
Margaretae Sobolem, quasi Compatres duo and Susceptores accesserunt. O quam
laeti meditamur istum natalem nostrum diemque adeo festum, ut muros hosce sacro
quodam minio pinxisse videatur! Ecquid huic foelicitati superesse possit?
Possit, ut quod Patris splendore semel tinctum* vestro olim foret Dibaphum;
Sequerisque Patrem jam passibus aequis. Euge speciosum Principem! in quo omnium
legimus Simulachra Autographa; Margaretae nostrae Palladium Frederici Patris
Numisma aureum and Matris Corneliae Ornamentum, Elizabethae dulcissimae, and in
vestro vuliu totam Deam confessae; cujus lauds ut hodiernum saeculum effundit,
ita Posteritatis Echo reparabit: cujus mascula anima jam sexu vestitur masculo,
Elizabetha Carolo. Carolo! O quam luxuriat dicendi Seges! Quam decies repetitus
placebit Carolus! Carolus Caroli Sobrinus and Caroli Avunculus. O Beatissima
Carolorum Climax! Macte esto gradibus Carolina scala, ut cum prae altitudine
sua supremus Rex Carolus Coelos scandat, novi subinde succrescant Caroli,
quibus, quasi internodiis, distincta ejus aeternitas usque and usque floreat;
sic ipse sibi superstes Carolus, non hominum (parum illud Nestoris) sed
Carolorum tres aetates vivat, Filii, Sobrini, utriusque Caroli.

Ad Regem and Principem in Colleg. Johan.
QVAE nupero dolor obriguit Academia, tanquam orbatae Niobes soror saxea, si
in pristinam Facundiam resolvatur hodie agnoscit omen vestrae Praesentiae.
Memnonis statua solaribus percussa radiis vocalem Musicam dedisse fertur:
habent vel hi Parietes Chordas Magicas, quas minima vultus vestri strictura,
quasi plectro animavit. Nec magis eloquuntur Lapides, quam e diametro miraculi
stupent Oratores. Quod in afflatis Numine fieri videmus; ita Deum recipere ut
ejiciant Hominem, instinctu sapere, non intellectu; perinde vestra in nobis
hospitatur Divinitas, cujus nimius splendour omnes omnium sensus sacrificat, and
tam sanctam nostri jacturam in lucro deputamus. Ignoscimus jam Fatis
immodestiam suam, imminens Literarum exitium ut favoris insidias gratulamur:
scilicet, ambitiosae moriuntur Musae, quae ad vestros pedes efflabunt Vale*
Lusit Archimedes Coelos in Sphaera; quid ni dicam Jovem in Carolo fabricatum?
Adeo ut Orator ille qui, manu deorsum flexa, O Coelum exclamavit, si istum ad
modum perorasset hodie, soloecismum manu non commisisset. Enimvero cum Regem
Optimum Maximum and Principem simul astantes videam, nescio quomodo Principis
Natalis videatur redux; ubi Solemn and Stellam fulgentes a Symbolis (licet non
equis radiis) conspicati sumus. Caesare mortuo novum in coelis emicuit sydus,
quod Julii Anima passim audiit. Caesaris Epilogus suit Prologus Caroli; neque
enim aptior Stella, quam Invictissima illius Herois Anima, quae vestrae sobol^
res gerendas ominaretur. Stellam dixi? Muto factum; crederem potius ipsum Solemn
fuisse, qui ^unc temporis tibi r^ligavit moderamen Diei, and ut Principis cunas
fortius videret, suum i^ stellam contraxit oculum. Ecce ut patrissa^ Carolus!
Vt ad vestras Virtutes anhelus surgit! Quod sub pientissime Rege accidisse
legimus Solemn multis gradibus retro ferri, Principis aetas pari portento
compensavit damnum, cujus festina virius devorat Horologium, and Pueritia
nondum libata Meridiem attigit. Parcatur mihi, si turgeat Oration; si nihil
praeter Solemn and Stellas crepet; quippe in Principis Natali ipsa Natura mihi
praeivit Allegoriam. O foelicem interim Academiam, and Aeternitatem quandam
nactam^ quae in Rege and Principe, and esse nostrum, and nostrum fore simul
complectitur. Non est quod plura expectentur saecula; viximus and nostram and
posterorum vitam. Sed vereor ne molestus fuerim importuno officio, quod in ta^
illustri praesentia in nescio quid majus piaculo excrescit. Minima coram Rege
Errata, tanquam angustiores rimae, extenduntur lumine. Oration itaque nostra pro
gento temporum reformabitur, vel, quod tantundem est, rescindetur. Hoc unicum
prae^abor votum; Vivas Augustissime, Pietas tuorum and Tremor Host^um. Vivas,
vel in hoc declivio, Literarum Stator. Vivas denique eam indutus gloriam, ut
Filium tuum Carolum appellemus Maximum, quia solo Patre minorem.

Oration habita ad Legatum quendam Gallicum, and Hollandiae Comitem, tunc
temporis Academiae Cancellarium.
QVam Augusta sit vestra Praesentia, and quam sacro horrore nostros percellit
anim^s, utinam Oratoris vestri stupor non ita nimis testaretur. Quem enim
alacritas offi^ii modo accenderat ut vos salutarem, impedit ^am eadem Religione
in illas aures importunus ruerem iuquilinus, ubi Regum consilia habitarunt. Nec
magis alloqui quam intueri nefas* Fulgura spont in ambor^m (...), quorum
splendorem si quis aspiceret* bidental fi^ret. Si quis Persarum, qui veneratur
Solemn, vos intueretur, utrumque ratus Numen, suum divideret sacri^icium. Nos
quod attinet, fatemur lippitudine radiorum victoriam, and hoc geminum honoris
jubar imbellis nostra ac^es eo magis commendat, quo minus sustineat. Salve
igitur, Celeberrime Hospes, cujus gratissimi adventus, ut capacia essent nostra
pectora, magnitudo gaudii nosipsos a nobis exclusit for as. Ecce quot Helluones
oculi vos inspicimus! Quot in vestris vultibus Quadragesimam violamus! Sed nos
indigni tantis dapibus. Margareta, and Regii illi Manes, quos in Fundatoribus
nostris numeramus, per me, tanquam per Legatum suum (ut Titulo vestro superbire
liceat) Adventum vobis gratulantur. Nec invideas mihi, clarissime Advena,
Legati nomen; nam cum Celi^udo vestra ad gradum meum (quem suscepisti modo)
dignaretur descendere, Humilitas nostra (quod in bilance solet) ad vestrum
apicem assurgebat. Scholas vidisti and illud unicum Sacellum, quorum alteri
docuisti Literas, alteri Pietatem. Et quid amplius studes apud nos invisere?
Eccum Academiam integram, Cancellarium dignissimum, qui quicquid Cantabrigia
nostra complectitur before repraesentat. Theatra and Scholarum Pyramides nos
ludibundi Vitruvii aedisicamus in chartis. Tu, Tu Architectus fortunae nostrae,
cujus Magnificentia vel Pictoris nostri a^daciam superabit. Multus sum,
Honoratissime Orator, in Cancellarii debitissimis laudibus, ut scias qualis
Heroes, quantus aliorum Patronus honori vestro hodie inserviat. Certe dum vos
M^jorum Gentium Nobiles simul a^stantes videam. Nescio quis Isthmus videatur
Galliam and B^ita^niam (invito Oceano) conjunxisse. Quin perpetuus sit ille
Regionum nodus, and ita Gordianus, ut neuter Alexander dis^indat gladio. Plura
vellem, and usque pergeret votorum pietas, sed victus diviti argumento plusquam
Demosthenis Anginam patior. Quare si aures vestras, Regibus assuetas, nimis
detinendo sacrilegus fuerim; si quid deliquerim, hoc saltem sit subitae
Orationis prodiga temeritas; ut ne paratus ad peccandum prodiisse videar.

Oration habita cum unus e Prelectoribus, deficiente Termino, pensum (pro more)
imponeret.
HOdiernus intravi (Iuvenes Academici) tanquam Cato Floralia, ut exirem tantum.
Convenimus fateor, sed ut dissiliamus: Siquidem hoc est longum Vale moribundi
Termini, qui nollet (ut Iuridici loquuntur) intestatus mori. Sed singulis
vestrum Legatum tribuit, and ejusdem cerae cohaeredes reddit. Penso igitur
vobis erit Aristotelis Liber primus de Anima Conscriptus. Et quidem vos scio
unam vel alteram Authoris paginam posse transcribere: hoc autem a vobis non
expeto. Neque est ut expectarem ut Heautontimorumen^s and misere Absyrtos
veteres Philosophos in Cruciatus denuo redigatis. Ruente Quercu vel quilibet
Homuncio ligna colliget. Illius autem animosior est Spiritus qui e triumphantis
Philosophi Fa^cibus eripiat, and eorum aliquem sub Clientela sua patrocinetur.
Obsoleta ista Democriti, vel etiam Thaletis opinio ingenio V^stro siat
Authentica. Neque tamen in ullas angustias vos redigam. Vniversas Naturae
Pandectas habeatis vobis usurarias. Modo etiam placuerit, (eruditi Iuvenes)
liceat vobis leviter perstringere, and exesa ista Philosophorum Placita risui
exponere. Quod si ita iis contigerit occumbere, habent quod Fatis imputent.
Stuporem jactent, atque impotentiam suam in lucro possunt deputare: Si pereant
manibus vestris periisse juvabit.

Oration habita in Scholis publicis cum Patris officio fungeretur.
QVam aequivocum sit Patris nomen, quota and quam discolor officii ratio, si
non aliunde, ab hac varia frequentia (Severiores viri and Lepidissima proles)
possem dignoscere? Si enim ad singula Auditorum ingenia quilibet Orator
componendus sit, ita ut cum Senibus tussiat, rideat cum pueris; quid ego
hominis? Quale futurus sum Monstrum, gravitate and nucibus, Patre and puero
interpunctum? Quod in dispertita and expansa Aquila fieri videmus unum corpus
duplicem ostentare faciem: eadem est nostra erga vos and filios bifrons
conditio. Hos cum aspicio, sumsonex Aquila pullos meosad vestru^ jubar
exploratura; ubi vos e contra, nescio quomodo ipse in pullum redeo, and ad
instar Aquilae juventutem renovo. Duae igitur Dramatis personae sustinendae
sunt; vestra in scena acturus sum Filium, in vestra Patrem, alterum genu
flexum, alterum stabit Elephantinum, oscillatione, quod quod aiunt, ludam.
Superam modo, modo inferam occupabo partem; partim Senex, partim Puer, qualis
Aeson ille in Aheno Medeae semicoctus. Et quae quidem aptior via inveniri
poterat quam per ferulam ad fasces, per Filii scabellum ad culmen Patris
assurgere? Serviendum ut imperes, Aulicorum methodus; a Vitulo ad Taurum
Milonis progressus. Vobis igitur, Viri Gravissimi, primitiae nostrae sunt
consecrandae; quod si nullo, vel, quod perinde est, tralatitio tantum honor
prosequerer, non dico causam, quin filii mei improbitate erga me pari, injuriam
vestram ulciscantur. Neque tamen interea noscimus quali vos compellemus nomine,
quorum Eruditio scribit Academiae Maritos, obsequium malit Filios. Perplexus
suit and tortuosus ille incesti nodus, quem de Oedipo suo fabulatur Graecia;
major Maeander unusquisque vestrum, quorum eruditione cum Alma Matter gravida
fiat, and quotannis parturiat; quorum praeceptis and exemplari virtute; cum
tenella pubes (quasi binis uberibus) lactetur indies; non Oedipus majori cum
aenigmate sceleratus, quam quilibet vestrum pius: Matris Maritus, Vxoris
Filius, and Fratrum Pater. Neque hic se sistit vestra divina indoles, cujus vel
pictura est satis prolifica; siquidem Alma Matter ubi concipiat, speciem vestram
ob oculos ponit, vestrum instar repraesentat animo, ut masculam magis, magis
excultam sobolem enitatur. Illi, illi estis, quibus si ante inventas literas
contigisset vivere, Imagines vestras ab Aegyptiis expressas, hodie pro Artibus
and Scientiis legeremus. Non ego sequax erroris illius qui nihil egregium ducit
nisi quod vetustum, qui praesentia fastidit tempora, and ex hesterno jure panem
atrum vorat. Senescit, si Diis placet, Natura; Majoribus quidem nostris dedic
animarum jugera, nobis spithamas; Gigantes illi, nos Pusiones. Degeneres animae
and vere minores in hac opinione: Lucrifecit haec aetas, non decoxit. Illi
quidem Literarum Atavi, sed quota est familia? cujus primus fuit illud quod
dicere nolo, secundus illud quod nequeo: Humilis principii nobilis progressus.
Habeant quod suum est Antiqui, sed ne in solidum fiant Domini: suas sibi lauds
vendicent, sed vestras vobis ne praeripiant; quorum ego meritis tantum confido,
ut veterum sicut canitiem veneror, sic misereor impotentiam. Ruct arunt illi
glandes, vestrum est triticum: calceati little dentes, and victus asper, vestrae
dapes and ingenii gulae; quibus quod retro est seculum tantum stravit mensam,
erit a quadris futurum. Clari Convivae, quibus obsonantur antiqui, ministrant
posteri. Sed quam effrons ego and devorati pudoris, qui dum vestra molior
Encomia, Orationem meam foelicitatis tantae commensalem reddam! Liceat tamen
peccare, Auditores, ut ignoscatis; pupura elotis maculis est iterata murice;
gloriabor de culpa a vobis remissa magis quam de innocentia. Julius Sabinus,
cum a Romano imperio defecisset, susis jam copiis and afflictis rebus in
monumentum quoddam se abdidisse dicitur, ubi cum Vxore tamdiu latuerit, ut
plures filios ex ea susceperit; tandem vero deprehensus, and pro Tribunali
positus, filios suos in medium sistens, sic affatur Iudicem. Parce, Parce,
Caesar; hos in monumento genui, hosce alui, ut tibi plures essemus supplices.
Vestram fidem, Auditores, quicquamne uspiam rotundius dictum? Consulite
quicquid est Rhetorum. O vanas spes tuas Cicero! O frustra susceptos labores! O
inanes cogitationes! Tinnis, tinnis prae hoc Oratorum maximo, qui si cum Vxore
tua Rhetorica tamdiu in Musaeo conclusus esses, quam ille in Monumento, nunquam
Orationem hujus parem genuisses. Gratias tibi, Sabine, de excusatione mea, qui
cum necesse sit ut delinquam, habeo tamen deprecandi formulam. Habeo silios
quos ostendam, hanc circumstantem Rhetoricam. Magna, magna est Infantium
Eloquentia, qui eo plus exorant quo non loquantur. Eorum illice tacendi Suada
and ego in praesens utar; neque dubito quin plus favoris demerear silentio,
quam ulteriori taedio.

Actus primi
Scena secunda.
REdeo jam alter Sosia: Redeo cum annorum sarcina. O quam tacito pede tempus
labitur, and obrepit non intellecta senectus! Non est, quam videtis, barbae
desperatio, sed genarum calvities; non sum implumi^ puer, sed defloccatus
senex. Prodite igitur in aciem, mei filii; non in aciem ingenii; nollem enim
vos nimis ingeniosos in pueritia, ne Doctores sitis in senectute. Prudens
Natura dedit Infantulis rationis somnum, ut in aetatis vespera lucubrentur. Cum
animae nimis vigiles in praetexta, dormiunt, ut videtis, in purpura. Festo die
si quid prodigeris, pro festo egere liceat, modo non peperceris; si Iuvenes
prodigatis cerebra, Senes capita eritis and nil praeterea. Sed non est quod de
vobis metuam; pari modo nostra, quo Claudiana familia est intertexta, aut
Regem, aut Fatuum nasci oportet; aut lepidos and facetos Iuvenes, aut eorum
Antipodas. Illos ita hilares and jocosos, ut ex Jovis cerebro jurares natos,
alios ita hebetes and tardos, ut vel ex patris delirio, vel ex novissimo
decreto. Non magis differunt illae primae sorores, Nox and Dies, quam hi
Fratres. In hisce radiorum pompa and adulta lux; in illis spissae tenebrae,
vel, si quod Intellectus lumen, qualis e squamis piscium, aut putri ligno
nocturnus splendour. Hercules and Iphiclus fratres fuerunt, indole dispares;
Herculi fortitudo data est, Iphiclo pernicitas pedum, ac si illum Al^mena ad
bellum, hunc ad fugam peperisset. Est and nobis multiplex Hercules, qui
duodecim terminos totidem laboribus mensuravit: unus forsan aut alter Iphiclus,
qui pocula sacra bibit and fugit; qui non alias se Herculis fratrem demonstrat,
quam quod trinoctium illud quod ad procreandum Herculem continuavit Jupiter in
intellectu suo usque conservat. Nata est (quamvis novitia) de quadam fabula;
qui cum agnum instdiis excepisset, and odora nare persequeretur Pastor, ubi
nullus pateret effugii locus, tugurium intrat, agnum fasciis involutum in cunas
componit, quas huc illuc subinde quassat, ut balanti puero conciliaret somnum;
si^ scrutantium examen elusit, and astu non dispari Ulyssem vicit: Sunt and in
nostra prole aliqui, quorum cunas si penitius excutiatis, illuc etiam reperire
est illud simplicius animal, nihil praeter agninam pellem and innocentiam.
Mortale ovum Castoris, immortale Pollucis; hic Jovem Deum imitatur, aeternus,
viridis, and mutationis expers; ille Jovem Cygnum; nec diu erit quin senior
factus canitie simulabit plumas; alter filius Jovis, alter (...). Quis tantam
componet litem? Quis conciliabit inter sese tam multiformis foe^us membra? Det
Pollux Castori immortalitatem mutuam, uterque vivet alternatim; dies nocti
lucem accomodet, utrinque crepusculum fiet; spargantur in emnibus merita, quae
in aliquibus fluunt mista, and mea side omnes idonei ad respondendum questioni.
Hitamen sunt in quibus stabit hodierna hilaritas: cum enim penuria verborum sit
Matter Rhetoricae, non video quin defectus ingennii sit Pater Iocorum. Sed esto
quod non sunt agiles and ad ingenium prompti; nonne statutis magis morigeri?
Non sunt stupidi, tantum obtemperant Authoritati. Centurio cum a Praelio
abesset, and Africanus Victor causam quaereret, respondit, se tuendis castris
dedisse operam, ne caeteris in acie d^ten^is diriperentur; suboluit Duci
pusilanimis ratio. Non amo nimium diligentes. Etiam and filli mei hisce lepidis
Exercitiis interessent, nisi quod tuenda sunt Castra, observinda Statuta, ne
caeteris jocantibus violarentur. Euge mei filii! non suit Militis ignavi^, sed
Castrorum cura; non Torpor ingenii, sed meius Statuti. Lex suit antiqua in
Tabulis Decemviralibus primum inventa, ad Justiniani Codicem postea progressa,
in Iure qua Canonic^, qua Civili receptissima; and tandem ad hoc Municipale
nostrum delapsa. Si quis faxit plus quam possit damnas esto. Lex imponit
Castitatis fibulam; nonne damnandus Eunuchus si committat stuprum? Cavet
Statutum ut frugi vivamns: nonne culpandus Mendicus si luxurietur? Pari modo
plectendi sunt mei filii si sint ingeniosi. Crudele Decretum quod mutis execuit
linguas, caecis extinxit oculos, filis meis ingenio interdixit.

Oration Inauguralis, cum Praelectoris Rhetorici munus auspicaretur.
QVanta and quam divina sit vestra benefaciendi Indoles, quam pauperrima
Gratitudinis nostrae talio, nescio an diutinum meum silentium, an hodierna
Oration luculentius fuerit testimonium. Imparem se fatetur modesta taciturnitas,
and in tanto certamine maluit cedere, quam infantibus Gratiis humanitatem
vestram balbutire. In minimis and quae compensari possunt beneficiis peccat
silentium, quod in majoribus est religiosum. Sed frigide agnoscere, tantundem
ac tacere; and in hoc tamen scelere pietatem meam invenietis, quod enim
sollicitis votis ambiunt alii, ut favori vestro paribus numeris respondeant, ut
munus and Gratiae in amoehaeam quandam Eclogam coalescant; secus ego gratulor
meam gratiarum ignaviam: quo enim magis infra muneris vestri magnitudinem
subsido, eo infamia mea munus commendo. Gratiae cum beneficio in bilance
posi^ae, and pro levitate sua in sublime actae, ex proprio ludibrio gloriam
addunt and pondus beneficio. Quod si elegantes magis velitis gratias, estote
vos minus munifici, Gratitudo ^st beneficii Echo, quae ut singula verba potest
repetere, ita longam sententiam ne dimidiare. Monosyllaba (ut ita dicam)
beneficia facile reverberamus, cum grandioribus and vestris ne unam aut alteram
syllabam rependimus: prodeo igitur in aciem cum amore vestro, sed ut succumbam
studeo. Contendunt gratiae cum beneficio, sed ut ex ista pugna major appareat
vestra victoria. Qui in hostis potestatem se lubens offert, invidet hosti
honorem suum; plenior ex capto quam ex dedititio Triumphus; and major erit
munificentiae vestrae Paean ex Oratore victo, quam ex imbelli silentio. Quorsum
autem ego in haec subsellia ascenderem, qui ita haereditarium a proavis meis
praelectoribus accepi silentium, ut necesse habuerim quasi ex traduce,
ta^nisse? Erat enim, cum Lectores legere pleonasmus haberetur. Artis fuit apud
illos dissimulare Artem; munus suscipere, cum privilegio dormire; implere
autem, (absit omen!) officium; ad industriam prodere, de posteris mereri male.
Crediderim sane ego illud fuisse muneris nostri ingenium, ut, quod Papae
solent, illarum virtutum a quibus maxim distant esse cognomines; proinde
Rhetores eligerentur illi, qui per integrum annuni obmutescerent. Nec immerito;
tam rarae enim fuerunt, tam infrequentes praelectiones nostrae, tam seculares
denique, ut nescio qui possum melius praefari, quam illis praeeonis verbis;
Venite ad Ludos quos nemo mortalium unquam vidit, nec visurus est postea. Sed
nova hoc anno exoritur Lectorum Religio, qui, aliter ac Lectores solent, ad
Canones and Statuta revocamur. Stamus indies, loquimur quotidie, and tam
ancipiti pulmonum virtute, ut and Pulpita ad vigiliam, and Auditores ad somnum
adigamus. Ad somnum? ad horrorem potius; tanto enim recentes hujus inusitati
prodigii percussi sunt metu, ut verendum sit ne ad Paedagogos* scripserint
novitiam aliquam haeresin suppullulasse, Babylonicam Meretricem in Rhetoricis
Lenociniis esse redivivam, and in liberalibus Scientiis septicollem Bestiam.
Ecquid amplius apud vos Papisticum? imo and quod pessimum est, noctu and
interdiu horas Canonicas observare Procancellarium; quem non citius maximo cum
honor nomino, quin eo destectanda mihi videtur Oration; cujus in lands tam
alacris est mea Rhetorica, ut si semel undarent lora, vereor quod habenas non
audiret denuo. Quotus enim est patronus noster? qui homines alioquin
somnolentos, tanquam matutinus Sol, radiis suis ad laborem suscitat; qui otiari
in officio, ac dormire in aprico pudendum ratus, non modo ipse laborat, sed and
nostri laboris est Artifex: ita eandem quam ipse exercet diligentiam felici
contagione nobis affricat. Qui denique (and quod ego palmarium duco) modestiam
meam, nimis difficilem, in hodiernum vestri obsequium rapuit. Vestri intelligo,
Senatus amplissime; quibus quicquid ego Praelectoris sum, refero acceptum;
quorum nescio an me Rhetorem elegerunt Iudicia, aut Suffragia crearunt.
Crearunt dico, and satis cum audacia repeto; tot enim and tam foecundae voces
in unum congestae, quem non Rhetorem fecissent? Quod igitur fabulantur poetae
ad Pandorae Natalitia universum Deorum Chorum fuisse a Symbolis, idem in
Rhetorica mea, and unanimi vestro assensu, quasi Epimuthion nactum invenietis.
Quare quos Eloquentia, si quae sit mea, agnoscit compatres, non dubito quin
usque habitura sit susceptores; ut eadem lubentia in aures vestras resiliat qua
facilitate pectorum profecta est. Non causabor in posterum imbecillitatem meam,
qui onus dedistis, dedistis humeros: and ut absint cae^era, satis erit virium
sub aquila vestra militare. Refert Seneca de pusillo and monogrammate (ut ita
dicam) homunculo, qui palaestram ausus est descendere, quoniam pugiles multos
and strenuos servos domi aleret. Si servi tantum potuerint, si vicarii roboris
confidentia infirmum herum commasculare possit, quid Domini facient? Et ego in
hunc literarium pulverem possum irruere, non Mercurio meo, sed quoniam tam
multos and tam facundas habeam Dominos. Non enim ad hoc officium designatus sum
a dextro aut a laevo vulture, non a sitella aut sortibus, non ab imperito
vulgo, vel (quod idem est apud Persas) hinniente equorum armento, sed a Senatu
vestro, scilicet (ut sobrie audax possum dicere) ab oecumenico literarum
concilio. Quid enim non infra erit eorum dignitatem, quibus Arts omnes pro
satellitio, and conjuratae veniunt ad Clientelam Scientiae? Impos hic sui
Rhetorica, and lauds vestras ne anhela quidem eloquentia adaequare potest.
Parcite, Auditores, si vos frequens compellem; ita enim subduxi mecum rationem
ad agendum, ut ubi vos nominaverim, Troporum affatim, abunde Figurarum.
Quodigitur artis Memoriae Professores solent per ea, quae sunt sibi ante oculos
posita, alia quaecunque memoranda significare; idem Auditores meos edoctos
velim, ut in vos ora and obtutus figant, ut hunc Metonymiam, illum Hyperbolen,
universam multitudinem pro continuata figurarum Allegoria imaginati, omnes
colores, omnia Orationis lumina, integram denique Rhetoricae Supellectilem per
quandam oculorum Metaphoram ad sese transferant. Iamque, Auditores, cum eo
deventum sit, ut vos omnes in volumen quoddam Rhetoricum compegerim, recipio in
posterum me lecturum: In praesens aliquid de Rhetorica dicendum censeo; neque
enim tam foelix Argumentum, quale vos reputo, prius reliquissem, quam
individuis praeconiis vos and Rhetoricam semel simulque commendare. Ferunt
Demonsthenem, optimum licet Rhetorem, non potuisse pronunciare nomen
Rhetoricae. Quae Demosthenis fuit impotentia, est Rhetoricae modestia, quae
licet apud omnes laudatissima sit and multi nominis, titulos tamen suos
erubescat proloqui. Quid igitur ego quam ut veterem illum medelae modum
imitarer? lapides aliquos in os injiciam, quos nisi favor vester, plus quam
Chymicus in preciosos verterit, indigni erunt qui in auribus vestris tam
disertis pendeant. Age igitur Rhetorica, explica virtutes tuas, quae Logicae,
Philosophiae caeterisque tuis Sororibus illicem facundiae hederam soles
praefigere. Si tibi in eodem deesses officio, quid aliud quam foris saperes,
domi insanires? Atque hinc quam optime Rhetoricae encomium auspicari possum,
quod nativa sit ejus Pulchritudo, cum in caeteris nil nisi emptitium fucum
deprehendas. Scitum est illud Phrynes Thebanae Commentum, quae cum Convivio
inter aequales adesset, and probe jam saturatae omnes ludis operam darent; Lex
lata est, ut quicquid facto praeiret quaevis, subsequerentur caeterae. Vbi ad
Phrynes vices deventum est, poscit aquam, faciem lavat, quod cum caeterae pro
imperio Legis fecissent, Phryne pulchrior, ut quae sordes eluerat, deformes
caeterae, ut quae fucum deterserant, apparuere. Hunc summa redit denique,
Autographa est Rhetoricae venustas, quae in caeteris est tralatitia. Fictitii
sunt aliorum vultus, cum nesciat Rhetorica qualis sit illa nova Prosopopoeia.
Caeterae quidem Scientiae Magnates sunt Dominae; sed tanquam Domin^e facies
suas e Rhetoricae Pyxide mutuantur. Vt reliquas taeceam; Quid Logica citra
Rhetoricam? Contractus ille pugnus ad colophos magis accommodus, quam ad aures
demulcendas; ubi vero in palmam Rhetoricae extendatur, non opus est ut dicam
quantum potuerit, cum frater meus Logicus exemplo suo nuper ostenderit. Quae
igitur alias Arts la^dibus suis deaurare solet, aequum est ut suis superbiat,
quae (tanquam Danista) Elegantiam suam foris locat usurariam, iniquum esset si
non ipsam sortem cum amplissimo foenore reciperet; quanquam quidem Rhetorica
non tam faecultates suas foenori apponit, quam, tanquam Missilia, in
Scientiarum plebem Regina disseminat. Hactenus quam dives Rhetorica in alienis
loculis, nunc videamus quam opulenta sit in suis. Quod ut facilius sieret,
utinam Thesaurarius ejus Cicero revivisceret; qui si toties de Rhetorica sua,
quoties de Consulatu gloriatus esset, and aeque indefessum argumentum
habuisset, and mitius ob superbiam vapularet. Hic ille Atticae Helenae Rivalis,
hic Palladii Graeci Ulysses; hinc illae Philosophi lachrymae Rhetoricam e
Graecia transmissuram. Quod enim Antonio Athenas proficiscenti Cives Minervam
suam desponsarunt; ideoque pro adulationis poena Talentum, quasi pro dote,
coacti sunt numarare: idem in Cicerone before ac vellent evenisse constat; qui
ubi Athenis studuit, Rhetoricam, praesidem Civitatis Deam, Vxorem duxit; and
ubi ae Pyraeo solveret, omnem ejus dotalem ornatum secum in Italiam transmisit.
Euge redux Cicero. Salvete in Tusculum Athenae. Opima magis spolia quam terna
illa Iovi Feretrio consecrata. O qualis fuit Ciceronis copia! Qualis ejus
dicendi Tyberis! imo Romanus Nilus! Quantum enim ejus Eloquentia excrevit, vel
deferbuit, tantum foecunda vel sterilis, foelix vel misera extitit Italia. Quot
ille Coronas ob Cives, quot ob Provincias desendendas meruit? qui cum duos
parricidio liberaret Roscium and Popilium, ob unum in aeternum debuit vivere,
test omnium optima Oratione: ob alterum mori, idque Popilii manu, in ejus
caede parricidium conf^ssi. Hic tamen Cicero Facundiae Sponsus; hic (pace Bruti
dixerim) Romanorum Rex; hi^, plusquam Caesar, perpetuus Dictator, ut divinum
Rhetoricae numen sacro, quondam borrore agnosceret, in Orationum primordiis
singultiit, ut ludit Comicus, victitavit Sorbillo. Vetus obtinuit Superstitio,
ut ubi Luna pateretur Eclipsin, armorum strepitus, vel quilibet alius clangor
parturienti (sic enim credebant) Numini obstetricari possit. Vbi laborat
Res-publica, ubi deliquium passura est Patria, intercedit Rhetorica ut Lucina
Juno, and suavissimo tonitru tumorem sedat. Tumultuatur Plebs, secedit in
Janiculum. Ecquis prodit Jupiter Stator? Ecce Rhetor Agrippa, qui Fabulae
cujusdam de ventre and membris tintinnabulo fugitivum apum examen ad praesepe
redegit. Tantum Artificis valet habitus oris. Senecam dum audiret Nero, quis
aequavit ejus quinquennium? Ita facundus senex insidiatur Tyranno, and animum
ejus ad vitia proclivem furtiva Rhetorica in virtutem prodit, sanctissime reus
Majestatis. Neque enim Reges aut Imperatores Rhetori^e jugum subterfugiunt.
Tonat Rhetorica? frustra sub lecto cubat Testudo Caligula. Fulgurat Rhetorica?
incassum lauro circundatur Tiberius, nec in isto circulo securus. Duplex enim
est Rhetoricae Genius; bonus, qui innocents praemiis afficit, and malus, qui
sceleratos exagitat; tam subtilis tamen est ejus Suada and hujus terror, ut
tanquam fulmen terebrans, salvis corporum vaginis ipsas animas liquefaciat.
Quid ego vobis Crassos, Curios, Loelios proponam? quorum illustrium Rhetorum
tam numerosa sunt apud Historiam Exempla; quam apud nos nulla: nam siqua sit
exilis and strigosa Oration, sine sanguine, sine anima; sententiis ad tertium
lapidem porrectis, haec (si placet) est Ciceroniana. Pudendum nominis
Sacrilegium! and cujus in vindictam miror facundos manes non resurgere novas
scripturos Philippicas. Sed ecce alius Ciceronis insons! qui perspicuum and
simplicem perosus stylum implicit loquitur and in aenigmate, ac si Persii
Carmina in Prosam Orationem per modum Anagrammatis resolveret: anxiae ineptiae!
and quae neminem Oratorem praeter Sphingem Monstrum, neminem Auditorem praeter
Oedipum admittunt. Tertius prodit uterque neuter, qui ambabus sellis sedet, qui
omnia dicendi genera experitur; cujus Oration tanquam multiformis Luna secundum
varias mutat Quartas; modo gibbosa, modo falcata, plena, semi-plena, ac si
Rhetorica Metempsychosin quandam instituerit, per omnes stylos pervagata. Vbi
interim Musarum Castitas? Adulter est ille Stylus, qui rem habet cum pluribus,
and maxima Oratoris laus est aequum and integritas. Sed proh stupor! Egone ut
Rhetoricae encomia moliar, and Oratorem nostrum publicum cui omnes assurgunt,
praetermittam? cujus nomen cum Demosthene triplicare, est Rhetoricam ex omni
part definire. Peregrinatur in aliis Rhetorica, hic Incola est, non Hospes
unde non magis illam divellas quam Solemn e Coelo, Iustitiam a Fabricio. Ille
decus, suae and dolor nostrae Gentis, qui cum Orator sit and Graecus Professor,
pari jure quo Caesar, Consules, nominari potest Academiae Oratores. Ille enim
verus Orator qui Ambidexter, in quo binae linguae unum eloquentiae trahunt
jugum. Refert Seneca de quodam, qui cum bis declamasset in eodem die, Graece,
and Latin, and sciscitaretur quidam (ut curiosum sumus Literarum genus)
quomodo perorasset, responsum tulit, been and (...), been Latin, perperam
Graece. Dictum non magis lepidum and rotundum quam hodieque verum; quam multi
enim sunt Literati (...); Quot Eloquentes (...); Plures Cicerones (pauci licet)
quam Demosthenes. Incipiat sane Rhetorica a Latinis, sed adolescat in Graecis.
Graecia a Latio mutuetur Calendas; sed Nonas, sed Idus apponat suas: qui enim
in solis Latinis est exercitatus, est Polyphemus monoculus, pene dixerim (...)
Rhetoricus. Possem, Auditores, ad Cathedram ascendere, and ibi etiam quomodo
Rhetorica pro Tribunali sedeat, demonstrare; sed pinge duos angues, sacer est
locus: vel si fas esset lauds ejus attingere, attingere tamen est Religio: ita
enim in illo divino Professore conturbavit prodiga Rhetorica, ut ne unciam
habeat unde cum posteris pro labor and vigiliis suis decernat. Huc usque
eminus quasi verba feci; tempus est ut cum auditoribus meis cominus agerem:
Moris enim est librum nominare, and sic pro hoc anno satisfecisse. Sed illud
quicquid est muneris reliquum, in Termini proxime ineuntis exordium differam;
ubi tamen spero Auditores meos non affutores; nam si nullo alio modo vos
deterrere possum, legam Arabice. O invidendam Praelectoris solitudinem! cujus
in Individuo, coelestem admodum, universa species Arabica, quantum ad nos
spectat, conservatur. Quod si meis ingratiis Auditores adsint, and Ego contra
me sistam Rhetorem, uterque agemus quod nostrum est, usque vobis grati erimus.
Rhetoricae and honori vestro pariter incumbemus; ita enim commodum nostrum and
observantia vestri mutuo nexu alligantur, ut quo quisque erimus magis Rhetores,
eo Munificentiae vestrae magis memores.

Oration habita in Scholis Theologicis, cum Moderatoris parts ageret.
QVae cum ita sint, Auditores, liceat tandem perorare, Piladi dabo ut body
insaniam, and tum finitus Orestes. Quod Reges solent, ubi satietas illos mundi
ceperit, Coenobium intrare ut seipsos dediscant; perinde de nostro ingressu in
hasce Scholas judicate. Penitet nostrae nugacis facundiae, and in severiori
hujus loci genio remedium quaero. Nec tamen sum ex illorum numero qui sapiunt
in gratiis, qui gravitatem complectuntur, ut continentiam Senes, qui cum
ulterius peccaere nequeunt, resipiscunt. Spadonum est haec virtus; ingenia
casta, quoniam non mascula; ac si Statuta nostra, sicut Turcarum Mulieres, non
alios agnoscerent Custodes praeter Eunuchos. Pudet haec opprobria nobis dici.
Sunt qui ingenio ingenium debellant, qui ex ferratis Stymphalidum pennis
desumunt spicula, quibus ipsas aves, vivas illas pharetras, interficiunt.
Hujusmodi cum audiam Tripodum Oracula, and ambiguos Vates, exemplo praeeuntes
ingenium, quod Orationibus insectantur. Video Catonem sui ipsius lacerantem
viscera; Video Demosthenem proprio Calamo pereuntem. Ad quid autem, dicit
aliquis, hispida haec rerum facies? Ergone defluet comptior Eloquentia, ut
barbae squallor dominetur? Absit omen! Regnet quidem Gravitas, sed citra
striatam frontem and Vultus Tyrannidem, ne sit instar Sileni Alcibiadis, ita
intus Numen ut extus appareat Demogorgon. Qui in Oratore odit foeminae
mollitiem, fastidit magis agrestes villos; qui denudat aures Rhetoricis
cincinnis, extirpat radicitus genarum sentes: Neque enim illi accedo, qui
consultus de optimo Rhetore respondit Statuta Academiae. Liber noster non stat
in catenis reus eloquentis criminis, sed tanquam Tyrius Apollo ideo
constringitur, ne suam gravatus servitutem mutaret Dominum. Facilis a libro ad
Respondentem transitio, quos cum ambos simul cogitem, nescio an gemellos recte
nominarem. Gemelli; corpora si respicias sunt unius Divortium, si animas unio
duorum, quasi vulnus a Natura factum amore mutuo erat coiturum. O quam studet
illam Naturae Diaeresin resarcire, qui cum libro non indulserit Nasum;
prohibere tamen nequit quin typis mandetur! ea enim est ejus cum literis
communio, ut literato ejus cumulo vel hunc unicum librum addere, erant qui
superfluum credidere. Vultis omnia? tam eruditus est noster Respondens, ut
vereor ne tanquam Cataphractus miles, onustus potius, quam munitus literis
videatur. Sed incassum ego molior; surge tui ipsius Encomium; ego enim (tanquam
pictum velum, aut expansum carbasum) spectaculum policeo^; tuum est, Scaligeri
verbo, monstrum perfectionis ostendere.

Oration prior habita in Scholis Juridicialibus, Domino Doctore Littleton
Respondente.
UNicum nostrum and captivum librum cum eodem obtutu quo numerosa tua
conspiciam volumina, nescio quin disparis nostrae conditionis luculenta Icon
videatur. Me quod spectat Eruditionis nostrae modulum satis unus, satis nullus
liber repraesentat; cum tua grandiora merita vix integra complecti possit
Bibliotheca. Ad quid autem librorum tantum; ubi magis est literarum? Veteris
picturae fuit opprobrium quod hic Canis, fuit adscriptum, cum viva effigies
(tanquam praeco domesticus) seipsam interpretetur. Credimus te literatum, non
propter Authorum, sed propter tuiipsius testimonium. Optimus Nomenclator
imaginis est loquax artificium. Propria virtus, non farrago librorum te
honestabit, and unicus tuus Orator erit Respondens. O quam superbit Alma Matter,
quae frequentem nuper enixa sobolem in te uno duplicavit numerum! Refert de
patre quodam Historia, qui inter filios divisurus bona, primo tantum tribuit,
and Lucium cohaeredem facit; tantum secundo, and Lucium addit; tertio tantum,
and usque Lucium fortunae suae rivalem: cumque in qualibet cera scripsisset
Lucium, hoc addit Elogium, Lucius and Fratres sunt Gemini. Quid aliud Gemini
quam Naturae aequilibrium? quae cum unum fratrem reliquos Triumviratus regula,
adaequare faciat, Quo tum te creavit virtus? Multiplex es in tuis Fratribus,
and quascunque lauds illi meruerunt, tu nasceris particeps. Cer^e si^te unum
tantum pepererit Academia, multos simul pariat necesse, ut duos dicatur
peperisse. Neque tamen de Fratrum copia desperandum est; si enim parturienti
Academiae, ut laboranti Lunae, strepitu and sono obstetricandum sit, nullum
facilius quam Iuridicorum erit puerperium. Crederem equidem vel in ipso utero
litigare velle ut citius nascerentur. Hinc est quod tam universa prodit Cadmi
seges, ut male metuo ne vix satis sit litium ad omnes alendos. Quod si bono
fato contigerit, armatae aristae se metent invicem and (piscium ad instar) ubi
praeda deficit, vorabunt mutuo. Liciat mihi, Themidos Magnates, Causidicorum
vulgus paulum perstringere, ut vestra magis internoscantur merita: cumque alias
modestia vestra non patiatur, in aenigmate saltem adulari liceat. Subdola
furium scientia hanc interreliquas excogitavit fallaciam. Fures duo a jurgiis
auspicati pugnam simulant, capita pro mutua Colophorum libidine probe
demulcent, quod cum confertus hinc illinc populus spectatum prodeat, usque
praeliantur bellicos^ Aucupes, dum a Collegis suis turbae commixtis, singulorum
marsupia pertunduntur. Non in vestram peccabo dignit atem, si nubat haec
Similitudo. Sunt and in vestra gente Cauponantes belli, qui ita disputant, ut
quaestionem in alienis loculis inveniant, and (quod passimum est) in illis
exercitiis nullum agnoscunt moderatorem. Ludiones sunt qui ob mercedem pugnant,
vestra Disputatio sola retinet liberalitatem scientiae. Sed Infans encomium
addendo detrahit; laudare quod satis nequis est sacrilegium admittere. Age
igitur, Doctissime Vir, and Disputatio vestra quae praecidit mihi Orationis
progressum, suo indicio, and vestris radiis magis eniteat.

Oration posterior, eodem Respondente.
DE Gallis dicitur quod primus plusquam virorum impetus, secundus minor sit
quam foeminarum. Digni profecto qui ab Vxoribus suis vapularent milites, cum
(tanquam meticulos^ lepores) fortitudinis suae sexum mutent. Non tu hujusmodi
Tyresias Gallicus, ut virilis anima sit degener in foeminam, and novissimae
hebdomadae fortis Disputatio subsidat hodie in sequiorem. Eccum vobis,
Auditores optimi, eundem Respondentem! virtutem parem! noster Hercules non
Ancillam induit, nec nobilis ille clavae terror ad humile ministerium Coli
emasculatur. Cestius Rhetor ita sibi and Eloquentiae suae supervixit, ut
discipulus ejus per cineres perorantis Cestii juraret. Quotusquisque est qui
suum ipsius stat Monumentum, cujus vigor igneus in flebile frigescit marmor,
idem Eruditionis Cadaver and Sepulcrum? Secus tua divina, virtus, quae aemulos
prius superare contenta, nunc audaci conatu seipsam molitur; quae cum alios ita
nuper vinceret, nunc ipsam Victoriam captivam ducet. Hoc habet quilibet
generosus animus, ut ne Solstitium patiatur, tantum abest ut agnoscat Tropicum.
Praestat aeternum fuisse claudum, quam tandem retrogradum. Malo Mulier esse
quam Eunuchus. Malo nasci quam fieri ignavus. Pristinae igitur virtutis memor
iterum descendis in pulverem, and priori gloria, tanquam optimo tubicine,
redaccensus instauras praelium. Proinde a Majoribus nostris cautum ect, ut duos
actus praestarent Iuridici; absque enim vobis and vestris litibus dualis
numerus non esset inventus. Hinc est quod semel tantum respondeat Theologus, ut
quos vestra jurgia duos effecerint, ejus Pietas reduces faciat ad unitatem. Si
Theologia and Medicina cum Iurisprudentia de forma concertarent, tam turbida
est Facultas vestra, ut, me Paride, vestrum esset Pomum Discordiae. Sterilescit
hoc anno Medicina, ut quae satis novit quod ingruente bello, citra Medicorum
opem mori possumus. Deficit Medicina, redundat Facultas vestra, neque mirum
tamen quod binos alat ubere foetus, cum ad Artis vestrae mulctram nos humanum
pecus toties veniamus. Gens Amazonum alteram mammam solet exurere, ut ad
praeliandum magis sit accommoda; ambas habet Iurisprudentia, and tamen plus
quam Amazon est bellicosa. Qui solet omnia duplicare Bacchus a Poetis fingitur
bis natus; duplex actus te peperit geminum. Ecce tibi Jovis and Patris mixtura
dulcis, qui disputationis fulmine te primum genuit, in amoris femur nunc
recondet. Epaminondas moriturus, cum ejus orbitatem defleret quidam, nihil de
tam egregia stirpe reliquum fuisse: Leuctram and Mantinaeam, duas pulcherrimas
filias se reliquisse dixit. Quid aliud tua disputatio gemina quam Leuctra and
Mantinaea? pulchrae quidem filiae, quas ita desponsatas sibi velit posteritas
aemula, ut qui in futurum seculum erit doctus, erit Gener tuus. Age igitur, and
fortiter, cavendum enim est ab Achillis fato qui usque fuisti invulnerabilis,
in Disputationis calce occidaris.

Oration itidem habita in Scholis Juridicialibus, cum Moderatoris parts ageret.
CVm vos intuear, Iurispiritum Par, simulque reductis introrsum oculis
imperitiam meam, Areopagum esse in hisce Scholis duplex argumentum in venio,
vestram in agendo solertiam, and nostras judicandi tenebras. Fabula de Capro
inter duos Arietes cursus arbitro, and ab hinc illinc procurrentibus utrinque
contuso; fabula inquam haec utinam esset fabula, nec in Moderatore vestro
hodiernum nacta (...). Saturni aetas foelix magis, quod innocens, an misera
quod nullis Legibus instituta, digna vobis quaestio. Gratulor quidem ego
primaevum scelus; qui primus deliquit, primus Solon and Lycurgus fuit, ita
Ciconiae ad modum vitae damno Iura peperit, and tanquam Autographus Draco, suo
sanguine Leges scripsit. Mehercule peccandi Inventio, quae Leges introduxit
cujus qui primus Author extitit, tanto beneficio redemit scelus, ut facinus
infra gloriam fuisse videatur. Nec vestra unius populi; sed Gentium* superbia
est Iurisprudentia, cujus in clientela Nationes omnes and Provinciae florent,
and de Iuris Civilis ac de Solis communione universae participant. Insulas,
Vrbes and singulae Geographiae frusta Ius Municipale occupat, cum Civil
universum Orbem complectatur, and Regiones, ut ut dissitas, sua tamen sub
ditione foederatas, velinvita Natura, jubet co^lescere. Britannos ipsos, quos
cum altero Orb in bilance quadam Natura posuit, Ius Civil (tanquam Isthmus
quidam) conciliat, and jugali quadam societate connectit. Neque magis Orbem Ius
vestrum colligit, quam illud alterum dividit and articulatim comminuit. Est
(quam vellem dixisse fuit!) leguleiorum genus, quos artem nescias an pulmones
professos; qui ambiguitate vocis abusi, Forum in Emporium mutant, ubi quid
vendant sat superque norint, qui tanti emunt poenitere. Quid turbae est apud
Forum? Quid illic homines litigant, qui ita clangant, ac si cum Proavis suis
Capitolium defenderent? Advertas modo, and audias Damonis Caprum a Causidico
quodam pari clamore quo olim surreptum; multum latrante Lycisca repetitum. Sed
quid ego illos perstringo, quos vestra coelitus dilapsa scientia ipsa
comparatione satis arguit? satis per seipsam splendet vestra purpura, ut ne
alieno rubore indigeat. Quod meum igitur est, Iudex assurgo, vultis, and
qualis? qui causam nescio. Ais? Aio: Negas? Nego; tam dubia est nostra
Moderatrix Trutina, ut ne pulvis sculum habeat Doctrinae qui vel hanc, vel
illam praegravabit sententiam. Agite igitur Themidos Supreme. Flamen, tuque
inferior Mysta, and dum vos tanto litetis Numini, ego (tanquam Cereris Arcano)
sacro excipiam silentio; neque enim alio consilio huc ascendi, quam quo
Philippi puer, ut Argumenta vestra, si prolixiora, mortalitatis suae admonerem.

Ad Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem.
QVos ad Aram vestram impulit prius Hostium malitia, eo Numinis bonitas allexit
denuo Supplices qui primum accessimus, grati jam redimus; and ubi Asylum
habuimus, eo Sacrificium reportamus, sed quantum thuri nostro diffidimus, ubi
te Jovem Statorem cogitamus? Beneficium quidem vestrum serio gratulamur, sed
and dolemus pariter; cujus magnitudo gratias in tantum provocat, ut nos ad
ingratos necesse damnet: enimvero nos indigni qui simus grati. Edvardus and
Elizabetha Virginei Reges conjugantur in gratiis; quorum munera suam ex traduce
Castitatem non conservassent, nisi quod Patrocinio vestro a sacrilego raptu
vindicarentur. O quam sidelis erit ille erga Regem suum, cujus pertinax Pietas
cineras Regios demeretur! Quam avida interim humanitas vestra, quae non nisi
tribus seculis contenta! quae retro aevum intuetur, ut in futurum prospiciat;
quae ad Proavos nostros ideo recurrit ut majori cum impetu ad Nepotes
prosiliat. Vt Gr^titudo igitur nostra coaetanea sit beneficiis vestris, qui
tres aetates beas, tertiam hominum aetatem vivas. Gratulamur igitur Patronum
nostrum, quem dum gratulamur fuisse, usque gratulamur fore: quicquid enim
gratiarum hodierni Clientes non absolvimus, posteris adimplendum relinquemus,

Dominationi vestrae maxim obnoxii Magister and Socii Coll. D. I.
22. Febr. 1637.
Ad Episcopum Lincolniensem.
Reverende Praesul;
LIteras vestras ad Doctorem datas, and ad nos tanquam haeredes secundae cerae
delatas, ut amoris vestri clementiam gratulamur! Consulto siquidem Amplitudinis
tuae refringis radios, priusquam ad imbellem nostram aciem pervenirent. Solemn
in unda spectamus faciles, quem in orb suo non sine lippitudine sustinemus.
Quae fuit scribendi;^ utinam eadem esset responsi methodus, ut excusatione ad
alium traduce peteremus veniam, and vicario rubore delictum nostrum fateremur.
Quanquam si penitius causam excutias, peccamus magis quod deprecamur, and
majori obsequio rebels fuimus, quam morigeri essemus. Quid enim aliud est
peregrinum asciscere quam sanguinem vestrum exhaeredem facere. Collegium matter
abdicat suos, si adopted alienos. Si Tros Tyrius que nullo discrimine, Tyrius,
vel in propriis penatibus erit inquilinus. Ergone degener tandem vestrae
familia, and desiderat indigenas honoribus pares. Erubescendum opprobrium! and
dignum quod tantus Mecaenas experiundo refutaret. Habet igitur quod imputet
Collegium, non quod defendat; si enim in hoc peccet, quod sobolem suam habeat
charissimam, jussu naturae peccat, vestris peccat sub auspiciis: pertinaciori
enim amplexu fovet filios, quia fratres tuos: Fratres dicimus, and satis cum
superbia repetimus, ita enim cura vestra profitetur Patrem, amor Fratrem; ut
non Oedipus majori cum aenigmate sceleratus fuerit, quam tu pius Matris
Maritus, and Fratrum Pater. Veneramur igitur Patris and Fratris mixturam
dulcem. Solvimus quas debemus gratias and magis debemus solutas. Est beneficii
Mantissa gratias admittere, praesertim nostras, quales receptas in damno potes
deputare,

Quos Paternitas vestra habet mancupi Magister and Seniores Coll. D. Joan.
Dat e Coll. D. Joan. 16. die Aprilis, 1641.
Ad Episcopum Lincolniensem tunc temporis e carcere laxatum.
CVjus laborantes fortunas pari animorum deliquio diu expressimus, ne graveris
si ejus redivivo jubare experrecti triumphemus: hodie enim est quod vivimus
postliminio, and in vindiciis honoris vestri, quotquot sumus, Virbii. Siquidem
in moerore vestro, quid aliud fuit vita nostra quam nocturno lucubratio, and
occidenti tuo superesse quam ingratiis Naturae vivere? Sed salva res est.
Reddidit diem redux Phosphorus; and post tanta cum Astris jurgia, Collegium
Matter jam tandem fatetur Coelos. Incassum Tubas fatigarunt Veteres ut Eclipsin
redimerent. Alma matter suspiriis suis magis sonoris prostigavit vestram;
scilicet hic fuit faelicitatis vestrae somnus, qui tantum abest, ut illam
extingueret, ut reficiat potius and alacriorem reddat. Eccum tibi majorem
mundum tuum ad exemplar compositum; vel (si mavis dictum) luce and tenebris
distinctum! Sol si perpetuus splenderet, nec Aram, nec Mystam haberet Persicam.
Enimvero caligantes oculi nostri pacti sunt inducias cum fulgore vestro, quibus
finitis ad pristinum redit seipsum. Aspicias quaesumus Clientum nomina, and
agnoscas tot radios a luminoso tuo corpore diffusos; nihil enim de nostro
habemus. Percurras singulos, and videas teipsum exiliorem semper ad modum, sed
modo before, modo augustius, pro varia speculorum indole reper^ussum; atque
hinc est quod Imaginem vestram, tanquam Collegii Palladium, inter Archiva
recondimus; ut matter enixa sobolem ad picturam sistat, vultus comparet, and ita
umbra vestra, plusquam splendore Phoebi; distinguat pullos. Gratulamur igitur
vel nostro nomine novas hasce honorum induvias: Vivas in posterum fortuna
major. Ingens vester animus, tanquam illud aeternum jecur, indignetur vulturem,
quo magis consumitur, angeatur magis, and inter ipsos invidiae molares crescat
virtus. Ita vovemus.

Paternitati vestrae quam maxim obnoxii Mag. and Socii Coll. D. I.
5. December. 1640.
Ad eundem jam factum Archiepiscopum Eboracensem.
USque and usque quod gratulamur si molesti simus, utinam indies cresceret
peccandi materia. Pietas officia^ non metuit Cramben, sed vestri honoris aemula
indignatur Non ultra. Quin placeat igitur nostris in literis fortunas tuas
ruminare, and prolixioris calami gutture (quod Philoxenus gruino voluit)
repetere dapum voluptatem. Neque restro tantum gaudemus, prensamus sinciput,
and in futurum gratulamur: provide factum and tempestive; eo enim perrexit
virtus vestra, ut si paululum promoveat, humanos limits supergressus eris
ineffabilis. At luxat nobis animos divinus horror, cum sacra facturis eminus,
and splendour vester and sublimitas obversentur. Nictat Religio quae veneratur.
Solemn, and tremore Luminum fatetur Deum. Eadem est nostra oculorum Conscienta,
qui radios vestros non sine visus crepusculo sustinemus. Nec minus sublimitatem
vestram luimus; siquidem sacrificantium Zelus, tanquam flamma Sacrificii, quo
magis ascendit, eo magis trepidat. Sed Optimus emollis Maximum. Clementia
vestra disputat cum Amplitudine, and hac amicissima ^ite, (quasi totius Naturae
puerperium) officium nostrum est oriundum. Ignoscimus Fatis immodestiam suam,
quicquid adversi contingit ut favoris insidias imputamus. Scilicet recurrere
videbantur fortunae vestrae, ut fortius prosilirent. Comprobavit exitus
ingenium commenti. Militans Ecclesia jam triumphat in promulside; and
fluctuans, ut olim Arca, tandem in montibus requiescit. Non amplius Collegium
Matter Canos lacerat, nec facie sua computat miserias. Musae, quibus vivere fuit
Hyperbole, nunc audent vigere; quippe Altitudo vestra (ut Niliaca Aegypti)
fertilitatem Literarum ominatur. Enimvero cum Astra sint soelicitatis nostrae
condi-promi; quid est quod a Superis non expectemus, Patrono nostro in hac
Syderum vicinia collocato? Orandus igitur es, Archi-Praesul Dignissime, ut
ambitionem nostram sero sisteres, ut honores vestros subinde catenares, and cum
supremum fortunae gradum conscenderis nec dum terminetur Climax vestra, Coelum
superest.

Dominationi vestrae Devotissimi Mag. and Socii Coll. D. I.
December. 12. 1641.
Epistola Gratulatoria ad Episcopum Dunelmensem, qui in Bibliothecam
Iohannensem saepius fuit Beneficus.
Reverende Praesul;
QVamvis ea sit Liberalitatis vestrae divina indoles, ut prodesse malit quam
agnosci, ea nostrae Talionis paupertas quae nec illam debita gratitudine metiri
valeat, nolumus tamen donis lacessiti alternas deserere, sed Amoebaeo gratiarum
obsequio humanitati vestrae succinere. Erubescimus quidem hunc imparem
congressum, ubi tam frequentia volumina unico gratulatorio Indice colligimus;
and quae Bibliotheca vix capit, exiguis Epistolii pellibus arctare cogimur.
Quotus enim es Mecoenas noster? Quam atavis erga nos beneficiis editus? qui ita
annuus in teipsun^ redis, ita (...) beneficia repetis, ac si novissima quaeque
munera recentiori fulgore castigares. Quotuplicem igitur veneramur eundem
Patronunt? qui ut caeteris omnibus praeripuit aemulationis secundas, ita nec
sibi ipsi concedit primas; sed variatis subinde amoris indiciis seipsum vicit;
nec diu erit quin ipsam victoriam captivam ducet. Esuriens modo Theca nostra
ita benignitate vestra extendit fauces, ut si qua hujusmodi satius posset capi,
a crapula propior quam a fame abesset. Solvimus igitur quas debemus gratias,
and usque debemus solutas, dapibus tuis Helluones accedimus; Libris and Honori
vestro pariter incumbimus; ita enim commodum nostrum and observantia vestri
mutuo nexu alligantur, ut quo quisque doctiores erimus, eo Munificentiae
vestrae magis memores.

Dominationi vestrae quam maxim devinctissimi Mag. and Socii Seniores Coll. D.
I.

Ad eundem Episcopum Dunelmensem.
Reverende Praesul, Mecoenas unice;
TAm frequentia sunt erga nos benefici^ vestra, tam perpetuis Choreis in orbem
acta, ut ducat ilia gratitudo nostra, nec anhela tamen Liberalitati tantae
respondere possit. Literae enim nostrae quid aliud sunt quam humanitatis
vestrae Echo? ita dimidiata loquuntur vo^e, nec nisi ultimas ejus syllabas
possunt repetere. Quorsum antem meditamur gratias, quas ne impune usquam
egimus, quin nova subinde in vindictam surgit Munificentia. Nolumus tamen,
nolumus inulti cedere, usque rebels in obsequio erimus, and quo unico tam
divinam indolem ulcisci possumus, munera vestra agnoscemus. Desponsast^ tibi
Bibliothecam nostram (ut Romany usus) per coemptionem, quae singulas librorum
frontes mariti nomine inscripta, tanquam victuro genio Posteritati commendatur.
Vnum autem prae omnibus Amplitudine vestrae debemus librum, illum volumus
memorem Patronorum indicem, qui scriptus and in tergo, nec dum sinitus, nomen
tuum, ut utramque ejus paginam summa cum lubentia recordatur

Paternitati vestrae devotissimi Magister and Socii Coll. D. I.

Domino Edvardo Littleton, Sigilli Custodi.
Honoratissime Domine,
QVod fortunas vestras infimi homines eminus gratulamur, peccamus de
in^dustria, ut scias communem laetitiam inde perceptam, vel ad Reipublicae
talos d^scendisse, Caput ubi lauro circundatur, triumphant and pede^. Obtinet
idem membrorum foedus, ut quicquid tibi accedit decoris, illud ut nostrum
gaudeamus: nec nostrum modo cum caeteris, habemus quod soli and ci^ra rivales
gloriemur. Cum enim pro humanitate qua polles maxima, Collegium nostrum no^ ita
pridem inviseres (parce dicto cui vestra Comitas fecit sidem) adoptasse tibi
Ma^re^ videbaris; sed privatam superbiam (...) pellat publica, and Gratulatio
nostra ad (...) Chorum est annectenda. Quae ante flu^^av^ Delos Insula, nato
Apolline steti^ (...)* olim fabula, erit olim Historia. R^s^rvav^t se tibi
fluctuans Anglia Tridente tuo c^mp^nenda. Nec nobis diutius frangit animum
Antecessoris fatum, quod in ignota arena ja^ceat Palinurus; alter erit jam
Typhis; and decumana quae illum absorpsit unda te propius ad Coelos tollet.
Blandius aequor n^mo non facile moderatur, ut non nisi mare turbidum est
periculum te dignum. Enimvero placent discordiae hac mercede, ut consilio tuo
sopiantur; tanti enim est vestrum Regimen, ut majora pateremur. Macte igitur,
Heroes ter maxim, triplici omine, ut Militans Ecclesia te agnoscat Scutum,
nutans Academia Scipionem, Laborans Britannia Statorem Jovem.

Honori vestro quam maxim deditissimi Magister and Socii Coll. D. I.

Edvardo Herbert, Domino Herbert de Cherbury.
Honoratissime ex utroque Domine,
QVod vestras graviores curas importuno officio intercalamus, peccamus magis si
deprecemur: rapis enim ad illud obsequium tui plenos, and tanto afflati numine
videmur nobis non posse delinquere. Enimvero eadem nobis agendi gratias quae
tibi promerendi incumbit necessitas, and Gratitudo nostra, ut ut audacior, in
hoc saltem erit innocens, quod a Liberalitate vestra suit tradux. Accepimus
libros tuos and Tuos, geminos istos purioris Tuae Minervae Filios. O quam (ut
ne quid amplius) satentur Patrem! Beatae, ad miraculum, Musae, quod intra
Literarum declivia, cum Artium jugula moliatur Aetas, ipse emineas Scientiae
Columen and Destina Veritatis. Libros dum legimus, legimus Vnum Duos. Quam
pulchre patrissant Volumina! Quam gemellos tuos Honores reserunt! Scilicet,
Bilix est vestra Nobilitas, Literis and Stemmate intertexta. Helicon sanguinis
tibi fuit in venis, non minor eruditionis quam Nataliu^ Claritas. Amplectimur
igitur hos Fratres in unum, and parentem suum ut Vnum nobiles veneramur. Sed
incassum gratias meditamur, quas magnitudo beneficii ita provacat, ut simul
extinguat. Sic vidimus Solemn ignem accendere, and fortiori radio sopire denuo.

Domine, Honori vestro quam Devotissimi.

Ad Doctorem Newall.
Dignissime,
NEscimus enim quali compellemus nomine, quem maternus Collegii amor scribit
Filium, misera mallet patronum, penes tuam erit benevolentiam, and Matrem
agnoscere, and Clientem reddere: Bibliotheca and Sacellum precantur a Symbolis,
and jugali quadam calamitate vestram attrahunt liberalitatem. O quam idoneum
nactus es Argumentum, and doctum te prositeri and pium; nec in tuis ipsius
virtutibus sistere, sed and nostrarum Artificem esse! Age igitur, Mecaenas
unice, and ubi divinam tuam benefaciendi indolem (cui nulla Epistola habet
parem Suadam) per legeris, nullus dubita quin usque erimus, qui sumus
Munificentiae vestrae memores,

Magister and Socii Coll. D. I.

Ad Magistrum Wandesforth.
QVin and nos admittis ad hoc gaudii convivium? Commendat epulas rivalis
Stomachus, quas solitaria quadra reddit insipidas. Liceat nobis commensales
esse faelicitatis tuae, and in communis Triumphi chorum accedere. Quorsum autem
supplices eramus, quod jure nostro possumus exposcere? Ea gaudemus gratis quae
non solliciti ambimus: ubi vero vota nuncupavimus; ubi sedulis precibus
Candidati fuimus,, non immerito victoriae laetitiam arrogamus. Namque nupera
est haec voluptas nostra; diuest quod extispices egimus virtutum tuarum, and in
illis meritis honores providimus secuturos. Nec dum clauduntur oculi: Matter
Collegium usque agit Sibyllam; perge vaticinium fortuna indies viridi
comprobare; perge Johannensem Genium agnoscere; perge denique eo assurgere, ut
Matter tua nequeat (quod Parentum erga Liberos conspicilla praestant) majori sub
specie representare filium. Sed ne nimii, ubi satis mul^i non possumus; inter
virtutes tuos and recentes honores perpetuas vovemus nundinas, qui serio tibi
hoc novissimum decus gratulamur,

Magister and Socii Coll. D. I.
Vndecimo Calend. Feb. 1637.
UBi aurita satis est filii pietas, ibi vel tacitae matris est loquax
paupertas, ita alacris gratitudo non expectat preces, sed in alto silentio
cognatae audit ejulatum miseriae. Collegium quod vestram lactavit
adolescentiam, vestra vicissim desiderat ubera, and quem in sinu fovit juvenem,
aetatis agnoscit baculum, and parents Scipionem; Bis perimus dum Squallorem
repetimus, and aliis cogimur facere notius, quod ipsi nescire malumus:
primitiae doloris nostri Deo sunt debitae, eo scilicet angustiarum redigimur,
ut Sacellum in Sacello quaeramus, nec inveniamus tamen: Quod aliis igitur
praesidii contigit, ut aram occupent, Sacellum sibi interdictum dolet; nisi
Elemosynas quas ipsum erogare solet ab aliis accipiat? Habemus capsulam, penes
te est ut dicamus Bibliothecam. O Quantum hoc mane nostrum! tam Augusta domus,
tam paucos inquilinos? Quam pulchrum esset araneas deturbare? Quam te dignum
huic putamini congruum adaptare nucleum. Agat prout velit liberalitas vestra,
quod pressius a nobis dictum fuit susius exponat, optimum enim ipse Oratorem
ages, and simul tibi quam maxim dovincies:

Magistrum etc Socios Coll. D. I.

Vinum est Poetarum Equus.
URbs Athenae cum fundaretur, Neptunus and Minerva litigarunt uter Civitatem
haberet cognominem, pactum est ut qui majori beneficio humanum genus ditare
posset, Vrbem nominaret; Neptumus Equum, Pallas olivam produxit, unde victrix
Athenas nominavit. Quod si meo judicio stetisset lis, si Neptunus talis Equi,
qualis est vinum Author suisset, dignus sane qui matri Academiae dedisset
nomen. Vinum Equus, a cujus ungula dulcior fons quam Hippocrene scaturiit.
Equus, qui plures alas ingenio addit quam Pegasus ad volatile remigium
accommodavit, qui labra proluit hoc font Caballino, non mirum si in proximo
versu Ebrius in bicipiti somniavit Parnasso. Vinum Equus, sed qui sessorem suum
saepe excutit, and ad terram affligit, qui tanquam ille Diomedis herum suum
devorat, Pitissant poetastri and longa quasi arundine equitant, cum Ennius ipse
pater, nunquam nisi potus ad arma prosiliit dicenda. Horatius toties equitavit,
ac si vinum tanquam Bucephalus neminem praeter illum vectare debuisset. Denique
ex hujus equi utero plures prodierunt Ingenii heroes quam ex Trojana, Vinum
Equus, at Cervisia Musarum Mulus majori ex part Asinus, vel si Equus Succussor
potius quam tolutarius, quam non citius nomino quin stupidus obmutesco. Sed
tempus est ut Equus men's habenas audiat, huc usque Equo vestro paravi Ephippia,
tenui stupa, ut vos conscenderetis: Vnicun^ est quod singulos velim
praemonitos, ea est hujus Equi ferocia, ut sobrium illud Phoebi Consilium sit
maturum, Parce puer stimulis and fortius utere loris.

FINIS.

