J. Cleaveland Revived: POEMS, ORATIONS, EPISTLES, And other of his Genuine
Incomparable Pieces, never before published.

WITH Some other Exquisite Remains of the most eminent Wits of both the
Universities that were his Contemporaries.

Non norunt haec monumenta mori.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1659.



For weighty Numbers, sense, misterious ways
Of happy Wit, Great Cleauland claims his Baies.
Sepultus Colleg: Whitintonij. 1. May Ano: 1658.
To the Discerning READER.
WOrthy Friend, there is a saying, Once well done, and ever done; the wisest
men have so considerately acted in their times, as by their learned works, to
build their own monuments, such as might eternize them to future ages: our
Johnson named his, Works, when others were called Plays, though they cost him
much of the lamp and oil, yet he so writ, as to obliege posterity to admire
them; our deceased Hero, Mr. Cleaveland, knew how to difference legitimate
births from abortives, his mighty Genius anviled out what he sent abroad, as
his informed mind knew how to distinguish betwixt writing much and well; a few
of our deceased Poets pages being worth cart-loads of the Scriblers of these
times. It was my fortune to be in Newark, when it was besieged, where I saw a
few manuscripts of Mr. Cleavelands, amongst others I have heard that he writ of
the Treaty at Uxbridge, as I have been informed since by a person I entrusted
to speak with one of Mr. Cleavelands noble friends, who received him
courteously, and satisfied his enquiries; as concerning the papers that were
left in his custody, more particularly of the Treaty at Uxbridge, That it was
not finished, nor any of his other papers fit for the press. They were offered
to the judicious consideration of one of the most aecomplisht persons of our
age, he refusing to have them in any further examination, as he did not
conceive that they could be published without some injury to Mr. Cleaveland;
from which time they have remained sealed, and locked up, neither can I wonder
at this obstruction, when I consider the disturbances our Author met with in
the time of the Siege; how scarce and bad the paper was, the ink hardly to be
discerned on it; the intimacie I had with Mr. Cleaveland, before and since
these civil wars, gained most of these papers from him; it being not the least
of his misfortunes, out of the love he had to pleasure his friends, to be
unfurnisht with his own manuscripts, as I have heard him say often, he was not
so happy, as to have any considerable collection of his own papers, they being
dispersed amongst his friends; some whereof, when he writ for them, he had no
other answer, but that they were lost, or through the often reading,
transcribing, or folding of them, worn to pieces; so that though he knew where
he formerly bestowed some of them, yet they were not to be regained; for which
reason the Poems he had left in his hands, being so few, of so inconsiderable a
Volume, he could not (though he was often solicited with honor to himself)
give his consent to the publishing of them, though indeed most of his former
printed Poems were truly his own, except such as have been lately added, to
make up the Volume; at the first some few of his Verses were printed with the
Character of the London Diurnal, a stitcht pamphlet in quarto, Afterward, as I
have heard M. Cleaveland say, the copies of verses that he communicated to his
friends, the Bookseller by chance meeting with them, being added to his book,
they sold him another Impression; in like manner such small additions (though
but a paper or two of his incomparable Verses or Prose) posted off other
Editions. I acknowledge some few of these papers I received from one of M.
Cleavelands near Acquaintance, which when I sent to his, ever to be honored,
friend of Grayes Inn, he had not at that time the leisure to peruse them; but
for what he had read of them, he told the person I entrusted, That he did
believe them to be Mr. Cleavelands, he having formerly spoken of such papers of
his, that were abroad in the hands of his friends, whom he could not remember;
my intention was to reserve the collection of these manuscripts for my own
private use; but finding many of these, I had in my hands, already published in
the former Poems, not knowing what further proceedings might attend the
forwardness of the Press, I thought my self concerned, not out of any worldly
ends of profit, but out of a true affection to my deceased friend, to publish
these his never before extant pieces in Latin and English, and to make this to
be somewhat like a volume for the study. Some other Poems are intermixed, such
as the Reader shall find to be of such persons, as were for the most part Mr.
Cleavelands Contemporaries; some of them no less eminently known to the three
Nations. I hope the world cannot be so far mistaken in his Genuine Muse, as not
to discern his pieces from any of the other Poems; neither can I believe there
are any persons so unkind, as not heartily to entertain the heroic fancies of
the other Gentlemen that are worthily placed to live in this volume; some of
their Poems, contrary to my expectation, I being at such a distance, I have
since heard, were before in print: but as they are excellently good, and so
few, the Reader (I hope) will the more freely accept them. Thus having
ingenuously satisfied thee in these particulars, I shall not need to insert
more; but that I have, to prevent surreptitious Editions, published this
Collection; that by erecting this Pyramide of Honor, I might obliege posterity
to perpetuate their memories, which is the highest ambition of him, who is,

Yours in all virtuous endevors, E. Williamson.
Newark, November. 21. 1658.
Verses that came too late, intended for Mr. J. Cleaveland, pictured with his
Laurel.
GReat storm of Wit, whose fierce sharp wounding rods,
Did awe the Powers, and discipline the Gods,
Whose singeing lightning falls on all he meets,
Granado's, Satyrs, Balls of wild fire greets
The Kirk, the zeal of the Scottish Nation,
He flung at all as vengeance were his own;
Monster of reason, and deep sense! what praise
Can reach thy Muse? Cleaveland commands his Bays.
Upon the KINGS return from SCOTLAND.
Returned? I Will never believed, first prove him hence;
Kings Travel by their beams and influence.
Who says, the soul gives out her ghests, or go's
A flitting progress 'twixt the head and toes?
She rules by omnipresence, and shall we
^eny a Prince the same ubiquity?
^r grant he went, and cause their knot was slack,
Girt both the Nations with his Zodiac:
^et as the Tree at once both upward shoots,
and just as much grows downward to the roots:
^o at the same time that he posted thither,
^y Counterstages he rebounded hither.
^ither and hence at once; thus every Sphere
^oth by a double motion enter-fere:
and when his Native form inclines him East,
^y the first mover he is ravished West.
^ave you not seen how the divided Damme
^uns to the Summons of her hungry Lamb,
But when the twin cries Halves, she quits the first,
Natures Commendum must be likewise nursed.
So were his journeys, like the Spiders spun
Out of his bowels of compassion.
Tow Realms, like Cacus, so his steps transpose,
His feet still contradict him as he goes.
Englands returned, that was a barren soil;
The bullet flying makes the gun recoil.
Death's but a separation, though indors'd
With spade and javelin, we were thus divorced;
Our soul has taken wing, while we express
The corpse returning to our principles.
But the Crab-tropick must not now prevail,
Islands go back, but when you're under ^ail;
So his retreat has rectified the wrong:
Backward is forward in the Hebrew Tongue.
Now the Church Militant in plenty rests,
Nor ^ea^s, like the Amazon, to lose her breasts:
Her means are safe, not squeezed until the blood
Mix with the milk, and choke the tender brood.
She that has been the floting Ark, is that
She, that is now sea^ed on mount Ararat.
Quits Charles, our souls did guard him northward thus,
Now he the Counterpane comes South to us.
Upon a talkative woman.
PEace Beldam Ugly, thou wilt not find
M'ears bottles for enchanted wind;
That breath of thine can only raise
New storms, and dis-compose the Seas.
It may (assisted by thy clatter)
A Pigmaean army scatter;
Or move, without the smallest strain,
Lotetto's Chapel once again,
And blow S. Goodrick while he prays,
And knows not what it is he says,
And help false Latin with a hem,
From Finkley to Jerusalem,
Or in the Pacifique Sea supply
The wind that Nature does deny.
What, do thou think I can retain
All this, and spout it out again?
As a surcharged whale does spew
Old rivers, to receive in new:
Thou art deceived, even Aeol's cave,
That can all other blasts receive,
Would be too small to let in thine:
How then these narrow ears of mine?
Defect of organs may with me pass,
By chance to pillorize an ass:
Yet should I shake his ears, they 'd be
Not long enough to hark to thee.
Yet if thou have a mind to hear.
How high thy voices merits are;
Go serve the States, thou'^t useful come,
And have the pay of every Drum,
Or trudge to Utrecht, there outrun
Dam^ Skurmans score of tongues with one.
But pray be still, for I do swear,
No torment's like that of the ear,
O let me when I chance to die
In Vulcans Anvil buried lie;
Rather then hear thy tongue once knell,
That Tom a Lincoln and Bow-bell.
Rebellis Scotus.
CVrae Deo sumus, ista si Cedant Scoto?
Variata splen^is domina Psyche est suis.
Aut Stellionat^s rea, (...),
Campanulae omnes, totus Vcalegon fuo,
Coriaceae cui Mill^es Mill Hydriae,
Suburbicanis pensiles paraeciis
Non sint Refrigerio, Poetic^s furor,
Comet a non minus, vel ore flammeo
Commune despuente fatum stellula,
Dirum ominatur, Ecquis, e, Stoa, suam
Iam temperet bilem? patria quando lue
Tam Pymmiana, ^d est pediculosa, perit?
Bomba machid^sque sit bolus mermeciis?
Scotos nec Ausim-nominare, carminum
Nisi inter Amuleta, nec Meditarier
Nisi cerebello quod Capilitio rubens
(Quale Autumo coluberrimum furiis caput)
Quot inter verba, tot vene^a prompserit.
Rhadaman^heum, fac, gu^tur ^sset nunc mihi,
Sulph^rque, patibulumque copiosus
Ructans, Magus quam Coenias bombycinas;
Poteram ut Agyrta circulator, pillulas
Vomicas loqui, aut (...) styga:
Aut ut Genevae stentores, perilleis
Tartara, and equuleos boar pulpitis:
At Machinanti par forem nunquam Scoto
Cunctis sclopetis hisce guttural bus.
Ut digna dii dicant, vocem par est prius,
(Praestigiator ut) sicas, and Acinaces.
Huc, huc, Iambe gressibus faxo tuis;
At huc, Iambe, morsibus faxo Magis,
Satyraeque tortrices, tot huc adducite
Flagella, quot praesens meretur seculum
Scoti veneficis pares, audax stylum
Horum cruore tinge, sic nocent minus.
Vt Martyrs olim induebant belluis
(Quasi sisterent reges sacros hypocritas)
En bos eodem schemate (at retro) Scotos,
Extra Scotos, intus feras, and sine tropo.
Fallax Ierna viperae nihil foves
Scoto colono? non ego Britanniam.
Lupis carentem dixerim, vivo Scoto.
Quin thamesinus pyrgopolinices Scotus
Poterat Leones, Tigrides, Ursos, Canes
Proprii Inquilinos pectoris spectaculo
Monstrasse; pro obolis omnibus quibus solet
Spectare monstra Cratis, and fort simul
Poene ocreatum vulgus, and patria fera
Scotos Eremus judicat terrae plaga
Vel omnipr asentem negans Deum, nisi
Venisset inde Carolus, cohors nisi
Crafordiana, miles and Montrosseus,
Feritatis ^luens notam paganicae
Hanc praestitisset semivictimam Deo;
Nec Scoticus est, totus Leopardus, Leo,
Habent and Aram sicut Arcam foederis;
Velut tabellae bifidis pictae plicis;
Fert Angelos pars haec, and haec cacodemonas:
Cui somnianti Tartarum suasit pavor
Sic poenitere, viderat regnum velim
Nigrius Scotorum semel, and esset innocens.
Regio, Maligna quae facit votum prece,
Relegetur ad Gyares breves nunquam incola:
Sed ut ille trechedipuum, magis Domicoenio,
Vt gens vagans recutita, vel contagium,
Aut Beelzebub, ^i des ubiquitafium.
Hinc erro sit semper Scotus, certos Locos,
Et hos and illos quos libet cito nauseans,
Vt frusta divisi orbis, and Typographiae
Mendicitatis offulas, curtas nimis.
Ipse Vniversitatis haeres Integrae,
Et totus in toto, Natio Epidemica,
Nec Gliscit ergo Iargonare Gallice,
Exoticis aut indicis modis, neque
Iberio nutu negare, nec studet
Callere quem de Belgicis Hoghen Moghen
Venture tumens, aut barba canthari refert.
(Quae Coriatis una men's nostratibus)
Pugna est in Animo, atque Animus in patina scoto,
Huic struthioni suggeret cibum Chalybs,
Et Denti-ductor appetitus, baltheo,
Pro more pendulos molares, inserit.
At interim nostras quid Involant dapes?
Serpens Edenum non Edenburgum Appetit.
Aut Angliae cui jam malum est Hemorhois,
Haemetopotas hos posteris meatibus
Natura medica supposuit hirundines
Cruore satiandos licet nostro prius,
Nostro sed and Cruore Moribundos quoque.
Nec computo credant priori, nos item
Novum Addituros, servitutem pristinae
Aliam, gemellam nuperae, fraterculos
Palpare quando coeperant Charos nimis
(Suffragiorum scilicet poppysmata)
Et Crustulum Impertire velut offam Cerbero
Subblandiens decreverat senatulus.
Nos ^raloculis? Arma Visceribus prius
Indemus usque and usque vel capulo tenus.
Seri videmus quo scotum tractes Modo
Princeps rebelli mitior tergo quasi
Sellas Equino detrahens apt at suo.
At Ius rapinas hasce defendit vetus?
Egyptus Istaperdit, aufert Israel
An bibliorum. Nescis hos satellites?
Praetorianis queis cohortibus, (nova
Jerusalem triarii^) spes nititur
Sororcularum? Cardo, cardo vertitur
Cupediarum, primativae legis, etc.
O bone Deus! quanti est Carere Linteis!
Orexis ut borealis, and fames movet!
Victuque vestibusque cassi, hinc Knoxio
Sutore simul, and Knoxio utuntur coquo
Pie quod algeant, quod esuriant pie.
Larvas quin usque detrahas, and Nummuli^
Titulisque (ut animabus) subest fallacia.
Librae and Barons (detumescant interim
Vocabulorum tympani) quanti valent
Hic Cantianum poene, poene villicum
Solidosque totos illa, sed gratis, duos.
Apage superbae fraudulentiae, simul
Prosapia Pictos, fide and Pictos procul:
Opprobrium poetico vel stigmati
Etiam Cruci Crux, non al^ter hyperbolus
Hyperscelestus ostracismo sit pudor.
Americanus, ille qui Coelum horruit
Quod H^spanorum repat eo sed pars quota!
Viderat ni Orco si Scotos, (hu^ tot Scotos!)
Roterodamus pepender at Medioximus.
Sat Musa! semissa fercularia
Medullitus vorans, Diabolis invides
Propriam sibi suam Scots paropsidem.
Ut berniclis en^m Scoti, sic Lucifer
Saturatur ipsis Berniclatoribus.
Nam lapsus a furca Scotus, mox and styge
Tinctus, suum novat^r in Plant-Anserem.
On an ugly woman.
AS Scriveners sometimes take delight to see
Their basest writing, Nature has in thee
Essayed how much she can transgress at once
Appelles draughts, Durers proportions;
And for to make a jest, and try a wit,
Has not (a woman) in thy forehead writ;
But scribl'd so, and gone so far about,
Indagine would never smell thee out;
But might exclaim, here only riddles be,
And Heteroclites in phisiognomie:
But as the mystic Hebrew backward lies,
And Algebra's, ghest by absurdities,
So must we spell thee, for who would suppose
That globous piece of Wanescot were a nose,
That crockt and caetera's were wrinkles, and
Five Napers bones glew'd to a wrist, and hand;
Egyptian Antiquaries might survay
Here Hieroglyphics, time has worn away,
And wonder at an English face, more odd
And antique, than was e're a Memphian god,
Eras'd with more strange letters than might scare
A raw an unexperienced Conjurer:
And tawny Africa blush, to see her ^rie
Of monsters in one skin so kennel'd lie.
Thou may without a guard her deserts pass,
When Savages but look upon thy face.
Were but some Pict now living he would soon
Deem thee a fragment of his Nation;
And wiser Ethiopians infer
From thee, that fable's not the only fair;
Thou privative of beauty, whose one eye
Does question Metaphysics verity;
Whose many cross Aspects may prove anon
Foulness, more then a mere Negation.
Blast one place still, and never dare t'escape
Abroad out of thy mother Darkness lap,
Lest that thou make the world afraid, and be
Even hated by thy nurse, Deformity.
To the King recovered from a fit of sickness.
Most Gracious Sir,
NOw that you are recovered, and are seen,
Neither to fright the Ladies, nor the Queen;
That you to Chapel come, and take the air,
Makes that a verse, which was before my prayer:
For, Sir, as we had lost you, or your fate,
Not sickness, had been told us, all of late.
So truly mourned, that we did only lack
One to begin, and put us all in black.
The Court, as quite dissolved, did sadly tell,
White Hall was only where the King is well.
No^ grieved the people less, the Commons eyes,
Free as their loyal hearts, wept Subsidies.
And in this public woe some went so far,
To think the danger did deserve a star.
Which though 't were short, as but to show,
You would, like one of us, a sickness know,
And that you could be mortal, and to prove,
By trial of their grief, your Subjects love,
Would keep your bed, or chamber, yet our fear
Made that short time we saw you not, a year;
So did we reason mindless, and to gain
Your quick recov'ry, strived to share your pain.
Nay, such an interest had we in your health,
That in you sick'ned Church and Commonwealth.
Alas, to miss you was enough to bring
An Anarchy, but that your life was King
More than your Scepter, and though you refrained
To come among us, yet your actions reigned;
They were our pattern still, and we from thence,
Did in your absence choose our rule and Prince.
And lived by your example, which will stay,
And govern here, when you are turned to clay.
For what is he, that ever heard or saw
Your conversation, and not thought it Law?
Such a clear temper, of so wise and sweet
A Majesty, where power and goodness meet
In just proportions; such religious care
To practice what you bid; as if to wear
The Crown, or Robe, were not enough to free
The Prince from that which subjects ought to be.
Lastly (for all your graces to rehearse,
Is fitter for a story, than my verse:)
Such a high reverence do your virtues win,
They teach without, and govern us within,
And so enlarge your Kingdoms, when they see
Our minds more than our bodies, bend the knee.
And though before you we stand only bare,
These make your Presence to be every where.
On a little Gentlewoman profoundly learned.
MAkes Nature maps? since that in thee
Sh' has drawn an Universitie,
Or strives she in so small a piece,
To sum the Arts and Sciences?
Once she writ only Text-hand, when
She scribled giants, and no men:
But now in her decrepit years,
She dashes dwarfs in characters,
And makes one single farthing bear
The Creed, Commandments, and Lords prayer:
Would she turn Art, and imitate
Monte-regio's flying gnat?
Would she the Golden Legend shut
Within the Cloister of a nut?
Or else a musket-bullet rear
Into a vast and mighty sphere?
Or pen an Eagle in the caul
Of a slender Nightingale?
Or show the Pigmies can create,
Not too little, but too great.
How comes it that she thus converts
So small a Totum, and great parts?
Strives she now to turn awry
The quick scent of Philosophy?
How so little matter can
So monstrous big a form contain?
What shall we call (it would be known)
This giant and this dwarf in one?
His age is blazed by silver hairs,
His limbs still cry out want of years.
So small a body, in a cage,
May choose a spacious Hermitage*
So great a soul does fret and fume
At the narrow world for want of room.
Strange conjunction, here is grown
A Molehill and the Alps in one.
In the self same action we may call
Nature both thrift and prodigal.
Upon the birth of the Duke of York.
MAke big the bon-fires, for in this one Son,
The Queen's delivered of a Nation,
She has brought forth a People, now we may
Confess our doubted life, and boldly say,
This Prince compleats our joy, because he can
Already make the Prince of Wales a man,
And so confute the nurse, when he shall see
Himself in him past his minority.
Good morrow, Babe, welcome into that air,
Which thou confirmest ours, which now we dare
Bequeath to our late nephews, that shall see
It always English in the Prince and thee,
And never know the doubtful Scepter stand
In expectation of a chosen hand;
Nor danger of an armed, that may bar
The Crown from falling perpendicular,
And so cross nature. For I must confess,
I wish the Prince such lasting happiness,
And do commend to Providence thi^ work,
That the State may not need a Duke of York.
And think a given, and protected Heir,
Enough to silence any modest prayer:
Yet since the wiser Heavens do conceive
A way to bless posterity, to leave
So much of Charles to them, as they shall see
Drawn to the life in so much imag'rie,
And durst not trust a Chronicle, but would
Derive his virtues only in his blood;
And thinking them too vast for one, did try
To coin a partner to his legacy:
May Heaven proceed to keep him, may he shine
To mock the poorness of the Indian Mine,
And scorn the Fleet, having a treasure fa^
Above the winds reach, or the Holland^^
So may he puzzle Statesmen, and put down
All reck'nings of revenews to the Crown,
And alter the Kings rents, for his two sons
Must go for twenty thousand millions;
And so make Charles the jealous world ally,
Thus grown too potent for an enemy,
All those must study leagues now, that had rather
Seem rich in any title than of Father.
But may he still be dreadful so and be
To these abroad feared as a Deity,
At home loved as a Father, whilst he thus
To them is Terror, and a Shield to us.
On Parsons the great Porter.
SIr, or great Grandsire, whose vast bulk may be
A burying place for all your pedigre:
Thou moving Coloss, for whose goodly face,
The Rhine can hardly make a looking-glass;
What piles of victuals had thou need to chew,
Ten Woods, or Marrets throats, were not enough;
Dwarf was he, whose wives bracelets fit his thumb,
It would not on thy little finger come.
If Jove in getting Hercules spent three
Nights, he might be fifteen in getting thee.
What name or title suits thy Greatness, thou,
Aldiboronifuscorphornio?
When Giants warred with Jove, had thou been one,
Where other oaks, thou would have mountains thrown;
Were thou but sick, what help could ere be wrought,
Unless Physicians posted down thy throat?
Were thou to die, and Xerxes living, he
Would not pare Athos for to cover thee;
Were thou t'imbalm, the Surgeons needs must scale
Thy body, as when Laborers dig a whale.
Great Sir, a people kneaded up in one,
We Will weigh thee by ship-burthens, not by the stone;
What tempests might thou raise, what whirlwinds, when
Thou breaths, thou great Leviathan of men:
Bend but thine eye, a Countryman would swear
A regiment of Spaniards quartered there;
Smooth but thy brow, they will say, there were a Plain,
TO act York and Lancaster over once again!
That pocket-pistoll of the Queens might be
Thy pocket-pistoll, sans Hyperbole,
Abstain from Garrisons, since thou may eat
The Turks, or Moguls titles at a bit:
Plant some new land, which never will empty be,
If she enjoy her Savages in thee:
Get from amongst us, since we only can
Appear like sculs marc'ht over by Tamberlane.
To the Queen upon the birth of one of her Children.
THat children are like Olive branches, we
Took for a figure, now't was prophecy,
Your birth's, great Queen have made a new account,
Who bring not forth some Olives, but the Mount;
And we, who wished your Table half way round
Beset with them, do now behold it crowned.
Were there no other Court, or Nobles, yet
The King, we see, can his own Court beget:
Nay in the first worlds age he that could do
Like him, was father of his Country too.
When in that dearth of subjects, Kings were fain
First to beget their Kingdoms and then reign.
When their own offspring were their people; and
One family both filled and made the land.
But I speak treason to say Princes blood
Can e're run into people, 't is a flood
Even in the fountain: small streams loose their name.
Such births like the Ocean are still the same.
No number makes them private we may call
Not all one Nation, but Nations all.
For as I Have seen the Ark drawn like the womb
Of the four Empires, and the world to come
Out of whose midst has sprung a mystic Tree
With every branch a Genealogy,
Not of some house, but of the world this bough
For Europe, that for Africa we allow:
And all the other smaller twigs there seen
Have stood for Isles, or Countries; so, great Queen,
From you as from the Ark, nothing can be
Born less then Kingdoms, or a Monarchy.
Your pains are all imperial, and your throws
Can bring forth naught that is not great; yet those
For daughters still have thus more public been,
That you by them to Christendom lie in,
Your sons may make us safe, but we the while
Must be a World divided, still an I Will,
We shall be now of the continent; this Sex
Will mak't all one to conquer, or annex,
To be allied, will bring, what some in vain
Hope for by the sword, an universal reign;
Which yet we may despair of, since we see
Europe to match yours, will want progeny.
To Cloris a Rapture.
COme Iulia, come! let us once disbody, what,
Strait matter ties to this, and not to that,
We Will disingage, our bloudles^e form shall fly
Beyond ^he reach of earth, where never an eye
That peeps through spectacles of flesh, shall know
Where we intend, or what we mean to do;
From all contagion of flesh removed
We Will sit in judgment, on those paires that loved
In old and latter times, then will we tear
Their Chaplets that did act by slavish fear,
Who cherish't causeless griefs, and did deny
Cupids prerogative by doubt, or tie,
But they that moved by confidence, and closed
In one refining flame, and never los'd
Their thoughts on earth, but bravely did aspire
Unto their proper* Element of fire,
To these we will judge that happiness to be
The witnesses of our felicity.
Thus we will like Angels move, nor will we bind
In words the Copious language of our mind,
Such as we know not to conceive, much less,
Without destroying in their birth, express:
Thus will we live, and ('t may be) cast an eye
How far Elisium does beneath us lie,
What need we care, though milky Currents run
Amongst the silken Meadows, though the Sun
Does still preserve by's ever waking ray
A never discontinued spring, or day.
That Sun, though all his heat be to it brought,
Cannot exhale the vapor of a thought.
No, no, my Goddess, yet will thou and I
Divested of all flesh so folded lie,
That never a body'd nothing shall perceive
How we unite, how we together cleave;
Nor think this while our feathered minutes may
Fall under measure, time it self can stay
To Attend our pleasures, for what else would be
But tedious durance in eternity.
An Elegy upon Ben. Johnson.
AS when the Vestal hearth went out, no fire
Less holy then that flame that did expire
Could kindle it again: so at thy fall
Our wits, great Ben, are too Apocryphal
To celebrate thy loss, since it is too much
To write thy Epitaph, and not be such.
What thou were, like th'hard oracles of old,
Without an ecstasy cannot be told.
We must be ravished first, thou must infuse
Thy self into us both the Theme and Muse:
Else, (though we all conspired to make thy hearse
Our works) so that 't had been but one great Verse,
Though the Priest had translated for that time
The Liturgy, and buried thee in Rhyme,
So that in Meeter we had heard it said
Poetic dust is to Poetic laid:
And though that dust being Shake-spears thou might have
Not his room, but the Poet for thy grave,
So that as thou did Prince of numbers die
And live, so thou might in numbers lie,
'Twere frail solemnity; Verses on thee
And not like thine, would but kind Libels be.
And we (not speaking thy whole worth) should raise
Worse blot^ then they that envied thy praise.
Indeed thou need'st us not, since above all
Invention, thou were thine own funeral.
Hereafter, when time has fed on thy Tomb,
The inscription worn out, and the Marble dumb
So that 'twould pose a Critic to restore
Half words, and words expired so long before;
When thy maym'd statue has a sentenced face
And looks that are the horror of the place;
That 't will be learnings and Antiquity,
And ask a Seldom to say, this was thee
Thou'^t have a whole name still, nor need'st thou fear
That will be ruined, or loose nose, or hair.
Let others write so thin, that they cannot be then,
Authors till rotten, no posterity
Can add to thy works; the had their full growth,
When first born, and came aged from thy pen,
Whilst living thou enjoy'dst the fame and sense
Of all that time gives but the reverence:
When thou art of Homers years, no man will say
Thy Poems are less worthy, but more gray.
It Is bastard poetry and oth' false blood
Which cannot without succession be good,
Things that will always last do thus agree
With things eternal; the at once perfect be.
Scorn then their censures, who gave out, thy wit
As long upon a Comoedie dit sit
As Elephants bring forth; and that by blots
And mendings, took more time then fortune plots,
That such thy drought was, and so great thy thirst
That all thy plays were drawn at the Mearmaid first,
That the Kings yearly but wore, and his wine
Has more right then thou to thy Catiline,
Let such men keep a diet, let their wit
Be rackt, and while they write, suffer a fit;
When the have felt tortures without pain the Gout,
Such, as with less, the state draws treason out;
Though they should the length of Consumptionslie
Sick of their Verse, and of their Poem die,
'Twould not be thy worst scene, but would at last
Confirm their boastings, and show made in have,
He that writes well writes quick, since the rule's true,
Nothing is slowly done that is always new;
So when thy Fox had ten times acted been,
Each day was first, but that 't was cheaper seen,
And so thy Alchymist played ore and ore,
Was new o'th stage, when 't was not at the door;
We like the Actors did repeat, the pit
The first time saw, the next conceived thy wit,
Which was cast in those forms, such rules, such Arts,
That but to some not half thy acts were parts,
Since of some silken judgments we may say
They filled a box two hours, but saw no play:
So that the unlearned lost their money, and
Scholars said only, that could understand:
Thy scene was free from monsters, no hard plot
Called down a god to untyth' unlikely knot.
The stage was still a stage, two entrances
Were not two parts, oth' world disjoined by the Seas;
Thine were Land-Tragedies, no Prince was found
To swim a whole scene out, then oth' stage drowned
Pitched fields, as Red bull wars, still felt thy doom.
Thou laid'st no siedges to the Music room,
Nor would allow to thy best Comedies
Humors that should above the people rise;
Yet was thy language and thy style so high
Thy sock to the ancle, busk in reached to the thigh;
And both so chaste, so 'bove Dramatick clean
That we both safely saw, and lived thy scene;
No foul loose line did prostitute thy wit,
Thou wrot'st thy Comoedies, did not commit,
We did the vice araign'd, not tempting hear,
And were made Judges, not bad part^ by the ear,
For thou even sin did in such words array,
That some, who came bad parts, went out good play,
Which ended not with the Epilogue, the age
Still acted, which grew innocent from the stage.
It Is true thou had some sharpness, but thy salt
Served but with pleasure to reform the fault,
Men were laughed into virtue, and none more
Hated fool acted, then were such before,
So did thy sting not blood but humors draw,
So much did Satyr more correct then Law,
Which was not nature in thee, as some call
Thy teeth, who say thy wit lay in thy Gall,
That thou did quarrel first, and then inspight
Did against a person of such vices write
That 'twas revenge, not truth, that on the stage
Carlo was not presented, but thy rage;
And that when thou in Company were met
Thy meat took notes, and thy discourse was net,
We know thy free vein had this innocence
To spare the party, and to brand the offense,
And the just indignation thou were in
Did not expose shift but his tricks and gin,
Thou might have used the old Comic freedom, these
Might have seen themselves played, like Socrates,
Like Cleon Mammon might the Knight have been,
If as Greek Authors, thou had turned Greek spleen.
And had not chosen rather to translate
Their learning into English, not their rate,
Indeed this last if thou had been bereft
Of thy humanity, might be called theft,
The other was not, whatsoever was strange,
Or borrowed in thee did grow thine by the change,
Who without Lattin helps had been as rare
As Beaumont, Fletcher, or as Shak-spear were,
And like them, from thy Native stock could say
Poets and Kings are not born every day.
An Epitaph.
STay gentle Reader and shed over
Those sacred Ashes one tear more.
These sad accents clothed in black
Mourn him whom Church and State do lack,
And this weeping Marble stone
Does invite a parting groan,
Here lies within this stony shade
Natur's darling whom she made
Her fairest model, her brief story
In him heaping all her glory.
Here lies one whom times of old
Amongst their wonders had in^ol'd,
Whose set beams might well aspire,
Kindled by Poetic fire,
Unto a starry light, and there
For a Grave adorn a sphere;
One so valiantly strong,
He feared to do any wrong,
Learnings glory, who alone
Was fit to write on his own stone;
Here tongues lie speechless, to be dumb
Is our best Epicedium.
Upon Wood of Kent.
SIr, much good do it ye, were your table but
Pie-crust or cheese, you might your stomach shut,
After your slice of beef, what dare you try
Your force on an ell-square of pudding-pie?
Perhaps't may be a taste, three such as you
Unbreakfasted, might serve Seraglio.
When Hanibal scaled the Alps, had thou been there,
Thy beef had drunk up all his vinegar:
Well might thou be of Guard to Henry the Eighth,
Since thou can like a pigeon eat thy weight:
Full wise was Nature, that would not bestow
These tusks of thine into a double row;
What womb could e're contain thee, thou can shut
A pond or Aviary in a gut.
Had not thy mother born thee toothlesse, thou
Had eaten, viper-like, a passage through;
Had he that wished the Cranes long neck to eat,
Put in thy stomach too, 't had been complete.
Thou Noah's Ark, dead Sea, thou Golgotha,
Monster, beyond all them of Africa!
Beasts prey on beasts, fishes to fishes fall,
Great birds seed on the lesser, thou on all:
Has there been no mistake, why may't not be,
When Curtius leapt the gulf, 'twas into thee.
Now we will believe that man of Chica could
Make pills of arrows, and the boy that would
Chew only stones, nor can we think it vain,
That Doranetho eat up the neighboring plain.
Poor Crisicthon, that could only feast
On one poor Girl, in several dishes dressed;
Thou have devoured as many sheep, as may
Cloth all the pastures in Arcadia;
Yet, O how temperate, that never goes on
So far, as to approach repletion.
Thou breathing Cau^dron, whose digestive heat
Might boil the whole provision of the Fleet;
Say grace as long as meals, and if thou please,
Break fast with Islands, and drink healths with Seas.
On Christ-Church windows.
YOu that profane our windows with a tongue
Set like some clock, on purpose to go wrong;
Who, when you were at Service, sighed, because
You heard the Organs music, not the Dawes,
Pitying our solemn State, shaking your head,
To see no ruins from the floor to the Lead:
To whose pure nose our Cedar gave offense,
Crying, It smelt of Papists frankincense,
Who walking on our marbles, scoffing said,
Whose bodies are under these tomb-stones laid?
Counting our tapers works of darkness, and
Choosing to see Priests in blew aprons stand,
Rather than in rich coapes, which show the art
Of Sisera's prey embroidered in each part:
Then when you saw the Altars Basin, said,
Why's not the Ewer on the Cup-board laid?
Thinking our very Bibles too profane,
'Cause you never bought such covers in Duck-Lane.
Loathing all decency, as if you would have
Altars as foul, and homely as a grave.
Had you one spark of reason, you would find
Your selves like idols, to have eyes, yet blind;
It Is only some base niggard, Heresy,
To think religion loves deformity.
Glory did never yet make God the less,
Neither can beauty defile holiness.
What Is more magnificent than heaven? yet where
Is there more love and piety than there?
My heart does wish (were it possible) to see
Paul's built with precious stones and porphyrie;
To have our hals and galleries outshine
Altars in beauty, is to deck our swine
With Orient pearl, whilst the deserving Quire
Of God and Angels, wallow in the mire.
Our decent coapes only distinction keep,
That you may know the Shepherd from the sheep,
As gaudy letters in the Rubric show
How you may holy days from lay-days know;
Remember Aarons robe; and you will say,
Ladies at Masks are not so rich as they.
Then are the Priests words like thunderclaps, when he
Is lightning like ray'd round with majesty;
May every Temple shine like those at Nile,
And still be free from Rat or Crocodile:
But you will urge, both Priest and Church should be
The solemn pa^tners of humility,
Do not some boast of rags? Cynicks deride
The pomp of Kings, but with a greater pride.
Meekness consists not in the clothes, but heart*
Nature may be vainglorious well as Art:
We may as lowly before God appear,
Dressed with a glorious pearl, as with a tear.
In his high presence, where the Stars and Sun
Do but eclipse, there is no ambition.
You dare admit gay paint upon a wall,
Why then in glass that is held Apocryphal?
Our bodies temples are, look in the eye,
The window, and you needs must pictures spy;
Moses and Aaron, and the Kings Arms are
Daubed in the Church, when you the warden were.
Yet you never fined for Papist, shall we say*
Banbury is turned Rome, because we may
See the holy Lamb and Christopher? nay more,
The Altar-stone set at the Tavern door?
Why cannot the Ox then in the Nativity,
Be imag'd forth, but Papists bulls are nigh?
Our pictures to no other end are made,
Than is your time and's bill, your death and's spade,
To us they are but Memento's, which present
Christ best, except his Word and Sacrament.
If 't were a sin to set up imag'ry,
To get a child were flat idolatry.
The models of our buildings would be thus
Directions to our houses, ruins to us,
Has not each creature which has daily breath,
Some thing which resembles heaven or earth:
Suppose some ignorant Heathen once did bow
To Images, may not we see them now?
Should we love darkness, and abhor the Sun,
'Cause Persians gave it adoration?
And plant no Orchards, because apples first
Made Adam and his lineal race accursed.
Though wine for Bacchus, bread for Ceres went,
Yet both are used in the Sacrament;
What then if these were Popish relics; few
Windows are elsewhere old, but these are new,
And so exceed the former, that the face
Of these come short of the outside of our glass:
Colors are here mixed, so that rainbows be
(Compared) but clouds without variety.
Art here is Natures envy; this is he,
Not Paracelsus, but by Chymistrie
Can make a man from ashes, if not dust,
Producing offsprings of his mind, not lust.
See how he makes his Maker, and does draw
All that is meant i'th'the Gospel, or in the Law.
Looking upon the Resurrection,
Me thoughts I saw the blessed Vision,
Where not his face is merely drawn, but mind,
Which not with paint, but oil of gladness shined:
But when I viewed the next pane, where we have
The God of life transported to his grave,
Light then is dark, all things so dull and dead;
As if that part of the window had been lead.
Jonas his whale did so men's eyes befool,
That they have begged him the Anatomy school.
That he saw ships at Oxford one did swear,
Though Isis yet will barges hardly bear:
Another soon, as he the trees espied,
Thought them in the garden on the other side.
See in what state (though on an ass) Christ went,
This shows more glorious than the Parli'ment.
Then in what awe Moses his rod does keep
The Seas, as if the frost had glazed the Deep;
The raging waves are to themselves a bound,
Some cry, Help, help, or horse and man are drowned.
Shadows do every where for substance pass,
You Would think the sands were in an hourglass,
You that do live with Surgeons, have you seen
A spring of blood forced from a swelling vein:
So from a touch of Moses rod, does jump
A Cataract, the rock is made a pump:
At sight of whose o're-flowings, many get
Themselves away, for fear of being wet.
Here you behold a sprightfull Lady stand,
To have her frame drawn by a Painters hand;
Such lively look and presence, such a dress
King Pharaohs daughters image does express,
Look well upon her gown, and you will swear
The needle, not the pencill has been there.
At sight of her, some gallants do dispute,
Whether in the Church it is lawful to salute?
Next Jacob kneeling, where his Kid-skin's such,
As it may well cozen old Isaacs touch.
A Shepherd see'ng how thorns went round about,
Abraham's ram, would needs have helped it out;
Behold, the Dove descending to inspire
The Apostles heads with cloven tongues of fire,
And in a superficies there you will see
The gross dimensions of profundity:
It Is hard to judge which is best built and higher,
The Arch-roof in the window, or the quier.
All beasts as in the Ark are lively done;
Nay, you may see the shadow of the Sun:
Upon a Landscape if you look a while,
You Will think the prospect at least 40 mile;
There Is none needs now go travel we may see
At home Jerusalem and Ninivy.
And Sodom now in flames: one glance will dart
Farther then Lynce with Galilaeus art,
Seeing Eliahs Chariot, we fear
There is some fiery prod'gy in the air,
When Christ to purge his Temple holds his whip,
How nimbly hucksters with their baskets skip.
St. Peter's fishes are so lively wrought,
Some cheapen them, and ask when they were cought.
Here Is motions painted too: Chariots so fast
Run that they are never gone though always past,
The Angels with their Lutes are done so true,
We do not only look, but harken too,
As if their sounds were painted: thus the wit
Of the pencil has drawn more then there can sit.
Thus as (in Archimedes sphere) you may
In a small glass the Universe survey;
Such various shapes are too in the imag'ry
as age and sex may their own features see,
But if the window cannot show your face,
Look under feet, the Marble is your glass;
Which too, for more then ornament, is there,
The stones may learn your eyes to shed a tear,
They never work upon the conscience;
They cannot make us kneel, we are not such
As think there is Balsome in the Kiss, or Touch,
That were gross superstition we know;
There Is no more power in them then the Popes Toe.
The Saints themselves for us can do no good,
Much less their pictures drawn in glass, or wood,
They cannot seal, but since they signify,
They may be worthy of a cast oth' eye,
Although no worship: that is due alone,
Not to the Carpenters, but Gods own son:
Obedience to blocks deserves the Rod,
The Lord may well be then a jealous God.
Why should not statues now be due to Paul,
As to the C^sars of the Cappitoll;
How many images of great Heirs, which
Had nothing but the din of being rich,
Shine in our Temples? kneeling always there
Where, when they were alive, they would scarce appear?
Yet shall Christ's Sepulcher have never a Tomb?
Shall every Saint have a John Baptists Doom?
No Limb of Marie stand? must we forget
Christ's Cross, as soon as past the Alphabet?
Shall not their heads have room in the window, who
Founded our Church, and our Religion too?
We know that God's a spirit, we confess,
We cannot comprehend his name, much less
Can a small glass his nature: but since he
Vouchsafed to suffer his humanity;
Why may not we (only to put's in mind
Of 's Godhead) have his manhood thus enshrined.
Is our Kings person less esteemed, because
We read him in our Coins as well as Laws?
Do what we can, whether we think, or paint,
All Gods expressions are but weak and faint,
Yet spots in Globes must not be blotted thence,
That cannot show the World's magnificence.
Nor is it fit we should the skill controu^
Because the Artist cannot draw the Soul.
Cease then your railings and your dull complaints,
To pull down Galleries and set up Saints
Is no impiety: now we may well
Say that our Church is truly visible:
Those that before our glass scaffolds prefer
Would turn our Temple to a Theater.
Windows are Pulpits now; though unlearned, one
May read this Bibles new Edition.
Instead of here and there, a verse adorned
Round with a Lace of paint, fit to be scorned.
Even by vulgar eyes, each pane presents
Whole Chapters with both Comment and Contents,
The cloudy mysteries of the Gospel here
Transparent as the Crystal do appear,
It Is not to see things darkly through a glass
Here you may see our Savior face to face;
And whereas feasts come seldom, here is discri'd
A constant Christmas, Easter, VVhitsuntide,
Let the deaf hither come, no matter though
Faiths sense be lost, we a new way can show,
Here we can teach them to believe by the eye
These silenced Ministers do edify:
The Scriptures ray's contracted in a glass
Like Emblems do with greater virtue pass,
Look in the book of Martyrs and you will see
More by the pictures than the History:
That price for things in colors often we give,
Which we would not take to have them while they live,
Such is the power of painting that it makes
A loving sympathy 'twixt men and snakes,
Hence then Paul's Doctrine may seem more Divine,
As Amber through a glass does clearer shine:
Words pass away, as soon as headache gone,
We read in books what here we dwell upon,
Thus then there is no more fault in imag'ry
Then there is in the practice of piety;
Both edify: what is in Letters there
Is writ in plainer Hieroglyphics here;
It Is not a new Religion we have chose,
It Is the same body but in better clothes;
You Will say they make us gaze when we should pray;
And that our thoughts do on the figures stray,
If so, you may conclude us beasts; what they
Have for their object is to us the way.
Did any ere use prospective to see
No further then the glass; or can there be
Such lazy Travelers so given to sin,
As that they will take their dwelling at the Inn?
A Christians sight rests in Divinity,
Signs are but spectacles to help faiths eye,
God is the Center; dwelling on these words,
My Muse a Sabbath to my brain affords;
If their nice wits more solemn proof exact,
Know, this was meant a Poem not a Tract.
An intertainment at Cotswold.
TRudge hence ye tender flocks, some gloomy grove
Must be this days refreshment, now remove
Your selves ye must; your walk's must be resigned
Unto a matchless troup of female kind,
Whose beauty, should the flat-nos'd Satyrs spy,
They would not live, but languish, and so die.
Troys lofty Towers, which once o're-topt the clouds
And menaced heaven, Hellens beauty shrowd's
In cinders; for his tender Heroes sake.
Leander cuts the H^lles-pontick Lake,
Yet those to these, were tawny, rivel'd, dun,
Such as a glim'ring Taper to the Sun.
This Turret swells (me thinks) as proud to be
The seat, or footstool of that Company;
And Eolus, before he will set free
The windy Tenant, says, Now go and flee
Over flow^y Gardens, brush the verdant meads
And sweetest walk's, where fairest beauty treads;
Yea, Ransack natur's wardrope for perfumes
More precious then the costliest dame consumes,
Then gently breath upon that lovely train
That are a tripping on the fallow plain;
For now, unless my Calender do ly,
Since fair Diana and her Company
Did trace these spacious plains, bright Phoebus Carre
Has run from Pisces to the watery Star,
From thence to Leo, for it is just the day
That was appointed for to dance and play;
That day, which to posterity shall shine
In Almanacks, writ with a Rubric line,
In which days praise the sisters that do sing
In pale Pyrene, and Heliconian spring
Do drink of, shall compose more witty lay's
Then were e're heard of in old Orpheus days;
Their chief Musician shall Indite a story,
Which shall eternize this days founders glory,
He Is a fit subject for a'l Poets quills,
That bring's Arcadia to our Cotswold-hills;
Me thinks each Creatur's proud to spend his breath
In vindicating this man's name from death;
The Candid winds, as they these downs fly over,
Whistle the praise of praise-deserving Dover;
Heavens winged Q^iristers do warble forth
More pleasant notes, and celebrate his worth
In sweetest tunes, the till-now sullen earth
Has decked her breast with flowers fit for mirth
Fain would she vent, but 'cause she cannot speak
His praise, she weeps it, else her heart would break;
For where that famous Valley she over looks,
Run drilling from her eyes sweet silver brooks,
Which, when in progress they salute those plains,
Whose large increase yields Wickham men great gains,
In honor of that place they leap on high,
And frisk and dance for joy they are so nigh;
Each lumpish peble stone they justle far,
As who should say, Be frolic as we are;
Then they repine at their streight-lacing shore
Prohibiting their passage to his door;
And to declare that they obliged stand
In sign of homage they salute the land;
But when their haste has posted them from thence,
Where his Tutelars keep their residence,
They burt against each nook, and as they swell
Look back and cry, For ever live, farewell.
Then they to Avoan blazon out his worth,
And she to Severne, Severne sets it forth
To Isis, who her sister Them implores
To tell the Ocean, an the Ocean roares
It to the world; so that there is no ground
Where his Encomions Echo does not sound;
The Bacchides, old Bacchus made to thee,
Their red-nos'd pimple-faced diety,
Those feasts called Orgia, and the Matrons chaste
To Ceres celebrate a nine-dayes feast,
Called first fruits offerings; to the Queen of May,
Called Flora, youth did make a holy day,
Where garlands decked the temples of the Queen*
And maidens measured Galliards on the green.
The ensuing age wants Patrons to support
Bacchus, or Ceres rights, or Flora's sport,
Till Dover comes, who Flora Queen of May
Does re-install into her holy day.
He sleights the rest, it is sure, because they be
The Grand supporters of all Luxury;
First shall the tender Lambs with Tigers dwell,
And fearful Hearts shall lodge with Lions fell;
First shall the glorious Star-bestudded sky
Want light, and Neptun's regiment be dry;
First shall the Courtiers leave their sweet embraces,
Ladies to plaster over their furrowed faces;
First she whose nasty breath offends her love
Shall cease her mouth to sweeten with a Clove;
First shall Nyctimene that bird of night
To fly at noon take pleasure and delight;
Ere Cotswold shepherds, on their joynted reeds,
Shall cease to sing his fame-deserving deeds;
Who from their Tombs wherein they were inthral'd
The ancient dancing, Druides has called,
Which from the woods did walk unto the plain,
There dance a Jigge, and so return again.
Let him that dares this dancing green deface
Be plagued as well as Erisicthon was,
Who, cause he ^eld those dancers sacred tree,
Was pined with famine, di'd in misery.
The rustic swains shall henceforth take delight,
To cheat the tedious cold December night,
With such sweet Sonnets as the Poets frame,
In honor of thy thi^-dayes-work and name:
Yea, they themselves so long shall sleep in mirth,
Making of Lambs-woll on the winters hearth,
Until Aurora's snow white limbs they spy
Through nights black Curtains, and the night to die:
Thus shall they daily sing, sit, hatch a laugh,
And to thy health (brave Dover) freely quaffe.
To the Queen.
Great Queen,
WHom tumults lessen not, whose womb, we see,
Keeps the same Method still, the same decree;
And midst the brandish't swords, and trumpets voice
Brings forth a Prince, a conquest to that noise.
We greet the courage of your births: and spy
Your consorts spirit dancing in your eye.
Valor he shrouds in armor, you in veil;
You wrapped in Tiffany, and he in maile.
The fairest bloom might since the seasons lou'r
Loose all its sent, and turn a common flower
A storm might blast the beauty of that brow,
And the fresh Rose shrink from its glory now.
But there the constant flower in tempests gay,
As in the silent whispers of the day,
Can thrive in blasts, and alike fruitful be,
When Charles in steel, or Charles in robes you see,
You smile a mother, when the just King stands,
Or with a shower, or thunder in his hands.
Thus you alone seated above all Jais,
Turn noise to tunes, and lightning into Stars.
An Elegy on Ben. Johnson.
POet of Princes, Prince of Poets (we,
If to Apollo well may pray to thee.)
Give Gloworms leave to peep, who till thy night
Could not be seen, we darkened were with light;
For Stars to appear after the fall oth' Sun,
Is at the least modest presumption.
I Have seen a great Lamp lighted by the small
Spark of a flint found in a field, or wall,
Our inner Verse faintly may shadow ^orth
A dull reflection of thy glorious worth,
And like a statue homely fashioned, raise
Some trophies to thy memory, though not praise.
Those shallow Sirs, who want sharp sight to look
On the majestic splendor of thy book,
That rather choose to hear an Archy prate,
Then the full sense of a learned Laureate,
May, when they see thy name thus plainly writ,
Admire the solemn measure of thy wit,
And like thy works beyond a gaudy show
Of boords and canvass, wrought by Inigo.
Ploughmen, who puzzled are with figures, come
By tallies to the reckoning of a sum,
And milk-sop heirs, which from their mothers lap*
Scarce traveled, know far countries by a map.
Shakespeare may make griefs, merry Beaumonts style*
Ravish and melt anger into a smile;
In winter nights, or after meals, they be,
I must confess, very good company*
But thou exact'st our best hours industry,
We may read them, we ought to study thee;
Thy scenes are precepts, every verse does give
Counsel, and teach us, not to laugh, but live.
You that with towering thoughts presume so high
(Swelled with a vain ambitions tympany)
To dream on Scepters, whose brave mischief calls
The blood of Kings to their last funerals,
Learn from Sejanus his high fall, to prove
To thy dread Sovereigne a sacred love;
Let him suggest a reverend fear to thee,
And may his Tragedy thy Lecture be;
Learn the compendious age of slippery power
That Is built on blood, and may one little hour
Teach thy bold rashness, that it is not safe,
To build a kingdom on a Caesar's grave;
Thy plays were whipped and libelled, only 'cause
They Are good, and savor of our Kingdoms laws,
Histrio-Mastix (lightning like) does wound
Those things alone that solid are and sound.
Thus guilty men hate justice, so a glass,
Is sometimes broke for showing a foul face;
There Is none that wish thee rods, in stead of bays,
But such whose very hate adds to thy praise;
Let Scriblers (that write post, and versifie
With no more leisure than we cast a die)
Spur on their Pegasus, and proudly cry,
This verse I made in the twinkling of an eye;
Thou could have done so, had thou thought it fit,
But 'twas the wisdom of thy Muse to sit
And weigh each syllable, suffering naught to pass,
But what could be no better than it was;
Those that keep pompous state, never go in have;
Thou went before them all, though not so fast;
While their poor cobweb-stuff finds as quick fate,
As birth, and sels like Alm'nacks out of date;
The marbled glory of thy labored rhyme
Shall live beyond the Calendar of time,
Who will their Meteors 'bove thy Sun advance;
Thine are the works of Judgment, theirs of
Chance.
How this whole Kingdome's in thy debt, we have
From others periwigs and paint^, to save
Our ruined sculs, and faces; but to thee
We owe our tongues, and fancies remedy.
Thy Poems make us Poets, we may lack
(Reading thy book) stolen sentences and Sack.
He that can but one speech of thine rehearse,
Whether he will or no, must make a verse.
Thus trees give fruit, the kernels of that fruit
Do bring forth trees, which in more branches shoot.
Our Canting English (of it self alone)
(I had almost laid a confusion)
Is now all harmony; what we did say
Before was tuning only, this is play.
Strangers who cannot reach thy sense will throng,
To hear us speak the accents of thy tongue,
As unto birds that sing: if it be so good
When heard alone, what is it when understood!
Thou shall be read as Classick Authors; and
As Greek and Latin taught in every land.
The cringing Monsieur shall thy language vent,
When he would melt his wench with complement;
Using thy phrases he may have his wish
Of a coy Nun, without an angry pish:
And yet in all thy Poems there is shown
Such chastity, that every lin's a zone.
Rome will confess, that thou make Caesar talk
In greater state and pomp than he could walk:
Catalines tongue is the true edge of swords,
We now not only feel, but hear thy words;
Who Tully in thy Idiom understands,
Will swear that his Orations are commands:
But that which could with richer language dress
The highest sense, cannot thy words express.
Had I thy own invention, which affords
Words above action, matter above words,
To crown thy merits, I should only be
Sumptuously poor, low in Hyperbole.
On Ben. Johnson.
WHo first reformed our stage with just est Laws,
And was the first best Judge in his own cause
Who (when his actors trembled for applause)
Could (with a noble confidence) prefer
His own, by right, to a noble Theater;
From principles which he knew could not err.
Who to his fable did his person fit,
With all the properties of Art and wit,
And above all that could be acted writ.
Who public follies did to covert drive,
Which he again could cunningly retrive,
Leaving them no ground to rest on and thrive.
Here Johnson lies, whom had I named before,
In that one word alone I had paid more,
Than can be now, when plenty makes me poor.
To his Mistress.
COme (dearest Iulia) thou and I
Will knit us in so strict a tie,
As shall with greater power engage,
Than feeble charms of marriage;
We will be friends, our thoughts shall go,
Without impeachment, to and fro;
The same desires shall elevate
Our mingled souls, the self-same hate
Shall cause aversion, we will bear
One sympathizing hope and fear;
And for to move more close, we will frame
Our triumphs and our tears the same:
Yet will we never so grossly dare,
As our ignobler selves to share;
Let men desire like those above,
Spiritual forms we will only love;
And teach the ruder world to shame,
When heat increases to a flame:
Love's like a Landscape, which does stand
Smooth at a distance, rough at hand.
In Nuptias Principis Auranchii and D. Mariae filiae Regis Angliae.
FAma Refert nostris terras haesisse bata^nas,
Atque unum quondam gentibus esse solum;
Oceanumque, duas qui nunc interluit or as,
Fluctibus haud semper dissecuisse suis.
Migrat in historiam, fuer atquae fabula, taedis,
Oceanusque tuo jam tandem pulsus amore est;
Et cedunt flammis, pontus and unda tuis;
Dum populus populi procus est, passusque sagittas
Nubentis simili principis igne calet.
Et tua dum nostras sociant sponsalia dextras;
Connubii tandem foedera nomen habent.
Non sponsam, Fateor, paribus natalibus aequas,
Nec similes thalamos fers, similesve thoras;
Nec te tam magnis jactas e Regibus ortum,
Nec stirpem decorant Regna ter^ampla tuam:
Haud tamen accedis minor; est pro sanguin^ virtus,
Quodque illi Faelix, dat tibi forte genus.
^ar Sceptris Patris Gladius, tibi stemmata bellis
Auxit, and antiquis Regibus aequa dedit.
^ar tua Regali victrix domus, hinc quoque nobis
Maj^rum factis Imperialis ades.
Et licet in dotem sponsae non porrigis Indos,
Sed plures conjux ferret Iberus opes;
Gallus and in thalamos Rueret magis aureus, and te
Ex arca vincat Natio multa sua:
Tu tamen in dotem patris clara arma ministrans
Ferrato in Gremium ditior Imbre ruis;
Amplior and sors est Indis, adferre triumphos,
Et par possesso victus Iberus adest.
Cujus ad Ereptum, plus est quod nasceris, Aurum,
Quam natum; Gemina est India capta, tua*
Fersque polo^coctum, dives, sub utroque metallum;
Et cadit in fiscum sol, oriturque, tuum;
Dum toties tibi vectat opes H^spania victas;
Cedit and in census annua prada tuos.
Nasceris, and puerum gens spoliata timet.
Aetatique metus nutrit, versatque coaevos;
Atque annis fingit damna futura tuis.
Anticipatque tuos, Infantia l^ta, triumphos,
Dum tenero fortis Spirat in ore Pater.
Qui sua bella, tuo cernit, sed mollia, vultu;
Misceturque tuis Mart Cupido genis*
Hic gemina oppositis vibrantur vulnera telis,
Currit ad haec conjux, hostis and illa fugit.
Upon the Marriage of the young Prince of Orange with the Lady Marie.
WE are no longer Island, speedily
Sement these hands, Priest; these our Isthmus be,
Nor does the Sea devide us, but'^ become
Our wedding ^Ring, Type of our Union.
Yet wedding's a too private style, for this
Not a plain morral match, but a league is,
A league that shall incorporate these two
Nations, and that third which shall spring from you.
Make haste then and prevent your years, we all
Long till we may the Belgian, Cousin call.
While thus you couple young, you seem to be
Espoused, not by consent, but sympathy.
And like the Vine and Elm secure from strife,
Embrace as born, not as made man and wife.
And you may like the Vine too multiply,
That he, who shall sum up your progeny
May be persuaded that you did bring forth
Not twins, but clusters; while their Native worth
Ante-dates breeding, and your issues are
Each babe a sucking Hero, infant star:
But why do I these needless fancies vent?
Your marriage is an Act of Parliament.
The state's your Priest: your people too, who see
You voted thus, thus signed, think you to be
Not wedded but enacted, and do since
Acknowledge you are now both Law and Prince.
Another upon the same.
It Is vain to wish them joys; nor is it meet
Verses should pray, changing to knees their feet.
This were the cry, God help you to a Saint,
Can fullness fail, or glorious bodies faint?
Votes are for meaner wed-locks, where there is
Some doubt, or hazard of a lasting bliss;
But now such labor's equally unwise,
As is the Priest's that prays for^'s Deities;
Blessings are proper to this Union
As heat to fire, or light is to the Sun,
Not is it a wonder, for the Prince did woo
Not birth, age, beauty, but religion too:
Here faith and reason Courts, this match does prove
Wisdom in youth, and policy in love.
Some Bridegrooms (like the days) all Nations try
And cheapen every toy before they buy.
When one is only worthy, and worth all
Those that were rivals for the golden ball,
He could not look on more, without offense,
Athirst of choice had thwarted providence.
The Theban ^earth could not devide these flam's
Which burnt through all the Seas, 'twixt Rhene and Thames.
Nor were their hearts linked by the painters hand,
Or Legates voice, such bonds are ropes of sand;
They their own Council, happier steps have trod,
Who not salute the image, but the God,
Should he have had a speaker, who (though young)
Carries an ordered babel in his tongue?
Or should her beauty in saint colors lie,
When there is no Tablet worthy but his eye?
This Sun and Moon may safely join their lips,
Who by their nearness banish all Eclips.
Their flames and flowers (stolen kisses like) do make
Equal amends, and at once give and take.
Here are such emulous beauties, that some do
Think them united in one body too.
So that our eyes see double; as a face,
Though single in the flesh, is two in the glass,
And 't must be so; unless that is now confessed,
Which once was soloecisme, that both are best,
And each is all; which large perfections are
Beyond our hopes and faiths, as well as prayer.
Thus then, here is nothing wanting, yet we may,
Although not for them, to them humbly pray*
Grant then Illustrious Prince (for we do vow
To know no Nuptial Deity but you)
Grant us our boon, although your abler parts
Make this a truer marriage of the Arts;
Yet throw your Euclid by, and only look
To the propositions of your living book,
And you will conclude truth does more clearly lie
There then in the maxims of Philosophy.
Measure over all her limbs, and you will see
No such proportions in Geometry,
Instead of heavens rude Globes, survey her eyes,
There lurks no Snake, or Scorpion in those skies.
You Will there find richer spears, and blushing tell
How in those points Angels, like you, do dwell.
Since she to day made you a number, try
Part of one Art alone to multiply.
Think of no Tacticks, but of those which are
Read in the Mar^iald orders of her hair.
Though you with victory have Armies led,
'Twas not so great a triumph as to wed,
Such ^etters will increase your liberty;
Count not these bonds amongst your Armory.
Thus Prisons prove strong Forts, and foes are slain
The second time, now by a captive chain.
And you (most gracious Lady, who alone
Are all the Goddesses we call upon)
Wear not too many Pearls, unless it be
Upon a day of sad humility.
When you keep Masks, or celebrate a feast,
If you would be rich, or glorious, come undrest.
Gems do but hide sparks of a brighter hew,
Those that are Stars to some are Clouds to you;
Think of no Jewel, but the Union,
That which the Priest not Ladies did put on,
And then you will find true luster; eyes are dim,
And weary with the light, but not of him
When you have made his Arms your seat, be it known
It Is to debase your self, to sit in the Throne.
An Epitaph on Ben. Johnson.
THe Muses fairest light in no dark time,
The wonder of a learned age; the line
Which none can pass; the most proportioned wit
To nature, the best Judge of what was fit,
The deepest, plainest, highest, clearest pen;
The voice most Echoed by consenting men;
The Soul, which answered best to all well said
By others, and which most requital made,
Tuned to the highest key of ancient Rome,
Returning all her Music with his own,
In whom with nature study claimed apart,
Yet who unto himself owed all this Art:
Here lies Ben. Johnson, every age will look
With sorrow here, with wonder on his book.
On one that was deprived of his Testicles.
THou Neuter Gender! whom a Gown
Can make a woman, Breeches none:
Crea^ed one thing, made another,
Not a sister, scarce a brother:
Jack of both sides, that may bear,
Or a distaff, or a spear,
If thy fortune thither call,
Be the Grand Signiors General^*
Or if thou fancy not that t^^de,
Turn the Sultana's Chambermaid;
A Medal where grim Mars turned right,
Proves a smiling Aphrodite;
How does nature quible, either
He, or she, boy, girl, or neither;
Thou may serve great Jove instead
Of Hebe both and Ganymed,
A face both stern and mild, cheeks bare
That still do only promise hair,
Old Cybele the first in all
This humane predicamental scale,
Why would she choose her Priests to be
Such Individuums as ye?
Such Insecta's, added on
To creatures by substraction,
In whom nature claims no part,
Ye only being words of Art.
To his Mistress.
WHat mystery is this? that I should find
My blood, in kissing you to stay behind;
'Twas not for want of color that required
My blood for paint: no die could be desired
On that fair cheek, where scarlet were a spot,
And where the juice of Lillies but a blot:
If at the presence of the murderer,
The ^^und will bleed, and tell the cause is there,
A touch will do much more, even so my heart,
When secretly it felt your killing dart,
Showed it in blood, which yet does more complain,
Because it cannot be so touched again,
This wounded heart, to show its love most true,
Sent forth a drop, and wrote its mind on you,
Was ever paper half so white as this?
Or Wax so yielding to the printed kiss?
Or seal so strong? no letter e're was writ,
That could the Authors mind so truly fit;
For though my self to foreign countries fly,
My blood desires to keep you company;
Here I could spill it all, thus I can free
My enemy from blood, though slain I be;
But slain I cannot be, nor meet with ill,
Since, but to you, I have no blood to spill.
The Puritan.
WIth face and fashion to be known,
For one of sure election,
With eyes all white, and many a groan,
With neck aside to draw in tone,
With harp in's nose, or he is none.
See a new Teacher of the town,
O the town, O the towns new Teacher.
With pate cut shorter than the brow,
With little rust starched you know how,
With cloak like Paul, no cape I trow,
With Surplice none; but lately now,
With hands to thump, no knees to bow.
See a new Teacher, etc.
With coz'ning cough, and hollow cheek,
To get new gatherings every week,
With paltry change of and to eke,
With some small Hebrew, and no Greek,
To find out words, when stuffe's to seek.
See a new Teacher, etc.
With shop-board breeding, and intrusion,
With some Outlandish Institution,
With Vrsines Catechism to muse on,
With Systems method for confusion,
With grounds strong laid of mere illusion*
See a new Teacher, etc*
With Rites indifferent all damned,
And made unlawful, if commanded,
Good works of Popery down banded,
And Moral Laws from him estranged,
Except the Sabbath still unchanged.
See a new Teacher, etc.
With speech unthought, quick revelation,
With boldness in predestination,
With threats of absolute damnation,
Yet yea and nay has some salvation,
For his own Tribe, not every Nation.
See a new Teacher, etc,
With after license cost a crown,
When Bishop new had put him down,
With tricks called repetition,
And doctrine newly brought to town,
Of teaching men to hang and drown.
See a new Teacher, etc.
With flesh-provision to keep Lent,
With shelves of sweetmeats often spent,
Which new Maid bought, old Lady sent;
Though to be saved a poor present;
Yet legacies assure the event.
See a new Teacher, etc.
With troops expecting him at the door,
That would hear Sermons, and no more;
With noting tools, and sighs great store,
With Bibles great to turn them over,
While he wrests places by the score.
See a new Teacher, etc.
With running text, the named forsaken,
With For and But, both by sense shaken,
Cheap doctrines forced, wild Uses taken,
Both sometimes one by mark mistaken,
With any thing to any shapen.
See a new Teacher, etc.
With new wrought caps, against the Canon,
For taking cold, though sure he have none;
A Sermons end, where he began one,
A new hour long, when is glass had run one,
New Use, new Points, new Notes to stand on.
See a new Teacher, etc.
The Flight.
My Laelia stay,
And run not thus like a young Roe away,
No enemy
Pursues thee (foolish Girl) it is only I,
I Will keep off harms,
If thou wilt be pleased to garrison mine arms;
What, do thou sear
I Will turn a Traitor? may these Roses here
To palness shread,
And Lillies stand disguised in new red.
If that I lay
A snare, wherein thou would not gladly stay;
See, see the Sun,
Does slowly to his azure lodging run,
Come, sit but here,
And presently he'il quit our Hemisphere;
So still, among
Lovers, time is too short, or else too long;
Here will we spin
Legends for them that have Loves martyrs bin,
Here on this plain,
We Will talk Narcissus to a flower again:
Come here, and choose
On which of these proud plats thou would repose.
Here may thou shame
The rusty violets with the crimson flame
Of either cheek,
And Primroses, white as thy fingers seek,
Nay, thou may prove,
That man's most noble passion is to love.
To a Lady that wrought a story of the Bible in needle work.
COuld we judge here, most virtuous Madam, then
Your needle might receive praise from our pen;
But this our want bereaves it of that part,
Whilst to admire, and thank is all our art,
The work deserves a shrine: I should rehearse
Its glory in a story not in Verse,
Colors are mixed so subt'lly, that thereby
The strength of Art does take and cheat the eye,
At once a thousand we can gaze upon,
But are deceived by their transition,
What touches is the same, beam takes from beam
The next still like, yet differing in the extreme,
Here runs this tract, thither we see that tends,
But cannot say, Here this, or there that ends:
Thus, while they creep insensibly, we doubt,
Whether the one powers not the other out.
Faces so quick and lively, that we may
Fear, if we turn our backs, they will steal away
Postures of grief so true, that we may swear,
Your Artfull fingers have wrought passion there:
View we the manger and the Babe, we thence
Believe the very threads have innocence,
Then on the Cross, such love, such grief we find,
As 'twere the transcript of our Saviors mind,
Each parcel so expressive, each so fit,
That the whole seems not so much wrought, as writ:
It Is sacred Text all, we may quote, and thence,
Extract what may be passed in our defense;
Blessed mother of the Church, be in the list
Reasoned with four, a she Evangelist,
Nor can the style be profanation, when
The needle may convert more than the pen,
When says may come by seeing, and each leaf,
Rightly peru^'d, prove Gospel to the deaf:
Had not that Helen happily found the Cross,
By this your work you had repaired that loss.
Tell me not of Penelope, we do
See a web here more chaste and sacred too.
Where are ye now, O women, ye that sow
Temptations, laboring to express the bow
Of the blind Archer, ye that rarely set,
To please your Loves, a Venus in a net,
Turn your skill hither, then we shall, no doubt,
See the Kings daughter glorious too without;
Women sowed only fig leaves hitherto.
Eves nakedness is only clothed by you.
To the King.
THe Prince has now an equal, and may see
A fellow to his sports, as great as he:
Nor need ^e lessen birth, or fall from state,
Or be deposed to an Associate;
Or else to fit companions to his play,
Need lay your Scepter or your Crown away.
And now you may behold, Sir, by your side,
Your Royal Self grown more, and multipl'd,
And those past years, before and since your Reign,
May in your Children see llv'd over again;
Who are your Emblemes; and though none be free
From fate, yet you in them immortal be:
And whilst we may preserve you living thus,
When e're you die, you not depart from us:
Your sons will keep most of you from the grave,
So, though we change, we no new King shall have:
You only will be varied; as a grain
Lost in a Harvest; more returns again.
And though perchance we cannot say, like those,
Who are Heirs to their fathers eyes, or nose,
Report his look, and are so justly faced
Like him, as if they were not born, but cast,
That all these signs we in the Princes find,
Yet sure there is more likeness in their mind,
Which you conveyed them through their mother, who
Even thus did travel with your virtues too,
Which to descend to our dull sense and earth,
Come to us in their shapes, and suffer birth.
And be your offspring, who when Chronicle
^s all we have, and Annals only tell
Your deeds and actions, and when men shall look
And see the Prince and Duke do all the book,
And live your Royal story, and that all
Which you did well, was but prophetical,
Will not be thought as your posterity,
But you in them will your Successor be.
To the Queen, upon the birth of her first Daughter.
AFter the Princes birth, admired Queen,
Had you proved barren, you had fruitful been;
And in one Heir born to his fathers place
And royal mind had brought us forth a race.
But we, who thought we wished enough to see
A Prince of Wales, have now a progeny:
And you being perfect now have learned the way
To be with Child as often as we can pray.
So that henceforth, we need no alters vex
With empty vows, being heard in either Sex:
Nor have we all our Kingdoms incense tried
So many years only to be denied.
We no desires, but thankful offerings bring,
That bearing many you prefer the King,
And to us yet have but one daughter shown;
Who else had been the Original alone.
Without a Copy: for the shapes we see
In tables of you but bright errors be.
Nor could we hope Art could beget an Heir
To that sweet form, unless your self did bear
Your Portraiture, and in a daughter show
That of your self, which yet no Painter drew,
Who with his subtle hand and wisest skill
Has hitherto but strived to draw you ill;
And when he takes his Pencil from your look,
Find's colors make you but a piece mistook,
And so paints treason, nor would have pretense
To escape, but that he limbs a fair pretense:
But in the Princess you are writ so plain
And true, that in her you were born again.
And when we see you both together placed,
You are your daughter, only grown in haste.
In both we may the self-same graces see,
But that they yet in her but Infant be,
Not woman beauties, nor will we despair
The Prince and Duke of York have equal share
In your perfections, which, though they divide,
Make them both Prince enough by the mothers side.
Whose composition is so clear and good,
That we can see discourses in your blood,
And understand your body, so refined
That of you might be born a Soul, or mind.
O may you still be fruitful, and begin
Henceforth to make our year by lying in.
May we have store of Princes, and they live
Till Heralds doubt what Titles they should give,
To this, may you be young still, and no other
Signs of more age found in you, but a mother.
Upon one that preached in a Cloak.
SAw you the Cloak at Church to day,
The long worn short Cloak lined with Say?
What had the man no Gown to wear?
Or was this sent him from the Mayor?
Or is it the Cloak which Nixon brought
To trim the Tub, where Golledge taught?
Or can this best conceal his lips,
And show Communion-sitting hips?
Or was the Cloak St. Paul's; if so,
With it he found the Parchments too;
Yes, verily, for he has been
With mine Host Gajus, at the new Inn;
A Gown (God bless us) trailes oth' floor,
Like the Petticoat oth' Scarlet whor^,
Whose large stiff plea^s, he dare confide,
Are ribs from Antichrists own side;
A mourning cope if it look to the East,
Is the black surplice of the beast.
On the May Pole.
THe mighty zeal which thou have late put on,
Neither by Prophet nor by Prophets son
As yet prevented, does transport me so
Beyond my self, that though I never could go
Far in a Verse, and have all times defied,
Since Hopkins and good Thomas Sternhold di'd;
Except it were the little pains I took,
To please good people in a Prayer book:
That I set forth, or so yet must I raise
My spirits for thee, who shall in thy praise
Gird up her loins, and furiously run
All kind of feet, but Satan's cloven one*
Such is thy zeal, so well thou do express it,
That were not like a Charm I Would said, God bless it.
I needs must say it is a spiritual thing
To rail against the Bishop and the King:
But these are private quarrels, this does fall
Within the compass of the General;
Whether it be a pole painted, or wrought
Far otherwise then from the vvood 't was brought,
Whose head the Idol makers hand does crop,
Where a profane bird towering on the top,
Looks like the Calfe in Horeb, at whose root
The unyoakt youth does exercise his foot,
Or whether it preserves its boughs befriended
By neighboring bushes, and by them attended.
How can thou choose but seeing it, complain
That Baal's worshipped in the groves again?
Tell me how cursed an egging with a sting
Of lust, do these unwily dances bring:
The simple wretches say they mean no harm,
They do'nt indeed, but yet these actions warm
Our purer blood the more: for Satan thus
Tempts us the more that are more righteous,
Often has a brother most sincerely gone
S^ifled with zeal and contemplation,
Where lighting on the place where such repair
He views the Nymph, and is clean out in's prayer.
Often has a sister grounded in a truth,
Seeing the jolly carriage of the youth,
Been tempted to the way that is broad and bad,
And were it not for our private pleasures, had
Renounced her little ruff and goggle eye,
And quit her self of the fraternity.
What is the mirth? what is the melody
That sets them in this Gentiles vanity?
When in our Sinagogues we rail at sin,
And tell men of the faults that they are in.
With hand and voice so following our Theams,
That we put out the sides-men in their^ dreams,
Sounds not the Pulpit then which we belabour
Better, and holier then does a Tabor;
Yet such is unregenerate man's folly,
He loves the wicked noise and hares the holy;
If the sins sweet enticing and the blood,
Which now begins to boil have thought it good
To challenge liberty and recreation;
Let it be done in holy contemplation;
Brother and sister in the field may walk,
Beginning of the holy word to talk;
Of David and Vriahs lovely wife,
Of Thamar and her lustful brothers strife,
Then underneath the hedge that is the next,
They may sit down and so act out the Text,
Nor do we want (how ere we live Austere)
In VVinter Sabbath nights some lusty cheer,
And though the Pastors grace which often does hold
Half an hour long make the provision cold;
We can be merry, thinking nee're the worse,
To mend the matter at the second course,
Chapters are read, and Hymns are sweetly sung,
Jointly commanded by the nose and tongue;
Then on the word we diversely dilate,
Wrangling indeed for heat of zeal not hate,
When at the length an unappeased doubt
Fiercely comes in, and then the lights go out;
Darkness thus makes our peace, and we contain
Our fiery spirits till we meet again:
Till then no voice is heard, no tongue does go,
Unless a tender sister shreek, or so.
Such should be our delights, grave and demure,
Not so abominable and impure
As those thou seek'st to hinder, but I fear
Satan will be too strong, his Kingdom's there,
Few are the righteous, nor do I know
How we this Idol here shall overthrow,
Since our sincerest Patron is deceas't,
The number of the righteous is decreas't;
But we do hope these times will on* and breed
A faction mighty for us, for indeed
We labor all, and every sister joins
To have regenerate babes spring from our loins,
Besides, what many carefully have done,
To get the unrighteous man a righteou^ son.
Then stoutly on, let not thy flocks range lewdly
In their old vanities, thou Lamp of beaudly,
One thing I pray thee, do not so much thirst
After Idolatries last fall, but first
Follow thy suit more close, let it not go,
Till it be thine as thou would have't, for so
Thy successors upon the same entaile,
Hereafter may take up the Whit sun Ale.
To the Queen.
Most gracious Queen
IF Poets could be born as often as you
Bring Princes forth, something might then be new.
The Alembecks of the womb and brain run cross
Elixar's, they are more common then our dross.
Your fair and beautiful soil pure Manna breeds,
When our dull mud is barren too in weeds.
Though then you here find nothing fresh but names,
This Verse being writ for Charles, and that for James:
Yet may they now (like sacred Relics) be
Loved and embraced for their Antiquity,
Your former teeming taught the costive earth,
And barren wives the fashion of a birth;
But now (as if your wise fertility,
An Extract were of all State-policie)
You give example unto men, and teach
Loyalty more than our Divines can reach.
You that do practice base exactions, and
Rail at the needful taxes of our Land,
Thinking your money better spent upon
A coach, a feast, or some new fashion,
Of devout Rebels, the Nonships which be
Walls that imprison us to liberty,
Like those Athenian Grandees, who to see
The costly madness of one Tragedy,
Could scatter large supplies, although 'twas known,
This want made them Spectatours of their own.
Learn homage now from Majesty, the Queen
Her self has here the best of Subjects been;
She pays large tribute, that it may appear,
Safety, like Heaven, is never bought too dear.
I Have read of Roman matrons, who did drown
Their richest jewels, to preserve their Town;
Stopping the gulf with pearls, which graced their ears;
They rather choose no ornaments than fears.
And those brave Dames of Carthage were content,
To shave their dangling tresses, which they lent
For cordage then, and glori'd they could see
What once was pride, turned now to Subsidy:
Baldness was beauty there, nor did they care,
So they could bend their bows, to lose their hair
But you (great Queen) contrive your Countries good,
Not from your locks expense, but from your blood.
Each parcel of the Duke, bright as his eyes,
Proves you give jewels of a wealthier prise;
Who, for a general safety, wish to be
Blessed with the pangs of your high agony,
Whilst the dull lees of man scarce daigne to give
Poor common service, that themselves may live;
Upon Tom of Christ-Church.
THou that by ruin do repair,
And by destruction art a Founder:
Whose Art does tell us what men are,
Who by corruption shall rise sounder:
In this fierce fires intensive heat,
Remember this is Tom the great.
And Cyclops think at every stroke,
Which with thy sledge his side shall wound,
That then some statute thou have broke,
Which long depended on his sound;
And that our Colledge-gates did cry,
They were not shut since Tom did die.
Think what a scourge it is to the City,
To drink and swear by Ca^fax bell,
Which bellowing without tune, or pity,
The nights and days divides not well;
But the poor Tradesman must give over
His Ale at eight, or sit till four.
We all in haste drink off our wine,
As if we never should drink more;
So that the reckoning after nine
Is larger now than that before.
Release this tongue, which erst could say,
Home Scholars; Drawer, what is to pay?
So thou of order shall be Founder,
Making a Ruler for the people,
One that shall ring thy praises wonder,
Than the other six bells in the steeple:
Wherefore think, when Tom is running,
Our manners wait upon thy cunning.
Then let him raised be from ground,
The same in number, weight, and sound,
So may thy conscience rule thy gain,
Or would thy theft might be thy bane.
On a Burning-glasse.
STrange Chemistry! Can dust and sand produce
So pure a body, and diaphanous?
Strange kind of courtship! that the amorous Sun,
TO embrace a Min'rall, twists his rays in one;
Talk of the Heavens mocked, by a Sphere, alas,
The Sun it selfes's here in a piece of glass:
Let Magnets drag base iron, this alone
Can to her icie bosom win the Sun;
Witches may cheat us of his light a while,
But this can him even of himself beguile:
In Heaven he staggers to both Tropicks, here
He keeps fixed residence all times of the year,
Here Is a perpetual Solstice, here he lies,
Not on a bed of water, but of ice;
How well by this himself abridge, he might
Redeem the Scythians from their lingering night.
How well by this glass Proxey might he roll
Beyond the Ecliptic, and warm either Pole;
Had but Prometheus been so wise, h' had never
Scaled Heaven to light his torch, but lighted here.
Had Archimedes once but known this use,
H' had burnt Marcellus from proud Syracuse;
Had Vesta's Maids of honor this but seen,
Their Ladies fire had never extinguished been;
Hels Engines might have finished their design
Of powder (but that Heaven did co^^termine)
Had they but thought of this; the Egyptians may
Well hatch their eggs without the mid wife clay;
Why do not puling Lovers this devise,
For a fit Emblem of their Mistress eyes?
They call them Diamonds, and say the have bin
Reduced, by them, to ashes, all within;
But they will assume't, and ever hence 'twill pass,
A Mistress eye is but Loves Burning-glass.
Upon Sheriff Sandbourn.
FIe, Scholars, fie, have you such thirsty souls,
To swil, quaff, and carouse in Sandbourns bouls?
Tell me, mad youngsters, what do you believe,
It cost good Sandbourn nothing to be Shreife,
To spend so many Beeves, so many weathers,
Maintaining so many caps, so many feathers?
Again, is malt so cheap, this pinching year,
That you should make such havoc of his beer?
I hear you are so many, that you make
Most of his men turn Tapsters, for your sake;
And that when he, even on the Bench does sit,
You snatch the meat from off the hungry spit;
You keep such hurly-burly, that it passes,
Ingurgitating sometimes whole half glasses,
And some of you (forsooth) are grown so fine,
Or else so saucie, as to call for wine;
As if the Sheriff had put such men in trust,
As durst draw out more wine than needs they must:
In faith, in faith, it is not well, my Masters,
Nor fit, that you should be the Sheriffs tasters;
It were enough, you being such Gurmundisers,
To make the Sheriffs, henceforth, turn arrant Misers;
Remove the Assise, to Oxfords soul disgrace,
To Henly on the Thames, or some such place;
He never had complained, had it been
A pe^^y Firkin, or a Kilderkin:
But when a Barrel daily is drawn out,
My Masters, then it is time to look about.
Is this a lie, trow ye? I tell you, No,
My Lord high Chancellor was informed so.
And oh! what would all the bread in town
Suffice, to drink the Sheriffs liquor down?
But he in Hampers must it from hence bring,
Oh most prodigious, and most monstrous thing!
Upon so many loaves of home-made bread,
How long might he and his two men have fed?
He would, no doubt, the poor they should be fed
With the sweet morsels of his broken bread:
But when that they poor Souls for bread did call,
Answer was made, the Scholars eat up all.
And when for broken Beer they craved a cup,
Answer was made, the Scholars drunk it up;
And thus, I know not how they changed the name,
But did the deed, and Longtail bore the Flame.
Not to Travel.
WHat need ^ Travel, since I may
More choicer wonders here survey;
What need I Tire for purple seek,
When I may find it in a cheek?
Or sack the Eastern shores, there lies
More precious Diamonds in her eyes?
What need I dig Peru for Oar,
When every hair of hers yields more?
Or toil for Gummes in India,
Since she can breath more rich then they?
Or Ransack Africa, there will be
On either hand more Ivory?
But look within all virtues that
Each Nation would appropriate,
And with the glory of them rest,
Are in this Map at large expressed;
That, who would Travel here might know
The little World in folio.
Jo: Cleveland HIS ORATIONS AND EPISTLES, On Eminent Occasions, In Latin.

English't by E. W.

Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1659.

Oration coram Rege, and Principe Carolo in Collegio Ioannensi Cantab. habita.
1642.
Augustissime Regum, Archetype Carole.
QVae nupero dolor obriguit Academia, tanquam orbatae Niobes soror Saxea, si
in pristinam facundiam resolvatur hodie, agnoscit omen vestrae praesentiae.
Mem^onis statua solaribus per^ussa Radiis, vocalem Musicam edidisse fertur:
Habent vel hi parie^es Chordas Magicas, quas minima vultus vestri strictura
quasi plectro animabit. Nec magis eloquuntur lapides, quam e Diametro miraculi
stu^ent Oratores: Quod in afflatis numine fieri videmus, it a Deum recipere ut
ejiciant Hominem, instinctu sapere non intellectu, perinde vestra in nobis
Hospitatur Divinitas, cujus nimius splendour, omnes omnium, sensus sacrificat,
and tam sanctam nostri jacturam in lucro deputamus. Ignoscimus ^am fatis
immodestiam suam, Imminens litera^um exitium ut favoris insidias gratulamur,
scil* ^ambitiose moriuntur Musae quae ad vestros pedes efflabunt vale. Lusit
Archimedes coelos in sphaera: quid ni dicam Iovem in Carolo fabricatum? Adeo ut
Orator Ille, Qui manu deorsum flexa, O Coelum! exclamavit, si istum in modum
perorasset Hodie, soloecismum manu non commisisset: Enimvero, cum Regem Optimum
Maximum and Principem simul astantes videam, nescio quo modo Principis Natalis
videatur Redux, ubi solemn and stellam, fulgentes a symbolis, (licet non aequis
Radiis) conspicati sumus. Caesare mortuo novum in coelis emicuit sydus, quod
Iulii Anima passim audiit: Caesaris Epilogus fuit Prologus Caroli: Neque enim
aptior stella, quam Invictissima illius Herois Anima, quae vestrae soboli res
g^rendas ominaretur: Stellam dixi? muto factum: Crederem potius ipsum solemn
fuisse qui tunc temporis delegavit Tibi moderamen Diei, and ut Principis cunas
fortius videret, suum in stellam contraxit Oculum: Ecce ut Patrissat Carolus!
ut ad vestras virtutes anhelus surgit! Quod sub pientissimo Rege accidisse
legimus, solemn muliis gradibus retro ferri Principis aetas pari portento
compensavit damnum, cujus festina virtus Devorat Horologium, and pueritia vix
dum libata meridiem ^ttigit. Parcatur mihi si turgeat Oration, si nihil praeter
solemn, and stellas crepet: quippe in Principis natali ipsa natura mihi praeivit
Allegoriam. O foelicem interim Academiam, and aeternitatem quandam nactam, quae
in Rege, and Principe, and Esse nostrum, and nostrum Fore, simul complectitur!
Non est quod plura expectentur soecula, viximus and nostram, and posterorum
vitam* Sed vereor ne molestus fuerim importuno officio, quod in tam illustri
praesentia, in nescio quid majus piaculo excrescit: Minima coram Rege errata,
tunquam angustiores Rimae extendu^tur lumine: Oration itaque nostra pro genio
temporum Reformabitur, quod tantundem est, Rescindetur. Hoc unicum praefabor
votum, Vivas, Augustissime, Pieta^ Tuorum, and Tremor Hostium. Vivas vel in Hoc
declivio stator literarum: vivas denique eam ^^dutus gloriam, ut Filium tuum
Carolum appellemus Maximum, qui^ solo Patre Minorem.

Dixi Jo. Cleev'land. Joa^n.
Cantabrig.
An Oration delivered before the King and Prince Charles, in St. John's
College at Cambridge, 1642.
Charles most August of Kings, and you, Great Britains hope, Illustrious
Charles.
THis Academy, whom but even now equally Marble with the widdowed Niobe, grief
congealed into a sencelesse-statue, if this day she be restored to her wonted
smiles, it is to you, Great Princes, and to your Auspicious presence, that she
must owe this happy change. The statue of Memnon darted upon by the Sun's royal
beams is reported by the ancients to have uttered a vocal harmony, nor is it
less true, that even these walls have now their charming chords, from which as
with a Plectre, or Quill, the least glance of your countenance has power to
call forth a most melodious Sound, and by a strange contrariety of miracle, at
the same time the stones speak, and the Orators are struck dumb with
admiration. It happens in those, who are actuated with Divine impulse that they
so receive God as to cast off Man, and that they understand rather by heavenly
instinct then by humane reason, in like manner your Divinity has taken up its
habitation in us, and with its over-powerfull splendor sacrificed all our
senses, and yet we account it a gain to have so gloriously lost our selves. We
now pardon the fates their immodesty, and congratulate the imminent dissolution
of Letters as a favorable surprise, for indeed the Muses must needs be
ambitious to die, if at your Royal feet they may be admitted to breath their
last: Archimedes sportively imitated the Heavens in a Globe, what hinders, but
that I may affirm Jove to be lively set forth in Charles; so that he, who
pointing to the earth cried out! O Heavens, if at this present he had so
declaimed, he had not committed a soloecisme with his hand, for since I behold
the best and greatest of Kings and Princes in place together, me thinks the
Princes birthday seems to be brought back to this present time in which we see
the Sun and Star shining in conjunction, though not with equal rays, when
Caesar died there appeared a new Star in Heaven, which was generally called
the Soul of Julius; the Epilogue of Caesar has been Charles his prologue, for
what Star was fitter to portend the great things to be done by your
offspring (mighty King) then the Soul of that most invincible Hero. Star
did I say? pardon me, great Sir, I should rather believe that it was the Sun
himself, who at that time resigned unto your hands the government of the day;
and, that he might the more intently observe the Prince's Illustrious Cradle he
contracted his universal eye into a Star; Behold how Charles begins already
Patrissare, and with what haste and eagre pursuit he soars up to his fathers
virtues, that which we read to have happened of old, under the most pious King of
Judah, that the Sun went back many degrees, is now in Charles his days
recompens't by no less a wonder; nor was the course of time then so much
retarded as his forward virtues have now hastened it and brought it on, since in
the very dawn of his youth, he has attained unto the noon of perfection.
Pardon me if my Oration swell and sound nothing but Sun and Stars, since in the
Pr^nce's Nativity nature has anticipated my allegory; Oh happy Academy, in the
mean time, and invested with a kind of eternity, as comprehending at the same
time in King and Prince, both our Present and our Future; what need we expect
the ages to come, having lived our own life, and that of posterity together:
But I fear least by an officious zeal, I have been too tediously troublesome,
which in so illustrious a presence, may soon grow up to a crime beyond
expiation. The least absurdities committed before a King, are like chinks which
though never so narrow, are discovered and enlarged by the light that passes
through them; our Oration thefore is to be corrected according to the genius of
the times, and that which is superfluous to be lop't off; One prayer alone
remains to Usher in the close. Live, most August, the desire and welfare of
your own and the terror of your enemies, Live, even in this descent of your
age, the stay, and prop of learning: Lastly, live adorned with so much glory,
that the Prince your Son may acquire the name of Charles the Greatest, as being
less then his Father only.

John Cleaveland.

Ejusd. Epistola ad Episcop. Lincolnensem, cum factus esset Archiepiscopus
Eboracensis.
USque, and usque quod gratulamur; Si molesti sumus, utinam indies succresceret
peccandi materia* Pietas officii non metuit Cramben, sed vestri honoris aemula
indignatur Non-ultra. Quin placeat igitur nostris in literis rumniare fortunas
Tuas, and prolixioris calami gutture (quod Philoxenus Gruino voluit) repetere
dapum voluptatem. Neque retro tantum gaudemus, prensamus sinciput, and in
futurum gratulamur: provide factum, and tempestive; eo enim pergat virtus
vestra, ut si paulum promoveat, humanos limits supergressus, eris ineffabilis.
At luxat nobis animos Divinus horror, quum sacra facturis eminus, and splendour
vester and sublimit as observantur. Nutat Religio quae veneratur solemn, and
Tremor Luminum fatetur Deum^^adem est nostra oculorum conscientia, qui Radios
vestros non sine O^ulari crepusculo sustinemus. Nec minus sublimitatem vestram
luimus; siquidem sacrificantium Zelus, (tanquam flamma sacrificii) quo magis
ascendit, eo magis trepidat. Clementia vestra disputat cum magnitudine, and hac
amicissima lite (quasi totius Naturae Puerperium) officium nostrum est
oriundum. Ignoscimus fatis immodestiam suam, quicquid adversi contigit, ut
favoris insidias amplectimur: sic recurrere videbantur Fortunae tuae, ut
fortius prosilirent Comprobavit exitus ingenium commenti: Militans Ecclesia jam
triumphat and fluctu^^^^ (ut olim Arca) tandem in montibus acquiescit. Non
amplius Collegium Matter Lanas lacerat, nec facie sua computat miserias. Musae,
quas vivere fuit Hyperbole, nunc audent vigere: Quippe altitudo vestra ut
Niliaca Aegypti fertilitatem literarum ominatur. Enimvero cum Astra sunt
faelicitatis nostrae Condi-promi, quid est quod a superis non expectemus;
Patrono in hoc syderum vicinia collocato. Orandus igitur es (Archi-Praesul
dignissime) ut ambitionem nostram sero sisteres, and honores vestros subinde
catenares, ut cum supremum Fortunae Tuae Radium conscenderis, nec dum
terminetur Clymax vestra, Caelum superest Dominationi.

Vestri quam Devotissimi J. Cleev'land.
Cantabrigiae.
An Epistle of the same Author to the Bishop of Lincoln, when he was made
Archbishop of York.
IF in never giving over our congratulations we are too importunate, I wish,
that every day new matter were afforded, of so offending; the zeal of my duty
fears no check, but rather, emulous of true honor, disdains to meet with a
Non ultra. It is a more than ordinary satisfaction in frequent Letters to
ruminate upon your fortunes, and (as Philoxenus wished in another sense) to
repeat the pleasure of those delicacies with a long-neckt quill; nor is it
enough to rejoice only for what is past; but to take hold on the fore-lock,
and congratulate for the future; and this certainly is a provident and
seasonable course, considering that your virtue moves forward so fast, that
within a short while it will go near to transcend humane limits, and so become
ineffable; but a certain divine horror unse^tles our minds, when, going to
offer up our respects, we observe from a far off, at once, your splendor and
exaltedness. Veneration staggers when it approaches the Sun, and the trembling
of our lights confess a Deity, such is the abashment of them, that they cannot
endure the brightness of your rays without an ocular twilight, nor have we
less awe of your exaltedness. For as much as the Sacrificers zeal, like the
flame of the sacrifice, by how much the more it ascends, so much the more it
trembles; but your clemency disputes with your greatness, and from this most
friendly strife (as if Nature were in travel) our duty is to take its birth;
we pardon the Fates their incivility, and whatsoever has happened adverse, we
embrace it as a favorable ambush. So your fortunes seemed to recoile back,
that they might spring forward with the greater force; the event has made good
the happiness of invention: the Church militant now triumphs, and lately
floating (as heretofore the Ark) now rests upon the mountains, no more shall
our Mother-Colledge card and spin, or discover her sorrows by her dejected
countenance; the Muses, who could not be said to live without an Hyperbole,
have now the confidence to show their excellencies; nor could it be otherwise,
since your advanced state (as that of Nile brought f^uitfulness to Egypt) is a
most happy A^spice of the prosperity of learning: and so long as the stars are
the stewards of your f^licity, what is that we may not expect from the Powers
above, having a Patron placed so near the stars? This only remains, Most
Reverend Archbishop, to be requested, that our ambition may at length be
restrained by some little curb put unto the full career of your Honors; so that
as when you shall seem to have mounted up to the highest pinnacle of your
fortunes, the scale of your ascent may not yet be terminated, and besides all
earthly glories, Heaven is still reserved the chiefest guerdon to crown your
high deserts.

Yours most humbly devoted, J. Cleaveland.

Alia ejusdem, ad Episcopum Londinensem.
CVjus laborantes parts pari animorum deliquio diu expressimus, ne graver is
in ejus redivivo jubare experrecti triumphemus: Hodie enim est quod vivimus
postliminio, and vindiciis Honori vestri quotquot sumus, sumus Virbit: siquidem
in moetore nostro quid aliud fuit vita nostra quam nocturna lucubratio? and in
tuo Occidente superesse, quam in gratiis naturae vivere? Sed focra res est:
Reddidit diem redux Phosphorus, and post tanta cum astris jurgia Collegium
matter taxdem fatetur Coe^os. Incassum tubas fatigarunt veteres* ut ecclipsin
redimerent. Alma Matter suspiriis magis sonoris profligavit vestram sc* hic fuit
foelicitatis vestrae somnus, qui tantum abest ut illam extingueret, ut
reficeret potius, and alacriorem reddat. Eccum majorem mundum tuum adexemplar
compositum, vel si mavis dictum luce and tenebris distinctum! Si Sol in
perpetuum splenderet, nec aram, nec mystam haberet Per^icum: Enimvero
caligantes oculi nostri pacti sunt inducias cum fulgore vestro, qu^bus finitis
ad pristinum redit seipsum. Aspicias quae sumus Clientum nomina, and agnoscas
r^dios e luminoso tuo corpore diffusos, nihil enim de nostro habemus. Percurras
singulos, and videas teipsum (prolixiorem semper admodum) sed modo before,
modo angustius pro varia speculorum indole repercussum. Atque hinc est quod
imaginem vestram (tanquam Collegii Palladium) inter Archiva recondimus, ut
Matter enixa sobolem, ad picturam se sistat, vnltus comparet, it a umbra vestra
(plusquam splendorem Phoebi) distinguat pullos. Gratulamur itaque (vel nostro
nomine) nov as hasc^ honorum inducias. Vivas in posterum fortuna major: ingens
vester animus (tanquam illud aeternum jecur) indignetur vulturem; quo magis
consumitur augeatur magis, and inter ipsos invidiae Molares crescat virtus.

J. Cleveland.

Another of the same Author to the Bishop of London.
THink it not strange that we now triumph, awakened by his revived luster,
whose sufferings we have long resented with a suitable depressure of spirit;
this day it is, that we start up (as it were) from the dead, and by an
honour^ble assertion of liberty, look how many men we are, so many Virbii we
are; for in the state of our sadness what was our life other than a late
sitting up at night? and to have lived in your declining Sunset, what was it
but to live at Natures courtesy? But now our condition is well amended,
Phosphorus returning, has brought back the day, and so many contests with the
stars, our Mother-Colledge has at length found Heaven an helper. In vain the
Ancients so often sounded their trumpets, to profligate the Suns eclipse; but
our sacred Mother, with the more effectual harmony of her sighs, has
dispelled yours; this indeed was the slumber of your felicity, and was so far
from extinguishing it, that it rather renewed it, and made it more flourishing;
behold, the greater world framed, or rather pronounced, according to your
exemplar, distinguished with light and darkness: if the Sun should shine
perpetually, he would neither have altars erected to him, nor would the
Persians keep in their sacred fire, our dazzled eyes have made a truce with your
brightness, which, that truce being ended, returns to its former luster; behold
here, we beseech you, your devoted Clients, and in them observe the rays that
flow forth from your own resplendent body, for we have nothing about us, that
we can call our selves. View every one of us, and there you may see your self
(to a great advantage always) but sometimes more full, and sometimes less,
according to the various reflection of the object; and hence it is that* we lay
up your image (as the Palladium of our College) amongst our Archives and
Monuments; as a Mother having brought forth her Infant, goes to her picture and
compares the features, so your shadow (more then the Suns brightness)
distinguishes us young ones: We congratulate therefore in our own behalf, this
new truce of honors. Live from hence forth greater then your fortune, and may
your exalted mind (like that eternal liver) despise the eating vulture, and by
how much the more it is consumed, so much the more increase, and your virtue
still grow up, and prosper even among the grinding teeth of envy.

J. Cleaveland.

Ejusdem Oration ad Acad. Cantab. Cancellarium, and Legatum Gallicum, public
habita.
Honoratissime Domine Cancellarie!
Illustrissime Hospes!
QVam Augusta sit vestra praesentia, and quam sacro horrore nostros praecellit
animos utinam Oratoris vestri stupor non ita nimis testaretur; Quem enim
alacritas officii nuper accenderat ut vos salutarem, impedit jam eadem Relligio
ne in illas importunus ruerem inquilimus aures ubi Regum Concilia habitarunt,
nec magis Alloqui quam Intueri nefas. Fulgura sunt in Amborum oculis, quorum
splendorem si quis aspiceret Bidental fieret: si quis Persarum (qui venerantur
solemn) aspiceret, utrumque ratus suum Numen, divideret sacrificium. Nos quod
attinet fatemur lippitudine, Radiorum victoriam, and hoc genunium, honoris
Iubar, imbellis nostra Acces eo magis commendat quo minus sustineat. Salve
igitur Celeberrime Hospes! cujus gratissimi adventus (ut Capacia essent nostra
pectora) magnitudo gaudii nos metipsos a Nobis exclusit for as. Ecce quot
Helluones Oculi vos inspicimus! Quot in vestris vultibus, Quadragesimam
violavimus! sed nos indigni tantis Dapibus; Margarita, and Regii illi Manes
quos in Fundatoribus nostris numeramus, per me (tanquam per Legatum suum (ut
Titulo vestro superbire liceat) adventum vobis gratulamur. Nec invideas mihi
(Clarissime Advena) Legati nomen, cum Celsitudo vestra ad Gradum meum, (quem
modo suscepisti) dignaretur Descendere. Humilitas nostra (quod in Bilance
solet) ad apicem vestram assurgebat. Scholas vidisti, and Unicum illua
Sacellum: Quorum Alteri do^uist^ Literas, Alteri Pietatem: and quid amplius
studes apud nos invisere? Eccum Academiam integram! Cancellarium Dignissimum!
Qui quicquid Cantabrigia nostra in se complectitur before repraesentat.
Theatra, and Scholarum Pyramides, Nos ludibundi Vitruvii Ludificavimus Chartis:
Tu, Tu, Architectus fortunae nostrae, cujus magnificentiae vel pectoris nostri
audaciam superabit. Multus sum (Honoratissime) Orator in Cancellarii
deb^tissimis laudibus, ut scias Qualis Heroes, Qualis Heroes, Quantus Aliorum
Patronus Honori vestro hodie inserviat. Certe dum vos majorum gentium Nobiles
simul astantes videam, nescio Quis Isthmus Galliam and Britaniam (invito
Oceano) conjunxisse videatur. Quin perpetu^s sit iste nodus, and ita Gordianus,
u^ neuter Alexander discindat Gladio. Plura vellem, and usque pergeret votorum
pietas, sed Rictus (Diviti Arg^^mento) plusquam Demosthenes Anginam patior:
Quare si Aures vestras (Regibus assuetas) nimis detinendo sacrilegus fuer^m; si
quid deliquerim, Haec sa^ltem sit subitae Orationis provida Temeritas, ut ne
paratus ad peccandum prodiisse videar.

Sic Dixit J. Cleaveland.

An Oration of the same Author, publicly spoken before the Chancellor of
Cambridge, and the French Ambassador.
HOw August your presence is, and with how sacred a horror it strikes our
minds, I wish the amazement of your Orator did not too apparently testify,
for the same duty which of late stirred me up with cheerfulness to salute you,
is now become a kind of religion in me, least I should rush, an importunate
inmate upon those nice ears where the Counsels of Kings have dwelt: Nor is it
less a crime to look upon you then to speak before you lightning appears in
your eyes, upon whose too powerful splendor whoever shall presume to look,
must become a Bidental sacrifice; If any of the Persians, who have the Sun in
Veneration should chance to behold you, he would take each of you for his own
deity, and so divide his sacrifice. But as to what concerns our selves we
confess by our dazzled eyes the victory of your rays, and this genuine luster
of honor our weak sight so much the more commends, by how much the less it is
able to endure the brightness of it; Hail therefore thrice renowned guest,
whose most grateful arrival (that our breasts might be so much the more
capacious to receive you) has with the excess of joy driven us out of our
selves: behold how many greedy eyes glut themselves with the beholding of you,
how many lents have we broken in your gladsome aspect, and yet we are unworthy
of such delicates; Great Margareta, and the Souls of those royal persons whom
we number amongst our founders, by me as their Ambassador (a title I have
cause to boast of) congratulate your coming hither, nor need you envy me, most
illustrious guest the Title of Ambassador, since your Highness has been
pleased to descend to my degree, which you have so lately taken upon you, or
rather our humility, as in equal poize of the balances raised it self up to
your height. You have seen our Schools, and that famous Chapel, to the one of
which you have taught learing, to the other piety, and what is there more among
us that you can desire to see, behold the whole University, behold our most
Noble Chancelour; who, whatsoever our Cambridge comprehends, represents with
high advantage; behold, our structures and the Magnificence of our Schools
wherein with the sport of Art we have put to shame whatsoever has been
described by Vitruvius, it is you, great Sir, it is you who are the Architect of
our fortune, and whose magnificence will far exceed the highest glories we can
presume to imagine. I am the more ample; most honored guest, in the deserved
praises of our Chancellor that you may be the more sensible, what worthy, what
Hero, how great a Patron of others it is, who is this day subservient to your
virtue and excellence; Certainly while I see two of the most Illustrious
personages of two such great Nations in place together, there seems I know not
what Isthmus, maugre the swelling ocean, to have joined France and Britain into
one; and may this knot be everlasting, and so strongly Gordian, that no
Alexander may be able to cut it asunder with his sword. Farther I would
expatiate, and the zeal of my wishes should still go on forward, but that by
the richness of the Argument, my mouth already suffers a squinancie greater
then ever Demosthenes felt: wherefore if I have been sacrilegious in detaining
overlong your ears accustomed only to the speech of Kings, if in this I have
been ought criminal, let it at least be imputed to the provident temerity of my
overhasty Oration, that I may not be thought to have come prepared to offend.

J. Cleaveland.

Ejusdem Oration in Scholis habita cum Junior Baccalaureus in Tripodem
deputaret. Cantab.
QVos ne videre possum citra Oculorum Hyperbolen, quomodo vos appellarem: and
cum altissimus vester Gradus, sine scala occupare nequit, Quaenam Orationis
Climax vestram scandet Dignitatem? Vestram dum suspicl^ in meo vultu invenio
purpuram: and ingentis curae quae pr^standae observan^e a me habet sollicitum
non novi subtilius Argumentum quam stuporem. Quod autem Poetarum Princeps
Deorum senatum ad suam cogit (...), pari liceat and mili vos invitare ad hoc
Ludicrum certamen nostrum. Vmbra'st haec nostra contentio and Icon Belli.
Murium, and Ranarum Pugna quid aliud fuit quam Iliadis Brachygraphia: and in
pusillis illis animalculis, Hector and Achilles (tanquam Iliades in Nuce)
coarctantur. Ea s^q^idem est pensi nostri conditio, ut Hic etiam Mars and Venus
implicati jacent. Pugna est, sed Ludicra: Lusus, and tamen Bellicus, ita ut nec
bis cincta placeat Philosophia, nec nuda Cithara. Qui virili toga indutus, nec
dum reliquit Nuces, sed totus Iocos crepat. Hujus ^go Palladam, Posthumam
Cerebri sui prol^n existimabo* Qui in hisce Floralibus solus Cato, and inter
Philosophiae spinas nullos admittis Rhetoricae Flores, Hujus Minerva ad
Amazonis instar, altera mamma destituitur. Ille demum sit miles noster, qui and
sese praestet ingenii veliten^, and Philosophiae Cataphractum; qui and
virislter audet disputare, and cum Bipode Tripode par-imparludere. Me quod
spectat: Ita Rationem ad agendum subduxi meam, ut utrunque munus molior simul,
and subterfugiam, Et pudibunda, metum inter and officium, Musa, and fugit ad
salices, and videri cupit.

Sic Dixit J. Cleaveland.

An Oration of the same Author delivered in the public Schools: When he was
Junior Batchelour, and was to dispute upon the Tripos.
YOu whom I cannot look upon without a Hyperbole of eyes, by what name, or
title shall I be able to salute you? And since your high and mighty degree
cannot be reached without a Ladder, what Climax of Oration will serve to climb
your dignity? while I suspect my cheeks to be hung with your skarlet, nor do I
know a more subtle argument of that exceeding care which holds me sollicitous
of rendering you your due respect then my silence and astonishment, but whereas
the Prince of Poets brought the Senate of the gods to his battle of Frogs and
Mice; by the same reason I may make bold to invite you to this sportive Combat,
or contention of ours, which is a shadow, or image of war; the fight of the
Mice and Frogs, what was it other then the shorthand of the Iliads, Hector and
Achilles drawn in little in those petty animals, like the Iliads compress't
within a Nut shell, and such also is the condition of our task, that Mars and
Venus may here be seen entangled together. It is a fight but sportive, a play
which yet has in it somewhat of war; so that streightlac't Philosophy will not
here be seasonable, nor the bare Harp alone; he, who clad in the Roab of
manhood has not yet left his toys, but seems as if he were made up of jests,
his Minerva I shall esteem the posthume offspring of his own brain; the man,
who appears a mere Cato in these May-games, and among the prickly Thorns of
Philosophy admits no flowers of Rhetoric, his fancy like and Amazon seems
bereft of one pap. Our Soldier must be such a one as can show himself, both a
light Horsman of wit, and a Cuirasser of Philosophy; who dares both manfully
dispute, and play at even, or odd with the two legged Animal, and the Tripos,
or three legged stool. As for me, I have so ordered my affairs, as to perform
both offices together, and yet provide for an escape: Thus my Muse at a loss
between duty and distrust, both fly's to the reeds, and yet desires to be seen.

J. Cleaveland.

Ejusdem Oration Salutatoria in adventum Illustrissimi Principis Palatinati.
Cantabrig.
Serenissime Comes Palatine:
SI Archetypam corporis vestri elegantiam possem transcibere, and Orationem
mea^^ tanquam venustatis Metaphoram, ^ vestro vult^^ deducere, ita imaginem
vestram aemutis encomiis exprimerem, (...) qui spectatum venias, venires
spectandus, and unicum esser Ioannense spect aculum (...) tibi ostentare. Sed
quoniam ad solares hosce radios caligat ponitus Atheniensis noctua* gratulor
mihi meam in^rtiam, stup^rem jact^. Ita enim cum Sacratissimo Principe in
Trutina quadam sum collocatus, ut in quantum deprimat me mea humilis facult as,
in tantum sursum nititu^ vestra Sublimitas. Salve igitur (Desideratissim^
Princeps) hujus Collegii Ani^^a, ceu potiu^ Omnium Animarum Collegium. Ita tibi
singuli devoti sumus, and in obsequium vestrum juncta phalange ruimus. Ecce
tibi Majorum tuorum monument a Margaretae (quae Semiramis invideat) cocta
moenia: Margaretae, and Henrici septimi, and nostrum omnium matri^, quae uno
partu enixa est, quot Herculem fabulantur genuisse, quinquaginta Socios. Nec
tibi, stemmati*; vestro solam Margareta^ debemus, quin and paternae gloriae
haeres esto, Fredericum volo beatissimae memoriae, qui vigintiab hinc plus
minus annis, una cum Augustissimo (tunc temporis surgente Iulo) ad hanc
Margaretae sobolem, quasi compatres, and susceptores accesserunt. O quam laeti
meditamur istum natalem nostrum, diemque adeo Festum: ut muros hosce, sacro
quodam Minio pinxisse videatur. Ecquid huic foelicitati superesse possit, ut
quot patris splendore semel tinctum, vestro olim foret Dibaphum; sequeris
patrem jam passibus aequis. Euge Principem pretiosum in quo omnium legimus
simulacra Autographa, Margaretae Palladium. Frederici patris numisma aureum,
and matris Corneliae ornamentum, Elizabethae dulcissimae, and in vestro cultu
totam Deam confessae; cujus lauds ut hodiernum saeculum effundit, ita
posteritatis echo reparabat, cuius mascula anima jam sexu vestitur masculo
Elizabetha Carolo. O quam luxuriat dicendi Seges! O quam Decies repetitus
placebit Carolus! Carolus, Caroli sobrinus, and Caroli avunculus. O ^eatissima
Carolorum Climax! Macte esto gradibus Carolina scala, ut cum pra altitudine tua
supremus Rex Carolus co^lum petat, novi subinde succrescant Caroli, quibus
(quasi Internodiis) distincta ejus aeternitas usque and usque floreat, sit ipse
subinde superstes Carolus non hominum (parum Illium Nestoris) sed Carolorum
tres aetates vivunt filii sobrini utriusque Caroli.

Sic dixit. J. Cleveland.

A Salutatory Oration of the same Author, upon the arrival of the Most
illustrious Prince Palatine.
Most Serene Prince:
If I were able to copy out the natural handsomnesse and elegant composure of
your body, and to deduce my Oration, as the Metaphore of beauty, from your
person, I should so set forth your Idea with emulous praises, that you who came
to behold, should then come only to be seen and admired, and it would be the
only design of St. John's College to show you unto your self. But since, like
the Athenian Owl, I am almost blinded with those bright Sun-like rays, I
applaud my self in my own weakness; and boast my stupidity; for being placed,
as it were, in the ^eales with you (most Sacred Prince) so much as my humble
faculty depres^eth me, so much your sublime Excellence is raised up and
advanced: Hail therefore, most desired Prince, the soul of this College, or
rather the College of al Souls. So devoted are every one of us unto you, that
we rush in a united Brigade, into the respect and observance of you. Behold
here the monuments of your Ancestors, great Margarets stately walls, to be
envied of Semiramis her self: walls, I may say, of pearl, as being the structure
of this famous Margaret, the mother both of Henry the leventh, and of this
whole Society of us here, having at one birth brought forth as many as Hercules
himself is ^abled to have begotten at one time, to wit, fifty Fellows: nor do
we owe unto you, and unto your noble Lineage Margaret alone, but we also look
upon you, as the true Heir of your Fathers glory, Frederick of most happy
memory, who about twenty years ago, together with the most August, the rising
Julius of his time, came, as it were Godfathers, or Undertakers hither to this
Progeny of the great Margaret; Oh how joyfully do we call to rememberance that
birthday of ours, a day so joyful and festival, that it seems to have le^t a
tincture of sacred Vermilion upon these walls, to this day. What more could we
have desired to have been added to our felicity, than that what has once been
puprled by your Fathers splendor, should be died in grain by yours, who so
closely follow the track of your Fathers noble footsteps; go on, most highly
valued Prince, in whom we plainly read, naturally and lively described by your
self, the resemblances of all your Ancestors at once, the Palladium of
Margaret, the golden Medall of your Father Frederick, the ornaments of
Cornelia-chaste Elizabeth your Mother, who this day appear to us all Goddess,
in the excellence of your form and virtues; and whose praises, as the present
age is filled with, so the echo of Poster^ ty will ever repeat, whose
masculine soul is now invested with a masculine Sex, Elizabeth with the
masculine Charles; Oh how many new occasions still crowd upon my discourse, to
make it swell into a vast bulk? how grateful is the name of Charles, though
ten times repeated? Charles the Cozen of Charles, and the Uncle of Charles. Oh
happy Climax of Charles's! Let this Caroline scale be an increase of your
Honor many degrees, that when our King Charles, at the very top of it, shall
touch Heaven for height, there may hyet spring up new Charles's, by which his
eternity distinguished (as it were by Internodes) may never cease to flourish,
and may Charles himself, in the mean while survive, not three ages of men (for
we regard not Nestors Ilium) but three lives of Charles's, the posterity of
both Cozen-German^, and long may they also live.

Ejusdem Oration in Scholis Publicis habita cum Patris Officio fungeretur.
Cantab.
QVam equivocum sit nomen Patris, quota, and quam discolor officii ratio, si
non aliunde, ab hac varia frequentia (severiores viri and lepidssima Proles)
possem dignoscere; si enim ad singula Auditiorum ingenia quilshet Orator
componendus sit, it a ut cum senibus Tussiat, rideat cum Pueris, Quid ergo
Hominis? Quale futurus sum Monstrum? Gravitate and nucibus Patre and Puero
interpunctum. Quod in Dispartita, Aquilaque expansa fieri videmus unum corpus
duplicem ostentare faciem, eadem est nostra ergo vos and Fil^os Bifrons
conditio. Hos cum aspicio sum Senex Aquila, Pullos meos ad vestrum Iubar
exportatura; ubi vos e contra, nescio quo modo, and ipse in Pullum redeo, and
(ad instar Aquilae) Iuventam renovo. Duae igitur Dramatis Personae sustinendae
sunt, Vestra in scaena acturus sum Filium, in vestra Patrem, alterum genu
flexum, alterum stabit Elephantinum. Oscillatione quod aiunt superam modo, modo
infimam occupato partem, partim Puer, partim Senex, qualis Aeson, ille in
Ahaeno Medeae semicoctus. Et quae quidem aptior via inveniri potest quam per
ferulam ad fasces? per Filii scabellum, ad Culmen Patris assurgere? serviendum
ut Imperes, Aulicorum methodus: A vitulo ad Bovem Milonis progressus, Vobis
igitur (viri Gravissimi) primitiae nostrae sunt consecrandae, quos s^ nullo,
vel (quod perinde est) translato honor persequar, non dico causam quin Filii
mei improbitate erga me pari, injuriam vestram ulciscantur. Neque tamen interea
noscimus quali vos compellarem nomine, Quorum Erudii^o scribit Academiae
Maritos, Obsequium malit Filios. Perplexus fuit and Tortuosus ille incesti
nodus, quem de Oedipo suo fabulatur Graecia; Major Maeander unusquisque
vestrum, quorum cum Eruditione Academia Ma^er Gravida fuit, and quotannis
parturiat; Quorum praeceptis and exemplari vir^^^e, quam Tenella Pubes (quasi
Binis Uberibus) lactatur indies. Non Oedipus majori cum Aenigmate sceleratus,
quam quilibet vestrum suis: Matris Maritus, uxoris Filius, and Fratrum Pater:
Neque hic sistat Divina vestra Indoles, enjus vel pictura est satis prolifi^a,
siquidem Alma Matter ubi concipiat vestram speciem ob oculos ponit, vestrum
instar repraesentat Animos, ut masculam magis excultam enitatur sobolem, Illi,
Illi estis, quibus si ante invent as liter as contigisset vixisse, Imagines
vestras ab Aegyptiis expressas, hodie pro Artibus, and scientiis legeremus. Non
ego sequax erroris Illius qui nihil egregium ducit, nisi quod vetustum: qui
praesentia fastidit Tempora, and hesterno jure Panem atrum devorat, Senescat
(s^ Di^s placet) Natura; Majoribus Nostris dedit Animarum Iugera, nobis
spithamas: Gigantes Illi, Nos Pusiones: Degene^es Animae, and vere Minores in
hac opinione: Lucrifecit haec aetas, non decoxit, Illi quidem literarum Atavi,
sed quota est Familia? cujus Primus fuit Illud quod dicere Nolo, secundus Quod
nequeo. Humilis principii nobilis progressus. Habeant quod suum est Antiqui,
sed ne in solidum fiant Domini, suas sibi lauds vindicent, sed vestras vobis
ne accipiant, Quorum ego meritis tantum confido, ut veterum ficut ego canitiem
veneror, sic misereor impotentiam, Ructarunt illi Glandes, vestrum est
Triticum. Calceati eorum denies and victus asper; vestrae Dapes, and ingeni^
gulae, quibus quod retro est soeculum stravit tantum mensas, erit a quadris
ficturum. Clari Convivae quibus obsonantur Antiqui, ministrant Posteri! sed
qu^m effrons Ego, and Devorati pudoris, qui dum vestra molior encomia orationem
meam tantae f^licitatis Commensalem reddam. Liceat tamen peccare (a^ditores) ut
Ignoscatis: purpura elotis maculis, iterat^a injuria gloriabor de culpa a vob^s
remissa, magis quam de Innocentia. Julius Sabinus quum a Romae Imperio
defecisset, fusis jam copiis and afflictis Rebus; in Monumentum quoddam se
abdidisse dicitur, ubi cum uxore tamdiu latuerit, ut plures filios ex ea
suciperet: Tandem vero deprehensus, and pro Tribunali positus, Filios suos in
medium sistens, sic affatur Iudicem, Parce, Parce, Caesar: Hos in Monumento
genu^. Hosce alui, ut Tibi plures essemus supplices! vestram fidem (Auditores)
quicquamne uspiam dictum Rotundius! O vanas spes tuas Cicero: Frustra susceptos
labores! O cogitationes inanes Tuas! Tinnis Tinnis prae Ho^ Oratorum Maximo;
Qui si cum uxore tua Rhetorica tamdiu in Musaeo clusus esses, quam ille in
Monumento, nunquam Orationem hujus parem genuisses. Gra^ias Tibi (Sabine) de
hac excusatione mea, qui cum necesse sit ut delinquam, habeo tamen deprecandi
Formulam: Habeo Filios Quos ostendam, Hanc circumstantem Rhetoricam; Magna,
Magna est Infantum Eloquentia qui eo plus exorant quo minus loquantur. Suorum
ilicet tacendi in praesens utar, neq^e dubito quin plus favoris demerear
silentio quam ulteriori taedio.

Six Dixit J. Cleaveland.

An Oration spoken by the same Author in the public Schools, when he took
upon him the office of Father.
HOw equivocall the name of Father is, what and how various the reason of the
paternall office, if by no other means beside (Grave Bench of Seniority, and
your more frolic Offspring) yet from this mixed co^course of Auditors, I
might be enabled to judge; for if every Ora^our should be driven to frame his
behavior according to the humor and capacity of all sorts of Hearers, so as
to cough with old men, to laugh with boys, what kind of man would this
dexterity require, or indeed what kind of monster must he be, interpointed with
graviy and whirlegigs, with Father and Children; that which we see happens in
the divided, or double-spred Eagle, where one body presents to view two faces,
the same is our double- fronted condition toward hyou, Grave Seniours, and
toward these my Sons, these, when I behold, I am the old Eagle, and going about
to expose my young ones to the test of your pier^ing rays; when your selves,
on the other side I look upon, I also my self, I know not how, return into a
Chicken, and, like a true Eagle, renew my youth. In this Comedy therefore, I am
to take upon me two persons, in your Scene I must act the Son, in yours the
Father; the one with a bended knee, the other stiff as an Elephant: I fancy my
self at the tottering game cal^'d Oscillation, where sometimes I possess the
upper part, sometimes the lower; partly a child, partly an old man, like that
famous Aeson of old, half boiled in the cauldron of Medea; and what fitter way
can there be found out, than by the rod of correction, to arrive at the staff
of authority; by the low settle of a Son, to come to the reverend chair of a
Father. We must serve, that we may obey; it is the rule of Courtiers: and,
according to Milo's practice, the way to come up to an Ox, is to begin at a
Calf. To you therefore, most Reverend Sages, our first fruits are to be
consecrated: but in case I shall be thought to accost you with none, or, which
is as bad, with borrowed honor: I see no reason, but my Sons may, with the like
disobedience toward me, revenge your injury; nor do I yet know in the mean
time, by what title to salute you, whose learning may style you the Husbands of
the University, whose obedience may rather make you pass for her Sons.
Intricate and perplexed was that incestuous riddle, which Greece reports of her
son Oedipus; but every one of you are a more involved Meander; with your
learning, our Mother^ University impregnated, brings forth every year, by your
precepts and exemplary virtue, as it were by two teats, the tender babes are
suckled every day; so that Oedipus himself was never branded with a more
mysterious incest, than each of you are guilty of, being the Husband of your
Mother, the Son of your Wife, and the Father of your brethren, nor do your
Divine fancies rest here, your very Pourtraitures being apt enough for
generation, for as our sacred Mother when she conceives, puts some of your
Idea's before her eyes, and has a representation of Souls like unto you, that
she may bring forth a Masculine and perfect offspring, such and so Authentic
you are, that if you had chanced to live before Letters were invented, your
pictures express' as Hieroglyphics by the Egyptians might have been read at
this day instead of Arts and Sciences, I am not addicted to that vulgar error,
of those that esteem nothing of any moment unless what is ancient, such loath
the present time, and in favor of yesterday feed upon course bread; Nature so
sooth must grow old, to our ancestors she gave acres of Soul, to us but spans,
they were Giants, we but Dwarfs; how degenerous, and truly little Souls have
they that persist in this opinion; the later ages have gained, and not become
bankrupt, those indeed were the great Grandfathers of Letters, but how many
families are there, the first of which were, I will not tell what, the second I
cannot tell what; a mean beginning has ofttimes a fair and happy progress;
let the Ancients have attributed to them what is their due, but let them not be
altogether Deified, they may challenge to themselves their deserved praises,
but must not defraud you of yours; so much respect I bear to the Ancients, that
I both reverence their gray hairs, and pity their decays; they be^ch forth
Acorns, but to you belongs the Wheat, their teeth were Hobnail'd, and their
fare course, but to you belong the delicates, and the luxury of wit, to you the
past ages, cover the table, and the future times attend with Trenchers, happy
guests as you are, whom Antiquity feasts, and posterity waits upon at Table:
but how frontlesse am I, and as it were eaten out of shame, who while I attempt
your Praises make my own Oration a fellow-commoner of so much felicity, yet
perhaps it may be allowable to let slip some offenses, that you (gentle
Auditors) may have what to pardon; the spots being once washed away out of my
skarlet, and the Grain renwed, I shall glory more in that fault which you shall
think worthy to be remitted, then in having been altogether innocent. Julius
Sabinus having revolted from the Roman Empire, when he had been overthrown in
battle, and red^c't to the utmost extremi^y he is said to have shut himself up
in an old Mounment, where together with his w^fe he lay hid for diverse years,
and during that time had begotten a great company of Children; but at last
being dis^^vered and brought before the judgment seat he placed his Sons
before him, and addressing himself to the Sovereign Judge, Spare me, said he,
spare me great Caesar, these Sons have I begot in the Monument, and I have
brought them up carefully, to the end that we might come the greater number of
suppliants before you; to you (courteous Auditors) I appeal, what could there
have been said more effectual then this; Vain were thy hopes, O Cicero; In vain
thy great pains bestowed, or were thy soaring phansies any thing but flashes,
thou were but low, and flat in respect of this most excellent of Orators; nor,
had thou been shut up in thy Musaeum with Rhetoric thy wife, could thou
ever have begot Orations like to his. I render thee thanks, O Sabinus, for this
my excuse, who since I could not but prove peccant, have yet by this means met
with so handsome a president of begging favor. I have also my Sons to show,
this crowd of Rhetoric that stands about me; Great, Great is the eloquence of
Children, who so much the more prevail, by how much the less they speak; their
example therefore for the present I shall follow, and doubt not but I shall
better deserve by being silent, then by the tediousness of my proceeding
forward.

J. Cleavel^^d.

FINIS.
COurteous Reader, by reason of my so far^e distance of place, some few
Errata's (too usual in printing) have escaped in the Latin Copies, the
Judicious that rightly knew our learned Author, will not impute such common
Errors* incident to the Press, to him, and therefore I have not thought them
worthy of taking notice of. There are some other faults in the English, p. 12.
r. for little Gentlewoman, littel Gentleman. Other mistakes correct with thy
more favorable judgment, Farewell.

E. W.
Courteous Reader,
These Books following are sold by Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill.
Admirable, and Learned Treatises of Occult-Sciences in Philosophy, Magic, etc.
TThe admired Piece of Physiognomy, and Chyromancy, Metoposcopy, the
Symmetrical Proportions, and Signal Moles of the body, the Interpretation of
Dream^; to which is added the Art of Memory, illustrated with Figures: by Rich,
Sanders, in Folio.

2. The no less exquisite than admirable work, Theatrum Chemicum, Britannicum;
containing several Poetical Pieces of our famous English Philosophers, who have
written the Hermitique Mysteries in their own Language; faithfully collected
into one Volum^, with Annotations thereon: by the I^de^agitable industry of
Elias Ashmole, Es* illustrated with Figures.

Excellent Treatises in the Mathematics, Geometry, of Arithmetic, Surveying,
and other Arts, or Mechanics.
3. The Golden Treatise of Arithmetic, Natural and Artificial, or Decimals;
the Theory and practice unit^d in a simpathetical proportion, betwixt Lines and
Numbers, in their Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of Form, Figure,
Magnitude, and affection; demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by
Calculations, and confirmed with variety of Examples in every Species; made
compendi^us and easy for Merchants, Citizens, Seamen, Accomptants, etc. by
Tho. Wilsfold* Corrector of the last^ Edition of Record, and many more.

Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Surgery, etc.
4. Culpepper's Semiotica Vranica, his Astrological judgment of Diseases from
the d^cumb^ture of the sick, much enlarged: the way and manner of finding out
the cause, change, and e^d of the Disease; also whether the sick be likely to
live, or die, and the time when Recovery, or Death is to be expected, according
to the judgment of Hippocrates and Hermes Trismegistus; ^o which is added Mr.
Culpeppers censure of Urines, with diverse others.

Admirable Useful Treatises newly Printed.
5. The expert Doctors Dispensatory: the whole Art of Physic restored to
practice: the Apothecaries shop, and Surgeons Closet opened; with a Survey,
as also a correction of most Dispensatories now extant; with a Judicious
Censure of their defects; and a supply of what they are deficient in: together
with a learned account of the virtues and quantities, and uses of Simples and
Compounds; with the Symptoms of Diseases; as also prescriptions for their
several cures: by that renowned P. Morellus, Physician to the King of France; a
Work for the order, usefulness, and plainness of the Method, not to be
paralleled by any Dispensatory, in what ^anguage soever.

6. Natures Secrets; ^r the admirable and wonderful History of the generation
of Meteors; describing the temperatures of the Elemants, the heights,
magni^udes, and i^fluences of Stars; the causes of Comets, Eearthquakes,
Deluge^, Epidemical Diseases, and Prodigies of Precedent times; with Presages
of the weather: and Descriptions of the weather-glasse: by T. Wilsford.

7. The Mysteries of Love and Eloquence; or the Arts of Wooing and
Complementing; as they are managed in the Spring Garden, Hide Park, the New
Exchange, and other eminent places. A work, in which are drawn to the life the
Deportments of the most Accomplish'^ Persons; the Mode of the^r Courtly
Entertainments, Treatment of their Ladies at Balls, their accustomed Sports,
Drolls, and Fancies; the Witchcrafts of their persuasive language, in their
Approaches, or other more Secret Dispatches, etc. by E.P.

8. Helmo^t disguised; or the vulgar errors of emperical and unskilful
Practicers of Physic confuted; more especially as they concern the Cures of
Fevers, the Stone, the Plague, and some other Diseases by way of Dialogue, in
which the chief tareties of Physic are admi^ably discoursed of, by I. T.

Books very lately Printed, and in the Press now Printing.
THe exquisite Letters of Mr. Robert Loveday, the late admired Translater of
the Volumes of the ^amed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating his Memory,
Published by his dear Brot^er Mr. A. L.

2. The so long expected Work, the New World of English Words, or a General
Dictionary, containing the Terms, Etymologies, D^finitions^, and perfect
interpretations of the proper significations of hard English words, throughout
the Arts and Sciences, Liberal; or Mechanic; as also other subjects that are
useful, or appertain to the Language of our Nation; to which is added the
signification of Prope^ names, Mythology, and Poetical Fictions, Historial
Relations, Geographical Descriptions of the Countries and Cities of the World;
especially of these three Nations, wherein their chiefest Antiquities, Battles,
and other most memorable Passages are mentioned: A Work very necessary for
Strangers, as well as our own Contrymen, for all persons that would rightly
understand what they discourse, write, or read. Collected and published by E.
P. For the greater honor of those learned Gentlemen and Artists that have been
assistant in the most Practical Sciences, their Names are prefixed before the
Book.

3. The way to bliss, in three Books, being a learned Treatise of the
Philophers Stone, made public by Elias Ashmole, Esquire.

4. Wit restored in several Select Poems, not formerly published by Sir John
Mennis, Mr. Smith, and others. An excellent Droll.

5. The Modern Assurancer, or the Clerks Directory, containing the Practick
part of the law, in the exact Forms and draughts of all manner of Presidents
for Bargains, and Sales, Grants, Feoffements, Bonds, Bills, Conditions,
Covenants, Jointures, Indentures; to lead the use of Fines and Recoveries, with
good Proviso's, and Covenants to stand seized, Charter parties for Ships,
Leases, Releases, Surrenders, etc. And all other Instruments and Assurances now
in use, intended for all young Students and Practicers of the Law, by John
Hern, of Inner Temple.

Likewise, 6. Exercitatio Elleiptica Nova, or a new Mathematical Contemplation
on the Oval Figure, called an Eleipsis; together with the two first Books of
Mydorgius his Conick; Analiz'd and made so plain, that the Doctrine of the
Conical Sections may be easily understood; a Work much desired, and nver before
published in the English tongue; by Jonas Moor, Surveyor General of the great
Level of the Fennes.

7. Naps upon Parnassus. A sleepy Muse nipt and pincht, though not awakened.
such voluntary and Jovial Copies of Verses as were lately received from some of
the WITS of the Universities, in a Frolic; Dedicated to Gondibert's Mistress,
by Captain Jones and others. Whereunto is added for Demonstration of the
Authors prosaick Excellencies, his Epistle to one of the Universities, with the
answer; together with two Satirical Characters of his own, of a Temporizer, and
an Ant^quary, with Marginal Notes by a friend to the Reader.

8. The Complete Midwife's Practice, in high and weighty Concernments of
Mankind: the second Edition corrected, with a full supply of such most useful
and admirable Secrets which Mr. Nicholas Culpeper in his brief Treatise, and
other English Writers in the Art of Midwifry, have hitherto wilfully passed by,
kept close to themselves, or wholly omitted; by T. Chamberlaia, M. P.

9. A Manual, or Miscelany of Meditations, Apopthegms Sentences, Precepts,
Observations, Characters and Essays, by R. R.

10. America Painted to the Life, the History of the Conquest, and first
Original undertakings of the advancement of the Plantations in those parts;
with an exquisite Map, by F. Gorges, Esquire.

11. The School of Physic, or the General Experimental Practice of the whole
Art, so reduced, either into Aphorisms, or choice and tried Receipts, that the
freeborn Students of the three Kingdoms, may in this Method find perfect
ways for the operation of such Medicines, so Astrologically and Physically
prescribed, as that they may themselves be competent Judges of the cures of
their Patients, by Nicholas Culpeper. To this exquisite Work, the Narrative of
the Authors Life is prefixed; together with his Nativity, calculated by
himself: Puplisht with the acknowledgement and approbation of his Late Wife,
Mistress Alice Culpeper, the last he ever wrote.

12. The Ascents of Moses in Parallels with his late Serene Highness Oliver
Lord Protector now in the Pres^e.

13. J. Cleaveland Revived: Poems, Orations, Epistles, and other of his Genuine
Incomparable Pieces, never before p^blisht. With some other Exquisite Remains
of the most eminent Wits of both the Universities, that were his Contemporaties.

FINIS.

