POEMS.

BY J. C.

WITH ADDITIONS.

Printed in the Year 1651.

TO THE STATE of LOVE, OR, The Senses Festival.
I Saw a Vision yesternight
Enough to tempt a Seekers sight:
I wished my self a Shaker there,
And her quick pulse my trembling sphere.
It was a She so glittering bright:
You Would think her soul an Adamite.
A person of so rare a frame,
Her body might be lined with'same.
Beauties chiefest Maid of Honor:
You Would break a Lent with looking on her.
Not the fair Abbess of the skies,
With all her Nunnery of eyes,
Can show me such a glorious prize.
And yet, because 't is more renown
To make a shadow shine, she is brown;
A brown, for which, Heaven would disband
The Gallaxye, and stars be tanned.
Brown by reflection, as her eye
Dazels the Summers livery.
Old dormant windows must confess,
Her beams their glimmering spectacles;
Struck with the splendor of her face,
Do the office of a burning-glass.
Now, where such radiant lights have shown,
No wonder if her cheeks be grown
Sunburned with luster of her own.
My sight took pay, but (thank my charms)
I now empale her in mine arms,
(Loves Compasses) confining you
Good Angels, to a Compass too.
Is not the Universe strait-lac't,
When I can clasp it in the Waste?
My amorous foulds about thee hurled,
With Drake, I compass in the world.
I hoop the Firmament, and make;
This my Embrace the Zodiac.
How would thy Center take my Sense,
When Admiration does commense,
At the extreme Circumference.
Now to the melting kiss that sips
The jelly'd Philtre of her lips
So sweet, there is no tongue can phras't,
Till transubstantiate with a taste,
Inspit'd like Mahomet from above,
By the billing of my heavenly Dove;
Love prints her Signets in her smacks,
Those Ruddy drops of squeezing wax;
Which, wheresoever she imparts,
They Are Privy Seals to take up hearts.
Our Mouths encountering at the sport,
My slippery soul had quit the fort,
But that she stopped the Salley-port.
Next to those sweets her lips dispense,
As Twin-conserves of Eloquence;
The sweet perfume her breath affords;
Incorporating with her words;
No Rosary this Votress needs,
Her very syllables are beads.
No sooner 'twixt those Rubies born*
But Jewels are in Earrings worn.
With what delight her speech does enter,
It is a kiss oth' second venture.
And I dissolve at what I hear,
As if another Rosomond were
Couched in the Labyrinth of my Ear.
Yet, that 's but a preludious bliss;
Two souls pickearing in a kiss.
Embraces do but draw the Line,
It Is storming that must take her in.
When Bodies whine, and victory hovers
'Twixt the equal fluttering Lovers,
This is the game, make stakes my Dear,
Hark how the sprightly Chanticlere,
That Baron Tell-clock of the night,
Sounds Boot-esel to Cupids knight.
Then have at all, the pass is got,
For coming off, oh name it not:
Who would not die upon the spot.
THE HECATOMB TO HIS MISTRESS.
BE dumb ye beggars of the rhiming trade,
Geld the loose wits, and let the Muse be splaid.
Charge not the parish with the bastard phrase
Of Balm, Elixar, both the Indias,
Of shrine, saint, sacrilege, and such as these
Expressions, common as their Mistresses.
Hence ye fantastic Postillers in song,
My text defeats your art, ties natures tongue,
Scorns all his tinsil'd metaphors of pelf,
Illustrated by nothing but his self.
As Spiders travel by their bowels spun
Into a thread, and when the race is run,
Wind up their journey in a living clew,
So is it with my Poetry and you.
From your own essence must I first untwine,
Then twist again each Panegyric line.
Reach then a soaring Quill that I may write,
As with a Jacobs staff to take the height.
Suppose an Angel darting through the air,
Should there encounter a religious prayer
Mounting to Heaven, that Intelligence
Should for a Sunday-suit thy breath condense
Into a body. Let me crack a string
In ventring higher; were the note I sing
Above heavens Ela, should I undecline,
And with a deep-mouthed Gammut sound again
From pole to pole, I could not reach her worth,
Nor find an Epithet to set it forth.
Metals may blazon common beauties, she
Makes pearl and planets humble herauldy.
As then a purer substance is defined,
But by an heap of Negatives combined;
Ask what a spirit is, you will hear them cry
It has no matter, no mortality:
So can I not define how sweet, how fair,
Only I say she is not as others are.
For what perfections we to others grant,
It is her sole perfection to want.
All other forms seem in respect of thee
The Almanacks misshap'd Anatomy,
Where Aries, head and face; Bull, neck and throat;
The Scorpion gives the secrets; knees, the Goat:
A brief of limbs foul as those beasts, or are
Their name-sak'd signs in their strange character.
As the Philosophers to every Sense
Marry its object, yet with some dispense,
And grant them a polygamie withal,
And these their common Sensibles they call:
So is it with her, who stinted unto none,
Unites all Senses in each action.
The same beam heats and lights; to see her well,
Is both to hear and feel, to taste and smell.
For can you want a palate in your eyes,
When each of his contains a double prize,
Venus his apple? can the eyes want nose,
When from each cheek buds forth a fragrant Rose?
Or can the sight be deaf, if she but speak,
A well-tuned face such moving Rhetoric?
Does not each look a flash of lightning feel
Which spare the bodies sheath, and melts the steel?
Thy soul must needs confess, or grant thy sense
Corrupted with the objects excellence.
Sweet Magic, which can make five senses lie
Conjured within the circle of an eye.
In whom since all the Five are intermixed,
Oh now that Scaliger would prove his fixed.
Thou man of mouth, that can not name a She
Unless all nature pay a Subsidy,
Whose language is a Tax, whose Musk-cat verse
Voids naught but flowers for thy Muses hearse,
Fitter than Celia's looks, who in a trice
Can state the long disputed Paradise:
And with Divines hunt with so cold a sent,
Can in her bosom find it resident.
Now come aloft, come, come and breath a vein,
And give some vent unto thy daring strain.
Say the Astrologer, who spells the Stars,
In that fair Alphabet reads Peace and Wars,
Mistakes his Globe, and in her brighter eye
Interprets Heavens phisiognomy.
Call her the Metaphysics of her Sex,
And say she tortures wits, as Quartans vex
Physicians: call her the Square Circle, say
She is the very rule of Algebra.
What ere you undertake not, say it of her,
For that is the way to write her Character.
Say this and more, and when thou hop'st to raise
Thy fancy so as to enclose her praise,
Alas poor Gotham with thy Cookko hedge,
Hyperboles are here but sacrilege.
Then rouse up Muse, what thou have revealed out
Some comments clear not, but increase the doubt.
She that affords poor mortals not a glance
Of knowledge, but is known by ignorance,
She that commits a rape on every sense,
Whose breath can countermaund a pestilence,
She that can strike the best invention dead,
Till bafled Poetry hangs down her head,
She, she it is, She that contains all bliss,
And make the world but her Periphrasis.
UPON Sir THOMAS MARTIN, Who subscribed a Warrant thus: We the Knights and
Gentlemen of the Committee, etc. when there was no Knight but himself.
HAng out a flag, and gather pence apiece
(Which Afric never bred, nor swelling Greece
With stories timpany) a beast so rare
No Lecturers wrought cap, nor Bartlemew Fare
Can match him; Natures whimsey, one that out-vyes
Tredeskin, and his ark of Novelties.
The Gog and Magog of prodigious sights
With reverence to your eyes, Sir Thomas Knights:
But is this bigamy of titles due?
Are you Sir Thomas, and Sir Martin too?
Issachar Couchant 'twixt a brace of Sirs,
Thou Knighthood in a pair of Panniers:
Thou that look wrapped up in thy Warlike leather,
Like Valentine and Orson bound together,
Spurs representative! thou that art able
To be a Voider to King Arthurs Table:
Who in this sacrilegious mass of all
It seems has swallowed Windsors Hospital.
Pair-royal headed Cerberus his Cozen:
Hercules labors were a Bakers dozen.
Had he but trumpt on thee whose forked neck
Might well have answered at the Font for Smeck;
But can a Knighthood on a Knighthood lie
Metal on Metal is ill Armorie.
And yet the known Godfrey of Bulloin's coat
Shines in exception to the Heralds vote.
Great spirits move not by pedantick laws,
Their actions though eccentrick, state the cause,
And Priscan bleeds with honor; Caesar thus
Subscribed two Consuls with one Julius.
Tom never oaded Squire, scarce Yeoman high,
Is Tom twice dipped Knight of a double die?
Fond man! whose fate is in his name betrayed,
It is the setting Sun doubles his shade;
But its no matter, for Amphibious he
May have a Knight hanged, yet Sir Tom go free.
On the memory of Mr. Edward King, drowned in the Irish Seas.
I Like not tears in tune, nor do I prize
His artificial grief who scans his eyes.
Mine weep down pious beads: but why should I
Confine them to the Muses Rosary?
I am no Poet here; my pen's the spout
Where the Rainwater of mine eyes runs out
In pity of that Name, whose fare we see
Thus copi'd out in griefs Hydrography.
The Muses are not Mair-maids; though upon
His death the Ocean might turn Helicon.
The Sea's too rough for verse; who rhimes upon it
With Xerxes strives to fetter the Hellespont.
My tears will keep no channel, know no laws
To guide their streams; but (like the waves their cause)
Run with disturbance, till they swallow me
As a description of his misery.
But can his spacious virtue find a grave
Within the impostum'd bubble of a wave?
Whose learning if we sound, we must confess
The Sea but shallow, and him bottomless.
Could not the Winds to counter-maund thy death,
With their whole card of Lungs redeem thy breath?
Or some new Island in thy rescue peep,
To heave thy resurrection from the deep?
That so the world might see thy safety wrought
With no less wonder than thy self was thought.
The famous Stagarite, who in his life
Had nature as familiar as his wife,
Bequeathed his Widow to survive with thee,
Queen Dowager of all Philosophy.
An ominous Legacy, that did portend
Thy fate, and Predecessors second end!
Some have affirmed, that what on earth we find
The sea can parallel in shape, and kind:
Books, arts, and tongues were wanting, but in thee
Neptune has got an Universiitie.
We Will dive no more for pearls, the hope to see
Thy sacred relics of mortality
Shall welcome storms, and make the Seamen prize
His shipwreck now more than his merchandise.
He shall embrace the waves, and to thy Tomb
As to a Royaller Exchange shall come.
What can we now expect? water, and fire,
Both elements our ruin do conspire;
And that dissolves us which does us compound:
One Vatican was burnt, another drowned.
We of the Gown our Libraries must toss,
To understand the greatness of our loss,
Be Pupils to our grief, and so much grow
In learning, as our sorrows overflow.
When we have filled the Rundlets of our eyes,
We Will issue't forth, and vent such Elegies,
As that our tears shall seem the Irish Seas,
We floating Islands, living Hebrides.
On the same.
TEll me no more of Stoics: can thou tell
Who't was, that when the waves began to swell,
The ship to sink, sad passengers to call,
[Master we perish] slept secure of all?
Remember this, and him that waking kept
A mind as constant as he did that slept.
Can thou give credit to his zeal and love,
That went to Heaven, and to those flames above
Wrapped in a fiery chariot? Since I heard
Who't was, that on his knees the Vessel steered
With hands bolt up to Heaven, since I see
As yet no sign of his mortality;
Pardon me, Reader, if I say he is gone
The self same journey in a watery one.
The Hue and Cry after Sir John Presbyter.
WIth Hair in Characters, and Lugs in Text;
With a splay mouth, and a nose circumflext;
With a set Ruff of Musket bore, that wears
Like Cartrages, or linen Bandileers,
Exhausted of their sulphurous Contents,
In Pulpit fireworks, which that Bomball vents;
The Negative and Covenanting Oath,
Like two Mustachoes, issuing from his mouth;
The Bush upon his chin, (like a carved story,
In a Box knot) cut by the Directory;
Madams Confession hanging at his ear,
Wiredrawn through all the questions, How and Where,
Each circumstance, so in the hearing Felt,
That when his ears are cropped, he will count them gelt;
The sweeping Cassock scared into a Jump,
A sign the Presbyter's worn to the stump:
The Presbyter, though charmed against mischance
With the Divine right of an Ordinance.
If you meet any that do thus attire'em,
Stop them, they are the tribe of Adoniram.
What zealous Frenzy did the Senate seize,
That tare the Rotchet to such Rags as these?
Episcopacy minc't, Reforming Tweed
Has sent us Runts, even of her Churches breed;
Lay-interlining Clergy, a Device
That Is nickname to the stuff called Lops and Lice.
The Beast at wrong end branded, you may trace
The Devils footsteps in his cloven Face.
A Face of several Parishes and sorts,
Like to a Sergeant shaved at Inns of Court.
What mean the Eldders else, those Kirk Dragoons,
Made up of Ears and Ruffs like Ducatoons?
That Hierarchy of Handicrafts begun?
Those new Exchange-men of Religion?
Sure they are the Antic heads, which placed without
The Church, go gape and disembogue a spout:
Like them above the Commons House, have bin
So long without, now both are gotten in;
Then, what Imperious in the Bishop sounds,
The same the Scotch Executor rebounds.
This stating Prelacy, the Classick Rout,
That spoke it often, ere it spoke it out.
So by an Abbeys Scheleton of late,
I heard an Echo Supererogate
Through imperfection, and the voice restore,
As if she had the hicop, over and over.
Since they our mixed Dioc^sans combine
Thus to ride double in their Discipline;
That Paul's shall to the Consistory call
A Dean and Chapter out of Weavers-Hall,
Each at the Ordinance for to assist.
With the five thumbs of his groat-changing Fist.
Down Dagon Synod with thy motley ware,
Whilst we do swagger for the Common Prayer.
That Dove-like Embassy, that wings our sense
To heavens gate in shape of innocence:
Pray for the Miter'd Authors, and defy
These Demicasters of Divinity.
For where Sir John with Jack-of-all-trades joins,
His Finger's thicker thah the Prelat's Loins.
The Antiplatonick.
FOR shame, thou everlasting Woer,
Still saying Grace, and never falling to her!
Love that is in Contemplation placed,
Is Venus drawn but to the Wast.
Unless your Flame confess its Gender,
And your Parley cause surrender;
You Are Salamanders of a cold desire,
That live untouched amid the hottest fire.
What though she be a Dame of stone,
The Widow of Pigmalion;
As hard and un-relenting She,
As the new-crusted Niobe;
Or what does more of Statue carry
A Nun of the Platonic Quarrey?
Love melts the rigor which the rocks have bred,
A Flint will break upon a Feather-bed.
For shame you pretty Female Elves,
Cease for to Candy up your selves:
No more, you Sectaries of the Game,
No more of your calcining flame.
Women Commence by Cupids Dart;
As a Kings Hunting dubs a Heart.
Loves Votaries inthrall each others soul,
Till both of them live but upon Paroll.
Virtue's no more in Women-kind
But the green-sicknesse of the mind.
Philosophy, their new delight,
A kind of Charcoal Appetite.
There Is no Sophistry prevails,
Where all-convincing Love assails:
But the disputing Petticoat will Warp,
As skillful Gamesters are to seek at Sharp.
The soldier, that man of Iron,
Whom Ribs of Horror all inviron;
That Is strung with Wire, in stead of Veins,
In whose embraces you're in chains,
Let a Magnetic Girl appear,
Straight he turns Cupids Cuiraseer.
Love storms his lips, and takes the Fortress in,
For all the Brisled Turn-pikes of his chin.
Since Loves Artillery then checks
The Breast-works of the firmest Sex,
Come let us in Affections Riot,
They Are sickly pleasures keep a Diet.
Give me a Lover bold and free,
Not Eunuch't with Formality;
Like an Ambassador that beds a Queen,
With the Nice Caution of a sword between.
Upon an Hermaphrodite.
SIr, or Madame, choose you whether,
Nature twist'd you both together:
And makes thy soul two garbes confess,
Both Petticoat and Breeches dress.
Thus we chastise the God of Wine,
With water that is Feminine,
Until the cooler Nymph abate
His wrath, and so concorporate.
Adam till his rib was lost;
Had both Sexes thus ingrost:
When Providence our Sire did cleave,
And out of Adam carved Eve,
Then did man 'bout Wedlock treat,
To make his body up complete:
Thus Matrimony speaks but Thee
In a grave solemnity.
For man and wife make but one right
Canonical Hermaphrodite.
Ravell thy body, and I find
In every limb a double kind.
Who would not think that head a pair,
That breeds such faction in the hair?
One half so churlish in the touch,
That rather then endure so much,
I would my tender limbs apparel
In Regulus his nailed barrel:
But the other half so small,
And so amorous withal,
That Cupid thinks each hair does grow
A string for his invis'ble bow.
When I look babies in thine eyes,
Here Venus, there Adonis lies.
And though thy beauty be high noon,
Thy Orb contains both Sun and Moon.
How many melting kisses skip
'Twixt thy Male and Female lip?
'Twixt thy upper brush of hair
And thy nether beards despair.
When thou speak, I would not wrong
Thy sweetness with a double tongue:
But in every single sound
A perfect Dialogue is found.
Thy breasts distinguish one another;
This the sister, that the brother.
When thou joyn'st hands, my ear still fancies
The Nuptial sound, I John take Frances:
Feel but the difference, soft, and rough;
This a Gantlet, that a Muffe:
Had sly Ulysses, at the sack
Of Troy brought thee his Pedlers pack,
And weapons too to know Achilles
From King Nicomedes Phillis,
His plot had failed; this hand would feel
The Needle, that the warlike steel.
When music does thy pace advance,
Thy right leg takes thy left to dance.
Nor is it a Galliard danced by one,
But a mixed dance, though alone:
Thus every heteroclite part
Changes gender, but thy heart.
Nay those which modest can mean,
And dare not speak, are Epicoene;
That Gamester needs must overcome,
That can play both Tib and Tom.
Thus did Natures mintage vary,
Coining thee a Philip and Mary.
The Authors Hermaphrodite, made after Mr. Randolphs death, yet inserted into
his Poems.
Problem of Sexes; must thou likewise be
As disputable in thy Pedigree?
Thou twins-in-one, in whom Dame Nature tries
To throw less then Aumes-ace upon two Dice:
Were thou served up two in one dish, the rather
To split thy Sire into a double father?
True, the worlds scales are even: what the main
In one place gets, another quits again.
Nature lost one by thee, and therefore must
Slice one in two, to keep her number just:
Plurality of livings is thy state,
And therefore mine must be impropriate.
For, since the child is mine, and yet the claim
Is intercepted by another name,
Never did steeple carry double truer,
His is the Donative, and mine the Cure.
Then say my Muse (and without more dispute)
Who it is that fame does superinstitute.
The Theban Wittall, when he once descries,
Jove is his rival, falls to sacrifice:
That name has tipped his horns: see, on his knees,
A health to Hans-en* Kelder Hercules.
Nay sublunary Cuckolds are content
To entertain their Fate with complement;
And shall not he be proud, whom Randolph daigns
To quarter with his Muse both Arms and Brains?
Grammercy Gossip, I rejoice to see
Shee'th got a leap of such a Barbary.
Talk not of horns, horns are the Poets Crest;
For since the Muses left their former nest,
To found a Nunnery in Randolphs quill,
Cuckold Pernassus is a forked hill.
But stay, I Have wak't his dust, his Marble stirs,
And brings the worms for his Compurgators.
Can Ghost have natural sons? say Ogg, is it meet,
Penance bear date after the winding sheet?
Were it a Phaenix (as the double kind
May seem to prove, being there is two combined)
It would disclaim my right: and that it were
The lawful issue of his ashes, swear.
But was he dead? did not his soul translate
Her self into a shop of lesser rate?
Or break up house, like an expensive Lord,
That gives his purse a sob, and lives at board?
Let old Pythagoras but play the Pimp,
And still there is hopes 't may prove his bastard imp.
But I Am profane; For grant the world had one,
With whom he might contract an union,
They two were one, yet like an Eagle spread,
In The body joined, but parted in the head.
For you my brat, that pose the Porph'ry Chair,
Pope John, or Joan, or whatsoere you are,
You are an nephew, grieve not at your state,
For all the world is illegitimate.
Man cannot get a man, unless the Sun
Club to the act of generation.
The sun and man get man, thus Tom and I
Are the joint fathers of thy Poetry.
For since (blessed shade) this Verse is Male, but mine
Of The weaker Sex, a fancy Foeminine:
We Will part the child, and yet commit no slaughter,
So shall it be thy Son, and yet my daughter.
Square-Cap.
COme hither Apollo's bouncing Girl,
And in a whole Hippocrene of Sherry
Let Us drink a round till our brains do whirle,
Tuning our pipes to make our selves mecry:
A Cambridge-Lasse, Venus-like, born of the froth
Of an old half-fill'd Jug of Barley broth,
She, she is my Mistress, her Suitors are many,
But she will have a Square-cap if ere she have any.
And first for the Plush-sake the Monmouth-cap coms,
Shaking his head like an empty bottle;
With his newfangled Oath, By Jupiters thumbs,
That to her health he will begin a pottle:
He tells her that after the death of his Grannam,
He shall have -- God knows what per annum:
But still she replies, good Sir La-bee,
If ever I have a man, Square-cap for me.
Then Calot- Leather-cap strongly pleads,
And fain would derive the pedigree of fashion:
The Antipodes wear their shoes on their heads,
And why may not we in their imitation?
Oh, how this football noddle would please,
If it were but well tossed on S. Thomas his Lees.
But still she replied, etc.
Next comes the Puritan in a wrought-Cap,
With a long-wasted conscience toward a Sister,
And making a Chapel of Ease of her lap,
First he said grace, and then he kissed her.
Beloved, quoth he, thou art my Text,
Then falls he to Use and Application next:
But then she replied, you Text (Sir) I Will be,
For then I Am sure you will never handle me.
But see where Sattin-Cap scouts about,
And feign would this wench in his fellowship marry,
He told her how such a man was not put out,
Because his wedding he closely did carry.
He Will purchase Induction by Simony,
And offers her money her Incumbent to be.
But still she replied, good Sir La-bee,
If ever I have a man Square-cap for me.
The Lawyer's a Sophister by his round-cap,
Nor in their fallacies are they divided;
The one milks the pocket, the other the tap,
And yet this wench he fain would have brided.
Come leave these threadbare Scholars, quoth he,
And give me livery and season of thee:
But peace Iohn-a-Nokes, and leave your Oration,
For I never will be your Impropriation.
I pray you therefore good Sir La-bee;
For if ever I have a man Square-cap for me.
Upon Phillis walking in a morning before Sunrising.
THe sluggish morn, as yet undrest,
My Phyllis brake from out her East;
As if she would made a match to run
With Venus, Usher to the Sun.
The trees, like Yeomen of her Guard,
Serving more for pomp, then ward,
Bank'd on each side with loyal duty,
Wave branches to enclose her beauty.
The Plants whose luxury was lopt,
Or age with crutches underpropt;
Whose wooden carkases are grown
To be but coffins of their own;
Revive, and at her general dole
Each receives his ancient soul.
The winged Choristers began
To chirp their Mattins: and the Fan
Of whistling winds, like Organs, played,
Until their Voluntaries made
The wakned earth in odours rise,
To be her morning-Sacrifice.
The flowers, called out of their beds,
Start, and raise up their drowsy heads:
And he that for their color seeks,
May find it vaulting in her cheeks,
Where Roses mix: no civil war
Between her York and Lancaster.
The Marigold, whose Courtiers face
Echoes the Sun, and does unlace
Her at his rise, at his full stop
Packs, and shuts up her gaudy shop;
Mistakes her kue, and does display:
Thus Phyllis antidates the day.
These miracles had cramp't the Sun,
Who thinking that his Kingdom's won,
Powders with light his frizled locks,
To see what Saint his luster mocks.
The trembling leaves through which he played,
Dapling the walk with light and shade,
Like lattice-windows, give the spy
Room but to peep with half an eye;
Least her full Orb his sight should dim,
And bids us all goodnight in him,
Till she would spend a gentle ray,
To force us a new-fashion'd day.
But what religious Palsie's this
Which makes the boughs divest their Bliss?
And that they might her footsteps straw,
Drop their leaves with shivering awe.
Phillis perceives, and (least her stay
Should wed October unto May;
And as her beauty caused a Spring,
Devotion might an Autumn bring)
Withdrew her beams, yet made no night,
But left the Sun her curate light.
Upon a Miser that made a great feast, and the next day died for grief.
NOr escapes he so: our dinner was so good,
My liquorish Muse cannot but chew the cood:
And what delight she took i the invitation,
Strives to taste over again in this relation.
After a tedious Grace in Hopkins rithme,
Not for devotion, but to take up time,
Marched the train'd-band of dishes ushered there,
To show their postures, and then as they were.
For he invites no teeth, perchance the eye
He will afford the Lovers gluttony;
This is a feast, a muster, not a fight,
Our weapons not for service but for sight.
But are we Tantaliz'd? is all this meat
Cooked by a Limner, for to view, not eat?
The Astrologers keep such Houses when they sup
On joints of Taurus, or their heavenly Tup.
Whatever feasts he made are sum'd up here,
His table vyes not standing with his cheer.
His Churchings Christ'nings, in this meal are all,
And not transcribed, but in the Original.
Christmas is no Feast moveable: for lo
The self-same dinner was ten years ago:
'Twill be immortal if it longer stay,
The Gods will eat it for Ambrosia.
But stay awhile, unless my whinyard fail,
Or it enchanted, I Will cut off the intail.
Saint George for England then: have at the mutton,
When the first cut calls me blood-thirsty glutton:
What Ajax with his anger quodl'd brain
Killing a sheep, thought Agamemnon slain:
The fiction's now proved true; wounding his roast,
I lamentably butcher up mine host.
Such sympathy is with his meat, my weapon
Makes him an Eunuch, when it ca^ves his Capon.
Cut a Goose-leg, and the poor soul for moan
Turns Creeple too, and after stands on one.
Have you not heard the abominable sport
A Lancaster Grand Jury will report?
The soldier with his Morglay watched the Mill,
The cats they came to feast, when lusty Will
Whips off great Pusses leg, which by some charm
Proves the next day such an old woman's arm:
It Is so with him, whose carkase never escapes,
But still we slash him in a thousand shapes.
Our serving-men like Spaniells rang, to spring
The fowl which he has clockt under his wing.
Should he on Widgeon, or on Woodcock feed,
It were ( Thyestes like) on his own breed.
To pork he pleads a superstition due,
But not a mouth is muzled by the Jew.
Sawces we should have none, had he his wish,
The Oranges in the margent of the dish,
He with such Hucsters tells them over and over,
The Hesperian Dragon never watched them more.
But being eaten now into despair,
Having naught else to do, he falls to prayer.
As thou did once put on the form of Bull,
And turnst thy Io to a lovely Mull,
Defend my rump great Jove, grant this poor beef
May live to comfort me in all this grief.
But no Amen was said: See, see it comes,
Draw boys, let Trumpets sound, and strike up Drums.
See how his blood does with the gravy swim,
And every trencher has a limb of him.
The Ven'sons now in view, our hounds spend deeper,
Strange Deer, which in the Pasty has a Keeper
Stricter then in the Park, making his guest
(As he had stoln't alive) to steal it dressed:
The scent was hot, and we pursuing faster,
Then Ovids pack of dogs e're chased their Master,
A double prey at once may seize upon,
Actaeon and his Case of Venison:
Thus was he torn alive. To vex him worse
Death serves him up now as a second course.
Should we, like Thratians, our dead bodies eat,
He would have lived only to save his meat.
A young Man to an old Woman Courting him.
PEace Beldam Eve; surcease thy suit:
There Is no temptation in such fruit.
No rotten Medlers, whilst there be
Whole Orchards in Virginity.
Thy stock is too much out of date
For tender plants to inoculate.
A match with thee, thy bridegroom fears,
Would be thought Interest in his years;
Which when compared to thine, become
Odd money to thy Grandam sum.
Can Wedlock know so great a curse
As putting husbands out to Nurse?
How Pond and Rivers would mistake,
And cry new Almanacks for our sake?
Time sure has wheeled about his year,
December meeting Ianiveer.
The Egyptian Serpent figures time,
And stripped, returns unto his Prime:
If my affection thou would win,
First cast thy Hieroglyphick skin.
My modern lips know not (alack)
The old Religion of thy smack.
I count that primitive embrace,
As out of fashion as thy face.
And yet so long it is since thy fall,
Thy Fornications Classical.
Our sports will differ: thou may play,
Leero, and I Alphonso way.
I Am no Translator; have no vein
To turn a woman young again:
Unless you will grant the ^ailor's due,
To see the forebodies be new:
I love to wear clothes that are flush.
Not prefacing old rags with plush:
Like Aldermen, or Monster-Sheriffs,
With Canvas backs, and velvet sleeves.
And just such discord there would be
Betwixt thy Skeleton and me.
Go study salve and Treacle, ply
Your tenants leg, or his sore eye;
Thus Matrons purchase credit, thank
Six penni-worth of Mountebank.
Or chew thy cood on some delight
Thou take in thy Eighty Eight.
Or be but bedrid once, and then
Thou Wilt dream thy youthful sins again.
But if thou needs wilt be my Spouse,
First hearken, and attend my Vows.
"When AEtnas fires shall undergo
"The penance of the Alps in snow,
"When Sol at one blast of his horn
"Posts from the Crab to Capricorn,
"When the Heavens shuffle all in one,
"The Torrid with the Frozen Zone;
"When all these contradictions meet,
"Then ( Sybill) thou and I will greet.
"For all these similies do hold
"In my young heat and thy dull cold;
"Then if a Fever be so good
"A Pimp, as to inflame thy blood,
Hymen shall twist thee, and thy Page
The distinct Tropicks of man's age.
Well (Madam time) be ever bald,
I Will not thy Pery wig be called.
I Will never be 'stead of a lover,
An aged Chronicles new cover.
To Mrs. K. T. who ask't him why he was dumb.
STay, should I answer (Lady) then
In vain would be your question.
Should I be dumb, why then again
Your asking me would be in vain.
Silence nor speech (on neither hand)
Can satisfy this strange demand.
Yet since your will throws me upon
This wished contradiction,
I Will tell you how I did become
So strangely (as you hear me) dumb.
Ask but the Chap-falne Puritan,
It Is zeal that tongue-ties that good man:
For heat of Conscience, all men hold,
Is the only way to catch their cold.
How should loves zealot then forbear
To be your silenced Minister?
Nay your religion, which does grant
A worship due to you my Saint,
Yet counts it that devotion wrong
That does it in the vulgar tongue.
My ruder words would give offense
To such an hallowed excellence;
As the English Dialect would vary
The goodness of an Ave Mary.
How can I speak, that twice am checked
By this and that Religious Sect?
Still dumb, and in your face I spy
Still cause, and still Divinity.
As soon as blessed with your salute,
My manners taught me to be mute:
For, least they cancel all the bliss
You signed with so divine a kiss,
The lips you seal must needs consent
Unto the tongues imprisonment.
My tongue in hold, my voice does rise
(With a strange E-la to my eyes;
Where it gets bail, and in that sense
Begins a newfound Eloquence.
Oh listen with attentive sight
To what my prattling eyes indite:
Or (Lady) since it is in your choice,
To give, or to suspend my voice,
With the same key set open the door
Wherewith you locked it fast before;
Kiss once again, and when you thus
Have doubly been miraculous,
My Muse shall write with Handmaids duty
The Golden Legend of your beauty.
He, whom his dumbness now confines,
But mean-to speak the rest by signs.
I. C.
A Fair Nymph scorning a Black Boy Courting her.
Nymph. STand off, and let me take the air,
Why should the smoke pursue the fair?

Boy. My face is smoke, thence may be guest
What flames within have scorched my breast.

Nymph. The flame of love I cannot view,
For the dark Lanthorn of thy hue.

Boy. And yet this Lanthorn keeps loves Taper
Surer then yours, that is of white paper.
Whatever midnight has been here,
The Moonshine of your light can clear.

Nymph. My Moon of an Eclipse is 'fraid,
If thou should interpose thy shade.

Boy. Yet one thing (sweetheart) I will ask,
Buy me for a new false Mask.

Nympth. Yes: but my bargain shall be this,
I Will throw my Mask off when I kiss.

Boy. Our curled embraces shall delight
To checquer limbs with black, and white.

Nymph. Thy ink, my paper, make me guess,
Our Nuptial bed will make a Press;
And in our sports if any came,
They Will read a want on Epigram

Boy. Why should my black thy love impair?
Let the dark shop commend thy ware:
Or if thy love from black forbears,
I Will strive to wash it off with tears.

Nymph. Spare fruitless tears, since thou must needs
Still wear about thee mourning weeds.
Tears can no more affection win,
Then wash thy Ethiopian skin.

A Dialogue between two Zealots, upon the etc. in the Oath.
SIr Roger, from a zealous piece of Freeze,
Raised to a Vicar of the Childrens threes;
Whose yearly Audit may, by strict account,
To twenty Nobles, and his Vails amount;
Fed on the Common of the femall charity,
Until the Scots can bring about their parity;
So shotten, that his soul, like to himself,
Walks but in Querpo: this same Clergy Elf,
Encount'ring with a Brother of the Cloth,
Fell presently to Cudgells with the Oath.
The Quarrel was a strange misshapen Monster,
etc. (God bless us) which they conster,
The brand upon the buttock of the Beast,
The Dragons tail ti'd on a knot, a nest
Of young Apocryphaes, the fashion
Of a new mental Reservation.
While Roger thus divides the text, the other
Winks and expounds, saying, My pious brother,
Hearken with reverence; for the point is nice,
I never read on it, but I fasted twice,
And so by Revelation know it better
Then all the learned Idolaters of the Letter.
With that he swelled, and fell upon the Theme,
Like great Goliath with his Weavers beam:
I say to thee etc. thou li'st,
Thou art the curled lock of Antichrist:
Rubbish of Babel, for who will not say
Tongues were confounded in etc.?
Who swears etc. swears more oaths at once
Then Cerberus out of his triple Sconce.
Who views it well, with the same eye beholds
The old half Serpent in his numerous foulds.
Accursed etc. thou, for now I scent
What lately the prodigious Oysters meant.
Oh Booker, Booker, how came thou to lack
This sign in thy prophetic Almanac?
It Is the dark Vault wherein the infernal plot
Of powder against the State was first begot.
Peruse the Oath, and you shall soon descry it
By all the Father Garnets that stand by it.
Against whom the Church, whereof I am a Member,
Shall keep another fifth day of November.
Yet here is not all, I cannot half untruss
etc. it is so abominous.
The Trojan Nag was not so fully lined,
Unrip etc. and you shall find
Og the great Commissary, and which is worse,
The Apparatour upon his skew-bald horse.
Then (finally my Babe of Grace) forbear,
etc. will be too far to swear:
For it is (to speak in a familiar stile]
A Yorkshire Wea-bit, longer then a mile.
Then Roger was inspired, and by Gods-diggers,
He Will swear in words at large, and not in figures.
Now by this drink, which he takes off, as loath
To leave etc. in his liquid Oath.
His brother pledged him, and that bloody wine,
He swears shall seal the Synods Cataline.
So they drunk on, not offering to part
Till they had quite sworn out the eleventh quart:
While all that saw and heard them, jointly pray,
They and their Tribe were all etc.
Smectymnuns, or the Club-Divines.
SMectymnuns? the Goblin makes me start:
In The Name of Rabbi Abraham, what art?
Syriack? or Arabic? or Welsh? what skilt?
Ap all the Bricklayers that Babel built.
Some Conjurer translate, and let me know it:
Till then it is fit for a West Saxon Poet.
But do the brotherhood then play their prizes,
Like Mummers in Religion with disguises?
Out-brave us with a name in Rank and File,
A Name which if'twere trained would spread a mile?
The Saints Monoply, the zealous cluster,
Which like a Porcupine presents a Muster
And shoots his quills at Bishops and their Sees,
A devout litter of young Maccabees.
Thus Jack-of-all-trades has devoutly shown
The twelve Apostles on a Cherry-stone.
Thus faction's All-a-Mode in treasons fashion;
Now we have Heresy by Complication.
Like to Don Quixots Rosary of Slaves
Strung on a chain; A Murnivall of Knaves
Packt in a trick; like Gypsies when they ride,
Or like Colleagues which sit all of a side:
So the vain Satyrists stand all a row;
As hallow teeth upon a Lute-string show.
The Italian Monster pregnant with his brother,
Natures Dyaeresis, half one another,
He, with his little sides-man Lazarus,
Must both give way unto Smectymnuus.
Next Sturbridge-Fair is Smec's; for lo his side
Into a five fold Lazar's shultipli'd.
Under each arm there is tuckt a double Gyssard,
Five faces lurk under one single vizzard.
The Whore of Babylon left these brats behind,
Heirs of confusion by Gavel-kind.
I think Pythagoras's soul is rambl'd hither.
With all the change of Raiment on together:
Smec is her general Wardrobe, she will not dare
To think of him as of a thorough-fare;
He stops the Gossopping Dame; alone he is
The Purlew of a Metempsuchesis.
Like a Scotch mark, where the more modest sense
Checks the loud phrase, and shrinks to 13. pence:
Like to an Ignis fatuus, whose flame,
Though sometimes tripartite, joins in the same:
Like to nine Tailors, who if rightly spelled,
Into one man, are monysyllabled.
Short-handed zeal in one has cramped many,
Like to the Decalogue in a single penny.
See, see, how close the Curs hunt under a sheet,
As if they spent in Quire, and scanned their feet;
One Cure, and five Incumbents leap a truss,
The title sure must be litigious.
The Sadduces would raise a question,
Who must be Smec at the Resurrection.
Who cooked them up together were to blame,
Had they but wyre-drawn, and spun out their name,
'Twould make another Prentises Petition
Against the Bishops, and their Superstition.
Robson and French (that count from five to five
As far as nature fingers did contrive,
She saw they would be Sessers, that is the cause
She cleft their hoof into so many claws)
May tire their Carret-bunch, yet never agree
To rate Smectymnuus for Polemonie.
Caligula, whose pride was mankinds bail,
As who disdained to murder by retail;
Wishing the world had but one general Neck,
His glutton blade might have found game in Smec.
No Echo can improve the Author more,
Whose lungs paies use on use to half a score.
No Fellon is more lettered, though the brand
Both superscribes his shoulder and his hand.
Some Welch-man was his Godfather, for he
Wears in his name his Genealogy.
The Banes are asked, would but the times give way,
Betwixt Smectymnuus and Et caetera.
The Guests invited by a friendly Summons,
Should be the Convocation, and the Commons.
The Priest to tie the Foxes tails together,
Moseley, or Sancta Clara, choose you whether.
See, what an offspring every one expects!
What strange pluralities of men and Sects?
One says he will get a Vestery, another
Is for a Synod: Bet upon the Mother.
Faith cry St. George, let them go to it, and stickle,
Whether a Conclave, or a Conventicle.
Thus might Religions caterwaul, and spite,
Which uses to divorce, might once unite.
But their cross fortunes interdict their trade,
The Groom is Rampant, but the Bride displayed.
My task is done, all my hee-Goats are milkt;
So many Cards, in the stock, and yet be bilkt?
I could by letters now untwist the rabble;
Whip Smec from Constable to Constable.
But there I leave you to another dressing,
Only kneel down, and take your Fathers blessing.
May the Queen Mother justify your fears,
And stretch her Patent to your leather-ears.
The Mixed Assembly.
FLeabitten Synod, an Assembly brewed
Of Clerks and Elders ana, like the rude
Chaos of Presbyt'ry, where Laymen guide
With the tame Woolpack Clergy by their side.
Who asked the Banes 'twixt these discolored Mates?
A strange Grotesco this, the Church and States
(Most divine tick-tack) in a pye-bald crew,
To serve as table-men of diverse hue.
She that conceived an Ethiopian heir
By picture, when the parents both were fair,
At sight of you had born a dappled son,
You chequering her 'magination.
Had Jacobs flock but seen you sit, the dams
Had brought forth speckled and ringstreaked lambs.
Like an Impropriators Motley kind,
Whose Scarlet Coat is with a Cassock lined.
Like the Lay-thief in a Canonick weed,
Sure of his Clergy e're he did the deed.
Like Royston Crows, who are (as I may say)
Friars of both the Orders Black and Gray.
So mixed they are, one knows not whethers thicker,
A Layre of Burgess, or a Layre of Vicar.
Have they usurped what Royal Judah had?
And now must Levi too part stakes with Gad?
The Scepter and the Crosier are the Crutches,
Which if not trusted in their pious Clutches,
Will fail the Criple State. And were it not pity
But both should serve the yardwand of the City?
That Isaac might stroke his beard, and sit
Judge of (...) and Elegerit.
Oh that they were in chalk and charcole drawn!
The Misselany Satyr, and the Fawn,
And all the Adulteries of twisted nature
But faintly represent this ridling feature,
Whose Members being not tallies, they will not own
Their fellows at the Resurrection.
Strange scarlet Doctors these, they will pass in story
For sinners half refined in Purgatory;
Or parboyl'd Lobsters, where there jointly rules
The fading Sables, and the coming Gules.
The flea that Falstaff damned, thus lewdly shows
Tormented in the flames of Bardolphs Nose,
Like him that wore the Dialogue of Cloaks,
This shoulder Iohn-a-Styles, that John-a-Noaks.
Like Jews and Christians in a ship together,
With an old Neck-verse to distinguish either.
Like their intended Discipline to boot,
Or whatsoever has neither head nor foot:
Such may their stript-stuffe hangings seem to be,
Sacrilege matched with Codpeece-symony;
Be sick and dream a little, you may then
Fancy these Linsie-Woolsie Vestry-men.
Forbear good Pembroke, be not over-daring,
Such company may chance to spoil thy swearing:
And these Drum-Major oaths of Bulk unruly,
May dwindle to a feeble By my truly.
He that the Noble Percyes blood inherits,
Will he strike up a Hot-spur of the spirits?
He Will fright the Obadiahs out of tune,
With his uncircumcised Algernoon:
A name so stubborn, it is not to be scanned
By him in Gath with the six fingered hand.
See, they obey the Magic of my words.
Presto; they are gone, and now the House of Lords
Looks like the withered face of an old hagg
But with three teeth, like to a triple gagg.
A Jig, a Jig; and in this Antic dance
Fielding, and doxy Marshall first advance.
Twiss blows the Scotch pipes, and the loving brase
Puts on the traces, and treads Cinqu-a-p^ce.
Then Say and Seal must his old hamstrings supple,
And he and rumpl'd Palmer make a couple.
Palmer's a fruitful girl, if he will unfold her,
The Midwife may find work about her shoulder.
Kimbolton that rebellious Boanerges,
Must be content to saddle Doctor Burges.
If Burges get a clap, it is never the worse,
But the fifth time of his Compurgators.
Nol Bowls is coy; good sadness, cannot dance
But in obedience to the Ordinance.
Her Wharton wheels about till Mumping Lidy,
Like the full Moon, has made his Lordship giddy.
Pym and the Members must their giblets levy
TO encounter Madam Smec that single Bevy.
If they two truck together; will not be
A Childbirth, but a Jail-delivery.
Thus every Gibeline has got his Guelph,
But Seldom, he is a Galliard by himself,
And well may be; there is more Divines in him
Then in all this their Jewish Sanhedrim:
Whose Canons in the forge shall then bear date
When Mules their Cosin-Germanes generate.
Thus Moses Law is violated now,
The Ox and Ass go yoked in the same plough:
Resign thy Coach-box Twisse; Brook's Preacher, he
Would sort the beasts with more conformity.
Water and earth make but one globe, a Roundhead
Is Clergy-Lay Party-per-pale compounded.
The Kings Disguise.
ANd why a Tenant to this vile disguise,
Which who but sees, blasphemes thee with his eyes?
My twins of light within their pent-house shrink,
And hold it their Allegiance now to wink.
Oh for a State-distinction, to arraign
Charles of high Treason against my Sovereign.
What an usurper to his Prince is wont,
Cloister and shave him, he himself has don't.
His muffled feature speaks him a recluse,
His ruins prove him a religious house.
The Sun has mewed his beams from off his lamp,
And Majesty defaced the Royal stamp.
Is It not enough thy Dignity's in thrall,
But thou wilt transmute it in thy shape and all?
As if thy Blacks were of too faint a die,
Without the tincture of Tautology.
Flay an Egyptian for his Cassock skin
Spun of his Countrey's darkness, line't within,
With Presbyterian budge, that drowsy trance,
The Synod sable, foggy ignorance.
Nor bodily nor ghostly Negro could
Rough-cast thy figure in a sadder mould*
This Privie-chamber of thy shape would be
But the Close mourner of thy Royalty.
'Twill break the circle of thy Jailors spell,
A Pearl within a rugged Oysters shell.
Heaven, which the Minister of thy Person owns,
Will fine thee for Dilapidations.
Like to a martyred Abbeys courser doom,
Devoutly altered to a Pigeon room:
Or like the College, by the changeling rabble,
Manchesters Elves; transformed into a stable.
Or if there be a profanation higher,
Such is the Sacrilege of thine attire.
By which thou art half deposed, thou look like one
Whose looks are under Sequestration.
Whose Renegado form, at the first glance,
Shows like the self-denying Ordinance.
Angel of light, and darkness too, I doubt,
Inspired within, and yet possessed without.
Majestic twilight in the state of grace,
Yet with an excommunicated face.
Charles and his Mask are of a different mint,
A Psalm of mercy in a miscreant print.
The Sun wears Midnight, day is beetle-brow'd,
And lightning is in Keldar of a cloud.
Oh the accursed Stenography of fate!
The Princely Eagleshrunk into a Bat.
What charm, what Magic vapor can it be
That shrinks his rays to this Apostasy?
It is no subtle film of tiffany air,
No Cob-web vizard, such as Ladies wear,
When they are veyl'd, on purpose to be seen,
Doubling their luster by their vanquished skreen:
Nor the false scabberd of a Princes tough
Metal, and three pil'd darkness like the slough
Of an imprisoned flame, it is Faux in grain,
Dark Lanthorn to our high Meridian.
Hell belcht the damp, the Warwick-Castle-Vote
Rang Britains Curfeu, so our light went out.
Thy visage is not legible, the letters,
Like a Lords name writ in fantastic fetters:
Clothes where a Switzer might be buried quick,
Sure they would fit the Body Politic.
False beard enough, to fit a stages plot,
For that is the ambush of their wit, God wot:
Nay all his properties so strange appear,
You Are not in the presence, though the King be there.
A Libell is his dress, a garb uncouth,
Such as the * Hue and Cry once purged at mouth.
Scribbling Assassinate, thy lines attest
An ear-mark due, Cub of the Blatant Beast,
Whose wrath before it is syllabled for worse,
Is blasphemy unfledged, a callow curse.
The Laplanders when they would sell a wind
Wafting to hell, bag up thy phrase, and bind
It to the Barque, which at the voyage end
Shifts Poop, and brings the Colic in the fiend.
But I Will not dub thee with a glorious scar,
Nor sink thy skuller with a Man of War.
The black-mouthed Si quis, and this slandering suit,
Both do alike in picture execute.
But since we are all called Papists, why not date,
Devotion to the rags thus consecrate.
As Temples use to have their Porches wrought
With Sphynxes, creatures of an antic draught,
And puzling Pourtraitures, to show that there
Riddles inhabited, the like is here.
But pardon Sir, since I presume to be
Clark of this Closet to your Majesty;
Me thinks in this your dark mysterious dress
I see the Gospel coucht in Parables.
At my next view, my pur-blind fancy ripes
And shows Religion in its dusky types.
Such a Text Royal, so obscure a shade
Was Solomon in Proverbs all arrayed.
Come all ye brats of this expounding age,
To whom the spirit is in pupillage;
You that damn more, then ever Sampson slew,
And with his engine, the same jaw bone too:
How is it he escapes your Inquisition free,
Since bound up in the Bibles Livery?
Hence Cabinet-intruders, Pick-locks hence,
You that dim Jewels with your Bristoll-sense:
And Characters, like Witches, so torment,
Till they confess a guilt, though innocent.
Keys for this Coffer you can never get,
None but S. Peter's ope's this Cabinet.
This Cabinet, whose aspect would benight
Critic spectators with redundant light.
A Prince most seen, is least: What Scriptures call
The Revelation, is most mystical.
Mount then thou shadow royal, and with have
Advance thy morning star, Charles's overcast.
May thy strange journey, contradictions twist,
And force fair weather from a Scottish mist.
Heavens Confessors are posed, those star-ey'd sages
To interpret Eclipse, thus riding stages.
Thus Israel-like, he travells with a cloud,
Both as a conduct to him, and a shroud.
But oh! he goes to Gibeon, and renews
A league with moldy bread, and clouted shoos.
The Rebel Scot.
HOw! Providence! and yet a Scottish crew!
Then Madam, nature wears black patches too:
What? shall our Nation be in bondage thus
Unto a Land that truckles under us?
Ring the bells backward; I am all on fire,
Not all the buckets in a Country Quire
Shall quench my rage. A Poet should be feared
When angry, like a Comets flaming beard.
And where is the Stoic? can his wrath appease
To see his Country sick of Pym's disease
By Scotch invasion? to be made a prey
To such Pig-wiggin Myrmidons as they?
But that there is charm in verse, I would not quote
The name of Scot, without an Antidote;
Unless my head were red, that I might brew
Invention there that might be poison too.
Were I a drowsy Judge, whose dismal note
Disgorgeth halters, as a Juglers throat
Does ribbands: could I [in Sir Emp'ricks tone]
Speak Pills in phrase, and quack destruction:
Or roar like Marshall, that Genevah Bull,
Hell and damnation a pulpit full:
Yet to express a Scot, to play that prize,
Not all those mouth-Granadoes can suffice.
Before a Scot can properly be cursed,
I must (like Hocus) swallow daggers first.
Come keen Iambicks, with your Badgers feet,
And Badger-like, bite till your teeth do meet.
Help ye tart Satyrists, to imp my rage,
With all the Scorpions that should whip this age.
Scots are like Witches; do but whet your pen,
Scratch til the blood come; they will not hurt you then.
Now as the Martyrs were enforced to take
The shapes of beasts, like hypocrites, at stake,
I Will bait my Scot so; yet not cheat your eyes,
A Scot within a beast is no disguise.
No more let Ireland brag, her harmless Nation
Fosters no Venom, since the Scots plantation:
Nor can ours feigned Antiquity maintain;
Since they came in, England has Wolves again.
The Scot that kept the Tower, might have shown
(Within the grate of his own breast alone)
The Leopard and the Panther; and ingrost
What all those wild Collegiats had cost.
The honest High-shoes, in their Termly Fees,
First to the salvage Lawyer, next to these.
Nature her self does Scotch-men beasts confess,
Making their Country such a wilderness:
A Land, that brings in question and suspense
Gods omnipresence, but that Charles came thence:
But that Montrose and Crawfords loyal Band
Atton'd their sins, and christ'ned half the Land:
Nor is it all the Nation has these spots;
There is a Church, as well as Kirk of Scots:
As in a pict^re, where the squinting paint
Shows Fiend on this side, and on that side Saint.
He that saw Hell in's melancholy dream,
And in the twilight of his Fancy's theme,
Scared from his sins, repented in a fright,
Had he viewed Scotland, had turned Proselite.
A Land, where one may pray with cursed intent,
O may they never suffer banishment!
Had Cain been Scot, God would have changed his doom,
Not forced him wander, but confined him home.
Like Jews they spread, and as Infection fly,
As if the Devil had Ubiquity.
Hence it is, they live at Rovers; and defy
This or that place, Rags of Geography.
They Are Citizens o'th World; they are all in all,
Scotland's a Nation Epidemicall.
And yet they ramble not, to learn the Mode
How to be dressed, or how to lisp abroad,
To return knowing in the Spanish shrug,
Or which of the Dutch States a double Jug
Resembles most, in belly, or in Beard:
(The Card by which the Mariners are stear'd.)
No; the Scots-Errant fight, and fight to eat;
Their Estrich-stomacks make their swords their meat:
Nature with Scots as Tooth-drawers has dealt,
Who use to hang their teeth upon their Belt.
Yet wonder not at this their happy choice;
The Serpent's fatal still to Paradise.
Sure England has the Hemeroids, and these
On the North-posture of the patient seize,
Like Leeches: thus they physically thirst
After our blood, but in the cure shall burst.
Let them not think to make us run of the score,
To purchase Villanage, as once before,
When an Act past, to stroke them on the head,
Call them good Subjects, buy them Ginger-bread.
Nor gold, nor Acts of Grace; it is steel must tame
The stubborn Scot: A Prince that would reclame
Rebels by yielding, does like him, (or worse)
Who sadled his own back to shame his horse.
Was it for this you gave your leaner soil,
Thus to lard Israel with AEgypts spoil?
They are the Gospels Lifeguard; but for them,
The Garrison of new Jerusalem,
What would the Brethren do? the Cause! the cause!
Sack possets, and the Fundamental Laws!
Lord! what a goodly thing is want of shirts!
How a Scotch-stomack, and no meat, converts!
They wanted food, and raiment; so they took
Religion for their Seamstresse, and their Cook.
Unmask them well; their honors and estate,
As well as conscience are sophisticate.
Shrive but their Titles, and their money poize,
A Lord and twenty pound pronounced with noise,
When construed, but for a plain Yeoman go,
And a good sober twopence; and well so.
Hence then you proud Impostors, get you go^e,
You Picts in Gentry and Devotion:
You scandal to the stock of Verse, a race
Able to bring the Gibbet in disgrace.
Hyperbolus by suffering did traduce
The Ostracisme, and shamed it out of use.
The Indian that heaven did forswear,
Because he heard the Spaniards were there,
Had he but known what Scots in hell had been,
He would Erasmus-like have hung between.
My Muse has done. A Voider for the nonce;
I wrong the Devil, should I pick their bones*
That dish is his: for when the Scots decease,
Hell like their Nation feeds on Barnacles.
A Scot, when from the Gallow-Tree got loose,
Drops into Styx, and turns a Solund-Goose.
The Scots Apostasy.
Is It come to this? what? shall the cheeks of Fame,
Stretched with the breath of learned Lowdo^s name,
Be flag'd again? and that great piece of sense,
As rich in Loyalty, as Eloquence,
Brought to the Test, be found a trick of State?
Like Chemists tinctures, proved adulterate?
The Devil sure such language did atchieve,
To cheat our un-fore-warned Grandam Eve,
As this Impostor found out, to besot
The experienced English, to believe a Scot.
Who reconciled the Covenants doubtful sense?
The Commons Argument, or the Cities pence?
Or did you doubt, persistance in one good
Would spoil the Fabric of your Brotherhood,
Projected first in such a forge of sin,
Was fit for the grand Devils hammering?
Or was it ambition, that this damned fact
Should tell the world you know the sins you act?
The infamy this super-treason brings,
Blasts more then murders of your sixty Kings.
A crime so black, as being advis'dly done,
Those hold with this no competition.
Kings only suffered then, in this does lie
The Assasination of Monarchy.
Beyond this sin no one step can be trod,
If not to attempt deposing of your God.
Oh were you so engaged, that we might see
Heavens angry lightning 'bout your ears to flee,
Til you were shrivel'd to dust; and your cold Land
Parcht to a drought, beyond the Lybian sand!
But it is reserved, and til heaven plague you worse,
Be Objects of an Epidemick curse.
First, may your brethren, to whose viler ends
Your power has bauded, cease to count you friends;
And prompted by the dictate of their reason,
Reproach the Traitors, though they hug the treason,
And may their Jealousies increase and breed,
Till they confine your steps beyond the Tweed.
In foreign Nations may your loathed name be
A stigmatizing brand of Infamy;
Till forced by general hate, you cease to rome
The world, and for a plague go live at home:
Till you resume your poverty, and be
Reduced to beg, where none can be so free
To grant; and may your scabby Land be all
Translated to a general Hospital.
Let not the Sun afford one gentle ray,
To give you comfort of a Summers day;
But, as a Guerdon for your traitorous War,
Live cherisht only by the Northern Star.
No stranger deign to visit your rude Coast,
And be to all, but banished men, as lost.
And such in height'ning of the infliction due,
Let provoked Princes send them all to you.
Your State a Chaos be, where not the Law,
But Power, your Lives and Liberties may awe.
No Subject amongst you keep a quiet breast,
But each man strive through blood to be the best;
Till, for those miseries on us you have brought,
By your own sword our just revenge be wrought.
To sum up all -- let your Religion be,
As your Allegiance, masked hypocrisy:
Until, when Charles shall be composed in dust,
Perfumed with Epithetes of Good and Just;
HE saved; incensed Heaven may have forgot
TO afford one act of mercy to a Scot;
Unless that Scot deny himself, and do
(What Is easier far) renounce his Nation too.
Rupertismus.
O That I could but vote my self a Poet!
Or had the Legislative knack to do it!
Or, like the Doctors Militant, could get
Dubbed at adventures Verser Banneret!
Or had I Cacus trick to make my Rimes
Their own Antipodes, and track the times:
Faces about, says the Remonstrant spirit;
Allegiance is Malignant, Treason Merit:
Huntington-colt, that posed the Sage Recorder,
Might be a Sturgeon now, and pass by Order:
Had I but Elsing's gift (that splay-mouth'd brother)
That declares one way, and yet means another:
Could I but write a-squint; then (Sir) long since
You had been sung, A Great and Glorious Prince.
I had observed the Language of the days;
Blasphemed you; and then Periwig'd the Phrase
With humble service, and such other Fustian,
Bells which ring backward in this great combustion.
I had reviled you, and without offense,
The Literal, and Equitable Sense
Would make it good: when all fails, that will do it;
Sure that distinction cleft the Devill's foot.
This were my Dialect, would your Highness please
To read me but with Hebrew Spectacles;
Interpret Counter, what is Cross rehearsed:
Libells are commendations, when reversed.
Just as an Optique Glass contracts the sight
At one end, but when turned does multiply't.
But you're enchanted, Sir; you're doubly free
From the great Guns, and squibbing Poetry:
Whom neither Bilbo, nor Invention pierces,
Proof even against the Artillery of Verses.
Strange! that the Muses cannot wound your Mail;
If not their Art, yet let their Sex prevail.
At that known Leaguer, where the Bonny Besse's
Supplied the bow-strings with their twisted tresses,
Your spells could never have fenced you: every arrow
Had launched your noble breast: and drunk the marrow:
For beauty, like white powder makes no noise;
And yet the silent Hypocrite destroys.
Then use the Nuns of Helicon with pity,
Lest Wharton tell his Gossips of the City,
That you kill women too; nay maids, and such
Their General wants Militia to touch.
Impotent Essex! is it not a shame
Our Commonwealth, like to a Turkish Dame,
Should have an Eunuch-Guardian? may she be
Ravished by Charles, rather then saved by thee.
But why, my Muse, like a Green-sicknesse-Girle,
Feed'st thou on coals and dirt? a Gelding Earl
Gives no more relish to thy Female Palate,
Then to that Ass did once the Thistle-Sallat.
Then quit the barren Theme; and all at once
Thou and thy sisters like bright Amazons,
Give Rupert an alarm, Rupert? one
Whose name is wit's Supersoetation.
Makes fancy, like et^rnitie's round womb,
Unite all Valor, present, past, to come.
He, who the old Philosophy controuls,
That voted down plurality of souls
He breaths a grand Committee; all that were
The wonders of their Age, constellate here.
And as the elder sisters growth and sense
(Souls Paramount themselves) in man commence
But faculties of reasons Queen; no more
Are they to him, who were complete before.
Ingredients of his virtue thread the Beads
Of Caesar's Acts, great Pompey's and the Sweds:
And it is a bracelet fit for Rupert's hand,
By which that vast Triumvirate is span'd.
Here, here is Palmestry; here you may read
How long the world shall live, and when it shall bleed.
Whatever man winds up, that Rupert has:
For nature raised him of the Public Faith,
Pandora's brother, to make up whose store,
The Gods were fain to run upon the score.
Such was the Painters Brieve for Venus face;
Item an eye from Jane, a lip from Grace.
Let Isaac and his Cit'z. flea of the place
That tips their A^tlets for the Calf of Stace;
Let the zeal twanging Nose, that wants a ridge,
Snuffling devoutly, drop his silver bridge:
Yes, and the Gossips spoon augment the sum,
Although poor Caleb lose his Christendom:
Rupert out-weighs that in his sterling self,
Which their self-wants paies in commuting pelf.
Pardon, great Sir; for that ignoble crew
Gains, when made bankrupt in the seals with you.
As he, who in his character of light
Styled it Gods shadow, made it far more bright
By an Eclipse so glorious; (light is dim,
And a black nothing, when compared to him:)
So it is illustrious to be Ruperts foil,
And a just Trophee to be made his spoil.
I Will pin my faith on the Diurnalls sleeve
Hereafter, and the Guild Hall Creed believe;
The Conquests which the Common Counsel hears
With their wide listening mouths from the great Peers,
That ran away in triumph: such a Foe
Can make them victors in their overthrow.
Where providence and valor meet in one,
Courage so poised with circumspection,
That he revives the quarrel once again
Of the souls throne, whether in heart or brain;
And leaves it a drawn match: whose fervor can
Hatch him, whom Nature poach'd but half a man.
His Trumpet, like the Angell's at the last,
Makes the soul rise by a miraculous blast.
'Twas the Mount Athos carved in shape of man
(As 't was defined by the Macedonian)
Whose right hand should a populous Land contain,
The left should be a Channel to the main:
His spirit might inform the Amphibious figure;
Yet straight-lac'd sweats for a Dominion bigger:
The terror of whose name can out of seven,
(Like Falstaffe's Buckram-men) make fly eleven.
Thus some grow rich by breaking; Vipers thus
By being slain, are made more numerous.
No wonder they will confess no loss of men;
For Rupert knocks'em, till they gig again.
They fear the Giblets of his train; they fear
Even his Dog, that four legged Cavalier:
He that devours the scraps, which Lundsford makes,
Whose picture feeds upon a child in stakes:
Who name but Charles, he comes aloft for him,
But holds up his Malignant leg at Pym.
Against whom they have several Articles in souse;
First, that he barks against the sense o'th House.
Resolved Delinquent, to the Tower straight;
Either to the Lions, or the Bishops Grate.
Next, for his ceremonious wag o'th tail:
But there the Sisterhood will be his Bail,
At least the Countess will, Lust's Amsterdam,
That lets in all religious of the game.
Thirdly, he smells Intelligence, that is better,
And cheaper too, then Pym's from his own Letter:
Who Is doubly pai'd (fortune or we the blinder?)
For making plots, and then for Fox the finder.
Lastly, he is a Devil without doubt;
For when he would lie down, he wheels about;
Makes circles, and is couchant in a ring,
And therefore score up one for conjuring.
What can thou say, thou wretch? O Quarter, quarter!
I Am but an Instrument, a mere S. Arthur.
If I must hang, O let not our fates vary,
Whose office it is alike to fetch, and carry.
No hopes of a reprieve, the mutinous stir
That strung the Jesuit, will dispatch a cur.
Were I a Devil, as the Rebel fears,
I see the House would try me by my Peers.
There Iowler, there! ah Iowler! 'st! it is naught
Whatever the Accusers cry, they are at a fault;
And Glyn, and Maynard have no more to say,
Then when the glorious Strafford stood at Bay.
Thus Labells but annexed to him we see,
Enjoy a copyhold of Victory.
S. Peter's shadow healed; Ruperts is such,
'Twould find S. Peter's work, yet wound as much.
He gags their guns, defeats their dire intent,
The Cannons do but lisp and complement.
Sure Jove descended in a leaden shower
To get this Perseus: hence the fatal power
Of shot is strangled: bullets thus allied,
Fear to commit an act of Parricide.
Go on brave Prince, and make the world confess,
Thou art the greater world, and that the less.
Scatter the accumulative King; untruss
That five-fold fiend, the States Smectymnuus;
Who place Religion in their Velam-ears;
As in their Phylacters the Jews did theirs.
England's a Paradise (and a modest Word)
Since guarded by a Cherub's flaming Sword.
Your name can scare an Athiest to his prayers;
And cure the Chin-cough better then the bears.
Old Sybill charms the Toothache with you: Nurse
Makes you still children; nay and the ponderous curse
The Clowns salute with, is derived from you;
(Now Rupert take thee, Rogue; how do thou do?)
In fine, the name of Rupert thunders so,
Kimbolton's but a rumbling Wheel-barrow.
Epitaph on the Earl of Strafford.
HEre lies Wise and Valiant Dust,
Huddled up 'twixt Fit and Just:
Strafford, who was hurried hence
'Twixt Treason and Convenience.
He spent his time here in a Mist;
A Papist, yet a Calvinist.
His Prince's nearest Joy, and Grief.
He had, yet wanted all Relief.
The Prop and Ruin of the State;
The people's violent Love, and Hate:
One in extremes loved and abhorred.
Riddles lie here; or in a word,
Here lies Blood; and let it lie
Speechless still, and never cry.
Epitaphium Thomae Comitis Straffordii, etc.
E^^urge Cinis, tuumque solus qui potis es, scribe Epitaphiu^:
Nequit Wentworthi non esse facundus vel Cinis.
Effare Marmor: and quem coepisti comprehendere,
Macte and Exprimere.
Candidius meretur urna, quam quod rubris
Notatum est literis, Elogium.
Atlas Regiminis Monarchici hic jacet lassus:
Secunda Orbis Britannici intelligentia:
Rex Politiae, and Prorex Hiberniae,
Straffordii, and Virtutum, Comes:
Men's Jovis, Mercurii ingenium* and lingua Apollinis;
Cui Anglia Hiberniam debuit, seipsam Hibernia.
Syd us Aquilonicum, quo sub rubicunda vespera occidente,
Nox simul and dies visa est: dextroque oculo flevit,
Laevoque laetata est Anglia.
Theatrum Honoris, itemque Scena calamitosa virtutis
Actoribus, morbo, morte, and invidia,
Quae ternis animosa Regnis non vicit tamen,
Sed oppressit.
Sic inclinavit Heroes (non minus) Caput
Belluae (vel sic) multorum Capitum:
Merces favoris Scotici, praeter pecunias:
Erubuit ut tetigit securis,
Similem quippe nunquam degustavit sanguinem.
Monstrum narro: fuit tam infensus Legibus,
Ut prius Legem, quam nata foret, violavit:
Hunc tamen non sustulit Lex,
Verum Necessitas, non habens Legem.
Abi Viator, caetera memorabunt posteri.
On the Archbishop of Canterbury.
I Need no Muse to give my passion vent,
He brews his tears that studies to lament.
Verse chymically weeps, that pious rain
Distilled with Art, is but the sweat of the brain.
Who ever sob'd in numbers? can a groan
Be quaver'd out by soft division?
It Is true, for common formal Elegies,
Not Bushells Wells can match a Poets eyes
In wanton waterworks: he will tune his tears
From a Geneva Jig up to the Spears.
But when he mourns at distance, weeps aloof,
Now that the Conduit head is our own roof,
Now that the Fare is public, we may call
It Britains Vespers, Englands Funeral.
Who has a Pensill to express the Saint,
But he has eyes too, washing off the paint?
There is no learning but what tears surround
Like to Seths Pillars in the Deluge drowned.
There is no Church, Religion is grown
From much of late, that she is increast to none;
Like an Hydropick body full of Rhewms,
First swells into a bubble, then consumes.
The Law is dead, or cast into a trance,
And by a Law dough-bak't, an Ordinance.
The Lyturgy, whose doom was voted next,
Died as a Comment upon him the text.
There Is nothing lives, life is since he is gone,
But a Nocturnall Lucubration.
Thus you have seen deaths inventory read
In the sum total -- Canterburie's dead,
A sight would make a Pagan to baptize
Himself a Convert in his bleeding eyes.
Would thaw the rabble, that fierce beast of ours,
(That which Agena-like weeps and devours)
Tears that flow brackish from their souls within,
Not to repent, but pickle up their sin.
Mean time no squalid grief his look defiles,
He guilds his sadder fate with noble smiles.
Thus the worlds eye with reconciled streams
Shines in his showers as if he wept his beams.
How could success such villainies applaud?
The state in Strafford fell, the Church in Laud:
The twins of public rage, adjudg'd to die,
For Treasons they should act, by Prophecy.
The facts were done before the Laws were made,
The trump turned up after the game was played.
Be dull great spirits, and forbear to climb,
For worth is sin, and eminence a crime.
No Churchman can be innocent and high,
It Is height makes Grantham steeple stand awry.
On I. W. A. B. of York.
SAy, my young Sophister, what think of this?
Chimera's real; Ergo falleris.
The Lamb and Tiger, Fox and Goose agree,
And here concorp'rate in one Prodigy.
Call an Haruspex quickly; let him get
Sulphur and Torches, and a Laurel wet,
To purify the place, for sure the harms
This monster will produce, transcend his Charms.
It Is Natures Masterpiece of error, this;
And redeems whatever she did amiss,
Before, from wonder and reproach, this last
Legitimateth all her by-blows past.
Lo here a General Metropolitan,
An Arch-Prelatique Presbyterian.
Behold his pious Garbs, Canonique Face,
A zealous Episcopo-mastix Grace;
A fair blew-apron'd Priest, a Lawn-sleev'd brother,
One Leg a Pulpit holds, a Tub the other.
Let Us give him a fit name now, if we can,
And make the Apostate once more Christian.
Proteus we cannot call him; he put on
His change of shapes by a Succession;
Nor the Welsh Weathercock; for that we find,
At once does only wait upon the wind:
These speak him not; but if you will name him right,
Call him Religious Hermaphrodite.
His head in the sanctified mould is cast,
Yet sticks the abominable Miter fast,
He still retains the Lordship and the Grace,
And yet has got a reverend Elders place.
Such acts must needs be his, who did devise
By crying Altars down, to sacrifice
To private malice; where you might have seen
His conscience holocausted to his spleen.
Unhappy Church! the Viper that did share
Thy greatest honors, helps to make thee bare,
And void of all thy dignities and store.
Alas! thine own son proves the Forrest-boar;
And like the Dam-destroying Cuckoo, he,
When the thick shell of his Welsh pedigree,
By thy warm fost'ring bounty did divide
And open, strait thence sprung forth parricide:
As if 'twas just revenge should be dispatched
In thee, by th'Monster, which thy self had hatched.
Despair not though; in Wales there may be got,
As well as Lincolnshire an antidote,
Against the foul'st venom he can spit, though's head
Were changed from subtle gray to poisonous red.
Heaven with propitious eyes will look upon
Our party, now the cursed thing is gone;
And chastise Rebels, who naught else did miss
To fill the measure of their sins, but his;
Whose foul unparalled apostasy,
Like to his sacred character, shall be
Indelible; when ages then of late
More happy grown, with most impartial fate,
A period to his days and time shall give,
He by such Epitaphs as this shall live.
Here Yorks great Metropolitan is laid,
Who Gods Anointed, and his Church betrayed,
Mark Anthony.
WHen as the Nightingale chanted her Vespers,
And the wild Forester couched on the ground,
Venus invited me in th'Evening whispers,
Uno a fragrant field with Roses crowned:
Where she before had sent
My wishes complement,
Unto my hearts content,
Played with me on the Green.
Never Mark Anthony
Dallied more wantonly
With the fair Egyptian Queen.
First on her cherry cheeks I mine eyes feasted,
Then fear of surfeiting made me retire:
Next on her warm lips, which when I tasted,
My duller spirits made active as fire.
Then we began to dart
Each at another heart,
Arrows that knew no smart:
Sweet lips and smiles between.
Never Mark, etc.
Wanting a glass to plate her amber tresses,
Which like a bracelet rich decked mine arm;
Gawdier then Juno wears* when as she graces
Jove with embraces more stately then warm.
Then did she peep in mine
Eyes humor Chrystalline;
I in her eyes was seen,
As if we one had been.
Never Mark, etc.
Mystical Grammar of amorous glances,
Feeling of pulses the Physic of Love,
Rhetorical courtings, and Musical Dances;
Numbering of kisses Arithmetic prove.
Eyes like Astronomy,
Straight limbed Geometry:
In her hearts ingeny
Our wits are sharp and keen.
Never Mark, etc.
The Authors Mock-Song to Mark Anthony.
WHen as the Night-raven sung Pluto's Mattins
And Cerberus cried three Amens at a houl.
When night-wandring Witches put on their pattins,
Midnight as dark as their faces are foul:
Then did the furies doom
That the nightmare was come;
Such a misshapen Groom
Puts down Su. Pomfret clean.
Never did Incubus
Touch sueh a filthy Sus,
As this foul Gypsy Queen.
First on her goosberry cheeks I mine eyes blasted;
Thence fear of vomiting made me retire
Unto her blewer lips, which when I tasted,
My spirits were duller then Dun in the mire.
But then her breath took place,
Which went an ushers pace,
And made way for her face;
You may guess what I mean.
Never did Incubus
Touch such a filthy Sus,
As this foul Gypsy Queen.
Like Snakes ingendring were plated her tresses,
Or like the slimy streaks of ropy ale;
Uglier then Envy wears, when she confesses
Her head is periwig'd with adders tail.
But as foon as she spoke,
I heard a harsh Mandrake:
Laugh not at my mistake,
Her head is Epicoene.
Never did, etc:
Mystical Magic of conjuring wrinckles,
Feeling of pulses, the Palmestry of Hags,
Scolding out belches for Rhetoric twinckles,
With three teeth in her head like to three gags.
Rainbows about her eyes,
And her nose weather-wise,
From them the Almanac lies,
Frost, Pond, and Rivers clean.
Never did, etc.
THE CHARACTER OF A London-Diurnall.
A Diurnall is a puny Chronicle, scarce pin-feather'd with the wings of time:
It is an History in Sippets; the English Iliads in a Nut-shell; the Apocryphal
Parliaments book of Maccabees in single sheets. It would tire a Welsh pedigree,
to reckon how many aps it is removed from an Annall: For it is of that Extract;
only of the younger House, like a Shrimp to a Lobster. The original sinner in
this kind was Dutch; Galliobelgicus the Protoplast; and the modern Mercuries
but Hans-en-Kelders. The Countess of Zealand was brought to bed of an
Almanac, as many Children, as days in the year. It may be the Legislative
Lady is of that Lineage; so she spawns the Diurnals, and they at Westminster,
take them in Adoption, by the names of Scoticus, Civicus, Britanicus. In the
Frontispice of the old Beldame-Diurnall, like the Contents of the Chapter, sits
the House Commons judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. You may call them the
Kingdoms Anatomy before the weekly Calendar: For such is a Diurnall, the day of
the month, with what weather in the Commonwealth. It Is taken for the pulse of
the Body politic; and the Emperick Divines of the Assembly, those spiritual
Dragoone^s, thumb it accordingly. Indeed it is a pretty Synopsis; and those
grave Rabbis (though in point of Divinity) trade in no larger Authors. The
country-Carrier, when he buys it for the Vicar, miscalls it the Vrinall: yet
properly enough; for it casts the water of the State, ever since it staled
blood. It differs from an Aulicus, as the Devil and his Exorcist; or as a
black Witch does from a white one, whose office is to unravell her enchantments.

It begins usually with an Ordinance, which is a Law still-born, dropped, before
quickened by the Royal Assent: It Is one of the Parliaments by-blowes, (Acts
being legitimate) and has no more Sire then a Spanish Gennet, that is begotten
by the wind.

Thus their Militia (like its patron Mars) is the issue only of the mother,
without the concourse of Royal Jupiter. Yet Law it is, if they vote it, though
in defiance of their Fundamentalls; like the old Sexton, who swore his Clock
went true, what ever the Sun said to the contrary.

The next Ingredient of a Diurnall is plots, horrible plots; which with
wonderful sagacity it hunts dry-foot, while they are yet in their Causes,
before Materia prima can put on her smock. How many such fits of the mother
have troubled the Kingdoms, and (for all Sir Walter Earl looks like a
Man-Midwife) not yet delivered of so much as a cushion! But Actors must have
their Properties; And, since the Stages were voted down, the only Playhouse
is at Westminster.

Suitable to their plots are their Informers, Skippers and Tailors; Spaniells
both for the Land and the Water: Good conscionable Intelligence! For, however
Pym's Bill may inflame the reckoning, the honest Vermin have not so much for
lying as the public Faith.

Thus a zealous Botcher in Morefields, while he was contriving some Quirpo-cut
of Church Government, by the help of his out-lying Ears, and the Ot^cousticon
of the Spirit, discovered such a plot, that Seldom intends to combat
Antiquity, and maintain it was a Tailors Goose that preserved the Capitol.

I wonder my Lord of Canterbury is not once more all-to-betraytor'd for dealing
with the Lions, to settle the Commission of Array in the Tower. It would do
well to cramp the Articles Dormant, besides the opportunity of reforming those
Beasts of the Prerogative, and changing their prophaner names of Harry and
Charles, into Nehemiah and Eleazer.

Suppose a Corn-cutter, being to give little Isaac a cast of his Office, should
fall to paring his Brows, mistaking the one end for the other; because he
branches at both. This would be a plot; and the next Diurnall would furnish you
with this Scale of Votes.

Resolved upon the Question, that this Act of the Corn-cutters was an absolute
Invasion of the Cities Charter, in the representative Forehead of Isaac.
Resolved, that the evil Councillors about the Corn-cutter are Popishly
affected, and Enemies to the State. Resolved, that there be a public
Thanksgiving for the great deliverance of Isaac's Brow-antlers; and a solemn
Covenant drawn up, to defy the Corn-cutter, and all his works.

Thus the Quixots of this Age fight with the Windmills of their own heads;
quell Monsters of their own creation, make plots, and then discover them; as
who fitter to unkennell the Fox, then the Tarryer, that is a part of him.

In the third place march their Adventures; the Roundheads Legend, the Rebels
Romance; stories of a larger size, then the Ears of their Sect; able to
strangle the belief of a Soli-fidian.

I Will present them in their Order; and first, as a Whiffller before the show,
enter Stamford, one that trod the Stage with the first, traversed his ground,
made a leg and Exit. The Countrey-people took him for one, that by Order of the
Houses was to dance a Morice through the West of England. Well, he is a nimble
Gentleman, set him but upon Banks his Horse in a saddle Rampant, and it is a
great question, which part of the Centaur shows better tricks.

There was a Vote passing to translate him, with all his Equipage into
Monumentall-Ginger-bread; but it was crossed by the Female-Committee, alleging
that the Valor of his Image would bite their children by the tongues.

This Cubit and an half of Commander, by the help of a Diurnall, routed his
enemies fifty miles off: it is strange you will say, and yet it is generally
believed, he would as soon do it at that distance, as nearer hand. Sure it was
his sword, for which the weapon salve was invented: that so wounding and
healing, like loving Correlates, might both work at the same removes.

But the Squib is run to the end of the Rope. Room for the Prodigy of Valor,
Madam Atropos in breeches, Wallers Knight-errantry: and, because every
Mountibank must have his Zany, throw him in Haslerigge, to set off his story:
these two like Bell and the Dragon, are always worshipped in the same Chapter:
they hunt in their Couples, what one does at the head, the other scores up at
the heel.

Thus they kill a man over and over, as Hopkins and Sternhold murder the
Psalms, with another to the same; one chimes all in, and then the other strikes
up, as the Saints-bell.

I wonder, for how many lives my Lord Hoptons soul took the Lease of his body.

First, Stamford slew him: then Waller out-killed that half a Bar: and yet it
is thought the sullen corpse would scarce bleed, were both these Manslayers
never so near it.

The fame goes of a Dutch-Heads-man, that he would do his office with so much
ease and dexterity, that the Head after execution should stand still upon the
shoulders: pray God Sir William be not Probationer for the place. For, as if he
had the like kanck too; most of those, whom the Diurnal has slain for him, to
us poor Mortals seem untoucht.

Thus these Artificers of Death can kill the man, without wounding the body,
like Lightning, that melts the Sword, and never singes the Scabbard.

This is the William, whose Lady is the Conqueror; This is the Cities Champion,
and the Diurnalls Delight; he, that Cuckolds the General in his Commission:
for, he stalks with Essex, and shoots under his belly, because his Oxcellency
himself is not charged there. Yet in all this triumph there is a Whip and a
Bell: translate but the Scene to Round-away-down: There Haslerigg's Lobsters
were turned into Crabs, and crawled backwards: there poor Sir William ran to
his Lady for a use of consolation.

But the Diurnal is weary of an arm of Flesh, and now begins an Hosanna to
Crumwel, one that has beat up his Drums clean through the Old Testament: you
may learn the Genealogy of our Savior, by the names in his Regiment. The
Muster-master uses no other List then the first Chapter of Matthew.

With what face can they object to the King the bringing in of Forraigners,
when themselves entertain such an Army of Hebrews? This Crumwel is never so
valorous, as when he is making Speeches for the Association; which nevertheless
he does somewhat ominously, with his neck awry, holding up his ear, as if he
expected Mahomet's Pigeon to come and prompt him. He should be a bird of Prey
too, by his bloody beak: his Nose is able to try a young Eagle, whether she be
lawfully begotten. But all is not Gold that glisters. What we wonder at in the
rest of them, is natural to him, To kill without bloodshed: for, most of his
Trophies are in a Church-window; when a Looking-glass would show him more
Superstition. He is so perfect a hater of Images, that he has defaced God's in
his own countenance. If he deal with Men, it is when he takes them napping in
an old Monument: Then down goes dust and ashes: and the stoutest Cavalier is no
better. O brave Oliver? Times Voider, Sub-sizer to the Worms; in whom Death,
that formerly devoured our Ancestors, now chews the Cud. He said Grace once, as
if he would have fallen aboard with the Marquess of Newcastle: Nay, and the
Diurnal gave you his bill of Fare: but it proved a running-Banquet, as appears
by the story. Believe him as he whistles to his Cambridge-Teem of
Committee Men, and he does Wonders. But Holy men (like the Holy Language) must
be read backwards. They rifle Colleges, to promote Learning; and pull down
Churches, for Edification. But Sacrilege is intailed upon him: There must be a
Cromwell for Cathedrals, as well as Abbeys. A secure sinner, whose offense
carries its pardon in its mouth: For, How can he be hanged for Church-robbery,
which gives it self the benefit of the Clergy?

But for all Cromwell's Nose wears the Dominical letter, yet, compared to
Manchester, he is but like the Vigils to an Holy Day. This, this is the man of
God; so sanctified a Thunderbolt, that Buroughs, in a proportionable blasphemy
to his Lord of hosts, would style him the Archangel, giving Battle to the Devil.

Indeed, as the Angels, each of them makes a several species; so every one of
his Soldiers is a distinct Church. Had these Beasts been to enter into the
Ark, it would have puzzled Noah to have sorted them into pairs. If ever there
were a rope of Sand, it was so many Sects twisted into an Association.

They agree in nothing, but they are all Adamites in Understanding. It is the
sign of a Coward, to wink, and fight; yet all their Valor proceeds from their
Ignorance.

But I wonder whence their General's purity proceeds: it is not by Traduction.
If he was begotten a Saint, it was by Equivocal generation: for the Devil in
the father, is turned Monk in the son: so his Godliness is of the same
parentage with good Laws; both extracted out of bad Manners, and would he alter
the Scripture as he has attempted the Creed, he might vary the Text, and say
to Corruption, Thou art my Father.

This is he, that has put out one of the Kingdoms eyes, by clouding our
Mother-University; and (if this Scotch mist further prevail) will extinguish
this other. He has the like quarrel to both, because both are strung with the
same Optic nerve, Knowing Loyalty. Barbarous Rebel! who will be revenged upon
all Learning, because his Treason is beyond the Mercy of the Book.

The Diurnal, as yet, has not talked much of his Victories; but there is the
more behind: For the Knight must always beat the Giant: that is resolved. If
any thing fall out amiss, which cannot be smothered, the Diurnal has a help at
Maw: it is but putting to Sea, and taking a Danish Fleet, or brewing it with
some success out of Ireland, and it goes down merrily.

There are more Puppets, that move by the wyre of a Diurnal; as Brereton and
Gell; two of Mars his Petty-toes; such sniveling Cowards, that it is a favor
to call them so. Was Brereton to fight with his teeth, as in all other things
he resembles the beast, he would have odds of any man at the weapon: O he is a
terrible slaughterman at a Thanksgiving-Dinner: had he been a Cannibal, to have
eaten those that he vanquished, his Gut would have made him valiant.

The greatest wonder is at Fairfax, how he comes to be a babe of Grace.
Certainly it is not in his personal, but (as the State-Sophies distinguish) in
his Politic capacity; regenerated ab extra, by the zeal of the House he sat
in; as Chickens are hatched at Grand Cairo, by the adoption of an Oven.

There is the Woodmonger too, a feeble crutch to a declining Cause; a new
Branch of the old Oak of Reformation.

And now I speak of Reformation, vous avez Fox the Tinker, the liveliest
Emblem of it that may be: For, what did this Parliament ever go about to
reform, but Tinker-wise, in mending one hole, they made three.

But I have not Ink enough to cure all the Tetters and Ringworms of the State.

I will close up all, thus: The Victories of the Rebels are like the Magical
Combat of Apuleius; who, thinking he had slain all three of his Enemies, found
them at last but a Triumvirate of Bladders. Such, and so empty, are the
Triumphs of a Diurnal; but so many imposthumated Fancies, so many Bladders of
their own blowing.

The Character of a Country-COMMITTEE-MAN, With the Ear-mark of a SEQUESTRATOR.
A Committee-man by his name should be one that is possessed, there is number
enough in the compellation to make an Epithet for Legion; he is persona in
concreto (to borrow the Solecisme of a modern Statesman) you may translate it
by the red bull phrase and speak as properly, enter seven devils solus, It is
a well trust title that contains both the number and the beast. For a
Committee-man is a noun of Multitude, he must be spelled with figures, like
Antichrist wrapped in a pair Royal of Sixes, thus the name is as monstrous as
the man, a complete notion of the same linnage with accumulative treason: for
his office, it is the resurrection of the Ileptarchy or England fritters, it is
the broken meat of a Crumbling Prince, only the Royalty is greater, for it is
here, as in the miracle of Loaves the voyder exceeds the Bill of fare, the Pope
and he rings the Changes; here is a plurality of Crowns to one head, join them
together and there is harmony in discord, the tripple crowned Turn-Key of Heaven,
with the tripple headed porter of hell. A Committee-man is the relics of
Regal Government, but like holy relics he out-bulks the substance whereof he
is a remnant, there is a score of Kings in a Committee as in the relics of the
Cross, there is the number of twenty. This is the Giant with the hundred hands
that weilds the Scepter, the tyrannical Beade-Roule by which the Kingdom prays
backward, and with a kind of Rebus, at every Curse drops a Committee-man. Let
CHARLES be wayved whose conducing clemency aggravates the desection, and make
Nero the question, better a Nero then a Committee, There Is less execution by a
single bullet then by case-shot.

Now a Committee-man is a party colored Officer, he must be drawn like Ianus
with Cross and Pile in his countenance, as he relates to the Soldiers, or face
about to his fleecing the Country, look upon him Martially and he is a Justice
of War; one that has bound his Dalton up in Buff, and will needs be of the
quorum to the best Commanders, he is one of Mars his Lay Elders, he shares in
the Government, though a Nonconformist to his bleeding Rubick, he is the like
Sectary in Arms as the Platonic is in love, keep a flattering in discourse but
proves haggard in the action; he is not of the Soldiers and yet of his flock,
it is an Emblem of the golden age (and such indeed he makes it) to him, when so
tame a Pigeon may commerce with Vulters. Me thinks a Committee hanging about a
Governor, and Bandiliers dangling about a furd Alderman, have an Anagrame
resemblance, there is no Syntax between a Cap of maintenance and a helmet, who
ever knew an Enemy routed by a Grand Jury, and a billa vera: It is a
left handed Garrison where their authority perches* but the more preposterous
the more in fashion; the right hand fights while the left rules the Reins, the
Truth is the Soldier, and the Gentlemen are like Don-Quicchott and Sancho
Pancha, one fights at all adventures to purchase the other the Government of
the Island. A Committee-man properly should be the Governor's Matrosse to fit
his truckle, and to new-string him with sinnews of War for his chief use, to
raise assessements in the neighboring Wapentake.

The Country People being like an Irish Cow, that will not give down her milk
unless she see her Calf before her: Hence it is he is the Garrisons dry Nurse*
he chews their contribution before he feeds them, so the poor Soldiers live
like Trochilus by picking the teeth of this sated Crocodile.

So much for his warlike or ammunition face, which is so preternatural, that it
is rather a vizard then a face* Mars in him has but a blinking aspect, his
face of Arms is like his Coat party per pale, Soldier and Gentleman much of
a scantling.

Now enter his Taxing and deglubing face, a squeezing look like that of
Vespasianus, as if he were breeding over a close-stoole. Take him thus and he
is the Inquisition of the purse; an Authentic Gypsy, that nips your bung with
a canting Ordinance, not a murdered fortune in all the Country but bleeds at
the touch of this Malefactor. He is the spleen of the body politic that swells
it self to the Consumption of the whole, at at first indeed he ferretted for
the Parliament, but since be has got off his Cope, he set up for himself, he
lives upon the sins of the people, and that is a good standing-dish too, he
verifies the Axiom Eisdem nutriter ex quibus componiter, his diet it suitable
to his constitution. I have wondered often why the plundered Countrymen should
repair to him for succor, certainly it is under the same notion as one whose
pockets are picked goes to Mol-Cutpurse as the predominant in that faculty.

He out-dives a Dutchman, gets a noble of him that was never worth six pence,
for the poorest escape not, but Dutch-like he will be dreyning even in the
driest ground, he Aliens a Delinquents Estate with as little remorse as his
other holiness gives away an Heretics Kingdom, and for the truth of the
Delinquency, both Chapmen have as little share of Infallability. Lie is the
Grand Sallad of Arbitrary Government, Executor to the Star Chamber, and
High Commission; for those Courts are not extinct, they survive in him like
Dollary changed into single moneys. To speak the truth he is the universal
tribunal: For since these times all causes fall to his Cognizance, as in a
great infection all diseases often turn to the Plague. It concerns our Masters
the Parliament to look about them, if he proceeds at this rate, the Jack may
come to swallow the Pike; as the Interest often eats out the Principal. As his
commands are great so he looks for a reverence accordingly. He is very punctual
in exacting your hat, and to say right, it is his due; but by the same title,
as the upper garment is the vails of the executioners. There was a time when
such cattle would have hardly been taken upon suspicion for men in office,
unless the old Poverb were renewed, that beggars make a free Company, and those
their Wardens. You may see what it is to hang together, look upon them
severally, and you cannot but fumble for some thrids of charity; But oh they
are Tarmagants in conjunction! like Fiddlers who are rogues when they go single;
and joined in consort, gentlemen Musitioners. I care not much if I untwist my
Committee-man, and so give him the receipt of this grand Catholican. Take a
State Martyr, one that for his good behavior has paid the excise of his ears,
so suffered Captivity by the Land-Piracy of Ship Money, next a Primitive
freeholder, One that hates the King, because he is a Gentleman transgressing
the Magna Charta of delving Adam. Add to these a mortified Bankerupt that
helps out his false Weights with some scruples of Conscience, and with his
peremptory scales can doom his Prince with a Mean tecall. These with a new
blew-stocking'd Justice lately made of a good basket-hilted Yeoman, with a
short-handed Clerk tack't to the Rear of him to carry the Knapsack of his
understanding, together with two or three Equivocal Sirs, whose Religion like
their Gentility is the Extract of their Acres, being therefore spiritual,
because they are earthly; not forgetting the man of the Law, whose corruption
gives the Hogan to the sincere Juncto. These are the simples of this precious
Compound, a kind of Dutch hotch-potch, the Hogan Mogan Committee-man.

A Committee-man has a Side-man, or rather a setter height, a Sequestrator; of
whom you may say, as of the great Sultans horse, Where he treads the grass
grows no more. He is the States Cormorant, one that fishes for the Public,
but feeds himself, the misery is, he fishes without the Cormorants property, a
rope to strengthen the gullet, and to make him disgorge. A Sequestrator! He is
the Devils Nuthooke, the sign with him is always in the clutches. There Is more
Monsters retain to him, then to all the limbs in Anatomy. It Is strange
Physicians do not apply him to the soles of the feet in a desparate Fever, he
draws far beyond Pigeons: I hope some Mountebank will slice him, and make the
Experiment. He is a Tooth-drawer once removed, here is all the difference, one
applauds the Grinder, and the other the Grist. Never till now could I verify
the Poets description, that the ravenous Harpie had a humane visage. Death it
self cannot quit scores with him. Like the Demoniack in the Gospel he lives
among Tombs, nor is all the holywater shed by Widows and Orphans a sufficient
Exorcism to dispossess him. Thus the Cat sucks your breath, and the Fiend your
blood; Nor can the Brotherhood of Witchfinders so sagely instituted with all
their terror, wean the Familiars.

But once more to single out my imbost Committee-man, his Fate (for I know you
would fain see an end of him) is either a whipping Audit, when he is wrung in
the withers by a Committee of Examinations; and so the sponge weeps out the
moisture which he soaked before; Or else he meets his passing peale in the
clamorous mutiny of a gut-foundred Garrison; For the Hedge-sparrow will be
feeding the Cuckoo, till he mistakes his Commons and bite off her head.
Whatever it is, it is within his desert: for what is observed of some Creatures,
that at the same time they trade in productions three stories high, suckling
the first, big with the second, and cliketing for the third; A Committee-man is
the Counterpoint, his mischief's superfetation, a certain scale of destruction;
For he ruins the Father, beggars the Son, and strangles the hopes of all
posterity.

FINIS.

