THE POWER OF KINGS, PARTICULARLY The BRITISH Monarchy Asserted and Vindicated,

IN A SERMON Preached at WAKEFIELD IN THE County of YORK Sunday, October the
30th, 1681.

By WILLIAM CLIFFORD, A. M.

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

TO ALL LOYAL SUBJECTS.
Gentlemen,
BEing about to Publish this Sermon, I could not bethink my self how to make a
more seasonable Dedication of it, than to You All: being you are equally
concerned, both as to Your Sacred, and Civil Interest, to maintain that
greatest of Privileges which Herein I have endeavored to defend. That the
Well-being of this Church and Kingdom depends upon this, Every one knows; and I
hope, we need not be admonished to look to the Cornerstone. What it is that
some Men would have, God Almighty only, and Themselves (if Themselves) do know:
however it is to be wished, that whilst They are decrying of Ours (without
doubt the Best of Governments) for Tyranny, Oppression, and Popery, They be not
buoying of These up in the World, and bringing of Them in (which God avert)
under the Mask of Faction.

May the Great GOD of Heaven and Earth say Amen to this Sermon, and Crown these
mean Essays; by making of all Those, whom Nature has made, and the Law of
Nations declared, His Majesty's Subjects, truly Loyal. Which, as it is the
hearty Prayer, so shall it be the sincere and perpetual Endeavor of,

Gentlemen, Your hearty Well-wisher, WILLIAM CLIFFORD.

THE POWER OF KINGS Asserted and Vindicated.
PSALM. 51. ver. 4. Against thee only have I sinned --
SInce it is become one of the great Masterpieces of our Incendiaries, to
magnify the Power of the People, to break open the Cabinet of State, to push
forward the heady and raging Multitude, with fictitious Devices; and to promote
that Diabolical Dialect, of Speaking evil of Dignities; I shall this day make
it my business, to undeceive such as have been misled by those false Fires.

Exodus 22 28.
Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor speak evil of the Ruler of thy People,
says Moses. Eccles. 10. 20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, says Solomon. And a greater than
Solomon was obedient to Caesar. Two of the Twelve Apostles bear record, that
there cannot be a surer note of a Schismatic, than to despise Dominion, and to
cast Dirt in the face of our Natural Lord.

It is not only the Voice of our Law, but we likewise have the unanimous
Astipulation, and Suffrages, of the Laws of God, Nature, and all Nations; That
a KING (being Deo secundus, soloque Deo minor,) can do no wrong; that is, no
wrong for which he can be accountable to any but God, being only his (and not
the Peoples) Vicegerent. And that I may evince this (I hope) beyond
contradiction, I have made choice of Holy David's Case, as being the most
apposite (to the best of my Judgment) of any that I could meet withal.

What St. Hierom has observed in the front of many of the Psalms, (which he
probably had out of Origin, with whose Volumes his Juvenile Studies abounded;
and Origin confesses, that he had it by Tradition from the Jew his Master;) is
undoubtedly true: viz. Titulum Psalmi esse Clavem, That the Key of each Psalm
is the Title. Which, if we do consult, it directs us to the Second Book of
Samuel, the 12th Chapter, where we find the Prophet Nathan, in his Message from
God to David; reproving him for his Sin in the matter of Vriah. Whereupon the
relenting Prince (being filled with the aggravating Circumstances of so great a
Crime) presently falls into that Pious Confession, in the 13th Verse of that
Chapter; I have sinned against the Lord.

And, as if that had been too small a Penance, upon second thoughts (which are
always presumed, to be the most sound and searching) he composeth this Psalm;
sighing out his Miserere mei Deus, Have mercy upon me, O God: for against thee
only have I sinned.

In doing right to this Text, I shall omit the Glosses of some later
Expositors, especially those of the Geneva-Faction; and that I may the more
exactly show you, what was the Judgment of the Primitive Christians in this
weighty Point of Allegiance; I shall cite the Councils, and Fathers, as being
the surest Witnesses in this Particular: and having been approved by the
Universal Church of Christ, no good Man can have the least occasion to doubt of
their Fidelity. And to these Testimonies, I shall add the Judgment of the
immortal Hugo Grotius, to whose Books, and Memory, for his Opinion in this
Point, all the Princes of Christendom do owe Protection.

And that these things may be the more perceptible, I shall move in this most
easy, and natural Method. Wherein I shall show,

1. That the Defection of Nature is so universal, that even Kings can plead no
Immunity from it, no Privilege against it. 2. That although the Depravity of
Nature be general; yet it is the Sacred Privilege of Kings only for their
Offenses, to be exempted from all Humane Jurisdiction. 3. That such are the
Impetuosities of the Vulgar, that notwithstanding this Sacred Reserve, Majesty
it self can scarce any where be inviolable. 4. That since the Persons, and
Power of Kings are esteemed Sacred, both by the Laws of God, Nature, and all
Nations; I shall exhort all Men, that they be to the utmost of their Power
careful, not to violate so great a Privilege.
1. That the Defection of Nature is so universal, that even Kings can plead no
Immunity from it, no Privilege against it. The Empire of Sin, after the Fall
of Man, was so general, that no Man can be excluded, that will not deny himself
to be Adam's Offspring. And thus we have the great Apostle of the Gentiles
asserting, that in Adam all died: And Holy David confessing, In sin was I
conceived, and in iniquity did my Mother bring me forth. But it is needlefs to
insist upon Particulars, when as the Wise Man has included all in his
Parenthesis, 1 King 8. 46.
There is no Man that sins not.

The Nature of this Proposition is such, as you hear it is universally granted:
therefore needs it no further Proof. Neither will any one be so simple as to
go about to exclude Princes from it, till that day approach, when both They and
We (Mortality being laid aside) shall be equally exempted. Till then both
Gratitude and Interest, oblige us to cover the Faults of our Superiors. And
therefore I shall proceed to show,

2. That although the Depravity of Nature be general; yet it is the Sacred
Privilege of Kings only, for their offenses, to be exempted from all Humane
Jurisdiction. In the former Proposition we have seen, that they by whom the
Actions of Men are weighed, and upon whom Proemium and Poena, the two Hinges of
all Law do turn; are not able so far to smother the Embryon of Original
Depravity, but that it will (in spite of the utmost care and vigilance) burst
from the Seed to the Fruit, into actual Impiety and Transgression. But yet for
all this are they not in the least liable to the Censure of any Man; No
Tribunal under Heaven has power to take cognizance of them, or call them into
question. The Prophet in our Text, tho a King, confesses his Transgression:
but it is with Reserve of Justice unto none, but to him, whom alone he owned
Superior; and therefore he cries, Against thee only have I sinned.

That some of our Moderns might evade this plain sense of the Text, they have
invented one, which as they think will do the business. Namely, that David
sinned in a double respect; One, as a King: Another, as a Private Person. (If
these be not the Notions of Forty Eight let the World judge.) As he was a
Private Person (say they) he was offensive to his Neighbor, as well as to God,
having been injurious to Vriah.

To which I answer: David's Repentance here, was either Feigned or Sincere;
Feigned it could not be, as appears by the circumstances; neither will they
suppose it. And if Sincere, how comes it to pass, that in his Confession, he
has no respect to his injured Neighbor? But here lies the bottom of the
business; If they could juggle the World into a belief, that David sinned as a
Private Person, then the unavoidable consequence would be; That he must be
obnoxious to that Law, which he had offended: and no Man is ignorant, that the
punishment of that Sin whereof David was guilty, was Death, by the Mosaical
Statute. What is this, but to seek a pretense for Regicide?

That David was injurious to Vriah, I do fairly and readily grant. But, that he
was a Private Person, neither They, nor all the World will ever be able to
convince me, it being not only absurd, but impossible. To say, that such a one
is a King, and a Private Person too, is a flat contradiction, which can never
be reconciled: for wherever the one is, it is impossible for the other to be
there also, at one and the same time.

But whether David were Private, or no, this was not the thing they aimed at;
which was, that he might be liable to Terrestrial Punishment: and then,
whatsoever looked (tho never so ill) like an Argument, must be brought to
maintain it.

Thus do Men become the Patrons of Error, and render themselves contemptible to
all discerning Persons. David was no Private Person after he was Anointed: this
was nothing therefore, but a distinction they had invented, and fitted for
their purpose: and either it (as I have showed) or our Logic must be false, Let
them show us one Example, and it shall be enough, of any Law, either Divine, or
Humane, of any Civilized Nation in the World that owneth it: but this they
cannot, being only engaged to their own crazed Heads for it.

David was a King, and as such, was (as other Kings) above the Law. Kings have
Power to dispense with the Law at their pleasure: Neither is there the severest
Punishment the Law can inflict, but it is in the Power of the King to remit it;
of this David could not be ignorant: nay, he seems to imply as much here; and
by how much the more he knew himself exempted from the Mosaical Law, by so much
the more earnest here he seems to be with God for a Pardon, to whose greater
Tribunal only he could be accountable. And of this his Earnestness, the
Original is a sufficient witness, wherein the Pronoun is twice repeated; (...)
Against thee, thee only have I sinned.

But I have to be more particular, wherein I shall undertake to prove, That

For Subjects to question the Actions (tho Offensive) or the Authority of their
Princes, is a thing that is most clearly Repugnant to Primitive Custom:
Inconsistent with the nature of the Kingly Office: And Diametrically opposite
to the Liberty of the Subject.

1. It is Repugnant to Primitive Custom. That which Men call Religion, will in
no wise allow the Prerogatives of Kings to be called in question. Thus the
thing was amongst the Hebrews: when they requested for a King to rule over
them, like as other Nations had, the Prophet answers them, that they should
have a King; and that their King should take their Wives and Children, their
Servants and Cattle, for his use and service; as you may read at large Sam. 1.
8. But that which is very observable, is, that the Prophet in the whole
description of that their King, who we know was none of the best, never so much
as sets the least bound or limitation to his Power, makes no observations
of the extent of his Authority. Whereas, if either this, or any other of the
Precedent, or Succeeding Authors of the Old Testament, had but made any cases
of Resistance or Restraint; I make no question, but the Antimonarchical Spirits
of these Times would have been diligent in the search, and discovery of them.
But so far was this from the business of Samuel, and the rest of the Prophets;
that they enjoin Obedience (even to the worst of Kings) tho it be not only to
the hazard of Goods, but Life. And we do find it twice pronounced (to make the
Obligation greater) concerning one of the most Insolent, and Unjust, of all
their Kings; Who can lift up his hands against Gods Anointed, and be guiltless?
1 Samuel 24. 7. and 25. 9.
That Golden Sentence of the Psalmist therefore must of necessity have a like
Relation to all Rulers; Psalm. 105. 15.
Touch not mine Anointed. And as the Law, so the Gospel, runs high
concerning Majesty. Our Savior prohibiteth us from doing any man Injury or
Injustice: but much more must we pay that Reverence, and Respect to Caesar,
which himself paid, and commanded us to do the like. You will never find him
controverting the Actions of Caesar, or his Delegates; but willingly submitting
to whatsoever they imposed: as you may clearly see in the Case of Tribute,
wherein he proved to St. Peter, that such as were Freeborn were not liable to
Taxation: Nevertheless (says he) lest we be troublesome, go thou to the Sea,
and taking up a Fish, in his mouth thou shall find a piece of Money, that give
them for thee and me.

Nay, so far was Christ satisfied of the Power of the Roman Emperor, that he
suffered Death upon the Sentence of Pilate the Governor; not because he wanted
Power to make Resistance, as Porphyrius, Julian, and some others, did vainly
affirm against the Primitive Christians: but because he would not in the least
seem to make any Exception from that General Rule of Obedience to Superiors,
that he had laid down; for otherwise, (as he said) he could pray to his Father,
who could send him more than Twelve Legions of Angels, to be his Assistants,
and to rescue their Sovereign Lord, and Creator, from the violence of that
hour.

Thus also we find the Disciples treading in their Masters steps, St. Peter,
and St. Paul,those two great Doctors of the Circumcision and Uncircumcision
asserting this Royal Prerogative; Submit your selves unto every Ordinance of
Man, (says Peter, whatsoever some of his Successors have to say to the
contrary) 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15.
for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as Supreme, or unto
Governors substituted by him, for the punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and
for the praise of them that do well: for so is the will of God, that in
welldoing ye may put to silence the Ignorance of foolishmen.

Answerably hereunto S. Paul clearly evinceth the necessity of Obedience to
Supreme Powers; telling us, that such are ordained of God; for which very
reason (says he) Romans 13.
ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake;
for he that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God. But
notwithstanding all this, our Enemies keep rubbing up the old Sore, and in
defiance of all our Persuasions, and good Councils to the contrary, they will
understand St. Paul, better than he understood himself. Just in another Case,
like to Andreas Althamerus, who having taken up an Opinion prejudicial to
Obedience, and Good Works; and being not able to reconcile it with the Doctrine
of St. James, does fairly therefore give St. James the Lio, in a Book printed,
since Mr. Calvin's Reduction of Geneva, at Strasbourg. So they tell us, that
they are willing to Obey Powers, could they have such Powers as the Apostle
meant of, when he writ this Epistle. Wherein, alas, they are miserably
mistaken, for the Apostle writ this Epistle to his Romish Converts, when they
were under the Government of a Cruel Heathen Emperor. Thus easily can Men's
Fancies lead them to assert they know not what: Both They and We have the
greatest cause to bless God, that we are not under such a Power as then was.

And that which claims the next degree of our Assent, after our Saviors
Doctrine, and the Apostles, is the Suffrage of the Universal Church, together
with the Practice of Primitive Christianity, the best (if not only) Interpreter
of the New Testament. He that consulteth these, will find them unanimously
asserting the Proposition we have now in hand. And what good Laws were made for
securing the Royal Rights of Kings, I shall refer the more, Intelligent to read
in the Universal Code, wherein you have the Four General Councils of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon; with the Five Primitive Synods, of
Ancyra, Neocesaria, Gangres, Antioch, and Laodicea; all which have been all
along received, and approved, by the Universal Church of Christ.

And as this was the Opinion of the whole Catholic Church, so does it still
remain, (and long may it do so;) there being no one Church in the known World
asserting otherwise; nor any sound, and sober Member of any Church, as far as I
was ever able to learn: Except a few deluded Creatures in the Church of Rome,
and a handful of Zealous Fools in the Reformed Churches, who have made
themselves ridiculous, and contemptible, in the Eyes of all thinking, and
judicious Persons; by asserting that, which the uninterrupted Opinion, and
Universal Practice of the Christian Church for Fifteen Hundred years, and
upwards, has flatly contradicted. And whether the Judgments of a few, and
those (it may be) for the most part Ignorant; or the Opinions of Thousands, who
(for their great Piety and exemplary Loyalty) are of precious Memory; be in a
Case of so great moment as this, to be preferred, he must have abjured his
Reason, that cannot easily distinguish.

However it be, we need go no further to learn Loyalty, than our own Church.
All the Laws of this Realm, both Sacred, and Civil, do teach us what it is. The
Oath of Fidelity, (which I suppose) most Men have taken, is sufficiently plain,
and obligatory; to which I remit you. And let any Man consult that, together
with his own Interest, and Safety, and then let him be Disloyal, if he can.

Neither did any of the Ancient Fathers recede one jot from the Apostolical
Doctrine, and Practice. It is the greatest wickedness in the World, to resist
the Supreme Power, says Clemens in his Constitutions. Tertul. ad Scapul. and
in A pologeticis saepissime.
And tho you blast our Fame ( says Tertullian speaking to the Romans) by
saying, we are Injurions to Majesty, yet can you find no such Man amongst us;
for tho we have filled not only the Country, but the Court, yet are we averse
to Rebellion. Our Savior has taught us, and St. Peter has taught us ( says
Nazianzen against Julian) Nazianz. Orat. 1. adversus Julian.
not to resist Lawful Authority, ( meaning the Emperor,) but rather to suffer;
it is lawful for us to flee, our Savior has permitted it, so did St.
Athanasius, so did St. Cyprian; neither have we any other Remedy left us, but
Prayers and Tears. And when an Emperor offered Violence to some of the
Christians, what Pious Advice does Ambrose, writing to Auxentius) give them:
Ambros. lib. 5. Orat in Auxentium.
Beware ( says he) of any weapons, but your Tears; with these you may, but with
any other you may not resist.

And that which will be the glory of the Christian World, to the end of the
World, as it will likewise be the shame of those that contrived, and acted that
Tragedy, an-indelible Example of Christian Patience, is that of the Theban
Legion; which consisted of near Seven Thousand Christian Soldiers, who being
in the Field, and having their Swords drawn in their hands, and of sufficient
Power to defend themselves, and rout the Forces of the Emperor; yet suffered
themselves quietly and calmly to be Martyred, rather than to obey the severe
and unmanly Edict of Maximian.

I might give Examples in every Century down to these very Times, and I might
have done it without going far from home. It is not long since the whole Church
of England was Martyred in the Cause of her Sovereign Lord. Let those who were
the Designers, and the Actors of that Unevangelical Zeal, live unparalled,
and die unpitied! But I shall content my self, and (I hope) satisfy every
Honest man, and modest Christian, with that which St. Chrysostom has said upon
the words of St. Paul, Romans 13. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, whosoever
ye be, tho an Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet, or whoever else, you must needs be
subject; for, if Christ and his Apostles (says he) thought it requisite to be
subject to Pagan, how much more requisite then must it needs be, to be subject
to Christian Princes.?

Besides the Fathers, I promised you the Judgment of the Immortal Grotius, who
has been miserably misunderstood by some in this Point: no man ever yet having
asserted, and defended the Prerogatives of Kings, with such strength of
Antiquity, such sober, solid, and substantial Arguments, as that Learned Man
has done. And his Observation (amongst many others of great worth) is this;
Grot. de jur.
That the Gospel is a more exact Rule, and a more pure Institution than ever
yet appeared in the World, Belli, etc. lib. 1. cb. 4. fusissime; and in Annotat.
and consequently does require a more perfect and entire Patience, Sacris
passim.
and Obedience; and therefore we cannot without great Sin, and the highest
Injury to our Blessed Lord, and his Gospel, recede from that exact Obedience
which he has enjoined, and whereof he has made himself our Example. And how
he behaved himself, the Apostle is the most credible witness, who tells us,
that 1 pet. 2. 21, 22, 23.
he did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his mouth; that when he was reviled,
he reviled not again; that when he suffered he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously, in all things leaving us his Example,
that we should tread in his steps. Thus Grotius.

And as the Law of Moses, the Gospel, and the Laws and Practice of all
Christian Nations; so the Law of Nature, and all Civilized (tho not Christian)
Nations, do assert this Truth: whereof Plato's Books of his Common Wealth are
an ample Testimony. And in the Twelve Tables (which are believed to be of
Grecian extract, Greece having furnished all the Heathen World with Laws, as it
is probably supposed,) which contain the Fundamentals of the Old Roman Law,
Crimen laesae Majestatis is the first, as being a guilt of the highest nature.

Hitherto we have seen what Primitive Custom has for this Assertion. It
appears by what has been spoken, that we must be so far from questioning the
Royal Prerogatives, that we are obliged both by the Law of God, Nature, and all
Nations, to vindicate them though it be with peril of life. And if our
Superiors should Command us any thing (as God forbid they should) contrary to
any of these Laws, you hear what is enjoined us; We must lay our hands upon our
Mouths, and suffer with that Meekness which becomes our Profession, remembering
the Examples of our Savior and the Primitive Christians, whereof I have given
you a full (and I hope satisfactory) account. However, I am assured that I have
spoken the Judgment of the best, and purest Ages of Christianity; neither can
any thing be sound in contradiction to this Doctrine in all the whole Life,
Actions, or Sufferings of Christ; nor in the constant and unerring Practice of
the Primitive Christians; nor in any of the Writings of the Apostles, or
Apostolic Men. I proceed therefore to show,

2. That for Subjects to question the Actions (tho offensive) or Authority of
their Princes, is inconsistent with the nature of the Kingly Office. The
Scepter is put into their hands by God Almighty alone: and with that the Power
he gives them is so great, as that he makes them capable of being accountable
to none, but Himself only; Thus he says, By me Kings Reign. Of this Power King
Solomon's Sentence is very absolute, Who shall say to a King, what do thou?
and of the unquestionableness, and uncontroulableness of his Authority, he
further adds, The wrath of a King is as the roaring of a Lion; who shall stir
him up?

Things depending on another, are governed by that on which they depend: this
is undeniable. Thus the Lives, and Liberties of Subjects, do depend upon the
good, or evil Will of their Prince. And thus much Pilate could allege to our
Blessed Savior, that he had power to condemn him, and that he had power to
release him; whereupon our Savior replied, without any denial, or refusal of
the Power, that he had no power at all, but what was given him from above; that
is, that Power wherewith he was invested, and which he then exercised, under
the Roman Caesar, was not only by the permission, but also by the Order, and
Institution of God.

Were it so, that the Actions of Kings, or their Authority, could be swayed, or
biased, by any other Terrestrial Power whatsoever, except their own: how
Proteus-like would Government be? How would the Laws of Mercy, and Justice,
which are so essential to the Being of a Government, that it cannot subsist
without them, be either wrested, or quite antiquated, by the Prevalency of a
Party? Admit but this, and then we should soon be sensible of the Prophets
complaint, Justice is gone away backward; having instead of Law, Rule, and
Order, nothing but Noise, Distraction, and Confusion. Which brings me to show.

3. That for Subjects to question the Actions, or Authority of their Prince, is
diametrally opposite to the Liberty of the Subject. We are subjected unto
lawful Earthly Powers, That under them we may lead godly, and peaceable lives,
says the Great Apostle. And that (according to the Prophet) Every man might
fit under his own Vine, and that none might make him afraid. The enjoyment of
our Lives, and our Liberties too, as well in Sacred, as Secular things, next
under God, we have from the Prudence of our Prince.

That our Lives have not hitherto been made a Prey to our Enemies, it is,
because his Sacred Majesty maintains, and defends them. That our Liberties,
both in Religion, and State, have not long since perished away in our bosoms,
it is, because we have a King to actuate, and enliven them. In a word, That the
Allies of Rome, or Geneva, have not long ere this extirpated the best Reformed
Church in Europe, the Church of England; it is, because his Sacred Majesty, and
his Predecessors, (and long may He, and His Successors be equally prosperous,)
have hitherto dispelled all those abominable Mists, of Schism, Sacrilege, and
Idolatry, which they raised amongst us.

Hitherto I have showed you, That a KING is the Greatest of all Earthly
Blessings, the Defense of our Lives, the Bulwark of our Liberties. Surely I
need not long stand to recommend it to you. How many Hundreds yet alive, have
not long since seen our tumultuous World; wherein tho Religion, and Liberty
were the Pretense, yet Prophanity, Atheism, and Slavery were the Event? Wherein
our greatest Enjoyment was the blessed Hotchpotch of Democracy: and the (...)
of our Devotion (instead of our pure, and Primitive Liturgy) was exercised in
an halting Directory, not only destructive of, and contradictory to, all
Antiquity, but also to it Self. And the wholesome Laws of our Gracious and
Natural Sovereign, abrogated together with Himself, to make way for worse. And
that which Crowned the Happiness, we had Reformation thrown amongst us with a
Sword in its hand, to let us see how basely we had abused the Power of the
Sword, in taking it from him, who alone (by the Law of God, Nature, and
Nations,) did justly challenge it.

The abrogation of Civil Power makes every Man Sui juris: so that take away the
Supreme Power, which is indeed the Life of all Laws, and then all manner of
Sins will be venial. Heresy and Schism, Murder, Conspiracy and Rebellion, the
blackest Impieties, these will never be boggled at. For indeed, that many Men
abstain from the Commission of these Sins, it is not because they are so much
afraid of the Justice of God; as of the Severity of the King, who swayeth the
Sword of Justice, as Gods only Vicegerent. And thus, at the long run, should we
be brought into the lamentable condition of the wretched Hebrews, of whom we
find this Melancholy Complaint registered by the Prophet no less than four times
together: that Judge. 17. 6. and 18. 1. and 19. 1. and 21. ult.
in those days there was no King in Israel, but every Man did that which was
right in his own Eyes. Which seasonably brings me to my Third Proposition,
namely to show,

3. That such are the Impetuosities of the Vulgar, that notwithstanding this
Sacred Reserve, Majesty it self can scarce any where be inviolable. Although God
Almighty has made so good security for his Anointed; tho their Crowns be
established by the firm and perpetual Decrees of all Laws, both Divine and
Humane: yet there are a sort of Men in the World, and the very Pest they are of
all Order and Society, the great Principles of whose Religion, are to vilify
and blaspheme Magistracy, and to trample upon and contemn all that is Sacred
and Venerable; purchasing to themselves the Applause of the Popularity by wild
Vtopian Notions, wherewith they do easily prevail upon, and seduce the giddy
Multitude.

And there is nothing vented, tho never so extravagant and phrenetical, but
some will countenance it. The most Lunatic Fancies being once broached, do not
long want Abettors. And hence there are several Objections raised, to
strengthen this Antimonarchical Fabric.

1. They object, Regem esse infra non supra Ecclesiam. This Objection is
equally asserted, both by the Romish and Reformed Party: the one endeavoring
hereby to magnify the Power of him who treads upon the Necks of Kings, tho
he was anciently wont, and still his Duty is the same, to embrace their Feet:
the other hereby striving to vindicate the Supreme Power of Classes and Synods.
And the Answer of the one, will be the sufficient conviction of either.

But first, it will be necessary to ask, Whether by the Church, they mean the
Catholic, or some part of it only?

If they mean the Catholic Church, then we must needs confess, that no King is
above, but within it: seeing it never yet was, nor never can be under the Power
of any Earthly Monarch. When they have said what they can for the Popes
Supremacy, we believe, that the Catholic Church owes Fealty to none, but only
to Him who rightly is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Lord Jesus
Christ. Neither can it be supposed to have any Visible Head, except in a
Council truly General, and that Headship can only remain Protempore Concilii.

But if by the word Church be meant any part only of the Catholic, as in
particular the Church of England: then we own no Head but the King alone; and
so here will be no work for the Superintendent and his Classis. And if they
demand our Reason, for this we remit them to the Canons of our Church, which
tell us, That the Kings of England claim no more Power in Ecclesiastical
Matters, than the Pious Kings of Israel, and the Religious Christian Princes
(even the Roman Emperors, for some of the first Centuries) anciently had. And
till they can show us a more warrantable Pattern, than the universal Christian
Practice of Fifteen Hundred years, and more; they must give us leave to
prosecute our Allegiance. Taking this First for granted, they proceed without
our allowance, or show of Reason.

2. To say, that a King must Servire Ecclesiae; which Phrase several Ancient
and Pious Authors have used, and to which we assent, if we may have leave to
understand it as the Ancients did. But if they go about by this Phrase, to
subject a King to the slavish humors of his People, we must take leave to
dissent, Servire Ecclesiae, according to the mind of such Authors as use it, is
no more than Necessitatibus Ecclesiae consulere, and in this sense the greatest
Monarch will not refuse it: this is all that St. Augustine means by it;
witness himself, Serviunt enim qui imperant, officio consulendi, and providendi
Misericordia. This is all that the Pagan Authors mean, when they render
Imperium, Servitutem. Thus therefore, if they will allow us to interpret we are
agreed: but if they will not, we must needs say, they are very bad
Etymologists, in striving to frame such Senses, with which Antiquity is utterly
unacquainted.

3. They allow a Power, (if the King do not in their sense, Servire Ecclesiae)
to Subordinate Magistrates, to correct the Miscarriages of Princes. A most
unjust and unequal Privilege! What is meant by Subordinate Magistrates, we
suppose to be such Persons as have received Authority from the King; let them
act in what capacity soever, either in Church, or State. And these Inferior
Powers are approved of God: 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15.
yet so, as the Apostle seems to make our Obedience to the King, and those
Inferior Powers, two different things; to the King we are so far enjoined
Obedience, that we cannot possibly fail in it, without being absolutely guilty
of Sin; to the Inferior Magistrate, we are obliged, so far as his Commands are
the same with the Kings, or not destructive of, or prejudicial to them; which
if they be, the same Obligation is upon us not to obey, but to appeal to the
Greater, viz. the King.

It is beyond all Controversy with me, and I hope with all good Men; that tho
Inferior Magistrates, with respect to Private Persons, be Public, yet with
respect to the King they are Private Persons. And as it is in the Power of
Inferior Magistrates, to take cognizance of, and punish the Offenses of
Private Persons, so doubtless is it in the Power of the King, to take
cognizance of, and punish the Offenses of Inferior Magistrates; with respect
to whom, they are no more than Private Persons, (as I have already showed,) and
so liable to be by him punished, for their Miscarriages, as Private. For
further sati^faction in this point of the Authority of Supreme, and Subordinate
Magistrates; I shall refer the more Curious, to mine Annotations upon the
Church-Catechism (in the Fifth Commandment,) now under the hands of the
Amanuensis; and will ( Bono cum Deo) be ere long ready for the Press.
It would certainly be no small Paradox, to say, That the King, having the
Supreme Power in these Kingdoms, (and long may He, and His Lawful Successors,
enjoy and exercise it,) might not invest such Persons as he should think fit,
with Inferior Magistracy, and punish them for the Abuse, or Neglect of the
Exercise of the Power he has given them; or degrade, and divest them of their
Authority.

4. If the Inferior Magistrates be Negligent, then the Pastors, and People,
have solemn leave to Depose (nay Martyr) Kings, to defend themselves (in such
Unchristian Actions) with the Power of the Sword, if their Lives and
Consciences (as they do most preposterously term it) cannot be otherwise safe
from the Tyranny of Kings. A most Antichristian Principle, and such as might
defile the very mouth of Beelzebub to pronounce it! Horresco referens. This,
and much more such horrid Stuff, may be found in the Commentaries of Pareus,
upon the 13th Chapter to the Romans. Neither could it ever have been better
confuted, than it was by King JAMES of Blessed Memory, and the Loyal University
of Oxford, who gave Order, That the Commentaries of Pareus should be hurnt (as
they well deserved) in Public, by the hands of the Common Hangman. And for the
utter extirpation of such Seditious, Impious, and Antimonarchical Doctrines, it
was decreed by the Oxonian University, in a full Convocation, June the 5th,
1622. That every Person that was to be honored with a Degree, in any Faculty
whatsoever, should before Admission Swear, (in an Oath framed for that very
purpose) to alienate such Principles: As may be seen at large in the Decree,
and Oath.

5. According to these Infernal Principles (in the late Times of Distraction)
this was usually their (most Illogical) Assertion; That it was lawful to fight
against the Kings Person, with his Power; and that the King might be killed in
his Personal, or Private Capacity, (as they called it,) and yet his Power never
the worse for it, his Authority not suffering. A strange Metaphysical Notion!
And so likewise, that St. Paul speaking of Kings, Romans 13.
means the Kingly Office, not his Person; with much more of this Nature. Thus
do they make the King a mere Platonical Idea, a Quality, not a Personal
Subsistence: As if the King of England were nothing but CAROLVS REX written in
Court-hand, without either Flesh or Blood. If it be so, to what purpose are
those significant Solemnities used at the Coronations? Why are they Crowned,
Inthroned, Inoyled? but to show their Personal, and Imperial Power and
Supremacy: in Military, Judiciary, and Religious Matters. That the Kings
Authority may be where his Person is not (if this be their meaning) is most
true; but, that his Person may be where his Authority is not, is most false:
And a King without Personal Authority, is a Contradiction, and no King. How
dull were the Primitive Christians, that could not bethink themselves of this
Distinction! what Blood and Martyrdom might it have saved? But let these faint
Chimera's vanish.

6. They say, that if we ascribe so much Power to the King, Religion cannot be
safe, but that he may alter it at his Pleasure. And so He may: Neither is the
Power of Kings in any thing more visible, than in establishing such Modes of
Public Worship, as they think fit. This is sufficiently asserted, and
maintained by the most Political Authors that hitherto I have met withal. Were
not the Religious Rites in Judea altered, according to the Genius of the
Prince? Thus we find the Rites of Ahaz altered by his Son Ezechias, which
Manasses his Nephew again restored, but by Josias they were again abolished.
Thus, if they demand, why in the Reign of Queen Mary the Romish Religion, and
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth the Reformed Religion, prevailed? there can be
no other Reason be given, but that (next under God) it was Ex Reginarum
Arbitrio.

It is an Old (and unanswerable) Maxim, Qualis Rex, Talis Lex. And if every
Magistrate must be divested of his Power, because it is possible He may abuse
it, then should we have no Power at all, at least no Exercise of Power, there
being the same Reason to fear every Man alike, because the Axiom ( Nemo est qui
falli neque at) includes all. But why our King may not be entrusted with the
same Power (seeing he cannot well use it worse) wherewith they durst entrust
their Protector, is a Paradox to me.

Or, suppose this should fall out (which always does not) that a King should
alter the received Religion; yet may we have sufficient comfort, if we
consider, that the Hearts of all Men are in the hand of the Lord, but more
especially are the Prove. 21. 1.
Hearts of Kings in his Power, and as the Rivers of water, he can turn them as
he pleases. It is Gods work (you hear) to sway the Inclinations of Kings, let
us then beware how we meddle in it. His Power is so unspeakable, that he can
equally effect his Will, as well by Evil, as by Good Kings.

Sometimes Prosperity, and sometimes Adversity is more profitable for the
Church. And if the Prince be Pious, then the Truth flourishes under him: and
if he be Ungodly, it will be Evil for the Church, but worse for him, whose
Condemnation shall One day be augmented, answerably to the greatness of his
Charge. And in the mean time, Rebellion will be so far from being agreeable,
that it will every way be contradictory to a Christian Profession. Well said
Saint Augustine, August. adsus Crescon. l. 3 chapter 51.
Reges cum in errore sunt,pro ipso errore leges contra veritatem ferunt; cum in
veritate sunt, similiter contra errorem pro ipsa veritate decernunt; ita and
legibus malis probantur boni, and legibus bonis emendantur mali. But I have to
my Fourth and Last Proposition, namely,

4. That since the Persons, and Powers of KINGS are esteemed Sacred, both by
the Laws of God, Nature, and all Nations; to exhort all Men, that they be to
the utmost of their Power careful not to violate so great a Privilege. The
Duty of Obedience to Kings, was a thing so well known, and so firmly believed
in the Primitive Times, that the Christians then stood in need of no other
Arguments to persuade them to it, but such as Christ and his Apostles left upon
Record. And seeing that those who lived so near the Apostles Days, were so
extraordinarily tenacious of this Duty: it raises Admiration in me, to
consider, That some Men amongst us, who do (at least) pretend to as great
Sanctity as ever any Primitive. Christian had, should go about to raise
Arguments, to defend their Taking up of Arms against their Lawful (and
Christian) Princes, from the same Sacred Scriptures, which the Ancients thought
laid sufficient Obligation upon them (as I have largely showed in the preceding
Parts of this Discourse) to obey even the worst of Heathen Powers.

That both God, Nature, and Nations, have privileged Kings, I have already
fully showed, and I trust so fully, as to render it (however to all good Men)
indubitable; the Authorities that I have made use of, are such as are
altogether unquestionable. For next to the Sacred Scriptures, which we all
equally own, and adhere unto, I have urged only such General Councils, and
Ancient Synods, as have hitherto been approved by the whole Christian World.
And for the Testimonies of the Fathers, or Others that I have used, they are
from the best and most Authentic Editions.

However therefore this Discourse may relish, it concerns not me; seeing that
I am assured, that I have all along Impartially spoken the Mind of the Catholic
Church. And that to this very day, there has not been a General Council, truly
so named; or any other Ancient (tho not Ecumenical) Synod, duly, and regularly
called, and debating; or an Authentic Copy of any Father; that have delivered
otherwise. If our Adversaries can produce the contrary, we challenge them in
the Name of God to do it: if they cannot (which is I am certain much more
easy,) then let their Brainsick Notions cease to be imposed upon the Vulgar
Multitude; who are more apt to be taken with Flatteries of their Chimerical
Greatness, and Supremacy; with Noise, and Impudence; than with any sober
Reason, or sound Arguments.

But let Us, who have so good Authority for our Warrant, as the Voice, and
Universal Practice of the Primitive Church, resolve (in spite of all
Contradiction) to be ever Conscious of our Duty.

Methinks, the very consideration of our Interest, and Society, should put us
in mind of Subjection: for what a Polity else should we make? what greater
Soloecism could we grant in Nature, than that the Head should give place to the
Supremacy of the Foot? Tho it be true (as the Apostle observes) that in the
Body, no one Member can be without antoher; yet for the Inferior to go about
to usurp the Office, and Power of the Superior, must needs make a Privation,
and so leave some place unfilled; to which Philosophy will in no wise yield.
There are not the most uncivilized of all People, but they have something of
Subordination: how much more then ought we to do that, which not only Nature,
but God, and the Law of Nations, have enjoined.

And if our Interest cannot draw us, let the Examples of our Savior, and the
Primitive Christians, persuade us; And if these be not sufficient to sway us,
let the Eternal Rewards of Grace entice us; nay, since God Almighty has made
such Sacred Defenses for Kings, let the Majesty of their Countenances dash our
daring Fancies into due Allegiance and Subjection.

A good Christian, and a good Subject, are Reciprocals; the one being not
possible to be found without the other. And if we have love for our great
Master, we can no way better manifest it, than by yielding a full Subjection to
such Powers as he has ordained to fill his Room, till Himself come, whose all
Power truly is, and to whom all Authority does rightly belong.

Let us therefore strive by Obedience to our Prince, to regain that Honor and
Credit, which our Nation by Disobedience has so lately lost. We may justly
say, That (with our Royal Prophet) we are become the very Scorn and Derision of
them that are round about us; but let us beseech God (with our Royal CHARLES
the Martyr) not to lay that Innocent Blood unto our charge. And for the future,
let us be active in repairing those Breaches of Loyalty, which the Father most
rightly claimed, for the Son. And let us not suffer our selves any more to be
deluded, with the Vanities of those Men, who (under the empty Notions, and
specious Titles of Christ's Kingdom, Liberty, and Reformation,) Preached up
nothing amongst us, but Hypocrisy, Rebellion, and Confusion.

Lastly, Let these miserable Calamities, under which we so lately groaned, be a
further Incentive of Loyalty to us. Let us think of them, and I question not,
they will be a means to make us Resolve, to stand by our Prince with our Lives
and our Fortunes. And to animate us in so indispensible a Duty, let us beg of
God to continue us in the True Religion, which at this Day by Law we profess;
and then we need not to question, but the sense of our Duty, will add strength
and perseverance to our Loyalty. Which (that it may do) God of his great Mercy
grant for Jesus Christ's sake: To whom with Thee, O Father, and Thee, O Blessed
Spirit; Three Persons, but One Immutable GOD, be given of the Holy Catholic
Church, all Power, Praise, and Glory, World without End, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

