The Clippers Execution: OR, Treason Justly Rewarded.
Manifested in the fearful example of two Women who were Notorious offenders,
and tried at the Old-Bayly the 13th of this present April, 1678. for Clipping
and Defaceing his Majesty's Coin, where they were found Guilty of High Treason,
and received Sentence to be Drawn on a Hurdle to the place of Execution, and
there their Bodies to be Burnt. One of them being accordingly Executed in
Smithfield upon the 17th of the said Month; as a warning for all others to
avoid the like Dreadful Punishment.

To the Tune of, In Summer Time.
With Allowance.



LAment, lament, good Christians all,
who now draw near unto this place,
To see a wretched Sinners fall,
who here does die in great disgrace:
Although the Laws are never so strict,
some daily do the same transgress,
And warnings all they do neglect;
they are rooted so in wickedness.
As by this sad example here,
it is confirmed to every one,
How that the Devil lays his baits,
to bring us to destruction:
For every one he has a snare,
to please, and satisfy their mind,
And for their ruin does prepare,
according as they are inclined.
This woman being Covetous,
for to grow rich it was her aim,
She did not value by what means,
which did procure her lasting shame:
Some of them did a practice make,
our Sovereigns Coin for to deface,
Not thinking at the last to come,
To end their lives in foul disgrace.
But though they for a time did Reign,
and prosper in their wickedness,
They now are brought to open shame,
their heinious crimes for to confess:
This wretched woman being one,
who having not the Fear of God,
Now for her Crime is hither come,
to feel his dreadful heavy Rod.
The second part,
to the same Tune.


HEr Clipping and her Fileing Trade
in private she long time did use,
Hoping she should not be betrayed,
she King and Country did abuse:
A little Girl she used to send
unto the Shops her Coin to change,
And so convei'd it to her Friend,
who put it off in manner strange.
At length the same suspected was,
by one that lived near Temple-Barr,
who watched the Girl when home she went
she being not of him aware:
With Officers the House they searched,
and there one woman they did find,
With Clippings in a Handbaskit,
which did appear of the same kind.
In breaking open another door,
they likewise plainly did perceive,
Clippings and Fileings on the Floor,
which carelessly they chanced to leave,
A File, and Shears, likewise there was,
and Melting-pot, which they did use,
And all things for their purpose fit,
the blinded world for to abuse.
For which to Prison they were sent,
until their Trial for to lie,
And time they had for to repent,
to make their peace before they dye:
Two of them Sentence did receive,
upon a Hurdle drawn to be,
And Burnt to Ashes in the Flames,
where people all the same might see.
This wretched woman being one
which here is brought unto your view,
To pay for her transgression,
because she proved so untrue:
A Spectacle of misery,
she does appear in this same place,
Being bound the Law to satisfy,
and end her life in great disgrace.
All you good Christians who are here,
and see her sad and woeful fall,
Pray that with patience she may heat,
and unto Christ for mercy call:
Who knows but that the Lord on high,
In mercy may her soul receive,
And free her from all misery,
if firmly she in him believe.
Let her Example warn you all,
to have the Lord still in your mind;
Least to such crimes you hap to fall,
and unto Sin you be inclined:
Beware of filthy averice,
and strive your lives for to amend,
Do not presume to follow vice,
least you come to untimely end.
A dreadful thing it is you see,
her body in the flames to burn,
But worse when soul, and body both,
into eternal Flames shall turn.
Therefore once more I say beware,
and strive Gods mercy to embrace,
And let it be your only care;
to find a Heavenly resting place.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.


