A TRUE RELATION Of the persecution of Samuel Clift, by Samuel Hierne Priest of
Minchin-hampton, and John Stevens, one who is set to do justice.
I Was moved to go to the Steeple-house to Hampton, upon the first day of the
week, and there I stood peaceably amongst the people, for the space of an
hour, or thereabouts, in which time Samuel Heirne was praying and preaching, as
he so called it: and he seeing me, he seemed to be in great rage; and after he
had entered into that called his prayer, he commanded the Officers to take me
away, or else he could go no further, as he said, or words to this purpose; so
according to his desire the Constable did; thronged me out of the house, and
abused me in words and actions, and put me in the Stocks, although I stood
peaceably* and did not disturb him in word nor action, although I was
thronged and abused as I stood amongst them; and after a while they let me out
of the Stocks, and told me, I might go about my business; but before I came
out of the Town the Constable came and took me again, and kept me prisoner in
an Inn, and desired me to promise him not to trouble him for keeping of me in
the Stocks, he being condemned in himself, that he had done me wrong, for
putting me in without breach of any Law, or without any Warrant or command of
any Magistrate, but only through the Priests words, and so it did appear that
he kept me prisoner in the house, to see whether I would promise him not to
trouble him; but I being not willing to satisfy his will for to promise him,
although I did not intend to do it: but at length he did let me go, and about
a month or five weeks after I was taken by a Warrant of John Stevens, and
brought before him, and when I came before him, he asked me, whether I was at
Hampton at Church, as he called it, at such a time or no? To which I answered
and told him, I was at the house at the time; he asked me, whether Samuel
Hierne did pray or preach while I was there, and I told him that he might call
it praying or preaching: And he asked me, whether I kept on my hat while I was
there? and I told him, I did buy my hat to wear it: Then he seemed to be in a
great rage, and struck me two or three blows, although he being one set to keep
the peace, he broke it himself, and commanded his man to make a Mittimus to
send me to prison, without I would give Bail for my good behavior for
disturbing of Sam. Hierne; and he falsely affirmed, that I confessed it, and said,
that I should go to prison, without I would give Bail; and I told him, that I
should give no Bail, for I knew no Law that I had broken; and so he caused his
man to make the Mittimus for to send me to prison; but yet I was preserved from
prison, but brought into the Quarter Sessions, and there Sam: Hierne prefered a
Bill of Indictment against me, and indicted me for disturbing of him in words
and actions, and brought in his hearers to swear to the Bill, that I did
wilfully and maliciously disturb him in words and actions, yet they themselves
do confess, that I stood peacable, and did neither act nor speak.

Here is also a Copy of the Bill of Indictment, which the Priest prefered
against me, and he and several of his hearers swore to it as follows.

Glocest. shire.
THe Jurors for Oliver Lord Protect or of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging,
upon their Oaths do present, That Sam. Clift late of Avening in the County
aforesaid, Clothier, the four and twentieth day of May, in the year of our
Lord, 1657. at Minchin-hampton in the County aforesaid, voluntarily and
maliciously did by word, deed and overture molest and interupt Samuel Hierne
Clerk, Preacher of Gods Word at Minchin-hampton aforesaid in the said County,
in time of divine Service, and open prayer and preaching by the said Sam.
Hierne in the Church aforesaid, then and there settled; and he the said Sam.
Hierne being licenced to preach, and in the peace of God being, in contempt of
the peace of God, and public peace and disturbance of the Congregation in the
Church aforesaid, then and there assembled, to the great dishonor of the
Almighty God, and contrary to the form of the Statutes and Laws in that case
made and provided, etc, and to the evil example of all others in the like case
offending, and against the public peace.

Samuel Hierne. Francis Maning. Charles Deane. George Renols. Will. Nicolas.
Tho. Newman. Rich. Butt.


These are they which swore to this Bill of Indictment falsely, for there are
several of themselves do confess that I did neither act nor speak, but stood
peaceable.

This Bill being presented to the grand Jury so called, did upon their oaths
find me guilty, and so brought to a Trial, and being examined by the petty
Jury, did upon their oaths bring me in not guilty, and so freed me; so all
whose eyes be open may see the unjust proceeding against the innocent, and
their confusion in their proceedings, the one swearing I was guilty, and the
other swearing that I was not. So like Priest like people, for the Priest he
falsely presents me, his hearers falsely swears against me, the Jury being of
the same generation, some of them swear one way, and some another; so all whose
eyes be open, consider what ye have been doing, and repent, and turn to the
Lord while ye have time, and put not the day of your visitation afar off:
These unjust proceedings was done above a year ago, but now it lay much upon me
to put it in print, and I to be clear of all men's blood am willing to do it,
known by the name of

Samuel Clift.

THE END.

