A CLOAK for KNAVERY OR, The Scottish Religion worn out, under which was hid
much iniquity, which now in time is discovered.
Sr. Georges Cross FOR England. St George's cross Religion Persecution
Emulation Discord and Mu^^^^ Dissimulatio^ Rebell^^^ Rapine Rebelion Plunder
Fornication Whoredoms Theft Cruelty Invasion Intrusion


A good Com^onwelths Man

scene: cloak labelled Religion covers Scotsman's clothing, which is labelled
with faults. A Commonwealth man observes. Religion is made a Covering
For every wicked and Rebelious thing,
Errors are hid here on the right and left
Rebelion, Idolitry, and Theft,
Plunders, and Rapins, Whordoms, Fornications,
Dissimulations, Flateries, and Invasions,
By Time, this Cloak is (...) of their Back
So their's discovered many a Knavish Knack
Sr. Andrews Cross FOR Scotland. St Andrew's cross Behold now, how these two
combined St George's and St Andrew's crossesPopish Crosses, cross one another.



THe Scots have worn out their religion, It is broken forth into open
Rebellion, their civility is turned into hostility; They proclaim their sin
like Sodom they hide it not; Woe unto their souls, for they have rewarded evil
unto themselves.

EMULATION which before was hid behind, in the nape of their neck, since these
Weather-cocks have turned their blew-bonets and cockt up their caps, it is upon
the frontlets of their Knaves-heads, as eminent as a Coxcomb. So much for
emulation.

A deceived heart has carried him aside, so that he cannot deliver himself,
nor say, is their not a lie in my right hand? he has the mark of the beast;
Sr. Andrews Cross is his Ensign, PERSECUTION his Banner an instrument of
cruelty: for as Sr. Georg's Cross for England, so is Sr. Andrews for Scotland:
Alas poor fools, to make Crosses more Common then signs in the streets.

His Arms in his Doublet sleeves, by which he should fight, to keep the
Liberties of England, he uses as limbs of REBELLION.

And as IDOLATRY is in his right hand, so in his left THEFT; Thus he does evil
with both hands, and errs every way, this is an Heritick indeed, to commit so
many errors, on the right hand, and on the left too.

He Is a mere Imposter, INVADER and INTRUDER, trespassing upon his neighbors
goods and lands, taking away other men's Wives, yea, and their precious lives
also.

He^ full of DISSIMULATION, in his breast is no true Royalty nor Reality, Trust
him not, for there are seven abomination^ in his heart.

In his scabbord is an instrument of CRUELTY, girt about him with DISCORD and
MURDER.

He per^e^utes the true Church, the Bride the Lambs Wi^^ upon His right thigh
is FORNICATION, and on his left WHORDOMS, and his brats are of Babell, not of
Sion.

He delights in Wars, his feet are swift to shed blood, destruction and
misery are in his ways, and the way of peace he has not known.

He cares not for the King Christ, he Raveneth and is full of RAPINE, King
Charles is in his mouth, but his Belly is his Sovereign Lord: Its that he makes
his God, for he can feed himself without fear, and glut himself therewith, when
it costs him nothing.

He is double hearted, if he pretend half an heart to the English with him, it
is but as his half Crowns which will not pass current in England, and the Scots
two-pences are of the same kind; He will cheat you if he can, or at the best,
you shall have of him thistles instead of Roses, unless he light upon some of
our new Cross Coin, which he may pay his Popish Crew withal, for it may be
they will like them, as well as Jacobusses; I am sure they esteem such Crosses,
above Crowns, and Angels too. And Jamee is somewhat like them, witness his Flag
of Defiance, the Standard of Sir Andrew their Popish God, under whose Banner
they can persecute apace, and join with Papists and other Malignants, but when
Jemy sees them too weak for him, this treacherous Rogue will turn his back
upon Pistol bullets, and then you shall see that which is written on his
backside, as well as on his fore-side, for he will turn a mere Coward. And as
he gave up Ahab, so he will bring Jezabel to a small scantling, and glad he can
escape so too, and destroy the posterity of Ah^^, and Baals Priests too if need
be; Any thing for a quiet life, And then the rest of his Bonny-Lads will prove
like English Blades, and the Lasses will be no more ridden with Papists, and
other Malignants like Asses.


